10.1016/0022-2496(64)90022-7
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 1, 204-214 (1964)  Transfer Effects in Discrimination Learning'  MORTON P. FRIEDMAN AND HAROLD GELFAND2  University of California, Los Angeles, California  Transfer effects which occur during the discrimination of overlapping stimulus compounds were analyzed. The learning materials were paired associates whose stimulus members were simple stimulus compounds. The compounds and responses received a single pairing (reinforcement) and the compounds were presented alone after either 12 or 27 seconds as a test for recall. In different experimental conditions, compounds with common cues were inserted in the training series either before or after reinforcement of the test compound and before recall. Experimental arrangements which might be expected to produce both positive and negative transfer were employed. The principal results were: (1) recall decreased as a function of the interval between reinforcement and test, (2) evidence was found for proactive but not retroactive interference mediated by the common cues, and (3) both proactive and retroactive facilitation mediated by the common cues was obtained. A mixed model arising from stimulus sampling theory was developed for the results. This model, which was in essence an all-or-none retention process coupled with a cue selection process generally did quite well. However, the model failed to provide an adequate description of the obtained proactive interference effects.  This study is concerned with a quantitative analysis of transfer effects which occur during the discrimination of stimulus compounds with common cues. Experimental arrangements which might be expected to produce both positive and negative transfer are considered. For example, in learning a discrimination between the stimulus compounds ab and ac, one would expect negative transfer early in training mediated by the common cue a, but one would also expect that the terminal accuracy of discrimination would reach 100%. Similarly, in a learning task in which the compounds ab and ac were assigned the same response, one would expect positive transfer mediated by the common cue a.  Exactly how to conceptualize common cues in discrimination learning is a problem of some theoretical interest. Within the framework of stimulus sampling theory (for an extensive review see Atkinson and Estes, 1963), two alternative formulations, the  ' This research was supported in part by a grant from the University Research Committee, University of California, Los Angeles, and in part by the Office of Naval Research (Nonr 233(58). a Now at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.  204  TRANSFER EFFECTS 205  component model (Burke and Estes, 1957) and the pattern model (Estes, 1959), have been suggested to handle discrimination problems with stimulus overlap. The component model correctly predicts the transfer effects which occur early in training, but in the negative transfer example cited above, it predicts less than 100% accuracy of discrimination. On the other hand, the pattern model correctly predicts the asymptotic accuracy of discrimination but fails to predict the transfer effects which occur during training.  Estes and Hopkins (1961), Friedman (1962), and Atkinson and Estes (1963) have suggested some modifications of the pattern model in order to allow a more complete description of simple overlap discrimination problems. The gist of the modified pattern model, termed the "mixed model" is that association or conditioning takes place in terms of patterns, but transfer to new or unconditioned patterns is mediated by responding to component cues.  As an example, consider a discrimination between the compounds ab and ac. The compounds are presented in random order, response 1 is reinforced in the presence of ab, and response 2 is reinforced in the presence of ac. According to the mixed model, patterns associated with these compounds will be conditioned separately as units. Once a pattern is conditioned to a response, it will continue to evoke that response on later trials. Thus the stimulus sampling and conditioning assumptions of the mixed model are like those of the simple pattern model. But consider a point in training at which the pattern associated with ab is conditioned to response 1, but ac is not yet conditioned. Then, according to the mixed model, responding in the presence of ac is determined by the conditioning status of the component cues. And, since cue a is conditioned to response 1 by virtue of its being a component of the conditioned pattern ab, response 1 is likely to occur in the presence of ac.  Some of the mixed model's qualitative predictions concerning relative rates of learning and error analyses do quite well, but there are no data detailing the specific trial-by-trial transfer effects which occur during the learning of compounds with common cues. These sorts of data are important for testing both alternative learning assumptions and alternative response rules. The present study was designed to obtain these transfer effects.  METHOD  Subjects. The subjects were 48 students recruited from introductory psychology classes at the University of California, Los Angeles. Participation in experiments was a course requirement.  Procedure. In all experimental conditions, paired associates items were presented together for 3 seconds, which will be denoted the reinforcement, and stimulus members were presented alone for 3 seconds and either 12 or 27 seconds later as a test for recall. Following a procedure used by Peterson, Saltzman, Hillner, and Land (1962), intervals between reinforcement and test on a given item were filled with presentations and tests on other items. The stimulus members of the paired associates were two-element coumpounds. The elements comprising the compounds  206  FRIEDMAN AND GELFAND  were common monosyllabic 3-letter English words, and the responses were the digits 1-9. A Hunter Cardmaster was used to present the items, and the inter-item interval was 2 seconds. Subjects were instructed to read the words and numbers aloud when they appeared, and to supply the number when only the words were presented. They were urged to guess, and there were less than 1 % omissions.  Design. A subjects-by-treatments design was employed so that all subjects received all experimental conditions. There were seven experimental conditions in all. The training paradigms for the various conditions are shown in Table 1. The cues comprising the compounds are denoted by letters, and the responses by numbers.  TABLE 1  TRAINING PARADIGMS AND OBTAINED AND PREDICTED PROPORTION OF CORRECT RECALLS FOR THE SEVEN EXPERIMENTAL CONDITIONS   Experimental condition Training paradigm T Proportion correct recalls   Rl R2  Obtained Predicted   Retroaction Control ab-1 cd-2 ab 0.243    Proaction Control cd-2 ab-1 ab 0.375    .      2-Reinforcement Control ab-1 ab-1 ab 0.583 0.559   Retroactive Interference ab-1 ac-2 ab 0.229 0.215   Intrusion errors   0.263 0.319   Proactive Interference ac-2 ab-1 ab 0.319 0.363   Intrusion errors   0.167 0.171   Retroactive Facilitation ab-1 ac-1 ab 0.479 0.467   Proactive Facilitation ac-1 ab-1 ab 0.461 0.467  These conditions were used to estimate parameters.  All experimental conditions consisted of two reinforced presentation of compounds which are denoted by "Rl" and "R2" in Table 1, and a single test on one of the compounds, which is denoted by "T." The interval between Rl and R2 and R2 and T was always 12 seconds.  Items in the first condition, Retroaction Control, received one reinforcement and were tested 27 seconds later for recall. Compounds intervening between reinforcement and test had no cues in common with test items. Table 2 contains a sample list of items which gives examples of the various experimental conditions. The Retroaction Control item is the first one on the list. The compound was "eat lie," and the response was "3." Between reinforcement and test there were 5 items or 27 seconds. Thus at number 7 on the list, the compound "eat lie" is presented for recall. The Retroaction Control condition is to be compared with the Retroactive Interference and Retroactive Facilitation conditions. Items in the Retroactive Interference condition also received one reinforced presentation and were tested 27 seconds later for recall, but 12 seconds after the reinforced presentation of the test compound, a compound with a common cue but a different response assignment was inserted in the training series. The Retroactive Interference item on the sample list in Table 2 starts with number 12. The compound "hip rag" is paired with the response "1" and is tested for recall at number 18. But between reinforcement and test, at number 15, the compound "hip ore," paired with a different response "8" but with the common cue "hip," is presented. Items in the Retroactive Facilitation condition were like items in  TRANSFER EFFECTS  207  the Retroactive Interference condition except that the inserted compounds were assigned the same response as the test compound.  TABLE 2  SAMPLE LIST OF ITEMS   No. Condition Item   1 Retro. Con. (RI) eat lie 3   2 Filler gem dip   3 Retro. Facil. (R,) nor top 2   4 Retro. Con. (R2) ant saw 6   5 Pro. Inter. (RI) pig bet 4   6 Retro. Facil. (R2) urn top 2   7 Retro. Con. (T) eat lie   8 Pro. Inter. (R2) sin bet 7   9 Retro. Facil. (T) nor top   10 2 Rein. Con. (R,) but lit 5   11 Pro. Inter. (T) sin bet   12 Retro. Inter. (R) hip rag 1   13 2 Rein. Con. (R2) but lit 5   14 Pro. Facil. (RI) dug his 9   15 Retro. Inter. (R.) hip ore 8   16 2 Rein. Con. (T) but lit   17 Pro. Facil. (R2) dug ash 9   18 Retro. Inter. (T) hip rag   19 Pro. Con. (111) sky rut 3   20 Pro. Facil. (T) dug ash   21 Filler pad she 2   22 Pro.- Con. (R2) yes pry 6   23 Filler row sap 9   24 Filler pal mix 1   25 Pro. Con. (T) yes pry  Items in the Proaction Control condition received one reinforced presentation and were tested 12 seconds later for recall. Items in the Proactive Interference condition were also tested 12 seconds after a reinforced presentation for recall but were preceded by the presentation of a compound with a common cue but with a different response from that assigned to the test compound. Items in the Proactive Facilitation condition were like items in the Proactive Interference condition, except that the response assigned to the inserted compound was the same as the response assigned to the test compound. The Proactive Facilitation item on the sample list is the compound "dug ash" paired with the response "9" at number 17, and tested 12 seconds later at number 20 for recall. Preceding the reinforced presentation at number 14, the compound "dug his," with the common element "dug," is presented paired with the same response.  A 2-Reinforcement Control condition was also run, in which the same compound received two reinforced presentations before test.  208 FRIEDMAN AND GELFAND  Each subject received 6 blocks of trials, and each of the seven experimental conditions was tested once in each block. Within each block, the order of occurrence of the conditions was randomly determined, and the responses were assigned randomly to the experimental conditions. Four experimental conditions contained compounds with common cues. For half of the items from these conditions in each block, the first element was the common cue, and for the other half, the second element was the common cue. This was randomly determined for each block. Dummy or filler items were used to fill out the blocks when necessary.  Two sets of six blocks were constructed, and 24 subjects were run with each set. Four orders of occurrence of the blocks were randomly determined, and 6 subjects were run under each block order in each set.  There was a 1-minute rest interval between blocks 3 and 4 while the cards were changed. The first 3 blocks and the last 3 blocks were run off without separation. The first and fourth blocks were preceded by 5 warm-up items which consisted of 3 reinforced dummy items, and one Proaction Control item. These items were not included in the analysis. Immediately following the warm-up items the experimental blocks began.  RESULTS  For each subject, a total correct score was tabulated for each experimental condition. The results of a subjects X treatments analysis of variance of these scores showed that both the subjects effects (F = 2.33, df = 47,282) and the treatment effect (F = 23.34, df = 6282), were significant at the 0.05 level. The Duncan New Multiple Range Test with an 0.05 protection level was used to compare individual treatment means. The statistical comparisons of experimental conditions which follow are based on the results of the Duncan Range Test analysis.  Table 1 shows the proportion of correct recalls for each experimental condition. Each proportion is based on 288 observations. Considering first the control conditions, it can be seen that the 2-Reinforcement Control condition, the third one on the list, produced the highest recall score, 0.583. The proportion of recalls for the Proaction Control condition, in which the interval between the single reinforcement and the test was 12 seconds, was 0.375. This was higher than the obtained score of 0.243 for the Retroaction Control condition, in which the interval between reinforcement and test was 27 seconds. With the Duncan Range test, the obtained differences between the three control conditions were statistically reliable.  It will be recalled that, in the interference conditions, compounds with common cues and different response assignments were inserted in the training series either before (Proactive Interference) or after (Retroactive Interference) reinforcement of the test compound. For the retroactive interference condition, the proportion of correct recalls was 0.229. This is to be compared with the Retroaction Control condition, in which the interval between reinforcement and test was the same, but the items intervening between reinforcement and test had no cues in common with the test compound. The proportion of correct recalls for the control condition was 0.243,  TRANSFER EFFECTS 209  which was close to the obtained value of 0.229 for the Retroactive Interference condition; this difference is not statistically reliable. Thus we have no evidence for retroactive interference which can be attributed to the reinforcement of different response in the presence of common cues. However, a different result obtains for the Proactive Interference condition. For the Proaction Control condition, the proportion of correct recalls was 0.375, whereas the corresponding proportion for the Proactive Interference condition was 0.319. This difference is statistically reliable. Thus there appears to be a fair amount of proactive interference due to the reinforcement of common elements in the presence of different responses. An analysis was also made of intrusion errors in the interference conditions; that is, responses occurring on test trials which are appropriate to the inserted compounds. The proportion of intrusion errors for the Retroactive Interference condition was 0.263, which, it might be noted, was higher than the proportion of correct recalls. For the Proactive Interference condition, the proportion of intrusion errors was 0.167.  Remember that the training paradigms for the facilitation conditions were the same as those for the interference conditions except that the compounds with common cues which were inserted in the training series were assigned the same response as the test items. For the Retroactive Facilitation condition, the proportion of correct recalls was 0.479, which is significantly greater than the obtained score of 0.243 for the Retroaction Control condition. The Proactive Facilitation condition alsop roduced significantly better recall than the Proaction Control condition: 0.461 correct recalls as compared with 0.375 for the control condition. The slight difference between the two facilitation conditions was not statistically reliable.  It is possible that the observed facilitation may have been due to a response recency effect; that is, a tendency to repeat responses which had occurred recently in the training series, independently of the compounds with which they were paired. As a rough check on this, a tabulation was made of "psuedo-intrusion" errors for the Retroaction Control condition; that is, responses which were assigned to the compound which occurred 12 seconds before recall of the test item. Assuming that there is no response recency effect, the expected proportion of such error responses is 0.125, which agrees with the obtained proportion of 0.139. It is concluded that the observed facilitation effects in the facilitation conditions can be attributed to the two reinforcements of the response in the presence of the common cues.  As a check for over-all changes in responding during the session, a comparison was made of correct recalls in the first 3 blocks and the last 3 blocks of the experiment. The proportion of correct recalls for all experimental conditions was 0.37 in the first 3 blocks, and 0.38 in the last 3 blocks. A similar analysis of each experimental condition separately also showed little or no changes over the session. This is consonant with the results obtained by Peterson (reviewed in Peterson, 1963), and the experiments of Keppel and Underwood (1962), who showed that proactive inhibition builds up rapidly over the first few presentations and remains fairly constant thereafter.  210 FRIEDMAN AND GELFAND  THEORETICAL ANALYSIS  We will now consider some detailed assumptions concerning the stimulus sampling, associative, and response processes which will allow quantitative predictions of the recall scores for the various experimental conditions.  We assume that there are three sources of stimulation which control behavior on both reinforcement and test trials. First, the cues associated with the compound itself; second, the cues associated with the component stimuli of the compound; and third, background or contextual cues arising from the general experimental situation.  In the case of the associative process, we assume an all-or-none retention model: A pairing of a stimulus compound and response will always result in the formation of an association, but the association may be lost over time in all-or-none manner. The associative process for the compound cues and component cues is assumed to be perfectly correlated. That is, either both the compound cues and the component cues are at full associative strength, or they both are at zero strength. If an association is lost, then the effect of a second reinforcement is the same as the first. If an association is retained over the interval between two reinforcements, then the second reinforcement serves to protect the association and to prevent any future associative loss. We assume that the background cues are randomly associated with the available responses in the situation, and the probability that they are associated with the correct response at any time is IIN, where N is the number of response alternatives.  When compounds are presented on a recall test, we assume that responding is determined by a hierarchy of response tendencies. If the association between the reinforced response and the compound cues is retained, then the correct response will always occur; if there is no response associated with the compound cues, then responses associated with the component cues determine the response; and if there are no responses associated with either the compound or component cues, then the background cues determine the response.  From the assumptions above, prediction equations can be derived for the probability of a correct recall for the various experimental conditions. These theoretical  TABLE 3  PREDICTION EQUATIONS FOR PROBABILITIES OF CORRECT RECALL  Retroactivn Control Proactivn Control 2-Reinforcement Control Retroactive Interference  Intrusion errors Proactive Interference Intrusion errors Retroactive Facilitation Proactive Facilitation  t+(1-t)IIN s+(1 -s)1IN s+(1 -s)s+(1 -s)Z1IN t+(1 -s)(1 -t)IIN  (1 -t)s+(1 -s)(1 -t)IIN s+(1 -s)(1 -t)IIN  (1 -s)t+(1 -s)(1 -t)]IN t+(1-t)s+(1-t)(1-s)IIN s+(1 -s)t+(1 -s)(1 -t)IIN  TRANSFER EFFECTS 211  expressions are given in Table 3. The parameter s is the probability that an association is retained at least 12 seconds, t is the probability that an association is retained at least 27 seconds, and N is the number of response alternatives.  We will illustrate how these equations are derived from our assumptions by going through the derivations for the Proaction Control, Proactive Interference, and Retroactive Facilitation conditions.  It will be recalled that in the Proaction Control condition, a compound received one reinforced presentation and was tested 12 seconds later for recall. According to our assumptions about the associative process, an association between compound cues and the reinforced response is always formed, and with probability s it is retained over the interval between reinforcement and test. If the association is retained, then according to the response assumptions, the correct response is made. If the association is not retained, it was assumed that the response is determined by the component cues. However, for the control items no compounds with common cues were in the training series, and thus the component cues cannot be associated with any response. In this case it was assumed that the response is determined by the background cues. Thus, the probability of a correct recall on a test trial for the Proaction Control condition is the sum of the probability s that lin association between compound cues and response is retained, and the probability (1 - s) (1/N) that an association is not retained but the background cues are associated with the correct response.  Consider now the Proactive Interference condition. The paradigm in Table 1 shows that a compound ab is tested for recall 12 seconds after reinforcement. Preceding the reinforcement, the compound ac paired with a different response is presented. A correct recall in the presence of the compound ab can occur in two ways: First, with probability s the compound cues associated with ab elicit the correct response; second with probability (1 - s) (I - t) (1/N) the compound and component cues elicit no response, but the background cues are associated with the correct response. (The component cues will never elicit a correct response since a different response was reinforced in the presence of the compound ac.)  As a final example of the derivational technique used to obtain the expressions in Table 3 we will consider the Retroactive Facilitation condition. The paradigm for the Retroactive Facilitation condition in Table 1 shows that a compound ab is paired with a response and tested 27 seconds later for recall. Between reinforcement and test, the compound ac with the common cue a and the same response is inserted in the training series. A correct recall could occur in three ways: First, from the assumptions, with probability t, the association between the cues associated with the compound ab and the response will be retained over the interval between reinforcement and test. Second, if the association is lost, then the response is determined by the component cues; and since ac is presented 12 seconds before the test, with probability s the cue a is still associated with the correct response at the time of the recall test. The probability of a correct recall in this case is (1 - t) s. Third, a correct recall could result also when  212 FRIEDMAN AND GELFAND  the correct response is associated with the background cues, but the responses associated with the compounds ab and ac are not retained; the probability of this event is (1 - t) (1 - s) (1/N).  Estimates of the parameters s and t were obtained from the Proaction and Retroaction Control conditions. Setting the observed proportion of correct recalls in the Proaction Control condition equal to the probability of a correct recall and solving for s yielded an estimate of s = 0.296. Similarly, an estimate of t = 0.148 was obtained from the Retroaction Control condition. By using these estimates of s and t in the equations of Table 3, predicted probabilities of correct recall were obtained for the other five experimental conditions. These predicted values are shown in Table 1.  An over-all comparison of the observed and predicted results show that the predictions are quite good. An especially striking confirmation of the model is the finding of equal recall in the two facilitation conditions. Except for two predictions, all predicted values are within the standard errors of the obtained proportions. The deviant predictions are, first, for the Proactive Interference condition, where there is associative loss not predicted by the model, and second, for the intrusion errors in the Retroactive Interference condition, which again indicates proactive interference not predicted by the model.  DISCUSSION  In the control conditions recall decreased as a function of the interval between reinforcement and test. This finding is consonant with the results of Peterson et al. (1962) and Estes (1961) in similar experimental situations. Because of the observed retention loss, it did not seem reasonable to use an all-or-none association process for this experiment, since the all-or-none association process (Estes, 1959; Bower, 1961) does not allow for associative loss. Estes (1961) has considered a number of modifications of the simple all-or-none process in order to deal with retention loss. In the present paper, we have considered an alternate learning process based on retention. More precisely, an all-or-none retention model was developed.  It is interesting that predictions from the all-or-none retention model are in many cases indistinguishable from the all-or-none association process. For example, if we apply the model to the usual paired-associates experiment involving multiple reinforcements, and assume that the probability of associative loss from reinforcement to reinforcement is constant, we find that the all-or-none retention model described here yields the same predictions in all cases as the all-or-none association model proposed by Bower (961). According to Bower's model, there is a fixed probability that the correct association is formed on any reinforcement; once the association is formed, the correct response then occurs on all further trials. In the all-or-none retention model proposed here, the correct association is always formed, but there is a fixed probability that it is lost between presentations; but once the association is retained between two reinforcements, then the effect of the second reinforcement is to  TRANSFER EFFECTS 213  fix the association. The critical learning events are different for the two models, but it is difficult to distinguish between them since both models predict the same sort of response protocols: a sequence of chance responding which terminates on any trial with a fixed probability followed by a jump to 100% correct responding.  A more general retention process than the simple retention model presented here can easily be formulated. In the simple retention model, if an association survives the interval between two reinforcements, then the second reinforcement always protects the association and prevents further associative loss. In the more general model, it could be assumed that there is a fixed probability that the second reinforcement will protect the association. There would thus be two theoretically distinguishable states of learning. This more general retention model is similar to Atkinson's (1962) strong and weak conditioning theory.  The notion of all-or-none forgetting used in the present model is compatible with recent information-processing theories of human memory. Briefly, these theories assume that items are stored in a finite number of memory cells. A new item placed in a cell may erase the old item in the cell, thus leading to all-or-none forgetting. The response process in these information-processing models consists of scanning the memory cells until the association is found. It is clear that the hierarchy of response tendencies assumed in the present model can be cast in terms of the search notions of the information-processing models.  The interesting finding in the interference and facilitation conditions was the asymmetry of the observed transfer effects. Equal amounts of proactive and retroactive facilitation were obtained. But in the interference conditions, proactive but not retroactive interference mediated by the common cues was observed. The model failed to predict the proactive interference effect. A number of modifications of the model have been considered in order to handle the proactive interference effect, and we will outline two such modifications here.  One possibility is that the proactive interference can be attributed to a true associative decrement. That is, the association between the test compound and response may be interfered with due to the primacy of the compound with common cues which preceded reinforcement of the test compound. Another possibility is that the observed proactive interference is not due to any associative loss, but rather to response competition at recall. That is, we can allow for the possibility that on recall trials, the common cues can evoke both responses with which they were paired. If we assume that a primacy effect is operating, so that the emitted response is the first response reinforced in the presence of the common cues, then the probability of a correct recall in the Proactive Interference condition would be s(1 - t) + (1 - s) (1 - t) I IN. This is the same as the equation for the probability of an intrusion error in the Retroactive Interference condition given in Table 3. Using the estimates of s and t from the control conditions, the predicted probability of a correct recall is 0.319, which is in good agreement with the obtained proportion. Unfortunately, these additional assumptions worsen the pre-  214  FRIEDMAN AND GELFAND  diction for intrusion errors in the Proactive Interference condition. Although the analysis in terms of response competition at recall is suggestive, it is clear that more work is needed on the question of asymmetry of transfer effects. With regard to the theoretical use of primacy, it should be pointed out that Peterson and Peterson (1962) have recently demonstrated the importance of primacy effects in paired-associate learning.  A final comment should be made concerning the generality of the response rule assumed in the model. In the present experiment, subjects never received feedback concerning correctness of responding. However, in situations in which feedback is given, it seems reasonable that the response rule will change as a function of the correctness of responding. Some data on this point is contained in a study of pattern-vs.component discrimination learning by Friedman (1962), and a theoretical treatment of response rule changes is contained in Atkinson (1960).  REFERENCES  ATKINSON, R. C. A theory of stimulus discrimination learning. In K. J. Arrow, S. Karlin, and P. Suppes (Eds.), First stanford symposium on mathematical models in the social sciences. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Univer. Press, 1960.  ATKINSON, R. C. Choice behavior and monetary payoff: Strong and weak conditioning. In J. Criswell, H. Solomon, and P. Suppes (Eds.), Mathematical methods in small group processes. Stanford, Calif: Stanford Univer. Press, 1962.  ATKINSON, R. C., AND ESTES, W. K. Stimulus sampling theory. In R. Luce, R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical psychology. Vol. 2. New York: Wiley, 1963. BOWER, G. H. Application of a model to paired-associate learning. Psychometrika, 1961, 26, 255-280.  BURKE, C. K., AND ESTES, W. K. A component model for stimulus variables in discrimination learning. Psychometrika, 1957, 22, 133-145.  ESTES, W. K. Component and pattern models with Markovian interpretations. In R. Bush and W. Estes (Eds.), Studies in mathematical learning theory. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Univer. ESTES, W. K. New developments in statistical behavior theory: Differential tests of axioms for associative learning. Psychometrika, 1961, 26, 73-84.  Press, 1959.  ESTES, W. K., AND HOPKINS, B. L. Acquisition and transfer in pattern-vs.-component discrimination learning. 1. exp. Psychol., 1961, 61, 322-328.  FRIEDMAN, M. P. Application of statistical learning theory to component-vs.-compound discrimination learning. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Indiana Univer., 1962.  KEPPEL, G., AND UNDERWOOD, B. K. Proactive inhibition in short-term retention of single items. .y. verb. learning verb. Behav., 1962, 1, 153-161.  PETERSON, L. R. Immediate memory: Data and theory. In C. Cofer and B. Musgrave (Eds.), Verbal behavior and learning. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1963.  PETERSON, L. R., AND PETERSON, M. J. Minimal paired-associate learning. Y. exp. Psychol., 1962, 63, 521-527.  PETERSON, L. R., SALTZMAN, D., HILLNER, K., AND LAND, V. Recency and frequency in pairedassociate learning. Y. exp. Psychol., 1962, 63, 396-403.  RECEIVED: June 26, 1963  Printed in Belgium