10.1016/0022-2496(64)90011-2
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 1, 392-404 (1964)  An All-or-None Model for Noncorrection Routines with Elimination of Incorrrect Responses*  RICHARD MILLWARD  Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island  A model is developed for paired-associate learning in which the correct response is not identified on error trials (the  noncorrection procedure). The principal assumptions made are (1) that subjects can learn to eliminate error responses and (2)  that response elimination and associative processes are all-or-none. A number of statistics including the mean learning curve,  sequential statistics, the distributions of the trial of the last error, the total number of errors, and the number of error  trials between the kth and (k -}- 1)st success are presented for the three-response case.  The one-element stimulus-sampling model (Bower, 1961; Estes, 1959) has been very successful in describing simple  paired-associate learning experiments. A natural extension of this model was made by Bower (1962) for the noncorrection and  partialcorrection procedures. In his paper, Bower assumes that, in a noncorrection situation, an incorrect trial with no  feedback leaves the probability of an error response unchanged. His explanation for this null effect is that saying "wrong" to  a subject produces an emotional response and as a consequence the subject does not consider the set of alternative responses.  In Bower's partial-correction situation, the subject is not told that he is wrong but is told to consider a set of alternative  responses containing the correct response. In this situation, Bower assumes that one of the k alternatives presented after an  error response is selected for rehearsal and then is learned or not learned with the same probability as correct and  reinforced responses. He presents empirical support for these assumptions.  This paper presents a model which assumes that subjects can eliminate error responses in the noncorrection procedure. No  question is raised about the interpretation given the simple noncorrection and partial-correction procedures discussed by  Bower. However, his interpretation may not be universally applicable. By the same theoretical argument that Bower uses to  justify his results, one can predict errorresponse elimination. According to the contiguity explanation of reinforcement, the  * Some of this paper was developed while the author was a Social Science Research Fellow at the Summer Institute on  Mathematical Models for Choice and Decision under the direction of Frank Restle. Other support came from National Science  Foundation Grant No. G-18110.  392  ALL-OR-NONE MODEL 393  last response made to a stimulus is reinforced. Bower has shown that instructions to subjects to select an alternative  response on error trials is effective. In a similar way, emphasizing avoidance of the error response could lead to its  elimination. This effect might be produced by instructing the subject not to make the same error response twice or by  penalizing the subject for repeating an error response. Furthermore, Bower's experiments did not let the subjects adjust to  the experimental situation. It is possible that the emotional effects of "wrong" may adapt out and the subject may eventually  learn to eliminate the error response.  Finally, Bower does not present a complete set of statistics for his theory. Certain details in his model are not made  explicit-in particular, the effect of learning the wrong alternative. An exact assumption about the learning of wrong  alternatives relates a special case of the model to be presented to Bower's model. For this case, the present paper adds  statistics to the model already presented by Bower. This case will be discussed after the development of the error-response  elimination model.  THE MODEL  The model is all-or-none in two respects: The learning of the correct response is considered to occur or not to occur on  correct trials, and the elimination of an error response is considered to occur or not to occur on an incorrect trial. In  situations involving three or more responses, the subject does not receive information concerning the correct response when he  is wrong. However, he can learn to eliminate the error response and subsequently to choose from the remaining responses. This  model incorporates these ideas into a Markov chain. The example used for deriving statistics is a three-response model. The  extension to four or more responses is logically straightforward but computationally a bit tedious. It is assumed that the  response alternatives are known to the subject and that he responds on every trial.  Axioms  (1) Associated with each stimulus item is a stimulus element which may be in any of N states, si , i = 0, 1, - - - N - 1. N is  the number of known response alternatives.  (2) On each trial the element is sampled and changes states according to the conditioning rules:  (a) If a correct response occurs, then the element changes from state si to sN_1 with probability c2 and remains in state si  with probability 1 - c2 .  (b) If an incorrect response occurs, then the element changes from state si to si+i with probability ai and remains in state  si with probability 1 - ai .  (3) The probability of a correct response on trials when the element is in state si  394 MILLWARD  is 1l(N - i). Thus, in state sN_1 , a correct response is always made and Axiom 2b is not applicable.  (4) The probabilities c2 and ai are independent of the trial number and the outcomes of preceding trials.  For the special case N = 3 considered here, the following special notation is used: aO = a, al = cl , and c2 = c2 for the  conditioning parameters, and g = 3 and g = 2 for the probabilities of a correct response when the element is in states so and  sl respectively. The change in notation al to cl reflects the fact that with only two alternatives, the subject can implicitly  correct and therefore gain information about the correct response and not just the error response. The constants g and g have  been left as variables to facilitate statistical derivations if more than three responses are considered.  More explicitly, the model may be stated as a Markov chain with states So to S4 . If we designate a correct response by 0 and  an error response by 1, then So is a state with the stimulus element in state so and response 1, i.e., So = (so, 1). Likewise,  states Sl to S4 are defined as (so , 0), (sl , 1), (sl , 0), and (s2 , 0). The transition matrix of the Markov chain is then  defined:  S4 S3 S2 S1 So  S, 1 0 0 0 0  S3 C2 (I - C2) g (I - C2) (1 - g) 0 0  T=S2 Cl (I -C1)g (1 -Cl)(1 -g) 0 0  S1 C2 0 0 (1 - C2) 9 (1 - C2) (1 - 9)  SO 0 ag all -g) (1 -a)g (1 -a)(1 -g)  The usual procedure in one- or two-element models has been to define the states of the Markov chain as states of conditioning  and to determine the response probabilities by a rule relating the probability of response to the state of conditioning. In  the present case, the states will include the response made by the subject. That is, the states are a combination of  conditioning and response outcomes.  There are advantages and disadvantages to incorporating the responses in the states of the Markov chain. One disadvantage is  the increased number of states. An advantage is that statistics concerning the observed response sequence are derived directly  from the transition matrix. For example, if the responses are not incorporated in the states and if the probability of an  error on trial n is desired, one must, for each state, consider whether an error occurred if the process was in the state. On  the other hand, if the states include the response made, only the error-response states have to be considered. In this paper,  the chief reason for including the response in the states of the Markov chain is to allow for different learning parameters on  error and correct trials. If the  ALL-OR-NONE MODEL 395  states do not include the response made, only an average learning parameter can be used. For many statistics, the average  parameter is sufficient; for others, the use of separate parameters simplifies the derivation of the statistics. Greeno (1964)  has recently discussed this problem in detail.  INITIAL CONDITIONS AND SIMPLIFYING NOTATION  The following definitions will simplify the equations to be derived.  Pi,n = the probability of being in state Si on trial n. 0 = a(I - g) + 9C2  = c1(1 - g) + gc2 . [(1  7rn =  (B - B)  b = (1 - a) (1 -g). b = (1 - cl) (I - g).  d=1-(1-c2)g. d=1-(1-C) g. e = (I - c2) (I -g). e = (I - C2) (I - g)'  _ (1 -a) 9C a9  K C  1 -(I -c2)g I -(I -C)g  g1=a(I-g) (I (0 -6)  xn = a random variable: xn = I if an error occurs on trial n; xn = 0 if a correct response occurs on trial n.  The following initial conditions will be assumed for all derivations: Po,l = (1 -g); Pl,l =b'; and P2,1 = Ps.1 = P4,1 = 0.  STATISTICS  The derivation of the probability obeing in the various states on trial n is straightforward and is presented here for  completeness:  P4,~ = I - a(I - g) -n - (I - 0)n-1.  P3.. = ag(I - g) -n . P2,n=a(I -g)(I -g)Ttn. P1,. =g(I - g)n-1.  Po,n = (I -b") (I - 0)".  396 MILLWARD  Mean Learning Curve  Because of the way the states are defined, an error can occur on trial n only if the process is in state Sor S2 on trial n.  The probability of an error on trial n, PP,, is the sum of the probabilities of being in states Sand S2 , i.e.,  Pe,n = Pn + P2.n * (3)  The expected total number of errors is  E(Exn] = (1 9 g) + (B 06 B) K' .  Matrix H  Let Q be the 4 x 4 matrix of the transient states. Kemeny and Snell (1960) show that matrix N, the fundamental matrix, is the  inverse of matrix (I - Q):  The ni;th entry in N gives the mean number of times the process will be in state S; , given that it started in state Si .  Since matrix N is not used explicitly, it is not presented here; it is, however, needed for the derivation of matrix H, which  follows and is used.  The element hi; of the H matrix is the probability that the process will go at least once to the state S; given that it  started in Si . Thus, 1 - hi; is the probability that the process will never enter state S; , given that it started in Si . As  Kemeny and Snell prove, H = (N - I) Ndg, where Ndg is the diagonal matrix derived from N by setting all elements off the main  diagonal to zero. That is, H equals  S 3 (1 - d) i 0 0  (1 - 6) d    S2 (1 -CI)d 6 0 0  - -    (1 -o ) d    S, aeg ae(1 - g) (1 - d) e  -     1 (1 - 6) 0 0d (1 - b) d  S, -adg ad(1 -g) (1- a) g b  (1 - 6) 0 Od (1 - b) d  Trial of the Last Error  For the last error to occur on trial n in state S, the process must be in state Son trial n, must not return to S, and  must not enter S2 . This has the probability  ALL-OR-NONE MODEL 397  Po,m(1 - hoo) (1 - ho2). The probability that the last error occurs on trial n in state S2 is derived in a similar way and is  P2,.,,(1 - h22). For n = 0, that is, no errors, the process must start in S1 and never go to state So . In terms of the  parameters of the model, the distribution of L (the trial of the last error) is  n=0   P(L - - (6)  = n) _ 1 (1 C2)g   l KOP.,,, + K2P2,n n>1,   where Ko was defined earlier and   K2   I - (1 - C2) g   The expectation and variance of L are   E[L] g)   = ~I Ko + [ - I (7)  2 1 K2K1'   92 62      Var [L] =(1 -g) rI 2 I   -  E[L]2 (8)  _ 1 K + [ I(2 _ 1 ) - r2   8 1 )~ K 2 K 1   $2 L S ~L l e 2 \   Number of Error Trials before First Success  Let f be the number of error trials before the first success. The distribution for f is  P(f=k)_ g k=0  - ~bk-1Ka + [bk-1 - bk-1l Kq k > 1  where  K3 = (I - g) [(I - a) g + ag],  (1 - g) (I - g) a[c1 + (1 - c1) g]  kb - b)  The expectation and variance off are  1 - - 1  E[f] - (I 1- b)2 K3 + (I - b)2 ( 1 g)2 K4 (10)  Var [fl = (I Ib)2 ( (I 2 b) -1) Ka  f__l (_2 _ 1 (_2 +L(1-b)21(1-b) -1)-(1-b)2\(1-b)  1), K,1 - E[f]2. (11)  398 MILLWARD  Total Number of Errors  Let u1 = Ix,, for n = 1, 2, --- . Since each x,, is a random variable, u1 is a random variable designating the total number of  errors. The following facts are relevant to the derivation of the distribution function of u1: (1) errors occur only in states  So and S2 , (2) since S2 can be reached only by passing through So , one error must occur in So , (3) if there is only one  error, i.e., m = 1, then S2 is never entered, and (4) if there are m > 1 errors, then m - i of them can occur in So and i of  them in S2 , i = 0, 1, ... m - 1. The probabilities of m = 0, m = 1, and m > 1 errors are derived from the H matrix (5). The  distribution function for u1 is  9c2 m = 0 1 -(I - C2)9  P(ul = m) = { (12  Km-1  5[hoo (1 -hoo)- + [ho- 1(1 - h,) -  (hoo - h22) h2 1(1 - h22)] Ks m 1,  where  Ka c2)g)2  Ks = Ksho2 all - g) (1 - S)  -- (ho. - h22) B[1 - (1 - C2) gl - 6[1 - (1 - C2) gl  This distribution is the sum of three geometrically distributed random variables; thus, the computation of the first and  second raw moments is easy. The expectation of u1 was presented earlier (4) and the second moment is  (1 + hoo) Ks 1 + hoo _ 1 + h22 E[u1) (1 - hoo)3 + (1 - hoo)2 (1 - h22)2 j Ks ,  (13)  Number of Errors between Successes  Let vk designate the random variable representing the number of errors between the kth and (k + 1)st success. Naturally, after  complete learning, the distribution of vx has all its density at zero. The probability that a correct response occurs by  guessing will be defined first and used in defining the distribution of vk .  Let gk be the probability that the kth success occurs by entering S1 and gk be the probability that the kth success occurs by  entering state S3 . The solutions for gk and gk are  gk = (1 - Cl)'-1g1 (14)  hk-1 33 - hk-1  gk = g1hM 1 + 1g1 [ h33 - h1l ] >  (15)  ALL-OR-NONE MODEL 399  where gl is the probability that the first success occurs by entering Sl and equals g/(1 - b) and gl is the probability that  the first success occurs by entering S3 and equals (1 - g) (1 - hol) ho3 . Of course, 1 - gk - gk is the probability that the  kth success occurs because of prior conditioning, that is, the process is in state S4 .  With gk and g, defined, the probability of j errors between the kth and (k + 1)st success is easily derived.  1 -(1 -c2)L(1 -g)9k+(1 -g)gkj gkeb'-1[(1 - a) g + ag] -f gkeb'-1(1 - b)  bi-1 - bi-1  +gkea(1 -g)(1 -b) [ b -b  j=0  Error Runs  The random variable u;,,,, equals 1 if there are j consecutive errors starting on trial n and equals 0 otherwise. u; is the  sum over all trials, n, of u;,n . Since the technique for determining the expectation of u; is well known, only the final  result is given.  (1 - g) b,-'  (17)  Bush (1959) has shown that r; , the number of runs of errors of length j in an infinite sequence, can be simply expressed as a  function of the u;-tuples. The relationship is r; = u; - 2u;+1 -}- u;+2 . If R equals the total number of runs, then R = ul -  tie .  Sequential Statistics  Let s ,,, be the joint probability of a sequence of j consecutive responses starting on trial n, i.e.,  s". = P(xm (1 x.', () ... xn+i-1). (18)  Since there are two possible types of responses, correct and incorrect, there are 2i such sequences and i designates the  particular sequence, i = 1, 2, 2i. The value of i is arbitrary but will be defined in a natural way by  i = 1 + 2. + 21x.+1 + 22xn+z + -.. 2;-lx.+j-1.  Table 1 presents the values of s2,. and s3,. . (For a discussion of the technique for deriving sequential statistics, see  Atkinson and Estes, 1963.) If the joint probability is wanted, not for a single trial, but, say, for the first n trials, the  valuesin Table 1 can be summed. These statistics are very useful in estimating parameters or testing the adequacy of the model.  MILLWARD  TABLE 1 SEQUENTIAL STATISTICS  Joint probability  S2, n  S3, 1 -  PO,. -  1 P2,n -  ePl,-  jP3,n  2 [(l - a) g + agl PO,. + [(1 - et) k + ell P2,m  3 eP,,n + jP3,n  4 [b + a(l - k)] PO,- + 6P2,-n  1 P4,rt + let + (l - C2)F.C2 + (1 - C2)' 9'1 P1,n  + 1C2 + (1 - C2) &2 + (1 - C2)2 k21 P2,n  2 - a) g(l - e) + ak(l - e)1 Po,n + hI + (l - Cl) k(l - P)) P2 n  3 e[(1 - a) g + ail Pl,n + e(l - b) P3,n  4 [b(l - a) g + akb + all - k) (l - b)1 Po,n + b(1 - b) P2,n  5 e(l - e2) 9P1,tt + e(l - C2) kP3,n  6 [gb + ak(1 - k)] (l - C2) Po,n + b(1 -  c2)kP2,n  7 [b + all - k)1 eP,,.. + AP3,n  8 [b2 + a(l - k) (b + b)1 Po,n + b2P2.n  Au tocorrelations of Errors  Let ck,n = xnxn+x . Obviously, ck,n will be 1 only if there is an error on both n and trial n + k. The expectation of the sum  of ck.,, over all trials is  trial  E [Y, ck.n] = (1 e g) [b(1 - B)k-1 + all - g) (l - e)w-1 n  + a(l -g)(l -a)(l -g)-x+ b(1 -B)61 -g) a1 .  (19)  Expected Number of Errors Following an Error on Trial n  In the simple one-element model, the expected number of errors after an error is a constant because an error indicates that  the element is in the unconditioned state where it started. In the response-elimination model under consideration, a similar  analysis could be made, but since there are two states in which errors can occur, the process  ALL-OR-NONE MODEL 401  is not necessarily restarted after an error. The solution of the expected total number of errors following an error on trial n  is  Po.n r(I - a) (I - g) + all - g) (I - g(I - C2))1  P". + P". 0 06  + P2.n _ (1 -C1) (I -g) PO,. + P2,n  (20)  DIRECT TESTS OF ASSUMPTIONS  The one-element model assumes that if an error occurs on trial n, conditioning did not occur before trial n. Suppes and  Ginsberg (1962) have suggested the use of a number of statistics to test the assumption of Bernoulli trials before the last  error. In the response-elimination model, there are two error states, so Suppes and Ginsberg's tests are not appropriate. For  example, the stationarity curve is not necessarily stationary in this case. To illustrate: Consider all sequences before their  last error if the parameter a = 0. In this case, the resulting stationarity curve has the probability of an error at .67. But  if a = 1, then, after one error, the stationarity curve would again be stationary but with a probability of .50. For values of  a between 0 and 1, there will be some sequences with the element in state so and some sequences with the element in state sl .  Thus, the stationarity curve may range between .67 and .50.  Another assumption implicitly made in this model is that the error response can be eliminated only on error trials. Bower  (1962) used the stationarity of the probability of a success after n consecutive errors from trial 1 as support for the null  effect. The response-elimination model assumes that this probability will change according to the function  Y = (I - g) bn-1[(I - a) g + ag] + An-1(I - g) [(I - cl) g + ail (21) (I - g) bn-1 + An-1(I - g)  where Y = the probability of success on trial n + I, given n consecutive errors starting on trial I, and where  A related statistical procedure to check the assumption of random guessing and independent trials uses the actual responses  made rather than their correctness. For each sequence of responses, let n be the last trial after which all three responses  are given. Then, before n, conditioning has not occurred and one response has not been eliminated. If the proportions of the  "one" responses, the "two" responses, and the "three" responses are made for each trial n, including only sequences for which  n < n,  402 MILLWARD  then the stationarity curve of these three proportions should be constant at 3. If learning is rapid, h will be very small and  the stationarity curve may not be especially useful. Even with random guessing, a large proportion of sequences can have h = 0  because runs involving two events and not the third are highly probable and conditioning may take place before too many trials  have occurred.  PARAMETER ESTIMATION AND GOODNESS OF FIT  Estimating the parameters of the response-elimination model is not, unfortunately, a simple matter. There is no simple  statistic to estimate any one parameter. All three parameters are involved in every statistic described above except the  distribution of the number of errors before the first success. This distribution does not involve c, , but a and cl are not  easily separated. Certain estimation procedures seem promising and are presently being examined. In particular, a minimum  Chi-square technique using the sequential statistics and a direct-search procedure (cf. Flood and Leon, 1963; Hooke and  Jeeves, 1961) is being programmed.  ALTERNATIVE EFFECTS OF A NONCORRECTION TRIAL  Although only a specific assumption concerning the effect of a noncorrection trial has been considered-that the subject can  eliminate the error response-the author does not contend that this is the only possible effect. Other effects and other models  for variant routines are possible and have been considered. The null-effect assumption for an error response has already been  mentioned and it will be discussed further later.  In order to consider all possibilities, the idea that an error response increases the probability of that error response  should be mentioned. Since subjects usually learn the correct response to all items, any consideration of the hypothesis that  the error response increases in probability must include a rule for eventually eliminating the error response. Increasing the  error-response probability and eventually eliminating the error response are contradictory processes, at least in a simple  interpretation. The fact that the correct response is learned seems to be sufficient evidence that the hypothesis is wrong.  There is, however, at least one way to have an increase in the probability of an error response and still get learning of the  correct response to all items. Assume that the error response is conditioned, but only temporarily. When it is conditioned,  each trial provides an opportunity for the conditioning to fail and for the subject to select again from all responses. This  interpretation is similar to a model developed by Crothers (1963), but is here applied to the error response rather than to  the correct response.  ALL-OR-NONE MODEL 403  Although it violates the spirit of the analysis of the effect of noncorrection trials presented in this paper, setting a = 0  in the response-elimination model brings it into agreement with Bower's results and interpretation of the noncorrection  situation. The response-elimination model was not intended for the partial-correction situation, but it can be applied to it.  Bower's interpretation of what happens on error trials in the partial-correction routine is that the subject selects one of  the k responses presented after the error response and rehearses it. If he learns it and it is correct, he responds with it  from then on; if he does not learn it or if it is incorrect, he guesses again from the total set of alternatives. Bower is not  explicit about whether subjects learn incorrect alternatives from the set presented after an error response. He simply uses  the probability that the correct item is selected and conditioned from the k alternatives and the complement of this  probability. If his idea of response selection and rehearsal is to be treated in detail, some assumption must be made about  the case where a subject learns an incorrect alternative response. Certainly, one effect of learning an incorrect response  would be to make the probability of an error on the next trial equal to 1.0.  In order to apply the response-elimination model to the partial-correction situation, one might assume that the subject  remembers the set of alternatives presented and when the stimulus next occurs guesses from this set. The idea that the subject  can remember the set of alternative responses on the next trial and then guess from the set is not very tenable. Bower's  assumption that one item is selected for rehearsal and is learned is more reasonable. However, in the noncorrection situation,  it is not unreasonable that the subject might learn which response is wrong and to eliminate it when he guesses on the next  trial. Even in the partial case, if the number of alternatives is large, it might be just as reasonable to remember the error  response as to select for rehearsal one item from a large set.  These two interpretations-error elimination and item selection-can be incorporated into the error-elimination model presented  above. Let us assume that, in the partial-correction situation, n alternative responses are available, k alternative responses  are presented after an error, and g = 1ln and g = Ilk. The probability that the subject learns one of the responses of the  reduced set is a. If the response learned from the reduced set k is not correct, then the subject learns another response from  the next reduced set. We explicitly assume here that he never again guesses from the N responses but always from the k  alternatives. Then cl is the probability of selecting and learning the correct response from the k alternatives. On the other  hand, if the subject eliminates the error response, then g = 1/n and g = 1/(n - 1), and the model as developed holds.  REFERENCES  ATKINSON, R. C., AND ESTES, W. K. Stimulus sampling theory. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of  mathematical psychology, Vol. 11. New York: Wiley, 1963. Pp. 121-268.  404 MILLIVARD  BOWER, G. H. Application of a model to paired-associate learning. Psychometrika, 1961, 26, 255-280.  BOWER, G. H. An association model for response and training variables in paired-associate learning. Psychol. Rev., 1962, 69,  34-53.  BUSH, R. R. Sequential properties of linear models. In R. R. Bush and W. K. Estes (Eds.), Studies in mathematical learning  theory. Stanford: Stanford Univ. Press, 1959. Pp. 293-307. CROTHERS, E. General Markov models for learning with inter-trial  forgetting. Psychol. Ser. Inst. for Mathematical Studies in the Social Sciences Tech. Rep., 1963, No. 53.  ESTES, W. K. Component and pattern models with Markovian interpretations. In R. R. Bush and W. K. Estes (Eds.), Studies in  mathematical learning theory. Stanford: Stanford Univ. Press, 1959. Pp. 9-52.  FLOOD, M. M., AND LEON, A. A direct search code for the estimation of parameters in stochastic learning models. Mental Health  Research Institute Preprint 109. Ann Arbor: Univ. of Michigan, May 1963.  GREENO, J. G. Markovian learning processes with identifiable states: 1. General considerations and application to all-or-none  learning. Mimeographed paper, Indiana Univ., 1964. HooKE, R., AND JEEVES, T. A. "Direct search" solution of numerical and  statistical problems. Y. Assoc. Computing Mach., 1961, 8, 212-229.  KEMENY, J. G., AND SNELL, J. L. Finite Markov chains. Princeton: Van Nostrand, 1960. SUPPES, P., AND GINSBERG, ROSE. A  fundamental property of all-or-none models, binomial distribution of responses prior to conditioning, with application to  concept formation in children. Psychol. Rev., 1963, 70, 139-161.  RECEIVED, January 2, 1964