10.1016/0022-2496(64)90012-4
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: I, 405-417 (1964)  Programming a Computer Model of Neurosis'  KENNETH MARK COLBY  Computer Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, California  AND  JOHN P. GILBERT  Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences, Stanford, California  Computer simulation of pathological thought and emotion is considered. A model of neurosis and its realization in the form of  a program are outlined. The organization of data structures and their processing to yield a program output similar to verbal  and nonverbal behavior typical of neurotic patients are described in detail.  Among the higher mental processes of interest are those which can be termed neurotic, involving mild to moderate  psychopathology. A number of theories have been proposed to account for them but, to our knowledge, none has been stated in  the explicit form of a computer program. We shall assume that for the readers of this journal the chief focus of interest will  be on the realization of a model of neurosis in the form of a computer program. We shall also assume some familiarity with  computer models of other cognitive processes, particularly those utilizing concepts of list structures and list processing  (Green, 1961; Newell and Simon, 1961).  Since the principal output of a person in the clinical psychiatric situation is verbal, one of our problems is to simulate by  means of a program those mental processes which produce verbal output. We are not, however, concerned with the linguistic  problem of generating good English sentences and we have avoided this problem by using a rigid format for sentences and a  restricted vocabulary. Closeness to natural language is not, therefore, a criterion for judging the program's output, which is  intended only to reflect inner mental states being simulated. It is not the format of the output which is important but the  emotional content of the sentences being expressed.  1 This investigation was supported by Grant MH 06645-01, 02 from the National Institute of Mental Health, and Grant NSF-GP 948  from the National Science Foundation.  405  406 COLBY AND GILBERT  In the clinical situation one also observes nonlexical linguistic and extralinguistic output from persons. This output is  represented in the program output by numbers whose values and their changes, again it must be emphasized, are meant to reflect  certain inner mental processes being simulated.  The present form of the program represents only a first step in an attempt to investigate current theories of thought  processes which include psychopathology. A brief introductory summary before the detailed presentation which follows might  clarify what the task of the program is and what it is not.  We are attempting to simulate a person who has severe conflicts in his belief systems. These intense conflicts inhibit a free  expression of beliefs and induce negative affects such as anxiety. To cope with these conflicts and to reduce negative  affects, several mechanisms are available to deal with conflict and reduce anxiety, but at a pathogenic cost of producing  distorted beliefs which are disguised substitutes for the original beliefs in conflict. The program at this point has no  self-corrective processes. Our ongoing work involves attempts to introduce self-corrective mechanisms which can be facilitated  by external input such as occurs in psychotherapeutic situations.  THE MODEL  We start by postulating a hypothetical mental system in which the data of experience are represented in two major forms, a  dictionary structure and a belief structure. A dictionary structure consists of word-names which represent minimum  distinguishable symbolic entities irreducible at the symbol-processing level of explanation. When combined according to  certain rules these atomic dictionary units contribute semantic terms to molecular units called "beliefs." The dictionary  structure represents a schematization of knowledge while the belief structure represents a thematization of knowledge. A  belief is a specific proposition accepted and held as true. It consists of informational (semantic) and energic (quantitative)  components.  We make a distinction between emotion, affect, and feeling. A belief is considered to be both an emotion and an idea. It is an  "emotional" idea, or, in Abelson's terms, a "hot" cognition (Abelson, 1963). An affect is a type of term located in a belief,  e.g., in the belief "I Fear Men" the term "Fear" represents an affect. A feeling represents the state of a regulatory monitor  (see section on Data) which can be reported on using affective terms, e.g., "I Feel Fear."  The first action postulate states that the system when activated attempts to express its beliefs as output. Beliefs are  collected into complexes according to relevance criteria set by a complex determining belief and attempt is made to express  each belief in the complex in turn. A second action postulate states that a belief can be expressed only if it does not run  into a countermanding belief which gives rise to a state of intense conflict. When two beliefs countermand each other and the  resultant  COMPUTER MODEL OF NEUROSIS 407  state of intense conflict is not handled integrativelv, a neurotic process exists. This conflicted, discordant clash and its  extended consequences are assumed to be the basis of psychopathology.  When a severe conflict state develops, a danger is recognized and the usual processing of a complex cannot continue until the  conflict state is reduced. Severe conflict is considered to be dangerous both since it involves a violation of some imperative  and since it is paralyzing to further decision and action. An attempt at conflict reduction is made by transforming the  initial belief, the "regnant," which ran into a countermanding belief in the complex. Depending on the degree of conflict as  represented by the danger level, distorting transformations are carried out on a regnant until a belief is created which can  get through the complex without conflict. It is this created belief which is then expressed, the regnant from which it derived  remaining unexpressed but still in the complex and in the belief structure. Unless it is already present the created belief is  added to the complex and to the belief structure.  During processing of a complex, a number of monitors track what is taking place in order to decide whether the processing  should continue, be temporarily interrupted (as, for example, to reduce conflict), or be terminated. These monitors estimate  degrees of danger, excitation, action-valence, pleasure, self-esteem and well-being. (We shall have no hesitation in using  anthropomorphic and introspective terms in describing the behavior of this hypothetical system. However, the terms refer to a  definite computation in the program.) If various criteria of optimality obtain, processing of a complex, with each belief  being expressed in turn, will continue to the end of the complex. If they do not obtain, processing of the complex will be  terminated and another complex selected for processing. Interruptions of the processing of a complex can take place for (a)  conflict reduction and (b) self-correction.  The complex which is most urgent is that which is selected. Each belief is assumed to possess a quantitative "charge" which  represents its degree of interest or import (to be contrasted with another quantity representing degree of acceptance, i.e.,  degree to which a belief is held to be true). The charge on a complex represents the average of all charges on the beliefs in  that complex. The threshold of a complex is a quantity which the total charge must exceed before a complex will be selected  for processing. The most urgent complex is one whose average charge exceeds its threshold by the greatest amount.  When a belief is expressed, it loses some of its charge, as does the charge on the complex being processed. If processing  continues to the end of the complex without difficulty, the threshold of the complex is lowered, giving it a better chance for  early selection, and thresholds of all complexes are lowered somewhat, enhancing exploration and expression of the belief  structure. If processing of the complex is terminated due to difficulty as estimated by the tracking monitors, the threshold  of the complex is raised and thresholds of all complexes are raised, thus limiting the selection of a complex to a smaller  set. Periodically the complexes are reformed. Once activated,  14  408 COLBY AND GILBERT  such a system continues indefinitely through time, continuously generating output consisting of expressed beliefs and monitor  reports regarding how well the system is functioning.  The output or observable macroprocesses of the system which characterize it as pathological are the episodes of anxiety  attacks and disturbances in pleasure, excitation, esteem, and well-being. Also it shows incongruities between the expressed  beliefs and feeling reports, and there occur semantic incongruities in the output expressions. At the level of microprocesses,  what is pathological is the intense conflict state with a holding back of certain highly charged beliefs and the expression of  disguised substitutes which are distorted transformations of the beliefs in conflict. The distortions are only rarely  recognized as such by the system, since it has difficulty calling into play its self-corrective processes.  The model represents a beginning first approximation to an ill-defined problem in an undeveloped field. It attempts to combine  what we consider to be the best hypotheses available regarding neurosis, both from the literature and from our own experience.  Like all models it is adequate in some respects and not in others. We are not concerned here with the truth status of the  major and subsidiary hypotheses so much as with the perhaps oversimplifying boundary conditions and simplifying assumptions.  The model omits consideration of ontogenesis and, since it is entirely at a symbol-processing level, it does not take into  account epigenesis (development from interaction between genetic and environmental agencies). But one must start somewhere and  we hope in time to improve the prototype as well as to develop others.  THE PROGRAM  The program is coded in SUBALGOL (Stanford University's version of BALGOL), and runs on an IBM 7090. At the time of writing  (December, 1963), it requires about 25,000 locations in the machine. The program is compiled in about 0.5 min and runs any  number of minutes desired. Twenty cycles (a cycle consists of processing a complex to its end or until it is switched off)  require 0.4 min with an output of 240 sentences.  DATA  Data are stored in two-dimensional arrays which can be visualized as matrices. There are four major portions of data (capitals  will be used for the program's specific terms): Belief Matrix, Reason Matrix, Dictionary, and Substitute Matrix. (For practice  purposes, actual data were taken from tapes and notes on a particular patient who had been in analysis for 3 years. Thus the  belief and dictionary structures are idiosyncratic but, of course, other patients have similar beliefs and similar dictionary  organizations.)  COMPUTER MODEL OF NEUROSIS 409  The Belief Matrix contains, under starting conditions, 114 beliefs, each row representing a particular belief location and  each column a particular term of the belief. The beliefs are stored in a fixed format with each row-column cell containing a  particular type of item. Since space has not been a problem thus far, no attempt has been made to pack the data more tightly.  In each row the cell contents are as follows:  Cell 1 -Complexity (a number (0, 1, 2, 3) indicating whether this is a simple or compound belief)  2 - Balance (a number (plus, minus, or zero) indicating the balance state of the belief)  3 - Acceptance (a number (e.g., 7,000) indicating a degree to which the belief is accepted as true)  4 - Reason Matrix Location (a number (e.g., 77) indicating the location on another matrix of a list of reasons (other beliefs)  which justify this one)  5 - Mark (a number for marking purposes)  6 - Level (a plus or minus number (e.g., - 3) indicating degree of imperativeness and whether the belief contains a "Not")  7 - Residual Charge (a number (e.g., 5,000) indicating how much charge (degree of import) remains on the belief after  expression, during buildup, etc.)  8 - Fixed Charge (a starting degree of import (e.g., 8,000) which remains the same throughout and is used for various  computational purposes)  9 - Subject Modifier (a number (e.g., 221) which represents a location on the Dictionary matrix of a word (e.g., of an  adjective). It is zero if no modifier exists.)  10 - Subject (a number (e.g., 72) indicating the location on the Dictionary matrix of the word, e.g., ("Father") which is the  subject of this belief)  11 -First Verb Modifier (a number indicating the Dictionary location of a "Not" if one exists in this belief, otherwise zero)  12 - Second Verb Modifier (a number indicating the Dictionary location of past or future tense terms. If zero, the belief is  in the present tense)  13 - Verb (a number indicating the Dictionary location of the verb of the belief)  14 - Object Modifier (a number indicating the Dictionary location of a part of speech modifying the object of belief)  15 - Object (a number indicating the Dictionary location of the object of belief)  As stated, cell # 1 indicates whether a belief is simple or compound. If the number is zero, the belief is simple and no  unpacking must be done. If the number is 1, this indicates that the number in cell 10 does not represent a Dictionary  location, but  410 COLBY AND GILBERT  another belief location, i.e., the subject of this belief is another belief. If the number in column cell ,# 1 is 2, this  indicates that the object of the belief is another belief which can be found in the Belief Matrix at the location given by the  number in cell 15. If the cell # I is 3, this indicates that both the subject and object of this belief consist of other  beliefs. One could potentially have as many levels of complexity as one desires, but we have limited starting conditions of  the system to two levels. That is, if the subject or object of a belief is another belief, this second belief in turn is not a  compound but rather a simple belief. When running, the program can generate beliefs of any degree of complexity.  Cell ,# 4 of a belief contains the location on the Reason Matrix (another twodimensional array) of a list of reasons  justifying the belief. The reasons are other beliefs which in turn have reasons. Thus the Belief Matrix combined with the  Reason Matrix comprise a cross-referenced belief structure with the beliefs having reasons of various number and depth  "hanging" from them.  A second portion of data termed the Dictionary is also stored in a two-dimensional array with indices ranging from - 20 to  300. Each row at a positive integer location contains a word-name and its accompanying list as described below. Contents of  the columns are:  Cell # 1 and 2 - (a Dictionary word in alphanumeric form. Since the 7090 allows only six characters per word, two cells are  used in order to store words up to 12 characters. Words over 12 characters are appropriately abbreviated)  3 - (a number indicating a part of speech, i.e., whether the word is a noun, verb, adjective, adverb, conjunction or  miscellaneous)  4 - (a number indicating an assigned valence, positive, negative, or neutral)  5 - (a number indicating a location on the Substitute Matrix, at which is stored another list [to be described presently])  6-10 - (numbers indicating Dictionary locations of properties of this word, i.e., those classes of which it is an instance. If  the 10th cell contains a negative integer, it indicates a location of a continuation line on the negative portion of the  declared array)  This latter convention for a continuation line allows the Dictionary array to be declared as 10 in width. Some words have  associative lists longer than 10. These words are assigned continuation lines. If the 10th cell of a continuation line  contains a negative integer, this indicates a continuation of the continuation line at another negative location. Thus one can  keep the Dictionary tightly packed and not waste space by having to declare an array of 300 by 50, only a few rows of which  would be filled with 50 items.  Each Dictionary word is a category or class name in that it is an instance of a class and it is a class which may have  instances. "Men" is an instance of the class "Persons". "Men" has as instances (i.e., as its extension) "Father", ,Yoe",  "Harry", etc. The name of a specific person is a class with a membership of one, that is, it is a primitive. Those  COMPUTER MODEL OF NEUROSIS 411  classes a word is an instance of are considered the word's Property List and they are stored in the Dictionary. Its own  instances are stored in a Substitute Matrix at the location indicated by cell 5 in the Dictionary. The individual wordnames  are denotative while their associated lists are connotative. Properties represent stored contiguity relations which can be  used for the computation of similarity, contrast or irrelevance relations.  The Substitute Matrix is another two-dimensional array, 200 by 10 in size. In each row the first cell contains the Dictionary  location of the word to which this list belongs. The second cell contains, if the word is a verb, the Dictionary location of  its antonym. Cells 3 to 10 hold Dictionary locations of instances or synonyms (if the word is a verb). Nouns and adjectives  have instances while verbs have synonyms and antonyms. Verbs are ordered into hierarchies cascading down from strong to weak  forms. For example, consider the list ranging from the strong "Abhor" to the weak "Reject."  Abhor Detest Hate Dislike Disapprove Reject  In the Substitute Matrix two kinds of synonyms are listed. If the integers are positive, the synonymn is a stronger from; if  the integer is negative, it indicates a weaker form. This type of Dictionary Matrix and Substitute Matrix organization permits  rapid searching and a great variety of alternatives when new beliefs are to be formed.  PROCESSES  The processes can be view as consisting of two parts, a main program and a group of procedures (closed subroutines) which the  main program calls on.  The main program begins by declaring those identifiers which will be global (i.e., recognized by all procedures), those  quantities which will be floating point or integer, and the arrays which will be used. The Belief Matrix, Reason Matrix,  Dictionary and Substitute Matrix are filled from data cards. Then the bulk of the processing begins by the main program  calling on the procedures "Formcomplex," "Findnext Complex," and "Process Complex."  The procedure "Formcomplex" works as follows. Each belief in the Belief Matrix is examined to see if it is a Level 3 belief.  Beliefs are ordered on three levels of imperativeness, Level 1 being the weakest and Level 3 being the strongest (a  categorical imperative). Unconditional or categorical beliefs are complex determiners. Once a Level 3 belief is found, all  beliefs in the Belief Matrix are examined for relevance to  412 COLBY AND GILBERT  the complex determiner. Relevance is computed by matching the subjects, verbs, and objects of the complex determiner and the  belief being examined. If the beliefs have two or more dictionary terms in common, the second belief is assigned to the  complex being determined by the first. A list of relevant beliefs is formed for each complex determiner and stored in a  two-dimensional array called the Complex Matrix. Some complex determiners will pick up only a few beliefs, while other  complexes will have many.  In the first cell of a complex list is stored a number representing how many items are on the list. This information is useful  when one wishes to insert a location of a new belief anywhere on the list and when one wishes to promote, demote, or delete  items on the list.  During "Process Complex" a copy of the first belief on the complex list is made into a working vector which becomes the  Regnant. It is matched against all others in the complex, and if no conflict is found its linguistic content is expressed in  output and the original belief loses 90 % of its residual charge. The second belief on the complex list then is copied into  the working vector to become the Regnant and the process described above is repeated. When conflict is found, a danger level  is raised by a function of the residual charge on the belief, and an attempt is made by using transformations to create a new  belief, which will not be conflictual in that complex.  Pathogenic conflict is defined as follows. If two beliefs have the same subjects and objects and their verbs are in antonymic  relation, the beliefs are considered to antinomies or contradictions. Thus "I hate Father" and "I like Father" are antimonies.  However, they do not yet constitute a pathogenic conflict. To qualify for the latter, the two beliefs must total 4 or more in  summing their imperative levels. Thus the coupling of "I hate Father" (Level 1) and "I must like Father" (Level 3) would  constitute a pathogenic conflict initiating coping processes to contend with the conflict state.  Once conflict is found to exist, the Regnant belief is successively transformed until a belief which can be express is  produced, the original Regnant remaining intact on the Belief Matrix and on the complex list. The nature of the transformation  depends on the degree of danger at the time and whether or not self-esteem is involved. Seven major transformations are  available. The first transformation selects a weaker synonym of the verb of a belief; the second selects an analog to the  object; the third selects both a weaker form of the verb and an analog to the object; the fourth selects a weak antonym of the  verb; the fifth selects an analog to the subject of the belief; the sixth exchanges the subject and object; the seventh  exchanges subject and object and selects an antonym of the verb.  To illustrate the operation of one of these transformations in some detail let us consider one in which a different object is  found for the new belief to be created. As was mentioned earlier in describing the Dictionary a noun has a property list  (classes of which it is an instance) and a substitute list (classes which are its instances). These lists of contiguity or  metonymic relations can be used to compute resemblance or  COMPUTER MODEL OF NEUROSIS 413  metaphoric relations. Suppose the Regnant belief is "Self admires Father" and because of intense conflict an appropriate  substitute must be found for "Father." To do this the program utilizes a procedure termed "Findanalog." This procedure can  determine the degree of analog (similarity) between any two nouns. It first looks at the properties of "Father" and let us say  the first item on the property list is "Men." It then goes to "Men" and looks at its instances. Let us say the first one is  "Father," which here would be ignored, and the second one 'Joe." Then the procedure looks at "toe's" property list and  compares it with the property list of "Father." It computes how many properties they have in common, and this defines the  degree of analog. Suppose it is required to find a 5 degree analog to "Father" and ")oe" is only a 3 degree analog. The  procedure then moves to the next name on the "Men" list and computes its degree of analog. If none of the items on the "Men"  list meet the criterion of a 5 degree analog, the procedure backs up to the next property on the "Father" list after "Men,"  let us say "Old," and then tries to find the required 5 degree analog among instances of "Old." If none of the properties of  "Father" are able to serve as a basis for finding the required analog, the transform is considered to have failed, level of a  Danger Monitor is raised, and another transform is selected. The procedure can also fail in the sense of finding the required  analog, but when the system tries to express the new belief with the new object, it again runs into a conflict, the Danger  Monitor is raised, and another transform is selected. If a new belief is created and can get through the complex without  conflict, a reason is created for it (rationalization) and stored on the Reason Matrix.  The type of transform selected depends on the level of danger and whether or not self-esteem is involved. The Danger Monitor  is one of several monitors in the program which oversee the processing of a complex and contribute to a final decision whether  to continue processing a particular complex or to switch it off.  Monitors consist of a system of procedures sensitive to various conditions. This system controls decisions regarding on-going  processing. The Danger Monitor keeps track of a level of danger normalized between 0 and 1. Danger is raised or lowered as a  function of the preceding value, how far the level must rise to reach the value of 1, and the residual charge on the Regnant  belief in conflict (R(7)), e.g., Danger = Danger + (1.0 - Danger). R(7)/100000.  In a procedure termed Picktransform a "space" between zero and 1 is divided among the transforms. For example when the Danger  Monitor is within a certain range, a particular transform will be tried. When a transform succeeds, i.e., it is able to create  a new belief which does not run into conflict, it is rewarded by being given a larger proportion of this space, consequently  narrowing the range of other transforms. Over time, if a particular transform is repeatedly successful, it will crowd out  other transforms. Thus a "preferred style" of coping with conflict can develop.  The transforms are ordered from low to high degrees of distortion. Transforms procedure distortions of the original beliefs  which vary in their degree of delusive  414 COLBY AND GILBERT  misbelief. The gain of a transform lies in temporarily reducing conflict by construction of a distortion of a belief in  conflict. The cost is (a) the resultant misbelief, (b) less than optimal discharge of a conflictual belief's residual charge,  and (c) the original conflict remains unresolved.  When a belief gets through the system and is expressed in output, 90 % of its residual charge is reduced. If a pathogenic  conflict is encountered, a new belief is created whose residual charge is a percentage, as determined by the transform used,  of the residual charge on the original Regnant. The weaker (less distorting) the transform the greater the amount taken off  the original Regnant. When the new belief is expressed, 90 % of its charge is taken off. It is added to be Belief Matrix and  to the complex in which it was formed. A strong transform is good at distortion but poor at discharge. Hence a complex whose  beliefs are not getting enough discharge will be repeatedly selected for processing. This state sequence simulates the  neurotic condition of repeated concern and preoccupation with certain conflicted complexes and beliefs rather than a more  equable distribution of concern over all possible complexes and beliefs.  An Excitation Monitor keeps track of the level of excitation during processing. The level is computed as a function of the  previous level and the residual charge on the Regnant belief. Another monitor tallies verb valences over time to see if 6 out  of 10 or 5 in a row are negative valences. In turn, the danger level, the difference in danger between present and immediately  preceding values, excitation level and verb-valence tallies are assessed by a Pleasure Monitor which decides whether a level  of pleasure is raised or lowered.  An Esteem Monitor is sensitive to whether esteem is involved in trying to express a particular Regnant. If expression of the  Regnant would violate an "Ought" or "Must" command in the complex, esteem is lowered. If a command involving esteem is obeyed,  esteem is raised.  A Well-Being Monitor evaluates conditions in the Pleasure and Esteem Monitors. It makes the final decision whether or not to  switch off the processing of a complex. The well-being value is a function of pleasure and esteem values. When it falls below  a certain value 6 out of 10 times or 5 times in a row, the current complex is switched off, which represents the ultimate  defense of the system under distress.  When processing of a complex is switched off, the belief just expressed is demoted to the bottom of the complex list. This  potentially allows greater progress through a complex the next time it is selected. Also after switch-off the threshold of a  complex is raised and so are all thresholds. If processing of a complex proceded to the end of the list, the threshold is  lowered and all thresholds are lowered by a small amount. The latter two conditions assert that when the system is running  well it will be more inclined to enhance exploration of its beliefs than when it is not running well, in which case the system  constrains exploration.  At the end of a complex run, whether switched off or not, all beliefs are built up by  COMPUTER MODEL OF NEUROSIS 415  a factor of their fixed charges. The next complex is selected by finding that one whose average charge most greatly exceeds  its threshold, the most urgent complex. Processing this complex is considered to represent one cycle. A count is kept of the  cycles and the program can be run any number of cycles desired, in order to observe its behavior over time. Periodically,  after any number of cycles, a sweep can be made through the Belief Matrix to reform the complexes. This permits the assigning  of newly created beliefs to complexes other than the ones in which they were created.  Final output consists of simplified English sentences which consist of expressions of the linguistic content of beliefs and  reports of levels from monitors (Table 1). The print-out of monitor values is an output display of internal processings  simulating those which give rise to non-verbal signs typically demonstrated by persons. In a clinical session a patient  describes his thoughts and feelings using sentences from natural language. Also observable are non-verbal features such as  facial expressions of emotion, gestures, voice changes, etc. Output from the program matches these phenomena. In (A) of Table  1 processing of a portion of a complex proceeds with Danger dropping until the fourth and fifth output sentences are reached.  The Danger value jumps up, indicating a conflictual situation. Both the fourth and fifth sentences are new beliefs arising  from the operations of transforms. The fourth has been created from the conflictual "Self idolizes Father," by finding an  analog to the subject. The created belief "Mother idolizes Father" can get through the system without conflict and hence is  expressed, accompanied by the Danger Monitor indicator that some  TABLE I  SAMPLE OUTPUT (Created Beliefs Italics)   Nonverbal output   Verbal output Danger Excitation Monitors Esteem Well-being  (A)   Pleasure    1. Self must not marry poor man .10 6979 .69 .03 .36  1. Self must have prestige .11 7958 .68 .04 .36  3. Self must be glamorous .11 6916 .69 .04 .37  4. Mother idolizes father .14 3667 .68 .05 .37  5. Al ought admire self .16 4833 .67 .05 .37  (B)       1. Self must not marry poor man .38 7319 .48 .34 .53  2. Self must have prestige .37 6212 .49 .35 .54  3. Self must be glamorous .36 8113 .49 .35 .54  4. Self admires al .49 5997 .46 .33 .51  5. Father ought admire mother .52 6838 .42 .33 .49  416 COLBY AND GILBERT  disturbance, however, was met. The fifth output sentence also represents a new belief created by a transform. It stems from  the original belief "Father must admire Self." ("Self" in output sentences refers to the patient being simulated.) Again a new  subject was found and the degree of imperativeness of the belief was lowered. The Danger Monitor rises again, indicating  internal conflict, while the other Monitors remain fairly stable.  In (B) of Table 1 the same portion of the same complex has been run again, but this time the starting values of the Monitors  are different and hence the new beliefs created are quite different in this run. The fourth output sentence this time is "Self  admires Al." Because the Danger and Esteem Monitors, which in this instance determine the choice of transform, are at  different levels from run (A), the original belief "Self idolizes Father," is transformed into "Self admires Al," by finding a  weaker verb synonym and a suitable analog to the object. Likewise the fifth output sentence, starting from the original  "Father must admire Self" becomes "Father ought admire Mother" through the operation of a transform which finds an analog to  the object and reduces the degree of imperativeness. Also to be noted in run (B) is that Danger rises while Pleasure and  Well-Being drop. This indicates that considerably more internal difficulty is occurring during run (B) than during run (A).  The number of beliefs and complexes grows in time and the order of beliefs on a complex list changes in time. At the moment we  are keeping the Dictionary fixed, but we plan to promote and demote in the Dictionary also so that the entire knowledge  structure can change dynamically through time.  Our next step, which we have begun, is to experiment with the program by communicating with it much as a psychotherapist does  in clinical discourse, in an attempt to modify its behavior using external input only. Hence there are procedures in the  program for testing implication (i.e., whether one belief implies another), for responding to input with affirmation, denial  or suspended judgment, and for judging the degree to which a belief is justified or warranted. However, these are not all  running at the moment, since their over-all use depends on some other self-corrective procedures in the process of being  written.  DISCUSSION  This project spans the areas of social psychology, psychiatry, and computer programming. We have addressed ourselves in this  report to details of the latter in the hope they might be of interest to those working in the area ofthe simulation of mental  processes. But a few words should be said about the psychological and psychiatric aspects involved.  At the level of social psychology we are interested in belief systems and how they operate in generating thought. Beliefs and  belief systems are known to change through  COMPUTER MODEL OF NEUROSIS 417  social influence. But the information-processing mechanisms involved remain obscure. In the psychotherapeutic session a  patient presents himself for change and a therapist makes attempts to effect change in degrees and contents of beliefs  involved in the patient's psychopathology. Hence the psychotherapeutic session offers a potential laboratory situation for the  study of intended social influence. However, this real-life situation contains too many uncontrolled variables for ideal  experimentation. Through a computer simulation which brings crucial variables under complete observation and perfect control,  we hope by experimentation to increase our understanding of the mechanisms of person on person influence.  The program as a realization of a theory states explicitly its definitions, postulates, and their consequences. In contrast to  verbally stated theories, we can be sure the consequences derive entirely from the postulates of the program. The definitions  are both nominal and ostensive in the sense that when we speak, for example, of "pathogenic conflict" we can point to a  precise procedure in the program which computes whether two beliefs are in conflict or not. We must postpone the question,  which eventually must be faced, of how closely this corresponds to the nature of pathogenic conflict in real persons. But at  this point we can say there is a rough match between the output of the program and typical behavior of patients in  psychotherapeutic sessions. With further experimentation we hope to increase the degree of fit to the point where we can begin  to feel we have an adequate information-processing theory of psychopathology and its modification by psychotherapeutic  influence.  REFERENCES  ABELSON, R. P. Computer simulation of "hot" cognition. In S. S. Tomkins and S. Messick (Eds.), Computer Simulation of  Personality. New York: Wiley, 1963.  GREEN, F. B., Jr. Computer models for cognitive processes. Psychometrika, 1961, 26, 85-91. NEWELL, A. AND SIMON, H. A.  Computer simultation of human thinking. Science, 1961, 134, 2011-2017.  RECEIVED: January 14, 1964