10.1016/0022-2496(64)90018-5
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 1, HH-I20 (1964)  Sensory Thresholds, Response Biases, and the Neural Quantum Theory  DONALD A. NORMAN'  Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts  Sensory differential thresholds are studied by models which partition the sensory process into two successive stages: a detection stage independent of motivational variables, and a decision stage which selects a response using the observer's motivations and expectations.  The detection model considered is the neural quantum theory. Several decision models are applied to the detection model, and the existing psycho-physical literature relevant to thresholds is analyzed.  Two aspects of the data, the psychometric function and isosensitivity curves (Receiver Operating Characteristic), are examined for three different experimental conditions: (1) the yes-no detection experiment; (2) the random presentation experiment; and (3) the two-alternative temporal forced-choice experiment.  The observer's task is to decide whether a particular observation is caused by signal or noise. In one decision strategy, the rigid criterion, the observer reports a signal only if he detects an increase in the number of excited states of at least k. Another decision strategy proposes a response bias: the observer reports a signal with probability tk if the number of excited states increases by exactly k. This model provides an explanation for the way in which the psychometric functions of quantum theory are transformed by changes in experimental procedure.  SENSORY DETECTION  One recurring psychophysical question, and the central one for this study, is whether sensory detection can best be represented as a discrete or as a continuous process. The problem is complex because there seem to be several different levels of the representation that must be considered separately. We must be careful to distinguish  This work is based upon my Ph.D. dissertation submitted to the University of Pennsylvania. I wish to thank Eugene Galanter and R. Duncan Luce for their assistance and critical discussions throughout the course of the investigation. I also wish to express my appreciation to Willard D. Larkin, Jack Nachmias, and Saul Sternberg for their help.  This research was supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation to the University of Pennsylvania, NSF G-17637, and a contract between the Office of Naval Research and the University of Pennsylvania, NONR-551. Preparation of this paper was completed at the Harvard Center for Cognitive Studies.  88  SENSORY DIFFERENTIAL THRESHOLDS 89  between discreteness in the sensory process from that due to other causes. For example, if the stimulus is itself a discrete variable, such as the intensity of light, then we might expect the sensory representation also to be discrete (although this is not logically necessary). Similarly, if the observer responds in terms of a finite response set (such as yes and no), then at some point in the process the stimulus representation must be partitioned into classes corresponding to the response representation and, therefore, must be rendered discrete. Such discreteness of the response mechanism in no way reflects upon the possible discreteness of the basic sensory representation.  In the sensory psychophysical experiments of this study, the stimuli assume one of two possible energy states on each trial,' and the observer is asked to identify the stimulus by making one of two responses. Because we are interested only in the observer's sensory processes, and not in the learning that invariably occurs at the start of each new experiment, we record the responses only after the behavior has reached a steady-state, and after each response we present an outcome that in any given run is determined by the presentation-response pair. This procedure is classified as a psychophysical detection experiment (Luce, 1963b).  In one form of the detection experiment, stimulus conditions are a signal of strength s and one of strength 0 (zero) or no signal (n), and the two responses are yes (y) and no, respectively. The psychometric function, the most common measure of performance in psychophysics, relates relative frequency of correct detections to signal amplitude [p(y/s) to s]. The psychometric function, however, is seriously affected by response biases; the observer's biases are as influential on the proportions of correct detections as are changes in stimulus amplitude.  The first comprehensive examination of the effects of bias on responses, signal detectability theory (Peterson, Birdsall, and Fox, 1954; Tanner and Swets, 1954; Tanner and Norman, 1954) treats biases as a crucial and necessary part of the decision process. The signal detectability theorists, recognizing that noise (whether external or internal to the observer or both) is always present, have pointed out that the signal and noise are sometimes confused. If the amplitude distributions of the physiological representations of noise and signal overlap, the observer's task is similar to that of a decision-maker testing a statistical hypothesis: does a particular observation arise from the signal or the noise population ? The observer is forced to some compromise between maximizing his correct and minimizing his incorrect detections, because he cannot do both at once when the distributions overlap. According to this model, incorrect detections do not necessarily represent erroneous guesses by the observer; they are inherent in the nature of the decision task. (For reviews and bibliographies of signal detectability theory see Green, 1960 and Swets, Tanner, and Birdsall, 1961.)  2 In this paper, "stimulus" refers to the entire presentation and "signal" to that particular attribute of the stimulus that is to be detected. The "background" is the part of the stimulus other than the signal that is present during and in between trials. Signal amplitude is measured in physical units, such as dynes per cm' or cycles per second.  90 NORMAN  The effects of biases, and thus of motivational variables, can be assessed through the relation between incorrect and correct detections when the signal amplitude is held constant. By varying the presentation probabilities and payoffs, it is possible to make the observer bias his response so that he almost never or almost always reports a detection. In other words, he can be made to trace out a curve on the unit square whose typical point is <p(y I n), p(y I s)> and whose end points are <0, 0> and <1, 1>. This locus of his performance is called the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC curve) by Peterson et al. (1954). Because the curve is generated under conditions of constant signal amplitude, and because, in the models discussed here, this means that the observer's sensitivity to the signal is constant; Luce (1963a) has suggested calling it an iso-sensitivity curve.  This paper follows the spirit of the signal detectability analyses in that it includes descriptions of both the detection and decision processes. In particular, we analyze a discrete detection model, the neural quantum theory, rather than the continuous process assumed in detectability theory. This investigation is a continuation and expansion of papers by Luce (1963a), Larkin and Norman (1963), and Norman (1962a). Luce's model, which proposed a low-threshold generalization of the neural quantum theory, provided the first complete analysis of both the quantal detection and decision process. Larkin and Norman applied Luce's model to an empirical study of response biases in data collected in the quantum experiment. They were mainly interested in the psychometric function and did not study iso-sensitivity curves. Minor problems in fitting Luce's model to some of Larkin and Norman's results have led to the present model.  THE CHOICE OF SENSORY MODALITY  The theories proposed and discussed here make no specific reference to particular sensory modalities, and, in particular, they do not postulate specific physiological mechanisms. There is little existing physiological evidence to help in formulating psychophysical theories that include the effects of motivational variables, and the psychophysical data do not yet force us beyond the most crude internal mechanisms.  In practice, most studies are either auditory or visual because these are the easiest domains to investigate. Nevertheless, our theories may be appropriate for only one modality and not for another, and so we must be careful about overgeneralizing our conclusions. This study is phrased in acoustical terms because our experiments, as well as most of those in the quantal literature, have been auditory. The theoretical notions, however, are meaningful for any aspect of any modality that can be represented as a one dimension continuum; whether they are correct for each such dimension is a separate empirical question. It might be, for example, that a more appropriate experimental task would be the detection of the change in separation between two pin pricks on the skin than the detection of a change in signal amplitude.  SENSORY DIFFERENTIAL THRESHOLDS 91  THEORY  THE DETECTION MODEL  The Sensory Process  In 1930 Bekesy proposed a threshold theory in which different sound amplitudes can excite only integral numbers of states, or neural quanta. A constant signal, however, is not assumed to excite a constant number of quanta. "Noise," either external or internal to the observer, causes continual fluctuations in the level of excitation, which in turn causes the number of excited quanta to vary. The term "noise" is used to signify any nonrelevant attribute of the "physiological" representation of the signal, such as a slow change in the level of excitation. "Noise" alters the characteristics of the detection probabilities.3 Because the stimulus is continuous, whereas its effects are discrete, there is usually more energy than the minimum amount needed to activate the number of quanta actually excited. This surplus energy, the residue, may assume any value between zero and one quantum, and its distribution approaches the uniform distribution as the variance of the noise distribution becomes large relative to the quantum size. A change in the number of excited quanta occurs if the effect of a signal  o I. F  ._ F U Z X t  W  a  O W  r  0  r  J  C  4 O m Y O  K  0.  A  K  K  SIGNAL AMPLITUDE  FIG. 1. Form of the neural quantum theory detection functions (A) before and (B) after the introduction of "noise."  3 Because satisfactory theoretical formulations of the neural quantum theory exist (Larkin and Norman, 1963; Luce, 1963b; Norman, 1962a), none is offered here. Derivations of the effects of internal noise on the psychometric functions may be found in these references.  92 NORMAN  plus the available residue is greater than the quantum size, so the probability that the signal changes the number of excited quanta is simply the integral of the residue distribution from zero to the signal size (modulo the quantum size); this is shown in Fig. 1B. Note that any particular theoretical detection curve reaches detection probabilities of zero and one at amplitudes that excite k - 1 and k quanta, respectively. The shape of the transition from zero to one depends strongly upon the noise distribution; however, as long as the variance of the noise distribution is sufficiently large, the curves are approximately straight line segments.  The decision structure postulated by B6kesy is a simple response criterion; if the number of excited quanta changes by less than the criterion amount, a detection is not reported; otherwise, it is. We will return to the decision strategy later.  The specific predictions about the shape of the psychometric function made by quantum theory have been verified experimentally (Bekesy, 1930; Stevens, Morgan, and Volkmann, 1941), but only under a limited set of experimental conditions and not by all investigators (Corso, 1956). Successful verifications have occurred when welltrained observers were used (usually the experimenters themselves), the experimental conditions were as "easy as possible" for the observer, and signals were presented in runs of identical trials of the same magnitude. (This experimental design will be referred to as a "quantal experiment.") The last feature of quantal experiments leads to the possibility that the results are artifactual, and that the true psychometric function has been biased into apparent agreement with the function of Fig. 1B. Unfortunately, these experimental conditions that seem to be necessary to produce quantal results do not permit direct measurements of the response bias because the same signal is always presented. If "catch trials" are inserted in the experimental runs, the results change (Larkin and Norman, 1963). If the neural quantum theory is correct, then it should be possible to explain in terms of a quantitative theory of response bias why and how "catch trials" modify the psychometric function. If the quantum theory is not true and some other function (such as the integral of the normal distribution) underlies the psychometric function, then it should be possible to show how this function is distorted by aspects of the quantal experiment into apparent agreement with the quantum theory.  The Signal Distribution  Because the background amplitude continually fluctuates, we may assume that the probability of a one quantum increase in the absence of signal is moderately large, that of a two quantum increase is considerably smaller, and that of a three quantum increase is still smaller, etc. Let q,(0) denote the probability that a k quantum increase occurs when there is no signal, and let qk(s) denote the probability of a k quantum increase when there is a signal of magnitude s, measured relative to the physical size of a quantum unit. As suggested, we assume that q,(0) > q,(0) > q,(0) - - -, and that  SENSORY DIFFERENTIAL THRESHOLDS 93  qo(0) = 1 - Ex i q,(0). An illustration of a distribution function for q,(0) is shown in Fig. 2. (The values of the parameters shown are approximately those that are estimated empirically from pure tone experiments.)  K  FIG. 2. Typical distributions of the probability of increasing the number of excited quanta by k, for various signal amplitudes.  Now consider what happens to the function ql(s) as the signal is gradually increased in amplitude. Its initial value is, of course, q,(0), and it increases with s up to s = 1, where it reaches a peak. The peak is not 1, however but rather 1 - 2 qk(l ). As s is increased further, there is an increasing chance that changes of two or more quanta will occur, and thus a decreasing chance that exactly one will occur, until s >, 2 when a change of two or more quanta must occur, in which case qt(s) must be zero. As in Fig. 1 B, the several portions of the function are assumed to be straight line segments. The behavior of qk(s) for larger k is much the same, the only difference being that qk(s) = qk(0) for s < (k - 1), that the peak of the function is at s = k, and that the value at the peak is 1 - E k,, qi(k). Although the quantum changes due to the background alone are relatively frequent, we assume that changes in the number of excited quanta due to fluctuation in the quantal representation of the background rarely coincide exactly with the quantal increase due to the onset of the signal. As a  94  NORMAN  result, the effects of signal and noise seldom add, and qk(s) = qk(0) for s < (k - 1). Insofar as they do add, then the initial region of the function should increase slightly with s, but we assume that this increase can be neglected. We also assume that the observer listens to the stimulus for some (brief) time interval around the signal presentation time. If the quantal representation increases more than once during the listening interval (presumably one of the increases may be caused by signal, but all the others must be caused by noise) we assume that the observer selects the largest increase in the number of excited quanta during that interval as his detection observation.  q1(0)  qp (0) q:(0) q, (0)  3 4 RELATIVE INTENSITY IN QUANTAL UNITS  FIG. 3. Probability that a signal increases the number of excited quanta by exactly k. (From Norman, 1962a).  On the assumption that qk(O) is zero for k _>- 4, the functions qk(s) are drawn in Fig. 3 and their equation are given in Table 1. In addition, the frequency functions for three different signal amplitudes are drawn in Fig. 2. Note that these functions are completely described by specifying three independent parameters: q,(0), q,(0), and q,(0).  SENSORY DIFFERENTIAL THRESHOLDS 95  TABLE 1   PROBABILITY THAT A SIGNAL, S, EXCITES EXACTLY k QUANTA, qx(O) = O. h _ 4 3 Ss <4   0 --~ S<1  1 <-s<2  2<-s<3   (s) qo(0) (1 - s)  0  0 l)  (s) qo(0) s + qi(0)  [1 - qz(0) - q3(0)) (2 - s)  0 0  (S) q3(0) 11 - q3(0) - g3(0)1 (S - 1) + qz(0)  11 - q3(0)) (3 - s) 0  (S) q3(0)  q3(0) [1 - q3(0)] (s - 2) + q3(0) 4-s   (s) 0  0  0 s-3  DECISION MODELS  The observer must respond to the stimulation on the basis of his detection observations, and because the observations arising from signal and noise overlap considerably, some false responses must occur. The experienced observer presumably "knows" these distributions because, after his response, he is always told what the actual presentation was.4 He is faced with effecting some compromise between the two types of errors and his decision presumably depends upon his evaluation of the experimental outcomes. We assume that he does this by adopting some decision strategy which he consistently applies to his detection observations.  The Rigid Criterion  The simplest response strategy to describe (and evidently the hardest for observers to use) is always to respond yes (the signal was heard) when the observation equals or exceeds c quanta, and to respond no otherwise. This strategy was described by Bekesy (1930) and by Stevens et al. (1941). The rigid criterion yields psychometric functions that are easily predicted from Fig. 3 by the relationship p(y I s) = Ek ~, qx&s). These are shown in Fig. 4 for several values of c. Note that, because of the noise distributions assumed (Figs. 2 and 3), these functions differ from those previously discussed in the literature(Fig. 1B) in that the response probability is not zero for s < (c - 1) quanta.  If the background tone is present throughout the run, observers generally produce data that suggest a two- (and sometimes a three-) quantum criterion. In the experiment described by Bekesy, the background was silence and the observer's task was to distinguish between two brief contiguous sound amplitudes. If the drift in size of the residue is slow relative to the signal duration, then the chance that noise causes even a one-quantum change in this experiment is less than that shown in Fig. 2 for an experiment in which the background tone is always present. Experimentally, the psycho  I This information is conveyed either by feedback after every trial or by the design of the experiment. For example, in the "quantal experiment," the observer knows that the same signal is presented on every trial of a run.  96 NORMAN  metric functions obtained by Bekesy were similar to those of Fig. 1 B and observers seemed able to maintain a one-quantum criterion for short periods of time (Bekesy, 1930).  S  FIG. 4. Rigid-criterion psychometric functions for the detection probabilities of Fig. 3.  A constant criterion apparently is not easily maintained. Only select, well-trained observers seem to produce a clean, stable data, and the experimental conditions must be as simple as possible for the observer. If the same signal is not presented on every trial, the rigid criterion seems to be destroyed (Larkin and Norman, 1963; Miller and Garner, 1944); however, if the same signal is always present, the experiment is open to the criticism that the observer knows the presentation schedule.  The Three-State Response-Bias Model  Luce (1963a) has proposed a decision model which is applicable to quantal-like experiments in which on each trial a signal of full magnitude occurs with probability P or no signal at all with probability 1 - P. This model is directly applicable to the quantal detection model by assuming that the observer picks a rigid criterion, c, but is more (or less) conservative than implied by the rigid criterion. We define the three state model by assuming that for a c-quantum criterion, those observations of less than c-quanta are never responded to, the c-quanta observations lead to yes responses with probability t, and the c + 1 and greater quanta detections always lead to yes responses.  The response probability for an increment between c and c + 1 quanta is a linearly weighted average of t and 1. The equations and arguments leading to them are presented by Larkin and Norman (1963) and Luce (1963a).  The Multi-State Response Bias Model  Let tk denote the conditional probability that the observer responds yes when a k-quantum change occurs, then the conditional probabilities of yes are given by:  Ay I s) - txgw(s), (1) z=o  SENSORY DIFFERENTIAL THRESHOLDS 97  and  p(.y I n) _ I, tkgk(O)k=0  We consider two mechanisms whereby an observer might arrive at values for the tk . First, suppose that he selected them so as to maximize some expected return, either money or utility, on each trial. If the outcome values of the observer's responses are specified by the payoff matrix of Table 2, he gains some amount 0ii if his response   TABLE 2 Response   PAY-OFF MATRIX   Stimulus presentation Yes No   Signal Oil Oil   Noise 023 022  Oii > Oii, i -;6.1.  In practice, Oii > 0 > Oii, i 0i.  is correct and gains an amount Oii , i 0.j, if his response is wrong. In general, Oii > Oi; and, in practice, Oi; < 0 < Oii , i zA j. The values Oij represent either amounts of money or of utility, and the presentation probability P represents either the actual presentation probability used by the experimenter or a subjective probability unique to the individual observer. The expected value (or utility) is easily seen to yield an equation that is linear in the set Of tk . The maximum expected outcomes occur when each of the tk's is either zero or one. These solutions include the rigid criterion model but not any probabilistic response bias model and do not allow an explanation of "mixed criteria" discussed by Larkin and Norman (1963) and Miller and Garner (1944), so we must seek some other explanation.  An alternative idea is to assume that the observer adjusts the values Of tk on a trial-by-trial basis, lowering tk if a k-quantum change is detected (DO and is incorrect (caused by noise), increasing tk if a Dk observation is made and is correct (caused by signal), and leaving tk unchanged for all D; observations, j :/-~ k.  This generalizes the learning model presented by Luce. We assume for simplicity that tk on trial i, tk(i), changes according to a linear stochastic learning model. Specifically, we suppose  (1 - 0) tk(i) + B s and Dk  tk(i -{- 1) = (1 - 6') tk(i) if n and Dk (3)  tk(i) otherwise.  98 NORMAN  We introduce a number of implicit assumptions when we suppose that the modification of biases are described by this learning model. First, although the adjustment process is affected by the previous stimuli and outcomes, we assume that it is not affected by past responses. Second, this particular linear learning model entails path independence: the value of tk(i -{- 1) is completely determined when we know both the value of tk(i) (regardless of how it was arrived at) and the stimulus presentation on the previous trial. Third, the model assumes limit points of one and zero, which means that if the signal should occur on every trial, the tk all approach a value of one and if noise should be presented on every trial, the tk all approach zero.  The asymptotic mean of tk(i), which is found by calculating E[tk(i + 1) 1 tk(i)] and by taking the limit as i approaches infinity is given by  - l m E[tk(Z)] = gk(S)I[qk(s) + bgk(0)]  where  b = (1 - P) 0'/P0.  There is experimental evidence that the linear stochastic model does not give a completely satisfactory description of at least some types of human binary-choice experiments (Anderson, 1960; Nicks, 1959; Sternberg, 1959) but some of the problems may result from the independence-of-path assumption rather than linearity. No detailed analysis has been made of the adequacy of this model for psychophysical experiments. We are only concerned here with the asymptotic mean bias, not with the pre-asymptotic or the detailed sequential behavior. Because it is known that many quite different models may have the same asymptotic means (Suppes and Atkinson, 1960), there is some hope that this learning model and, in particular, the independenceof-path property, do not totally restrict our results.  Even restricting our attention to path-independent linear models, however, there are other adjustment procedures that are just as plausible as the one stated in Eq. 3. For example, suppose that the observer were to increase the value of tk whenever the signal produced a change of k or fewer quanta, and to decrease tk whenever the noise produced a change of k or more quanta, then the probability that tk is increased is P[1 - Z,I+1 qi(s)] and the probability that tk is decreased is (1 - P) Ek qi(0). The asymptotic mean of tk then becomes  1 - 2; qi(s)  tk = lim E[tk(i)] = k+1  i'ao  1 - 2; qi(s) + b qi(0) k+l k  This is of the same form as Eq. 4, but the values of the individual tk's are different. A particular learning model permits us to predict how payoffs, signal presentation probabilities, and detection probabilities affect the response bias, but at the price of  SENSORY DIFFERENTIAL THRESHOLDS 99  a number of untested assumptions. The important result for our purposes is the form Of tk; its exact value is a function of the particular learning model used and the parametric identifications made. Because we are interested only in the form of the results, we will restrict our attention to the model of Eq. 3 and the asymptotic mean expressed in Eq. 4. Note that, although there are a number of tk's, only one more parameter, b, is added to the over-all model by the decision structure, bringing the total number of parameters to only four. Three of these are determined by the stimulus conditions and one by the reinforcing conditions. It should be possible to estimate the signal parameters from one experiment and then to predict all further experiments carried out under the same stimulus conditions by estimating only the bias parameter b from the data.  The learning model analysis assumes that the observer has knowledge of his results after each trial, hence some form of information feedback must be used in our experiments. The assumption of asymptotic performance is difficult to evaluate in practice, but, at the least, it suggests that only experienced observers should be studied and that the initial performance at the beginning of each session should not be recorded.  .8  .2  0  0 I 2 3 4 s  FIG. 5. Multi-state response bias model psychometric functions for various values of response bias, b.  DETAILED PREDICTIONS OF THE MULTI-STATE RESPONSE-BIAS MODEL  The Psychometric Function  We now examine in more detail some implications of the multi-state model with learning that was given in Eq. 3. Consider first the way in which p(y I s) varies with signal amplitude, i.e., the theoretical psychometric function. If we assume that the learning parameters 0 and 0' are independent of signal amplitude and thus of qk(s), then in an experiment measuring the psychometric function, the response bias, b, should remain constant. If we substitute values of qk(s) from Table 1 and values of tk from Eq. 4 into Eq. 1 for p(y I s), we can compute psychometric functions for a specific choice of the noise probabilities, q,(0), and various values of b (Fig. 5). The values of q,(0) and qx(s) are fixed for any particular observer and should not vary from experiment to experiment as long as the signal and background characteristics are constant. Because the response probabilities in the multi-state model are the sums of response probabilities for a number of different detection states, some of which decrease and at least one of which increases with amplitude, this model predicts "plateaus" in the over-all psychometric function under almost all conditions and nonmonotonicity in some restricted cases.  The Iso-Sensitivity Curve  To find the iso-sensitivity curve of the multi-state model, we must eliminate b from the equations for the response probabilities. Unfortunately, the resulting dependence of p(y I s) on p(y I n) for a fixed signal amplitude is not easy to express. We can, however, obtain simple relations for certain limiting conditions. At relatively high signal amplitudes we can assume that the probability of noise equalling or exceeding the signal is negligible. Suppose that (y - 1) < s G y and that  q,(0) = 0 for k > y,  then  and  p(y I s) = q,(s) + [I - qr(s)] ty-i;  Therefore,  p(y I n) = q,-i(0) tv  p(y I s) = i q,(S) P(y I n + q,(s). q,-j(0)  This is a straight line running from <0, q,(s)> to <q,,_1(0), 1 > as shown in Fig. 6. This line cannot be the complete iso-sensitivity curve because by using appropriate payoffs it should be possible to force an observer always (or never) to respond yes, which corresponds to the extreme bias conditions of b equal to zero or infinity. Thus, the  SENSORY DIFFERENTIAL THRESHOLDS 101  line segments from (0, 0> to <0, q,(s)> and <qv_, , 1> to <1, 1> are probably part of the curve. Note that these predictions are independent of the learning model. If y = 3, and q,(0) = 0, then Eq. 6 and Fig. 6 represent the iso-sensitivity relation for 2<s<3.  f  FIG. 6. Approximate iso-sensitivity curves for the multi-state model.  Next consider stimuli in the range 1 < s < 2. If we assume that qI(0) is much larger than q2(0) and that q,(0) = 0, then for large values of b, tl can be considered negligibly small so  and  Therefore,  p(y I s) = q2(S) t2 p(y I n) = q2(0) is  p(y I S) = g2(S) p(y I n). (7) q2(0)  As b decreases, and so as p(y I s) approaches q2(s), this approximation is no longer reasonable. Rather, as b approaches zero, t2 approaches one and the approximations are:  p(y I s) = [I - g2(S)] tl + q2($)  102 NORMAN  and  so that  p(y I n) = q2(0) tl + q2(0),  p(y I S) = 1 - q2(S) p(v I n) - 1 - q2(S) (12(0) + q2(S)' qI(0) qj(0)  This is a straight line from <qj(0) -}- q2(0), 1) that passes through the "true" detection values <q2(0), q2($)>. Equations 7 and 8 are also shown in Fig. 6. The true iso-sensitivity curve approaches these straight lines for very large and very small values of b. These approximations turn out to be useful in estimating parameters for the model. Complete curves, plotted for a few numerical values of ql(0), q2(0), and q2(S) using Eqs. 1, 2, and 4, are shown in Fig. 7.  0  0  p( Y 1n)  FIG. 7. Exact iso-sensitivity curves for the multi-state model for three sets of signal parameters.  The model is easily applied to signal detection experiments in which the signal is imbedded in a background of white (Gaussian) noise. The amplitude of white noise  SENSORY DIFFERENTIAL THRESHOLDS 103  is normally distributed with zero mean and standard deviation equal to its rms (root mean square) voltage. The noise parameter, qk(0), is estimated by assuming that the observer's internal noise can be neglected compared to the noise in the stimulus.  The Iso-Bias Curve  To derive the psychometric function, b is held fixed under the assumption that P, 0, and 0' do not change throughout the experiment. The general analytic solution for the iso-bias curve, i.e., the relation between p(y I s) and p(y I n) under this assumption, has not been obtained, but numerical solutions for the general iso-bias relations for several values of b as 0 < s < - are shown in Fig. 8. The iso-bias curves are approximately straight lines. (This is exact when q$(s) = 1 and q3(0) = 0.)  FIG. 8. Iso-bias curves for the multi-state model for various values of response bias, b.  A MULTI-STATE MODEL FOR THE RANDOM PRESENTATION EXPERIMENT  In contrast to the quantal experiment in which the same signal is repeatedly presented in each run, Miller and Garner (1944) studied the effect of varying the signal amplitude from trial to trial. The signals were brief increments in the amplitude of the background tone. On each trial, the signal amplitude was randomly selected from the entire set of 23-26 amplitudes used in the experiment. This is much like the usual method of constant stimuli except that the background serves as the standard stimulus and it is always present.  Our learning analysis cannot be applied directly to the bias parameters tk in this  104 NORMAN  experiment. For example, if the signal with zero amplitude is not included in the signal set, there are no incorrect detection observations and so there is no need for information feedback. However, the observers are not trying just to determine whether a signal is presented, for if so, they would always answer yes. Nor can they be detecting quantum changes and responding if and only if the changes exceed some criterion, because Miller and Garner's results for random presentations are considerably different from the rigid criterion results (Fig. 4) that they got when they used the quantal method.  To construct a plausible decision scheme within the quantum theory that may account for the random presentation results, let us introspect a little, remembering that the observer had had extensive practice with the quantum experiment and was familiar with the ambiguity between the quantum detection observations caused by signal and noise. We assume that the observer is cautious and wishes to respond only when he is certain that he has heard a signal. He knows that zero amplitude signals often sound like real signals, so on each trial he asks whether his observation could have been heard in the absence of signal. He is familiar with the noise distribution from his previous experience in the quantum experiment and from listening to the background tone alone during the intervals between signal presentations. That being so, we assume that after some observations of a k quantum detection he decides that that observation might just as well have been caused by noise, and he reduces the value of the bias parameter tk accordingly. The frequency with which he acts as if noise had caused the observation is based on his estimate of the probability that noise would do so, that is, 4k(0). Similarly, we assume he raises the value of tk about as often as he thinks that the set of signals to which he is listening would cause a k quantum observation. The resulting stochastic description of the adjustment process is  s 1/S4k(Si) (1- 0) tk(i) + 0  tk(i + 1) _ (1 - 0') tk(i) with probability (1/S)4k(0) (9) tk(i)  otherwise,  where s; is an element from the signal set, j = 1, 2, 3, 1., S and each signal is equally likely with probability 11S. Solving for the expected asymptotic value of tk as the number of trials approaches infinity yields  lim E[tk(i)] = tk = s '=1 where b = $ . (10) 4k(SI) + b4k(o)  9=1  SENSORY DIFFERENTIAL THRESHOLDS 105  The psychometric function is given by  p(y I s;) _ Y tkgk(Sj)k=o  Unlike any of our previous results, tk is constant for the experiment and is independent of the actual signal presented, although it is a function of the set of signals presented. This means that the response probabilities are piecewise-linear functions of qk(s;) and, therefore, of signal amplitude. So the psychometric function consists of straight-line segments which change slope at integral quantum values of the signal amplitude.  Miller and Garner found that their results with random signal presentations were better described (as evaluated by a chi-square analysis) by straight-line segments whose slope changed at integral quantum values of signal amplitude than by a normal ogive. The quantum sizes were determined from the results of previous quantal experiments.  It is interesting that when the response-bias model is applied to the relatively simple experiment in which the signals occur in runs of fixed amplitude, the resulting psychometric function is nonlinear, whereas a similar model applied to the more complex random presentation experiments predicts a linear relationship between response probability and signal amplitude.  A MULTI-STATE MODEL FOR THE Two-ALTERNATIVE TEMPORAL FORCED-CHOICE  EXPERIMENT  The experiment discussed in the previous sections in which the observer's task is to decide on each trial whether a signal was presented is known as the "yes-no" design. We now discuss the temporal forced-choice design in which each trial is composed of a number of time intervals, exactly one of which contains the signal. On each trial the observer must decide which interval contained the signal. The same behavioral relationships (psychometric functions, iso-sensitivity curves, and isobias curves) can be studied in temporal choice designs as in yes-no detection experiments.  We consider only the simplest temporal forced-choice experiment, the two-alternative one in which the two possible signal presentation are signal followed by noise, (s, n), or noise followed by signal, (n, s>. The rational strategy is to compare the two observations and to select the interval for which the quantal change is larger. If the two observations are the same, say both Dk , then there is no basis for choice and the observer must guess, choosing the first interval with some probability uk . In general, then  A1 I <s, n>) = I I gi+k(s) qk(O) + I ukgk(S) qk(O) i=1 k=0 k=0  (12)  106 NORMAN  and  p(1 I <n, s>) _ qi+k(0) qk(s) + ukgk(O) qk(s)(13)  i=1 k=0 k=0 Thus, subtracting Eq. 13 from Eq. 12,  p(1 I <s, n)) = p(1 I <n, s>) + I Y [qi+k(s) qk(0) - qi+k(0) qk(s)] i=1 k=0  (14)  The functions qk(s) are piecewise-linear in signal amplitude, and q,(0) is independent of the signal amplitude, so the psychometric function and false detection relations, Eqs. 12 and 13, are piecewise-linear functions of signal amplitude. The iso-sensitivity relation, Eq. 14, is a straight line with unit slope. These results are independent of any assumptions about the learning of bias parameters (except that uk must be constant) and of the values of the noise parameter, q,(0).  Note that the number of correct responses, p(1 I <s, n>) P -}- p(2 I <n, s>) (1 - P), can be obtained from Eq. 12 and the complement of Eq. 13. When P = 0.5, the number of correct responses is independent of the observer's biases and depends only upon the signal parameters.  A learning model analysis, similar to that suggested for the yes-no detection experiment, can be carried out to obtain asymptotic values of the bias parameters. Specifically, suppose that  (1 - 0) uk(i) -}- 0 <Dk , Dk> and <s, nj  (1 - 0') uk(i) if <Dk , Dk> and <n, s> (15)  uk(i) otherwise.  Solving for the expected value of uk(i) as i approaches infinity:  = limm E[uk(i)] = 1/(1 + b), (16) i K0  where b = (1 - P) 0'/P0 and P is the probability that the signal is presented in the first interval <s, n>.  The predicted psychometric functions for the temporal forced-choice experiment, for several values of response bias, are shown in Fig. 9. The iso-sensitivity curves for various signal amplitudes are shown in Fig. 10, along with the curves for the same amplitudes in the yes-no detection experiment.  At any given signal amplitude the minimum value of p(1 ( <s, n)) in Eq. 12 occurs when all of the uk's are zero. This is the point  C gi+k(0) qk(s), gi+k(s) qk(0)>  i=1 k=0 i=1 k=0  SENSORY DIFFERENTIAL THRESHOLDS  107  20  0 O I 2 3 8  FIG. 9. Multi-state psychometric functions for the two-alternative temporal forced-choice experiment, for various values of response bias, b.  G Z t  T v  Q  0  0  P(yln) AND p (I I (n,s))  FIG. 10. Multi-state iso-sensitivity curves for yes-no and forced-choice experiments for three sets of signal parameters. Lines drawn with the same symbols are computed from the same parameters.  108 NORMAN  on the iso-sensitivity plane. By symmetry, the maximum point on the iso-sensitivity diagram is  00  (II - 1 1 gi+k(S) qk(0)] I LI - gilk(0) gk(S)]l  i=1 k=0 i=1 k=0  The model is not specific about the remaining locus of performance, but it is a good assumption that the points <0, 0> and < 1, 1> should be part of the iso-sensitivity curve. We join these points to the curve by straight lines for illustrative purposes, but we will only study the curve given by the model (Eq. 14).  It is possible, of course, that observers adopt nonoptimal strategies in the forcedchoice experiment. For example, suppose that an observer were to listen during the first interval and, if he heard a signal according to some criterion, were to respond "1" without listening to the second interval. If, however, he failed to detect a signal in the first interval according to that criterion, then he listens to the second interval and responds "2" if the signal is heard. If it is not heard in either interval, then interval one is guessed with probability w. (Inexperienced observers often report this strategy.)  Theoretical performance under this strategy is similar to that for the simple yes-no detection experiment. The probability of responding "1" given that the signal did occur in the first interval is given by  p(I I <s, n>) - tkgk(S) + w [I - tkgk(S)] /I - tkgk(O)] (17)  k=0 k=0 k=0  and the probability of responding "1" given that the signal occurred in the second  interval is  p(I I <n, s>) - tkgk(0) + w LI - tkgk(O)] [I - tkgk(S)] (18)  k=0 k=0 k=0  When w is zero, Eqs. 17 and 18 are identical to the corresponding yes-no equations (Eqs. 1 and 2), so that performance is identical to that in the yes-no situation. When w is not zero, Eqs. 17 and 18 are the same as the yes-no equations except that the same quantity is added to both p(y I s) and p(y I n), displacing the yes-no points upwards along a line of slope one. The iso-sensitivity curve of Eqs. 17 and 18 is, therefore, below that of the corresponding yes-no experiment when it has slope greater than 1, as it does near <0, 0>, and above the yes-no curve when it has slope less than 1, as it does near <1,1>. The two curves rapidly converge as they approach <1,1>. This forced-choice curve is never much different from the yes-no curve and is very different from the forced-choice curves of Eq. 14.  In the general forced-choice experiment with more than two intervals, a decision strategy analogous to that used with two intervals is applicable. The analysis, however, is quite difficult for the multi-state model, and it will not be attempted here.  SENSORY DIFFERENTIAL THRESHOLDS 109  THEORETICAL CONCLUSIONS  The Psychometric Function  The rigid criterion decision model for the neural quantum theory predicts straightline psychometric functions having prescribed slopes. Superficially, this prediction seems easy to check experimentally. Unfortunately, the only experimental conditions that have been found to yield results that are consistent with the theory do not permit one to measure the response biases, and experiments that do permit one to measure the response bias do not yield straight line results. It is not difficult to invent decision theories that explain the deviations from straight lines; a number of examples have just been discussed. The difficulty is that by introducing catch trials (i.e., using signal presentation probabilities other than one), the simple linear psychometric function of the simple quantum theory is distorted into a many-segmented curve that is much more difficult to distinguish from, for example, the cumulative normal distribution. The question is which experiment yields the true function and which the distorted one. If we start by assuming that the neural quantum theory underlies the detection process, decision models can be applied to the detection observations that account for the "quantal" results obtained by Bekesy (1930) and Stevens et al. (1941), as well as the psychometric functions reported when different procedures are followed (Miller and Garner, 1944, Larkin and Norman, 1963). No continuous detection model has been proposed as yet that is able to describe quantitatively the results of both the quantal experiments and the "catch trial" experiments.  Typical psychometric functions predicted by the multi-state response bias version of the neutral quantum theory and by a cumulative normal distribution chosen to approximate it are in shown Fig. 11 A. Certainly the two distributions are different; the quantal theory curve has discontinuities in its first derivative at integral quantum values; the exact shape of the curve is a function of the particular decision theory used, but the discontinuities result from the detection theory. Figure 11 B shows the results of a Monte-Carlo experiment using each of the curves of Fig. 11A as the true detection probability. Fifty signal stat-trials were run at each signal amplitude. It is difficult to distinguish between these two "experimental" distributions. Thus the binomial variability inherent in our data is going to make it very difficult to infer which types of function best describes them. Of course, the variability would be reduced if the number of observations per point were increased. To study the shape of a function a large number of signal amplitudes must be examined, probably at least as many as in Figs. 11A and B (16 points). If the signal probability is 0.5, then 100 trials are needed at each signal intensity to get the number of observations used in Fig. 11 B, making a total of 1600 trials for an individual psychometric function. Even this number of trials may be more than can be obtained in one experimental session.  Moreover, the detailed shape of the psychometric curve is not really a good way to test the discrete models because it depends considerably upon the exact decision  NORMAN  1.0 0.8 0.6 a 0.4 0.2 0  A  Multi- state Normal  0.8 _~ 0.6 r  g 0.4  0.2  B  Co s  0  9Q8e  0  n  C  Low Threshold ----- Multi-state .................. Sig. Detect.  C  0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 P(Y1n) and p(1j<n,s>)  0a  0  Multi-state Normal  FIG. 11. Comparison of theoretical predictions.  SENSORY DIFFERENTIAL THRESHOLDS 111  process assumed. The discontinuous changes in shape at integral quantum values, however, are more important. The discontinuities in the first derivative of the psychometric function are insensitive to the decision model, and so the existence of abrupt changes in slope at integral multiples of amplitude in the experimental results would be a strong point in favor of the theory. Unfortunately, discontinuities in response probabilities can also occur at any amplitude that the observer changes his quantal criterion, so the location of discontinuities in the shape of the psychometric function is meaningful only for the response-bias model.  The Iso-Bias Curve  The iso-bias curve for the multi-state response bias model (Fig. 8) is sensitive to both the decision model and the assumption (used in the derivation of the psychometric function) that the parameter b is constant during the experiment. Because little is known about the possible dependence of b (and specifically of the learning rate parameters B and B') on motivational variables (see Luce, 1963a), alternative iso-bias relationships cannot be readily explored.  The Iso-Sensitivity Curve  Various discrete models predict different forms for the iso-sensitivity curve. Luce's low-threshold, response bias model predicts that it consists of two straight line segments, whereas the multi-state response bias model says that it is a smooth curve (Fig. 7). The signal detectability prediction is a smooth curve which, although it resembles that of Fig. 7, becomes a straight line when plotted on normal-normal probability paper (on which both vertical and horizontal axes are normal probability distribution transformations othe response probabilities). The slope of the line equals the ratio of the standard deviation of the noise distribution to the standard deviation of the signal plus noise distribution. Unfortunately, the three curves are very similar as can be seen in Fig. 11 C. The asymmetry of the curves at different signal amplitudes is specifically predicted by the discrete models, once the noise parameters are fixed.  Even if a particular model were true, the data points need not necessarily lie on the predicted iso-sensitivity curve. The models that we study of the iso-sensitivity curve specify the observer's best possible performance when he is constantly attending to the stimulus and keeping a stable response strategy. If he does not follow a stable decision strategy but, for example, oscillates between two "pure" strategies, then his performance must oscillate between the two points on the iso-sensitivity curve corresponding to the "pure" strategies. In general, the observed performance can lie anywhere in the convex space defined by the iso-sensitivity curve as its upper boundary and the minor diagonal as its lower boundary (or, indeed, in the region below the main diagonal to the reflection of the iso-sensitivity curve if the subject chooses to be  perverse). If the observer is inattentive or inconsistent in his choice of decision strategies, the experimental test of the theories become difficult. Experimental points significantly above a predicted iso-sensitivity curve are good evidence against a theory; points below the curve may arise from a variety of causes and do not necessarily detract from the theory.  In one sense, the inability of these models to account for all of the behavior indicates that the models are incomplete. We prefer, however, to consider this an unsolved experimental problem that is, perhaps, easier solved in the laboratory than in our theories.  Temporal Forced Choice  The temporal forced-choice experiment seems to offer the most promise as an aid in distinguishing between a continuous and a discrete detection theory. The isosensitivity predictions for Luce's low-threshold model and for the multi-state model are straight line segments with a slope of one; the locations of the lines are predicted by each theory in terms of parameters that can be estimated from yes-no data. The prediction of the form of the function is insensitive to assumptions about the decision model and completely independent of any learning models (Fig. 11 C).  The signal detectability prediction is a curve that is symmetric about the major diagonal and, for the two-alternative temporal forced-choice experiment, it is located by assuming that the separation between the means of the noise and the signal distributions normalized by the standard deviation of the noise distribution is \/2 larger than the same quantity for the corresponding yes-no experiment (Fig. 11 C) (Swets and Birdsall, 1956).  PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  Adding the response-bias decision strategies to the neural quantum theory has reduced its distinguishing characteristics and rendered experimental tests difficult. As we have seen in the preceding discussion, experimental variance, arising both from statistical sampling variability and from inconsistency in the observer's performance, make it difficult to find adequate distinguishing features. The statistical variability problem can be solved simply by collecting more data, but observer variability needs to be brought under experimental control. Unfortunately, we do not always know how to do this, and, even worse, it is likely that the large number and length of experimental sessions required to reduce binomial variability will magnify the problems of observer stability.  We must also distinguish between those features of the predictions that derive from the decision model and those that result from the detection model; we are most interested in experiments that get at the latter. There is much less evidence about the decision models than about the detection models. It is possible that different decision  SENSORY DIFFERENTIAL THRESHOLDS 113  models apply under different circumstances, that the strategy that the observer selects may depend upon the experiment, the past results, and his own idosyncracies. The things we should look for to test the neutral quantum theory are:  1. The invariance of signal parameters. The same signal parameters and quantum size should describe all experimental results for a given observer. The only degrees of freedom in fitting individual experimental data should be in the choice of the bias parameter (b) or, more generally, in the choice of the decision model itself.  2. The function qk(s). The empirical psychometric functions and isosensitivity curves can be used to estimate the signal parameters for each signal amplitude; these estimates should be similar in form to those shown in Fig. 3 and should be described by the equations of Table 1, if the quantum model holds.  3. Discontinuities in the slope of the psychometric function. Discontinuities in the first derivative of the psychometric function should occur at integral values of the quantum size.  4. Temporal forced-choice iso-sensitivity curve. The shape and location of the temporal forced-choice iso-sensitivity curve is an important test of the quantal model because fewer assumptions are involved than in most of the other predictions.  EXPERIMENTAL LITERATURE  Although there is a sizable literature of psychophysical experiments, most of it cannot be used to evaluate threshold theories, because response biases have not been measured. The major source of usable data, the signal detectability experiments, usually involved an acoustical background of white noise; we prefer experiments conducted with a minimum of external noise in order to examine the detection process, because, with the large fluctuations in background introduced by the white noise, the predictions of the threshold models become very similar to those of signal detectability theory and the chance of discriminating between the two already similar models decreases.  PURE TONE EXPERIMENTS  The first experiments supporting the neural quantum theory were performed by Bekr6sy in 1930. In addition, Stevens et al. (1941), Miller and Garner (1944), Neisser (1955), and Larkin and Norman found quantal results using the method described by Stevens et al. These experiments all used acoustic signals. A one-quantum rigid criterion was found by Bek6sy, a two-quanta rigid criterion when Stevens' techniques are used, and a mixture of criteria with the other methods. Stevens et al. studied both frequency and amplitude discrimination, whereas the other studies examined only amplitude.  114 NORMAN  Miller and Garner (1944) found that the random presentation of several different signal amplitudes in a pure tone background resulted in a psychometric function that could be better fit by a continuous function consisting of straight-line segments that change slope only at quantal amplitudes than by a cumulative normal distribution. The quantum size was independently determined from previous experiments using the method of Stevens et al. This piecewise-linear psychometric function was derived in this paper from the multi-state response bias model.  VISUAL EXPERIMENTS  In 1953 (a, b) Blackwell published an extensive study of psychophysical techniques in vision. Included were several quantal experiments from which he concluded that, although the results of individual experiments were often consistent with the quantum theory, data from the same observer in different experiments did not satisfy the rigidcriterion quantal predictions unless the quantum size was assumed to fluctuate widely. Because this assumption did not seem satisfactory, Blackwell concluded that his data do not support the theory. However, because response biases sometimes produce effects that at first appear to be inconsistent with quantal notions, it is desirable to re-evaluate Blackwell's data in terms of a response bias model.  The response bias analysis of Blackwell's data permits all the curves for any given subject to be described with the same quantum size, thus eliminating the major disagreement of his data from the neural quantum theory (Norman, 1962b).  Blackwell used a "quantal index" as a measure of the goodness of fit to a rigid criterion. The index is the ratio Cl/(C, - Co), where Cl is the smallest intensity for which p(yes) = 1. Integral values of the index represent integral (and rigid) quantal criteria. If a subject adopts a response criterion such that he never responds to zero or one quantum changes, that he always responds with probability t to two-quanta detections, and that he always responds to three or more quantum detections, then the non-0 or 1 part of the psychometric function must range from one to three quanta, and so the quantal index must be 1.5. Blackwell reports that of the data that could not be described by quantal curves, most of them had quantal indices ". . . with the greatest frequency at 1.5" (1953b, p. 405).  TEMPORAL FORCED-CHOICE  There do not appear to be any published iso-sensitivity curves for temporal forcedchoice experiments. However, one series of experiments has recently been completed by Elizabeth Shipleys (unpublished) using a 1000 cps signal in a background of band limited white noise. These experiments are of special interest because she used the same equipment and stimulus parameters (except for the white noise) and a procedure  s I would like to thank Dr. Shipley for permission to include her data in this paper.  SENSORY DIFFERENTIAL THRESHOLDS 115  similar to that used by Larkin and Norman (1963) and Norman (1962a, 1963) in their quantal studies. She obtained both yes-no and two-alternative temporal forcedchoice data for two observers, E. S. (not Dr. Shipley) and D. C., by varying both payoff matrices and signal probabilities. Her iso-sensitivity data are shown in Figs. 12, 13, and 14. Figures 12 and 13 show the same observer at different signal amplitudes. The arrows connecting the pairs of yes-no and temporal forced-choice points in Fig. 13 and the yes-no points in Fig. 14 indicate that the two points in each pair were obtained under the same experimental conditions. The tail of the arrow is located at the data point from the first use of that presentation probability or payoff matrix and the head is at the point from a later run under the same conditions. Note that in Fig. 13A the data from the observer's first day of temporal forced-choice fall on the yes-no iso-sensitivity curve, suggesting that she initially used a nonoptimal strategy but then altered her behavior. (These data are not shown in Fig. 13B.) This observer (E.S.) did not start the temporal forced-choice experiments until 2 weeks (six experimental sessions) after starting the yes-no experiments. The other observer (Fig. 14) was introduced to temporal forced-choice and yes-no procedures at about the same time and there are no discrepancies in his forced-choice data.  The solid lines drawn through the points in Figs. 12-14A are Luce's low-threshold theoretical lines drawn by eye (they are not necessarily "best fits" to the points), subject to the constraints that the temporal forced-choice line has a slope of one and that the two segments of the yes-no line pass through the points <0, 0> and <1, 1) and intersect on the forced-choice line. In all three figures, the yes-no data would be better fit by the multi-state response bias model, but this has not been done because of the difficulty in estimating parameters from these limited data.  The data for these two observers are again presented in the B portion of Figs. 12-14, where they are plotted on normal-normal ruled probability graph paper. The solid lines are the best fitting (by eye) straight lines through the points with the constraint that the temporal forced-choice lines have a slope of one; these lines are the predictions of signal detectability theory. According to that theory, the separation between the means of the signal and noise distributions (normalized by the standard deviation of the noise distribution) in the forced-choice experiment should be 1.414 (= V2) that of the yes-no experiment run under these same conditions. The observed increases are 1.39, 1.54, and 1.68 for Figs. 12-14, respectively. The range of these values include both the signal detectability and the multi-state model predictions. The question is whether the forced-choice data (Figs. 12-14B) appear to be "bowed" or straight in the normal-normal plots, that is, whether the data points lie above the straight line segments near the edges of the graph and below the straight line near its intersection with the major diagonal. The amount and direction of curvature required by the threshold model (on this type of graph) is shown by the curved line in Fig. 12B which is the threshold theory forced-choice curve of Fig. 12A transformed into normalnormal coordinates. Two of the three curves appear to have the required curvature.  NORMAN  0 . 2 .4 .6 .8 1.0 P(Yln) 81 p (,ICn,s>)  c v a  a. n  2  0  _2  m v m  v E L 0 Z  P(yls) 8l p(tl<s,n>)  FIG. 12. Iso-sensitivity curves obtained with a background of white noise. The same data are shown in A and B, but on different coordinates. Open circles are yes-no detection experimcnts, and closed circles from temporal forced-choice. The lines are the theoretical two-state model (A) and the signal detectability theory (B). The "curved" line in B is the same two-state model theoretical prediction shown as the solid line in A.  SENSORY DIFFERENTIAL THRESHOLDS  C N  ,.. . 6 Q  .4  fll  .2  a  0  0 . 2 .4 .6 .8 1.0 p(yin) 8a p(ij<n,s>)  n c.  v _ .8  .6 .4 . 2 T  a .05  .95  .05 .2 4 .6 .8 .95 p (yln) a p(l) <n,sA  2  0  v E  -I  O Z  m 0 m 0  FIG. 13. Iso-sensitivity curves obtained with a background of white noise. The same data are shown in A and B, but on different coordinates. Open circles are yes-no detection experiments, and closed circles from temporal forced-choice. The lines are the theoretical two-state model (A) and signal detectability theory (B). The crosses in A are the results on the day -the observer was first introduced to temporal forced-choice.  NORMAN  '7,.8 C  r  .4  dS  CA .2 T  A O:OC  0  M t ( ! a ri 0 .2 .4 0-6 .8 1.0 p(yln) 81 p(11~n,s>)  .95  tl)  .8 d .6 df .4  _N .2 T  a .05  I 2  .05 .2 .4 .6 .8 .95 p(yln) 81 p(j f<n,s>)  2  FIG. 14. Iso-sensitivity curves obtained with a background of white noise. The same data are shown in A and B, but on different coordinates. Open circles are yes-no detection experiments, and closed circles from temporal forced-choice. The lines are the theoretical two-state model (A) and signal detectability theory predictions (B).  SENSORY DIFFERENTIAL THRESHOLDS 119  The third curve, Fig. 1413, is completely ambiguous. Unfortunately, these data do not seem to lend themselves to a statistical analysis.  These forced-choice data, although favorable to threshold theory, are certainly not conclusive. They are presented because they are all that are available, either with or without a noise background.  CONCLUSION  Our primary interest in this paper is with the question of continuity versus discreteness. If we find evidence for a discrete sensory process we can then ask our secondary question concerning the exact detection and decision models. The experimental studies that we have just examined support a threshold theory of discrimination and, in all cases where there are sufficient data, the neural quantum theory. The test for a particular decision theory is difficult and these data do not allow us to examine the various responses bias theories.  Further evidence for a low-threshold is reported by Norman (1962b, 1963) in a series of experiments designed to investigate the multi-state decision model discussed in this paper. All of the analyses performed on these experiments support the existence of a low differential threshold in hearing. These analyses include the examination of the location of the iso-sensitivity functions and the characteristics of the psychometric functions by both the discrete models and signal detectability theory. In these experiments the expanded range of the psychometric function (the range of signal amplitudes for which the response probabilities differ from one and zero) and the occasional appearance of "plateaus" in the data for psychometric functions led to the rejection of the two- and three-state response bias models in favor of the multi-state model. The multi-state model, however, failed to describe "high" amplitude iso-sensitivity curves, the iso-bias predictions were not correct, and the shapes of the psychometric functions were not always well described. The adjustment process is the most likely suspect for the cause of the difficulties because it contains the most tenuous assumptions.  The neural quantum theory as modified by the response bias models described by Luce and in this paper provides a reasonable description of the observer's performance. It is the only theory that can quantitatively describe the changes in psychometric and iso-sensitivity functions as experimental conditions change from the "quantal experiment" to yes-no and temporal forced-choice experiments, and, finally, to random presentation of signal amplitude.  REFERENCES  ANDERSON, N. H. Effect of first-order conditional probability in a two-choice learning situation. _7. exp. Psychol., 1960, 59, 73-93.  BAKPsv, G. VON. Ober das Fechnersche Gesetz and seine Bedeutung fur die Theorie der akustichen Beobachtungsfehler and die Theorie des Horens. Ann. d. Phys., 1930, 7, 329-359. (Translated in Bek6sy, G. von. Experiments in Hearing. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1960.)  120 NORMAN  BLACKWELL, H. R. Psychological thresholds: Experimental studies of methods of measurement. Engineering Research Bulletin 36. Ann Arbor: Univer. of Michigan, 1953. (a)  BLACKWELL, H. R. Evaluation of the neural quantum theory in vision. Amer. -7. Psychol., 1953, 66, 397-408. (b)  CORSO, J. F. The neural quantum theory of sensory discrimination. Psychol. Bull., 1956, 53, 371-393.  GREEN, D. M. Psychoacoustics and detection theory. Y. Acoust. Soc. Amer., 1960, 32, 11891203.  LARKIN, W. D., AND NORMAN, D. A. An extension and experimental analysis of the neural quantum theory. In R. C. Atkinson (Ed.), Studies in mathematical psychology. Stanford, Calif. Stanford Univer. Press, 1963.  LucE, R. D. A threshold theory for simple detection experiments. Psychol. Rev., 1963, 70, 61-79, (a)  LucE, R. D. Detection and recognition. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical psychology. Vol. 1. New York: Wiley, 1963. (b)  MILLER, G. A., AND GARNER, W. R. Effect of random presentation on the psychometric function: Implications for a quantal theory of discrimination. Amer. ,7. Psychol., 1944, 57, 451-467. NEISSER, U. A methodological study of the quantal hypothesis in auditory psychophysics. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University, 1955.  NICKS, D. C. Prediction of sequential two-choice decisions from event-runs. ,J. exp. Psychol., 1959, 57, 105-114.  NORMAN, D. A. Stochastic learning and a quantal model of signal detection. Proceedings of the Joint Automatic Control Conference, Symposium on discrete adaptive systems. Amer. Inst. Elec. Eng., 1962. (a)  NORMAN, D. A. Sensory thresholds and response biases in detection experiments: A theoretical and experimental analysis. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation (available from University Microfilms, Ann Arbor, Michigan) Univer. of Penn., 1962. (b)  NORMAN, D. A. Sensory thresholds and response bias. j. Acoust. Soc. Amer., 1963, 35,1432-1441. PETERSON, W. W., BIRDSALL, T. G., AND Fox, W. C. The theory of signal detectability. IRE Tram., 1954, PGIT-4, 171-212.  STERNBERG, S. H. A path independent linear model. In R. R. Bush and W. K. Estes (Eds.), Studies in mathematical learning theory. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Univer. Press., 1959, 308339.  STEVENS, S. S., MORGAN, C. T., AND VOLKMANN, J. Theory of the neural quantum in the discrimination of loudness and pitch. Amer. Y. Psychol., 1941, 54, 315-335.  SUPPES, P., AND ATKINSON, R. Markov learning models for multi-person interactions. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Univer. Press, 1960.  SWETS, J. A., AND BIRDSALL, T. G. The human use of information. III. Decision making in signal detection and recognition situations involving multiple alternatives. IRE Trans., 1956, PGIT-6, 138-165.  SWETS, J. A., TANNER, W. P., Jr., AND BIRDSALL, T. G. Decision processes in perception. Psychol. Rev., 1961, 68, 301-340.  TANNER, W. P., Jr., AND NORMAN, R. Z. The human use of information. II. Signal detection for the case of an unknown signal parameter. IRE Trans., 1954, PGIT-4, 222-227.  TANNER, W. P., Jr., AND SWETS, J. A. The human use of information I: Signal detection for the case of signal known exactly. IRE Trans., 1954, PGIT-4, 213-221.  RECEIVED: January 15, 1963