10.1016/0022-2496(65)90001-5
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 2, 205-218 X1965)  Signal Detection Theory and Crozier's Law:  Derivation of a New Sensory Scaling Procedure  MICHEL TREISMAN  Institute of Experimental Psycholo,;y, University of Oxford, Oxford, England  The relation between sensory thresholds and the "sensory scale" is examined in the light of the threshold model given by  signal detection theory. The problem is seen as that of determining the function relating E, the central effect of a stimulus  serving as the decision axis when threshold judgments are made, and I, the physical intensity of the stimulus. Consideration  of the model shows that when deviations from Weber's law occur they may be accompanied by departures from Crozier's law and  that the occurrence and extent of the latter depend on the relation between E and I and can be used to define it. The argument  is applied to some of the data on visual brightness discrimination in the literature. The results suggest that E may be  related to I by a power function with an exponent of the order of 1.0. The disparity between this function and the  psychophysical laws given by classical scaling procedures is discussed, and it is suggested that it may prove useful to  hypothecate a distinction between central discriminal and metric processes.  Fechner (1860) believed that a scale of sensation could be derived from data on difference thresholds. To achieve this end he  assumed that a just noticeable difference in stimulus intensity corresponded to an increase of one unit in sensory magnitude,  an arbitrary basis for his scale which has never ceased to arouse controversy. We now have models of threshold discrimination  more sophisticated than those that were available to Fechner; the question arises whether we can supply a more secure basis  for, or interpretation of, his sensory scale. This problem will be examined here in the light of the model of the threshold  given by signal detection theory, and we will begin with a brief summary of it.  Statistical decision theory (Neyman and Pearson, 1933) and the hypothesis that the central neural effect of the same stimulus  varies on successive presentations (Thurstone, 1927) have been combined in signal detection theory, which interprets threshold  judgments as attempts to detect signals in noise, and this model has had considerable success (de Vries, 1943; Rose, 1948;  Tanner and Swets, 1954; Gregory, 1956; Barlow, 1956; Swets, Tanner, and Birdsall, 1961; Blackwell, 1963). Figure 1 relates the  psychometric function given by the method of constant stimuli to the central effects postulated by this model. When stimuli  varying on a physical dimension I are presented  205  206 TREISMAN  to a subject, they produce central neural effects whose mean magnitude is given by E = f(I). (This relation will be referred  to as the "E function".) The dimension E is the decision axis: Each presentation of a stimulus causes the central occurrence  of a magnitude of E and a decision rule is applied to this magnitude to determine what response the subject will make. When a  given stimulus I' is repeatedly presented a distribution of central effects results with a mean E' and variance of . To decide  on trial (1) of an experiment, whether or not the stimulus presented was greater than I', the decision rule applied requires  that the central effect produced on that trial, Ei , must be compared with a criterion, E,; if Ei exceeds the criterion the  response is "Yes", if not, "No." On trials on which a stimulus I" > I' is presented, the probability of the response "Yes,"  P(Y I I"), will be the integral of the distribution centered on E" for E > E,; when I' is presented the corresponding integral  of the E' distribution gives the false positive rate, P(Y I I'). The optimal criterion, E, , could be computed by a number of  alternative methods (Birdsall, 1955); however, the definition proposed by Neyman and Pearson (1933) has the advantage that  subjects can plausibly be assumed to apply it both in the common psychophysical procedures and in everyday situations  (Treisman, 1964a). The Neyman-Pearson criterion requires that the false positive rate must not exceed a fixed limiting value,  and it is satisfied if E, = E' + zo,' , where z is a constant such that P(Y I I') is equal to the limiting false positive  rate. Thus the subject can follow an optimal procedure without knowing the form of the E" distribution, or the a priori  probability of I".  The E' and E" distributions may be described as "noise" and "signal + noise" distributions respectively; it is usually assumed  that they are approximately normal. Figure 1 illustrates the determination of either the incremental threshold or the absolute  threshold by the method of constant stimuli. For the latter I' = 0, for the former I' > Io , where Io is the absolute  threshold, and I' is a constant background intensity on which variable stimulus increments, JI, are superimposed. In each  case the threshold criterion, P(Y) = 0.5 (where P(Y) is the probability of the response "Yes"), will be satisfied by the  stimulus I" = I' + dI, for which E" = E, = f (I"). When I' = 0, I" = dI = Io , which is the absolute threshold; when I' is  supraliminal d7 = I" - I' is the just noticeable difference, and it corresponds to zvE. The standard deviation of the  psychometric function, oi, , will correspond approximately to I' - I", where I' is the stimulus for which P(Y) = 0.84. The  central effect of I' is E = E" +  aE --.  The present paper will mainly consider the discrimination of visual brightness. The limits to visual discrimination have been  attributed to the Poisson variability of light (Hecht, Shlaer, and Pirenne, 1942; de Vries, 1943; Rose, 1948). If E is a  linear function of I, and the variance of E is mainly due to quantum variability, we would expect a square root relation  between aE. and E'. This model has been extended by Treisman (1964b): a simple assumption is made about the biological noise  which, together with quantum variation, accounts for the variability of the central effects  CROZIER'S LAW AND SENSORY SCALING 207  of visual stimuli, and the model is then able to explain the occurrence of Weber's law, and other psychophysical findings.  This account makes a,, a square root function of E' when I' is small, and a linear function of E' when I' is large. But  although GE, increases as E' increases when the whole range of variation in visual intensity is  EC  E" E"'  E' 4'-zc  I I EI ~i  I   P(Y) I I  I I  I I I  1.00 I    I I I  0.84 i   I    0.50 ----------- -    DECISION AXIS  ~--- 01 --,F _ i  STIMULUS MAGNITUDE  FIG. 1. The signal detection model for the measurement of the absolute or incremental threshold by the method of constant  stimuli. Repeated presentation of a stimulus I produces a dispersion of central effects on the dimension E. This dimension is  the "decision axis" which is used to determine the response when a threshold discrimination is made. The psychometric function  for P(Y), the probabilityof the response "Yes," is shown. The value of P(Y) corresponding to I', the standard stimulus, is  the false positive rate. T' is the stimulus giving P(Y) - 0.50; I" - I' = JI. I" -I- ap - I"', abeing the standard deviation  of the psychometric function. In this procedure a, and aal, the standard deviation of AI, are the same.  208 TREISMAN  considered, for the small range of stimuli, I', I", I', used in determining a single incremental threshold, a sufficiently  close approximation for our present purposes is given if we take vE, -* a,,, -' OE"' OE  A linear relation between E and I has been assumed explicitly or implicitly in a number of accounts (de Vries, 1943;  Blackwell, 1963; Treisman, 1964b), and Rushton (1961) has presented a possible neural basis for such linear relations. Here we  have defined E as the central neural effect of the stimulus which is used to determine what response is to be made, and we can  regard the problem of specifying the function E = f (I) as the modern equivalent to Fechner's problem of how to measure  sensation. Fechner concluded that sensation was a logarithmic function of stimulus intensity, while more recently it has been  claimed that "direct" scaling procedures demonstrate a power function with, in the case of brightness, an exponent of 0.33  (Stevens, 1960), though the validity of this conclusion has been questioned (Treisman, 1961, 1962, 1963a, 1963b, 1964c). The  present paper will examine the problem of specifying E = f (I) in the light of the signal detection model, and will show that  a scaling procedure can be derived from this model which can be used to determine the relation between E and I.  We see from Fig. 1 that E" - E' = zg,, where z is the constant required by the Neyman-Pearson criterion, and that E' - E" =  vE, where E' is the mean central effect of I', the stimulus strength giving P(Y) = 0.84. It follows that  (E- E')I(E' - E") - zaE/v, = z  for all values of E. This invites comparison with an empirical relation between the difference threshold and its standard  deviation which was described by Crozier (Crozier, 1936; Upton and Crozier, 1936; Crozier and Holway, 1937; Holway, 1937;  Holway and Crozier, 1937; Blackwell, 1963). "Crozier's law" can be written  where AI is the difference threshold, vat is its standard deviation, and C is a constant. When d7 stands for the incremental  threshold determined by the method of constant stimuli, va, will be given by the standard deviation of the psychometric  function, az, , which corresponds to I"' - I" in Fig. 1. But when dI is determined by the method of limits the value of aa,  obtained tends to underestimate a,, (Cane, 1956; Treisman and Howarth, 1959), and consequently the value of Crozier's constant  given by the method of limits will usually be larger than when the method of constant stimuli is used.  If the signal detection model is accepted, a consequence of great interest is that the simultaneous validity of Eqs. 1 and 2  limits the possible relations between E and I. If E is a linear function of I then one equation will imply the other for all  values of I, and we will have C = z. (This is the case that Blackwell (1963) appears to have in  CROZIER'S LAW AND SENSORY SCALING 209  mind.) But this is a special case; for other functional relations between E and I, if Eq. I holds it does not necessarily  follow that Crozier's law will hold too. Whether it does or not will depend on a further factor-the constancy of the Weber  fractionwhose effect will depend on the E function. We shall now examine the effect of this factor for power function and  logarithmic relations between E and I.  Let us suppose that E = a log I -}- b, where a and b are constants, and that I" = (W + I)I'. It follows that  C = (I" - I,) (I- - I  WI'  exp[(E' __ b)/a1 - (W + 1)I' WI'  exp[(I/a){[(E,- - E')lz] + E" - b}] - (W + 1)I,  W (W + 1)(z+I)tz - W - I  Similarly, if we let E = aIn + b, where a, b, and n are constants, we will get  C = (I" -r) - W  (I-r,) {[(W+I)n-11/Z+(W+I)n}"n-W-I.  When n = 1 Eq. 4 resolves into C = z, so that for E = aI + b a central detection process with a fixed false alarm rate will  give Crozier's law for all values of I, whatever values W may take.  Equations 3 and 4 define C in terms of W z, and n. Since the last two are constant, when Weber's law holds strictly C will be  constant too. Thus provided l"(I' is constant, if the Neyman-Pearson criterion is applied centrally the data obtained will  conform to Crozier's law whether E is a logarithmic, linear, or power function of I.  We can solve Eq. 3, and, provided we know n, Eq. 4, for the value of z corresponding to a given value of C. This suggests that  we might solve E = f (I) by determining z for different possible functions and seeing which function gives the values of z  which correspond to the obtained false positive rates. However Table I shows that this hope is forlorn; it gives solutions for  z for a number of possible E functions for values of W and C that might be met experimentally. Unfortunately the values of z  are so similar for the different functions that it would not be feasible to choose between them by examining false positive  rates.  210 TREISMAN  TABLE 1 VALUES OF 5 CORRESPONDING To DIFFERENT E FUNCTIONS  C W a log I+ b a75+b aI+b all' +b  3.0 0.05 3.1 3.1 3.0 2.8  0.25 3.4 3.3 3.0 2.8  5.0 0.05 5.2 5.0 5.0 4.9  0.25 5.7 5.4 5.0 4.7  The dependence of C on W in Eqs. 3 and 4 suggests a more promising approach to solving E = f (I). For the considerable range  of values of I for which the Weber fraction is relatively constant, these equations tell us only that Crozier's law will hold.  But at small values of I big increases in W occur, and here the way C varies or fails to vary may indicate whether a log  function or a power function with a particular exponent best describes the relation between E and I. If the relation is linear  C, of course, will be constant for all values of I, and this is what appears to be shown by the data for brightness  discrimination in Fig. 2, which have been taken from Holway (1937). In this figure dI/I has been plotted against log I, and  the corresponding values of log aa, have been plotted against log dI. The former curve shows W varying between 0.02 and 2.88.  But a straight line with a slope of one appears to fit the relation between log aa, and log [lI over the whole range of  variation in I, despite the increase in W for small values of I. The line is given by log aa, = log 4I - log C, C = 6.7 being  the mean value of d7/a,, for all the data. Since the method of limits was used this value of C probably overestimates z.  Since Holway's data show no deviation from Crozier's law as W increases they are compatible with a linear relation between E  and I. But Mueller's (1951) data, plotted in Fig. 3, do not show quite the same result. Mueller measured the incremental  threshold for visual intensity using the method of constant stimuli. Values of the (50 %) thresholds and their standard  deviations were obtained by plotting Mueller's data on probability paper and fitting straight lines by eye. Each point for  subject H is the mean of three sessions, each point for subject R the mean of 2 sessions. The mean value of C for all subject  H's data was 5.09, for subject R it was 3.89. In Fig. 3 log C has been plotted against log W for each subject, and the  theoretical curves given by a logarithmic E function, and by power functions with exponents of 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1.0, are  also shown. These curves were obtained by calculating C for different values of W from Eqs. 3 and 4. For each subject the mean  value of C for the six highest intensities of I was taken as an estimate of z, since these values of I gave small and similar  values of W(for H they ranged from 0.04 to 0.12, and for R from  CROZIER'S LAW AND SENSORY SCALING  ba o, 1 0  J  2  FIG. 2. Data from an experiment by Holway (1937): the just noticeable increment in brightness was determined at various  intensities, using the method of limits. The results of a series of observations on one subject are shown. In the lower figure  AIII is plotted against log I; in the upper log adl is plotted against log dI for the same observations. A straight line with  slope equal to one, as given by Crozier's law, log ad l = log d7 - log C, was fitted to the latter data; despite their scatter  the fit is satisfactory.  212  TREISMAN  0.07 to 0.10), and it was seen in Table 1 that C is a good estimate of z for a variety of E functions, when W is small.  Mueller's data have few points for the larger values of W, thus they do not give any very precise indication of the form of  the E function. The least-squares solution for n and z was calculated, for Eqs. 3 and 4, for each of his subjects. To do this  all combinations of exponents between 0.1 and 3.0 with all values of z between C 1.0 were examined, where C is the mean  value of C for all the subject's data, and the values  0.8  00  n=1-0  U  0 1.~ J  0_8F  0-6  04  02F  0.01 , , 2-5 1.0 1.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 Log W  FIG. 3. Data from an experiment by Mueller (1951) who measured the incremental threshold for brightness discrimination by the  method of constant stimuli for two subjects. For each subject log C has been plotted against log W. Theoretical curves are  shown for the functions E = a log I -F b, and E = a In -F b, where n = 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, or 1.0.  CROZIER'S LAW AND SENSORY SCALING 213  giving the smallest sum of squared deviations in C were taken. For subject H the best-fitting solution was z = 5.6, n = 0.5,  and for subject R it was z = 4.2, n = 0.6. Thus the data do not fit a linear or logarithmic function, but are compatible with  a power function with an exponent of the order of 0.5-0.6.  This treatment of the data has not taken account of the random noise, I., which may be added to I. This "dark light" has been  attributed to the spontaneous decomposition of molecules of visual pigment (Barlow, 1957a), though random neural activity  might also contribute to it. Ideally it should be estimated (Gregory, 1956; Barlow, 1957a; Treisman, 1964b) and added to I,  and the relation determined should be that between E and (I -{- In).  The interpretation of these data is also limited by the fact that most of the variation in W occurs at low values of I. At  high background intensities W is relatively constant, and the validity of Crozier's law at these values of I is compatible  with a logarithmic, linear, or any power law. Thus it could be argued that the law indicated by the relation between C and W  at low intensities is peculiar to those low intensities, and that when I is large some other law might apply. However both  this difficulty and the need to estimate I,, can be avoided if we hold I constant at a relatively high level and vary W in  some other way. Blackwell and Law (1958) have recorded data of this sort. They measured brightness differential thresholds in  4 subjects at a number of background intensities, with a 0.01 sec exposure duration, and targets subtending either 1' or 45'.  The small target gave larger values of W than the big one for the same values of I, and the change in C correlated with this  variation in W can be used to determine the E function. This was done for the two highest background intensities used (1210 or  1200, and 104 or 101 ft-L) since these gave values of W for the large target which were small (ranging between 0.07 and 0.12),  so that the corresponding C values could be taken as good estimates of z. For each subject approximate solutions for n were  obtained from Eq. 4, using the values of Wand C given by the small target, and taking C for the large target at the same  background intensity as the value of z. The exponents obtained for the four subjects were: 0.85 and 0.65, 0.65 and 0.3, 1.65  and 2.0, 1.35 and 1.0 (the value for the higher brightness is given first in each case).  These results invite comparison with the rather scanty neurophysiological data on the nature of the visual afferent message,  since a parallel between the psychophysically determined E function and some aspect of the nervous message would be useful  evidence for identifying the latter as the neural basis of sensory discrimination. Hartline and Graham (1932) found that the  maximum frequency of discharge of single ommatidia of limulus was logarithmically related to I, and this has sometimes been  taken, perhaps unjustifiably (Barlow, 1957b), to indicate that a similar relation might hold for the vertebrate eye. Kuffier,  FitzHugh, and Barlow (1957) examined the effects of change in illumination on the discharge of ganglion cells in the cat's  retina; their results did not support a logarithmic relation, though they were looking at maintained discharges not at the  peak frequency. However, it must be noted that in  214 TREISMAN  measuring psychophysical thresholds the eye is usually adapted to I', and changes in E are produced by relatively small  increments to this adapting intensity. Thus the function E = F(I) applies only to situations of this sort. It is quite  possible that variation in the neural response consequent on large changes in 'I might follow a logarithmic or some other law,  different from the function best describing the effect on the nervous discharge of small departures from an adapting  intensity. This lends particular interest to the data obtained by FitzHugh (1957). He examined the effect of brief flashes of  light of near-threshold intensity on the discharge from the cat's ganglion cell, recording the relation between the intensity  of a flash and the number of impulses produced in a critical period following it; he fitted power functions to the data for  individual cells and obtained mean exponents of 0.6 to 1.2:  Holway's (1937) results, in Fig. 2, suggest an exponent of 1.0, Mueller's (1951) data give exponents of the order of 0.5-0.6,  and the exponents calculated from Blackwell and Law's (1958) data range from 0.3 to 2.0 with a mean of 1.1. Thus the  psychophysical data suggest a range of exponents similar to that found by FitzHugh. This agreement would be expected if that  neural correlate of a flash of light which FitzHugh studied-the number of impulses produced in optic nerve fibers in a  critical period following the flash-were the basis for brightness discrimination in man, constituting the central effect of  the stimulus whose measure serves as the decision axis, E. But the data which have been discussed above are not a sufficient  basis for this conclusion. They are at best suggestive, since they were not collected for the present purpose and are not  altogether satisfactory for it. For a reliable determination' of the E function more data on difference thresholds are needed.  These should be collected by the method of constant stimuli for background intensities giving an adequate range of values of W  and the data should allow I,to be estimated, or else I can be held constant and the area or duration of the brightness  increment varied. Both methods should preferably be used together on the same subjects so that the consistency of the  exponents determined at high and low values of I can be studied. Reliable measures of the false positive rate should also be  The data presented above illustrate the application of the scaling procedure based on comparing C and W, and its potential  usefulness. They also suggest some problems of interest. The different psychophysical results give a considerable range of  exponents: to what extent is this due to real differences between the E functions for different subjects, rather than  experimental and sampling error? What E scales will be obtained for sensory dimensions other than brightness ? It has been  suggested that incremental and decremental thresholds (i.e., thresholds for detecting "black flashes") depend on different  retinal mechanisms: "on units" in the first case, "off units" in the second (Pirenne, 1962; Short, 1964). It will be of  interest to compare the E functions for the two types of threshold.  The evidence above suggests that the E function for brightness may be linear or a power function with an exponent not very  different from 1.0. If further research  CROZIER'S LAW AND SENSORY SCALING 215  confirms this, it will appear to conflict both with the logarithmic psychophysical law found by Fechner and also shown by  procedures such as category scaling, and the power law with an exponent of 0.33 proposed by Stevens (1960). We must therefore  consider how such a conflict could be resolved.  It has been argued elsewhere that the usual reasons for preferring either the power function or the logarithmic psychophysical  laws given by the so-called "direct" and "indirect" scaling procedures respectively are invalid (Treisman, 1961, 1962, 1963a,  1963b, 1964c). Instead a simple model has been proposed in which in a sensory scaling experiment the subject is regarded as  performing a sensory-motor task which requires him to take account ostimulus magnitudes in selecting his responses. The  model assumes that the stimulus has a central neural effect, S, which is some function of the stimulus magnitude, I, and that  the central nervous system uses S as a measure of the stimulus, employing this measure to select an overt response, R. We can  use the relations between the observables, I and R, to make inferences about the intervening central effect, S, which is not  directly observable by psychophysical techniques, though potentially susceptible to physiological observation. The relations  between these three measures can be represented by a stimulus function, S = f (I), and a program for using S to select R which  in a case such as magnitude estimation could be written as a response function R = g(S). The stimulus function, S = f (I),  corresponds to the psychophysical law aboutw hose true form there has been so much controversy. In this model its form is  independent of the uses to which S may be put, which are defined by the "response program" which is selected by the  experimenter's instructions. Thus if S is a logarithmic function of I, then this will remain true whatever the task the  subject is called upon to perform. If, for example, the category scaling procedure is applied then equal intervals on S will  be selected for the different categories, but in magnitude estimation values of S will be subjected to an exponential  transformation to specify the response. S =f(I) could be a logarithmic or power function, but if it is assumed that S is a  logarithmic function of I a number of intractable problems in scaling theory disappear, which does not happen for the power  function. This leads us to conclude that of the two the logarithmic psychophysical law should be preferred (Treisman, 1964c).  If the relation between E and I suggested by the results above is confirmed we will again appear to have two conflicting  psychophysical laws, one a power function with an exponent lying in a range about 1.0, and the other a log function. But this  conflict can be resolved if we apply an hypothesis which has proved useful in explaining a number of other perceptual  phenomena: this is that perceptual analysis is hierarchical or sequential, stimulus inputs being analyzed in a number of  stages (Treisman, 1963c). There is no a priori reason for identifying E and S; these could well apply to two different stages  in the analysis of the afferent input. We would suggest that threshold decisions are made at a fairly peripheral or early  stage of sensory analysis, and that the E scale measures the neural effect used in making these decisions. At a further  216 TREISMAN  stage information about the magnitude of I is extracted from the afferent input and stored. It has been suggested in another  context that information about the magnitude of a stimulus might be identified and stored by selecting an appropriate point in  a metric array, a series each point or unit of which represents a magnitude (Treisman, 1963d). A physical analogy is the  process of measuring the length of an object by lining it up with a measuring stick and marking the stick at the point which  coincides with the end of the object: the distance of this mark from the origin is then the length of the object. The S scale  would then correspond to this store or metric array; any afferent input E' would be measured against it and a unit S' would be  selected to represent the magnitude of the stimulus.  A useful central measure of the magnitude of a stimulus I' should satisfy two conditions: (i) The units should not be so fine  that maintained or repeated observation of a nominally constant stimulus can result in apparent variation in its magnitude, as  recorded centrally. This condition would be met within acceptable limits if the metric unit, S', recording the magnitude of a  stimulus 1', corresponds to any value of E in a range not less than E' zQE. (ii) The units should not be so coarse that  stimuli which are discriminably different, on a difference threshold judgment, can simultaneously be recorded as having the  same apparent magnitude. This condition will be met if S' records effects in a range not greater than E' zoE . It follows  that the central metric scale, S, should correspond exactly to a summated j.n.d. scale, and therefore to the extent that  Weber's law holds S should be logarithmically related to I. If it is the case that E is approximately a linear function of I,  then when 4111 is constant zQEIE will also be constant, and S will be a logarithmic function of E. For other relations between  E and I, the relation between S and E will be determined, when Weber's law holds, by the logarithmic relation between S and I.  If this argument is correct we must distinguish a metric central scale, S, which serves as a basis for mensuration tasks, and  is related to I by a metric stimulus function or psychophysical law which may be logarithmic, and a discriminal scale, E,  which serves as the decision axis for threshold judgments and is related to I by a discriminal stimulus function which, as far  as the present evidence goes, does not appear to be logarithmic. The E function could be regarded as a description of the  performance of the sensory transducer, but the metric scale, S, depends not on sense organ characteristics but on the size of  the difference thresholds. S would directly underlie performance in tasks such as category scaling or equisection (which  commonly produce logarithmic psychophysical laws) or fractionation (subtraction of log 2 on the S scale would correspond to  "halving a sensation") or it might undergo yet further transformations (such as an exponential transformation to give  "magnitude estimates").  At the present stage the distinction between metric and discriminal central scales is speculative. Whether it will prove worth  maintaining will depend on how far further application of the C- W scaling procedure to determine E functions supports the  preliminary results above.  CROZIER'S LAW AND SENSORY SCALING 217  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  I would like to thank Drs. A. W. Ingleton, H. B. Barlow, F. H. C. Marriott, and P. E. Hallett for reading the manuscript and  for helpful comments and suggestions, and to express my appreciation to Professor R. C. Oldfield for research facilities and  to the Medical Research Council for their support.  REFERENCES  BARLOW, H. B. Retinal noise and absolute threshold. ,7. opt. Soc. Amer., 1956, 46, 634-649. BARLOW, H. B. Increment thresholds  at low intensities considered as signal/noise discriminations. 1. Physiol., 1957, 136, 469-488. (a)  BARLOW, H. B. Noise and the visual threshold. Nature, 1957, 180, 1405. (b)  BIRDSALL, T. G. The Theory of Signal Detectability. In H. Quastler (Ed.), Information theory in psychology. Glencoe, Ill.: The  Free Press, 1955.  BLACKWELL, H. R. Neural theories of simple visual discriminations. ,J. opt. Soc. Amer., 1963, 53, 129-160.  BLACKWELL, H. R., AND LAW, O. T. A study of possible "photosensitization" of the human eye by white light. Engng. Research  Inst. Rep. No. 2455-9-F. University of Michigan, June, 1958.  CANE, V. R. Some statistical problems in experimental psychology. Y. Roy. statist. Soc. B., 1956, 18, 177-194.  CROZIER, W. J. On the variability of critical illumination for flicker fusion and intensity discrimination. Y. gen. Physiol.,  1936, 19, 503-522.  CROZIER, W. J., AND HOLWAY, A. H. On the law for minimal discrimination of intensities. I. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 1937, 23,  23-28.  FECHNER, G. T. Elemente der Psychophysik. Leipzig: Breitkopf and Hartel, 1860.  FITZHUGH, R. The statistical detection of threshold signals in the retina. Y. gen. Physiol., 1957, 40, 925-948.  GREGORY, R. L. An experimental treatment of vision as an information source and noisy channel. In E. C. Cherry (Ed.),  Information theory. Third London symposium. London: Butterworth, 1956.  HARTLINE, H. K., AND GRAHAM, C. H. Nerve impulses from single receptors in the eye. cell. comp. Physiol., 1932, 1, 277-295.  HECHT, S., SHLAER, S., AND PIRENNE, M. H. Energy, quanta and vision. Y. gen. Physiol., 1942, 25, 819-840.  HoLwAY, A. H. On the precision of photometric observations. Y. opt. Soc. Amer., 1937, 27, 120-123.  HOLWAY, A. H., AND CROZIER, W. J. On the law for minimal discrimination of intensities. II. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 1937, 23,  509-515.  KUFFLER, S. W., FITZHUGH, R., AND BARLOW, H. B. Maintained activity in the cat's retina in light and darkness. Y. gen.  Physiol., 1957, 40, 683-702.  MUELLER, C. G. Frequency of seeing functions for intensity discrimination at various levels of adapting intensity. Y. gen.  Physiol., 1951, 34, 463-474.  NEYMAN, J., AND PEARSON, E. S. On the problem of the most efficient tests of statistical hypotheses. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.  A., 1933, 231, 289-337.  PIRENNE, M. H. Visual acuity. In H. Davson (Ed.), The eye. Vol. 2. The Visual Process. New York: Academic Press, 1962.  ROSE, A. The sensitivity performance of the human eye on an absolute scale. Y. opt. Soc. Amer., 1948, 38, 196-208.  218 TREISMAN  RUSHTON, W. A. H. Peripheral coding in the nervous system. In W. A. Rosenblith (Ed.), Sensory communication. New York: Wiley,  1961.  SHORT, A. D. Studies on quantum effects in human vision. Unpublished B. Sc. thesis, University of Oxford, 1964.  STEVENS, S. S. The psychophysics of sensory function. Amer. Scient., 1960, 48, 226-253. SwETs, J. A., TANNER, W. P., AND  BIRDSALL, T. G. Decision processes in perception. Psychol. Rev., 1961, 68, 301-340.  TANNER, W. P., AND SWETS, J. A. A decision-making theory of visual detection. Psychol. Rev., 1954, 61, 401-409.  THURSTONE, L. L. Psychophysical analysis. Amer. Y. Psychol., 1927, 38, 368-389.  TREISMAN, M. The nature of the psychophysical law and its significance for the scaling of sensory magnitudes. Acta Psychol.,  1961, 19, 213-214.  TREISMAN, M. Psychological explanation: the "private data" hypothesis. Brit. Y. Phil. Sci., 1962, 13, 130-143.  TREISMAN, M. Laws of sensory magnitude. Nature, 1963, 198, 914-915. (a)  TREISMAN, M. Neural effects and the psychophysical law. Nature, 1963, 200, 1241-1242. (b) TREISMAN, M. Auditory unmasking. Y.  acoust. Soc. Amer., 1963, 35, 1256-1263. (c) TREISMAN, M. Temporal discrimination and the indifference interval: implications  for a model of the "internal clock." Psychol. Monogr., 1963, 77, Whole No. 576. (d)  TREISMAN, M. The effect of one stimulus on the threshold for another: an application of signal detectability theory. Brit. 1.  Statist. Psychol., 1964, 17, 15-35. (a)  TREISMAN, M. Noise and Weber's law: the discrimination of brightness and other dimensions. Psychol. Rev., 1964, 71, 314-330.  (b)  TREISMAN, M. Sensory scaling and the psychophysical law. Quart. ,7. exp. Psychol., 1964, 16, 11-22. (c)  TREISMAN, M., AND HOWARTH, C. I. Changes in threshold level produced by a signal preceding or following the threshold  stimulus. Quart. Y. exp, Psychol, 1959, 11, 129-142.  UPTON, M., AND CROZIER, W. J. On auditory intensity discrimination. Proc. Nod. Acad. Sci., 1936, 22, 417-420.  DE VRIES, H. The quantum character of light and its bearing upon threshold of vision, the differential sensitivity and visual  acuity of the eye. Physica, 1943, 10, 553-564  RECEIVED: November 20, 1964