10.1016/0022-2496(65)90014-3
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 2, 1-18 {1965)  The General-Gamma Distribution and Reaction Times'  WILLIAM J. MCGILLZ AND JOHN GIBBON  Columbia University, New York, New York  The general-gamma distribution describes input-output times in a multistage process consisting of exponential components whose  constants are all different. The distribution and its unique history are examined. A stochastic process that leads to it is  presented. The conditional density (hazard) function is studied as a means for estimating parameters. Finally, the multistage  process model is applied to simple reaction times in an effort to reveal underlying detection and response components.  A system receives an input and grinds it through a series of discrete processing stages, then generates an output. There is no  feedback, no parallel processing, no branching, no backward motion of any kind. The description sounds almost too simple to  bother with. Yet something like this with a few added restrictions turns out to be a rather well known stochastic process  whose behavior is not especially easy to work out. In fact, if we start with just the processing times and an uncertain  knowledge of the size of the system, the task of unraveling it proves to be fairly tricky.  Our interest in a chainlike process is aroused because such chains offer plausible models for important latency effects. For  instance when an animal runs down an alley or learns to delay before responding, the duration of the latent period can be  ascribed to a chain of responses that must be played out before the terminal response can occur. Bush & Mosteller's (1955)  treatment of response times in a single alley illustrates this type of application. Stochastic chains have also been used as  models for reaction time (see Christie and Luce, 1956; Stone, 1960; Restle, 1961; and LaBerge, 1962).  The type of mechanism we have in mind might also be described as a counting device. Prohibitions on skipping around and  backward motion merely establish that the counting record must increase step by step as new events occur. We try to  characterize the mechanism in a fairly general way by allowing each successive event to put the counter into a new state  expressing the likelihood of transition to the next count,  ' This paper was begun in a graduate seminar at Columbia University, extended and revised at Lincoln Laboratory in Lexington,  Massachusetts, Columbia University, and at the Institute for Mathematical Studies in the Social Sciences at Stanford  University. The work was supported by AFC 49(638)-1253.  2 Special NIMH Fellow at the Institute for Mathematical Studies in the Social Sciences, Stanford University, 1963-64.  2 MCGILL AND GIBBON  but a new input can never decrease the count. (The latter possibility happens when the counting device executes a random walk,  increasing with certain events and decreasing with others.) Accumulative counting is thus applicable to behaviors that proceed  to a conclusion through a sequence of unidirectional steps.  The term "general-gamma distribution" is used in this paper to describe the density function of waiting times for a specified  event in a multistage counting process whose transition constants are all different. It is an obvious extension of the  ordinary gamma distribution generated by a process with just one transition parameter. The present paper is an effort to put  together what is known about the general-gamma process, and to add a few modest contributions to the literature. It is perhaps  strange that a compilation should be deemed necessary, but as we hope to make clear, the general-gamma distribution is a  strange beast. It pops up in mutant forms in a number of different scientific fields. As early as 1910 we find it in the  theory of radioactive decay; see Bateman (1910) and Jeffreys & Jeffreys (1956). In queuing theory, it is known as the  "general-Erlang" distribution; see Morse (1958). There is even an article in statistical learning theory containing a discrete  version of the general-gamma distribution; see Miller & McGill (1952) and McGill (1963, p. 348). The intimate connections  among the processes described in these papers are not at once evident. Each field is constrained to view its problems in its  own way. So we should not be surprised to find that the distribution has been rediscovered a number of times and that some  information about it has not achieved wide circulation.  A second anomaly is that the general-gamma distribution has a very innocent looking functional form leading many writers to  stop as soon as they have developed it. But if we take an empirical latency distribution and ask for a critical test of the  likelihood that it comes from a multistage process, or if we try to establish the transition constants of the various stages,  much of this innocence is dispelled.  In the present paper we first develop the general-gamma distribution as it appears in the literature and outline its  background. Then we connect it with the stochastic process from which it comes and investigate the estimation problem by  looking at what is known as the "conditional density function" or the "hazard function." Finally an application of the  general-gamma process to the analysis of simple reaction times is considered.  LATENCY DISTRIBUTION  Imagine a system that drives an input through k + 1 stages of processing. For instance, a sensory system that makes its  acknowledgment of a new stimulus contingent on the occurrence of at least k + 1 nerve impulses, would meet our specification.  Successive impulses in the discharge set off by the stimulus would then constitute successive stages of the detection process.  The latter is complete with the event numbered k + 1 in the sequence, and a time interval between stimulus onset and the  GENERAL-GAMMA DISTRIBUTION  instant of detection becomes determined. This time interval is the focal point of our interest.  We assume each stage of the multistage process to be characterized by a constant AO , Al , A21 ... Ak , identifying the stage  and indicating (in a loose way) the probability of transition to the next stage. The constants are defined as follows:  Ai = lim pi dt~odt'  where pi is the probability of transition between stages i and i + 1 in a small interval of time At. We call the Ai "time  constants" because we want to convey the idea that each transition parameter is a fixed property of the stage to which it is  attached, and is therefore constant in time. A long wait for the next count makes it neither more nor less likely to occur.  Obviously this is an important restriction and it is uncharacteristic of many processes that grow either restless or inert as  they continue to wait for the next expected event. In fact we shall soon find ourselves dealing with a time function A(t)  which changes its magnitude as it continues to wait.3  When the processing chain is replaced by a sequence of time constants, an input moves through it in a series of irregular  jumps patterned by the magnitudes of the constants. As we have noted, the within-stage transition probability is fixed.  Consequently, passage times through any stage will be governed by an exponential distribution:  f(ti) = Aie 'iti  where Ai > 0 and ti >, 0.  Suppose a clock starts as the process is entered, and runs until the k + 1st transition occurs. The clock will then be said to  measure the latency distribution of the process. Evidently the timing can be stopped and reset with each transition between  adjacent stages, but many interesting cases include stages that are not easily available for direct examination. Reflexes and  reaction times are typical examples. Consequently our interest is centered on the total latency of the process. This latency  is obtained from the component passage times:  where t is summed over the k + 1 stages each of which is exponentially distributed  3 We risk a bit of confusion in order to get an intuitive term suggesting the meaning of the transition parameters in the  multistage gamma process. Our constant Ai is the reciprocal of a quantity (also known as a time constant) measuring the  discharge time of a RC circuit. We want to use the descriptive term "time constant" and yet avoid writing reciprocals in  expressions like Eqs. I and 2. Hence our definition.  MCGILL AND GIBBON  with an arbitrary time constant. The distribution of t is what we have called the general-gamma distribution. We first write  down its density function fk(t) and later show how it is derived. The density function is  z=k  A(t) _ C;kate l'', for t > 0. t=o  It is a surprisingly simple outcome, just a weighted sum of the exponential components.  The weights are computed from the time constants:  j-k:  j=0 /lj j~6ti  Processes with only a single stage (i.e., k equal to zero) are also included by defining Coo as unity. The area in the tail of  the distribution is found easily by integrating the separate terms of the sum:  s= r.  1 -F,(t) _ Cike Air. 4=U  As we have suggested, this distribution has an interesting history. It is encountered in a number of fields that maintain  little contact with one another, and has been rediscovered several times. Part of the history is illuminated by a proof of Eq.  1 based on generating functions that we can develop quite easily.  The moment generating function of any component latency in the process is defined  as  mt(B) - f x eetf(tt) dtz , 0  which, given our definition of f(tz), is readily shown to be  MAO) = (1 - 9A)-1.  Since the total latency is the sum of k -f- 1 independent random components, its m.g.f. is immediately represented by the  product of the component generating functions:  i= k 6 Mk(B) _ (1 - aZ )_1. 2=0  Evidently M,(B) inverts back into fk(t), but the problem is to see how to do it. It happens that the inversion of  transformations in the form of Eq. 3 is a classical problem  GENERAL-GAMMA DISTRIBUTION 5  in engineering applications of the Laplace transform. The inversion is carried out by expanding M,.(B) in partial fractions:  9 -i - C.  _ _ xk  0 (1 ~i ) i=0 1 - ~el ~i)  where now the problem is to determine the weights Cik . This expansion is handled as follows. We first change the initial  index to j and then multiply through by 1 - 9/Ai in order to isolate Cik:  If B is set equal to Ai , an explicit expression is found for each Cik in terms of the complete set of time constants. It is  then a simple matter to invert  _Cik  Mk(e) - ~ 1 - (e~~i)  term by term. This yields our Eq. 1 for fk(t), and completes the proof.  In electrical engineering, Eq. 1 is called the "Heavyside expansion" of fk(t). Starkey (1955, pp. 49-50) uses just this  problem as an example to illustrate the inversion of a Laplace transform that is the reciprocal of a polynomial; see also W.  L. Smith (1953 pp. 456-459).  We noted in our introduction that Eq. 1 is called the "general-Erlang" distribution in queuing theory; (Cox & Smith, 1961, pp.  114-116; and Morse, 1958, chap. 5). This forbidding terminology seems to have arisen innocently enough. Erlang was a Danish  engineer who became well known after 1917 for his applications of probability to telephone traffic. He is now regarded as a  pioneer queue theorist. In any event, Erlang (1920) proposed the gamma distribution as a model for the duration of telephone  calls. A. Jensen (1948), writing in a memorial volume dedicated to Erlang, extended the latter's idea to the general-gamma  process and almost inevitably Erlang's name became attached to it.  Jensen attributed the distribution to Lundberg (1940) and Palm (1946). However a much earlier version was published by Bateman  (1910) who derived the weights in the way that we have outlined. Bateman encountered the multistage process in studies of  radioactive decay with elements such as uranium. The parent element decays with an appropriate time constant into a new  element which has its own time constant, decaying in turn into still another element, and so on. Bateman wanted to find the  expected number of radioactive products produced within a given observation interval  6 MCGILL AND GIBBON  if the decay constants are arbitrary. His solution is outlined by Bharucha-Reid (1960, pp. 295-298) who also shows that it is  easily converted into a stochastic process.  We conclude this introduction to the general-gamma distribution by observing that it is quite difficult to visualize the  properties of the process with only the information provided by its latency distribution. This is because the weights become  intractable when the number of stages exceeds three or four. Consequently it is hard in such cases to see just how the time  constants will affect the distribution. We can note from Eq. 2 that  i=k  Cik=1, k=1,2,3...,  i=0  since Fk(0) must be zero. Moreover, the plausible notion (which turns out to be cor  rect) that fk(0) is zero for processes with more than one stage implies  i=k  CiA=0, k=1,2,3 ..,  i=o  If these relations seem confusing, we might also add that half the weights are negative and that a particular Cik may have  almost any value whatever, depending on the relative sizes of the time constants.  ORDERLY TRANSITIONS  In a number of situations that are of considerable practical interest, the latency distribution of the general-gamma process  simplifies to a form that is more manageable than the general case. These situations occur when the time constants of the  chain form an orderly array. The ordinary gamma distribution (all time constants equal) is an obvious example, but there are  others. Consider, for instance, the following process suggested by Jensen (1948):  Ao = A  a, = all + 1/fl)  Ak =.1(I + k/fl).  In view of its linearly increasing constants, this array forms a "linear birth process."  Substitution in Eq. I produces the latency distribution:  fk(t) = A(I + k1fl) (P + k - I) e_At(1 - e (Ais)t)k.  GENERAL-GAMMA DISTRIBUTION 7  The troublesome weights have been eliminated, and the distribution is very close to the negative binomial whose properties are  well known. Moreover, when J3 is set equal to unity, fk(t) reduces to the simple form of the Yule-Furry process discussed by  Feller (1957), Bharucha-Reid (1960), and McGill (1963).  Finally we should note that with A fixed, the time constants in the chain approach each other as fl increases. If we examine  the limit of fk(t) under this restriction, Eq. 4 approaches the gamma distribution. Hence Eq. 4 provides a very simple way to  pass from the general-gamma distribution to the ordinary gamma in which all time constants are equal.  STOCHASTIC PROCESS  When time constants refuse to behave nicely, or when they are unknown, another simplification must be found. Another one  exists and it is very important indeed. To exhibit it, we begin with the differential equation for a stochastic process given  by Feller (1957, p. 402),  P,'(k) = - P,(k) Ak -I- Pt(k - 1) Ak-1 , for k > I.  Our notation differs slightly from Feller's. The symbol Pt(k) is the probability that k transitions take place in a (fixed)  time period t, and its derivative with respect to time is P,(k). The differential equation reflects the fact that in any small  time interval At at the end of t, the process can find itself at stage k via one of two routes; either it was already in k and  remained there with probability 1 - Akdt, or it was at stage k - 1 and made the transition upward with probability Ak_ldt.  There is no restriction in Eq. 5 indicating the magnitude of Ak in relation to A,-, . These parameters are arbitrary.  Nevertheless Eq. 5 is often called a "birth process."4  The solution of Eq. 5 is well known and closely related to Eq. 1, but we shall carry our development a step further before  writing it down. First note that P,(k), the probability of k transitions in time t, forms a discrete probability distribution.  We shall refer to it as the response distribution in order to keep it distinct from the latency distribution which is also  defined for the same process. Since the constant Ak (governing transitions out of stage k) is independent of time, it follows  that an important relation exists between the response distribution and the latency distribution, namely,  fk(t) dt = P,(k) - Akdt. (6)  The term "pure birth process" is sometimes reserved for sequences in which the constants AO , Al , .-., Ak increase stage by  stage. A pure death process is then a sequence of transition constants that decreases stage by stage. We prefer this more  restricted terminology.  8 MCGILL AND GIBBON  The infinitesimal probability of a latency that stops the clock at time t is constructed from the probability of k transitions  in time t, i.e., P,(k), multiplied against the probability that the final transition happens in the infinitesimal interval dt  tacked on the end of t, i.e., akdt. In view of the relation between response and latency distributions we now recast Eq. 5 as  follows:  P;(k) _ - fk(t) + f,-1(t). (5a)  Integrating the differential equation yields a new difference equation:   Pt(k) = Fk_1(t) - Fk(t), k > 0,   Pt(0) = 1 - Fo(t), k = 0, (5b)  where, of course, F,(t) is the cumulative latency distribution. One minor substitution brings us to  fk(t) = Ak[Fk-1(t) - Fk(t)1, (5c)  for k > 0. Our argument is that Eq. 5c is true of the general-gamma distribution for any proper choice of parameters, and it  is a fact that Eq. 1 satisfies Eq. 5c. This claim is verified easily by examining the moment generating functions of both  sides. (The m.g.f. of a distribution in "tails" form is no special problem; see McGill (1963, p. 353). We find  Mk(0) _ .B [Mk(o) - Mk-1(0)1  We have a simple recursive relation  Mk(0) 0 _1  Mk-1(0) _ ~1 - ak) >  and step by step it reduces to the m.g.f. of the general-gamma distribution. Thus the general-gamma distribution is a solution  of the difference equation for the stochastic latency process given by Eq. 5c.  The response distribution of the general-gamma process is evidently  1 i=k  P,(k) - ~k CikAie "t>  which follows directly from Eqs. 1 and 6. Equation 7 expresses the probability of finding exactly k transitions in a fixed  time interval t. This result is given in Bateman (1910), Lundberg (1940), Jensen (1948), Feller (1949), Bartlett (1955, p. 55)  BharuchaReid (1960, p. 186 and p. 297). It is a generalization of the Poisson distribution. In  GENERAL-GAMMA DISTRIBUTION 9  the ordinary Poisson process, subscripts are omitted from the time constants, and all stages have identical properties.  A distribution that covers discrete trials instead of continuous time but is otherwise similar to Eq. 7, was published by  Woodbury (1949) and by Miller & McGill (1952). The end product of our development is that we have found a stochastic process  in the form of Eq. 5c which is directly applicable to the general-gamma distribution. Equation 5c makes it clear that  AM = 0, A(0) = 0,  k>0,  and Eq. 5a indicates thatfk(t) passes through a unique maximum. Moreover, by adding down Eq. 5b we find:  i---k  1 - Fk(t) _ Ps(i). i=o  The familiar relation between the tail area of a gamma distribution and the Poisson sum turns out to be a consequence of the  stochastic process and is a general property of all multistage gamma processes. The linear birth process, for example, takes  on the following forms; (see Eq. 4):  -   Pt(k) + k (4a)  -   k 1) e At(1 e 1t1R)k   which is a negative binomial distribution; and   -   1 + (4b)  - Fk(t) - ~~ -   i 1) e "(l Qatip)t.   i=o   The tail area of the latency distribution in a linear birth process is found by summing the appropriate terms of the negative  binomial.  CONDITIONAL DENSITY FUNCTION  Given a latency distribution generated by a multistage gamma process of unspecified length, can we operate on it to determine  the ai , and to decompose the over-all distribution into inferred distributions of parts of the process?  First recall that the time constant, Ak , of the last stage may be recovered from  __ fk(t) ~k Fk-1(t) - Fk(t) .  10 MCGILL AND GIBBON  This is a simple adjustment of Eq. 5c, but it requires knowledge of Fk_1(t), and the latter is not easily determined if the  length of the chain and its parameters are unknown. A slight generalization of Eq. 9 yields  Aa(t) - 1 A(F),(t) .  (10)  In some areas of statistics Eq. 10 is known as a "hazard function." We call it a conditional density function following Davis  (1952), since it does in fact wipe out any considerations that might have produced latencies shorter than those occurring  right now or later on. If we reach a particular point in time, and the clock measuring latency is still running, any  circumstance that might have led to a shorter latency is irrelevant, provided only that the current probability of the final  transition can be stated.  It is easily shown that the tail distribution of latencies in a multistage process may be represented in terms of the  conditional density function, namely:  I - F,(t) -_ exp (- I't0 A&kT) d7  Many sources establish this result. The proof given by Davis (1952) is especially easy to follow. In any event, since the  probabilities in Eqs. 2 and 11 are identical, it must be the case that the conditional density function carries full  information concerning the time constants A,, Al - - -,A, of the general-gamma process. We now attempt to extract this  information by using what we have learned about the stochastic mechanism underlying the general-gamma distribution. First,  however, we point out a simple relation between the conditional density function and the ordinary cumulative distribution. The  relation is obtained from Eq. 11 by taking the logarithm of both sides and then differentiating. We find:  d In (1 - Fl,(t)) dt  - - Ak(t).  (l0a)  The slope of the logged tail distribution is the conditional density function; (see Parzen, 1962, p. 168). This is a very  simple and powerful graphic aid for viewing latency phenomena. An example based on empirical reaction times and sample  approximations of the quantities in Eq. l0a is shown in Fig. 1.  Now we turn to the stochastic-process interpretation of the general-gamma distribution in an effort to analyze its conditional  density function. First write:  Ax(t) __ Pt(k)  Ak ZZ=0 P 1(Z) .  (12)  This follows via substitutions from Eqs. 6 and 8 into Eq. 10, and is a very useful  GENERAL-GAMMA DISTRIBUTION I I  result. The expression on the right hand side of Eq. 12 is familiar from queuing theory; see Saaty (1961, chap. 14). It is the  probability that exactly k transitions prior to the last one have occurred before time t. So we have shown that the conditional  0 L  d O.  0  H 0  0  0.25  0 a 0 d  0.20  1.00 0.90 0.80 0.70 0.60  0.50  0.40  0.30  0.15  170 180 190 200 210 220 230 240 250 Reaction time 1 (milliseconds)  C O 0.50O 0 n v E 0 0 0 a 0  0.40  0.30  0.20  0.10  0.00  rn 0 0  FIG. 1. Frequency distribution of reaction times to brief tones (1000 cps) of medium intensity. Data based on 100 responses of  one listener. Right hand ordinate (lower curve) is conditional distribution of the same data. Each point on lower curve is  approximately - 5 times the slope of the line segment in the distribution directly above it. The factor of 5 is the size of  the class interval (5 msec). Discrepancies are grouping errors due to measuring proportionlonger-than-t from front end of  class interval instead of middle. Erratic behavior of conditional distribution in this example appears to be due to narrow  width of class intervals.  density function at time t, divided by the time constant of the last stage, yields the probability that an ongoing process is  in its last stage at time t. Because of the nature of the multistage process, this probability must be small at first and must  increase monotonically as elapsed time increases. Long waits can only increase the likelihood that the last stage of the  process has been reached. It follows that the conditional density function of the general-gamma distribution is monotonic  increasing with time. In view of Eq. 10a this implies a characteristic behavior of the slope of the tails distribution. The  behavior is illustrated in Fig. 2 and offers a fairly good test of the conjecture that an empirical latency distribution might  have been generated by a multistage gamma process.  12 McGILL AND GIBBON  The complement of Eq. 12, i.e., the probability that the last stage in the ongoing process is not yet reached by time t, can  be written:  1 -- Ak(t) - 1 - F k-I(t) . Ak 1 - F,(t)  (12a)  The result comes directly from Eq. 8. In view of our discussion of Eq. 12, the complementary probability must decrease  monotonically toward zero as elapsed time increases. The conclusion follows from our interpretation of Eq. 12 or it can be  established independently via substitution from Eq. 2 in Eq. 12a. In the latter case we proceed by removing a factor e-41 from  the numerator and denominator of the right hand side on the supposition that Ah is the smallest constant of the set. It is  then easy to show that  Ak(t) _ y1 - A,,,/AA,, for h G k,  ~~ (1 a,; (0 for h = k.  (13)  Moreover, when the smallest transition parameter happens to be A,, , we can show (now via the derivative of Eq. 12a) that the  approach to the limit is monotonic. Hence, we establish that the asymptotic slope of the logged tail distribution is not the  constant Ak of the last stage but the smallest constant Ah (governing the slowest component) wherever it may be located.  Whatever the actual sequence of processing stages, the time constants become rearranged from large (fast) to small (slow) in  the latency distribution. We might then just as well treat any process as though its transition parameters Ai were arranged in  order of decreasing magnitude since they can be extracted in this way (in reverse order) from the conditional density function.  It should be evident that the foregoing operation on the k + 1-stage general-gamma distribution produces an inferred  distribution of a subprocess obtained by summing together all k stages other than the slowest. This follows from Eq. 12a. If  we find an accurate value for the asymptotic slope of the tail distribution (or the conditional density function), we can then  produce the distribution of the k-stage subprocess from the distribution of the whole process. The outcome iterates on down  through smaller and smaller subprocesses, so that in general  z-~'-i Ax i(t)  [1 -Fk-At)1 = [1 -Fk(t)1 11 [1 ----]  (14)  where the constants Ai are extracted in order of increasing magnitude. In principle the entire process can be decomposed or  "unpeeled" in this way, starting with nothing more than the overall latency distribution. Sequence information about time  constants is lost but everything else can be recovered. Of course very serious practical difficulties are encountered in  applying these results to empirical distributions. Our data usually  GENERAL-GAMMA DISTRIBUTION 13  do not yield solid information about the tail region of the latency distribution. Hence the estimated asymptote of the  conditional density function can be seriously in error. This error is propagated into the estimation of the next time constant  with the result that the estimation technique finds it increasingly difficult to see back through more than one or perhaps two  stages. The errors are very similar to those that Van Liew (1962) ascribes to the "backward projection" method of graphic  analysis used in physiology. This way of estimating parameters is hazardous with anything less than extremely stable  distribution data. On the other hand the weakness is counterbalanced by the fact that the time constants describing the  slowest (and hence the most significant) components of the process may be estimated without committing u~, in advance to the  number of stages.  APPLICATIONS TO SIMPLE REACTION TIMES  Simple reaction times belong to a cluster of relations (such as the dI/I functions) involving stimulus intensity and generally  viewed as being determined by sensory mechanisms. Other problems such as foreperiod effects or effects due to instructions,  changing stimulus probabilities, rewards for fast or slow responding, are deliberately detoured in order to keep the emphasis  on sensory processes. But these other problems and the demonstrable effects they have on reaction times, cannot fail to  complicate our thinking. The net result is that efforts to reconstruct sensory processes now seem to produce some fairly  intricate mechanisms. Few of us consider the substrate of reaction times in terms of a simple neural chain linking S to R.  Instead, the chain is thought to be organized out of a series of complex and functionally distinct stages: receptor activity,  stimulus analysis, sharpening, transmission, signal detection, motor response. This conception illustrates the modern blurring  of boundary lines between sensation and perception. The blur is an obvious consequence of nonsensory variables mentioned above  and the effects they have on thresholds. Our conception is more like a flow chart or a block diagram than like a reflex arc,  and, of course, this view is built into much of the recent work on signal detection theory in psychophysics; see Green (1960),  and Swets, Tanner, & Birdsall (1961) for good summaries. Similar construction is found in recent attempts to portray decision  mechanisms underlying choice reaction times; see Christie & Luce (1956), Audley (1960), and Stone (1960).  If we try to analyze the block diagram, one of the most annoying obstructions encountered almost at once is the fact that the  response movement is immediately available to observation but not particularly interesting. We want to study detection but we  are unable to view the mechanism (from the outside) except by looking back through the response. It was to illuminate this  problem that our analysis of the general-gamma process was carried out.  We consider simple r.t.'s to have three principal stages: (1) input, (2) detection,  14 MCGILL AND GIBBON  (3) response. A train of impulses flows back from the receptor. It is detected by a suitable mechanism and a response is  ordered. Assume that the detection is accomplished by counting impulses. A neural counter sits and waits for the initial  barrage of the impulse-train. Nothing is settled until the counter reaches a predetermined critical number (set by  instructions and by the previous history of responding) whereupon a detection state exists and the response is called out.  The model may be wrong in its choice of details, but it is undoubtedly wrong in the details suggested. The integration time is  essentially endless and allows no detection failures. The system is also noiseless so there can be no false starts. Despite  these obvious weak points, a simple counter model of stimulus detection seems to work well at high intensities. It has been  developed in just about this form by LaBerge (1962).  Weak stimuli take time to detect because they generate slow impulse rates. Hence the detection time of a counter mechanism  must be a function of stimulus intensity. Our problem is to see how to submit this general line of reasoning to systematic  checking if the investigation is obstructed by the response that terminates the sequence.  0 L U7 O  H O  C O O d O  a  120 130 140 150 Reaction time t (milliseconds)  FIG. 2. Distributions of reaction times to brief (0.5 sec) tones (1000 cps) at intensities (sound pressure levels) shown. Each  distribution based on 100 responses of one listener. Data at 50, 60, and 70 db are shifted in time to allow comparison with  distribution at 100 db (correctly placed). Actual locations are as follows: 50 db-add 70 msec to time scale; 60 db-add 45  msec; 70 dbadd 31 msec.  GENERAL-GAMMA DISTRIBUTION 15  The simplest way is to assume that the response movement (or the part of it that is variable) has a characteristic latency  independent of stimuli and independent of the detection time. So we apply the theory of the general-gamma process by assuming  that at high and medium intensities the response stage has a slow exponential delay while detection and input stages are made  up of exponential components with fast time constants that depend on the stimulus. In this way our development in the previous  section can be brought into play.  Figure 2 shows several frequency distributions of auditory r.t.'s obtained from a single listener who was responding to  different intensities. The stimulus was a 1000 cps tone rising in roughly linear form to full intensity over approximately 100  msec. The different distributions signify changes in intensity from 50 db to 100 db sound pressure level. Although we do not  see much of their tails, the tail distributions appear to have the characteristic candy-cane appearance demanded by the  conditional density function of a general-gamma process. Many latency distributions do not, particularly those obtained in  free operant behavior; see, for example, Hearst (1958). In any event these distributions seem to meet our initial test.  Reaction times gathered under comparable conditions also exhibit conformity with the restriction on the conditional density  function; see Greenbaum (1963). However, we should note that Luce (1962) reports reaction-time distributions (based on time  band reinforcement) which do not conform to the gamma model.  When the gamma model is applicable how do we find the vestige of the response in the distribution of reaction times ? The  easiest and most obvious approach is to bypass detection problems by going to a very intense stimulus. If transmission times  exhibit low-order random variation, the tail of the reaction time distribution will be heavily weighted by the response  component. Moreover the prominence of this linear tail will depend on the prominence of the stage that generates it, i.e., on  the size of its time constant relative to the other time constants of the process. As intensity decreases, the detection stage  requires more and more time. This should not only spread the distributions corresponding to different intensities apart (in  time), it should also make the approach to the linear tail slower. Finally, if it happens that the detection stage takes  longer than the response, the tail-asymptote should change.  The distributions in Fig. 2 have been shifted together in order to allow easy comparison of their tails. There appears to be a  common linear asymptote between 60 db and 100 db, and the approach is slower for the weaker stimuli as we might expect. The  slope of the tail is approximately 0.05, yielding 20 msec as the average random delay of the response stage. This is not an  unreasonable figure and in fact it is in fairly good agreement with physiological data (see Sashin & Allen, 1960) but it does  present certain difficulties.  The r.t. distribution generated by a 60 db tone is located approximately 45 msec beyond the distribution at 100 db. All of  this difference might be due to increased detection time. How could such a large detection delay then be squared with a re-  16 MCGILL AND GIBBON  sponse delay of only 20 msec and still yield the response latency in the asymptote of the r.t. distribution ?  The fact is that the problem cannot be surmounted unless most of the delay introduced by decreasing the stimulus intensity is  fixed, i.e., nonrandom, or unless the detection process itself consists of substages arranged in the form of a gamma process.  In that event the proper comparison would be between 20 msec and the delay expected of a single count in the detection stage.  Since impulse rates averaging 10 per second imply 100 msec delays, it is apparent that even single counts might take  appreciable time.  Our principal conclusion is that the detection time for medium intensities is probably quite long, and our general-gamma model  will certainly fail unless one of the possibilities suggested in the previous paragraph presents itself. Thus the question of  whether we really see the response stage in the tail of the r.t. distribution should be pushed. For instance, we must account  for the linear relation between the average and standard deviation of empirical r.t. distributions; see Chocholle (1940),  Restle (1961), and Greenbaum (1963). In the general-gamma process the relation is a consequence of putting varying impulse  rates into a detector that must reach a certain count before it detects. The independence of the response stage can only  weaken this relation at high intesities (short reaction times). Whether the "purified distributions" arrived at by peeling the  final stage away via Eq. 14 can be made to yield an improved linear relation is a resolvable question, but better tail data  are required in order to answer it. If the relation fails to improve with this operation, perhaps the response stage is not in  the tail of the reaction time distribution at all and is really located among the fixed delays at the beginning of the  distribution.  An interesting way to try to settle this last question is to measure r.t.'s from the same subject instructing him (on cue) to  make one or the other of two responses (right index finger and left foot, for example). Two different distributions are then  built up around the two responses which are deliberately chosen so as to introduce different response delays into the reaction  times. We can then check our reasoning by using Eq. 14 to peel off the response stage. The purified distributions should match  one another since detection and input conditions are identical. On the other hand, if the response appears among the initial  delays, Eq. 14 will fail, but the distributions may be matched by sliding them along the time scale, i.e., by subtracting out  two different delay constants.  REFERENCES  AUDLEY, R. J. A stochastic model for individual choice behavior. Psychol. Rev., 1960, 67, 1-15. BARTLETT, M. S. An  introduction to stochastic processes. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer. Press, 1955.  BATEMAN, H. The solution of a system of differential equations occurring in the theory of radioactive transformations. Proc.  Cambridge phil. Soc., 1910, 15, 423-427.  GENERAL-GAMMA DISTRIBUTION  17  BHARUCHA-REID, A. T. Elements of the theory of Markov processes and their applications. New York: McGraw Hill, 1960.  BUSH, R. R., & MOSTELLER, C. F. Stochastic models for learning. New York: Wiley, 1955. CHOCHOLLE, R. Variation des temps de  reaction auditifs en fonction de 1'intensita diverse frequences. Annie Psychol., 1940, 41, 5-124.  Cox, D. R., & SMITH, W. L. Queues. London: Methuen, 1961.  CHRISTIE, L. S., & LUCE, R. D. Decision structure and time relations in simple choice behavior. Bull. math. Biophys., 1956,  18, 89-112.  DAVIS, D. J. An analysis of some failure data. I Amer. statist. Assn., 1952, 47, 113-150. ERLANG, A. K. The application of the  theory of probability in telephone administration. Pr.)c. Scandinavian H. C. Orsted Congr., Copenhagen, 1920. (Reprinted in  The life and works of A. K. Erlang by E. Brockmeyer, J. Halstrom, & A. Jensen. Transactions of the Danish Academy of Technical  Sciences, Copenhagen, Denmark, 1948. Pp. 172-200, Whole No. 2.)  FELLER, W. On the theory of stochastic processes with particular reference to applications. In J. Neyman (Ed.), Proceedings of  the Berkeley symposium on mathematical statistics and probability, Vol. 1. Berkeley and Los Angeles: Univer. California Press,  1949. Pp. 403-432.  FELLER, W. An introduction to the theory of probability and its applications. (2nd ed.) New York: Wiley, 1957.  GREEN, D. M. Psychoacoustics and detection theory. Y. acoust. Soc. Amer., 1960, 32, 11891203.  GREENBAUM, H. B. Simple reaction time: a case in signal detection. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Columbia University,  1963.  HEARST, E. The behavioral effects of some temporally defined schedules of reinforcement. Y. exp. anal. Behav., 1958, 1, 45-55.  JEFFREYS, H., & JEFFREYS, B. Methods of mathematical physics. (3rd ed.) Cambridge, England: University Press, 1956.  JENSEN, A. An elucidation of Erlang's statistical works through the theory of stochastic processes. In E. Brockmeyer, H. L.  Halstrom, & A. Jensen, The life and works of A. K. Erlang. Transactions of the Danish Academy of Technical Sciences,  Copenhagen, Denmark, 1948. Pp. 23100 (Whole No. 2).  LABERGE, D. A recruitment theory of simple behavior. Psychometrika, 1962, 27, 375-396.  LUCE, R. D. The mathematics used in mathematical psychology. Address before American Association for the Advancement of  Science, Philadelphia, Penna, 1962.  LUNDBERG, O. On random processes and their application to sickness and accident statistics. Uppsala, Sweden: Univer. of  Uppsala, 1940.  McGILL, W. J. Stochastic latency mechanisms. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, & E. Galanter (Eds.) Handbook of mathematical  psychology, Vol. 1. New York: Wiley, 1963. Pp. 309-360.  MILLER, G. A., & MCGILL, W. J. A statistical description of verbal learning. Psychometrika 1952 17, 369-396.  MORSE, P. M. Queues, inventories and maintenance. New York: Wiley, 1958.  PALM, C. Reference is to a paper in Swedish, published in Techn. Medd. Fran. Kungl. Tele., 1946. Cited by Jensen, A., An  elucidation of Erlang's statistical works through the theory of stochastic processes. In E. Brockmeyer, H. L. Halstrom, & A.  Jensen, The life and works of A. K. Erlang. Transactions of the Danish Academy of Technical Sciences, Copenhagen, Denmark,  1948. Pp. 23-100 (Whole No. 2).  PARZEN, E. Stochastic processes. San Francisco: Holden Day, 1962. RESTLE, F. Psychology of judgment and choice. New York:  Wiley, 1961. SAATY, T. L. Elements of queuing theory. New York: McGraw Hill, 1961.  18 MCGILL AND GIBBON  SASHIN, P., & ALLEN, J. The latency of the human electromyogram in relation to reaction time. Quart. Progr. Rep. Res. Lab.  Electronics. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, July 1960. SMITH, W. L. On the distribution of queuing times. Proc.  Cambridge phil. Soc. 1953, 49,449-461. STARKEY, B. J. Laplace transforms for electrical engineers. New York: Philosophical  Library, 1955. STONE, M. Models for choice reaction time. Psychometrika, 1960. 25, 251-260.  SwETs, J. A., TANNER, W. P., &c BIRDSALL, T. G. Decision processes in perception. Psychol. Rev., 1961, 68, 301-340.  WOODBURY, M. A. On a probability distribution. Ann. math. Statist., 1949, 20, 311-313.  VAN LIEW, H. D. Semilogarithmic plots of data which reflect a continuum of exponential processes. Science, 1962, 138, 682-683.  RECEIVED: December 31, 1963