10.1016/0022-2496(65)90015-5
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 2, 19-25 (1965)  Learning Model Solution to a Problem in Constrained Optimization'  EDWARD CROTHERS  Stanford University, Stanford, California  Two modes of presentation, A and X, are assumed to be available for teaching a concept or association. Learning models are  applied to answer the question: given that i trials have been allotted a priori to the first mode and j trials for the second  mode, what sequencing of the A and X trials will yield the maximum proportion correct on a test after Trial i -!- j ? The  schedules are rank-ordered on the basis of predicted proportion correct on the test, and these rankings sharply contrast the  long-short model with the random-trial increment, two-operator linear, and one-element models.  This note treats the problem of using a learning model to specify optimal presentation orders, subject to certain constraints  on the optimization routine. It is assumed that on each trial there are two modes of presentation, A and X, available to the  experimenter. These modes might represent two different ways of teaching the same association or concept. For example, type A  trials and type X trials could be presentations of the same item, but at two different levels of information feedback to the  subject. Alternatively, an A trial might be defined as the presentation of a rule or other abstraction which is to be learned,  and an X trial would consist of showing an example which illustrates the rule. One constraint assumed is that trials of types  A and X will be presented with frequencies i and j, respectively, where the numbers i and j are decided upon a priori, i.e.,  independently of the responses on the training trials. Our aim is to determine which sequencing of the i + j trials will  produce the maximum expected proportion correct on a test given after Trial i + j (called the maximum terminal proportion  correct). In one context, the test might involve recalling the response upon presentation of the paired-associate stimulus. As  a second example, the test could consist in transferring to new exemplars of a concept.  In order to develop the predictions regarding optimal scheduling, we require a learning model of the effects of type A and  type X trials. For the sake of generality, we apply the long-short (LS) learning and retention model (Atkinson and Crothers,  1964) and the random-trial increment (RTI) model (Norman, 1964). The two-element  ' This research was supported by Contract OE 3-14-020 between Stanford University and the U.S. Office of Education.  19  20 CROTHERS  model (Suppes and Ginsberg, 1963) is a special case of the LS model, while the singleoperator linear model is a specialization  of the RTI model. The one-element model can be obtained from either formulation; we shall view it as a special case of the RTI  model. Another reason for employing the LS and RTI models in studying constrained optimization is that these two versions  provided the best fits to response sequence data from eight paired-associate learning experiments (Atkinson and Crothers,  1964). A tentative conclusion of that report, based on a comparison of goodness-of-fit X2s, was that the LS model is more  satisfactory than the RTI version. However, the present paper suggests a more direct and severe test of the models by  generating parameterfree predictions of optimal trial scheduling.  According to the RTI model, a reinforced presentation can have one of two outcomes. With probability a, the reinforcement is  effective and the probability of an error decreases from q to aq; with probability 1 - a, the probability of an error remains  at q. Let us assume that parameters a and a operate on a type A trial, while parameters b and /3 refer to a type X  presentation. Before proceeding, it is essential to insert a remark which also applies to the LS model; viz., that the  following arguments are contingent on the customary, but perhaps not compelling, assumption oindependent trials.  For the moment, consider the case i =.j = 2. The (2) = 6 possible schedules are AAXX, AXAX, AXXA, plus their three  counterparts obtainable by interchanging A's and X's. Then with probability alb2 the terminal proportion incorrect equals  galg2, or with probability 2a(1 - a) b2 this proportion equals gag2, etc., regardless of the schedule. These calculations  exhibit the commutativity property of the RTI model. To obtain the two-operator linear model, we take a = b = 1; the  one-element model is defined by letting a = g = 0. Therefore, with fixed i and j, the RTI model, and in particular its two  more familiar special cases, predict the terminal proportion correct to be equal for all six schedules. By contrast, it will  be shown later that the LS model implies a rank-ordering of the schedules on the basis of terminal proportions. Moreover, we  shall prove that when i = j = 2, this model asserts that no more than four of the 6! = 720 hypothetically possible orders can  arise.  The LS Markov model can be collapsed into a three-state chain, where the states are L(long-term conditioning), P (partial or  short-term conditioning), and U (unconditioned). The transition matrix and response vector are   State Pr (Correct)   0 0 L 1   1 -a 0 l P p (1 a)  c 1 -b-c U g   Of course, setting b = 0 gives the two-element model. We shall assume that (1 a) characterizes events on a type A trial.  OPTIMIZATION PROBLEM 21  Similarly, on a type X trial,    State Pr (Correct)  1 0 0 L 1  X= x 1-x 0 J P p .  y z 1-y-z U g  (lb)  Since the same thing is being taught on the two types of trials, the corresponding states in (la) and (lb) are identical.  Therefore the parameter p is equal in (la) and in (lb), and likewise for g. Otherwise, the formulation is quite general, since  we have assumed that the transition probabilities differ according to the trial type. Also, the subject is said to be in state  U prior to the first reinforcement.  Then to every training schedule there corresponds a terminal state probability vector derivable by matrix multiplication, and  from this vector the terminal proportion correct can be found at once. However, if the total number of trials is i +- j, there  are (` i ') different schedules to be examined, so some device is needed to reduce the algebraic labor. Because we are more  interested in the rank-order of the terminal proportions correct under various schedules than in the proportions themselves,  the following theorem permits the desired simplification.  THEOREM 1. The rank-order of schedules according to terminal proportion correct is identical to the rank-order according to  terminal probability of occupying state L.  Proof. For fixed i and j, consider two schedules Sl and S2 , and let X11 and A2 be the terminal probabilities of state L under  the respective schedules. Let Pr (C I Sk) be the terminal probability of a correct response under schedule Sk (k = l, 2) and  let Pr (U I SO be the terminal probability of state U, given schedule Sk . Then  Pr (C I Sl) = A1 ~- g Pr (U I Sl) + p[l - A1- Pr (U I Sl)],  Pr (C I S2) = A2 -1- g Pr (U ! S2) -I- p[l - A2 - Pr (U I S2)].  But  Pr (UISl)=Pr(UIS2)=(1-b-c)i (1-y-z)',  so  Pr (C I Sl) - Pr (C I S2) = (Al - A2) (1 - P).  Hence, for p G 1,  Pr (CISl)5Pr(CIS2)aAh>A2.  Therefore, if we interpret forgetting as a transition from state P to state U, the rankorder will be preserved despite  forgetting in the interval between training and test.  22 CROTHERS  Naturally it is most practical to use small values of i and j in testing the predictions about rank-order. For one thing, the  number of schedules is not inordinately large; also, the terminal proportion correct is more likely to be low enough to  produce a discriminable observed rank-order. These are among the reasons which lead us to introduce the theoretical results by  taking i = j = 1.  Now the problem reduces to ranking the schedules AX and XA on the basis of terminal probability of occupying state L. For  brevity we denote by Pr (AX) and Pr (XA) the terminal probabilities of state L under the corresponding schedules. Routine  algebraic manipulations yield  Pr (AX) - Pr (XA) =,y,  where y = c(x - y) - z(a - b). Therefore we have the fundamental result that  Pr (AX) ;j! Pr (XA) a y Z- 0. (2)  Extensions of Eq. 2 to longer schedules is easily accomplished after we prove a preliminary theorem.  THEOREM 2. The rank-order of two schedules, S, and S2 , in terms of terminal proportion correct is preserved if (i) the  schedules are prefixed by identical strings of trials or if (ii) the schedules are suffixed by identical strings of trials.  Proof. (i) Such initial trials change the state vector at the start of schedule Sk from (0, 0, 1) to some vector (u, v, 1 - u  - v), where u and v are the same for S, as for S2 . Transitions from state P depend only on the values of i and j, not on the  sequence. Hence the rank-order is independent of the initial state vector, providing the latter is the same for S, as for S. .  (ii) Let Ai and A2 be the augmented terminal probabilities of state L after one additional trial, psay S, plus a tye X trial  and S2 plus a type X trial. Then  Ai=A,+yPr(UI S,)+x[l-A,-Pr (UIS,)],  A2 = A2 + y Pr (U I S2) + x[1 - A2 - Pr (U I S2)].  Whence,  Ai - Az = (A, - A2) (1 - x).  The same argument applies to suffixes other than X.  To digress momentarily, we mention that Theorem 2 is considerably more general than the LS model. Regarding part (ii) of the  theorem, the effect of appending a sequence of trials can be expressed by applying an operator Q to the current values of A,  and A2. The subscript of Q is suppressed since only one operator is needed in  OPTIMIZATION PROBLEM 23  this discussion. Hence we have QA1 = Ai and QA, = AZ . Part (ii) of Theorem 2 states that if A1 > A2 , then QA, > QA2; in  other words, for the LS Model Q is a monotonic operator. Any operators which are monotonic and path-independent will preserve  rank-orders-the operators need not be those of the LS model. It is also easy to state a general assumption under which part  (i) of Theorem 2 is satisfied; viz.,  Pr (C I AX) > Pr (C I XA)  for all initial states. That is, if the subject can be in any one of several states immediately prior to the AX and XA  presentations, we assume Pr (C I AX) > Pr (C I XA) for each state. Under this assumption it is clear that Pr (C I AX) > Pr (C  I XA) for the process as a whole. In the LS model these equations are strict equalities when the initial states are L and P.  To summarize the above remarks, any model whose operators are path-independent and monotonic and which satisfies assumption  (3) has Theorem 2 as a consequence.  Let us resume the task of using Theorem 2 and Eq. 2 to generate orderings for schedules which have more than two trials. We  begin with the example i = 2 and j = 1. After the ordering has been obtained we reapply Theorem 2 and get the ordering for i =  j = 2. Affixing an initial A trial to the schedules in Eq. 2 gives for y > 0,  Pr (AAX) > Pr (AXA).  On the other hand, if the A trial is appended to the end of the schedules in Eq. 2, we have for y > 0,  Pr (AXA) > Pr (XAA). Putting together the two above results,  Pr (AAX) > Pr (AXA) > Pr (XAA) a y > 0. (4a) It might be noted parenthetically that  Pr (AAX) - Pr (AXA) = (1 - b - c) y,  and  Pr (AXA) - Pr (XAA) = (1 - a) y.  When y < 0 the chain of inequalities is reversed. By symmetry, we can interchange A's and X's, a's and x's, etc., obtaining  Pr (AXX) > Pr (XAX) > Pr (XXA) y > 0. (4b)  Equation 4a implies that of the 3! = 6 hypothetical rank-orders for i = 2, j = 1, the LS model permits only two; one for y > 0  and another for y < 0. Further, the  24 CROTHERS  rank-order for i = 1 and j = 2 is determined by the order for i = 2 and j = l, since the latter establishes the sign of y. If  both conditions i = 2, j = 1 and i = 1, j = 2, are presented, only two of the 62 = 36 pairs of rank-orders are possible.  Either AAX and AXX are optimal, or XAA and XXA are. Under the assumption of independent trials, we can test the LS and RTI  models without estimating parameters.  Theorem 2 allows us to transform Eqs. 4a and 4b in order to obtain the aforementioned case i = j = 2. Appending a final X  trial to the schedules in (4a) gives  Pr (AAXX) > Pr (AXAX) > Pr (XAAX) c> y > 0.  On the other hand, affixing an initial X trial to the schedules in (4a) gives  Pr (XAAX) > Pr (XAXA) > Pr (XXAA) r> y > 0.  Combining the two above equations,  Pr (AAXX) > Pr (AXAX) > [Pr (XAAX), Pr (AXXA)]  > Pr (XAXA) > Pr (XXAA) ra y > 0.  The relations involving Pr (AXXA) were obtained from Eq. 4b. Thus the LS model predicts that either (5) or (5) with the  inequalities reversed must hold. The ordering of the two middle schedules in (5) cannot be determined so readily. This  difficulty will be discussed later. Nevertheless, we have the exceedingly strong prediction that when i = j = 2, at most four  of the 6! = 720 rank-orders can occur.  It is instructive to insert numerical values for the parameters of the LS model. As an example, let a = b = 0.2, c = 0.6, x =  0.4, y = z = 0.1. Then y = 0.18. After some straightforward calculations of terminal probabilities, term-by-term substitution  into (5) yields 0.83 > 0.81 > [0.75, 0.70] > 0.62 > 0.50. So if, say, p = 0.5, the maximum difference between schedules will  be 0.17. Clearly, the most favorable circumstance for making comparisons arises when learning is slow.  The inability to rank-order schedules XAAX and AXXA (see Eq. 5) raises the question of exactly what schedules can and cannot  be ordered for arbitrary values of i and j. Let the schedules Sl and S2 each contain i presentations of A and j presentations  of X; let ml , m2 , - - -, mi be the trial numbers on which A is presented in Sl , and let nl , n2 , . . ., ni be the trial  numbers on which A is presented in S2 . Then Theorem 2 and Eq. 2 induce an ordering of Pr (Sl) and Pr (SZ) if and only if mk <  lax. for all 1 G k < i or mk >,nk for all 1 G k <' i.2 The proof of this assertion begins by observing that for y > 0 Theorem  2 and Eq. 2 immediately imply  Pr (...AX...)>Pr(...XA...),  2 1 am indebted to Eric Holman for this observation.  OPTIMIZATION PROBLEM 25  where the dots denote the contexts-the presentations preceding and following AX and XA. Of course, we assume that the contexts  for AX and XA are identical. According to the above equation, each time an A presentation is moved to the right of an X, the  probability for the new sequence is reduced from the probability for the original sequence. So the test of whether or not two  schedules can be ordered consists in determining if one can be derived from the other, and the only permissible operation is  moving A trials to the right in either (but not both) schedules. For example, XAAX > XAXA > XXAA, and AXXA > XAXA > XXAA, but  neither XAAX nor AXXA can be obtained from the other. If SI is the original schedule and S2 is the one obtained by displacing  the A trials, then m,. < nk for all 1 < k < i, since each displacement of the kth A trial adds one to nk . This reasoning does  not imply that schedules such as XAAX and AXXA cannot be ordered by other means; it does show that Theorem 2 and Eq. 2  generate only partial orderings. At least for the cases of greatest interest, viz., low values of i and j, the ordering is  almost complete.  This argument permits derivation of rank-orders for arbitrary i and j. The optimal schedule is either AA - AiXIX2 ... Xi or  XIX2 ... X;AIAZ --- Ai , and that the other yields the lowest terminal proportion correct. This is an important result,  because sometimes in practice the parameter values will make it difficult to discern the complete observed ordering of  schedules. Another useful fact is that the sign of y can be determined from, say, i = 2, j = 1, and then the expected ordering  is known for any i and j. Finally, we note that all the foregoing statements hold if A and X are regarded as representing the  net effects of trial blocks, rather than single trials.  Experimental tests of the predictions for constrained optimization are in progress as part of a study of second-language  (Russian) acquisition. Here type A and type X trials are identified as presentations of multiple-choice grammar rules and  sentences, respectively. Analyses will include correlating the observed and predicted rank-orders.  REFERENCES  ATKINSON, R. C., AND CROTHERS, E. J. A comparison of paired-associate learning models having different learning and retention  axioms. Y. math. Psychol., 1964, 1, 285-315.  NORMAN, M. F. Incremental learning on random trials. Y. math. Psychol., 1964, 1, 336-350. SUPPFS, P., AND GINSBERG, ROSE. A  fundamental property of all-or-none models. Psychol. Rev., 1963, 70, 139-161.  RECEIVED: March 19, 1964