10.1016/0022-2496(66)90009-5
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 3, 163-173 (1966)  Presolution Dimensional Shifts in Concept Identification: A Test of the Sampling with Replacement Axiom in All-or-None Models'  TOM TRABASSO  University of California, Los Angeles  AND  GORDON BOWER  Stanford University, Stanford, California  The experiment tests an all-or-none theory for concept learning. The assumption tested is that the subject tries out cues  (hypotheses) randomly without utilizing information from the past sequence to limit his search. The test condition run  involved multiple shifts in relevancy of two cues during the course of learning. Contrary to prediction, this procedure  retarded learning. A proposed revision assumes that the subject eliminates inconsistent cues but after awhile forgets that  they had been eliminated. Quantitative assumptions to this effect accurately fit the present results. Related research is  discussed which also is consistent with the revised sampling rule.  The basic postulate of all-or-none learning models (e.g. Bower, 1961; Restle, 1961, 1962; Bower and Trabasso,1964a) is that  the subject's performance changes in discrete, discontinuous steps. In those situations where only a single unit is to be  learned, the learning sequence of an individual subject may be characterized by a Markov chain with two states, one of which  is absorbing. Each subject begins in the non-absorbing (unlearned) state wherein he responds correctly with probability p. On  some one trial, an effective learning event occurs whereby the subject enters the absorbing (learned) state and responds  correctly with probability 1. The important Markov chain assumptions are that the probability of making the transition from  the initial to the learned state is independent of the previous history of the subject and is constant over trials.  1 This research was supported by research grants MH-08741-01 from the National Institutes of Health, USPHS, and NSF grant 81  by the Committee on Research, University of California, Los Angeles to the first author. The second author received support by  research grant HD-00954 from the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. The authors thank Sharon Deans for  her assistance in collecting the data for the study.  163  164 TRABASSO AND BOWER  The present paper is concerned with a test of these latter assumptions. Specifically, we shall consider the learning of a  two-category concept identification problem. In concept identification problems of this type, the subject learns by the  conventional anticipation method a binary rule to classify a series of complex stimuli which vary in n binary dimensions. A  dimension is either relevant and always leads to correct responses or it is irrelevant and leads to correct and incorrect  responses on half of the trials. The models of Restle (1962) and Bower and Trabasso (1964a) commonly suppose that on an error  trial the subject samples either hypotheses or cues based upon the dimensions and proceeds to test the relevance of the  sampled hypotheses. If the subject is correct, he retains the hypotheses for another trial; if he makes an error, the subject  resamples with replacement from the population of available hypotheses, H. The probability of learning on an error trial, c,  is assumed to equal the probability that the subject samples a relevant hypothesis (i.e., the proportion of relevant  hypotheses in H.)  In this model the constancy of the learning parameter follows from the assumption of resampling with replacement. In effect,  the theory assumes that the subject has no memory for what previous hypotheses have been tried and rejected. If hypotheses  have been rejected from H as they were sampled, tested and found to be inconsistent with the stimulus-response assignments,  and if no new hypotheses were added to the initial pool, then the proportion of relevant hypotheses, c, would increase with  each error. The question of what kind of resampling occurs is unanswered. If memory is operative, as other data indicate (e.g.  Trabasso and Bower, 1964a), then the model would have to be modified to take account of this variable in the sampling process  and learning rate.  The present test involves what has been called "additivity of cues" (Restle, 1962). Suppose a weight, w; , is assigned to cue  j and represents its salience. The probability of sampling cue j after an error is called c; and is  w;  CJ=  Y_ wk k  The summation in the denominator is over all cues in the available pool. If cue j is the only relevant cue, then c; is the  probability that after an error, the subject solves the problem by selecting cue j, which ensures that he will make no further  errors. If the pool of cues and their weights remain fixed, then c; remains fixed over trials. This entails a geometric  distribution of errors before solution with mean of l /c; .  The standard additivity design (Restle, 1962) involves three conditions with a constant pool of cues but varying the set of  relevant cues. Letting wi summarize the combined weight of a constant pool of irrelevant cues, the three conditions and their  respective learning rates are as follows:  wi  Condition 1: Cue 1 relevant: cl =  wi-I-w$+wi.  SAMPLING AXIOM IN ALL-OR-NONE MODELS 165  Condition 2 W2 : Cue 2 relevant: c2 =  wl + w2 + wi  Condition 1.2: Cues 1 and 2 relevant and redundant: c1.2 = u'1 + w2  Thus, c1.2 = cl + c2 . The learning rate for Condition 1.2 may be predicted from the error scores (which estimate c) in  Conditions 1 and 2.  The present test involves a procedure which theoretically should produce the same additivity result, although the prediction  is arrived at in a different way. The procedure, called a Dimensional Shift (DS) condition, has the subject begin with Cue 1  relevant and Cues 2 and i irrelevant. On the second error of a series (if the subject made a second error), the subject was  told "correct" and the classifications were shifted by the experimenter so that Cue 2 was now relevant while Cues 1 and i were  irrelevant. The new classification was that which would be correct according to the subject's response on the shift trial. To  illustrate, suppose Cue 1 is the location of a dot (above or below the central figure), Cue 2 is the shape of the central  figure (circle or triangle) and the categories are called "A" and "B." Starting with the dot relevant, suppose the second  error occurred when a circle was presented and the subject said "A." Then he was told "correct" and the classification rule  was shifted (without the subject's knowledge) to the shape as relevant with the rule: circle-A and triangle-B. After the  shift, the subject's responses were reinforced according to the new assignments. If the subject made a second error on this  new series, he was told "correct" on that trial and the rule was shifted back to the dot as relevant and shape irrelevant,  again with the specific response assignments determined by the subject's response on the shift trial. By this procedure, the  classification rule could be shifted back and forth repeatedly over the course of learning. A subject was considered to have  solved the problem if he responded correctly on ten consecutive trials following a shift or following an informed error. The  statistic of interest is the mean number of informed errors since the theory supposes that opportunities for resampling and  solving the problem occur only when the subject is told that he is wrong.  Despite the complexity of the DS procedure, in theory it should be an easy problem for the subject. He is expected to solve on  that informed error trial when he samples either Cue 1 or Cue 2 to test. Thus, the observed mean informed errors in the DS  condition should be equal to that in Condition 1.2 and be less than those in Conditions 1 and 2. To illustrate the reasoning  here, suppose an informed error occurs while Cue 1 is relevant. If, on that trial, the subject samples Cue 1, he will solve  without any more errors. If, at the informed error trial, the subject samples Cue 2, which is currently irrelevant, he will  eventually make another "incorrect" response (without being told so) but on that trial, the experimenter will shift the  correct answers into correspondence with the hypothesis that the subject is using. In this case, the subject will be told  "correct" and he will make no further errors. In either event, the total  166 TRABASSO AND BOWER  probability that any informed error is the last one is the probability that the subject samples Cue 1 or Cue 2 on that trial.  In an earlier experiment (Trabasso and Bower, 1964b), a DS condition was compared with the mean of Conditions 1 and 2.  Although learning in the DS condition was slightly faster, the difference was not statistically significant. Our subsequent  analysis given above, instigated a replication of the experiment with the addition of Condition 1.2 as a proper control group.  METHOD  Procedure. The same instructions were read to all subjects. The subject's task was to learn to classify cards into two  classes, called Alpha and Beta. The subject was told that the cards could be classified correctly according to a rule and he  was given a detailed description of the stimulus dimensions and their values.  Cards were presented one at a time on a holder. The subject self-paced his verbal responses and the experimenter showed the  correct classification after the subject responded to each card. The subject had 4 sec. to view the pattern after  reinforcement. A different order of presentation was given each subject by shuffling cards at the end of every 32 trials if  the subject had not reached the criterion of 10 successive correct responses. Since the probability of an informed error was  lower (1 /4 vs. 1/2) for the DS condition compared with the other conditions, an equal opportunity for informed errors was  achieved by terminating the experiment at 152 trials for the subjects in the DS condition and at 76 trials for all other  subjects when the subject failed to learn.  Stimulus materials. The stimuli were geometric figures drawn in crayon pencil from templates on white 3 x 5-inch file cards.  There were five binary dimensions: shape (circle or triangle); position of a 1/4-inch dot (above or below the figure); color  of the figure and dot (red or blue); number of lines within a figure (one or two) and position of an open side on the figure  (right or left). There were 25 = 32 patterns for conditions 1, 2 and ADS; condition 1.2 had 16 patterns since the shape and  dot were relevant and redundant.  Experimental conditions. Four groups were run in the experiment.  Group DS had a problem where one of two dimensions (shape or dot) was initially relevant. As outlined above, on every second  error, the subject's response was called correct in accord with an instantaneous shift of the response assignments to the  other relevant dimension.  Group 1.2 has a problem both the shape and dot dimensions were relevant and redundant throughout.  Group 1 had a problem with the shape relevant and the dot position irrelevant. Group 2 had a problem with the dot position  relevant and the shape irrelevant.  In all problems, the color, line, and open-side dimensions varied independently and were always irrelevant. Within each  condition, the four stimulus-response assignments were counterbalanced across subjects.  Subjects. The subjects were 220 volunteers recruited from introductory psychology classes at the University of California, Los  Angeles. Participation in experiments was a course requirement. The first forty subjects in each group were randomly assigned  to their condition. Additional subjects were run in Groups 1.2, 1, and 2 for different experimental purposes and their data  are also included. The subjects were thus distributed: 40 in Group DS; 90 in Group 1.2; 45 each in Groups 1 and 2.  SAMPLING AXIOM IN ALL-OR-NONE MODELS 167  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  Additivity of cues. Statistical comparisons between learning rates were made by using maximum-likelihood estimates. Taking  into account those subjects who failed to learn, the equation for these estimates (from Bower and Trabasso, 1964,) is  P  c - E[T] - (1 - P)'  In Eq. 2, c is the estimate of the learning parameter, P is the proportion of subjects who solved the problem, and E(T) is the  mean number of informed errors for all subjects. Comparisons of the estimate for Group 1.2 with the others was made by  likelihood-ratio tests (c.f. Restle, 1961) and the results are summarized in Table 1.  TABLE 1  SUMMARY OF EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS  Group Proportion of Mean informed Learning Chi-square  solvers errors rate   1.2 .99 4.14 .239 -  DS .90 6.75 .135 11.02,  1 .96 5.87 .164 5.46,  2 .96 10.13 .095 31.29,  Idf=1, p<.05.  In Table 1, it can be seen that the shape and dot cues were additive but that Group DS learned more slowly that Group 1.2. The  relevant cues were additive in that Group 1.2 learned faster than either Group 1 or 2, respectively. The predicted rate for  Group 1.2 is the sum of the rates of groups 1 and 2, or .095 -{- .164 = .259, which was not significantly different from the  observed value of .239 (X2(1) = 0.62, p > .50). Converting to mean errors, the predicted value is 3.86, compared with 4.15  observed. The mean number of informed errors for group DS was nearly equal to the average of Groups 1 and 2, a result which  replicates the prior finding (Trabasso and Bower, 1964b). However, the significant difference between the learning rates of  Groups DS and 1.2 disconfirms the main prediction under test. Accordingly, we are led to consider some modification in the  theory's assumption. The critical assumption would appear to be that regarding the subject's memory.  A revision Involving Resampling without Replacement for a Fixed Number of Trials  As pointed out above, resampling with replacement amounts to the assumption that the subject can not remember what events have  occurred in the past information  168 TRABASSO AND BOWER  sequence. If we wish to alter this postulate by imputing some memory to our model subject, there appears to be at least two  ways to proceed. One approach is to suppose that the subject remembers specific stimulus-response information from the trials  of the recent past. An alternative approach is to suppose that he remembers some hypotheses that he has tried and rejected.  For various reasons, the former approach seems more facile in handling the present data of the DS condition. Adopting the  former approach-memory for specific past stimulus-response information-there still are several alternative ways to introduce  this factor in the theory. We have tried several notions, and we report here the one which appears most promising.  As before, it is assumed that information processing (sampling) goes on only on a trial when the subject is told that his  response is wrong. Let us call this trial n for a reference. We make three assumptions. First, assume that the subject  remembers the specific stimulus pattern and correct response from trial n - 1. Second, assume that after the error on trial n,  he compares the stimulus-response information on trial n to that which he remembers from trial n - 1. This comparison is a  consistency check on each attribute of the stimulus. He temporarily sets aside (eliminates from consideration on this trial)  any attribute which has inconsistent response assignments on trials n and n - 1. For example, if both patterns are red but are  given different responses or if the colors differ but are given the same response, then the color attribute has inconsistent  assignments on those two trials and hence would be set aside. Third, assume that once an attribute is found to be inconsistent  and is set aside, it remains set aside (eliminated) for the next k informed error trials. The number k could be considered to  be a random variable; for our purposes here, it makes no material difference if we assume that k is some constant. Translating  the sense of the assumptions into other words: we suppose that the subject discovers that certain attributes are not relevant,  but that he eventually forgets this information as other events intervene; when he forgets it, that attribute again becomes an  available candidate for sampling. We have thus postulated two means by which a cue could be set aside for the sampling that  takes place on error trial n: (a) the cue fails to pass the consistency check in the trial n vs. n - 1 comparison, or (b) it  failed on an earlier consistency check and has not yet been revived. At the end of this process, the subject may be conceived  to have two lists: those attributes that are still effective candidates for being the relevant cue and those that have been  temporarily set aside. It is assumed that he then selects a cue from the pool of effective cues (the first list), with the  sampling probability of a cue determined by its weight or salience.2  2 This mode of exposition makes it appear that the subject is engaging in an exhausting series of cognitive operations. A  simpler description is to say that after the error the subject samples cues randomly one at a time, and stops with the first  cue that passes its consistency checks (is not eliminated by information in memory). This process achieves the same end result  as the exhaustive one elaborated in the text.  SAMPLING AXIOM IN ALL-OR-NONE MODELS 169  A few implications of this revised sampling rule may be noted in passing. First, the rule will never eliminate a relevant cue  that has had fixed response assignments throughout training. Second, an irrelevant cue has a probability of 1/2 of being set  aside at each error trial. The net effect of the rule in the standard problem is simply to reduce the average weight of the  irrelevant cues (which is unknown in any event). Third, of importance to us, this rule is the only one we have been able to  devise which is consistent with the results of our prior experiments on presolution reversals (Bower and Trabasso, 1964b). In  Experiments I and II of that earlier report, the S-R assignments were reversed if a subject errored after 10 (or 5) trials on  the initial assignments; yet such reversed subjects solved their problem with about the same number of errors as did controls  whose answers were not reversed. In Experiment III of that report the subject was told "correct," and the S-R assignments were  reversed on every second error that he made; yet the average number of informed errors before solution was the same as for  controls trained with fixed S-R assignments.  The reversal results fit easily into the altered sampling rule. The important point to be noted is that the relevant cue would  never be eliminated by our rule in those experiments. The assignments for the relevant cue on an informed error pattern and  the one preceding were always consistent. The only occasions for an inconsistency was on a reversal shift trial, but on that  trial the subject's response was called "correct," hence he would not carry out a consistency check. Thus, the altered  sampling rule would expect no interference in learning the reversal problem, as was found.  Sampling Rule Applied to Cue-Additivity and DS Conditions  We now interpret the results of the present experiment in terms of this revised sampling rule. We consider first the results  on cue additivity. It may be seen that the general effect of the altered sampling rule is to reduce the weight of the  irrelevant cues by some average amount; let b be this average fractional reduction. In these terms, the three groups in the  additivity paradigm would have the following average learning rates:  Group 1: Cue 1 relevant, Cues 2 and i irrelevant  wl (3a) cl __ zvl + b(w2 + wi) .  Group 2: Cue 2 relevant, Cues 2 and i irrelevant  _ 2 (3b) c2 w2 + b(wl +  Group 3: Cues 1 and 2 relevant, Cue i irrelevant  _ wl + w2 (3c) C1 2 wl + w2 + bwi .  170 TRABASSO AND BOWER  It is clear enough that cz.2 is larger than either cl or c2 so, in this qualitative sense, cue additivity still follows from  the new sampling rule. However, Eqs. 3a and 3b involve more unknowns (3) than we have relations, so c1.2 is determined only up  to a function of the known estimates, cl and c2 , and the unknown, b. Hence, no parameterfree prediction of c1.2 is possible  in this case.  Nonetheless, a slight variant of Conditions 1 and 2 does permit a parameter-free prediction of c1.2 . The variant is to run a  condition (call it 1') similar to Group 1 except that Cue 2 is absent; similarly, Condition 2' is similar to Group 2 except  that Cue I is absent. Let cl' and c2' be the estimated learning rates under these new conditions. cl' is given by Eq. 3a with  w2 = 0, and c2' is given by Eq. 3b with wl = 0. For this case, the following relation may be derived:  c - cl'(1 - c2,) + c2'(1 - Cl') (4) 1'2 - 1 - ci'cz.'  Fortunately for this analysis, conditions 1' and 2' had been run in the experiment (with 45 subjects each) for different  purposes. The estimates obtained by Eq. 2 from their data were cl' = .114 and c2' = .173. We note that these estimates are  larger than cl and c2 (see Table 1), as the model expects (Eqs. 3a, 3b). When these values of cl' and c2' are substituted into  Eq. 4, the value of c1.2 predicted is .252. This accords tolerably well with the observed estimate of .239 in Table l.  The analysis above demonstrates that the revised sampling rule is consistent with cue-additivity results. However, this is not  a very exacting validity check; almost any sampling axiom will do fairly well in this regard.  Application of the revised sampling rule to the Dimensional Shift (DS) conditions encounters analytic difficulties. The  problem is that sometimes the sampling probability for Cue 1 is cl (when both cues are effective), sometimes it is cl' (when  Cue 2 has been temporarily set aside), and sometimes it is 0 (when it has been set aside). The same holds for Cue 2. To deal  with this complexity, we have simulated the DS experiment with 40 Monte Carlo runs of the model. The main features of the  Monte Carlo runs were as follows:  (a) 20 stat-subjects began with Cue 1 relevant and 20 with Cue 2 relevant.  (b) Prior to learning, the probability of a correct response was 1/2 (ignoring shift trials when told "correct" instead of  "error").  (c) When both cues were effective, the sampling probabilities were cl = .095 and c., = .164.  (d) if Cue 2 were set aside, the sampling probability on cue 1 was cl' = .114; if Cue 1 were set aside, the sampling  probability of cue 2 was c2' = .173.  (e) if the currently relevant cue were sampled on an error trial, the subject solved the problem with no more errors.  SAMPLING AXIOM IN ALL-OR-NONE MODELS 171  (f) if the currently irrelevant cue were sampled on an error trial, then with probability 1/2 it was presumed inconsistent  with the prior trial information and was set aside for k subsequent informed error trials. With probability 1/2 it was  presumed consistent with the prior trial information; in this case, the subject retained that cue as his hypothesis, made a  second (uninformed) error, and solved when the answers were shifted into line with his hypothesis.  Four different set of 40 Monte Carlos each were run with k taking on the constant values 1, 2, 3, 4. Recall that k is the  number of subsequent error trials for which an inconsistent cue is set aside. Table 2 compares some summary statistics of  Group DS with those of the four Monte Carlo runs.  TABLE 2  SUMMARY STATISTICS COMPARING GROUPS DS AND MONTE CARLO DATA  Statistic Group DS 1 Error trials before replacement (k) 4    2 3   Mean informed errors 6.75 5.18 6.10 6.42 7.28  Standard deviation 8.78 4.15 5.82 7.23 7.78  Mean shifts 6.25 4.52 5.55 5.75 6.62  Mean trial of last error 25.85 19.22 21.15 22.62 26.80  Standard deviation 36.60 17.74 21.20 25.06 31.18  Average success       probability .516 .550 .470 .478 .500  Number of subjects       solving on       Shape 13 18 17 14 16  Dot 23 22 23 26 24  Number of       inconsistencies  13 16 15 14  Number of subjects       switched into       criterion 15 14 18 13 14  In Table 2, as k is increased, the data of Group DS are more closely approximated. The approximation improves particularly for  average informed errors, average trial of last error, and average shifts as well as their variances. For these data, the best  value of k would be between 3 and 4. The larger observed variance in informed errors and trial of last error resulted from  four subjects who did not solve in Group DS, whereas all Monte Carlo subjects solved. The close approximation of the success  probabilities before learning supports the assumption that percentage correct responses in this task is near 1/2.  172 TRABASSO AND BOWER  The number of DS subjects solving on the shape or the dot dimensions should be proportional to the sampling probabilities of  these two dimensions; that is, the expected proportion of subjects solving on the shape cue is approximately c,/(c, + c2), or  .195/.259 = .366. For Group DS, omitting the nonsolvers, the prediction is that 36 X .366 = 13.2 subjects will solve on the  shape cue; 13 did so. For the Monte Carlo groups, 40 x .366 = 14.6 subjects were expected to solve on shape; averaging the  four runs, 16.25 subjects did so. The average number of subjects who were shifted into solution for the Monte Carlo groups is  14.75, whereas 15 did so in Group DS. Additionally, the error distribution of Group DS was compared with that generated by the  Monte Carlos for each value of k. The generated distribution tended to be geometric in form and none differed significantly  from that of Group DS by Kolmogorov-Smirnov two-sample tests. Putting together these various comparisons of data with model  predictions, we seem to have definite support for the revised sampling rule.  Stationarity of Presolution Responses  Since subjects learned the DS problem under conditions where the stimulusresponse assignments were continually shifting and  since the average probability of a correct response was near the chance level of one-half, the learning of this problem would  appear discrete. Similarly, the learning of Problems 1, 2, and 1.2 were examined for their correspondence to assumptions of  the all-or-none models. In theory, the presolution responses may be represented as a stationary and independent Bernoulli  process. The data prior to the last error for subjects in Groups 1.2, 1 and 2 were combined since presolution responding  should be the same for these groups. Backward learning curves over ten trials prior to solution for these groups showed a  slightly positive but nonsignificant trend (tau = .378,p > .05), with the average probability of a success at .524,  significantly higher than the a priori one-half (X2(1) = 5.77, p G .05). Successive correct and incorrect responses prior to  the last error were statistically independent. (X2(1) = 2.65, p > .05). Thus, the basic assumption of discrete learning in  these problems would appear to be supported by the presolution data of all four groups.  Random Reinforcement  We have shown that the revised sampling rule explains the present DS result and also the presolution reversal results reported  previously. We mention one other set of results which were not explainable by the former "no memory" assumption but which seem  consistent with the revised sampling rule. In experiments by Levine (1962) and Holstein and Premack (1965), the subject was  first exposed to a trial block of random reinforcement (no cue relevant) followed by consistent reinforcement of a particular  cue. Both experiments found that rate of learning the consistent problem was retarded  SAMPLING AXIOM IN ALL-OR-NONE MODELS 173  relative to control subjects who had no prior series of random reinforcement. Moreover, the learning rate deficit was constant  and independent of the number of trials in the random series (Levine used from 4 to 60 trials). The interference produced by  random reinforcement is expected by the revised rule because an inconsistent reinforcement on the to-be-relevant cue during  the random series would set it aside for some trials carrying over into the consistent problem. Moreover, the number of  carry-over trials that it is set aside depends only upon the last inconsistent trial on the to-be-relevant cue before the  problem shift, and the number of prior inconsistent trials is irrelevant. Hence, the interfering effect of the random series  should be relatively independent of its length, as was found.  REFERENCES  BOWER, G. H. Application of a model to paired associate learning. Psychometrika, 1961, 26, 255-280.  BOWER, G., AND TRABAsso, T. Concept identification. In R. C. Atkinson (Ed.), Studies in mathematical psychology. Stanford:  Stanford Univ. Press, 1964, Pp. 32-96. (a)  BOWER, G., AND TRABASSO, T. Reversals prior to solution in concept identification. Yournal of Experimental Psychology, 1964,  66, 409-418. (b)  HOLSTEIN, S. B., AND PREMACK, D. On the different effects of random reinforcement and presolution reversal on human concept  identification. ,journal of Experimental Psychology, 1965, 70, 335-337.  LEvINE, M. Cue neutralization: The effects of random reinforcements upon discrimination learning. Yournal of Experimental  Psychology, 1962, 63, 438-443.  RESTLE, F. Statistical methods for a theory of cue learning. Psychometrika, 1961, 26, 291-306. RESTLE, F. The selection of  strategies in cue learning. Psychological Review, 1962, 69, 329-343. TRABASSO, T., AND BOWER, G. Memory in concept  identification. Psychonomic Science, 1964, 1, 133-134. (a)  TRABASSO, T., AND BOWER, G. Presolution reversal and dimensional shifts in concept identification. ,journal of Experimental  Psychology, 1964, 67, 398-399. (b)  RECEIVED: December 23, 1964