10.1016/0022-2496(66)90020-4
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 3, 371-387 (1966)  The Structure of Responses to a Sequence of Binary Events  JULIAN FELDMAN'  Universtiy of California, Irvine, and System Development Corporation, Santa Monica, California  AND  JOE F. HANNA'  Michican State University, East Lansing, and System Development Corporation, Santa Monica, California  A procedure developed by Foulkes for determining the structure of a sequence of binary events was found to be a useful  base-line model of structure determination by human subjects. The structure is represented in terms of the subsequences of  events (states) which lead to different probabilities of the events. While the subjects' behavior after each state is not  given by the Foulkes procedure, their behavior appeared to be largely a function of the probabilities of the events after each  state (matching) and the latest event in the state (positive recency).  In a recent paper, Foulkes described a procedure for determining the structure in a sequence of binary events (Foulkes, 1959).  The paper is of interest to students of human behavior for three reasons: (1) Foulkes originally developed his procedure as a  model of human behavior in binary-choice experiments. (2) It is well known that the structure of the subjects' responses in  binary-choice experiments is a function of the structure of the event sequence. (3) The general form of the Foulkes procedure  closely resembles that of recently proposed models of human learning and concept formation (Feigenbaum, 1961; Hunt, 1962).  Foulkes did not investigate the relationship between his procedure and human behavior; and after his initial statement about  the origin of his work, he made no further mention of human behavior. He recommended his procedure only as a device for  determining the structure of a sequence. In this paper, the behavior of a modified  I The authors are indebted to Allen Newell, who suggested a method of analysis similar to the one used here, to Otto J. M.  Smith, who brought the work of Foulkes (1959) to our attention, to Janet C. Cornsweet, who ran the last ten subjects and to B.  F. Green, who commented on an earlier draft of this paper. The research reported here was supported in part by a grant from  the Carnegie Corporation of New York.  371  372 FELDMAN AND HANNA  form of the Foulkes procedure will be compared to human behavior in a binary-choice experiment with particular emphasis on the  analysis of the structure of the human responses.  The Foulkes procedure. The basic assumption of the Foulkes procedure for determining the structure of a sequence is that the  tth event, Et, of the sequence depends only on the events immediately preceding Et and on nothing else. In other words, the  event sequence is generated by a Markov process where the states are composed of events of the sequence.  The second assumption is a restriction on the kinds of states that will be allowed. If Et_i has no effect on Et , then no  events farther back than t - i can have any effect on Et . This condition is easily stated in conditional probability  notation: If  Pr(Et I Et_i , E,-i+l ..  then  Pr(Et I Et-j-. , .. Et-1) = Pr(Et I Et-j+1 , ... Et-1) for any positive n.  The actual procedure developed by Foulkes follows intuitively from these two assumptions and the desire to preclude redundant  states. For a sequence of A's and B's, the Foulkes procedure first tests whether Pr(A, I At-,) is different from Pr(At I  Bt-1), i.e., whether Pr(A) is a function of the immediately preceding event. This test is made by tabulating the number of A's  and B's following A's and the number of A's and B's following B's and comparing these four frequencies with a 2 x 2 chi-square  test. By the second assumption, if Pr(A I A) is not different from Pr(A B), then no other states can exist. If Pr(A I A) is  significantly different from Pr(A B), then data are collected on the second-order conditional probabilities: Pr(A J AA), Pr(A  I BA), Pr(A I AB), and Pr(A I BB). If the first pair of second-order conditional probabilities, Pr(A I AA) and Pr(A I BA),  differ, then the procedure will begin to keep data on the four corresponding third-order conditional probabilities. The second  pair of second-order conditional probabilities is treated similarly. This procedure continues until conditional probabilities  cease to differ, the capacity of the machine is reached, or time runs out. The procedure can also cease to keep track of a  given pair of conditional probabilities, e.g., Pr(A I AA) and Pr(A I BA), and revert to keeping track only of the lower-order  conditional probability, e.g., Pr(A I A).  _1) = Pr(Et I Et_j+1 , -.. Et-1)  Two deficiencies. As a model of human behavior, the Foulkes procedure has two obvious deficiences: The first of these is  related to the second assumption. This assumption prevents the procedure from detecting the structure of some simple but  interesting sequences for which this assumption does not hold. For example, a double alternation, AABBAA..., has Pr(A I A) =  Pr(A I B) = .5, and the Foulkes procedure will never discover that Pr(A I AA) = 0, Pr(A I BA) = 1, Pr(A I AB) = 0, and Pr(A I  BB) = 1. However, the restriction is somewhat artificial, and the Foulkes procedure can be generalized in several ways to  overcome this particular handicap.  RESPONSES TO A SEQUENCE OF BINARY EVENTS 373  The second deficiency of the Foulkes procedure is that it lacks an explicit rule for generating predictions. Foulkes was  concerned with identifying the states of the source, and in his paper he tested the procedure by comparing the states detected  by the procedure with the states of the source. However, in using the Foulkes procedure as a model, it is desirable to make  comparisons between the behavior of the model and the behavior of the subjects beyond the comparisons of the states  discriminated and the order of discrimination. Hence, some rule must be provided for the generation of predictions.  Two modifications. In most of the applications of the Foulkes procedure in this paper, the procedure will be modified from the  description given above to correct the two deficiencies. The first modification consists of simultaneously tallying the number  of A's and B's which occur after all states of five events or less. Thus the conditional probabilities for all states of  length five or less are computed simultaneously. In the original Foulkes procedure the conditional probabilities of the states  AS and BS, i.e., Pr(A I AS) and Pr(A I BS) are calculated only after the procedure is convinced that S itself is a significant  state. The modified procedure simply gathers information on all conditional probabilities simultaneously.  The second modification is the provision of a prediction rule consisting of two parts: selection of a state and determination  of Pr(A I S). In the original Foulkes procedure it would appear quite natural to select the longest significant state. Thus if  the sequence preceding trial t was AAB in that order, and Pr(A I A) is significantly different from Pr(A I B), and Pr(A I BB)  is significantly different from Pr(A I AB), but Pr(A I BAB) is not significantly different from Pr(A I AAB); then the  appropriate state to use for prediction purposes would appear to be AB. In the modified Foulkes procedure, the state selected  is the longest one which is significant, i.e., Pr(A I AS) is significantly different from Pr(A I BS). Thus this rule will  select the correct states for a double alternation.  The simplest assumption about behavior after any state S is that the Pr(a I S) = Pr(A I S), where lower case letters are used  to indicate predictions. As a first approximation, this assumption will be adopted in the modified Foulkes procedure.  Representations of the Foulkes procedure. Sources of the type being considered here can be represented in a number of  different ways. One representation is simply as a table of conditional probabilities. A source which Foulkes used as an  example (and the one used to generate the event sequence for the experiment described below) is represented in Table 1. A  second representation is a transition diagram (Fig. 1). A third representation, and the one which is probably most useful is  that of a network or tree (Fig. 2). The nodes of the net represent tests. The Foulkes procedure which starts off by collecting  data on Pr(A I A) and Pr(A I B) can be represented as a simple net with one test-What was Et_1 ?-and two tally cells for  collecting data on Pr(A I A) and Pr(A I B). The extensions of the Foulkes procedure can be represented by replacing the two  tally cells with nodes which test E,-,, and so on. Thus the net "grows" to fit the source. The net representation of the  Foulkes procedure reveals its close  374  FELDMAN AND HANNA  relationship to two other models of human behavior. Feigenbaum (1961) has developed a net model of verbal learning, and Hunt  (1962) has developed a net model of concept learning.  TABLE 1  DEFINITION OF EVENT SEQUENCE  State Pr (A I S)* 16  BB 15  BAB 4  ARAB 3  BARB 12  BA 9  BAA 9  AAA 3  FIG. 1. Transition diagram representation of the structure of the event sequence (the ringed numbers are 16* transition  probability).  METHOD  Procedure. The general experimental procedure was that of a self-paced, noncontingent, binary-choice experiment in which the  subject was asked to predict whether an A or B would occur on each of 1000 trials. The specific procedure used was adapted  from one described by Shepard and Chang (1963). The event sequence was presented and the predictions were recorded on an IBM  026 card punch. The card hopper was loaded with 500 buff cards (IBM 508) which had a sequence number, identification  information, and an A or B punched on them. The A or B  RESPONSES TO A SEQUENCE OF BINARY EVENTS 375  Ftc. 2. Discrimination net representation of the structure of the event sequences.  was interpreted (printed) on the blank side of the card (in column 40, row 4). The experimental procedure was initiated by the  experimenter. He loaded the card bed by pressing the "feed" key twice. The keyboard was then covered by a mask which allowed  the subject to depress only two keys, A or B. The card bed was completely covered by a mask. The area between the punching  station and the reading station was covered by a mask with a hole the size of a 25-cent piece exposing the center of this  area. The subject was then called in and read the instructions given below. The subject made a prediction by depressing the A  or B keys. This action caused a punch in column 1 of the card in the punching station, and the 026 under program control moved  this card into the reading station where the subject could see the event through the hole in the mask. The subject proceeded  at his own pace limited only by the understanding that he had been called for a 2-hour experiment. After 500 trials, the  subject took a 5-minute break outside of the experimental room. During the break, the experimenter placed the cards containing  the second half of the event sequence in the card hopper. The subject returned and the experiment continued. The experiment  was conducted in a laboratory room about 8' x 8' x 8' in size. One of the experimenters was always present. The subjects  required about 1 hour to make the 1000 responses.  Subjects. The first ten subjects used in the experiment were college students from UCLA and Santa Monica City College drawn  from the subject pool of the System Simulation Research  376 FELDMAN AND HANNA  Laboratory of System Development Corporation, Santa Monica, California. The second ten subjects were obtained from the Student  Placement Service at the University of California, Berkeley. The subjects were paid an hourly rate for their time. They were  not paid on the basis of their performance in the experiment.  Instructions. "We are going to present you with a sequence of 1000 cards. Each of these cards has an A or a B on it. Before  you see each card we want you to predict whether the card will have an A or a B on it. You make your prediction by pushing the  A button or the B button on the keyboard. Depressing the button will record your prediction and move a card under the window  so you can see what was actually on the card. The sequence of A's and B's has been created by the use of certain rules. We  want you to learn these rules and use them in making your predictions."  Event sequence. The 1000-trial event sequence had the same conditional probability structure as the sequence used by Foulkes  in his principal example (Foulkes, 1959, Fig. 6). This structure is represented in Table 1 and Figs. 1 and 2. The same  sequence was presented to each subject, except that for subjects 6-10 and 16-20, the events A and B were interchanged. Before  the analyses presented below were made, the events and responses for subjects 6-10 and 16-20 were interchanged again so that  all data are comparable.  RESULTS  Trial-by-Trial analysis. The modified Foulkes procedure was used to generate trial-by-trial predictions for each of the 1000  trials of the same event sequence that was presented to the subjects. The modified Foulkes procedure prediction on trial t was  Pr(a I S),, where S was the longest significant state which matched the events preceding trial t, and Pr(a I S)t was the ratio  of N(A I S) preceding trial t to N(S) preceding trial t. The average of the absolute differences between the proportion of  subjects predicting A on each trial and the model's predictions was .17.  Although a model with a 17 % average error does not at first appear to be of much interest, the model gains favor when the 17  % statistic is compared to the average error of alternative models (See Table 2).  TABLE 2  MEAN TRIAL-BY-TRIAL ERROR OF ALTERNATIVE MODELS  Model Mean % error (1000 Trials)  Foulkes (source) 17  Linear operator (0 .80) 25  Linear operator ((x = .95) 22  Linear operator (a = .995) 21  Restle (Restle, 1961) 20  Random 31  Foulkes (subjects) 10  RESPONSES TO A SEQUENCE OF BINARY EVENTS 377  The linear operator model  Ipt=apt-1+(1 -a)Et-i,0<a<1,Et-1=0,1]  has been frequently offered as a model of binary-choice behavior (e.g., Bush and Mosteller, 1955). Most estimates of a lie in  the range from .8 to .995, and the average error has been computed for p, = .5 and a = .8 (25 %), a = .95 (22 %), and a = .995  (21 %). Varying the value of po from 0 to 1 in steps of .1 had no effect on the average error statistics for a = .8 and a =  .95. For a = .995, extreme values of pu increased the average error to a maximum of .25. Restle (1961) has proposed a model in  which the states are homogeneous runs of events, e.g., AB, ABB, ABBB, - - -, BA, BAA, . . ., and the behavior after S is a  function of the Pr(A I S). The average error for the Restle model was 20 %.  An approximation to the upper bound of the average error statistic was obtained by considering the average error (31 %) of a  random model whose prediction on each trial was a number between 0 and 1 selected randomly from a uniform distribution. An  approximation to the lower bound was obtained by basing the conditional probabilities of the Foulkes model on the aggregate  behavior of the subjects rather than the behavior of the event series. Thus the Pr(a I S)t was based on the previous behavior  of the subjects following S rather than the previous behavior of the event sequence following S. The average error of this  model was 10 %.  On the basis of this trial-by-trial analysis, the modified Foulkes procedure, although its average error is high, appears to  be a better model of behavior in this situation than any of the reasonable alternatives. This result suggests a more detailed  comparison between the Foulkes procedure and the behavior of the subjects.  Several possible sources of the discrepancy between the behavior of the modified Foulkes procedure and the behavior of the  subjects will be considered:  1. The states discriminated by the subjects differed from the states discriminated by the Foulkes procedure.  2. The order in which the states were discriminated differed.  3. The predictions made by the subjects prior to trial t affected the subjects' predictions on trial t.  4. The predictions rule(s) used by subjects differed from the one(s) used in the modified Foulkes procedure.  Discrimination of significant states. For the source used in the experiment described above, the Foulkes procedure would  predict that the subjects would discriminate the states of the source. The source can be represented by the seven terminal  states listed in Table 1: BB, BAB, ARAB, BAAB, BA, BAA, AAA. However, these states are not independent. For example either the  pair of states, AAA-BAA, is discriminated or neither state is discriminated because discrimination by definition means that  378 FELDMAN AND HANNA  Pr(A I AS) is significantly different from Pr(B I BS). Thus the discrimination of these seven critical states actually  requires the discrimination of the five state pairs represented by the seven states:  AA-BA  AB-BB  AAA-BAA  AAB-BAB  AAAB-BARB  and a sixth state pair, A-B, which must be discriminated before the Foulkes procedure can discriminate any of the other  states. Of the 62 states of length five or less (31 statepairs), the Foulkes procedure then discriminates 6 state-pairs and  does not discriminate 25. Table 3 provides a comparison between the predictions of the model (multiplied by the number of  subjects, 20, for ease of comparison) and the behavior of the subjects. A subject is considered to have discriminated a state  pair, AS-BS, if Pr(a I AS) is significantly different from Pr(a I BS).2  TABLE 3  COMPARISON OF STATES DISCRIMINATED BY FOULKES PROCEDURE AND BY SUBJECTS  Subjects  Foulkes  Yes No Totals  Yes 92 28 120  No 49 451 500  Totals 141 479 620  The principal diagonal of Table 3 indicates that actual behavior was in general agreement with the predicted behavior  especially when one considers that a not unreasonable naive model consisting of a fair coin would not discriminate any states  2 Foulkes experimented with several different significance levels for deciding that a pair of conditional probabilities was  significantly different. The lowest level of significance he used was 0.10. The 0.05 level was selected for the present  analysis because of the larger frequencies obtained by gathering all data simultaneously rather than gathering data only on  those conditional probabilities currently at the bottom of the net. A significance level of 0.10 for the present procedure  applied to the event sequence resulted in the discrimination of states in addition to those given in the definition of  sequence. However, a significance level of 0.05 discriminated only the states given in the definitions of the sequence.  RESPONSES TO A SEQUENCE OF BINARY EVENTS 379  at all. The distribution of the 28-state pairs discriminated by the Foulkes procedure but not by the subjects is interesting.  There were six failures to discriminate the A-B pair, two failures to discriminate the AA-BA pair, no failures to discriminate  the AB-BB pair, two on the AAA-BAA pair, 7 on the AAB-BAB pair, and l I on the AAAB-BAAB pair. The salience of the BB state  [Pr(A I BB) = 15/16] is clearly seen; no subject failed to discriminate it. Aside from this and the failures on A-B, the  failures to discriminate appear to be a function of the length of the state.  Of the 49 instances where subjects discriminated state pairs that were not significant in the source, two state pairs stand  out because they were discriminated by more than half of the subjects. Thirteen subjects discriminated the ABA-BBA pair and  eleven subjects discriminated the AABBA-BABBA pair. Both of these state pairs include at least one state that has the sequence  BB in it.  Development of significant states. The Foulkes procedure predicts the order in which states are discriminated. The procedure  discriminates states in order of length from shortest to longest and, within any given length, in order of the size of the  difference between the conditional probabilities. Thus, the Foulkes procedure discriminates the states of the test sequence in  the order indicated in the first column of Table 4.  TABLE 4  RANK ORDER OF STATE DISCRIMINATION  (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)  State pair Foulkes Modified Widest Extreme Mean  procedure Foulkes discrepancy probability behavior   procedure     A-B 1 4 5 6 2.54  AB-BB 2 2 1 1 2.28  AA-BA 3 5 6 5 2.64  AAA-BAA 4 3 3 2 2.50  AAB-BAB 5 6 4 4 3.77  AAAB-BAAB 6 1 2 3 4.95  In addition to the Foulkes procedure there are several other plausible hypotheses for the order of state discrimination. A  second such hypothesis is the modified Foulkes procedure described above (column 2 of Table 4). These rankings were obtained  by calculating the chi-square statistic mentioned above at the end of each block of fifty trials. A third hypothesis is that  the states are discriminated in order of the discrepancy between the conditional probabilities of the members of a pair of  states (column 3 of  48o-io  380 FELDMAN AND HANNA  Table 4). The discrepancy between the modified Foulkes procedure and the widest discrepancy hypothesis results from the  idiosyncrasies associated with the early trials of the sequence, i.e., with any small sample. A fourth hypothesis is that the  states are discriminated on the basis of the extreme value of the conditional probability of one of the members of a pair of  states (column 4 of Table 4).  The order in which subjects discriminated the states of the source is represented in Column 5 of Table 4 in the means of the  rankings of the 20 subjects. The procedure used to obtain the ranking for each subject was the same as the procedure used to  obtain column 2 except that states which were not discriminated by some subjects were omitted from both the numerator and  denominator in calculating the mean.  An examination of Column 5 of Table 4 reveals a large difference between the order of discrimination of the first four  state-pairs and the last two state pairs. Thus, length of state would appear to be a factor in order of discrimination.  However, the fourth pair of states (AAA-BAA) and the fifth pair (AAB-BAB) are both of length three. Further examination of  Table 4 suggests that the order of discrimination is a function of both the length of states and the values of the conditional  probabilities following the state pairs, i.e., Pr(A I AS) and Pr(A I BS). The exact nature of the function cannot be  completely determined on the basis of the present data; however, it is clear that the function is not the same for all  subjects.  Prediction-event states. Several investigators of binary-choice behavior have maintained that the subjects' predictions on the  trials preceding trial t affect their behavior on trial t (Hake and Hyman, 1953; Bruner, Wallach, and Galanter, 1959). The  subjects' predictions of the Foulkes sequence were examined to investigate this hypothesis by considering states of the form  "event," "prediction-event," "eventprediction-event," ... for all such states of length six or less. These states are in  contrast to the "event," "event-event," "event-event-event" ...type states used in the previously described analysis. A  comparison between Pr(a I aS) and Pr(a I bS), where S includes both predictions and events, should indicate whether a previous  prediction affected the prediction on trial t. As described above, comparisons were made only between those states which  differed in the leftmost symbol. Thus two kinds of comparisons were made-between states whose leftmost symbol was a prediction  and between states whose leftmost symbol was an event. There were 21 state pairs whose leftmost symbol was an event, and 42  state pairs whose leftmost symbol was a prediction. For 20 subjects, there were 420 cases where the event was the leftmost  symbol of the state pair and 840 cases where the prediction was the leftmost symbol of the state pair. Of the 420 event-cases,  160 state pairs were significantly different. Of the 840 prediction-cases, there were 66 state pairs that were significant. It  would appear that the events preceding trial t had a much greater effect on behavior on trial t than did the predictions  preceding trial t.  However, even some of the 66 cases which suggested that the prediction preceding trial t affected the prediction of trial t  were spurious. The problem of determining the  RESPONSES TO A SEQUENCE OF BINARY EVENTS 381  influence of the prediction on trial t-i on the prediction of trial t is complicated by the fact that the prediction on trial  t-i is itself dependent upon the immediately preceding events. Thus, a simple test of the type described above between Pr(a I  aS) and Pr(a I bS) may be misleading. A test of this hypothesis requires at the very least a comparison of Pr(a I aA), Pr(a  bA), Pr(b I aB), and Pr(b I bB) with estimates of these probabilities derived with Pr(a S) and Pr(b J S). The procedure will  be illustrated for Pr(a I aA), the estimate of Pr(a I aA). By the definition for conditional probabilities, Pr(a I aA) =  N(aAa)f1V(aA). N(aAa) is obtained by summing the product of Pr(a J S) and the number of occurrences of (SiAa) over all Si  where Si represents all event states of length four. In more conventional notation,  1V(aAa) = Y N(SiAa) * Pr(a I Si).  Similarly,  1V(aA) = Y N(SiA) * Pr(a 4 Si).  These calculations were made for all 20 subjects and the resulting "predicted" frequencies were compared with the observed  frequencies as illustrated in Table 5 for subject 12.  TABLE 5  OBSERVED AND ESTIMATED EFFECT OF RESPONSES FOR SUBJECT 12  Observed Estimated  Pr (a I aA) .76 .73  Pr (a I bA) .31 .33  The apparent effect of the response preceding an A event for subject 12 (Pr(a I aA) _ .76 and Pr(a I bA) = .31) is spurious,  since the difference can be predicted from a consideration of his behavior following states composed only of preceding events  (Pr(a I aA) = .73 and Pr(a J bA) = .33]. While a comparison of the Pr(a I aA) with Pr(a I bA) and Pr(a I aB) with Pr(a I bB)  indicated 22 discriminations were made by the twenty subjects, a comparison of the observed behavior with the predicted  behavior indicated only 3 discriminations. (All comparisons were made with a 2 X 2 chi-square test and a .05 significance  level.) It would thus appear that the events preceding trial t had a much greater effect on behavior on trial t than did the  predictions preceding trial t.  Behavior after states. Thus far, the principal interest has been the identification of the states which were discriminated,  and the analysis has focused on whether or not  382  FELDMAN AND HANNA  the behavior following a state was significantly different from the behavior following the other member of the state pair. The  remainder of the analysis will concentrate on the nature of the behavior following the state.  Probability matching. An examination of the mean number of a responses after each state and the number of A events following  each state in the source (see Table 6)  TABLE 6  NUMBER OF A EVENTS AFTER EACH STATE IN THE SOURCE AND MEAN NUMBER OF a RESPONSES AFTER EACH STATE FOR 20 SUBJECTS (trials  501-1000)  State Total Source Mean SD State Total Source Mean SD  500 258 258 20.6 AAAAA 0 0 0 0  A 258 112 137 21.5 AAAAB 4 0 1 1.0  B 242 146 121 11.7 ABABA 8 3 4 1.7  AA 113 38 42 11.2 AAABB 26 25 21 3.6  AB 146 53 43 8.5 ABABA 16 6 7 3.6  BA 145 74 94 16.1 AABAB 18 5 6 2.9  BB 96 93 78 13.2 ABABA 40 20 27 8.3  AAA 38 4 5 4.5 AABBB 1 1 1 0.4  AAB 75 34 18 6.6 ABABA 12 1 2 1.8  ABA 53 27 29 8.6 ABABB 15 8 5 2.9  ABB 93 90 76 12.9 ABABA 8 4 4 2.2  BAA 75 34 37 10.6 ABABB 18 18 15 3.5  BAB 71 19 25 8.4 ABABA 45 20 23 6.6  BBA 92 47 65 12.9 ABABB 45 11 16 6.9  BBB 3 3 3 0.7 ABABA 3 3 3 0.7  AAAA 4 0 0 0.3 ABBBB 0 0 0 0  ARAB 34 8 5 3.2 BAAAA 4 0 0 0.3  AABA 34 16 18 6.0 BAAAB 30 8 5 2.7  AABB 41 40 33 5.2 BAABA 26 13 15 5.1  ABAA 27 12 13 4.7 BAABB 15 15 13 2.2  ABAB 26 8 9 4.3 BABAA 11 6 5 1.8  ABBA 89 44 63 12.7 BABAB 8 3 3 1.7  ABBB 3 3 3 0.7 BABBA 49 24 35 6.7  BAAA 34 4 5 4.4 BABBB 2 2 2 0.4  BAAB 41 26 12 5.1 BBAAA 22 3 3 3.1  BABA 19 11 11 3.5 BBAAB 26 18 7 3.6  BABB 52 50 43 8.3 BBABA 11 7 7 1.9  BBAA 48 22 25 6.7 BBABB 34 32 28 5.0  BBAB 45 11 16 6.9 BBBAA 3 2 2 1.0  BBBA 3 3 3 0.7 BBBAB 0 0 0 0  ~BBBB 0 0 0 0 BBBBA 0 0 0 0      BBBBB 0 0 0 0  RESPONSES TO A SEQUENCE OF BINARY EVENTS 383  indicated that the probability matching so often reported in binary-choice experiments was indeed reflected in the data. This  observation was reinforced by the least-squares estimates of a (.998) and P (.013) in the linear-regression model  N(aI S)=N(AI S)+#  for all event states of length five; where N(A I S) is the number of A events that occured following state S.  Positive recency. Another often-suggested hypothesis is that subjects are more likely to predict event A on trial t if event A  has occurred on trial t - 1. In conjunction with the probability-matching hypothesis, the positive-recency hypothesis would  mean that  N(a I SA) > N(A I SA) and N(a I SB) < N(A I SB).  The event states of length five were separated into two classes, states ending in A and states ending in B, and the regression  coefficients for each class were estimated. The following equations were obtained.  N(a I SA) = 1.38 * N(A I SA) - 1.24  N(aI SB)=.80*N(AI SB)+0.31.  Thus, subjects' behavior was affected by the most recent event in the manner suggested by the positive- recency hypothesis.3  Negative recency. An examination of Table 6 indicates there were 7 states which were followed by negative recency  behavior, i.e., 1V(a I SA) < N(A I SA) or 1V(a I SB) > N(A I SB). Five of these states, BAB, ABAB, BBAB, AABAB, ABBAB, are of  the form SBAB. The other two states are BABAA and AAAAB.  An examination of the residuals from the regression equations estimated in the preceding section indicates that behavior that  followed several additional states tended toward negative recency even though this behavior did not qualify under the  definition given above. Other than the states listed above, the states for which N(a I SA) is less than the regression  estimate for 15 or more of the 20 subjects were ABBAA and BBABA, while the states for which N(a I SB) was greater than the  regression estimate for 15 or more subjects were BABB and BBABB.  s Another possible explanation of the obtained behavior is the regression hypothesis which assumes that the behavior of  subjects, or at least part of their behavior, is random and uniformly distributed in the 0-1 interval. Then if the Pr(A I A)  is less than 0.5, the regression hypothesis would predict that the Pr (a I A) would be greater than the Pr (A I A).  Unfortunately in the Foulkes source the Pr (A I A) and the Pr (B I B) are both less than 0.5, and the regression hypothesis  and the positive recency hypothesis make the same prediction. However, Engler (1958) and Anderson (1960) have used sequences  where the Pr (A I A) is greater than 0.5. For these sequences the positive recency hypothesis and the regression hypothesis  make different predictions. The Engler and Anderson data support the positive recency hypothesis.  384  FELDMAN AND HANNA  With the exception of State AAAAB, the states that were followed by negative recency behavior fall into two classes. Class one  are those states which end in a single alternation pattern. Class two are those states which end in a run of two symbols. All  states which meet these criteria were not followed by negative recency behavior. However, these classes are consistent with  the findings of other investigators (e.g., Anderson, 1960). These results indicate that the  probability-matching-positiverecency model must be supplemented by negative recency considerations based on a tendency toward  predicting single alternation and toward predicting the end of a run of like events.  The strength of these negative recency tendencies varied from subject to subject. One subject, Subject 7, had marked single  alternation behavior. Table 7 presents the behavior of Subject 7 after certain selected states for the last 500 trials. A  comparison of this behavior with the source indicates marked negative recency behavior in contrast to Subject 7's overall  positive recency behavior.  TABLE 7  REGENCY BEHAVIOR OF SUBJECT 7 AFTER SELECTED STATES  State Recency behavior  AB - .03,  BA + .17  ABA + .02  BAB - .20  ABAB -.42  BABA - .26  ABABA - .50  BABAB - .63  The fraction represents the number of a's (b's) predicted by Subject 7 after the particular state in the last 500 trials of  the event sequence less the corresponding number of A(B) events all divided by the number of times the state occurred in the  last half of the sequence.  DISCUSSION  The models of binary-choice behavior in the literature make varying assumptions about the states upon which their predictions  are based. The linear operator model in its simplest form has only two states, and the most recent event completely determines  the state of the model (Estes and Straughan, 1954; Bush and Mosteller, 1955). This set of states appears to be too small, and  later models have larger sets. Restle (1961)  RESPONSES TO A SEQUENCE OF BINARY EVENTS 385  has suggested a model that has states composed of homogeneous runs of events. Thus, AB, ABB, ABBB, - - -, BA, BAA, - - -, are  all states of Restle's model. Toda (1963) has proposed a similar set of states for sequences in which the A and B events have  identical run structures.  The results described here suggest that the next logical step in assumptions about the subject's perception of the states in a  binary sequence is that the subject will discriminate the states of the source. Of course, this conclusion must be modified on  two grounds. Nether the present investigation nor previous investigations have furnished definitive information on the limits  of the ability of human subjects to discriminate states. Secondly, this study indicated some deviations between the set of  states discriminated by subjects and the significant states of the source. One important source of these deviations appears to  be strongly salient states, i.e., states that are followed by one event with a probability very close to one.  A most interesting finding in this study is the relatively small effect that predictions on trials preceding t had on  predictions on trial t. This conclusion is based on the relatively small number of states discriminated on the basis of  predictions compared to the number discriminated on the basis of events and on the additional fact that even some of the  apparent effects of predictions can be attributed to preceding events. The discrepancy between this result and that of Hake  and Hyman (1953) could possibly be explained by the greater degree of structure in the sequence used in the present  experiment.4 However, Bruner, Wallach, and Galanter (1959) reported that predictions had a strong effect even when the  sequence was a simple, periodic, noiseless pattern.  Previously proposed models of binary-choice behavior have nothing to say about the order in which states are discriminated.  The states of these models may vary from sequence to sequence (e.g., Restle and Toda), but do not vary from the beginning of a  sequence to the end of a sequence. Although the Foulkes procedure does not completely predict the order in which states are  discriminated, it forms a useful base-line model to which must be added the additional consideration of salient states.  A complete model of binary-choice behavior must account for the states and also for the behavior of the subjects after each  state. In this respect, the original Foulkes procedure is not complete. In the linear operator model, behavior after each  state is an exponentially weighted moving average of preceding events. In Restle's model, behavior is a weighted average of  events occurring after preceding occurrences of the state.  4 It is possible that the discrepancy between the Hake-Hyman finding and the present result could be an artifact of different  statistical techniques for evaluating the effect of predictions. To test this hypothesis, the uncertainty statistic used by  Hake and Hyman was computed for the data reported here. The results are consistent with our statement in the text. The three  preceding events are a better predictor of behavior on trial t than the three prediction-event pairs preceding trial t. The  result holds for the comparison of the two preceding events and the two predictionevent pairs. However, a single  prediction-event pair is a better predictor than a single event.  386 FELDMAN AND HANNA  Toda simply estimates behavior after each state from the data. The present results were, in general, congruent with the basic  proposition that behavior after each state is a function of the event sequence and particularly the events following previous  occurrences of that state. This base-line matching model must be qualified by two considerations: positive recency and simple  patterns.  The positive-recency behavior observed in the present data was so strong that it prompted a reexamination of the classic study  of negative recency (Jarvik, 1951). The principal result reported by Jarvik was that the percentage of subjects predicting  that a run would continue decreased as run length increased, i.e.,  Pr(a I AA) > Pr(a I AAA) > Pr(a I AAAA) > Pr(a I AAAAA) > Pr(a I AAAAAA).  The data presented above suggest that  Pr(a I AA) = Pr(A I AA) -}- e,, Pr(a l AAA) = Pr(A I AAA) +e,, --- .  In other words, Jarvik's subjects are predicting that the runs will be short because in their experiences with the sequence  the runs are in fact short. From the data furnished in Jarvik's report, the Pr(A I S) can be computed for the first four of  these cases, and the Pr(a I S) > Pr(A I S) for three of these four. Thus, our earlier statement (Feldman, 1959) that the  behavior reported by Jarvik is probably best explained as a function of the particular event sequences used can now be  amended; what appears to be negative-recency behavior is best explained by a combination of matching and positiverecency  behavior. Negative-recency behavior certainly exists, and it has been observed in the data reported here. However, a far more  widespread form of behavior is matching plus positive recency, and it can account for previously reported cases of negative  recency behavior.  The success reported here, and by others, in improving models of binary-choice behavior by increasing the number of states  suggested the possibility that behavior after each state might also be analyzed in terms of states. More specifically, the  Foulkes procedure was made recursive so that the subject's behavior after each state was examined by a discrimination-net  analysis of the predictions following each state. For example, the predictions immediately following a particular state might  form a single alternation, e.g., ABAa ... ABAb ... ABAa --- . A recursive analysis would detect such behavior. However, there  was no such behavior in the event sequence used in this experiment, nor was any such behavior detected in the subjects  responses.  CONCLUSION  The ability of human subjects to determine the structure of a sequence as complex as the one used in this experiment was  somewhat surprising. This result, in addition to the detailed analysis presented, indicates that the Foulkes procedure is a  good  RESPONSES TO A SEQUENCE OF BINARY EVENTS 387  basis for a model of binary-choice behavior. The inadequacies of the Foulkes procedure, particularly the inability to detect  patterns in the double-alternation class, have to be corrected. A specification of behavior after each state must also be  formulated. However, the general character of the model-a hypothesis-testing exploration of the sequence-is correct and quite  consistent with most observations about binarychoice behavior. These conclusions are reinforced by the fact that the Foulkes  procedure is one of a general class of discrimination-net procedures that have been successfully used as models of human  learning and concept formation. The EPAM model of Feigenbaum (1961) and the concept formation model of Hunt (1962) are both  very closely related to the Foulkes procedure.  REFERENCES  ANDERSON, N. H. Effect of first-order conditional probability in a two-choice learning situation. Journal of Experimental  Psychology, 1960, 59, 73-93.  BRUNER, J. S., WALLACH, M. S., AND GALANTER, E. H. The identification of recurrent regularity. American Journal of Psychology,  1959, 72, 200-209.  BUSH, R. R., AND MOSTELLER, F. Stochastic models for learning. New York: Wiley, 1955. ENGLER, J. Marginal and conditional  stimulus and response probabilities in verbal conditioning. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1958, 55, 303-317.  ESTES, W. K., AND STRAUGHAN, 1. H. Analysis of a verbal conditioning situation in terms of statistical learning theory.  Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1954, 47, 225-234. FEIGENBAUM, E. A. The simulation of verbal learning behavior.  Proceedings Western Joint Computer Conference, 1961, 121-132. Also in E. A. Feigenbaum and J. Feldman (Eds.) Computers and  thought. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1963, 297-309.  FELDMAN, J. On the negative recency hypothesis in the prediction of a series of binary symbols. American Journal of  Psychology, 1959, 72, 597-599.  FOULKES, J. D. A class of machines which determine the statistical structure of a sequence of characters. Wescon Convention  Record, 1959, 4 (3), 66-73.  HAKE, H. W., AND HYMAN, R. Perception of the statistical structure of a random series of binary symbols. Journal of  Experimental Psychology, 1953, 45, 64-74.  HUNT, E. B. Concept learning: An information processing problem. New York: Wiley, 1962, 222243.  JARVIK, M. E. Probability learning and a negative recency effect in the serial anticipation of alternative symbols. Journal of  Experimental Psychology, 1951, 41, 291-297.  RFsTLE, F. Psychology of judgment and choice. New York: Wiley, 1961, Ch. 6.  SHEPARD, R. N., AND CHANG, J. J. Forced-choice tests of recognition memory under steadystate conditions. Journal of Verbal  Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1963, 2, 93-101.  TODA, M. Microstructure of guess processes: Part. C. Division of Mathematical Psychology, Institute for Research, State  College, Pennsylvania, Report No. 7, June, 1963.  RECEIVED: DECEMBER 18, 1964