10.1016/0022-2496(66)90011-3
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 3, 184-196 (1966)  Conditioning Parameter Model for Reinforcement Generalization in Probabilistic Discrimination Learning'  WAYNE LEE  University of California, Berkeley, California  A stochastic model is presented to deal with the following situation: On each trial a stimulus from a set is presented to the  subject who responds from a discrete set of possible responses and then receives reinforcement. The stimuli may be from a  discrete set or may be points on a continuum. Each stimulus has one element associated with it which may be in any of the  states corresponding to the set of responses. The effect of reinforcement is given by conditioning parameters; the effect may  generalize across stimuli. Conditional probability matching is predicted if no generalization takes place, but not necessarily  otherwise. Pertinent experimental results are discussed.  Traditionally, "discrimination learning" has referred to cases in which one response is appropriate when one stimulating  situation (i.e., stimulus) is current, whereas another response is appropriate when another stimulus is present. With the  advent of statistical learning theory, the idea arose of discrimination in which reinforcement is only probable regardless of  the situation and the response, but that the probabilities vary with the situation. This is "probabilistic discrimination  learning." The problem of generalization has been treated within statistical learning theory formulations of probabilistic  discrimination learning by assuming common stimulus elements between stimulating situations (Burke and Estes, 1957; Atkinson,  1958).  The present paper concerns a different approach to generalization in probabilistic discrimination learning. Generalization is  accounted for by means of conditioning parameters rather than by common stimulus elements. In addition, the theory is  developed to handle stimuli which are points on a continuum, as well as discrete stimulating situations. The discrete theory  will be developed first, and then extended to the continuous case. This paper will consider only asymptotic response  probabilities.  THEORY  An experiment consists of a series of trials. A trial commences by the presentation to the subject of one stimulus, i, from a  set of N possible stimuli. There is a probability  1 This paper was facilitated by NIH grant GM 11128. This work was carried out in part at the Institute of Human Learning which  is supported by grants from the National Science Foundation and the National Institutes of Health.  184  MODEL FOR REINFORCEMENT GENERALIZATION 185  for the occurrence of each stimulus, pi . Then the subject responds "1" or "2," whereupon the experimenter replies "1" or "2."  The reply of the experimenter would typically be considered his assertion as to the "correct" response for that trial. There  is a probability, 7Ti , that the experimenter will terminate a trial by emitting "1" (probability of the reinforcement of  "l"), conditional on the presentation of stimulus i, which is noncontingent with respect to the subject's response.  It is assumed that reinforcement of "1" tends to make the response "1" more likely on succeeding trials, not only for trials  when the same stimulus is present, but, to an extent, for all trials and all stimuli. This idea is handled by the following  axioms.  STIMULUS AXIOM. There is one element associated with each stimulus i. This element is in one of two states-conditioned to  response "1" (in state 1), or conditioned to response "2" (in state 2).  DIRECT CONDITIONING AXIOM. If stimulus k is presented on a trial, and if element k is in state j (= 1 or 2), then if response  j is reinforced, element k remains in state j; otherwise, element k goes to state j' (the alternative state) with probability  ckk , and remains in state j, with probability 1 - Ckk .  GENERALIZATION CONDITIONING AXIOM. If stimulus i is presented (i :f- k), and if element k is in state j, then if response j is  reinforced, element k remains in state j; otherwise, element k goes to state j' with probability cki , and remains in state j  with probability 1 - cki .  RESPONSE Axiom. If stimulus k is presented on a trial, and if element k is in state j, then the subject responds "j."  The preceding assumptions allow the states of element k on successive trials to be treated as a Markov chain. The probability  that the element will be in one state or the other on trial n + 1 is conditional on the state at trial n, but the  conditionality extends no further back than one trial. Suppes and Atkinson (1960) and Atkinson and Estes (1963) have dealt  with Markov theory applied to learning in some detail, so no explanation will be provided here. The transition matrix follows:  State, trial n -+ 1  State, trial n  2  N  N  (1 - -i)YiCki  (1 - -i)piCki  i=1 i=1  Y -ACki 1 - I -ipiCki  i=1 i=1  The asymptotic probability that element k is in state "1" can be determined from the matrix:  uk -  - Y-iN=1 7ripiCki - ~'N .h  `i=1 1"iCki  The Response Axiom implies that the conditional response probability gk = uk . The comparable one-element model for simple  "non-discriminative" binary choice yields probability matching, regardless of the conditioning parameters. The comparable  result here would be conditional probability matching or what Lee (1963) has called probability micromatching. In general, the  present model does not yield micromatching -the asymptotic response probability in general depends on the pi's and chi's as  well as the 7ri's. However, micromatching does result in certain cases.  First, if there is no generalization (cki = 0, for i -,4 k, we have uk In this case, the model is equivalent to a set of  simple binary prediction situations proceeding simultaneously and without interaction.  Second, if rri = a = constant for all i, then uk = vr, for all stimuli k. In this case the cue provided by the stimulus has no  validity-it is an irrelevant cue. Although this case is degenerate from the point of view of the problem considered here, it  has some interest for simple binary prediction, since it states that if irrelevant cues, such as invalid hypotheses, occur to  the subject during the course of learning, and if these are conditioned, then the matching theorem still holds regardless of  the probability of the sampling of such cues, and regardless of the amount of generalization between such cues.  Molar response probability. Molar response probability refers to the asymptotic probability of response"1" without regard to  the stimuli presented. In general, the present model does not state that molar response probability will equal molar  reinforcement probability. However, in some cases, this will be true. A sufficient condition is that gk = irk for all k  (micromatching). To see this, note that the molar response probability is given by E7,gkpk , and the molar reinforcement  probability by Yk 7rkpk.  Relation to Common Stimulus Element Approach  Burke and Estes (1957) have treated probabilistic discrimination learning with generalization by assuming that when two  stimuli, T, and T, , are presented, there are a set of common stimulus elements which may be present during either a T, or a  T, trial. The question can be raised, does the conditioning parameter model have the same form as the common element approach?  Are these two ways of saying the same thing as far as empirical consequences are concerned ? The general answer is no,  although the models are similar in some ways.  Consider the conditioning parameter model for just two stimulating situations, T, and T, , and let g and (1 - g) be the  probabilities for T, and T, , respectively.  MODEL FOR REINFORCEMENT GENERALIZATION 187  Furthermore, assume symmetry between Tl and T,, in the sense that the same conditioning parameter c operates within each  situation, and the same generalization parameter c' operates for the two cross-reinforcements. Then,  PC (1 - P)c' g(Ti) ='I ( PC + (1 - P)7) +'r2 ( PC + (1 - 9)c' ),  and  _ PC, (1 - P)c g(T2) - -r ( PC, + (1 - 9)c ) + ~2 ( flc, + (1 - P)c )  Popper and Atkinson (1958) tested equations based on the common element theory of Burke and Estes (1957) which are similar to  the preceding equations, in that g(T,) and g(T2) are linear functions of al and 7T2 -In those equations, the degree to which  common elements are present during a trial, w, entered:  AT) = -r(1 - w + fl-) + -2(w(1 - 9))  g(T2) ='n(9w) + -2((1 - oi) + (1 - fl)-)  Note that both models state that g(T,) and g(T2) are linear functions of arl and 7r2 (assuming that c, c', and w are not  functions of -rrl or 7r2). However, even if a linear relationship were found, at most only one model could fit the data.  The equations can be written in the following form, for either model.  g(TI) = Aryl + (1 - A)rr2  g(T2) = Burl + (1 - B*2.  There is actually only one degree of freedom for either model for the coefficients. The common element model requires that  A different relation is specified by the conditioning parameter model, unless c = c', the special case of no discrimination  learning. Thus, although linearity of the g's in 7rl and 7r2 is specified by both models, the relationship between  coefficients is different, and at most only one of the models could fit any real data.  In addition, the models differ in the effect of P changes on the g's. For the common element model the relationship is linear  but for the conditioning parameter model the relationship is nonlinear.  The linearity in 7Ti and 7r2 given by the two models is based on the assumption that w and c are constant as arl and 7r2 vary.  One would also be likely to assume that P does not effect co or c, although the axioms of the models do not strictly demand  this.  Continuous Stimulus Dimension  Suppose that the N stimuli in the preceding developments are ordered intervals on some continuum, x. Then suppose that the  number of intervals becomes larger and larger, while the size of each interval becomes smaller and smaller. Then, in the  limit, Eq. 1 becomes  g(x) = f -(y)f(y)cx(y - x) dy ff(y)cx(y - x) dy  where y is the variable of integration, f(y) is the unit probability density function of the stimuli, and cx is a conditioning  function. cx is written as a function of y-x because the simplification will often be made that the shape of the function  c,,(y) is the same for different x's, but the location varies. c,,(y - x) might very well be, for example, a normal  distribution symmetric around x. The subscript in cx indicates that the function need not necessarily have the same shape  around every point x, but for most practical applications such a simplification would be made. In that case cx will be written  simply as c. c.,(y - x) is the conditioning function giving the value of the probability that a reinforcement j at pointy will  change the state of the element at point x to state j, if it is not already in state j. The function would be expected to be  highest at point x, and lower to either side.  The 7T-Transform Theorems  THEOREM 1. Assume that f(y) and cx(y - x) are independent of the choice of'r(y), and let ~T(y) = a7r(y) + b, where a and b are  constants constrained by the necessity for 0 <'TT(y) < 1. Then the new response function  9'(x) = ag(x) + b.  This result can be proved by substitution and application of elementary rules for integrals. This is a powerful result, since  it is independent of the shape of f(g) and cx(y - x), assuming cx(y - x) is independent of the 7T(y) function utilized.  THEOREM 2. Assume the same conditions as Theorem 1, and similarly apply a linear transformation to 7'(y). Let P be the molar  probability of response "1." Then PT=aP+b.  PROOF. The molar response probability P equals fg(x)f(x) dx. By Theorem 1  PT = f [ag(x) + b] f(x) dx = a f g(x)f(x) dx + b f f(x) dx = aP -}- b.  MODEL FOR REINFORCEMENT GENERALIZATION 189  Relation to Detection Theory  Consider a detection task in which the subject must state on each trial which of two possible signals occurred. According to  the assumptions of statistical detection theory, presentation of a signal gives rise within the subject to a sample point from  a continuous probability distribution. Letft(x) and.f2(x) be the unit probability distributions within a subject for the two  signals, and Nl and N2 the number of times each signal is presented. Let  and  Nifi(x)  ~(x) __ Nifi(x) + N2f2(x)  f(x) = Nlfi(x) + N2f2(x) . Nl + N2  Suppose feedback is presented after each response by the subject. Then the detection task is formally equivalent to the task  presented in this paper for a continuous stimulus distribution.  ROC curves with micromatching. Lee (1963) calculated receiver-operatingcharacteristic (ROC) curves for two normal  distributions under the assumption of micromatching, generating different points by specifying different relative frequencies  for the two signals. The curves mimicked the ROC curves from a cutoff decision theory so closely that examination of an  empirical curve could not be expected to distinguish between micromatching and a cutoff mode of response.  Atkinson' has utilized a different technique for generation of ROC curves under feedback, in which the different points on a  curve are obtained by the use of different probabilities of the experimenter's lying to the subject about one of the stimuli  presented. Consider an ROC curve, p2(2) versus pl(2), in which pl(2) is the probability that the subject responds "2" when  stimulus "1" is presented. Let a be the probability that a sample point from fi(x) will be called "2" by the experimenter.  THEOREM 3. If micromatching obtains, the ROC curve points generated by different U's will lie on a straight line terminating  at one end at the point (p2(2), pl(2), for = 0), and at the other end at the point (1, 1, for a = 1).  PROOF. Because of the lying, the subject does not "perceive" the 7r(x) as  NJi(x)I [Nlf1(x) + N2f2(x)]  Instead he sees a 7T'(x) = (1 - Nlf1(x)/[Nifi(x) + N2f2(x)], and micromatches to this.  2 Personal communication.  p2(2) = f -Nl fl(x) + N2f2(x) f2(x) dx f(x)  Nlfl(x)f2(x) N2f22(x)  _  f(x) dx + f f(x)  = -912 + 922  pl(2) = f -N1 fi(x) + N2f2(x)fi(x) dx f(x)  __ a Nlfi(x)2 dx -{- N2fl(x)f2(x) dx  f(x) f(x)  = -911 + 921 - (4)  The Ni; terms are constant parameters of the problem as a varies. Elimination of a yields  p2(2) = Nll pl(2) + (N22 - AA), 911  the linear relationship desired. Equation 3 shows that p2(2) is smallest when a = 0, and increases monotonically with a,  Likewise Eq. 4 shows that pl(2) increases monotonically with a. When a = 1, p2(2) = pl(2) = 1, as Eqs. 3 and 4 can then be  simplified to the integrals of unit density distributions.  Note that the theorem is independent of any constraints on the shape or relative frequency of the two density distributions,  f1(x) and f,'x).  A Flattening Theorem  Intuitively, generalization would seem to tend to make the response probabilities in different categories more alike one  another than they would be without generalization. The categories that have the highest reinforcement probabilities would tend  to have their response probabilities lowered because of the generalization of reinforcement from categories with lower  reinforcement probabilities, and likewise, those categories with low-reinforcement categories would tend to have higher  response probabilities. In the extreme case of completely general reinforcement, i.e., when the c function is flat, all peaks  and valleys in 7r(x) would become flattened to a constant g(x).  In less extreme cases, however, a response probability need not deviate toward the 7r(x) mean. To make the intuitive idea more  precise, and to specify conditions sufficient to assure such flattening effects, the following theorem was derived. The  conditions assumed correspond to the conditions in several experiments, and the experimental results will be discussed later.  MODEL FOR REINFORCEMENT GENERALIZATION 191  Assumptions for Theorem 4.  (i) 2n ordered stimulus categories exist on a continuum. The right hand categories are labeled in order i = 1, n, where  category n is the extreme right-hand category. The left-hand categories are labeled in order i = -1, -n, where category -n is  at the extreme left of the continuum. The two middle categories are categories 1 and -1.  (iia) Let 7ro = (7r1 + 7r_1)/2, and let each 7ri be written  7ri = 7ro + hi (i = 1, n),  7ri = 7ro - hi (i = -1, -n).  Assume all hi's are positive numbers, and that the hi's are symmetric in the sense that hi = h_i (i = 1, n).  (iiia) The hi's are monotonic increasing from left to right:  hi < hi+1 (i = l, n - 1).  (iva) The differences between adjacent hi's are monotonic decreasing for the right-hand categories: hi+1 - hi < hi,, - hi+1 (i  = 1, n - 2). or  (iib - iiib - ivb). The same as (a), except  (iib) 7ri = 7ro -hi (i = 1, n)  7Ti = 7ro + hi (i = -1, -n)  (iiib) hi+1 < hi (i = -n, -2)  (ivb) hi+1 - hi < hi+a - hi+1 (i = -n, -3)  (v) pi = p - Z (Z = 1, n)  (vi) pi+1 < pi (i = 1, n - 1).  (vii) Let ca be the conditioning parameter operating on category k, when the stimulus sample is from category k. Let ci (or  c_;) be the parameter operating on category k when the stimulus sample is from the category j steps to the right (or left) of  category k. Then assume c; = c_; (symmetry of reinforcement), and c;+, < c; (strength of generalization decreases with  distance).  THEOREM 4. Given assumptions (i) - (vii), gk is bounded by 7ro and Irk .  Recall that for no generalization gk = Irk . Under the conditions specified, then, the effect of generalization is to make the  response probability, if anything, more like the mean 7ri value, Ira , than it would be without generalization.  PROOF. By Eq. 1 the response probability for any right hand category k is  _ Y- 1 7ri piCi-k + L.,1 7T-iP-iC-(i+k-1)+k1)  gk - C'n 1 PA-k + Y-7=1 p-iC-(i+k-1)  Substituting according to assumptions (iia), (v), and (vii) yields  l (-0 + hi)pici-k + ~n 1 (7r0 - hi)CiCi+k-1 `i----1 PA-k + ~n 1 piCi+k-1  n  n  7To + ~Z=1 hipiCi-k + Y-i=1 -hipiCi+k-1 . `i'=1 PA-k + `i'=1 piCi+k-1  Factor out hk from each numerator term, and let di = hi/hk .  rL.. 1 dipiCi-k +~1 (-dipiCi+k-1)1 9k = Tro + hk ~' Y-7=1 `i 1 pPA-k + piCi+k-1  Since ak = iTo + hk , if R = 1, 9k = Irk , and if R = 0, gk = ao . Then it must be proved that 0 < R G 1.  First it will be shown that the numerator and denominator of R are positive numbers (or the numerator may be zero under the  assumptions). Then it will be shown that the numerator is smaller than the denominator. We may write the numerator of R as  ipi(Ci-k - Ci+k-1)'  By assumption (vii), Ci-k - Ci+k-1 ->- 0, since the index of the second parameter must be larger than the index of the first  parameter for right hand categories (k > 0). Then the summation can be no less than zero.  Now it will be shown that R < 1. Begin by assuming it is true. This means  n n n diPiCi-k + I (-dipiCi+k-1) < jPiCi-k + YpiCi+k-1  i=1 i=1 i=1  or  n n  0 < (1 - di)pjcj-k -I- (1 + di)PiCi+k-1  i=1 i=1  MODEL FOR REINFORCEMENT GENERALIZATION 193  This inequality will be justified. Once it is demonstrated, the assertion R < 1 follows. Each di is nonnegative since each is  the ratio of two positive numbers, and the pi's and c;'s are likewise positive or zero, since they are probabilities. Thus  there can be no negative terms in the right hand summation. The only negative terms occur when 1 - di is negative. Since dk =  h,/h, = 1, and since the di's must be monotonic just as the hi's are by assumption (iiia), the only possibly negative terms  are the (1 - di)pici_k terms for i = k -+ 1, n.  The strategy will be to show that each negative term can be paired with a positive term of equal or larger absolute magnitude.  Two separate sets of negative terms must be considered: (1) terms with i = k -}- 1, 2k - 1, which will be paired with terms in  the same summation; and (2) terms with i = 2k, n, which will be paired with terms in the second summation. If 2k > n, the  second set of negative terms do not exist, and need not be considered.  First, for each term in set (1), there is another term'in the first summation with the same c; . Factoring out this c; , and  summing, yields  c,[(1 - dk+7)Ck+j + (1 - dkJpk-J, for j = 1, k - 1.  By assumption (vi) p,-; > p,+; . It is necessary to show that the absolute value of the positive term 1 - dk-; is greater than  or equal to the absolute value of the negative term, 1 - d,+; ~, or by implication, that dk+, + dk-; < 2. If all di  differences for adjacent categories between k-; and k+; are equal, as allowed by assumption (iva), then dk+; -{- dk-; = 2,  since the value of di midway between dk+; + d,-; is dk = 1. If the di differences are not equal, then by assumption (iva) they  must be progressively smaller going from d,-; to dk+; , and dk+; + d,-; < 2. This proves that each negative term in set (1)  can be paired with a positive term to produce a nonnegative sum.  Each nonpositive term in set (2) can be paired with a nonnegative term in the second summation with the same c; , and the sum  of such pairs can be written  Ci-k[(1 - di)Yi + (1 + di-2k+1)Yi-2k+11, i = 2k, n.  Here, each 1 - di is nonpositive, and each 1 -F- di is positive. By assumption (vi), pi-2k+1 ;~-' pi , so it remains to show  that I 1 - di I < I 1 -}- di-2k+1 i, or di - di-2k+1 < 2. The two di's are 2k - 1 intervals apart. The maximum difference  would occur if the differences between all successive di's were equal, since by assumption (iv), increments otherwise would  become progressively less, if anything, and the difference di - di-2k+1 would be less than maximal. If equal increments  obtain, each increment would have the value 2/(2k - 1), since dk = 1, and this value would result from summation of equal  increments for k - 1/2 steps. Then, for equal increments  di - d,-2k+1 = (2k - 1) 2k ? I = 2.  13  If increments became less at one or more steps, the difference would remain the same or decrease. This proves that each  nonpositive term in set (2) can be paired with a positive term, yielding a positive sum. Thus Eq. 5 has been justified, and  this implies than R <_ 1.  The proof was for right-hand categories. The proof for the left-hand categories is essentially the same. Likewise the theorem  has been proved for assumptions (a). The assumptions (b) are identical to (a), except the order of categories is reversed. No  separate proof is necessary. Note that although symmetry of the c;'s around category k was assumed, it was not assumed that  the c; values were equal for different k's.  THEOREM 5. If the same assumptions hold as in Theorem 4, except that there is a middle category with parameters 'ro and po ,  then go = 7To, and 9k is bounded by 7To and Trk , as before.  PROOF. We obtain  yL.i--1 hipi~i-k ~i' 1 (-hipici+k)  9k = 'ro poc-k + Y -'i=, YiCi-k -I- Y-n 1 pici+k  If k = 0, the numerator of the right-hand fraction is 0, and go = 7ro . The rest of the proof is so much like the preceding  proof that it will be omitted.  Continuous case. If the category intervals are equal on the continuum, and if the number of intervals becomes larger as the  size becomes smaller, then a theorem analogous to the preceding one is possible. We would have g(xo) = a(xo), and in general  g(x) bounded by 7r(xo) and 7r(x).  EMPIRICAL TESTS  As previously discussed, both common element and conditioning parameter approaches predict that g should be linear with 7r1  and 7Ta . Popper and Atkinson (1958) and Atkinson, Bogartz, and Turner (1959) studied the two-situation case with constant al  , and variable vr2 across groups. A nonlinear relationship between g(TI) and 7T2 was found in both experiments, and thus both  models fail. As noted, the two models differ in predictions of the relation between g(T,) and P, but the data pertinent to  this difference seem not to be available.  Lee (1963) and Lee and Janke (1964) collected data which also refute the conditioning parameter model. The stimuli were sample  points from two normal distributions. Different continua were used, including dot position on a file card, grayness, and  number. The representative samples from two distributions were randomized together, and presented to the subjects one at a  time. The subjects responded "1" or "2" and the reply of the experimenter was "1" or "2," depending on which distribution the  MODEL FOR REINFORCEMENT GENERALIZATION 195  sample point originated from. The situation was designed to be comparable to detection of one of two signals. The two signals  were represented by the two distributions, and a distribution dispersion was comparable to the hypothesized internal  dispersion of a given signal over successive presentations. Detection theory postulates that a subject forms a cutoff point,  and responds according to whether the sample point on a trial is above or below the cutoff point. A properly located cutoff is  optimal in the sense of maximizing the expected percentage of correct responses.  The conditions for pi's and hi's for Theorem 4 were met in Lee and Janke (1964) and in a sense, in one treatment in Lee  (1963). Obviously the cutoff mode of responding is inconsistent with the model presented here. The gk's actually found in the  experiments were between the predictions of detection theory and the conditioning parameter model, and thus somewhat  inconsistent with both approaches. The deviations from gk = TTk micromatching were similar to deviations toward optimal  responding in the simple cueless two-choice prediction situation, except that the deviation appears earlier in the sequence of  trials.  Unpublished studies show that in some cases gk deviates from 7Tk away from decision theory. Conditions favorable to such a  result seem to be unequal molar reinforcement probabilities, and low discriminability between component distributions.  In such experiments the conditions for Theorem 4 have not been strictly met; however, the model has no difficulty in  accounting for flattening, since with a flat generalization function a completely flat g function is predicted. It is only the  "sharpening" in contradiction to Theorem 4 that would seem to present a problem.  CONCLUSIONS  The conditioning parameter model is obviously a failure in the strict sense that data from several experiments contradict it.  However, it does as well or better than an optimal decision theory could do, it is not obviously worse than the Burke-Estes  component model. The model is quite simple for symmetrical two-stimulus (TI - T2) asymptotic data, and could easily bear the  burden of a more complicated axiom system. The model is fairly simple for the continuous stimulus situation. There would seem  to be no competitor to it in stochastic theory. Decision theory provides an alternative here, but all in all, the conditioning  parameter model would appear to be more in line with the data.  REFERENCES  ATKINSON, R. C. A Markov model for discrimination learning. Psychometrika, 1958, 23, 309-322. ATKINSON, R. C., BOGARTZ, W. H.,  AND TURNER, R. N. Supplementary report: Discrimination learning with probabilistic reinforcement schedules. Yournal of  Experimental Psychology, 1959, 57, 349-350.  196  LEE  ATKINSON, R. C., AND ESTES, W. K. Stimulus sampling theory. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.) Handbook of  mathematical psychology, Vol. 2, New York: Wiley, 1963, Pp. 121-268.  BURKE, C. J., AND ESTES, W. K. A component model for stimulus variables in discrimination learning. Psychometrika, 1957, 22,  133-145.  LEE, W. Choosing among confusably distributed stimuli with specified likelihood ratios. Perceptual Motor and Skills, 1963, 16,  445-467.  LEE, W., AND JANKE, MARY. Categorizing externally distributed stimulus samples for three continua. Yournal of Experimental  Psychology, 1964, 68, 376-382.  POPPER, JULIET, AND ATKINSON, R. C. Discrimination learning in a verbal conditioning situation. ,journal of Experimental  Psychology, 1958, 56, 21-25.  SUPPES, P., AND ATKINSON, R. C. Markov learning models for multiperson interactions. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1960.  RECEIVED: March 2, 1964