10.1016/0022-2496(66)90017-4
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 3, 287-315 (1966)  Metric Structures in Ordinal Data  ROGER N. SHEPARD'  Bell Telephone Laboratories, Incorporated  Murray Hill, New ,jersey  Under appropriate conditions, data merely about the ordering of objects-or of the separations between objects-is sometimes  sufficient to fix the positions of those objects on an essentially numerical scale. This paper uses both mathematical and  "Monte Carlo" results to establish and clarify the possibility of thus extracting metric information from purely ordinal data  for two multidimensional cases: (a) analysis of proximities, in which one is given a single rank order of all n(n - 1)/2 pairs  of n objects with respect to psychological similarity or "proximity"; and (b) nonmetric factor analysis, in which one is given  a different rank order of n individual objects with respect to each of m psychological attributes. As n (and m) increase, the  ordinal data are found to determine a spatial representation of the objects more and more nearly to within a general  similarity transformation, in the case of analysis of proximities, or an affine transformation, in the case of nonmetric  factor analysis. Extensions of these results to other cases are also considered.  Prior to the development of procedures of measurement specifically for the behavioral sciences, discussions of scientific  measurement (e.g., Cambell, 1920, 1928) tended to focus on the physical sciences and, hence, on scales in which the distance  of separation (or spacing) between points on the scale is uniquely determined except for an arbitrary multiplicative constant  (viz., the "scale factor" that fixes the size of the unit). Such discussions, that is, were almost exclusively concerned with  what Stevens (1951) has classified as "interval" and "ratio" scales.  Subsequently, however, the rather different character of data collected in the behavioral sciences has led psychologists to  construct weaker typts of scales such as the "ordered metric" type proposed by Coombs (1950). With this type of scale the  separations between the points are determined only to within the enormously wider  I I am greatly indebted to my colleague J. B. Kruskal for enabling me to carry out extensive Monte Carlo explorations using  his improved computer programs for nonmetric scaling. I have also profited from discussions of various aspects of this  investigation with him and with J. D. Carroll. The preparation of artificial data and the running and analysis of the computer  calculations were carried out by Miss Maureen Sheenan. The paper itself has benefited from the critical comments of several  readers including, particularly, C. H. Coombs and R. D. Luce.  287  288 SHEPARD  class of order-preserving transformations. Recent investigations have indicated, though, that the difference between an  interval and an ordered metric scale, say, may not be as great as at first appears. Accordingly the corresponding distinction  between metric and nonmetric information may be susceptible to further clarification.  I. BACKGROUND: ONE-DIMENSIONAL SCALES  Those scales are usually considered nonmetric in which the relations among the interpoint distances are specified by  inequalities only (rather than by the strict equalities that are required to fix an interval scale). Simple ordinal scales  (Stevens, 1951) as well as the, ordered metric and "higher ordered metric" scales (Coombs, 1950, 1964; Fagot, 1959; Siegel,  1956) are all essentially nonmetric according to this definition, since the strongest information that is given about any two  values or interpoint separations concerns only which one is the larger. Nothing is explicitly stated about how much larger.  APPROXIMATION OF NONMETRIC SCALES TO METRIC SCALES  Actually though, if nonmetric constraints are imposed in sufficient number, they begin to act like metric constraints. In the  case of a purely ordinal scale the nonmetric constraints are relatively few and, consequently, the points on the scale can be  moved about quite extensively without violating the inequalities (i.e., without interchanging any two points). As these same  points are forced to satisfy more and more inequalities on the interpoint distances as well, however, the spacing tightens up  until any but very small perturbations of the points will usually violate one or more of the inequalities.  Abelson and Tukey (1959, 1963) have established this intuitively plausible fact on a more quantitative and rigorous footing.  Given any nonmetric scale (i.e., set of inequalities on the coordinates or coordinate differences for the points on a scale),  they propose an associated interval scale (i.e., set of explicit metric coordinates for those points) that best represents the  nonmetric scale in this "maximin" sense: The smallest "formal" product-moment correlation between the proposed coordinates and  any other coordinates that satisfy the same inequalities shall be as large as possible.  They have examined, particularly, the case of four points on a one-dimensional scale. In this case they found that, if only  the rank order of the points themselves is known (the ordinal scale), the squared maximin correlation, r2, is already .65. If,  in addition, the rank order of the distances between adjacent points is known (an ordered metric scale), r2 increases to  between .67 and .94 (depending upon the particular ordering given). Finally, if the complete ordering of all interpoint  distances is known (a higher ordered metric scale), r2 increases still further to between .9l and  METRIC STRUCTURES IN ORDINAL DATA 289  .97 (depending, again, on the particular ordering). For many practical purposes, then, a knowledge of the rank order of the  interpoint distances may become almost as good as a knowledge of the actual distances themselves.  Frank Goode (1962; Coombs, 1964, pp. 96-102) has investigated a different ("worksheet") method for the conversion from higher  ordered metric scales to interval scales. Apparently owing to the strong constraints in this type of nonmetric scale, though,  the canonical representation proposed by Goode (his "equal-delta" solution) typically agrees very closely with the maximin r2  solution of Abelson and Tukey (e.g., see Coombs, 1964, p. 102).  EFFECT OF NUMBER OF SCALE POINTS ON THE APPROXIMATION  The results of Abelson and Tukey, particularly, demonstrate that different types of nonmetric scales vary in the extent to  which they approximate (or behave like) metric scales. But the question remains, for any one type, as to whether this degree  of approximation increases or decreases with the number, n, of points on the scale. Neither Abelson and Tukey nor Goode have  reported any systematic examination of higher ordered metric scales consisting of more than four or five points, but Abelson  (1959) and Abelson and Tukey (1959) have reported investigations of the dependence of maximin r2 on n for the ordinal case and  for certain simple ordered metric cases.  Whether the over-all effect of the nonmetric constraints should become looser or tighter with an increase in n is not  immediately apparent for these particular cases, since in both the ordinal and simple ordered metric cases the number of  constraints increases linearly with the number of points.  In fact, however, Abelson and Tukey found that maximin r2 generally decreased with increasing n. For example, as n increased  from 3 to 20, r2 declined from .75 to .41, for the purely ordinal scale, and from .93 to .69, for the "diminishing returns"  ordered metric scale (in which the separation between each successive pair of adjacent points is less than the preceding  separation).  These systematic declines may in part have been a consequence peculiar to the maximin criterion adopted by Abelson and Tukey,  though. For, each increase in n introduces opportunities for satisfying the given nonmetric constraints by means of more and  more bizarre spacings (Abelson and Tukey's "corner sequences"). However, owing to the improbability of such irregular extremes  of spacing in nature, their practical significance may be small. For some purposes, then, the maximin r2 may not be the most  useful criterion. Whether a criterion based on some expected deviation (rather than the most extreme possible deviation) would  also show this general decline with increasing n has not, apparently, been determined.  There is reason to suppose that an exploration of the higher ordered metric case would lead to conclusions that diverge  sharply from those just reviewed for the ordinal and simple ordered metric cases. In particular, since the number of  inequalities  290 SHEPARD  that must be satisfied increases like n2 (rather than like n) in the "higher" case, increases in n should lead to a tighter  and tighter over-all constraint on a higher ordered metric scale. That is, such a scale should become more and more like a  fully metric scale (Shepard, 1962b, p. 239).  Suppes and Winet (1955) and Aumann and Kruskal (1958, p. 118) have reported results, for a particular limiting case of  infinite n, that provides further support for this intuitive argument. Specifically, they establish that a complete ordering  of the distances between all points on a closed interval determines those distances except for a multiplicative scalar. Thus,  in the limit of a linear continuum at least, the information in the higher ordered metric scale becomes precisely equivalent  to the information in the corresponding interval scale.  EXTENSIONS TO BE EXPLORED  The need is rapidly developing for further explorations of the conditions under which essentially metric information can be  extracted from seemingly nonmetric data. In addition to the potential relevance of such explorations for theories of  measurement in general, there is also the clarification that they should supply for certain scaling procedures recently  developed at the Bell Telephone Laboratories in particular. These latter include a variety of multidimensional scaling which  has sometimes been called "analysis of proximities" (Klemmer and Shrimpton, 1963; Kruskal, 1964a, b; Shepard, 1962a and b,  1963, 1964, 1965) and a variety of "nonmetric factor analysis" (Shepard and Kruskal, 1964). Both of these two types of  procedures have been found in practice to yield tight, metric solutions even when the input data consisted of nothing but rank  orders. As in the case of one-dimensional higher ordered metric scales, moreover, the extent to which this conversion from  qualitative to quantitative information could be fully realized seemed to increase with the number of points, n. Accordingly,  particular attention will be given, here, to the systematic effects of this variable.  II. THE CASE OF A SINGLE ORDERING OF PAIRS OF OBJECTS: ANALYSIS OF PROXIMITIES  Among the types of nonmetric scales already mentioned, the higher ordered metric type is of particular interest here because  it evidently represents the closest approximation to a truly metric scale. There is even reason to suspect that the  approximation becomes asymptotically perfect as n is indefinitely increased in an appropriate manner. Moreover, psychological  data are readily collected in just the form required for this type of scale. For example, subjects may be presented with all  pairs from a set of n stimuli and asked to rank order these n(n - 1)/2 pairs with respect to the subjective similarity (or  dissimilarity) of the two stimuli in each pair.  Or, even if a numerical rating of similarity is obtained for each pair, these ratings  METRIC STRUCTURES IN ORDINAL DATA 291  may be meaningful only to within a monotonic transformation (i.e., on an ordinal scale). Thus, an analysis of Ekman's (1954)  data on rated similarity of pairs of colors showed that the original ratings were curvilinearly related to interpoint distance  in the underlying psychological scale (Shepard, 1962b, p. 237). Since the form of the curvilinear relation was not known in  advance of the analysis, only the rank order of the original ratings could be assumed of significance for the scale.  Data of this general form are not of course confined to ratings of subjective similarity. There are also many other types of  measures of the psychological closeness of pairs of objects, stimuli, or people-such as frequency of confusion, disjunctive  reaction time, strength of association or mutual choice. All of these seem subsumable under the more generic term "proximity  relation" (Coombs, 1964) or "proximity measure" (which will be used here).  ANALYSIS OF PROXIMITIES AS A MULTIDIMENSIONAL PROBLEM  Clearly, any scale used to represent a set of n objects should have the property that psychological proximity is preserved in  the geometry of the scale. That is, if objects A and B are more closely related psychologically than objects C and D, then the  corresponding scale-points A and B should be closer together than the points C and D. The central question with which we are  here concerned then takes this form: Given a complete set of n(n - 1)/2 proximity measures for n objects, to what extent is a  metric arrangement of the corresponding n points rigidly determined by the requirement that the rank order of the interpoint  distances be just the reverse of the rank order of the given proximity measures?  We must notice, however, that some sets of proximity measures cannot be accommodated in this sense by any one-dimensional  scale. For example, four points A, B, C, D cannot be arranged on a line in such a way that their six interpoint distances have  the order BC < CD < AB < AD < BD < AC. In order to satisfy these constraints, the points must be arranged in a two-dimensional  space. In short, although all ordinal scales and simple ordered metric scales can be one-dimensional, many higher ordered  metric scales are necessarily multidimensional.2 The present investigation is primarily concerned with such multidimensional  scales for two reasons. First, they have not previously been studied as thoroughly as unidimensional scales and, second, they  are more general in the sense that unidimensional scales can always be subsumed as a special case.  LIMITATIONS OF PURELY NONMETRIc REPRESENTATIONS  Before proceeding further, mention should be made of a technique for the multidimensional analysis of proximity measures that  has already been developed by W. L.  z In general, any ordering of all n(n - 1)/2 distances among n points (including ties) can be realized in a Euclidean space of  n - 1 dimensions (Bennett and Hays, 1960, pp. 37-38; Shepard, 1962a, pp. 129-130).  292 SHEPARD  Hays and refined by Coombs and his other associates (see Coombs, 1964, Chs. 21-22). This technique differs from others to be  considered here in that it does not attempt tc, recover a metric configuration. It does start with a (partial) ordering of the  interpoint distances, but the result consists of only an ordering of the points on the "axes" of the solution.  The question, here, is whether such a purely nonmetric solution preserves all of the significant information in the original  nonmetric data. Now if it did, then any particular metric spacing along the axes that might be adopted for the purposes of  constructing a spatial picture of the solution should be equally consistent with the original data. However this is not at all  the case; for, clearly, the rank order of the interpoint distances changes drastically with alterations in this spacing.  Indeed solutions that have been presented spatially in this way (Coombs, 1964, pp. 476, 493) can be shown to violate the  original data for just this reason.3 Coombs himself acknowledges that "the figure does not adequately reflect the metric  relations nor the relative lengths of the two dimensions" (p. 476). Still, the fact that inconsistencies arise from an  arbitrary "metrization" of nonmetric solution conclusively shows that some of the information in the initial data has been  ignored in the process of constructing the solution.  METRIC SOLUTION BY ITERATION ON A COMPUTER  As early as 1954 there were indications that the kinds of constraints considered by Abelson, Tukey, and Goode, in one  dimension, (but ignored by Hays and Coombs, in more than one dimension) might permit the recovery of essentially metric  solutions even in the multidimensional case. In some preliminary explorations, which later led to an application of  multidimensional scaling to the study of stimulus generalization (Shepard, 1955, 1958), it became apparent that a small number  of points on a plane typically could be moved only slightly without disrupting the rank order of the interpoint distances.  Some crude two-dimensional solutions were even obtained by a trial-and-error process of alternately adjusting the positions of  small movable markers on a flat surface and measuring the distances between the markers until a satisfactory approximation to  the desired ranking was achieved. Entirely independently, Frank Goode used a somewhat similar trial-and-error process (using  pencil and worksheet) to show that a particular configuration of nine points in two dimensions could be closely reproduced on  the basis, solely, of the rank order of the 36 distances among those points (Goode, 1957).  Nevertheless, metric representations of higher ordered metric scales in more than one dimension did not become practicable on  a large scale until the crude method of  a In the first of these two spatial solutions presented by Coombs, for example, the distance between the points B and E is  considerably greater than the distance between the points A and D. But, in the partial ordering of distances from which this  solution was obtained, the distance BE is actually eight levels below (i.e., smaller) than the distance AD (see Coombs, 1964,  p. 469).  METRIC STRUCTURES IN ORDINAL DATA  293  successively adjusting the positions of markers on a plane was explicitly formalized to the point where it could be  implemented on a digital computer. The great speed and storage capacity of the computer permitted solutions with much larger  numbers of points than could ever have been attempted by hand. Moreover, by recasting the method into the more abstract  language of a computer program, the inherent restriction of physical adjustments to two or, at most, three dimensions could be  removed without difficulty. Finally, in the analysis of real data, the errors of measurement (always present in empirical  estimates of proximity) could be balanced against each other in a more objective manner.  In the first program of this kind (Shepard, 1962a, b), the coordinates of a trial configuration were iteratively adjusted in a  manner designed to bring the rank order of the interpoint distances into closer and closer coincidence with the inverse of the  rank order of the given proximity measures. A considerable number of solutions have now been obtained by applying this program  to real psychological data as well as to artificial data for which the "true" configuration was known in advance. The  configurations to which this program has converged have generally supported the notion that the over-all constraint does  indeed increase with the number of points, n. With as many as 15 points, the solutions possessed a degree of metric precision  that was, at the time, quite surprising (e.g., see Shepard, 1962b, Fig. 3).  More recently, Joseph Kruskal (1964a, b) has introduced some significant refinements into this general type of method. In  place of the originally adopted measure of departure from a perfect inverse ranking (Shepard, 1962a, p. 136), Kruskal proposed  the measure  where di; is the distance between the trial points i and j during the current iteration and where 'tii; is the corresponding  value in that sequence which (a) is monotonically related to the given proximity measures and (b) minimizes the expression (1)  for the current di; values. In words, the measure is simply the square root of a suitably normalized sum of squared deviations  from the best-fitting monotonic sequence.  A desirable feature of this measure is that, while it is strictly invariant under any monotonic transformation of the given  proximity measures, it does vary continuously with changes in the coordinates of the configuration. Kruskal was thus able to  use the negative gradient of this measure to construct an iterative process that seeks its minimum by the method of steepest  descent. The advantage of Kruskal's steepestdescent algorithm appears to be primarily theoretical or conceptual, however; the  stationary configurations to which his process converges have been found in practice to be essentially indistinguishable from  the solutions obtained by the earlier iterative process. Again, this is to be expected for any reasonable method owing to the  294 SHEPARD  very tight constraints imposed by the input data as soon as n becomes at all large (cf., Kruskal, 1964a, Fig. 11).4  Still, no systematic exploration of the effect of n on the accuracy of solutions obtained by these methods has previously been  reported. For this reason a rather extensive exploration of this kind was recently undertaken (using Kruskal's refined  algorithm), and the results will be described in a following section. First, however, it is instructive to consider some  mathematical arguments concerning what happens in the theoretical limit as the number of points becomes infinite.  MATHEMATICAL CONSIDERATION OF SOME LIMITING CASES OF LARGE n.  If more and more points are randomly imbedded in some k-dimensional convex region of Euclidean space, this region will  gradually become uniformly filled with points. As a helpful heuristic, therefore, let us pass immediately to the limiting case  in which all points in this region have been filled in. The question, analogous to the one answered by Aumann and Kruskal  (1958) and Suppes and Winet (1955) for one dimension, then becomes this: Does a knowledge of only the rank order of the  distances between the points in this region determine the distances themselves (except for an arbitrary scale factor) ?  Fortunately the transition to more than one dimension entails no qualitative changes. An affirmative answer to the question  follows rather directly from already established geometrical results.  Notice, first, that every possible distance that does not exceed the diameter of the region under consideration will occur for  some pair of points in that region. Hence any transformation of the set of points that preserves the rank order of the  interpoint distances necessarily has the property that, if two distances were initially equal to each other, they must remain  equal to each other (although they may of course change together during the transformation). Clearly then, since all points on  the (k - 1)dimensional surface of any sphere are equally distant from the center point, spheres must be preserved under the  transformation. Now it is already known that every sphere-preserving transformation is either a similarity transformation or  the product of an inversion (in a sphere) and an isometry (Coxeter, 1961, p. 104). The possibility of an inversive  transformation can immediately be ruled out, however. It preserves neither the rank order of concentric spheres nor the  equality of nonconcentric spheres, whereas both of these invariances are required by the given rank order of the interpoint  distances. Hence we can conclude that the given rank order determines the set of  ' One advantage of the method of steepest descent is that the computational algorithm is directly dictated by the definition  of the criterion to be optimized. Creative understanding is therefore needed only for the construction of the criterion-not  for the construction of the algorithm. This fact has undoubtedly facilitated the extension of the general type of iterative  approach considered here to other cases discussed in the ensuing sections; viz., cases of nonmetric factor analysis (by  Kruskal and Shepard), analysis of pair-comparison data (Carroll and Chang, 1964b), and nonmetric analysis of factorial  experiments (Kruskal, 1965).  METRIC STRUCTURES IN ORDINAL DATA 295  points to within a similarity, transformation and the distances themselves to within multiplication by an arbitrary scale  factors  The same conclusion can also be reached by considering the obvious fact that the distribution of interpoint distances for any  particular convex region approaches a definite limiting form as n--> oo. Hammersley (1950), for example, has shown that the  frequency function of distance, d, between points uniformly distributed in a k-dimensional hypersphere is given by  fx(d) = 2kkdk-1I1_d2(2k + 2, 2), (2)  where the scale factor is chosen so that the largest distance is unity, and where I,'(p, q) is the incomplete beta-function  ratio tabulated by Pearson (1934). Provided that the number, n, of points is sufficiently large, then, the inverse of the  distribution function obtained by integrating fk(d) should permit a conversion from the rank of a distance to a number  essentially proportional to that distance. Whether such a procedure would be useful in practice, of course, depends upon how  insensitive the function fk(d) is to departures from the assumed uniform spherical distribution of points.  In a recent investigation Benzecri (1964, 1965) examines the case in which the points are assumed to be drawn from a  distribution that is spherical but normal (or Gaussian) rather than uniform (as assumed just above). In addition to its  naturalness, this assumption has the advantage of permitting the coordinates to be treated as independent random variables.  For this case Benzecri establishes rather stronger results than those given above. First, he defines the dimension, k, of an  ordering on all n(n - 1)/2 distances among n points to be the minimum number of dimensions (in Euclidean space) in which that  ordering can be realized. He also says of such an ordering that it determines a configuration to within E if the difference  between corresponding distances of any two suitably normalized configurations achieving that order (in Euclidean k-space) is  less than e. (By a suitable normalization is meant, for example, a resealing of the configurations so that each has a maximum  interpoint distance of unity.)  If, then, the points are assumed to be sampled from a spherically normal distribution, the two theorems of Benzecri can be  stated as follows: First, for any specified number of dimensions, k, and any positive quantities 8 and e, there exists an n  such that, with probability greater than (1 - 8), the order of the distances among n points will be of dimension k and will  determine a configuration to within e. Second, for any number of dimensions, k, and any positive 8 and e, there exists a  number, no ,  5 In the computer solutions described earlier this scale factor is usually fixed by some convention such as that the mean  distance among the points (or, alternatively, the mean square distance of the points from the centroid) be unity. Further  conventions can also be imposed, if desired, to fix the position and orientation of the configuration. Sometimes, for example,  it is convenient to insure that the centroid is at the origin and that the principal axes of the configuration coincide with  the orthogonal axes of the coordinate system.  296 SHEPARD  such that all distances among n points, where n > no , are determined to within E by a well-defined function of their order;  viz.,  dif :~, Fk r(di,) - 2 n(n - 1)/2 )  where r(di;) is the (integer) rank of the distance di; [1 < r(di;) < n(n -1)/2], and where the function Fk is the square root  of the inverse X2 function for k degrees of freedom. This last result depends upon the fact that, when the points are  distributed normally (rather than uniformly in a sphere, as considered above), the squared interpoint distances will be  distributed in accordance with X2 (rather than as indicated in connection with expression (2) above). Proofs for these two  theorems can be found in Benzecri's report.  Benzecri also presents some illustrative examples that suggest that the method (based on his second theorem) of converting  ranked proximity measures into distance estimates may have some practical utility. Still, the usefulness of the theorems  themselves is somewhat limited by the fact that they tell us nothing about what values of e and S can be attained for any  given number of points, n. Moreover, it is known that there exist "degenerate" configurations that can be drastically  distorted in certain ways without altering the rank order of the interpoint distances. Perhaps the simplest of these  pathological cases is that in which the points are divided into two clusters in such a way that all between-cluster distances  exceed all within-cluster distances. In this case the ratio of the between to the within distances is quite indeterminate and,  can, in fact be made arbitrarily large (Shepard, 1962b). Benzecri's results indicate that the probability of such degenerate  configurations becomes vanishingly small for sufficiently large numbers of random points. However their prevalence among cases  of practical interest remains to be determined.  MONTE CARLO EXPLORATIONS FOR INTERMEDIATE VALUES OF n  In order to gain some more definite, quantitative information about how the constraints tighten up as n increases over the  range of practical interest, an empirical investigation was undertaken by means of the computer method described above.  Specifically, the accuracies of computer-generated metric reconstructions were evaluated in a number of cases in which these  reconstructions were obtained solely on the basis of the rank orders of interpoint distances in two-dimensional configurations  of from 3 to 45 random points.  The degree of constraint in each case was assessed by comparing the metric configuration reconstructed by the computer with  the original "true" configuration from which the rank order was initially obtained. The particular measure of agreement chosen  was the product-moment correlation of the n(n - 1)/2 interpoint distances in the reconstructed configuration with the  corresponding distances in the original  METRIC STRUCTURES IN ORDINAL DATA 297  "true" configuration. The solutions were secured by applying Kruskal's steepestdescent algorithm to an arbitrary starting  configuration (see Kruskal, 1964a, pp. 10-11).  Since the "true" configurations were two-dimensional in every case, a two-dimensional solution could always be found (in  principle at least) for which the departure from monotonicity (1) would be zero. However the reduction of this measure to zero  does not entail a perfect metric reconstruction. For a finite number of points there generally will exist a roughly polyhedral  region in the n-k-dimensional space of the coordinates within which the desired rank order of the interpoint distances is  satisfied. The iterative process, of course, stops as soon as it moves across the boundary into this region. Since the  gradient vanishes there, there is no longer a basis for making any further adjustments in the configuration. What we are  really interested in here is the size of this region. To the extent that the first solution found within this region is always  very close to the true configuration, we can reasonably conclude that the region must be small; i.e., that the configuration  is tightly constrained.6  Solutions were obtained for 120 different configurations, all constructed from a set of random coordinates used earlier by  Coombs and Kao (1960, pp. 222-223). Twodimensionality of the "true" configurations was insured by using only the first two of  the three coordinates presented for each point by Coombs and Kao (viz., their coordinates a and b). Altogether 45 random  points were thus made available by renumbering the 30 points in their Table 2 (as points 16 through 45), following the 15  points in their Table 1. Twelve subsets of these 45 points were then selected so as to include, in turn, the first 3, 4, 5, 6,  7, 8, 9, 10, 15, 20, 30, and 45 points. Thus, these 12 subsets were nested in the sense that each succeeding subset contained  all the points in all preceding subsets. Another such sequence of 12 nested subsets was then constructed after first  "circularly" renumbering the points, so that the points originally numbered 10 through 45 were now numbered 1 through 36 while  the points originally  s With the gradient method, convergence often becomes extremely slow in the close vicinity of the minimum. In order to keep  computing time within reasonable bounds, therefore, a decision was made that, if the measure of departure from monotonicity  (1) was not reduced to zero within 50 iterations, a configuration would be accepted as a sufficiently close approximation to  the final solution if this measure was reduced at least to the value .01. (This is well below the value, .025, that Kruskal  (1964a, p. 3) qualitatively rates as an "excellent" fit.) The effect of accepting the more lenient criterion (.O1 rather than  zero) is that the measures of agreement between the reconstructed and the true configurations (to be reported in Tables 1 and  2) are biased, if at all, in the direction of underestimating the metric precision of the reconstruction. Moreover, failure to  reduce the departure from monotonicity strictly to zero occurred in only about 25 % of the cases.  The gradient method can also become very slow or, indeed, even trapped in a local minimum while the measure (1) remains  unacceptably high. Whenever this occurred, the process was begun again from a different starting position. This proved to be  necessary in only about 15 of the cases. In the end, a satisfactory solution (with the measure (1) below .01) was achieved  in every case within a total of 150 iterations.  298 SHEPARD  numbered 1 through 9 were now numbered 37 through 45. This process of renumbering and then selecting nested subsets was  repeated until five different numberings had been completed (the sixth would have been identical to the first). This entire  process was then repeated after renumbering the points in reverse order, so that the points originally numbered 45, 44, - - -,  1 were now numbered 1, 2, - - -, 45. The final result, then, was 10 different sequences each consisting of 12 nested subsets  of points; that is, a total of 120 sets.  Of course the 10 largest configurations all comprised the same 45 paints, but the fact that the numbering changed from one  configuration to the next insured that the iterative process began with a quite different starting configuration in each of  these 10 cases (see Kruskal, 1964a, pp. 10-11). This permits an evaluation of the extent to which the result of the iterative  process is influenced by the position from which it starts. If the constraints of the data are sufficiently tight, this  influence should be entirely negligible.  The results are summarized in Table 1. For each of the tested numbers of points (n) columns A and B present, respectively, the  smallest and the root-mean-square of the ten correlations obtained for that number. Column C gives for each number of points  similar "rms" correlations between the "true" and reconstructed distances-but for the first three points only. Thus it is  possible to see how the accuracy of reconstructing the triangle formed by the first three points of each nested sequence  improves as more and more additional points are included in the total configuration. The close agreement between columns B and  C indicates that the first points in each nested sequence were essentially representative of the entire set of random points.  TABLE 1  MONTE CARLO RESULTS FOR ANALYSIS OF PROXIMITIES: ACCURACY OF RECONSTRUCTION AS A FUNCTION OF THE NUMBER OF POINTS, n.  n A B C  min r rms r rms r (triangle)  3 .753 .935 .935  4 .896 .967 .972  5 .896 .950 .971  6 .951 .981 .986  7 .919 .980 .969  8 .985 .994 .994  9 .988 .996 .997  10 .992 .998 .998  15 .999,79 .999,91 .999,96  20 .999,946 .999,979 .999,993  30 .999,950,6 .999,998,3 .999,998,9  45 .999,999,61 .999,999,75 .999,999,94  METRIC STRUCTURES IN ORDINAL DATA 299  The results presented in Table 1 show that, while the reconstruction of the configuration can occasionally be quite good for a  small number of points, it is apt to be rather poor (for n less than eight, say). As n increases, however, the accuracy of the  reconstruction systematically improves until even the worst of the ten solutions becomes quite satisfactory with ten points  and, for all practical purposes, essentially perfect with 15 or more points. For n > 15 the precision of the reconstruction  reaches the level where further improvements are of primarily theoretical interest only. Even for these intermediate values of  n, then, a purely ordinal scale of proximity entails, with overwhelming probability, an essentially ratio scale of distance.  It is also clear that the number of dimensions is determined as well. Certainly, for the larger values of n, the given rank  orders could not have been accounted for by any solution in one dimension (cf., Shepard, 1962b, p. 227). But, since a complete  account is attainable in two dimensions, there is no need to consider solutions of three or more dimensions.  III. THE CASE OF MULTIPLE ORDERINGS OF INDIVIDUAL OBJECTS: NONMETRIC FACTOR ANALYSIS  The preceding section was exclusively concerned with the general case in which all pairs of objects from some set are ordered  with respect to the psychological proximity between the two objects in each pair. The fact that metric structure can be  extracted from seemingly nonmetric data in this case raises the question as to whether a similar possibility might not exist  for other, quite different cases.  An essential requirement for the recovery of metric structure seems to be that the number of nonmetric constraints be  sufficiently large with respect to the number of parameters needed to characterize the structure. This was insured, for large  n, in the higher ordered metric case (of analysis of proximities), since the number of constraints there increased at a rate  approaching n2. For weaker cases in which the number of constraints is no larger than n itself (such as the ordinal or simple  ordered metric cases) this high degree of metric precision is never attained.  There is, however, another case in which the number of constraints can become large with respect to the number of parameters  to be recovered. This is the case in which we are given not just one, but many different ordinal scales for the same set of  objects. For example, many different individuals might be asked to order the same n objects with respect to their own personal  preference for each of these objects. Or the same individual might be asked to order the n objects with respect to each of  several different subjective attributes. Or, finally, n different individuals might themselves be ordered on the basis of  their performances on each of a number of different types of tests. In these cases, as we shall see, the number of constraints  on the solution  48o-5  300 SHEPARD  can become large enough to permit an essentially metric solution. First, however, we must consider just what type of  geometrical representation would constitute an appropriate solution in this case.  ANALYSIS OF MULTIPLE ORDERINGS AS A MULTIDIMENSIONAL PROBLEM  If all the orderings that we have obtained for a set of n objects are indentical, we have in effect nothing more than a single  ordinal scale. In this event there is no hope of extracting a metric structure from the data. (Although, of course, Abelson  and Tukey (1959, 1963) indicate how a metric can be imposed on such data.) Typically, however, experiments of the three kinds  mentioned above do not yield data with such a high degree of simple unanimity. If, for example, individuals are asked to rank  different makes of cars according to their preferences for these, they will return widely different orderings. Moreover the  disagreements between these orderings cannot be attributed exclusively to unreliable variations or "noise" in the data but  will stem, in part, from real differences between individuals in the weights that they attach to subjectively distinguishable  factors (such as comfort, prestige value, sportiness, or economy, say).  The notion that the existence of more than one underlying factor or dimension is what accounts for the consistent differences  between the various obtained orderings suggests the multidimensional model illustrated in Fig. 1. Here, as before, the n  FIG. 1. Spatial model for nonmetric factor analysis.  METRIC STRUCTURES IN ORDINAL DATA 301  objects that have been ordered are represented by n points in a Euclidean space of some number of dimensions, k. In addition  to these points, however, we now include m different directions or vectors through this space-one for each of the obtained  orderings of the n objects. The problem of the analysis of the multiple orderings can then be formulated as follows: Given m  complete orderings of n objects, find a spatial representation of minimum dimensionality such that the give* orderings can be  recovered as the orders in which n points project onto m vectors. In Fig. 1 the five points, A, B, C, D, and E, project onto  one vector (the solid line) in the order ABCDE. Owing to the difference in direction of the second vector (the dashed line),  however, that vector is able to account for the quite different order CBEAD. Clearly, vectors in additional directions will  account for still other orders. In a one-dimensional scale, on the other hand, more than a single order could never be  accommodated.  RELATION TO EARLIER APPROACHES TO METRIC AND NONMETRIc FACTOR ANALYSIS  The model just described is, of course, identical to the standard factor-analytic model (Harman, 1960; Thurstone, 1947) except  that a strong linearity assumption of the standard model has been dropped. That is, in the standard model it is supposed that  the input data consist-not merely of m rank orders of the n objects-but of m numerical scores for each of the n objects. The  recovery of the underlying structure, moreover, is based on the assumption that the given scores are linear functions of the  projections on the vectors. In the proposed nonmetric model, the assumption that these functions are linear is replaced by the  assumption that they are merely monotonic.  The relation between the proposed nonmetric factor analysis and the standard, metric factor analysis is quite analogous to the  relation between the analysis of proximities, discussed in the earlier sections, and the standard, metric multidimensional  scaling, first developed fully by Torgerson (1952). In both cases an assumption of linearity that underlies the standard model  has been abandoned in favor of a weaker assumption of monotonicity. Results to be presented in the ensuing sections indicate  that, when n and m are sufficiently large, the stronger assumption is unnecessary in the case of factor analysis just as it  was in the case of multidimensional scaling.  Nonmetric factor analysis evidently was first envisaged by Thurstone (1947, p. xiii). However, owing probably to the  mathematical difficulties that confront a purely analytic assault on the nonmetric case, relatively little progress has  subsequently been reported in this particular direction. Indeed, about the only concrete advance with respect to the specific  nonmetric model briefly suggested by Thurstone, and considered in detail here, seems to be that achieved by Bennett (1956). He  was able to show that the number, k, of dimensions that would be required for such a spatial solution could in principle be  inferred on the basis of the given rank orders. Bennett did not, however, provide any method for actually reconstructing the  configuration  302 SHEPARD  of points and vectors in this space; nor did he investigate the degree to which such a configuration might be metrically  unique.  Still, there are heuristic reasons for expecting that tight, metric solutions may be attainable-at least under favorable  circumstances. Suppose, for example, that the true underlying structure is two-dimensional. In this case a complete  specification of the positions of n points and the directions of m vectors will require at most 2n + m parameters. The number  of constraints in the given nonmetric data, on the other hand, will be closer to n - m. Hence, as the number of objects and  the number of different orderings of these increase, the product will begin to dominate the sum. Earlier experience in the  case of higher ordered metric scaling (i.e., analysis of Proximities) suggests that, under these conditions, an essentially  metric solution may be recoverable.  METRIC SOLUTION BY ITERATION ON A COMPUTER  The above considerations encouraged a collaborative attempt, with J. B. Kruskal, to apply an iterative process of the general  type that we had already found so effective for extracting structure from proximity data (Shepard, 1962a, b; Kruskal, 1964a,  b) to the somewhat different problem of extracting structure from multiple orderings (Shepard and Kruskal, 1964). This newer  application is a bit more complicated of course. In order to approach a monotonic relation, for each vector, between the  projections of the points on that vector and the corresponding initially given scores, not only the positions of the n points  but also the directions of the m vectors must be adjusted during each iteration.  The computer program itself was written by Kruskal and, as in his earlier program (Kruskal, 1964a), employs the method of  steepest descent to minimize an explicitly defined measure of departure from a perfect, monotonic fit. As one natural  modification of the measure adopted in the earlier case (1), Kruskal proposed in the new case to minimize the function  (xtj - xij) x 2  Here xi; is the projection of the point i in the direction j (or, if i and j are both considered as vectors, xi; is the scalar  product of i and the unit vector j). In exact analogy with the earlier formula (1), then, ii; is the corresponding value of  the best-fitting monotonic sequence for vector j (again ,"best-fitting" in the sense that the sequence minimizes (4) for the  current xi; values).  Exploratory applications of this computer program both to empirical and to artificial data have indicated that, if the numbers  of points and vectors are not too small, the solutions are again rather tightly constrained (Shepard and Kruskal, 1964;  Shepard, 1964). However, until now no systematic attempt had been made to gauge how the degree of over-all constraint depends  upon these numbers. Moreover, as will now  METRIC STRUCTURES IN ORDINAL DATA 303  be seen, even in the limiting case (of infinite n and m) the solution will generally have at least one residual degree of  freedom that it did not have in the case of the analysis of proximities.  MATHEMATICAL CONSIDERATION OF A LIMITING CASE  As before, consider a k-dimensional convex region of Euclidean Space that is completely filled with points. But, this time,  suppose that the given informationinstead of specifying the order of the distances between all possible pairs of  pointsspecifies the orders in which the individual points project onto vectors or axes in all possible directions through this  space. To what extent are the positions of the points and directions of the vectors metrically determined by the given  information in this limiting case?  In order to answer this question it is helpful to notice, first, that there is a formal analogy between this case and the one  considered earlier. The principal difference is that the role played by spheres (including circles and hyperspheres) in the  limiting case of analysis of proximities is played, here, by planes (including lines and hyperplanes). For, just as all points  that are equally distant from a given point fall on a sphere in the earlier case, all points that project down onto the same  point on a given vector fall on an (orthogonal) plane in the present case. Moreover, just as the ordering of the distances  among the points previously determined "concentricity" of spheres and the order of concentric spheres, the ordering of the  projections of the points now determines parallelism of planes and the order of parallel planes.  A consequence is that the class of permissible transformations is wider in the case of nonmetric factor analysis than in the  case of analysis of proximities. For, whereas only similarity transformations preserve concentric spheres, any nonsingular  affine transformation will preserve parallel planes (Coxeter, 1961, p. 203; Birkhoff and MacLane, 1941, p. 263). That is, any  configuration of points that achieves a given set of ordinal constraints (of the kind considered here) not only can be  subjected to an arbitrary similarity transformation without violating those constraints, but it can also be subjected to the  kind of uniform "shearing" that results when the underlying space is linearly stretched or compressed to different degrees  along different arbitrary directions (see Klein, 1939, p. 75). However, in order to preserve the given orders of the  projections on the vectors, the vectors must themselves be transformed by the associated inverse adjoint transformation  (Thrall and Tornheim, 1957, p. 193).  The practical consequence of this result is that a metric solution in the case of nonmetric factor analysis will have at least  one more degree of freedom than a solution in the case of analysis of proximities. In particular, while the position,  orientation, and scale of the configuration had to be fixed by arbitrary convention in the earlier case, the variance of the  points on the principal axes of the configuration must now be fixed as well. For example, these variances might all be set  equal to the same  304  SHEPARD  arbitrary constant (by applying that affine transformation that carries the ellipsoid of the distribution of points into a  sphere). Note, however, that these added degrees of freedom are by no means peculiar to nonmetric factor analysis. The inverse  adjoint transformation of the vectors preserves not only orders but scalar products as well. Hence the solutions of standard  linear factor analysis are also determined only to within an affine transformation (unless some additional constraint is  imposed by convention).  Since more general transformations (like the projective) do not preserve parallelism, on the other hand, it is clear that, in  the present limiting case of nonmetric factor analysis, the solution is indeed determined to within an affine transformation.  In this limit, then, nonmetric factor analysis evidently becomes capable of providing a solution that is just as completely  metric as the solution provided by linear factor analysis. That is, from purely ordinal scores, we can in principle recover  numerical projections on an interval scale. 7  It would be nice to have results in this case that resemble those that Benzecri established for the case of analysis of  proximities. It might, for example, be shown that an affine solution is (with probability 1 - 8) determined to within e  provided that the number of points, n, and the number of orderings of those points, m, are both sufficiently large. Again,  however, the utility of such a result would be rather limited unless it also specified the values of 8 and e that could be  achieved with given numbers n and m.  Moreover, such results would have to be based on the assumption that the parameters of the true configuration are distributed  essentially uniformly or, at least, randomly. As in the case of analysis of proximities, degeneracies can occur under special  circumstances. The simplest kind of degeneracy in the analysis of proximities was one in which the n objects could be divided  into two clusters such that the withincluster proximity measures all exceeded any of the between-cluster measures.  Correspondingly, the simplest kind of degeneracy in nonmetric factor analysis seems to arise when the n objects can be  partitioned into two groups in such a way that all the objects in one group precede (or follow) all the objects in the other  with respect to all m of the given orderings. Experience with real psychological data suggests that such degeneracies may  sometimes arise in the case of nonmetric factor analysis. Certainly, one can easily imagine circumstances in which one of n  objects is chosen as most preferred by all m subjects, or in which one out of n individuals tests higher than all others on  all m tests.  ' Note, though, that this metric rigidity of the solution in the case of nonmetric factor analysis holds only when there are  at least two underlying dimensions. There is a curious discontinuity here in that no metric information can be extracted when  the points vary along but a single dimension. For, as was noted earlier, in the absence of error all orders will necessarily  coincide in that case.  METRIC STRUCTURES IN ORDINAL DATA 305  MONTE CARLO EXPLORATION OF INTERMEDIATE CASES  Again, the presently most feasible means of gaining definite information about the metric determinacy of solutions for values  of n and m in the range of practical interest appeared to be an empirical exploration on the computer. As before, then,  ordinal data obtained from two-dimensional configurations of random points (and directions) were supplied to the computer  program, described above, for nonmetric factor analysis. The objective was to evaluate the extent to which the configuration  reconstructed by the computer on the basis of the ordinal information was affinely equivalent to the "true" metric  configuration.  A number of such true configurations were artificially constructed on the basis of the random coordinates of Coombs and Kao  (1960) used above in the similar examination of the analysis of proximities. This time, however, only the first 40 of the 45  pairs of coordinates were used. Of these, the first 20 were taken to define the positions of 20 points in a two-dimensional  plane, and the last 20 were taken to define the positions of the termini of 20 vectors emanating from the origin (at the  center of the configuration of points) in that same two-dimensional space. (Although these 20 vectors thus varied randomly in  length as well as direction, only the directional information was actually used.)  Five different sets of coordinates of this sort were provided by the five "circularly" permuted and renumbered sets used in  the earlier Monte Carlo investigation of analysis of proximities. The five pairs of coordinates that had originally appeared  last in the first set of 45, however, were also removed from whatever positions they had in the four permuted sets. (The five  additional sets constructed for the earlier investigation by reversing the order of the pairs were not included in this new  exploration.) Finally, from each of the five permuted sets, nine different subsets were constructed by taking all combinations  made up of the first 5, 10, or 20 points together with the first 5, 10, or 20 vectors. There were, thus, altogether 5 x (3 X  3) or 45 artificially constructed random configurations.  For each of these 45 true configurations, then, scalar products were calculated between all directions and all points (where,  for the purposes of the calculation, both were treated as vectors). Next, for each direction, the rank order of the  projections of the points in that direction was determined from the ordering (with respect to algebraic size) of all scalar  products formed on the basis of the vector defining that direction. Finally, the iterative process of nonmetric factor  analysis was applied to each of these resulting sets of purely ordinal data in order to find a metric configuration that  accounted for the data in the sense of reducing the measure of discrepancy (4) to zero-or at least to .01 (as previously  explained in footnote 6).  As before, the degree of congruence between the original true configuration (of points and directions) and the configuration  reconstructed by the computer provides an indication of the extent to which an underlying metric structure is really contained  306 SHEPARD  in the purely ordinal data. One measure of accuracy that seems rather natural, here, is the root-mean-square, over all m  directions, of the product-moment correlation between the projections of the true points on each true vector and the  projections of the reconstructed points on each corresponding reconstructed vector. For each combination of values for n and  m, column A in Table 2 presents the smallest of the five "rms" correlations found, in this way, for the five different  solutions obtained under that combination. Column B, then, presents the root-mean-square of all five of those same rms  correlations.  TABLE 2  MONTE CARLO RESULTS FOR NONMETRIc FACTOR ANALYSIS:  ACCURACY OF RECONSTRUCTION AS A FUNCTION OF THE NUMBER OF POINTS, n, AND NUMBER OF DIRECTIONS (OR VECTORS), M  A B C D E F    Correlation Coefficient Coefficient  n m min r between of agreement of agreement    projections between points between vectors    rms r min c, rms cD min crms cv  5 5 .738 .937 .707 .925 .519 .881  5 10 .927 .967 .977 .981 .799 .919  5 20 .963 .981 .970 .988 .903 .959  10 5 .972 .985 .952 .976 .950 .985  10 10 .991 .995 .986 .993 .991 .996  10 20 .986 .996 .981 .995 .987 .996  20 5 .982 .992 .973 .983 .991 .997  20 10 .993 .993 .979 .989 .998 .998  20 20 .995 .998 .992 .997 .999 .999  It seemed desirable, too, to compute another measure of agreement that would be more comparable to the correlations between  interpoint distances presented earlier for the case of analysis of proximities (Table 1). Of course, precisely the measure  used there is not appropriate here, since it is invariant only under similarity transformations-not under afflne  transformations. Fortunately, J. D. Carroll (personal communication) has worked out a more suitable method of assessing  agreement between configurations of the present type. He defines, as his coefficient of agreement between  METRIC STRUCTURES IN ORDINAL DATA 307  the true and reconstructed configurations of points, the value of the expression  after the reconstructed configuration has been subjected to the affine transformation that maximizes this coefficient. Here  yz; and yz represent the coordinate for the point i on the jth axis of an underlying coordinate system for the reconstructed  and true configurations, respectively. (The origin is taken to be at the centroid of they* .) This measure is invariant under  similarity transformations of the true configuration and affine transformations of the reconstructed configuration. Moreover,  since the square of this measure can be interpreted as the fraction of the variance of the coordinates that has been accounted  for in the reconstruction, it is essentially like a correlation coefficient. The smallest of the five different coefficients  of this kind is given, for each combination of values for n and m in column C of Table 2. The root-mean-square of all five  such coefficients is given, for each of these same combinations, in column D.  Carroll has also defined a coefficient of agreement between the directions of the true and reconstructed vectors, c. It is  simply the mean cosine of the angle between corresponding vectors in the original and reconstructed configurations-after the  reconstructed vectors have been subjected to the inverse adjoint of the affine transformation that was found to maximize the  first coefficient, c.,, defined by (5). As before, the smallest coefficient in each set of five is presented in column E,  while the rms average of all five is presented in column F.  The Monte Carlo results summarized in Table 2 provide empirical confirmation for the theoretically expected relation. For all  three types of measures, the metric precision of the reconstruction systematically increases with both the number of points,  n, and the number of directions, m. The smallest coefficients obtained range between .50 and .75, for only 5 points and 5  directions, but are all above .99, for as many as 20 points and 20 directions. Again, the metric uniqueness that is strictly  attainable only as a theoretical limit evidently can be closely approached within a range (of n and m) that is readily  realizable in practice. Again, however, these results are based upon random distributions of points and vectors. In some  practical applications the vectors may tend to cluster in one sector of the space (corresponding, perhaps to a general  evaluative direction) and, in such applications, metric indeterminacy may arise more often than the results of the above Monte  Carlo explorations suggest.  308 SHEPARD  IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS  The geometrical arguments and Monte Carlo explorations reported here have indicated that, as the number of nonmetric  constraints becomes sufficiently large with respect to the number of parameters of the spatial representation, the  representation is determined essentially metrically; specifically, to within a similarity transformation (in the case of  analysis of proximities) or an afflne transformation (in the case of factor analysis). In the first case, an ordinal scale of  proximity can be converted into a ratio scale of interpoint distance and, in the second case, several ordinal scales can  simultaneously be converted into as many interval scales. The following sections take up some further questions concerning the  generality and implications of these results.  INFLUENCE OF ERROR IN REAL DATA  The mathematical and Monte Carlo results have both been confined to artificial cases in which a perfect account of the given  ordinal data was attainable in a space of low dimensionality. Owing to the inevitable contribution of error in real  psychological data, on the other hand, one must be content with an imperfect solution. The question therefore arises as to  whether the above conclusions about the recoverability of metric structures also applies when the data from which we start are  not only merely ordinal but fallible as well.  The evident success of numerous applications to real psychological data indicates that this is, in fact, the case (e.g.,  Klemmer and Shrimpton, 1963; Kruskal, 1964a; Shepard, 1962b, 1963, 1964, 1965). In the case of analysis of proximities,  Kruskal (personal communication) has also invesitgated the robustness of the solution by imposing random deviations on  artificially generated data. Generally, a moderately high level of added "noise" can be sustained before the recovered  configuration suffers serious deterioration. Again, since the overdetermination of the solution apparently derives from the  domination of n2 over n (or, more strictly, of n(n - 1)/2 over n - k for a fixed number of dimensions, k), the invulnerability  to error should increase with the number of points, n.  Indeed, the analysis can be regarded, in part, as a technique for purifying noisy data. Since errors often are relatively  independent, their effects tend to cancel out in a solution of small dimensionality. Just as a regression line is usually a  better predictor of further observations than the individual points upon which it was based, a spatial representation of the  type considered here can be both more reliable and more valid than the fallible data from which it was derived.  Of course it is always possible to add so much noise that the underlying structure is completely obscured. This situation  (which, fortunately, has seldom arisen in practice) can be recognized by the fact that quite different but locally optimum con-  METRIC STRUCTURES IN ORDINAL DATA 309  figurations can be found for which the measure of departure from monotonicity has approximately the same (nonzero) value.  CONTRIBUTION TO THE PROBLEMS OF REDUCTION AND INTERPRETATION OF DATA  An important advantage of a satisfactory solution, when it does prove attainable, is that it furnishes a more parsimonious  representation of the original data. In the case of the analysis of proximities, for example, the initially given n(n - 1)/2  proximity measures can then be reconstructed from just n - k coordinates (where, generally the number of dimensions, k, is  much smaller than n). Thus, in a reanalysis of Ekman's (1954) data on the subjective similarities among 14 colors, it was  found that the 28 coordinates for the colors in a two-dimensional solution (resembling the conventional "color circle")  provided a sufficient basis for the essential reconstruction of all 91 of the original similarity estimates (Shepard, 1962b).  Such a complete reconstruction could not, of course, be achieved on the basis of a purely nonmetric solution (like that  described by Coombs, 1964, p. 493) which, as was already noted, cannot contain all of the original information.  The reduction to a more concise representation is not, in itself, the only advantage to be gained from such an analysis  however. Perhaps even more important is the finding that such a representation sometimes provides an insight into the number  and nature of the psychologically important dimensions underlying the empirical data. Thus, a "proximity" analysis of  Rothkopf's (1957) data on confusions among all 36 dot-and-dash signals of the Morse code, indicated that the subjects'  responses were primarily governed by just two dimensions of the signals; viz., the total number of components (whether dots or  dashes), and the ratio of dots to dashes among these components (Shepard, 1963, Fig. 2). Likewise, in a more recent analysis  of confusions among 10 vowel phonemes, a three-dimensional solution was obtained in which the three axes were found (after  rotation) to agree closely with the frequencies of the first three formants (or resonances) of these sounds as measured  physically (Shepard, 1964).  A purely nonmetric solution of the type proposed by Hays can in principle provide information, too, about the underlying  dimensions (cf., Coombs, 1964, p. 486). However, although alternative nonmetric solutions can be obtained for the same data,  there seems to be no basis for rotating axes so as to achieve correspondences of the kind just mentioned in connection with  the metric solution for the 10 vowel sounds (see Coombs, 1964, p. 494). This, again, is a curious aspect of the nonmetric  solutions, since the data themselves are strictly invariant under orthogonal rotations of the underlying configuration (from  which those data are presumed to derive). The practical consequence is that, unless the axes of the solution happen to come  out with a lucky orientation, nonmetric solutions in three or more dimensions may be relatively difficult to interpret. In the  case of metric solutions, on the other hand, objective procedures are already available for rotating axes so as to facilitate  interpretation (Carroll and Chang, 1964a; Miller, Shepard, and Chang, 1964).  310 SHEPARD  Whether the method of nonmetric factor analysis considered here will also prove useful in the reduction and interpretation of  real psychological data remains to be seen as this new method is applied, too, to empirical data of substantive interest.  EXTENSION TO OTHER CASES  Analysis of proximities and nonmetric factor analysis are not the only cases in which the number of given nonmetric  constraints can exceed the number of parameters of the solution. Possibly, therefore, other classes of ordinal data may also  be found capable of yielding essentially metric solutions.  Pair-comparison data represent one class that has already been examined from this viewpoint. Klemmer and Shrimpton (1963), for  example, modified the method originally proposed for the analysis of proximity measures (Shepard, 1962a) in such a way that it  will converge, when possible, upon a one-dimensional preference scale in which the distance between the positions of two  objects, A and B, on the scale is monotonically related to the absolute difference between the number of subjects who choose A  over B and the number of subjects who choose B over A. This method avoids the strong parametric assumptions of Thurstone's  Case V. Yet, when it was applied to Thurstone's own data (Thurstone, 1959), it yielded a scale that correlated .999 with the  scale that he had originally obtained by means of a Case V analysis. Moreover, the minute changes that did appear in the new  scale evidently were in the direction of permitting a slightly better reconstruction of the original data (Klemmer and  Shrimpton, 1963, p. 167).  Carroll and Chang (1964b) have developed a computer program for the analysis of pair-comparison choices that differs from that  of Klemmer and Shrimpton in that it is specifically designed to provide solutions in two or more dimensions and, thereby, to  account for reliable differences in the preferences of different subjects. The basic model closely resembles that for the  variety of nonmetric factor analysis already considered above, except that the initial data consist (for each subject) othe  individual pair-comparison choices (e.g., a + 1 or - 1 for each ordered pair of stimuli) rather than a single rank order of  all n stimuli. Correspondingly, the algorithm, instead of minimizing the measure of discrepancy adopted for nonmetric factor  analysis (4), minimizes the sum of squared distances between those projections (of individual pairs of points on individual  axes) that do not fall in the pair-wise order prescribed by the data. Under appropriate conditions such a minimization has  been found capable of recovering metric configurations (again, to within an affine transformation). As in the case of  nonmetric factor analysis, however, the method seems to be somewhat susceptible to degeneracy (as, for example, when one  stimulus is preferred to all others by all subjects).  A final example concerns a somewhat different type of application. Iterative algorithms resembling some of those mentioned  here have recently been employed to transform data matrices so as to achieve an "additive structure" (Goode, 1964;  METRIC STRUCTURES IN ORDINAL DATA 311  Kruskal, 1965; Morey and Yntema, 1965, Appendix). The objective is to find a monotonic transformation on the entries of the  matrix such that each transformed entry can be expressed, as nearly as possible, as a sum of two numbers; one characterizing  its row and one characterizing its column. Tversky (1964) has established a necessary and sufficient condition for the  achievement of additivity in this sense, and Kruskal (1965) has actually obtained solutions that proved to be essentially  unique (to within a linear transformation). Again, however, there are degenerate cases that fail to yield a properly  determinate solution (as when all entries in one row or column of the matrix exceed all other entries).  When a determinate solution is achievable, the transformation to additivity provides a very general method for removing  undesired interaction effects in the analysis of variance. For "nondegenerate" matrices of sufficient size it can also yield,  at the same time, a conversion from a purely ordinal scale of the cell entries to an essentially unique interval scale. Thus  another type of application of algorithms of this kind is to the construction of metric scales in accordance with the general  scheme of "simultaneous conjoint measurement" proposed by Luce and Tukey (1964).  Incidentally, an important aspect of the scheme proposed by Luce and Tukey, as they point out, is that it replaces "derived  measurement," which has been characteristic of the behavioral sciences, with "fundamental measurement," which was previously  restricted to the physical sciences (see Suppes and Zinnes, 1963). However all of the methods considered here for extracting  metric representations from ordinal data would seem to qualify as fundamental measurement in this sense.  IMPLICATIONS FOR A GENERAL APPROACH TO PSYCHOLOGICAL SCALING  In surveying the various approaches that have been taken to problems of psychological scaling, one can discern two rather  broad categories which might be characterized briefly, if somewhat loosely, as the metric and the nonmetric. Thurstone and  Stevens are both proponents of metric approaches in this sense, although they advocated procedures that differ widely in  almost every other respect. Indeed, in one form or another metric approaches have pervaded almost the entire field of  psychological scaling-as it is represented, for example, in the comprehensive treatments of Guilford (1954) and Torgerson  (1958). Nevertheless a few investigators, most notably Coombs and his associates (but, in some instances, Guttman (1944) and  others, too), have been exploring alternative approaches that are essentially nonmetric in character. Indeed, I expect to see  increasing use made of nonmetric methods owing to the recent publication of Coombs' (1964) signal book.  The fact that metric approaches have generally prevailed until now probably stems in large part from an understandable desire  to imitate the procedures of measurement that have proved so successful in physics. Unfortunately, however, the attempted  imitation has generally failed to capture an essential ingredient of physical  312 SHEPARD  measurement. As Suppes and Zinnes (1963) and Luce and Tukey (1964) point out, physical variables such as length, mass, and  time have submitted to what they term "fundamental measurement," whereas psychological variables such as brightness, loudness,  pitch, etc., have generally yielded to metric determination only in the sense of "derived measurement." Moreover, the  construction of metric scales in the behavioral sciences has usually depended upon assumptions of a rather strong and often  dubious character.  The approach exemplified by Thurstone (and, of course, Fechner) takes the limited reliability or resolving power of the  subjects as basic. Hence the kind of scale that is sought is one in which the variability of the subjects' responses is  uniformly related to the unit of measurement over the whole range of the scale. Typically specific distributional assumptions  are required, as in Case V of Thurstone's "law of comparative judgment" wherein the internal "processes" resulting from all  stimuli are assumed to be independent and normally distributed with the same variance in the metric of the underlying scale  (Thurstone, 1927). Likewise, the alternative metric model for treating the same type of data, sometimes referred to as the  Bradley-TerryLuce model, is based upon assumptions that-although different-are of comparable metric rigidity (see Bradley and  Terry, 1952; Luce, 1959, pp. 27, 55). Apart from questions of the empirical validity of such strong assumptions, they  sometimes lead to purely logical difficulties. In applications to multidimensional scaling (Torgerson, 1952), for example,  Suppes and Zinnes (1963, p. 60) have noted that the assumption of normality presupposes the puzzling possibility of negative  interstimulus distances.  Then too, as Stevens (1957, p. 175) has argued, it is not clear that we really should be happy with a scale that is  constructed solely in terms of units of resolving power or error variability (any more than a physicist should be happy with a  scale of voltage constructed solely on the basis of empirically determined inaccuracies in the positioning of the pointer of a  voltmeter). Other considerations, notably the simplicity of the laws relating the measured quantity to other quantities,  should presumably be considered of overriding importance.  In his program to abandon resolving power as a basis for psychological measurement, Stevens has made some use of such  interrelations among measured variables. Still the program, at its philosophical basis, seems to place rather heavy reliance  on the assumption that subjects' direct, subjective estimates can be accepted at numerical face value. The potential danger  here exists, moreover, even when the subjects produce their magnitude estimates in non-numerical form. In an experiment by  Indow and Kanazawa (1960, p. 334), for example, non-numerical "ratio estimates" of the distances among some multidimensional  stimuli were found to be nonlinearly related to interstimulus distances on a true ratio scale-i.e., distances in the recovered  Euclidean representation. 8  e This internal evidence was made possible by-and constitutes further evidence for-the  great extent to which the ordinal constraints overdetermine such a multidimensional structure.  METRIC STRUCTURES IN ORDINAL DATA 313  It is probably the desire to avoid just these sorts of problems that has motivated Coombs and others to explore nonmetric  approaches. There is, first of all, the highly plausible presumption that simple, qualitative judgments can usually be madenot  only with greater ease and assurance-but also with greater reliability and validity than numerical or quantitative judgments.  In addition, there is the hope that such "nonmetric" judgments, when combined in sufficient quantity, will be found to entail  a definite and useful scaling representation without recourse to strong (and hence vulnerable) assumptions. Finally, such an  approach can be based either upon direct subjective judgments, as advocated by Stevens (1957), or upon error or confusion  data, as might be desired in those applications expressly concerned with discriminability (e.g., Coombs, 1964, pp. 480-487;  Rothkopf, 1957; Shepard, 1958, 1963, 1965).  There is, however, one drawback to at least the multidimensional methods that are described in Coombs' book. It is simply  this: Although those methods start with data of an appropriately simple form, they do not always extract all of the  information that is reliably contained even in such ordinal data. Thus the methods proposed for multidimensional scaling on  the basis of proximity measures (Coombs, 1964, Chs. 20-22), for multidimensional "unfolding" (Ch. 7), and for nonmetric factor  analysis (Ch. 12), all seem to have been developed under the assumption that, from "nonmetric" data, one can only recover a  nonmetric solution.  The results reported here, on the other hand, show that under many different conditions of both practical and theoretical  interest, unique metric representations are actually entailed by the kinds of ordinal data considered by Coombs. The fact that  such representations are essentially unique was largely unappreciated until recently. This is probably attributable to the  fact that the conversion of these latent constraints into explicit and recognizable structures required iterative computations  that could not even be attempted, in many instances, except on a high-speed digital computer. The recent appearance of a  number of computer programs for the extraction of metric structure from ordinal data raises the hope that useful metric  representations will now prove attainable without resorting to the strong and controversial assumptions that have  traditionally seemed unavoidable in the behavioral sciences.  REFERENCES  ABELSON, R. P. Efficient conversion of nonmetric information into metric information. American Psychologist, 1959, 14, 406.  (Abstract)  ABELSON, R. P., AND TUKEY, J. W. Efficient conversion of nonmetric information into metric information. Proceedings American  Statistical Association Meetings, Social Statistics Section, 1959, 226-230.  ABELSON, R. P., AND TUKEY, J. W. Efficient utilization of nonnumerical information in quantitative analysis: General theory  and the case of simple order. Annals Mathematical Statistics, 1963, 34, 1347-1369.  AUMANN, R. J., AND KRUSKAL, J. B. The coefficients in an allocation problem. Naval Research Logistics Quarterly, 1958, 5,  111-123.  314  SHEPARD  BENNETT, J. F. Determination of the number of independent parameters of a score matrix from the examination of rank orders.  Psychometrika, 1956, 21, 383-393.  BENNETT, J. F., AND HAYS, W. L. Multidimensional unfolding: Determining the dimensionality of ranked preference data.  Psychometrika, 1960, 25, 27-43.  BENZI`CRI, J. P. Analyse factorielle des proximites. Publications de ('Institute de Statistique de l'Universite de Paris, 1.  1964, 13; II. 1965, 14.  BIRKHOFF, G., AND MAcLANE, S. A survey of modern algebra. (First edition.) New York: MacMillan, 1941.  BRADLEY, R. A., AND TERRY, M. E. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs. 1. The method of paired comparisons. Biometrika,  1952, 39, 324-345.  CAMPBELL, N. R. Physics: The elements. Vol. 1. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer. Press, 1920. (Reprinted as Foundations of Science:  The philosophy of theory aad experiment. New York: Dover, 1957.)  CAMPBELL, N. R. An account of the principles of measurement and calculation. London: Longmans, Green, 1928.  CARROLL, J. D., AND CHANG, J.-J. A general index of nonlinear correlation and its application to the interpretation of  multidimensional scaling solutions. American Psychologist, 1964, 19, 540. (Abstract) (a)  CARROLL, J. D., AND CHANG, J.-J. Non-parameterc multidimensional analysis of paired-comparisons data. Paper presented at the  joint meeting of the Psychometric and Psychonomic Societies in Niagara Falls, October 9, 1964. (b)  COOMBS, C. H. Psychological scaling without a unit of measurement. Psychological Review, 1950, 57, 145-158.  COOMBS, C. H. A theory of data. New York: Wiley, 1964.  COOMBS, C. H., AND KAO, R. C. On a connection between factor analysis and multidimensional unfolding. Psychometrika, 1960, 25,  219-231.  COXETER, H. S. M. Introduction to geometry. New York: Wiley, 1961.  EKMAN, G. Dimensions of color vision. ,journal of Psychology, 1954, 38, 467-474.  FAGOT, R. F. A method for ordered metric scaling by comparison of intervals. Psychometrika, 1959, 24, 157-168.  GOODE, F. M. Numerical analysis methods of scaling. Dittoed notes, University of Michigan, May, 1957.  GOODE, F. M. Interval scale representation of ordered metric scales. Dittoed manuscript, University of Michigan, May, 1962.  GOODE, F. M. An algorithm for the additive conjoint measurement of finite data matrices. American Psychologist, 1964, 19, 579.  (Abstract)  GUILFORD, J. P. Psychometric methods. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1954.  GUTTMAN, L. A basis for scaling qualitative data. American Sociological Review, 1944, 9, 139-150. HAMMERSLEY, J. M. The  distribution of distance in a hypersphere. Annals Mathematical Statistics, 1950, 21, 447-452.  HARMAN, H. H. Modern factor analysis. Chicago: Univer. Chicago Press, 1960.  INDOw, T., AND KANAZAWA, K. Multidimensional mapping of Munsell colors varying in hue, chroma, and value. Yournal of  Experimental Psychology, 1960, 59, 330-336.  KLEIN, F. Elementary mathematics from the advanced standpoint: Geometry. New York: Dover, 1939 (paperback edition).  KLEMMER, E. T., AND SHRIMPTON, N. W. Preference scaling via a modification of Shepard's proximity analysis method. Human  Factors, 1963, 5, 163-168.  KRUSKAL, J. B. Multidimensional scaling by optimizing goodness of fit to a non-metric hypothesis. Psychometrika, 1964, 29,  1-27. (a)  METRIC STRUCTURES IN ORDINAL DATA 315  KRUSKAL, J. B. Non-metric multidimensional scaling: A numerical method. Psychometrika, 1964, 29, 115-129. (b)  KRUSKAL, J. B. Analysis of factorial experiments by estimating monotone transformations. Journal of the Royal Statistical  Society (Series B), 1965, 27, 251-263.  LuCE, R. D. Individual choice behavior. New York: Wiley, 1959.  LuCE, R. D., AND TUKEY, J. W. Simultaneous conjoint measurement: A new type of fundamental measurement. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 1964, 1, 1-27.  MILLER, J. E., SHEPARD, R. N., AND CHANG, J.-J. An analytical approach to the interpretation of multidimensional scaling  solutions. American Psychologist, 1964, 579-580. (Abstract) MOREY, J. L., AND YNTEMA, D. B. Experiments on systems. In J.  Spiegel, and D. E. Walker (Eds.) Second congress on the information system sciences, Washington, D. C. : Spartan, 1965.  PEARSON, K. Tables of the incomplete beta function. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer. Press, 1934. ROTHKOPF, E. Z. A measure of  stimulus similarity and errors in some paired-associate learning tasks. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1957, 53, 94-101.  SHEPARD, R. N. Stimulus and response generalization during paired-associates learning. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Yale  University, 1955.  SHEPARD, R. N. Stimulus and response generalization: Tests of a model relating generalization to distance in psychological  space. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1958, 55, 509-523. SHEPARD, R. N. The analysis of proximities: Multidimensional  scaling with an unknown distance function. I. Psychometrika, 1962, 27, 125-140. (a)  SHEPARD, R. N. The analysis of proximities: Multidimensional scaling with an unknown distance function. II. Psychometrika,  1962, 27, 219-246. (b)  SHEPARD, R. N. Analysis of proximities as a technique for the study of information processing in man. Human Factors, 1963, 5,  33-48.  SHEPARD, R. N. Extracting latent structure from behavioral data. In Proceedings of the 1964 symposium on digital computing,  Bell Telephone Laboratories, May, 1964.  SHEPARD, R. N. Approximations to uniform gradients of generalization by monotone transformations of scale. In D. Mostofsky  (Ed.), Stimulus generalization, Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Univer. Press, 1965. Pp. 94-110.  SHEPARD, R. N., AND KRUSKAL, J. B. Nonmetric methods for scaling and for factor analysis. American Psychologist, 1964, 19,  557-558. (Abstract)  SIEGEL, S. A method for obtaining an ordered metric scale. Psychometrika, 1956, 21, 207-216. STEVENS, S. S. Mathematics,  measurement, and psychophysics. In S. S. Stevens (Ed.), Handbook of experimental psychology. New York: Wiley, 1951. Pp. 1-49.  STEVENS, S. S. On the psychophysical law. Psychological Review, 1957, 64, 153-181.  SUPPES, P., AND WINET, M. An axiomatization of utility based on the notion of utility differences. Management Science, 1955,  1, 259-270.  SUPPES, P., AND ZINNES, J. L. Basic measurement theory. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of  mathematical psychology. Vol. 1. New York: Wiley, 1963. Pp. 1-76.  THRALL, R. M., AND TORNHEIM, L. Vector spaces and matrices. New York: Wiley, 1957. THURSTONE, L. L. A law of comparative  judgment. Psychological Review, 1927, 34, 273-286. THURSTONE, L. L. Multiple factor analysis. Chicago: Univer. Chicago Press,  1947. THURSTONE, L. L. The measurement of values. Chicago: Univer. Chicago Press, 1959. TORGERSON, W. S. Multidimensional  scaling: I. Theory and method. Psychometrika, 1952, 17, 401-419.  TORGERSON, W. S. Theory and methods of scaling. New York: Wiley, 1958.  TvERSKY, A. Finite additive structures. Michigan Mathematical Psychology Program Technical Report MMPP 64-6, August, 1964.  RECEIVED: March 1, 1965  48o-6