10.1016/0022-2496(66)90025-3
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 3, 470-483 (1966)  A Markov Model for Order of Emission in Free Recall'  THADDEUS M. COWAN*  Department of Psychology, Albion College ,2 Albion, Michigan  A stochastic model is described which predicts the kinds of words that will appear in given recall positions. The emission of  words in free recall is regarded as a Markov chain where the category of the recalled word is determined by the kind of word  preceding it. The model employs three parameters based on associative measures between and within the categories of stimulus  words. These parameters can be estimated by any one of the several existing verbal association indices. An experiment is  described which tests the model. In spite of the nonmonotonic form of the data, the model proves to be a valuable predictor  when only one if its three parameters is made free for fitting.  Unlike other models of recall which explain changes from one trial to another (e.g., Bush and Mosteller, 1955; Miller and  McGill, 1952; Waugh and Smith, 1962), the present model seeks to describe the kinds of words that will appear in given recall  positions during the first recall trial. The emission of words in the first trial is regarded as a Markov process. The  occurrence of a given type of word in one recall position is seen as being determined by the kind of word which immediately  precedes it.  The type of experiment appropriate to the model is described as follows. Words from a stimulus list, one which preferably  exceeds the immediate memory span, are presented singly. The entire list is given a number of times, each time in a different  order. The purpose of the multiple random orders is to eliminate as much as possible the serial position effect. After the  last presentation the subject is asked to recall the words in the order they occur to him. Such an experiment is similar to  those used to demonstrate associative clustering. Bousfield (1953) and others have shown that stimulus words belonging to the  same category tend to appear together in recall. Theoretically, these words occur together because there are associative  connections between them. The measure of these connections should indicate the extent to which  * Now at Oklahoma State University.  1 A somewhat shortened form of this paper was given at the 1965 Midwestern Psychological Association meeting.  2 The major portion of the work represented by this paper was done while the author was at the University of Connecticut. The  author wishes to thank Dr. David Zeaman and Dr. Betty House of the University of Connecticut for their valuable criticisms.  470  MARKOV MODEL IN FREE RECALL 471  one word will occur as a response to another. The present model is based on the assumption that such associative bonds exist  and that they are instrumental in ordering the emission of word sequences.  THE MODEL  A list of stimulus items is divided into two groups. The division need not necessarily be equal. One group is designated as  Category 1 (Ci), the second as Category 2 (C2). The "strength" of Cl or C2 is defined in terms of the associative connections  which exist among its members. For example, Cl words may be names of animals while C2 items are selected randomly. If Cl  contains more associative connections between its members than C2 then Cl would be designated as the "stronger" of the two  categories. The recall of a strong category word might lead to another word in the same category by virtue of the existing  associative interconnections. The recall of a weak category word might lead to another word from its category for the same  reason. There exist then at least two sets of associative interconnections which may or may not differ in strength-those  belonging to Cl (Cl -> Cl) and those belonging to C2 (C2 -~ C2). These will be designated as within-category associations.  A third set of connections exists between the two categories (Cl --* C2 or C2 -~ Cl). These will be labeled between-category  associations. They determine the extent to which the recall of a word from one category will elicit a word from the other  category. The strength of the between-category connections indicates the tendency with which a word from Cl will elicit a word  from C2 . It also indicates the extent to which a word from C2 will evoke a word from Cl , since these associations are  assumed for the moment to be bidirectional.  The model does not attempt to predict the category of the first recalled word. In spite of the multiple random presentations  of the stimulus items, primacy or recency is almost certain to influence the outcome of at least the first response. The  recall process during the first trial, then, might proceed as follows. If the first word is a Cl word, it may elicit another  Cl word by means of a within-category association, or it may give rise to a word from C2 by way of a between-category  association. Given that the word first recalled belongs to Cl , the likelihood of a CI word, for example, occurring second is  determined by the probability that a within-category association will be made. This probability is given as follows:  P(C1 i Ci) _ -ff(Cl - Cl)  .ff(Cl - Cl) + -ff(Cl - C2)  The probabilities P(C2 1 Cl), P(C, I C2), and P(C2 1 C2) are similarly defined.  472 COWAN  The within-category and between-category association measures are almost certain to be different for each word. That is, the  within-category association measure between Cla and the remaining Cl words will have a different value than that between Clb  and the remaining Cl words. It is necessary to introduce the simplifying assumption that each C, word is indistinguishable  from all other Cl words. Similarly, each C2 word is assumed to be no different than every other C2 word. Given these  assumptions, the within-category and between-category connections are the same for each word in a given word class.  The problem of estimating the measures of within-category and between-category associations for any Cl and C2 word becomes one  of determining the expected values for these measures. This is facilitated by an analytic method suggested by Pollio (1963).  The stimulus words are made to form a Cl x Cl , a C2 x C2 , and a Cl x C2 matrix (Fig. 1). In each cell of each matrix is  recorded some measure of association  CIO) C1 (2) Cl(3)  Ci(ci)  Cuu CR2) Cu3) ' . CI(q)  FIG. 1. A C1 x C, matrix used to aid in the assessment of a,. Similar matrices are used to determine the values of a2 and S.  between the word pair represented by the cell. The sum of the entries in the Cl x Cl and C2 x C2 matrices is labeled ai and a2  , respectively. The sum of the entries in the Cl x C2 matrix is symbolized by P. The mean or expected association value  between any Cl word occurring first in recall and the remaining Cl words is given by allcl , where cl represents the total  number of words in the category. Likewise, the expected number of within-category interconnections between any C2 word  occurring in the first recall position and all other C2 words is given by a,lc2, with c2 being the total number of C2 words.  The extent to which any Cl word will lead to a C2 word is given by Plc, . The appropriate estimate of the between-category  connections between a C2 word and Cl is #1c2 .  MARKOV MODEL IN FREE RECALL 473  It might be noted that the measures of association between word pairs can be estimated by the methods reviewed by Marshall and  Cofer (1963).3 Some of these measures are more appropriate than other for the present model, however. Earlier it was assumed  that the association between word pairs is bidirectional. This assumption simplifies the model and is based on the success of  such indices as the mutual frequency (mutual relatedness) score and the stimulus equivalence score as measures of association.  These measures imply bidirectionality. The mutual frequency score is the percentage of free associations in common with the  two words, and the stimulus equivalence score is merely the number of free associates the two words share.  With these estimates of the within-category and between-category associations, the probability that a Cl or C2 word will  follow a Cl or C2 word occurring first in recall can be determined. The probability of a Cl word following another Cl word,  for example, is  Iff(C, -> Cl) a1/C1 al  P(CI Cl) -C)l  ./#(C1 - Cl) + #(1 -i C2 al C1 + NI CI -1+9'  This probability does not remain constant throughout recall, however. It is rarely the case that a word appears twice in the  same recall. It is assumed, therefore, that once a word is recalled, it is not available for recall again during that trial.  As each recalled word is made unavailable, the within-category associations from one of the two sets and the between-category  associations diminish.  Suppose, for example, three Cl words and three C2 words are presented and complete recall follows. A possible recall sequence  is given in Fig. 2. Word a from Cl  F 2a  C2b  c2c  POSITION  I 2 3 4 5 6  FIG. 2. A possible recall sequence of six items. An item is recalled once  producing diminishing associations.  and only once  The usefulness of the methods reviewed by Marshall and Cofer as aids in estimating the parameters (a,, a2, and S) is largely  an empirical question. The investigator is not obligated to use these methods, and he may choose to render one, two, or all  three of these parameters free for fitting.  474 COWAN  appears in the first recall position, and at some later time in recall a second word from C,, word b is given. The number of  within-category connections encountered with the recall of b will be less than the number of within-category associations met  with the recall of a. This is evident since a will not appear as a possible response to b. The measure of within-category  associations which would normally occur between b and the remainder of C1 is reduced by the measure of the within-category  connection between b and a. Since it is assumed that all words in C1 are indistinguishable from each other, the association  between each pair in C is equal in value to the association between every other pair in C1 . The best estimate of this value  is given by a1/c1(c1 - 1). (The comparable estimate for connections between each pair in C2 and between each C1 and C2 word  pair is a2/c2(c2 - 1) and fl/cc, , respectively.) In the example above word a is unavailable as a response to word b. Hence  the measure of association normally expected between b and the remaining words in C1(i.e., (X1/c1) is reduced by a,fc1(c1 -  1). Therefore, the value of the within-category associations encountered by b equals  a1 a1 c1 cl(c1 - 1)  or  al  C12 - C1 (c1 - 2).  The expected value of C1--* C1 within-category associations encountered with the recall of a C1 word after r1 other C1 words  have been recalled can be shown to have a general solution. The formula for this expected number is given in Table 1. Also  presented in Table 1 are the general formulas for the other within-category and between-category associations. The terms r1  and r2 refer to the number of C1 and C  TABLE 1  FORMULAS FOR THE MEASURE OF ASSOCIATION FOLLOWING r1C1 WORDS AND r2C2 WORDS RECALLED  Association Formula  C1 -C al (c, - rl - 1) C12 - Cl  C1 -, C2  (C2 - r2)  CJC2  C2 -. C2 2 (C2 - r2 - 1) C22 - C2  C2 - C1 9 (cl - rl) CIC2  MARKOV MODEL IN FREE RECALL  475  words previously recalled (i.e., before the word given last). The following general transition probabilities can now be  defined.  P(CI I Cl) -&(C1-> Cl)   =   .#(Cl Cl) + -#(Cl - C2)   a1C2(Cl - (1)  rl - 1)   a1C2(Cl -   rl - 1) + N(C1 - 1) (C2 - r2)   - -   P(C2 I C1) N(C1 1) (C2 r2) (2)  __   a1C2(Cl -   rl - 1) + N(Cl - 1) (C2 - r2)   - -   P(C2 I C2) a2C1(C2 r2 1) (3)  __   a2C1(C2 -   r2 - 1) + NlC2 - 1) (Cl - rl)   - -   P(C1 C2) NC 2 1) (C1 rl)   = (4)  a2C11C2 -   r2 - 1) + N(C2 - 1) (Cl - rl)   These transition probabilities suggest a process with two states. If a word from C1 is recalled, the process is in state Cl .  If a C2 word is given, the process is in state C2. Since the transition probabilities vary as a function of the number of Cl  and C2 words previously recalled (not counting the word last recalled), the process is non-Markovian. If, however, the states  are redefined so that each state represents the type of word just recalled (Cl or C2) and the number of words of each type  previously recalled (r1 and r2), the process can be treated as a Markov chain (Feller, 1957, p. 370). In designating the  states, the notation C,)..,,) (or C2(,,,.n)) will represent the state in which a Cl (or C2) word has just been given with m Cl  words and n C2 words previously recalled. Thus state C2(5,4) implies the recall of a C2 word after five Cl words and four C2  words have been given.  The probabilities present in the transition matrix are derived from Eqs. 1-4 with the appropriate values for r1 and r2  inserted. Consider the probability of going from state C1(o.1) to state Cl(1.1) , for example. The initial state C,(o,l) is  one in which a Cl word is recalled after one C2 word only has occurred. A transition is made from a Cl word to another Cl  word, and the number of previously recalled Cl and C2 words involved in the computation of the transition probability is zero  and one, respectively. These values for r1 and r2 are appropriately substituted in Eq. 1 to give the probability P(C1)l.l) I  C,(o.l)), This transition probability remains constant throughout the process.  The transition matrix, matrix P, is apt to be very large. However, the analysis can be simplified considerable by arranging  the states so that P is in canonical form. That is, certain sets of states are arranged in such a way so that when one set is  reached the process cannot enter the states located below it. Such as matrix is given in Table 2. The states are numbered to  conserve space and divided into sets labeled I, II, III, etc.  48o-i6  TABLE 2  TRANSITION MATRIX P FOR THE FIRST FOUR WORDS RECALLED (X's signify nonzero entries)  o,  State No.  State IV III II I States No.  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1 2 3 4 5 6 1 2 3 4 1 2  IV  Cl)z.o) 1 C2,9.o, 2 Cl(21i) 3 C2(2.1) 4 Ci)1.2) 5 C2(i.2) 6 C1013) 7 0 0 C2co,s, 8  a  III z C1,2.0) 1 x x  C2,2.o, 2 x x Clu.i, 3  x x  C2,l.i, 4 X x  Ci,o.2, 5 X x  C2(a.2) 6 x x  II  Cl(i.o) 1 x x  C2(l.o) 2 x x  CUM) 3 x X  C2)o.1) 4 x x  I  CUM) 1 x x  C2)n,o) 2 x x  MARKOV MODEL IN FREE RECALL 477  These sets contain all the possible states involved in recalls of lengths designated by the set number. Note that the  transition probabilities associated with the states in set I lead only to set II; set II states lead only to set III; set III  leads to set IV, etc. The matrix in Table 2 is actually a submatrix of P formed by truncating P between any two adjacent sets  of states. Any submatrix so formed will be designated as matrix Q. A new matrix, matrix H, is defined as follows where I  represents an identity matrix.  H=(I-Q)-1-I.  It can be shown that H contains the set of probabilities describing the likelihood of ever entering one state from any other  (see Appendix). For instance, the probability of starting in C1(o.o) in the first recall position and ending in C2(3.2) in the  sixth recall position can be found in H. In this case H must be computed from a Q matrix which includes at least set VI.  The probability that a C1 word (or a C2 word) will occur in any recall position is also easily derived from H. For example,  the probability of a C2 word occurring sixth in recall, given that the first word recalled belongs to C1 , is found by summing  the probabilities in H between state C1(u,o) and the following states belonging to set VI: C20(,5) ) C2(1,4) ~ C2(2,3) I  C2(3,2) 1 C2(4,1) r and C2(5.0) . It was to this problem that the following experiment was directed in an attempt to  demonstrate the model.  EXPERIMENT  SUBJECTS  The subjects were 80 undergraduate summer session students. STIMULUS MATERIALS  The stimuli were 30 words selected from the Connecticut Free Association Norms (Bousfield, Cohen, Whitmarsh and Kincaid,  1961). Ten items represented a category of words relating to food. This category will be designated as C,. The remaining 20  words (C2) were miscellaneous. The stimulus words are given in Table 3. No attempt was made to control any other stimulus  feature such as word length, Thorndike-Lorge frequency count, etc. The 30 words were arranged in three random orders with the  restriction that no two C1 words ("food" words) would occur in immediate succession. The three random orders were put together  to form one continuous 90-word list.  PROCEDURE  The experiment was run as part of a regular classroom exercise. Each subject was given a differently ordered stimulus list  contained in a small hand-operated memory  478  COWAN  TABLE 3 STIMULUS WORDS  Category 1 Category 2   Apple Accordian Hammer  Cherry Bark Hospital  Doughnut Bed Lamp  Eat Bible Mail  Food Blotter Match  Grapefruit Copper Pail  Hungry Capsule Spear  Kitchen Door Spool  Olive Dress Web  Starving Globe Wheel  drum which the subject was to manipulate himself. The experimenter instructed the subjects that a signal would be given every  2.5 seconds, at which time the subject was to turn to the next item on the list. The subjects were given a practice list of  ten consecutively ordered single digit numbers. The subjects were then told that they would be given 30 different words and  that each different word would appear three times but not in immediate succession. They were told that when the end of the  list was reached they would be asked to recall as many of the 30 different words as they could. The subjects were asked to  write the words in the order in which they occurred to them, and write them in a column provided on the data sheet. Three  minutes were allowed for recall.  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  The measures of al , a2 , and # employed a modified form of an association index proposed by Bousfield, Steward, and Cowan  (1964). They used the number of free associates common to two or more words from a given category as a measure of stimulus  equivalence. The computed values for al , a,, and P were 267, 27, and 25, respectively. There are at least two possible  measures of cl and c2 . One is the number of Cl and C2 words presented to the subject. The other is the number of Cl and C2  words the subject recalls. When the first of these two measures was used, no combination of parameter values would produce a  function that fit the data. Consequently, the mean number of CI and C2 words recalled (6.30 and 10.49, respectively) were  taken as values for cl and c2 . It was necessary for reasons of computation to round these recall figures to the nearest whole  number. The values for al , u,, and fl given  MARKOV MODEL IN FREE RECALL 479  above were based on cl and c2 measures of 10 and 20, respectively. The more effective measures of cl and c2 were 6 and 10 and  the values of al , C,, and # were reduced accordingly. The adjusted values of al , a8 , and P were 89.0, 6.4, and 7.5 in that  order.  The model was made to generate the theoretical probabilities of a Cl word occurring in each of recall positions 2-14. The  procedure used in generating these probabilities was as follows. First a matrix of transition probabilities was formed with  the above parameter values. Matrix H was then computed.4 The probability of a Cl word occurring in recall positions I, II,  III, etc., when a Cl word occurred first, is given by the sum of the probabilities in matrix H associated with state Ci(o.o)  and each Cl state in set I, II, III, etc. The sum of the probabilities associated with state C2(o,o) and each Cl state in set  I, II, III, etc. gives P(C, I C2(o.o)) for each recall position.  If the data are divided between those subjects who recalled a Cl word first and those whose first recall was a C2 word, no  further manipulation of the model is necessary. However, for reasons that will become apparent, the unseparated data was  analyzed. This means that the likelihood of a Cl word occurring in each recall position must take into account the probability  of a Cl or C2 word being given first. As was noted previously, any attempt to give a rational estimate of the probability  associated with the first recall position is probably confounded by a recency phenomenon. Consequently, an empirical measure  was used here. The proportion of subjects giving a Cl and CZ word first was .275 and .725, respectively. Thus with these as  initial probabilities the theoretical probabilities of a Cl word occurring in each subsequent recall position, regardless of  the category of the first word, were found.  The approximation between the model and the data (proportions of subjects recalling a Cl word in each position) was  unacceptable. Consequently, a2 was made free, given several values, and a family of curves was generated. It was found that  when a2 was given a value of 48 a reasonable approximation of the data resulted as shown in Fig. 3. The goodness-of-fit was  made by inspection. This raises a question in regard to freeing this particular parameter (). A possible explanation is  suggested by the independent findings of Cofer and Reicher (1964) and Puff (1964). It was demonstrated that organization in  recall is influenced by organization in the stimulus list. That is, if words from a category occur together during the  presentation of the stimulus words, they will tend to appear together (cluster) in recall. It might be inferred that the  occurrence of items together during their presentation increases the association between them. This of course would increase  the value of a. In the present investigation the ten "food" words (Cl) were separated in the stimulus list but not the twenty  miscellaneous items (C2). Hence the C2 within-category associations (a,) would be greater in value than anticipated.  a The IBM 7040 at the University of Connecticut computation center was used to generate these theoretical values. The program  which computes matrix H is available to anyone interested in generating theoretical functions appropriate to their own  480 COWAN  1007  (D zn  JU Jv  Ua_ u  w 0 I- O z3.  6o  60  40  20  0 ~--i  0 2 3 4 5 6 7 10 I 'l 12 13 14 RECALL POSITION  FIG. 3. Predicted and observed percentage of subjects giving a C1 word as a function of recall position. Since the subject's  length of recall varied, the number of empirical measures per position drops from 80 to 62.  As a further demonstration of the model, the data were divided into those recalls with a C1 word appearing in the first  position and those with a C2 word occurring first. The mean number of Cl and C2 words recalled when a Ct item appeared first  was 6.73 and 10.36, respectively. When a C2 word occurred initially, the expected values of cl and c2 were 6.14 and 10.53 in  that order. For expediency the values of 6 and 10 were retained as recall values, and the measures of al , cx2, and P remained  unchanged. Again the probabilities of a word from C appearing in positions 2-14 were computed. The theoretical curves and the  empirical data are shown in Figs. 4 and 5. The differences between the two sets of empirical data are interesting in  themselves. They indicate that the characteristic of the first item recalled has con  100  .0 zM -J U J QU Uv WClCc u  F-. o  Z~ 0'  wC:) U  Cc - MU  Q  60  60  40  20  0 1 "/-T-,-,--mar  0 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 RECALL POSITION  FIG. 4. Predicted and observed percentage of subjects recalling a C, word when a C, word appeared first in recall. The number  of empirical measures drops from 22 to 17.  MARKOV MODEL IN FREE RECALL 481  siderable bearing on the course of recall that follows. The model reflects this difference and provides a reasonable fit of  the data.  There is an interesting feature of the model that lends itself to more general problems in recall. The model treats the values  of cl and c2 in terms of the number  100  Z Pcv _J U J QV  U v W Q.  LC U Zn 40  20  U  Q- - Q _  80  60~  0+-1  0 2 3 4 5 8 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 RECALL POSITION  FIG. 5. Predicted and observed percentage of subjects recalling a Cl word when a CQ word  appeared first in recall. The number of empirical measures drops from 58 to 45.  of stimulus items the subject recalls and not the number of stimulus items presented to the subject. This might indicate that  the subject receives, organizes, and recalls completely only a limited number of items from the stimulus list. An alternative  hypothesis, one which is not supported by the model, would be that the subject receives and organizes the entire list but  falls short of complete recall because of deterioration of the memory trace. If this second hypothesis were true, the most  appropriate measure of cl and c2 would be the number of CI and C2 items presented. This measure was found to be unsatisfactory.  It is felt that the model offers a novel approach to the analysis of organization in recall. It speaks well for the model that  the data, which seem to be nonmonotonic, are adequately approximated by the theoretical functions. Furthermore, the model  predicts these results with only one parameter free for fitting. The experiment described of course does not represent a  complete test of the model. Analyses of other phenomena such as clustering would offer further tests of some interest.  APPENDIX  DERIVATION OF MATRIX H  The transition matrix P is such that each set is entered once and only once, and after a set has been entered it is  immediately left. All sets then are transient except the  482 COWAN  set representing maximum recall. The states in this set are absorbing. The absorbing states in a situation with 15 C1 words  and 15 CZ words would be C1~14.1s) and Caus.14) . Recall cannot progress beyond these states and the set cannot be left.  Matrix P (which is in canonical form) is separated between two adjacent sets (e.g., sets I and II in Table 2). The point of  separation is determined by the desired recall length. The sets above the division (sets III, IV, V, VI, etc.) will not be  relevant to the analysis and will collectively be regarded as absorbing. The sets below the division (sets I and Il) remain  transient and collectively they form a matrix which will be designated as Q. Kemeny and Snell (1960) define H as a matrix  representing the set of probabilities that the process will ever go from any transient state to any other transient state, and  they offer the following theorem  where  H=(N-I)N;g,  or  N = (I - Q)-1 H = [(I - Q)-1- I] Nd9.  All nonzero entries in P lie entirely below the main diagonal. Thus the operation I - Q yields a matrix with ones in the main  diagonal and zeros above it. The inverse of this matrix is N which will also have ones in the main diagonal. Thus Nde (a  matrix with only the diagonal entries of N) is an identity matrix as is N-,,'. Hence  H=(I-Q)-I-I.  REFERENCES  BOUSFIELD, W. A. The occurrence of clustering in the recall of randomly arranged associates. Journal of General Psychology,  1953, 49, 229-240.  BOUSFIELD, W. A., COHEN, B. H., WHITMARSH, G. A., AND KINCAID, W. D. The Connecticut free associational norms. Technical  Report No. 35, Contract Nonr-631(40) between the Office of Naval Research and the University of Connecticut, 1961.  BOUSFIELD, W. A., STEWARD, JUDITH R., AND COWAN, T. M. The use of free associational norms for the prediction of clustering.  Journal of General Psychology, 1964, 70, 205-214.  BUSH, R. R., AND MOSTELLER, F. Stochastic models for learning. New York: Wiley, 1955. COFER, C. N., AND REICHER, G. M.  Clustering in free recall as a function of certain methodological variations. Technical Repo+t No. 3, Contract Nonr-(30)  between the Office of Naval Research and Pennsylvania State University, 1964.  FELLER, W. An introduction to probability theory and its applications. New York: Wiley, 1957. KEMENY, J. G., AND SNELL, J. L.  Finite markov chains. Princeton: D. Van Nostrand, 1960. MARSHALL, G. R., AND COFER, C. N. Association indices as measures of  word relatedness:  a summary and comparison of ten methods. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1963, 1, 408-421.  MARKOV MODEL IN FREE RECALL  483  MILLER, G. A., AND MCGILL, W. J. A statistical description of verbal learning. Psychometrika, 1952, 17, 369-396.  POLLIO, H. R. A simple matrix analysis of associative structure. ,journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1963, 2,  166-169.  PUFF, C. R. Clustering as a function of the sequential organization of stimulus word lists. Unpublished Doctoral dissertation.  University of Connecticut, 1964.  WAUGH, NANCY C., AND SMITH, J. E. K. A stochastic model for free recall. Psychometrika, 1962, 27, 141-154.  RECEIVED: May 17, 1965