10.1016/0022-2496(67)90030-2
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 4, 351-376 (1967)  Neural Counting Mechanisms and Energy Detection in Audition  WILLIAM J. MCGILL  University of California San Diego, California 91037  A remarkable correspondence between data on detectability of auditory signals in noise and theoretical analysis, based on  energy fluctuations of the stimulus, is considered in detail.  In the present treatment the fluctuation statistics of acoustic noise are superimposed on a (Poisson) mean counting rate in  the auditory system and the resulting counting distributions are analyzed. Detection laws derived from the latter are then  compared with auditory data on masking and intensity discrimination, as well as with analogous predictions obtained from  direct analysis of stimulus energy. The outcome can be characterized as establishing that internal counting states mimic the  noise energy fluctuations. Hence, detection laws derived from either domain are found to be essentially equivalent. This  result justifies the stimulus-based analysis of detectability now current in auditory psychophysics, but it also suggests that  sensory detection models involving decision strategies with substantial information processing may prove to he unnecessarily  complicated.  1. INTRODUCTION  We do not know the precise mechanism, or whether there is even a causal connection, but it is apparent that much of the basic  data on auditory thresholds and intensity discrimination can now be modeled successfully via the properties of energy  fluctuations in short bursts of noise. Green's (1960) analysis of detectability in white noise is a case in point, as are two  closely related studies by Jeffress (1964), and Pfafin and Mathews (1962), each dealing with sine-wave signals masked by  noise. These papers derive auditory masking effects from the statistics of the stimulus, and produce accounts that handle  monaural detection surprisingly well. Sensory filtering and integration of the acoustic input are usually assumed, but such  transformations express themselves as shaping operations on the stimulus. Accordingly, an important class of auditory  thresholds seems to be traceable to analogous probability distributions in the stimulus domain. The net outcome is that the  listener can be painted out of the picture in the ideal way that sensory psychologists strive to discover-a successful  definition of the stimulus.  The purpose of this paper is twofold. First, we want to show how auditory detectability is linked with noise energy  statistics, and, second, we want to exhibit  )i`) 1967 by Academic Press Inc.  351  480/413-I  352 MCGILL  a neural counting mechanism that preserves these statistics in a remarkably unpretentious way. The mechanism we propose is  rather primitive in comparison with the usual paraphernalia of ideal detection, but its failures as an ideal system are  arresting because they are also shared by the human auditory system. This is not meant to be a cryptic statement. Ideal  detectors have no difficulty discovering small amplitude changes or small phase shifts in pure tones. Our counting mechanism  does-and so do people. There are many other points of similarity.  The counting mechanism is said to observe a mass flow of impulses in a sensory channel for a fixed (short) interval of time.  Then it reads out a record of its count for comparison with a stored, current threshold value called the critical number. If  the count exceeds the critical number, a stimulus is detected whether or not one occurs. Our approach is seen to be closely  related to classical work in signal detection, and particularly to neural counting schemes considered by Creelman (1961),  Fitzhugh (1957), and Siebert (1965).  The counting mechanism is essentially a focal point where the flow of information arising in the inner ear is monitored in  undifferentiated form. Lack of differentiation is implied when we speak of "energy detection" and it is a vital restriction.  The action resembles a pneumatic traffic recorder stretched across a highway, although this simple comparison is not entirely  apt. Sensory monitoring seems to be able to concentrate on the parts of the flow that mask a particular signal. The monitoring  system somehow achieves and maintains its attention to the signal in ways that are not yet really understood. Consideration of  mechanisms involved in selective attention is systematically avoided in the present discussion. We have problems aplenty as  matters stand. Selectivity will, however, turn up as an important empirical parameter when we attempt to deal with critical  bands, and it will come back to plague us at a number of other critical points.  The key element in the scheme offered here is a counting center that eventually comes to concentrate on a specified number of  information channels smeared together as a kind of summation unit. If the impulse sequences passing down these channels are  repetitive according to fixed rules (a wide range of rules will do), the smearing alone is sufficient to produce a  Poisson-like process in the counting center (Drenick, 1960). For example, a continuous tone delivering constant power into the  ear at a single frequency may be thought of as exciting running discharges from an array of nerve fibers responsive to  different frequencies via the imperfect analytical action of the cochlea. These running discharges will not correspond  perfectly. When the activity is brought to a focus for counting, short segments of the pooled discharge will resemble a  Poisson process. This is a very important conclusion based on recent studies of superposition effects in renewal processes  (Cox, 1962, pp. 72-77). In an energy detector collecting impulses from independent stations in the receptor, it means that  short observation periods will exhibit fluctuating counts even though the flow of acoustic power into the ear is strictly  constant during each observation period.  NEURAL COUNTING MECHANISMS AND ENERGY DETECTION IN AUDITION  353  The counting record will be governed by a Poisson distribution, and a characteristic side effect of this type of detection  will be an internal "noise" whose level is proportional to the stimulus energy. Familiar psychophysical principles such as  Weber's law then become deducible on very simple arguments from the superposition effects inherent in energy detection.  Poisson counting for pure tones cannot be advanced with utter assurance in the current state of our knowledge, but the  restriction offers an excellent place to begin because it provides a reasonable and convenient base for calculating effects  found with noise stimuli. When the counting has Poisson form, it is determined entirely by the mean activity rate, or, in this  instance, by the mean count recorded during a sensory integration time (observation period). On the other hand, if intensity  jumps about unpredictably from trial to trial as it does when a stimulus is sampled from a noise process, this variation must  be imposed on the Poisson mean, modifying the form of the counting distribution. The latter is now no longer completely  determined by the mean flow of events and interesting things may happen to detectability ill such circumstances.  We have a clearly prescribed problem. Begin with Poisson neural counting. Impose the energy statistics of the stimulus on the  Poisson mean, and find the resulting counting distribution. Then choose a critical number yielding stable detection; for  example, a fixed false-alarm probability or some related criterion. The critical number and the counting distribution must now  jointly determine an auditory detection lacy for comparison with the detection law actually obtained.  Our approach is obviously oversimplified, but it has one exceptional virtue in that it is quite sensitive to failure. As will  be evident soon enough, we are often right, but occasionally things will go wrong, creating serious and interesting  difficulties. The manner in which a well-behaved model goes off the track generally affords information of prime importance.  e begin by applying the neural detection mechanism in a particularly simple visual case which serves to illustrate both our  notation and the transform calculus we use. Next, we take up auditory intensity discrimination, showing first our model of  noise, then our results on counting distributions. Finally, we consider an account of the successes and failures of approaches  involving energy detection.  2. EXAMPLE OF MASS FLOW COUNTER MODEL  Suppose the crucial event in detecting a flash of light involves a count of nerve impulses. The latter are generated as  consequence of absorption of light quanta in the retina. This is essentially the view proposed by Barlow (1957), and Treisman  (1964).  A monochromatic background illumination delivers an average of No quanta of light to a restricted region of the retina during  the sensory integration time (observation  354 MCGILL  period). In the simplest case, this stimulus gives rise to a (Poisson) mean of aNo events as seen in the counting center. The  constant a matches the energy units employed to the sensory effect produced. Counting rate is thus assumed proportional to  stimulus energy. Unfortunately for our arithmetic, a fixed number of quanta cannot be guaranteed in each observation period  because of the inherent noisiness of incandescent light.  Accordingly, set up the moment-generating function of the neural counting distribution as follows:  Me  ,(0) _ wvo(i) - exp [ai(eo - 1)], (1) i=0  where the term wm(i) will specify a Poisson probability,  wm(z) = mie lil. (2)  If the same number of light quanta were absorbed in the retina during each observation period, the weighting function w,o(i)  in Eq. 1 would be replaced by a delta function, and Eq. 1 would then be a Poisson generating function. The outcome turns out  not to be Poisson because the flow of light energy is itself random and Poisson (Hecht, Shlaer, and Pirenne, 1942). Poisson  weighting is applied to the mean counting rate and when the summation in Eq. 1 is carried out, we find  Me(e) = exp [NO(eacee-i1 - 1)]  The outcome is familiar. It is known as Neyman's Type-A distribution (Neyman, 1939):  g=W  po(1) _ WN.(Z) - waif r i=0  where now po(j) is the counting distribution observed when light energy is transformed into nerve impulses following our  rules. The result is verified by computing the m.g.f. of Eq. 4 and noting that it is Eq. 3. The mean and variance of Neyman's  Type-A distribution are easily found via Eq. 3. They are  no  aNo  a2 = all + a) No.  Notice that no , the mean background count, need not be an integer.  Now suppose a flash is superimposed on this background condition for some subset of trials. The counting distribution is then  elevated to a mean value ng -}- no , where . na = aN,, is the increment in the count associated with the energy of the  NEURAL COUNTING MECHANISMS AND ENERGY DETECTION IN AUDITION 355  stimulus flash. The distribution remains Neyman Type-A. Detectability is stabilized by choosing a critical number k high  enough to keep the false-alarm rate acceptably low. (A Neyman-Pearson criterion will be used in this paper, but the results  developed do not seem to depend on the criterion in an important way.) We write for the falsealarm probability,  In similar fashion  s =T (6)  P.(k) _ y p.(1).   P,(k) _ y p.(.1). (7)  symbolizes the analogous detection probability obtained with the same critical number when the light energy is set at Ns + No  in Eq. 4. The probabilities in Eqs. 6 and 7 may be found directly, but we bypass long-winded computations by applying the  central limit theorem. The latter drives Eq. 4 toward normality as mean energy increases, a fact which is demonstrated by  operating on Eq. 3.  In view of the normal limit, the critical number k may be expressed as a normal deviate from the background mean count  k-aNo  'doc, [a(1 -}- a) No]lie -  where do, is the standard distance from the mean background to the critical number for detection.  Our restriction to a fixed false-alarm rate imposes an identical restriction on the distance do, , and the critical number is  written down in terms of this constant and the background level. Set the detection probability at P,,(k) _ . The normal  approximation to Eq. 7 then produces  aNo + doc[a(I -+" a) No]"' - a(N., + No) [a(1 + a)(N, + No)]11z  a )lie N  d  1 + a N112  - oo  0  The result obtained in Eq. 9 is a detection law for visual intensity It states that the just-detectable increment should be  proportional to the square root of the background light intensity when the viewer is able to maintain a stable criterion.  There are several ways in which the result can be strengthened. Detection probability can be easily extended to values above  and below PA(k) I . In addition, other criteria might be substituted to remove some of the arbitrariness of the arbitrary  discrimination.  356 MCGILL  false-alarm rate. These artifices improve the argument but leave the square-root law of visual intensity discrimination  essentially intact.  Data at low and medium background luminances appear to provide empirical confirmation of the square root law under appropriate  stimulus conditions. It is labeled the "de Vries-Rose law," and is ordinarily developed via a rationale quite different from  the one we have used (see Barlow, 1957; Bouman, 1961). Our approach emphasizes the role of mass flow of information in the  sensory channel. We now attempt to develop the same type of argument in the auditory case.  3. ENERGY DISTRIBUTION OF SHORT BURSTS OF NOISE CONTAINING A SINE-WAVE SIGNAL  There is no unique energy distribution for bursts of acoustic noise. Fluctuations during short intervals of a noise process  depend on the random mechanism generating the noise, particularly on the autocorrelation function, and a variety of likely  possibilities exists (see, for example, Grenander, Pollack, and Slepian, 1959). Our treatment of energy fluctuations is  therefore bound to be somewhat schematic and idealized. Although we do not anticipate serious trouble, typical noise sources  used in auditory experiments may be poorly approximated by the noise energy distribution developed here. In fact, there is no  real assurance that energy (or power) is the variable we want. Jeffress (1964) develops auditory detection phenomena quite  effectively from the envelope (amplitude) statistics of a narrow-band noise stimulus, and much of the engineering literature  concentrates on this property. Amplitude is proportional to the square root of power or energy. Evidently one distribution  determines the other, but the characteristic forms of the functions differ. At this stage the best prescription for progress  seems to be to grind out the consequences of the various alternatives, trying to discover a view of the stimulus that will  ultimately prove easy to live with. The energy variable has obvious initial advantages because it is additive and  mathematically tractable.  Consider a narrow-band noise centered on a fixed frequency. The wave form resembles a sinusoid with fluctuating amplitude. If  observations of the latter are made at widely spaced intervals and observation times are themselves short, the amplitudes will  exhibit a simple probability distribution. Lord Rayleigh (1880) computed this distribution by considering the effect of adding  many sinusoids at the same frequency in random phase. Subsequently, Rice (1944, pp. 104-108) worked out the form of the  amplitude distribution when a fixed (brief) sine-wave is mixed with a narrow-band noise process of this type. Rice's handling  of the problem as well as a variety of other pertinent background details are presented very clearly by Jeffress (1964). We  now proceed along the track Jeffress decided to avoid, converting amplitude distributions into energy distributions.  NEURAL COUNTING MECHANISMS AND ENERGY DETECTION IN AUDITION 357  Suppose that short intervals of duration T are clipped out of the mixture of signal and noise. The noise band is narrow and T  is short. Hence amplitudes are seen to fluctuate at random between observations but not during an observation. This device was  employed by Rice (1944, p. 98) and makes it possible to use the statistical properties of amplitude as the basis for analogous  energy computations. The conversion to energy is accomplished by multiplying one-half the squared sine-wave amplitude against  the duration T. Accordingly, call No the mean energy in samples of noise obtained by the method described above, and suppose  that the sine-wave signal has fixed energy E. Identify the mixture of signal and noise by calling x the (random) energy  variable. Evidently x varies from sample to sample because of the random properties of the noise component. Rice's result then  produces a density function for the fluctuating energy in a mixture of signal and narrow-band noise:  fs(x) = 1 exp (- E + " ) - IJ2(Ex)li2/1No]- (10) No No  lo( ) is a zero-order Bessel function with purely imaginary argument (Whitaker and Watson, 1963, p. 372). This notation is  familiar to engineers, but it is somewhat cumbersome since Eq. 10 describes a Poisson-weighted function that is purely real,  as we shall show shortly. In any case, 10(0) ---- l, and Eq. 10 then yields Ray_ leigh's distribution when E is set equal to  zero:  Mx) = N e :~IN~. o  Observe that Eq. 11, suitably standardized, is chi-square with two degrees of freedom, and that Eq. 10 is noncentral  chi-square with noncentrality parameter 2E/No . This is, of course, no accident. It reflects the central limit theorem in  randomly added phases, and the squaring operation in going over to the distribution of energy.  The moment-generating function of the noncentral stimulus distribution in Eq. 10 is given by  Mx(9) = f eaxfs(x) dx, 0  eEB /1-N  1 - N,)9  (12)  This transform is handy for what we propose to do next.  A broad, flat noise spectrum may be constructed out of narrow noise bands. At first thought, we might try to lay out these  narrow bands as adjacent blocks of frequencies. However, because the samples are of finite length T, interactions between  adjacent blocks will not permit adding up the energies of the different frequency components in a simple way. Section 6 shows  that a particular spacing of narrow-band  358 MCGILL  noise generators produces a nearly flat spectrum consisting of mutually orthogonal (i.e., additive) components. The spectrum  turns out not to be sharply limited at an upper cutoff frequency. When the duration is sufficiently long, however, the  spectrum trails off rapidly and this is not thought to be a serious defect. The important thing is that a broad-band noise  process can be constructed from the convolution of a specified number v of elementary noise generators. Accordingly, if each  noise component has the same expected energy No, the generating function of the signal-noise energy distribution is given by  eElen-iaoa eE2eii-xae eE,eii-rrae  Mx(e) - I - Noe . I No e . ... . I - Noe ,  eEgsi1-xoa  (I - Noe) .  (13)  The term ES symbolizes the energy sum of the fixed signal components. Generally, we assume that all but one of these are zero,  so that, in effect, we have the energy distribution of a single sinusoid added to a broad-band noise. The inversion of Eq. 13  is straightforward. It is  i 1 ( x i+v-I ex x p  9 x = _  I [WEa/Np(Z)] No No (14)  i=o r(t + v)  The expression wE81,o(i) is our shorthand for a Poisson probability as defined earlier in Eq. 2. The signal and noise mixture  distribution is essentially noncentral chi-square with 2v degrees of freedom, and we now use Poisson weights instead of Bessel  function notation. When the signal is set at zero, all Poisson weights except w,(0) = 1 disappear. The energy distribution of  noise alone is thus seen to be  i  fo(x) = No No f exp No , r (v)  If v = 1, Eqs. 14 and 15 reduce to Eqs. 10 and 11, respectively.  This is our noise energy model and it is a fairly common one. Equation 15 is given by Rice (1944, pp. 98-99) as the  approximate distribution for short bursts of noise. The same result is proved in stronger form by Grenander, Pollak, and  Slepian (1959, p. 398). Green (1960) uses Eq. 15 as the distribution of noise power, basing his argument on the analysis of  Peterson, Birdsall, and Fox (1954, p. 194). Finally, Green and Swets (1966) point out the applicability of noncentral  chi-square to the energy distribution of mixtures of signal and noise.  Intensity discrimination based on the statistics of the stimulus now becomes a routine enterprise. An energy threshold x, is  chosen for discriminating the pure  NEURAL COUNTING MECHANISMS AND ENERGY DETECTION IN AUDITION 359  noise distribution in Eq. 15 from the mixture of signal and noise in Eq. 14. The threshold exhibits false alarm and detection  probabilities as follows:  Pr (False Alarm) = 1 -Fo(xe) = Y zv,, I Jj), =o  (169)  c+v-1  Pr (Detection) = 1 -F,(xc) = y [wEBINo(i)] y [w,,,;,~-o(j)].  i=o J=o  (16b)  The Poisson sums displayed in Eq. 16 are familiar expressions for tail integrals of chi-square distributions with an even  number of degrees of freedom. In view of Eq. 169, it appears that the false-alarm probability is invariant whenever the energy  threshold xc is fixed in relation to the mean background energy No . Similarly, Eq. 16b shows that a given detection  probability and an invariant false-alarm rate imply a fixed signal to noise ratio. The quantity E,/,V, must then be constant  at the threshold of detection. This is a variant of Weber's law in noise masking and it is supported by the data.  The result can be demonstrated a bit more graphically by turning to the central limit theorem in conjunction with Eq. 14.  Normality is approached as Es or v (or both are allowed to grow; see Fig. 1.  The mean and variance of the signal-noise energy distribution in Eq. 14 are easilN found from the Poisson-weighted moments of  the constituent gamma distributions:  E(x) = Es + vNo,  911(x) = 2E,No }- vN 2.  (17)  The detection threshold is specified by fixing the false-alarm rate when E, is set at zero. Fixing false-alarms implies  xc - vNo -{- doc . vl'2No , (18)  where (as in our demonstration of the counter model in Sec. 2) the normal deviate do, is fixed. Now insert this criterion into  the analogous normal deviate when the signal Es is in fact presented, letting the detection probability be  [xe - (Es -F- vNo)](2EsNo i- VNo2)-I 2 ^_' 0.  The threshold is found to generate a characteristic detection law given by:  Ee/v112No - doc - (19)  Equation 19 demonstrates again that an energy criterion, as given by the twofold restriction to a median detection probability  and an invariant false-alarm rate, implies that the signal-to-noise ratio must be fixed at threshold. A further (unspoken)  360 MCGILL  H R] Q m O a w fQ J U  SIGNAL t NOISE ENERGY RELATIVE TO MEAN NOISE LEVEL (X/No)  Fic. 1. Cumulative energy distributions of mixture of brief sinusoid and noise, illustrating approach to Gaussian form as  complexity of noise increases. On left is Rayleigh-Rice distribution (integral of Eq. 10 in text). Ratio of (fixed) signal  energy to mean noise energy is set at 4. Curve on right is cumulative distribution constructed by mixing nine additional  orthogonal noise components, all with the same mean energy No , together with the signal-noise compound on the left. The more  complex process describes an energy distribution in which the sinusoid is centered in a noise of medium bandwidth. Curve is  integral of Eq. 14 in text.  implication is that the mechanism responsible for intensity discrimination is insensitive to phase.  A study of detectability in a broad-band receiver led Peterson, Birdsall, and Fox (1954) to an expression that is essentially  the same as the one given in Eq. 19. This important paper deals with the optimum properties of the likelihood ratio applied to  a variety of problems in electronic communication. Detectability is taken to be the normalized distance (actually the square  of the distance) between signal and noise distributions of the log likelihood ratio. When the distributions have nonidentical  variances, as with most physical processes, the distance fails to have a unique representation. However, Peterson et al. show  that changes in variability are small enough in the case at hand to permit simple approximations. Section 7 (Eq. 19a) of the  present paper offers just such an approximation for our own use. It provides a slight improve-  NEURAL COUNTING MECHANISMS AND ENERGY DETECTION IN AUDITION 361  ment on the result given by Peterson et al. (1954, p. 201, Eq. 135) and on Eq. 19 above. Evidently Eqs. 19 and 19a are closely  related. Hence our findings on detectability of sinusoids in noise are very similar to those reported by Peterson et al. for  the case of pulse-like signals in a broad-band receiver. This outcome supports the view that auditory energy detection, as  developed here, is prescribed by the properties of broad-band noise and by the use of an energy statistic. The Neyman-Pearson  criterion does not seem to play an important role in our arguments.  The conclusion just outlined may startle readers who have maintained only casual contact with recent psychophysical work in  signal detection. The manifold successes of the latter in analyzing auditory mechanisms are sometimes attributed to an  abandonment of threshold ideas and their replacement by a form of complex information processing in which listeners are said  to sense likelihood ratios. We have now developed the logical basis for what might be called threshold energy detection. Later  sections of the paper will demonstrate that, at least in certain instances, the model seems to work quite well.  Energy detection is simple. It is primitive. It is perhaps the antithesis of complex information processing. Early  applications of detection theory in audition did indeed appear to stress conversion of the stimulus into a cognitive  equivalent of the likelihood ratio. It was then easy to use engineering studies of likelihood ratio detection in order to  define an ideal psychophysical observer. The surprising development, at least to the writer, has been the discovery that a  mathematically ideal observer and a simple energy detector, although worlds apart conceptually, behave rather alike. It is  probably fair to say that the attractiveness of the ideal-observer approach diminishes as the power of more elementary  formulations becomes apparent. One of the earliest of these formulations is a pioneering paper by Marill (1956) based on the  proposition that the ear cannot use phase information for detecting signals. One of the most recent is a remarkable chapter on  energy detection by Green and Swets (1966). We have already called attention to the important work of Jeffress (1964), and  Pfafflin and Mathews (1962).  4. NEURAL COUNTING DISTRIBUTION  Our previous section illustrates how the masking effects of noise can be predicted directly from the statistics of the  stimulus. Next, we devise a neural mechanism that detects changes in intensity by mimicking the statistics of acoustic noise,  yet manages to see pure tones as though they were noisy. This is the way human intensity discrimination seems to work.  A given packet of stimulus energy is mapped into a mean count in the sensory channel. Repeated trials with exactly the same  stimulus energy would generate a Poisson counting distribution. We now consider what happens when the stimulus  distribution in Eq. 14 drives the mean counting rate. In the language of transforms, the problem is set up as follows:  MAO) = f 'f$(x) ' Max(B) dx, (20)  where Max(B) is the moment generating function of a Poisson distribution with mean value ax; the constant a matches the  stimulus units to the counting rate; the driving function f,,(x) is the stimulus energy distribution given by Eq. 14; and  M;(B) is the moment generating function of the counting distribution we are trying to specify. (It is perhaps unrealistic to  assume that each frequency region of the stimulus transfers energy to the ear via the same transfer constant a, but  computations are materially simplified when we make the assumption and we are not going out of our way to look for  difficulties here.) Accordingly, when the above particulars are inserted into Eq. 20, it becomes:  i=a; N-1 x N )i+v-1e x1N0 ax(ee-1) ' i= exp[aE,,(ee - 1)/I + aN- aN (21)  (I + aN- aN,,ee).  This is the m.g.f. of the sought-after counting distribution. The inversion into a counting distribution is not particularly  difficult in view of the close parallel with Eq. 13, but before carrying it out, we note two points of perspective. First, the  background noise disappears when No = 0. It is then evident from Eq. 21 that  M;(B) --o. exp[aE$(e- 1)],  which is the transform of a Poisson distribution determined by the signal alone. Similarly, when ES = 0 the signal energy is  removed, and  M;(0) -* (1 + aNo - aNoe v.  This is the transform of the Greenwood-Yule version of the negative binomial. Freeman (1963, pp. 124-126) provides a concise  discussion of Greenwood and Yule's (1920) early attempt to generalize the Poisson distribution. The problem is remarkably  similar to our counting problem. The label, "negative binomial," implies that v need not be an integer whereas we have  developed an argument restricting v to integral values (see Eq. 13). We nevertheless retain the more general terminology  because Rice's approach to the energy distribution of bursts of noise (1944, p. 98) treats v as a parameter to be estimated  from data and we shall frequently operate this way too. In any event, a pure noise stimulus is said to convert the Poisson  counting process into a negative binomial. A mixture of signal and noise then produces  NEURAL COUNTING MECHANISMS AND ENERGY DETECTION IN AUDITION 363  a counting distribution that might be labelled a noncentral negative binomial by analogy with the stimulus distribution.  Specifically, for v > 1 in the stimulus distribution, the probability ps(j) that exactly j counts are recorded during the  sensory integration time, turns out to be  i=x,  p'(3) _ Y_ LWEe/No(~)] ~~t +J j v i 1)l 1 +laNo ,~  This is the promised inversion of Eq. 21 into its corresponding counting distribution. Our discrete noncentral counting  distribution is evidently closely related to the continuous distribution of signal and noise energy (Eq. 14) from which it is  developed. The Poisson weights are identical, and the negative binomial components of Eq. 22 can be viewed as discrete  versions of the constituent gamma distributions in Eq. 14. Hence the statistics of counting appear to mimic the mixture of  signal and noise delivered to the ear. The primary objective of our inquiry has been achieved.  When pure noise is presented to the ear, the counting distribution reverts to a simple negative binomial expression. It is  readily obtained by setting EG --= 0 in Eq. 22. All weights following w,(0) = I are then zero and we have  .1-{- v - 1 1 -a-"V-.  NO) aNo '  (23)  where v ? 1, j > 0. Equation 23 is identical with the generalization of the Poisson law developed by Greenwood and Yule (1920).  The counting distributions (Eqs. 22 and 23) can be used to produce detection probabilities in the auditory system itself  instead of projecting the problem into the stimulus domain as the solution was achieved in Sec. 3. It is anticipated that the  outcomes cannot diverge seriously, and they do not. Our findings on this point are examined the next section.  5. DETECTION PROBABILITIES  A. SIGNAL IN NOISE  In neural counting, the threshold is called a critical number and is Consider how this threshold affects the false-alarm  probability computed noise statistics given in Eq. 23:  labeled k. from pure  po(k) _ Y, P.(j), s=a.  J r ~ + i - 1)l 1 -}-laNo (24)  364 MCGILL  Partial sums of the negative binomial are made quite a bit easier by an identity linking them to the simple binomial (see  Patil, 1960)  Po(k) j-0 1 hi -}-aNo )'(-I -}- aNo) (25)  Moreover, as noise energy increases, the Poisson approximation to the binomial furnishes an even simpler expression:  ^'=v-1  j=0 1+aNo  (26a)  Equation 26a is a false-alarm probability. The analogous detection probability is obtained via similar steps, working now from  the noncentral counting distribution in Eq. 22:  i=ro j=i+v-1  P,(k) =' Y~ WEsINO(t) ' Y_ WNU(j)" _ k+v-1  i=0 j=0 ~`1+.N. '  (26b)  Equations 26a and 26b are approximations, but fairly good approximations for all but the lowest background levels. It is  apparent from Eq. 26a that the false-alarm probability must be nearly invariant when k -{- v - 1 stands in fixed relation to  the background noise level. Similarly, Eq. 26b shows that a given detection probability in conjunction with a stable  false-alarm rate implies a fixed signal-to-noise ratio at the detection threshold. The conclusions are almost identical to  those drawn from Eqs. 16a,b which were based directly on the stimulus. Moreover, Eqs. 26a,b, derived from analysis of counting  statistics, bear a remarkable resemblance to the pair of stimulus formulae. It is plain that Poisson counting driven by an  acoustic noise mimics the energy distribution of the acoustic input.  B. NOISE INCREMENTS  This case presents a slightly different problem. A small increment in the level of a wideband background noise must be  detected. The format of the false-alarm probability is seen to be identical with Eq. 26a, but now a detection is made by  increasing the noise level, leaving the critical number intact. With pure noise the detection probability must be approximately  7=v-1  Ps(k) '=' Y_ wusw' _ k+v-1  j=0 Ps l+a(N9+No) '  (27)  These two results (26a, 27) imply a fixed signal-to-noise ratio at the threshold of  NEURAL COUNTING MECHANISMS AND ENERGY DETECTION IN AUDITION 365  detection. The conclusion is fairly obvious, and we can demonstrate it easily. Begin by calling  1-to =k+v-1/1 +aNo, t_,,=k+v-1/1 + a(NS+No).  We then have  and as No increases  !x0(1 -a- aNo) = fts(l 4- a(NS -+- No)),  Accordingly, rewrite the detection probability in Eq. 27 as  -0-1  P.(k) = I wf-o ii,,, 1No(1)_ -o  (2s)  The parameter ft, specifies the false-alarm probability, and the expression (1 -{ N,) is a signal-to-noise ratio. A given  detection probability and an invariant false report rate must then determine a (nearly) fixed signal-to-noise ratio at the  detection threshold as claimed.  6. INTERPRETATION OF PARAMETER v  The noise model outlined in Sec. 3 leads to a chi-square energy distribution with 2P degrees of freedom (Eq. 15). Each  narrow-band component contributes 2 degrees of freedom to the total. Noise bands are so spaced in frequency that their  energies add. Accordingly, a broad-band noise process possessing a certain simple structure can be decomposed into v mutually  orthogonal narrow-band components. We now investigate this structure to ascertain how many such components there might be. The  analysis follows Woodward (1953, pp. 31-34).  Consider a cosine wave between -T/2 and {-T/2, having a frequencyfo , amplitude A; in this interval, and zero amplitude  outside. The Fourier transform of the waveform is  +T/2  X(f) = A; f cos 2 vrfot - e j2"ftdt,  _ AiT sin_ 7T(f - f(,) T sin Tr(f -F fo) T  2 1 n(f -fo) T + -(.f + fo) T  Suppose a broad-band noise is formed by combining a set of such elementary spectra, spaced df = 1/T cycles per second apart as  illustrated in Fig. 2. The Fourier spectrum of the combined noise is then written as follows:  Z-AZT sin a(fT - i) sin -(fT -f- i)  X(f) _ 2 Tr(fT - i) + 7T(fT + i) ~.  (29)  366 MCGILL  A gross energy measure is now constructed by forming the product X(f) - X(f) and integrating over the entire frequency range:  J+~X(f)'X(-.f)df= AZ2T2+r(sina(fT-i))2+( sin7r(fT+i) df  i=I 4 J 7r(fT - i) 7r(fT + i) )2]  FiG. 2. Construction of noise spectrum from orthogonal narrow-band noise components when stimulus has fixed duration T.  Frequency spacing is df = 1/T. Amplitude of each component is random and independent of other components. Illustration shows  only positive frequencies with weights at expected value of amplitude distribution. Latter is the same for each narrow-band  component. Low frequencies omitted for clarity. (After Woodward, 1953, p. 33.)  Equation 29 generates this simple expansion because the orthogonality property of sin x/x functions forces crossproduct terms  to integrate to zero (see Harman, 1963, p. 35). Integration brings  2=Ai2T 2 _1 1  2=~ 7=V _ A,z2Tl2, - Y, xi. 2=1 i=1  The xi are narrow-band noise energies each with a Rayleigh distribution as given in Eq. 11. The components are orthogonal and  hence statistically independent. What has been shown here is that a wide-band noise process having the simple  NEURAL COUNTING MECHANISMS AND ENERGY DETECTION IN AUDITION 367  structure depicted in Fig. 2 and Eq. 29, can be described by the energy distribution previously claimed in Eq. 15. The  demonstration must be considered rough and ready since each component noise process has been treated as though it were lined  up in cosine phase. However, phase variations cancel out when the product X(f) - X( J_) is formed and no problem seems to  result from our effort to skirt such difficulties.  Figure 2 shows that the expected noise energy spectrum has no upper limit. It falls off fairly sharply however (unless T is  very short), at a point defined by  W = vdf = v/T.  We thus specify a nominal bandwidth W by fixing on the location of the uppermost narrow-band noise component. Conversely, an  ideal low-pass noise with a frequency cutoff at W, may be said to have approximately  elementary components. In Eq. 30 the parameter W is measured in cycles per second and T is expressed in seconds.  Evidently bandwidth and duration are properties of the stimulus, so that under ideal circumstances the parameter v may be  considered to be determined when the stimulus is chosen. In reality, however, the duration T is an unspecified sensory  integration time-the duration of a poststimulatory observation period-which is not necessarily the same as the signal  duration. Similarly, the parameter W, as we use it, describes the bandwidth of a counting process. The latter is tuned to  unspecified portions of the sensory information channel. In many circumstances then, the parameter v is fixed by little-known  properties of the auditory detection mechanism. Further analysis requires estimating v from detection data and such estimates  must be judged against our knowledge of the temporal and frequency characteristics of auditory detection. An example of this  process is developed in the next section, when we study the width of a critical band.  Finally, observe that if N is the total (mean) energy in the frequency band spanned by the noise stimulus, the noise power per  unit bandwidth (power; cycle) may be computed as follows:  N _ N ,  (31)  IPT - v 1'~ o  The symbol No on the right-hand side of Eq. 31 is our expression for (mean) noise energy per narrow-band (Rayleigh) component.  The relation establishes that an ideal noise model makes this energy figure comparable to the noise power per cycle--a most  surprising outcome. The result comes from Peterson, Birdsall, and Fox (1954) and is widely used in experimental work in  auditory detection.  480/413-2  368 MCGILL  7. FAMILIAR OUTCOMES IN AUDITORY DETECTION  A. NOISE-INTENSITY DISCRIMINATION  A steady, hissing background noise is presented to the ear. Increments in the level of the noise are added on certain  occasions called stimulus trials. The question is how big such increments must be before they become just detectable against  the background. It is not possible to give a precise answer unless more detail is supplied about the experimental format, but  enough is known to allow us to draw general conclusions without hesitation.  Suppose the experimental conditions stabilize the false report rate, i.e., the listener adopts a fixed criterion, and suppose  the stimulus increment is brief. Equations 26a and 27 then say that the signal-to-noise ratio is fixed at detection threshold.  An independent line of argument leads to the same conclusion, and we now offer this argument because we want to elaborate on  it subsequently.  The mean and variance of the noise-driven counting distribution in Eq. 23 can be obtained via the negative binomial:  E(j) =v-aNo,  a''(1) = v - aNo(I + aNo).  The central limit theorem then produces an approximation for the critical number:  k - vaNo ti doe v112aN  0  where (as before) doe is a constant unit-normal distance from the mean background count to the detection threshold. This  specification for k is now inserted into the parallel expression for the detection probability. The latter is set at 1/2, and  V1 /2Ns  N='doe  (32)  In other words, counting statistics decree that the signal-to-noise fixed at threshold when the false-alarm rate (the  listener's criterion) remains invariant. N$ and No are measurements of power per unit bandwidth governing the increment and  background noise respectively. Evidently the increment Ng is smallest when the parameter v is as large as possible in the  circumstances. An astute sensory counting mechanism should then accept information over the full bandwidth of the noise  stimulus. With minor changes in criterion, this is essentially the result given by D. M. Green (1960) based on direct analysis  of the noise stimulus. We confirm it and extend it to counting processes in the channel. The conclusion is evidently a firm  one and does not appear to depend on subtleties in the detection model.  ratio must be  NEURAL COUNTING MECHANISMS AND ENERGY DETECTION IN AUDITION 369  Equation 32 is, of course, Weber's Law. It was established empirically over nearly the full range of noise intensity  discrimination in a classic paper by Miller (1947). Recently Miller's results have been reexamined and confirmed in an  experimental study by Raab, Osman, and Rich (1963).  A second conclusion in good accord with Miller's experimental data deals with an invariance in the psychometric function.  Analysis of Eq. 32 shows that the psychometric function should be approximately normal and independent of the background level  when the signal-to-noise ratio is fixed. Hence, all the psychometric functions for different background levels should  superimpose. Miller's Fig. 4 demonstrates that this happens in the data, although his handling of the matter differs somewhat  from the rationale offered here.  B. PURE TONES MASKED BY NOISE  The line of proof just established can now be followed in the case of the noncentral counting distribution in Eq. 22. Its mean  and variance are  E(j) = a(E,, + vNo),  (1) = a(E,, + vNo) + a2(2E,,No + vN2).  These computations should be compared with Eq. 17 which gives analogous moments of Rice's signal-noise distribution. The  variance of the counting distribution (above) shows linear addition of internal and external noise variances since they are  independent. In any event, these two moments of the counting distribution inserted into our now familiar argument based on the  central limit theorem, produce a detection law for a sinusoid masked by wide-band noise:  ES (19) vii2N0 ' doo  The detection probability is 1/2 and the false-alarm rate, as specified by do, , is constant. As before, E3 is a measure of  signal energy and No is noise power per unit bandwidth. Notice that the equation is numbered (19) because it is essentially  the same as the one based directly on stimulus energy. The signal-to-noise ratio is evidently fixed at detection threshold as  was the case with pure noise statistics. Now, however, the parameter v is located in the denominator. This tells us that  detection is most sensitive, i.e., E6 is smallest, when the sensory mechanism can restrict itself to the narrow band in which  the stimulus is principally located. The central limit theorem fails when v becomes very small, but this detection strategy is  intuitively sound.  Hawkins and Stevens (1950), in a basic paper on auditory psychophysics, showed that the empirical masking function for  sinusoids in white noise is governed by  370 MCGILL  fixed signal-to-noise ratios. However, no energy restriction was imposed. The latter was studied by Green, McKey, and  Licklider (1959) without altering the conclusion. Hence, Eq. 19 appears to agree with the data on noise masking.  Several recent papers deal with measured- increases in detectability as signal intensity increases: e.g., Egan, Greenberg, and  Schulman (1961); Egan, Schulman, and Greenberg (1959); Green, Birdsall, and Tanner (1957). Each describes the outcome as a  linear function relating the Thurstone distance measure d' to the signal-to-noise ratio E,,/NO. This turns out to be a  generalization of Eq. 19 based on Peterson et al.'s (1954) more precise formulation of detectability.  The result is not linear as Eq. 19 might appear to suggest. In our notation, the familiar d' of detection theory becomes dos =  doc + dcs , where do, is the unit-normal distance between background and stimulus counting distributions, doo is the standard  distance from the background to the critical number, and d,s is the analogous distance from the critical number to the  stimulus counting distribution. The critical number in the noncentral counting distribution may now be expressed in standard  form  h - a(E, + vN(,)  [a(Es + vNo) + a2(2E,No + VNo2)]1/2 ^-' - dcs  Moreover, do, = dos = dos/2 at the "least error" criterion, i.e., the choice of critical numbers that minimizes error.  Substitution then produces a simple relation between detectability dos and signal energy.  1 1 1  -do-. ` S + 2v//2 ,  (19a)  where s = Es/v112No . Graphs of Eq. 19a using energy values typically occurring in auditory work, display a good linear  relation between dos and E,,INo when v > 100. The slope of the line is approximately V-1/2, although this way of fitting  auditory data overestimates v.  When v = 1, as in the narrow-band case considered by Jeffress (1964), none of the above results apply. The normal  approximation fails and the relation between dos and signal energy is distinctly curved. Jeffress observes that in audition  "d' is a voltage-like quantity," meaning that d' is linear with amplitude-not with energy. This certainly appears to be the  case with narrow-band (v = 1) noise. Our finding is that as the bandwidth of the noise process increases, this clear  distinction fades and detectability can be formulated as an energy-like quantity. The same conclusion is expressed by Green  and Swets (1966, p. 206).  C. CRITICAL BANDS  Equation 19a can now be applied to offer a fresh perspective on the critical band problem. Egan et al. (1959, 1961) used slope  constants approximating 0.08 to fit  NEURAL COUNTING MECHANISMS AND ENERGY DETECTION IN AUDITION 371  detectability data in the form of Eq. 19a. Our treatment converts this value for the slope into v = (1/0.08)2 _ 156. Pure-tone  (1000 cps) stimuli, as employed by Egan et al., were sec. in duration. A sensory observation period probably does not extend  over durations of this magnitude, but if it is close, the nominal bandwidth computes at W >  ~_ 300 cps. The band is wider to the extent that the observation period is shorter. We are, of course, estimating the width of  a "critical band." It appears to be large, but not alarmingly so, in view of the many rough edges on the noise model, and a  tendency to overestimate bandwidths inherent in our procedure. If the counting process increases its bandwidth in order to pay  attention to the broad-band energy characteristics of a pure-noise stimulus, the bandwidth adjustment might now be inferred  from a parallel study of the parameter v derived from pure-noise detectability, guided by the form of Eq. 32. To the writer's  knowledge there are no such data in the literature. The problem does not appear to be a difficult one, and seems only to  reveal a gap in the data.  A comparison providing general support for the energy-detection model but offering little information on the issue of  adjustable bandwidths, is the following. Suppose the noise background and false-alarm rate are fixed by experiment, and the  observation time is treated as fixed. Equations 19 and 32 give us  Es/NST ^-' (WE . WN)112. (33)  The terms WE and WN are (possibly different) values of the nominal bandwidth Ll' in Eq. 30 emerging from the two detection  experiments. Hence, Eq. 33 interprets an empirical power ratio as indicating a bandwidth. It implies that ES > NJ for  detection data, and certainly this appears to be in accord with what we know of the data.  :Miller's (1947) figure for the power ratio (NS/No) at the threshold of detectability in white noise is roughly 1/10, whereas  the analogous power ratio for a 1000-cps tone masked by the same noise is roughly 50/1. Thus, the empirical value of the  geometric mean in Eq. 33 is somewhere near 500 in good numerical agreement with the restrictions prescribed by Eq. 33.  D. ADDITIVITY OF NOISE  Raab, Osman, and Rich (1963) repeated Miller's earlier work on noise intensity discrimination. They demonstrated that  increments produced via gain changes in a single noise generator, and increments produced via an independent noise source,  yield the same experimental masking function. There was some initial confusion as to the interpretation of this result  (nothing else could have occurred), but the matter was subsequently cleared up by D. M. Green (1966). Nevertheless, an  invariance of the type described by Raab et al., is a fundamental characteristic of noise energy, and we now show that it  applies to the channel statistics as well.  372 MCGILL  The negative binomial distribution governing counting statistics for pure noise is shown in Eq. 23. Its moment-generating  function is  M;(B) = (1 + aNo - aNoee)_,.  If an intensity increment is produced by a change in noise gain, the generating function shifts to  M#) = (1 + a(N$ + No) - a(Ns + No) e0)- (34)  which, of course, is another negative binomial with a larger mean value.  Now turn to the case in which an increment is produced by a separate noise source adding in random phase with the background.  We first treat the increment as though its energy were fixed, writing down the generating function of the noncentral noise  distribution (Eq. 21):  Max(e) = exp [ax(e0 - 1)/1 + aNo - aNoee] . (1 + aNo - aNoe8)v  Here x is a particular characteristic form of pure noise:  noise increment drawn from an energy distribution with the  The increment x is evidently not fixed. We must then integrate over its distribution,  and the generating function of the compound becomes  MAO) = f f(x) Max(e) dx. 0  When the two functions are inserted and the product is integrated, we find  M,(9) = (I -{- a(N8 + No) - a(Ns + No) e0)-  The outcome proves to be a negative binomial identical to Eq. 34. It is apparent that noise-counting statistics for changes in  gain and for independent noise sources are identical. Noise energy is additive and the channel cannot determine whether a  particular increment comes via change in gain or via the intervention of a separate noise source.  8. FAILURE OF THE MODEL  The most evident failure occurs in pure-tone-intensity discrimination. Stimulus models also fail here, perhaps even more  seriously. Increments in pure tones, locked in phase and presented for a precise time interval, exhibit no statistical  fluctuations.  NEURAL COUNTING MECHANISMS AND ENERGY DETECTION IN AUDITION 373  Once the increment rises above some minimum threshold necessary for discrimination, a stimulus model says that it should  become detectable. The essential point is not that detectability must be especially sharp, but that it must be independent of  the background level. Experiments with pure tones show this is not the case.  On the other hand, a Poisson counting mechanism, as noted at the beginning of this paper, has a built-in internal noise. The  noise level is proportional to the mean counting rate. This fact means that incremental detectability continues to be linked  to the background level as the latter increases, and hence one of the main weaknesses of the stimulus model can be avoided.  Consider the m.g.f. of the noncentral counting distribution (Eq. 21), and let the noise level No become vanishingly small. We  noted earlier that the limit of the m.g.f. in this case is  M;(6) = exp[aE,(ee - 1)]. (35)  The generating function in Eq. 35 signals a Poisson distribution as expected when stimulus variability is eliminated. Poisson  variables are perhaps best normalized via a square-root transformation, but we proceed more intuitively. Consider intensity  discrimination with pure tones, fix the false-alarm rate, and express the latter as a normal deviate. The critical number for  detection must then be approximately  k = aEo -}- doe (aEo)112,  where Eo is the energy of the background sinusoid accumulated over the observation period. This energy is considered fixed for  every observation period, although the count is not. Now set the detection probability at z , and determine what happens with  an increment taking the energy level to ES ~ Eo . Evidently,  aEo + doc(aEo)1/2 - a(ES -f- Eo)  a1/2(Es + Eo)1/2  a1/2Es/Eo/2 ' doe .  ^--' 0,  (36)  If the false-alarm rate remains invariant, median detectability dictates that the pure tone self-masking function should  follow a square-root law. The writer's data on 300- and 1000-cps tones say no-the law is nearer to linear. Green (1967)  reports the same result.'  The origin of the failure is not clear. Of some interest is the fact that the energy transfer constant a which matches the  stimulus units to the sensory counting rate, appears in Eq. 36 but not in the noise detection formulae derived earlier. It  seems  1 Our data were gathered via the method of adjustment on a single listener. The slope of the masking function (log Es plotted  against log Eo) at 1000 cps was found to be 0.84. Green (1967) reports nearly the same figure based on three listeners and  obtained by the method of forced choice.  374 MCGILL  rather unlikely that this parameter could remain fixed across the full range (1013 : 1) of audible intensities. Local  linearity, i.e., a slowly changing function for a, would permit us to derive most of the results we have seen prior to our  consideration of pure tone intensity discrimination. It would also permit us to use Eq. 36 to handle the form of the  psychometric function for increments in pure tones even though the expression seems to fail in intensity discrimination. It is  not yet clear whether this scheme produces any return in dealing with pure tones. An early Russian paper on pure-tone  detection (Lifshitz, 1945) suggests that the Poisson model works quite well near absolute threshold.  There are many potential sources of failure involving instabilities in the transfer constant a. Energy transfer to the ear is  clearly not uniform at all audible frequencies. This fact is often used to explain the shape of the audiogram, but it should  produce its most serious effects in noise intensity discrimination. Pure tones would be relatively undisturbed. A somewhat  different instability causing problems in pure-tone intensity discrimination is the following. Suppose the information rate  through the counter is high and the latter is refractory. A fixed refractory period following each count will cause the  counting rate to fall off in relation to input energy as the latter increases. The mismatch then drives intensity  discrimination away from the square-root law in Eq. 36 toward a linear law. This fact was established by Bouman, Vos, and  Walraven (1963) and has been used to explain the shift away from square-root-law detectability at high background levels in  visual intensity discrimination. It would be plausible as an explanation here if some evidence of square-root-law intensity  discrimination could be uncovered with pure tones at very low background levels. To the writer's knowledge, there are no such  findings in the literature at present.  Finally, we should acknowledge that the wholly undifferentiated superposition of information and the fixed sampling times  required by the simple models of energy detection we have considered here, are probably too simple. Sampling times as  estimated from threshold data seem to fall between 100 and 300 msec, and yet it is very easy to resolve two,slightly  suprathreshold clicks 30 msec apart. Sampling time may not be fixed, and what passes for this variable in our models may in  fact reflect a very complex process.  Simple energy detection also appears to be unsuited to the stimulus uncertainty inherent in even the best controlled  psychophysical procedures. Sensory mechanisms seem unable to identify the time and place and character of an uncertain signal  despite the experimenter's best efforts to communicate this information. It is possible then that the sensory system, not  knowing exactly when and where and how to look, keeps several avenues of information open: Hence, the picture of detection we  want may be one in which not one but an unspecified number of independent summation units do energy detection simultaneously,  This approach, which is rather like the "magic number" channel capacities in information theory, is useful in trying to ,deal  with several puzzling irregularities in auditory temporal integration, and in the shapes  NEURAL COUNTING MECHANISMS AND ENERGY DETECTION IN AUDITION 375  of ROC curves, ROC curves generated by changes in critical number and using the negative binomial distribution with its  noncentral variant, exhibit only barely observable asymmetry, whereas detection data usually show very marked asymmetry.  The consequences of simultaneous energy detection by a number of independent summation units are not fully worked out, but  they do seem to accord fairly well with the discrepancies between the model set forth here and the detection data as they are  currently known.' Efforts will have to be made to untangle these very basic problems. They must not be permitted, however, to  obscure the central idea that stimulus-oriented treatments of detectability in the auditory case are very effective. Their  effectiveness probably derives from the fact that some form of energy detection is involved and the latter can be accomplished  via simple counting schemes in the auditory nervous system.  REFERENCES  BARLow, H. Increment thresholds at low intensities considered as signal/noise discriminations. Journal of Physiolology, 1957,  136, 469-48&.  BOIJMAN, M. A. History and present status of quantum theory in vision. In W. A. Rosenblith (Ed.), Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press  and Wiley, 1961. Chap. 21, pp. 377-401.  BouMAN, M. A., VOS, J., AND WALRAVEN, P. Fluctuation theory of luminance and chromaticity discrimination. Journal of the  Optical Society of America, 1963, 53, 121-128.  Cox, D. R. Renewal theory. London: Methuen, 1962.  CREELMAN, C. D. Human discrimination of auditory duration. Journal Acoustical Society of America, 1961, 34, 582-593.  DRBNICK, R. F. The failure law of complex equipment. ,Journal of the Society of Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 1960, 8,  680-690.  EGAN, J., GREENBERG, G., AND SCHULMAN, A. Interval of time uncertainty in auditory detection. Journal of the Acoustical  Society of America, 1961, 33, 771-778.  EGAN, J., SCHULMAN, A., AND GREENBERG, G. Operating characteristics determined by binary decisions and by ratings. Journal of  the Acoustical Society of America, 1959, 31, 768-773. FITZHUGH, R. Statistical detection of threshold signals in the retina.  Journal of General PlYsiolology, 1957, 40, 925-948.  FREEMAN, H. Introduction to statistical inference. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1963. GREEN, D. M. Auditory detection of a  noise signal. ,Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 1960, 32, 121-131.  GREEN, D. M. Comments on an article by Raab, Osman, and Rich. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 1966, 39, 748-749.  GREEN, D. M. The additivity of masking. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 1967, in press.  GREEN, D. M., BIRDSALL, T., AND TANNER, W. P. Signal detection as a function of signal intensity and duration. Journal of the  Acoustical Society of American, 1957, 29, 523-531.  GREEN, D. M., MCKEY, M. J., LICKLIDER, J. C. R. Detection of a pulsed sinusoid in noise as a function of frequency. Journal of  the Acoustical Society of America, 1959, 31, 1446-1452.  This explanation of the characteristic asymmetries of auditory ROC curves was first suggested to the writer by M. 1VI. Taylor.  376 MCGILL  GREEN, D. M., AND SWETS, J. Signal detection theory and psychophysics. New York: Wiley, 1966. GREENWOOD, M., AND YULE, G. U.  An inquiry into the nature of frequency distributions representative of multiple happenings with particular reference to the  occurrence of multiple attacks of disease or of repeated accidents. Journal of the Royal Statical Society, 1920, 83, 255279.  GRENANDER, U., POLLACK, H. O., AND SLEPIAN, D. The distribution of quadratic forms in normal variates; a small sample theory  with applications to spectral analysis. Journal of the Society of Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 1959, 7, 374-401.  HARMAN, W. W. Principles of the statistical theory of communication. New York: McGraw Hill, 1963.  HAWKINS, J., AND STEVENS, S. S. The masking of pure tones and of speech by white noise. Journal of the Acoustical Society of  America, 1950, 22, 6-13.  HECHT, S., SHLAER, S., AND PIRENNE, M. H. Energy, quanta and vision. Journal of General Physiology, 1942, 25, 819-840.  JEFFRESS, L. A. Stimulus-oriented approach to detection. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 1964, 36, 766-774.  L[FsHITZ, S. J. Sensation elements for hearing and touch. Comptes Rendus (Doklady) de l'Academie des Sciences de 1' URSS,  1945, 48, 479-481.  MARILL, T. Detection theory and psychophysics. Technical Report No. 319, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Research  Laboratory of Electronics, Cambridge, Mass. October 30, 1956.  MILLER, G. A. Sensitivity to changes in the intensity of white noise and its relation to masking and loudness. Journal of the  Acoustical Society of America, 1947, 19, 609-619.  NEYMAN, J. On a new class of `contagious' distributions, applicable in entomology and bacteriology. Annuls of Mathematical  Statistics, 1939, 10, 35-57.  PATIL, G. P. On the evaluation of the negative binomial distribution with examples. Technometrics, 1960, 2, 501-505.  PETERSON, W., BIRDSALL, T., AND Fox, W. The theory of signal detectability. Transactions of the Professional Group on  Information Theory (IRE), 1954, PGET4, 171-212.  PFAFFLIN, S., AND MATHEWS, M. Energy detection model for monaural auditory detection. Journal of the Acoustical Society of  America, 1962, 34, 1842-1853.  RAAB, D., OSMAN, E., AND RICH, E. Effects of waveform correlation and signal duration on detection of noise bursts in  continuous noise. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 1963, 35, 1942-1946.  RAYLEIGH, J. W. On the resultant of a large number of vibrations of the same pitch and arbitrary phase. Philosophy Magazine,  1880, 10, 73-78. (Reprinted in Scientific papers of Lord Rayleigh, Vol. 1 (1869-1881). New York: Dover, 1964. Pp. 491-499.1  RicF, S. O. Mathematical analysis of random noise. Bell System Technical Journal 1944, 23, 282-332. Reprinted in N. Wax (Ed.),  Noise and stochastic processes. New York: Dover, 1954. (Page references cited are from Wax.)  SIEBERT, W. M. Some implications of the stochastic behavior of primary auditory neurons. Kybernetik, 1965, 2, 206-215.  TREISMAN, M. Noise and Weber's law. Psychological Review, 1964, 71, 314-330.  WHITAKER, E. T., AND WATSON, G. N. A course of modern analysis, New York: Cambridge Press, 1963.  WOODWARD, P. M. Probability and information theory, with applications to radar. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1953.  RECEIVED: November 9, 1966