10.1016/0022-2496(67)90057-0
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 4, 341-347 (1967)  Graph-Theoretical Properties of Elithorn's Maze  DAVID N. LEE'  Carnegie Institute of Technology, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania  The Perceptual Maze Test, originally devised by Elithorn and later further developed in collaboration with the author, is  currently being used to study human perceptual problem-solving skills. It has been found that test performance is relatively  independent of previously acquired skills; that it is impaired by certain forms of organic brain damage; and that it is  related to certain mathematical properties of the test item structure. Hypotheses as to the nature of the solving processes  employed by subjects led to the graph-theoretical matrix analysis of the item structure presented in this paper.  The analysis of the structure of the Elithorn maze is relevant both to psychology and to graph theory. It is not the purpose  of the present paper to discuss in detail the psychological importance of the maze test as an instrument in the study of human  perceptual problem-solving-in this context the reader is referred elsewhere (e.g., Benton, Elithorn, Lee, and Nixon, 1963;  Davies, 1965; Lee, 1965)-but rather to consider the analytical properties of the structure of the maze in relation to the  problem-solving task.  In Fig. 1 a simple maze item is shown. The subject is required to find a pathway from the bottom vertex to the top row which  satisfies the following conditions: it must lie along the lattice lines; it must be unidirectional in a general upward sense;  it must pass through the greatest number of black dots.  In a recent paper (Davies and Davies, 1965) an analysis of the maze structure was proposed, which, in fact, has implicitly  many points in common with a graphtheoretical matrix analysis reported in an earlier paper (Buckingham, Elithorn, Lee, and  Nixon, 1963). The formulas for the mean distribution of pathway scores are identical in the two papers, except for the  different notations used. However, the Davies  ' The analysis reported in this paper forms part of a doctoral thesis (Lee, 1965), the research for which was carried out  during the tenure of a grant from the British Medical Research Council. For details on other analytical properties of the maze  and on a study of human problem solving using the maze test the reader is referred to the original thesis. The preparation of  the present paper was supported in part by the Public Health Service Research Grant MH 07722, from the National Institutes of  Health. The author is currently at the Center for Cognitive Studies, Harvard University.  341  and Davies analysis of the distribution of pathway scores through any particular maze is open to more serious criticism. The  authors develop a formula for the distribution which involves terms referred to as interaction terms. In order to evaluate the  distribution of pathway scores for any particular maze, these interaction terms first have to be computed, but the authors do  not report a method of accomplishing this. It will be verified that, in fact, this formula is an incomplete version (in a  computational sense) of the more general formula developed in the earlier paper. In this paper the mathematical formalization  was presented in condensed form and no proofs were given. The central concepts involved will here be developed in more detail,  employing the same notation. In particular, it will be proved that the actual distribution of the scores of pathways between  any dots on a maze (and between the vertex and the top of the maze) is derivable solely from a matrix, the elements of which  represent simply the total number of pathways between dots on the maze.  The basic structure of the maze is a triangular lattice, in the form of an interlacing binary tree, each intersection point  either containing a dot or being vacant. A maze may thus be completely specified by the parameter n = number of horizontal  maze rows, excluding the (bottom) vertex, together with the list of points which contain dots; the number of dots on a maze is  designated by the parameter r. The (p, q) coordinate system, defined on the maze lattice, which is used to designate the  lattice intersection points is shown in Fig. 1. Thus, for this maze n = 7, r = 7, and the coordinates of the lowest dot are  N  M  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 f 013151151128 0 1 0 4 1 5 0 64 0 0 0 0 3 0 16 0 0 0 1 1 8  0 0 0 0 4  0 0 0 4  0 0 2  0 11  0  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 f 0 1 2 1 1 0 3 0 14 0 ' 0 1 0 4 1 2 0 24 1 ' 0 0 0 0 3 0 10 2 0 0 0 1 1 5 3  ' 0 0 0 0 4 4  0 0 0 4 5  0 0 2 6  0 1 7  0 0 f  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 f  FIG. 1. Illustration of the concepts and notation.  GRAPH-THEORETICAL PROPERTIES OF ELITHORN'S MAZE 343  We now introduce the directional concept of accessibility. A lattice point "j" is accessible from a lattice point "i" if and  only if there exists a maze pathway, in an upward sense, from i to j. With reference to the (p, q) coordinate notation, the  necessary and sufficient conditions for the accessibility of a lattice point (p; , q;) from a point (pi , qi) are  pj > pi ; pj - pi ~ qj - qi ; qj % qi .  Geometrically this means that j is a point of the triangular lattice with bottom vertex i.  If] is accessible from i there may be one or several pathways linking the two points. If i is the bottom vertex of the maze  and if each point j is labeled with a number equal to the number of pathways from the vertex to j, then the distribution of  these numbers takes the form of the Pascal triangle. This is stated in the following theorem.  THEOREM 1. In a maze the number of pathways linking the (bottom) vertex to the point (p, q) _ (g).  The proof by induction is immediate, noting that the number of pathways up to (p + 1, q) is equal to the sum of those up to  (p, q) and (p, q - 1).  This result may be generalized:  COROLLARY 1.1. The number of pathways from the point (pi , qa) to the (accessible) point (p; , q;) is given by  ni;  - (pi - pi). qj - qi  The proof is immediate on considering the transformation of the origin of coordinates to the point (pi , qi).  In considering, in particular, the pathways between maze dots, the dots are labeled 1, 2, 3, ..., r by starting at the bottom  vertex and working along consecutive rows from left to right (see Fig. 1). Dot labeled i is situated at the point (pi , qi)  for i = 1, 2, 3,..., r. Furthermore, since all maze pathways start at the vertex and end on the top row it is convenient to  consider the vertex as the starting dot "0", and to link all the points on the top row to a finishing dot "f"-see Fig. 1.  Thus, if dot j is accessible from dot i the number of pathways i --* j is:  nil (pi - pi) qi - qi  for i, j = 0, 1, 2,..., r.  For i = 0, 1, 2,..., r, the number of pathways from dot i to the top row of the maze (i.e., i -~ f) is 2n-P:.  We may now define the matrix N = (ni;) for i, j = 0, 1, 2,..., r, f. The matrix is square and of order (r + 2). It is also  clear that ni; = 0 if i > j, or if i = f zA j: and if we further arbitrarily define nii -- 0 for i = 0, 1, 2,..., r, f then N  is an upper  triangular matrix with zeros down the main diagonal. In Fig. 1 the N matrix for the maze is given.  It will now be shown that the distribution of the scores of the pathways between any two dots on a maze can be derived solely  from the N matrix for the maze (the score of a pathway between two dots i and j is the number of dots between i and j through  which the pathway passes). As an intermediate step it is convenient to introduce a matrix M = (mi;). The form of M is similar  to N [i.e., M is an (r -!- 2) X (r -;- 2) upper triangular matrix with zeros in the main diagonal), but whereas ni; = the  total number of pathways i -*j, mi; = the number of pathways i --> j passing through no intermediate dot (i.e., with score  zero). In Fig. 1 the M matrix for the maze is given. The general relationship between the two maze matrices is expressed in  the following theorem.  THEOREM 2. The two matrices N and M of any maze are related by:  MN=N-M. Proof. The equation may be written  E, miknkl - nil - mij; k=0  = 0, 1, 2,..., r, f.  Now miknki is equal to the number of pathways i --> j with k as the first intermediate dot. Thus summing over k, and  remembering that nit = mii = 0, we obtain the number of pathways i -->.j with at least one intermediate dot (k). This is  clearly equal to the total number of pathways i --, j (= ni;) minus the number with no intermediate dots (= mi;); this  completes the proof.  COROLLARY 2.1. By a directly similar proof it can be shown that  NM =MN=N-M,  i.e., the two matrices M and N commute.  COROLLARY 2.2. M may be expressed in terms of N by  M --. N(I + N)_1 - (I + N)_l N,  where I is the (r + 2) X (r -F- 2) unit matrix.  This follows immediately from Theorem 2 and Corollary 2.1 noting that (I + N) is non-singular.  It is now possible to derive the distribution-of-pathway-scores matrices. With m = maximum pathway score on a maze, there  exists a sequence of matrices  VOA = (vi;)); i,j = 0, 1, 2,..., r, f; s = 0, 1, 2,..., m;  where viV = number of pathways between dots i and j with score s.  GRAPH-THEORETICAL PROPERTIES OF ELITHORN'S MAZE 345  Each of the Vas) matrices is of the same form as N and M; in particular V~ = M. For s =0,1, 2,..., m the V(sl matrices may  be derived from M (and hence, by Theorem 2, from N). That is, for any maze the distribution-of-pathway-scores matrices V'S'  are related to the maze matrix M by V(s) = Ms+', for s = 0, 1, 2,..., m, where m = maximum score on the maze.  This result is similar to a theorem proved by Luce and Perry (1949) in their matrix analysis of group structure; the reader is  therefore referred to this article for the proof.  Two corollaries follow immediately:  COROLLARY 2.2.1. Substituting for M in terms of N, by Theorem 2, we get  V(S) _ (N(I + N)-')s+i - Ns+'(I + N)-(s+'). s = 0, 1, 2,..., m.  COROLLARY 2.2.2. If m is the maximum score on amaze, then M7' = 0 for p > m-}-1. In particular, if m(i, j) = maximum score i  --~- j then (M11)j; = 0 for p > m(i, j) -}- 1.  Thus it has been shown that the actual distribution of the scores of the pathways between any two dots on a maze (the V(s)  matrices] may be derived solely from the N matrix for the maze, which expresses only the total number of pathways between dots  on the maze.  A set of elements of the Vas) matrices which is of particular interest is the set  (s~ .  which is the distribution of pathway scores for the whole maze. In particular vo"l> = (MM+1)of = number of solution pathways  (score m). Now, from the above two corollaries we have  v (s) = (Ns+1(I N)-(s+1) )of m 1 t-s 1sl Of + =  t=s  m (  - Y_ (-1)t-g Is~ (Nt+1)of .  Comparing this with Eq. (3) derived by Davies and Davies (1965), it will be seen that their interaction term I(t) is identical  to (Nt+i)of .  The problem of the distribution of the maximum pathway score (m) of mazes of any given size (n) and number of dots (r), which  was discussed by Davies and Davies,  is certainly important and is an intriguing problem. However, the approach adopted by these authors does not appear to throw  much light on the general problem. The present author considers that the problem could best be tackled by a combined  graph-theoretical and combinatorial analysis approach, and would like to present the problem as a challenge to workers in this  field. The problem may be stated formally as follows: Given the set of all possible mazes of size n (= number of horizontal  maze rows, excluding the vertex) and containing r dots, then the number of mazes of this set = (;), where x = number of  lattice points (excluding the vertex) = 2n(n + 3). How many mazes of this set have a maximum pathway score of m, for m = n, n  - 1, n - 2,... ?  In conclusion perhaps a few comments on the psychological aspects of the maze test are justified. In the 1963 paper it was  argued that the structure of the maze which is most relevant to the problem-solving task is not the lattice structure per se  but rather the structure of accessibility relations between the dots on the maze. That is, it was postulated that subjects  adopt a dot-oriented approach to the task, and in accordance with this idea the matrix formalization of the structure of  dot-accessibility relations was developed. More recent experimental work has lent support to the argument (Lee, 1965). In  particular, a hypothetical solving strategy, based on the concept, has been computer-simulated and the strategy pathways on 72  mazes have been compared with those chosen by a subject (Elithorn and Lee, 1965). Though a fair correspondence was found, the  study underlined the difficulty of simulating a subject's performance in detail. It may be expected, for example, that a  subject will not employ only one strategy, but will draw on a whole set of strategies. In the experiments to date, the only  concrete data on a subject's performance have been the end-product of his search, namely the pathway chosen. What is required  is more information on the intermediate processes of solution, and in an attempt to study these in same detail the writer is  currently engaged on an experiment to study the eye movements of subjects attempting the maze task. It is hoped to follow this  with a more detailed simulation study.  REFERENCES  BENTON, A. L., ELITHORN, A., FOGEL, M. J., AND KERR, M. A perceptual maze test sensitive to brain damage. Yournal of  Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 1963, 26, 540-544. BUCKINGHAM, R. A., ELITHORN, A., LEE, D. N., AND NIXON, W. L. B. A  mathematical model of a perceptual maze test. Nature, 1963, 199, 676-678.  DAVIES, ANN. D. M. The perceptual maze test in a normal population. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 1965, 20, 287-293.  DAVIES, M. G. AND DAVIES, ANN D. M. Some analytical properties of Elithorn's Perceptual Maze. ,journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 1965, 2, 371-380.  ELITHORN, A. AND LEE, D. N. The simulation of perceptual problem-solving skills. Paper presented at the British Psychological  Society Conference, Aberdeen, April 1965.  GRAPH-THEORETICAL PROPERTIES OF ELITHORN'S MAZE 347  LEE, D. N. A psychological and mathematical study of task complexity in relation to human problem solving using a perceptual  maze test. Unpublished doctoral thesis, University of London, 1965.  LucE, R. D. AND PERRY, A. D. A method of matrix analysis of group structure. Psychometrika, 1949, 14, 95-116.  RECEIVED: December. 13, 1965.