10.1016/0022-2496(67)90048-x
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL. PSYCHOLOGY: 4, 162-173 (1967)  Decomposition of Communication Networks'  KENNETH D. MACKENZIE  Carnegie Institute of Technology, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania  This is a study of the structural relationships among four commonly used networks in small-group experiments. Using graph  theory several relationships among these networks are developed. The results demonstrate how these networks can be decomposed  into subnetworks. Several behavioral consequences are developed and a rationale is provided for using 5-person groups in  experiments. Other consequences indicate several experimental procedures that can be used in the analysis of organizations.  INTRODUCTION  Small-group communication network experiments often employ an apparatus which permits communication between designated pairs  of subjects. If it is possible for a given pair to communicate with each other, then this communication channel is said to be  open; if not, it is said to be closed. Graphs have been used to describe the open channels, where the vertices of the graph  represent the subjects and the edges of the graph represent the open channels. There is a small number of graphs which are  used in many experiments. This paper examines the relationships among the four most common graphs and uses these relationships  to derive several behavioral consequences and a suggested optimum-sized network.  In the small-group literature the four most commonly used networks are called the wheel, chain, circle, and all-channel, which  are illustrated in Fig. 1 for a graph of five vertices. They are defined in the next section. [These basic networks, the  definitions of R. G. Busacker and T. L. Saaty (1965), are described in graph theoretic terms as the once-connected centered  tree, the simple chain progression, the minimal 2-connected graph, and the complete graph of n-vertices. The small-group  descriptions are used in this paper.] In this paper, the analysis is restricted to these four connected graphs. Loops and  parallel edges are excluded from here because of the nature of the apparatus used in small-group experiments.  1 This research was supported by Ford Foundation Grant 1-40055 to the Graduate School of Industrial Administration, Carnegie  Institute of Technology, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.  162  DECOMPOSITION OF COMMUNICATION NETWORKS 163  XI  X3 Xq  CHAIN GRAPH ALL-CHANNEL GRAPH  FIG. 1. Four frequently used graphs in small group experiments.  EDGE PARTITIONING AND GRAPHIC SUMMATION  Let the graph G be denoted by G =__ (X; I') where X is the set of vertices -VI , X,__ .rand I' is the set of edges, 1'7; ,  between all connected vertices (xi , x;) for 1',j, -- 1, 2,..., n. If G has it vertices, the edges can be given by a square  matrix of order n denoted by ;, G 'ii, whose entries ga; for i, j, ~ 1, 2,..., n and i --1-j are defined by  I if_ r2i exists / 0 otherwise  164 MACKENZIE  Note that for an edge Fi; = F;i , but for a digraph the arcs are not, in general, symmetric.  For any connected graph G = (X; F) it is possible to partition the edges into r disjoint connected parts Fl , F2 ,..., F,  where Fi n F; _ 0 for all i, j = 1, 2,..., r and i -)'- j. Associated with each connected part Fk C F are subsets Xk C X  containing the vertices in r,. Each connected part, r,, of the edge partition and associated set of vertices, Xk , define the  connected subgraph Gk = (Xk ; Fk). For the purposes of this paper, the edge matrix of the connected subgraph Gk , denoted ~I  Gk 11 is a square matrix of order n. Therefore,  T  Y_IIGkII=IIGII k=1  Let the connected subgraphs Gi = (Xi ; -Pi) and G; _ (X; ; I';) be the two subgraphs defined by the parts Fi and F; of F and  their associated sets of points, respectively. Then, the graphic snm2 of Gi and G; , denoted Gi V G; , is defined by  GiUG, =(XiuX1;l'iuF,) (3)  for i, j, = 1, 2,..., r and where 1'i n F; _ ~ and for each Gi there is at least one subgraph G; for which Xi n X; ~ 0 and Xi  C X and X; C X. The graphic sum of all r parts is denoted by Uk-1 Gk , where  U Gk = G. k=1  If G = Uk=, Gk , then II G II = J:'_, II Gk 11. Further, by definition of edge partition and graphic summation, if G = Uk`1 Gk  , then Fl , F2 ,..., F, form an edge partition of F.  Whenever an edge partition Fl , F2 ..... F, is formed from F, the associated subgraphs G,, G,,..., G, form a decomposition3 of  G = (X; F). Figure 2 shows three decompositions of a 4-vertex all-channel graph.  z It should be noted that a subgraph is not the same as a factor since, in general, each subgraph does not span G and is  connected. The graph is not assumed to be regular_ The graphic sum is not the same as the product of edge-disjoint spanning  subgraphs.  a Decomposition is different from factorization since the subgraphs are not necessarily factors even though they are  line-disjoint. In the special case in which each of the subgraphs of a decomposition spans the graph, decomposition becomes  factorization. All factorizations with connected factors are special cases of decomposition.  A factor is an (edge-disjoint) spanning subgraph. That is, every vertex of G must be included in every factor and no two  factors can have any common edges. Since every vertex is in a factor, all participants in a network are included along with a  few of the channels connecting them, even though in a factor they need not all necessarily be connected. There are many cases  in which it is much more interesting behaviorallyto include onlyconnected subsets of the participants  XI  X2  DECOMPOSITION OF COMMUNICATION NETWORKS 165 X4 XI XI XI X2 X2 X3 U U U U U  X3 X2 X3 X4 X3 X4 X4 XI 41 X4 XI X2  U  X3  FIG. 2. A few graphic decompositions of a 4-vertex all-channel graph.  Xq X3  SOME DECOMPOSITION THEOREMS  Using the definitions given in the preceding section, several decomposition relationships among the four graphs (the wheel,  chain, circle, and all-channel) are derived. Throughout the rest of the paper the following conventions are used in labeling  the vertices. The vertices are labeled counterclockwise starting from the top of the graph (as oriented in Fig. 1) for the  circle and all-channel graphs and from top to bottom for the chain. The central vertex of the wheel graph is labeled Xl and  the remaining vertices are labeled from left to right (cf. Fig. 1).  or subgroups, cliques, etc., in a study of group behavior or to analyze how a subgroup fits into the group. The type of  subgraph described in decomposition can represent a functioning subgroup within the group. 1lerely being able to connect all  the participants is not very interesting in the study of social phenomena. While the idea of factorization has man} fruitful  applications in certain branches of graph theory, with its limitations it is not potentially as interesting substantively as  decomposition to researchers in the social sciences. So for these reasons, decomposition is used in this paper rather than  factorization. It is hoped that the theorems and their implications resulting from the idea of decomposition will be of  interest to both graph theorists and social scientists.  166 MACKENZIE  Following these conventions, the matrices of the four connected graphs are as follows:  For the wheel graph:  1ifi=land   j=2,...,n;   gi; _ lifj=land (5)  i=2,...,n;   0 otherwise.   For the chain graph:   j 1 for i - j j = 1 where i, j, (6)  _   gi' 1 0 otherwise.   For the circle graph:   1 for I i - j I = 1 where i, j, = 1, 2,..., n   or i=landj=n (7)  _   gi'   or i = n and j = 1;   0 otherwise.   For the all-channel graph:   1 for i j for all i, j, = 1, 2,..., n;   - ( (8)  -   gz;   ~ 0 for i = j for all i = 1, 2,..., n.   Note that these four graphs of two vertices are identical and a 3-vertex chain is identical to a 3-vertex wheel and a 3-vertex  circle is the same as a 3-vertex all-channel. All these graphs are different for n _>- 4.  THEOREM 1. Any connected graph G = (X; I') of r edges can be decomposed into r two-vertex subgraphs Gl , G2 ..... G,. .  The maximum number of 2-vertex subgraphs is (z), the number of possible edges of a n-vertex all-channel graph. Also, a wheel  graph of n-vertices can be decomposed into (n - 1) 2-vertex subgraphs and a circle graph of n-vertices can be decomposed into  n 2-vertex subgraphs. Furthermore, a circle graph of n-vertices can be decomposed into k 2-vertex subgraphs and one (n - - k  rt 1)-vertex chain subgraph.  THEOREM 2. An all-channel graph G = (X; I') of n-vertices is the graphic sum of n - 1 wheel graphs, Gk = (X,, ; T,), k = 1,  2,..., n - 1, of n, n - 1,..., 2 vertices, respectively.  DECOMPOSITION OF COMMUNICATION NETWORKS 16)7  Proof. Let x, be the central vertex of the wheel of n vertices G, =-_ (X, ; I'1). Then li G,!! is given by (5). Let x, be the  central vertex of the wheel of n - l vertices G- (_Y, ; I',). Then the elements of !, G, I! are given by  gc;  1 if i - 2 and j =- 3,..., n; Iifj =2 and i-3,...,n0 otherwise.  Continue until reaching G1 r,,-1) where central vertex is .x, . Then the elements of ~ ; G1 !j are given by  1 if i = n - 1, j = n; gc;-= Iifj=n--l,i=n; 0 otherwise.  Hence, every element of lI G I! is in one and only one I! G,. !; and the diagonal elements are all zeros and the off-diagonal  elements are all unity. Therefore, Yn-1 I~ Gk  G 11, and the theorem is proven.  The minimum number of wheel subgraphs that a n-vertex all-channel can be decomposed into is n - 1, since any smaller  decomposition would violate the condition of edge partition.  THEOREM 3. An all-channel graph of n-vertices can be decomposed into the following subgraphs: one n-vertex circle, two (n -  2)-vertex wheels, a (n - 3)-vertex wheel, a (n - 4)-vertex wheel, ..., a 2-vertex wheel.  Proof. Let the circle subgraph of n-vertices be given by (7). Let the central vertex of a wheel be x, . Then, because of the  circle subgraph, the vertices of the wheel subgraph about Y, are x, , A';3, X, ,..., x-, . Thus we have a (n - 2)-vertex  wheel on x, . Let a second wheel have x_ as its vertex; then, because of the preceding two subgraphs, the vertices of this new  wheel subgraph about x., are t, , x,r , x,..., x, which defines a new (rt --- 2)-vertex wheel graph. Now consider a wheel  subgraph centered on A;3. The possible new (not vet accounted for) vertices of this wheel subgraph are .v,, , .V; ,..., .e which define a (n -- 3)-vertex wheel. Continuing counterclockwise until reaching A'-.= , the last wheel subgraph is a  2-vertex wheel. Ever_\ edge has been accounted for once and only once by this procedure  The decomposition of all-channel graphs into circle subgraphs is much more did'icuit than into wheel subgraphs or a  combination of a circle subgraph and (n - 2) wheel subgraphs. If the number of vertices is prime, a very_ simple result  obtains; but if n is odd but not prime (composite), the problem is much more difficult. It is necessarily complicated because  of the way the circle subgraphs return to the same ~-ertex in less than n-edges when the number of edges is not prime and the  distance  168 MACKENZIE  between vertices is a greatest common denominator not equal to unity. For example, in a 9-vertex all-channel graph one obtains  a 9-vertex circle whose edge progression is xl , X21 ..., x9 , xl ; another whose edge progression is xl , x3 , x5 , x7 , x9 ,  x2 , x4 , xs , x8 , xl ; three 3-vertex circles whose edge progressions are xl , x4 , x7 , xl , and x2 , x5 , x$ , x2 , and x3  , xs , x9 , x3 ; and another 9-vertex circle whose edge progression is xl , x5 , x9 , x4 , x8 , x3 , x7 , x2 , xe , xl . For  any distance or length of an edge progression greater than 2(n - 1) no new arcs are used. For example, for n = 9 an edge  progression of length 5 gives (XI , xe), (XI , x2), etc. which have already been accounted for in the other circles. In order  to prove the result for an odd composite (not prime) number of vertices, it is necessary to know two facts. First, every  composite number can be factored uniquely into prime factors. Second, if a = l li pi-' is the prime factorization of a number  a, where ai is the multiplicity of the prime number pi , and similarly n = l li pis` is the prime factorization of n, then the  greatest common divisor of the pair (a, n) is fl, pin'int,.,w. Denote the greatest common divisor of (a, n) by g.c.d. (a, n).  Let 1, 2,..., m < 2(n - 1) be the set of integers less than or equal to 2(n - 1). Given this set of integers, let al , a2  ,..., al and al < m be those integers greater than unity for which the fraction nlai is integer not equal to unity and bl , b2  ,..., b4 be those integers for which the fraction n/b; is not integer and where g.c.d. (b; , n) is an integer not equal to  unity. For example, if n = 15, then al = 3, a2 = 5, and bi = 6. Further, let c; be defined such that it is the smallest  integer such that (nlb;)c; is a prime factor (not equal to one) of n and b;lc; is prime. For n = 15, bl = 6, and ci = 2, then  ncllbl = s - 2 = 5 and bllcl = 3. Let p be the number of integer of type ai and b; . With these definitions in mind we can  state Theorem 4.  THEOREM 4. An all-channel graph of n-vertices, where n > 3 is an odd number, can be decomposed into 2(n - 1) - p circle graphs  of n-vertices, al circles of n/al vertices, ..., nlal circles of (nlal) vertices, bllcl circles of (ncllbl) vertices,...,  bglcq circles of (nbQlcq) vertices.  Proof. Consider first those integers < 2(n - 1) that are neither an ai nor a b; . Then, for the first (unity), define a circle  as in (7). The result is a n-vertex circle whose closed edge progression is xl , x2 ,..., xn , xi . For the second integer not  an ai or b; (two), define the n-vertex circle whose edge progression is xl , x3 , x5 , x7, ..., xn_1 , X21 X41 ..., xn_2 , xl  . The two n-vertex circle subgraphs are two parts of an edge partition. Similarly, all other integers < 2(n - 1) which are  neither an ai nor a b; will yield n-vertex circles. There will be exactly 2(n - 1) - p of these. Now consider the al , a2  ,..., al , integers for which the fraction nlai (i = 1, 2,..., l) is an integer not equal to unity. For a circle starting with  xl , the edge progression of the subgraph is xl , xi -{- ai , xl + 2ai,..., xi -{- (nlai) ai = xi . The resulting subgraph is  an nlai vertex circle. Likewise for the circle starting at x2 , etc., until the final circle starting at  DECOMPOSITION OF COMMUNICATION NETWORKS 169  vertex nlaz . Similarly for each ai . Next consider the bl , b,.., ba , integers for which the fraction nlb; , j = 1, 2,...,  q, is not integer and whose g.c.d. (b; , n) is an integer not equal to unity and the integer c; such that nlb; and b;lc; is  prime. Take the number b,. and form a circle subgraph beginning with xI. The edge progression is xl , xl --- b; ,..., xl --  nb;lc; ~ xl which defines a circle of nb;lc; vertices. For the same b; start the next circle at x2 and form a new subgraph.  Continue until starting vertex b;; c; . In none of the constructions is the same edge ever used more than once and all are  used. This proves the theorem.  COROLLARY 1. If n > 3 is a prime number, all all-channel graphs of n-vertices can be decomposed into '2(n -- 1) circle graphs  of n-vertices.  Proof. If n is prime, then the greatest common denominator of any number 2(n - 1) and n is unity. Hence, p in Theorem 4 is  zero. Hence, by Theorem 4, the corollary is proven.  THEOREM 5. If n > 3, an all-channel graph of n-vertices can be decomposed into the graphic sum of one (n - 1)-vertex  all-channel and one n-vertex wheel.  Proof. Let the n-vertex wheel have xl as its central vertex. Then, as in Eq. 5, the symmetric edges of this wheel are the one  in the first row and column of 11 G 11. The remaining elements in I; G lI define a (n - 1)-vertex all-channel graph whose  vertices are x2 , x3 ,..., xn .  Corollary 1 and Theorem 5 are illustrated for a 5-vertex all-channel in Figs. 3 and 4, respectively.  COROLLARY 2. If n 4 and n - 1 is prime, then an all-channel graph G of n-vertices can be decomposed into an n-vertex wheel and  1-(n - 2) circles of (n - 1)-vertices.  X4 X3 X4  ALL-CHANNEL 1. OUTSIDE" 1. INSIDE"  GRAPH CIRCLE GRAPH CIRCLE GRAPH  Fcc. 3. An example of Corollary 1 for the 5-vertex all-channel graph.  170 MACKENZIE  Proof. By Theorem 5, an all-channel graph of n-vertices can be decomposed into a n-vertex wheel and a (n - 1)-vertex  all-channel. And, since n - 1 is prime, by Corollary 1, the (n - 1)-vertex all-channel can be decomposed into (n - 2) circle  graphs of (n - I)-vertices.  X3 X4  X2 X3 X4 X5 X3  X4  FIVE -VERTEX FIVE-VERTEX FOUR-VERTEX ALL-CHANNEL WHEEL GRAPH ALL-CHANNEL GRAPH GRAPH  Fcc. 4. An example of Theorem 5 for the 5-vertex all-channel graph  The preceding results are only a subset of those obtainable through graph-theoretic analysis. The main interest of this paper,  however, is not graph theory; but rather the behavioral interpretation of the preceding results. The next section is a  discussion of the potential behavioral consequences that derive from the mathematics.  DISCUSSION  An edge partition is used to develop the various results of the preceding sections because it corresponds to subgraphs  connected by open channels in small-group experiments. Another possibility is a vertex partition which would focus on the  subjects in an experiment. An edge partition and the resulting graphic decomposition is very helpful in the analysis of the  organizational structure of the group and the identification of the possible subgroups and even cliques. The next few pages  examine the various results in terms of the organization structure and substructures.  Theorem 1 states that a connected graph of r edges can be decomposed into r 2-vertex subgraphs. While being trivial  mathematically, it means that a communications network can be considered as a graphic composition of its dyads. That is, the  structure of a small group can be analyzed in terms of each of the dyads. If the analysis were to proceed further to include  an analysis of the content of each dyadic communication, the authority, decision, or functional structure can be pieced  together from the  DECOMPOSITION OF COMMUNICATION NETWORKS ICI  parts. This is a result that has been used in several studies (Faucheux and Mackenzie, 1966; Mackenzie, 1964; Mackenzie and  Huysmans, 1965; and Mackenzie and Frazier, 1966).  A direct corollary of Theorem 1 is that a wheel graph of n-vertices can be decomposed into (n -- 1) 2-vertex subgraphs. The  central vertex of a wheel graph can be considered as a "leader" in a social situation and the other n --- 1 vertices his  "subordinates." The content of the interaction may differ with the individual subordinate due to division of labor or to other  specialization based upon the requirements of the organization and the individual capacities or interests of the subordinates.  Another direct corollary of Theorem 1 is that a circle graph of n-vertices can be decomposed into k 2-vertex subgraphs and one  (n -- k + 1)-vertex chain. Reversing the proposition, a careful content analysis of a complex organization (one having many  levels and subgroups on each level) might reveal the existence, functionally, of a circular flow of interaction among the  various parts of the organization by piecing together the interacting dyads and chains. On the other hand, what appears to be  a simple circle might be composed of functionally differentiated subgroups which may relay information, solve problems, or  Theorem 2 states that an all-channel graph of n-vertices is the graphic sum of n I wheel graphs ranging from a n-vertex wheel  down to a 2-vertex wheel. Thus it is logically possible to view an all-channel as a graphic summation of n - 1 different  wheels. The all-channel is often used to represent a committee where all individuals are freely interacting. It is usually  considered an equalitarian organization form since all participants have equal access to one another. On the other hand a  wheel network is considered authoritarian since it places the maximum possible restrictions on communication in a connected  network by having only the open channels going to the central person. But if what looks like an all-channel is really a series  of wheels, then the network might be considered oppressive rather than democra tic. In fact, one member of the all-channel  could have n - I "supervisors." Conclusions about one network, like an all-channel, being a priori more or less equalitarian  than another do not result from a careful analysis of the topological properties of the various networks.  Theorem 3 states that an all-channel graph of n-vertices can be decomposed into a n-vertex circle, two (n -- 2)-vertex wheels  and n - 4 other wheels of diminishing number of vertices. Thus an all-channel graph can be decomposed into a circle connecting  all vertices and a series of wheels. One direct implication is that it is possible to have wheel subgraphs in an all-channel  transmitting one type of message (as in a local problem solving center) within a subwheel and different kinds of messages  between subgroups and yet another set of messages to the overall circle group.  Theorem 4 gives the general way that an all-channel can be decomposed into just circle graphs. Corollary 1 states that for  n-prime, an all-channel graph of n-vertices can be decomposed into !,(n - 1) n-vertex circles. For example, in Fig. 3, the  172 MACKENZIE  all-channel is the graphic sum of two 5-vertex circles which are labeled the outside and the inside circles. That is, the  "star" inside the all-channel unwraps into a 5vertex circle. Hence, there exists the possibility for such a graph of  considering the all-channel graph as the superposition of two communications networks. Experiments could be performed to see,  whether two circle groups, properly arranged, could be considered as one group which in terms of communication channels  appears to be an all-channel.  Theorem 5 states that any all-channel graph (n >, 3) can be decomposed into an n-vertex wheel and an (n - 1)-vertex  all-channel. This result is particularly interesting to the author because it has been useful in interpreting an experiment he  is currently conducting. In this experiment a five-man all-channel functions as if it were two separate networks in the manner  described in Theorem 5. In terms of the pattern of communications, each group is an all-channel and yet when subjects are  questioned, they always designate one of the subjects as leader. Analysis of the content shows a perfect all-channel among  four (excluding the leader) over which the group shares information and a perfect wheel centered on the leader over which the  group's decisions are made. So in this case the possibilities suggested by Theorem 5 actually obtain experimentally (cf. Fig.  4).  In a substantive sense, the behavioral consequences of this paper were anticipated by Simon (1962, p. 477) when he stated:  ... hierarchies have the property of near-decomposability. Intra-component linkages are generally stronger than in  intercomponent linkages. This fact has the effect of separating the high-frequency dynamics of a hierarchy-involving the  internal structure of the components-from the low frequency dynamicsinvolving interaction among components."  The results of this paper suggest methods for identifying the components of an organization. This leads to clearer statements  about the total organization (graph) of which the components (subgraphs) are part. Simon's (1962) concept of a hierarchic  system (a system composed of interrelated subsystems which are in turn subsystems, etc.) can be made more precise using the  type of analysis presented in this paper.  The five theorems and two corollaries establish a few of the structural interrelationships among the wheel, chain, circle, and  all-channel graphs. It was noted earlier that all four graphs are identical for a 2-vertex graph, and for a 3-vertex graph the  wheel and chain and the circle and all-channel are identical. So that the smallest graph for which all four graphs are  different is a 4-vertex graph. Since each graph represents a different and commonly employed communications network, one  desirable feature of a communications network is that it permits the different configurations simultaneously. If, however, the  size of the network is too large, it becomes difficult to organize and control during an experiment. So, what is the "best"  size of a small group ? The answer, suggested here, is that the "best"-size group is the smallest  DECOMPOSITION OF COMMUNICATION NETWORKS 173  (to reduce cost and control problems) that allows the other three networks to operate simultaneously in an all-channel to give  maximum network flexibility.  Given an all-channel and the similarity of the different graphs for n = 2 and 3, the number must be at least four. A graph G =  (X; I') is defined here to be a general n-vertex all-channel graph if it can be decomposed into all of the following subgraphs:  (i) one or more wheels of three or more vertices, (ii) one or more circles of three or more vertices, (iii) one or more chains  of four or more vertices.  An all-channel graph of 4-vertices is not general. By Corollary 2 a 5-vertex allchannel can be decomposed into two 5-vertex  circles and a five-point circle can be decomposed into a 3-vertex wheel and a 4-vertex chain. Hence, the smallest general  all-channel has five vertices. Therefore, by the stated criterion five is the "best" size for a communications network  experiment. Any larger number will be general too, but has the disadvantage of increasing the problems of cost and control.  CONCLUSIONS  Using an edge partition and a special form of graphic decomposition, the structural interrelationships among four frequently  used communication networks are analyzed. The results of the analysis are used to examine the related behavioral implications  and to provide an answer to the problem of the "best"-size small group. The analysis, as far as it goes, demonstrates that  important behavioral consequences can be derived by viewing group structures in terms of their possible subgroup  decomposition. It is very possible for different subgroups within an organization to communicate within the subgroup on one  dimension and with other subgroups or the whole organization on other dimensions. The contents of messages are probably more  important than the frequency and direction of interaction in understanding the behavior of subjects in an experiment. The  mathematical results of this paper give a systematic way of determining the possible subgroups. The four graphs studied in  this paper are closely interrelated and that because of these relationships, it is not correct to assert properties about  groups merely on the basis of the total structure of the channels of communications.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  The author wishes to thank Fred W. Glover of the University of California, Berkeley for his comments concerning Theorem 4 and  the referees for their very helpful suggestions.  174  MACKENZIE  REFERENCES  BUSACKER, R. G. AND SAATY, T. L. Finite graphs and networks: an introduction with applications. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1965.  FAUCHEux, C. AND MACKENZIE, K. D. Task dependency of organizational centrality: its behavioral consequences. Yournal of  experimental social Psychology, 1966, 2, No. 4, in press. MACKENZIE, K. D. A mathematical theory of organizational structure.  Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of California, Berkeley, 1964.  MACKENZIE, K. D. AND FRAZIER, G. D. Applying a model of organization structure to the analysis of a wood products market.  Management Sciences, 1966, 12, 13340-13352. MACKENZIE, K. D. AND HUYSMANS, J. H. B. M. A formal analysis of a group decision  making experiment, Working Paper No. 11, Ford Foundation Project in Organizational Behavior, Graduate School of Industrial  Administration, Carnegie Institute of Technology, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, March, 1965.  SIMON, H. A. The architecture of complexity. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 1962, 6, 467-482.  RECEIVED: August 16, 1965.  Printed in Belgiton