10.1016/0022-2496(68)90085-0
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: S, 422-441 (1968)  Relations between Choice and Latency Measures in a Selective Learning Paradigm'  JACK CATLIN AND HENRY GLEITMAN  University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104  Three experiments were run in a two-response selective learning paradigm to ascertain relations between (1) choice and latency on trials with both alternatives available, and (2) latency when only one alternative is available, with one alternative reinforced with greater probability. Variations used rats or pigeons, spatial or visual discrimination. One class of models of choice, accumulator models with absolute thresholds (Audley and Pike, British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 1965, 18, 207), was examined in light of the data. Simple accumulator models, without interference between subprocesses leading to choice of the different alternatives, are clearly inadequate. An extension of Audley's accumulator model with interference (Psychological Review, 1960, 67, 1) makes predictions which deviate from those of the simple accumulator in the same fashion as do the data. Any attempt to account for the data by an accumulator model must provide for interference; further study of accumulators with interference would seem warranted.  A recurrent problem in the analysis of selective learning and performance is the prediction of choice behavior from the strengths of the individual responses. While there have been many studies that bear on this issue inferentially (for example, the voluminous literature on transposition and related matters), only a few experiments have attacked the problem directly by assessing both choice and individual response strength in the same situation. The most pertinent of these studies was performed by Logan (1952a, b), operating within the theoretical framework of the Hull-Spence tradition. Logan trained rats in a two-bar test chamber. During some of the trials (choice trials), both bars were available to the subject and choice was recorded; during others (here called solo trials), only one or the other of the two bars was presented and latency was the measure taken. The two responses were brought to different strengths  1 This research was supported by NIMH grant MH 10629-03 to H. Gleitman. The authors are indebted to Drs. R. R. Bush, J. Nachmias, F. Norman, J. Van Laer, and D. Williams, and Mr. D. Alexander for helpful advice and discussions. Special thanks are due Dr. R. J. Audley for valuable criticisms and suggestions, and for making some of his mathematical analyses available to us.  422  CHOICE AND LATENCY IN SELECTIVE LEARNING 423  by having a different delay of reinforcement associated with each of them; this differential contingency held for both choice and solo trials.  The results of this study were somewhat ambiguous. Logan obtained a rough correspondence between the probability that Rl would be selected on a choice trial and the probability that the latency of a solo trial for 121 would be shorter than the latency of a solo trial for R2 . However, these probabilities were not exactly equal: choice led to more extreme values than did the relation between solo trials, a result contrary to predictions from the Hull-Spence conceptual system, which had instigated Logan's work in the first place.  Unfortunately, Logan's results rest on somewhat shaky procedural foundations. First, the same delays of reinforcement held both on solo and choice trials: one of the bars was reinforced more quickly than the other, whether it was presented singly or with its mate. Under the circumstances, the subject could acquire differential response tendencies on both solo and choice trials; performance might then be due simply to the subject's prior choice experience instead of representing the interaction of two separate response strengths carried over from solo training. Second, it is very possible that the subjects learned a position preference and approached the more favored side first on all trials, whether choice or solo. If subjects did learn such a position preference, the preferred side would necessarily exhibit shorter latencies on solo trials; differential latencies would then be mere artifacts indicating that at bottom the solo trials were still choice trials after all. Finally, since data were averaged across subjects, some critical within-subject patterns may have been obscured.  The present paper reports several studies using variants of the Logan design. These studies have two objects: (1) to determine the relationships between solo latencies, choice latencies, and choice probability, uncontaminated by some of the possible artifacts that may have operated in Logan's study; and (2) to consider some possible models of the choice process in the light of these empirical relationships. This last point needs some elaboration.  We are here considering one class of models of the choice process, dubbed "accumulator models" by Audley and Pike (1965). In such models, the choice process is conceived as one in which the alternative tendencies that comprise the choice race toward some absolute reaction threshold, with that alternative chosen that first reaches this goal. In a sense all such models may be likened to a horse race in which several horses compete, starting from the same point and racing toward the same finish line. As Audley and Pike point out, this class of models can be further subdivided into two subclasses. It may be that the horse race is "simple": the horses race in strict independence of each other. On the other hand, it may be that the race is more complex: the horses may interact, with the front runners kicking the ones behind, making it even harder for them to catch up. The simple horse race model is exemplified in Hull's (1943) system and in some of Spence's (1956) earlier theoretical discussions of selective learning. Both writers held that in a competition between two or more  424 CATLIN AND GLEITMAN  responses, that response would win out whose momentary reaction potential would first exceed some critical threshold:2 the important point here is the assumption that the momentary reaction potential of any one response is utterly unaffected by that of any of the others. In such a race, a given horse runs at the same speed whether alone or in the presence of others, so that, chance factors aside, the outcome will be the same either way. In contrast, Audley (1960) proposes a race in which the competitors do not race in isolation: a given response alternative, once ahead, pushes its rivals back to the starting point.  It would be remarkable if the choice mechanism were indeed so simple as to be mirrored by the simple horse race model. Still, it may be fruitful to consider the empirical consequences of this model as a first point of departure. We will restrict ourselves to a situation in which there are only two alternatives, A and B. According to the model, a choice trial represents a race where the two competitors vie simultaneously. On any such trial, the latency of each of the two alternatives is drawn from its underlying latency distribution with victory awarded to the shorter of the two latencies so drawn. By the assumption of simple competition, the latency distributions that underlie each alternative on choice trials are identical to those obtained for the respective solo trials. Two predictions follow:  First, if PA stands for the probability of an A response on a choice trial, and P[LSA < Ls,] for the probability that the latency of a solo trial to A is shorter than the latency of a solo trial to B, then  PA = P[LsA < Lsa] - (1)  Precisely this prediction was drawn from Hullian theory by Logan (1952b). It follows from Hull's approach as indeed from any model which incorporates the assumption of simple competition between the response alternatives.  Second, if pairs of solo trials, one trial each for A and B, are selected at random, let us denote the member of the pair with the shorter latency as the "victor." (In a sense, this is the victor of a race in which the horses are run successively rather than simultaneously.) A solo trial to A victorious over its respective solo trial mate to B will be designated as a VA trial. If we let E[LvA] be the expectation of the latency on VA trials, and E[LCA] the expectation of the latency on choice trials when response A is made, then given the basic assumption of the simple horse race model, we predict that  E[LvA] = E[LCA](2)  s Within Hull's system this is strictly true only if the momentary reaction potentials for all responses are subthreshold at trial start. If one or more reaction potentials are above threshold, the assumption is that the response with the largest reaction potential is performed, and with the same latency as if no competing responses existed. But even fully elaborated, the Hull-Spence model still belongs to the class of simple horse race models.  CHOICE AND LATENCY IN SELECTIVE LEARNING 425  More generally, the distributions of LA and LIA should be the same in all details. For the assumption of the simple horse-race model is precisely that incorporated into our rule for constructing solo victors: a latency is drawn from each underlying distribution, and the response with the shorter latency is the response that is actually made.  It should be emphasized that predictions (1) and (2) follow from any version of the simple horse-race model, whatever its particular assumptions about the form of the underlying latency distributions for the alternative responses. We will first show that these predictions are not both borne out by the behavior orats and pigeons in our version of the Logan experiment. We will then discuss our data as they bear on more complex horse-race models of the kind proposed by Audley (1960).  METHOD  EXPERIMENT 1  The purpose of this experiment was to determine the relationship between choices, solo latencies, and choice latencies under conditions which ensured that all differential_ response tendencies were based on solo trials only.  Subjects. The subjects were eight male, experimentally naive, hooded rats of the Long Evans strain that were four to six months of age at the start of the experiment. Throughout the study they were maintained at 85% of their ad libitum body weight and fed on a 23-hour schedule.  Apparatus. The apparatus was a standard rat test chamber, modified as follows. The manipulanda were three Lehigh Valley pigeon keys, mounted behind three circular holes, each ~ in. in radius, cut in the instrument panel. One hole was in the center and slightly elevated (its center was 5 in. from the chamber floor); the other two were somewhat lower and to either side (the center of each was 2 in. from the midline of the chamber and 12 in. from the floor). A standard pellet feeder delivered 45 mg Noyes sucrose pellets into a hopper located at the floor and midway between the two side keys.  Procedure. Subjects were first trained to press the lit center key for food reinforcement. After this training was thoroughly established, the experiment proper began. Each subject received 50 trials per day. Each trial began with the center key lit. As soon as the center key was pressed, its light was turned off, and, according to a prearranged order, the right key lit up (22 trials), or the left key lit up (22 trials), or both the right and the left key lit up (6 trials). Gellerman orders were used to determine the sequence of right and left solo trials. Every 9th trial, beginning with trial 5, was a choice trial. There was a 15-second intertrial interval during which the chamber was in darkness.  Two groups of four subjects were run (FR-5 and FR-15). On solo trials when only one key was lit subjects in Group FR-5 had to press five times to turn off its light. (Subjects in Group FR-15 had to press 15 times.) Light removal was an automatic consequence of the 5th (or 15th) press, but reinforcement was not: reinforcement was provided on only some of the solo trials and more frequently on one key than on the other. On choice trials when both keys were lit, a noncorrection method was used: the first press of either key turned off the light of the other. Another 4 (or 14)  426  CATLIN AND GLEITMAN  presses of the key initially chosen were required to remove its light. There was no reinforcement on choice trials regardless of which key was chosen. Each subject was run for 24 sessions. Before the first session the subject was given one unreinforced choice trial to determine initial preference (designated as R2) .3 On sessions 1 through 4, reinforcement was provided on 73% of the solo trials to Rl and on 27% of the solo trials on R2 . The percentages were reversed on sessions 5 through 8, reversed again on the next four sessions, and so on throughout the 24 sessions. About five sessions were administered each week.  For all trials, latency was defined as the time interval between pressing the center key and the first press of a lit key. It was recorded by means of a 10/second pulser which sent impulses to a print-out counter during that interval. Since the pulser was running continuously, latency measurement was accurate to the nearest .2 second. A separate decade of the print-out counter recorded whether the subject had pressed an unlit key prior to the lit one on solo trials. Another decade recorded choice during choice trials.  We believe that this general procedure has several advantages when compared with that employed by Logan: (1) the use of the center key allows a more precise measurement of latency, since it guarantees that the subject is "ready" for the trial and ensures that he is properly centered at the start of the latency interval. (2) Differential reinforcement is confined to the solo trial. (3) Solo trials are reinforced on a partial schedule which makes it more difficult for subjects to form a discrimination between solo and choice trials.  EXPERIMENT 2  This experiment was substantially identical to Experiment 1, except that pigeons were used as subjects rather than rats.  Subjects. The subjects were six male Silver King pigeons, about four to six years of age. They were experimentally naive at the start of the experiment. Throughout the experiment they were maintained at 80% of their body weight and fed on a 23-hour schedule.  Apparatus. The apparatus was a standard three-key pigeon chamber. The manipulanda were three Lehigh Valley pigeon keys that could be transilluminated from behind. Reinforcement was delivered by a standard pigeon feeder which allowed access to food grain.  Procedure. The basic procedure was essentially identical to that employed in Experiment 1. Every trial began with the center key lit. Once this was depressed, its light was turned off and the right key lit up, or the left key lit up, or both keys lit up. All key lights were white. The number of solo and choice trials, their order, the proportion of solo trials reinforced on one side or the other, and the intertrial interval were all identical to those employed in Experiment 1. There were only two procedural differences. First, for all subjects, 15 pecks at the side key were required to turn off its light. Second, for half the subjects, there was no reinforcement on choice trials whatever the choice (as in Experiment 1); the other half, however, were always reinforced on choice trials regardless of the choice. This variation was run to control for the possibility that subjects learned to discriminate choice trials from solo trials, with two lit keys serving as a negative stimulus.  Each subject was run for 12 sessions. Rl and R2 were determined as in Experiment 1. On sessions 1 through 4, reinforcement was provided on 73 % of the solo trials to Rl , The percentages were reversed on sessions 5 through 8, and reversed again for the next four sessions. About six sessions were administered each week. Data were recorded in the same manner as in Experiment 1.  a The two response alternatives are designated Rl and R2 in contexts where they refer unambiguously to the initially nonpreferred (RI) or preferred (R2) alternative in our studies. In more general discussion the alternatives are designated A and B.  CHOICE AND LATENCY IN SELECTIVE LEARNING 422  EXPERIMENT 3  The purpose of this study was to rule out the possibility that the various relationships between solo and choice effects were due to a position preference in which the subjects approached the more favored side first on both choice and solo trials. When the alternatives are two different visual stimuli appearing equally often on both sides, such a bias cannot occur.  Subjects and apparatus. Both subjects and apparatus were the same as in Experiment 2. Red and green lights were used to transilluminate the side keys; white light was used for the center key.  Procedure. The procedure was an adaptation of the basic method employed in Experiments 1 and 2. As before, each trial began with the center key lit. As soon as the center key was depressed, the right key lit up in red or in green (13 trials each), or the left key lit up in red or in green (13 trials each), or both keys lit up (red on the right and green on the left for four trials; green on the right and red on the left for another four trials). Modified Gellerman orders were used to determine the sequence of the various solo trials. Beginning with trial 7, every seventh trial was a choice trial. Reinforcement conditions on choice trials were identical to those that prevailed in Experiment 2; in this manner some of the subjects were always reinforced on choice trials, ar_d some never were.  One of the stimuli was arbitrarily chosen to be favored first (S1). For half of the subjects, S1 was red; for the other half it was green. During the first session, reinforcement was provided on 73% of the solo trials to Sl , and on 27% of the solo trials on S2 . The number of reinforcements was the same whether the stimuli appeared on the right or the left key. This procedure continued until the subject achieved a criterion of three consecutive sessions in which Sl was chosen on every choice trial. When this criterion was attained, the percentages were reversed on the following sessions until the same criterion was achieved for S. . After this, the percentages were reversed again. In all other respects the procedure was identical to that used in Experiment 2.  RESULTS  GROSS PATTERN OF RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SOLO AND CHOICE MEASURES  Solo latency and choice. Mean proportions of Rl choices and the mean difference between solo latencies for R, and R2 are plotted over sessions in Fig. t for Experiment 1. (The FR-5 and FR-15 groups were combined since the same pattern held in both.) As the figure indicates, solo latencies and choice responses followed the reinforcement bias during solo trials. On solo trials, the latencies were shorter for the more favored alternative; on choice trials, the more heavily reinforced alternative was preferred. The zig-zag pattern on the curves follows naturally enough, given that the favored side was shifted every four sessions. On the whole, both solo latencies and choice preferences tracked the reinforcement pattern reasonably well; there is no evidence that either one lagged behind the other.  Figure 1 presents results averaged over subjects and within sessions. Inspection of the latency distributions on solo trials indicate that we are not dealing with some artifact of averaging. Figure 2 shows the latency distributions on solo trials over 24  428  CATLIN AND GLEITMAN  -1.00  U w O  cc N u  Z H Q J  Z Q w  6.0  --------- PERCENT CHOICE R, SOLO LATENCY DIFF.  R1  R2 +  .00  SESSIONS AND RESPONSE FAVORED  Fia. 1. Percentage choice of Rl and difference between mean solo latencies as a function of session.in Experiment 1. For each block of four sessions, it is indicated along the abscissa whether Rz or RZ was more frequently reinforced.  sessions for one subject in the FR-15 group of Experiment 1. As the figure shows, the distributions shift with the reinforcement conditions, and are in rough correspondence with the subject's preference on choice trials. Similar patterns have been obtained for almost all subjects in all three experiments. Whether choice trials were reinforced or not (a condition that was varied in Experiments 2 and 3) did not affect the general pattern.  Solo latency and choice latency. Table I presents mean latencies for dominant and nondominant responses on choice trials for all three experiments. A response was considered dominant if the subject chose it on more than 50% of the choice trials in a  4.0  2.0  4.0  6.0  -.90  _ .80  .70 U  O 2 U  .60  FZ w 50 U d  Z  _ .4D Q w  -.30  -.20  _ .10  CHOICE AND LATENCY IN SELECTIVE LEARNING 429  Z V a 0 Z Q O V Z Q O_ O O V Z O Q  DAYS 1-4 R1 +  DAYS 5-8 R2 +  DAYS 9-12 R1+  DAYS 13-16 R2+  DAYS 17-20 R1 +  DAYS 21-24 R2+  012345 10~ SEC  FiG. 2. Latency distributions of solo trials for one subject in Experiment 1 over all sessions. (Distributions are plotted using relative frequencies, with trials to Rl above, trials R, below, the horizontal midline.)  block of two sessions. (Blocks of two sessions in which choice was evenly divided were excluded from this analysis.) Mean choice latency tends reliably to be less for dominant than for nondominant responses. Over the three experiments, this is true for 15 out of 18 subjects; for one of the remaining three subjects, the two measures were equal,  It appears that, for dominant responses, choice and solo latencies are roughly the same. Over all three experiments, ten subjects show solo latencies that are longer than choice latencies for dominant responses, while six show the opposite effect. Within, individual subjects these differences (in either direction) tend to be small. On the other hand, for nondominant responses, mean solo latency is reliably longer than mean choice latency. Over the three experiments, 16 of the 18 subjects show this effect.  430  CATLIN AND GLEITMAN  TABLE 1  MEAN LATENCIES ON SOLO AND CHOICE TRIALS FOR DOMINANT AND NONDOMINANT RESPONSES IN ALL EXPERIMENTS (IN SECONDS)   Experiment and subject" Solo trials Choice trials  Experiment 1 Dominant Nondominant Dominant Nondominant   14, FR-5 1.2 2.8 1.2 2.0   21, FR-5 2.0 2.6 1.8 2.0   22, FR-5 1.1 1.6 1.0 1.1   23, FR-5 1.6 3.2 1.5 1.6   2. FR-15 1.4 2.7 1.5 1.8   6, FR-15 2.4 9.1 2.5 3.0   12, FR-15 1.5 3.8 2.1 1.8   24, FR-15 2.2 6.3 1.4 3.1   Mean 1.7 4.0 1.6 2.0   Experiment 2       25A 3.0 6.0 2.2 3.5   26 A 2.9 5.1 2.0 3.1   28A 1.2 1.8 1.2 2.9   29B 1.6 3.6 1.3 2.0   30B 2.8 7.8 3.1 1.5   32B 2.2 3.8 2.0 6.7   Mean 2.3 4.7 2.0 3.3   Experiment 3       25 A 1.4 3.1 1.5 1.5   28 A .8 1.4 .7 1.0   29 B 1.2 2.0 1.0 1.8   32B .9 4.0 1.2 1.9   Mean 1.1 2.6 1.1 1.6  a A: always reinforced on choice trials; B: never reinforced on choice trials (in Experiments 2 and 3).  SPECIFIC PREDICTIONS OF THE SIMPLE HORSE-RACE MODEL  Choice preference. The model predicts that the probability that Rl will be selected on choice trials will be equal to the probability that a solo latency for RI is shorter than for R2 . This prediction can, of course, be tested directly by computing the appropriate proportion. This procedure is somewhat laborious; more importantly, it does not take into account possible within-session changes in overall reaction speed common to Rl and R2 that might attenuate the relationship. In consequence, we adopted another way of assessing P[LSR. < LSRz].  CHOICE AND LATENCY IN SELECTIVE LEARNING 431  We will first describe this procedure for Experiments 1 and 2. For each subject and each session we obtained the proportion of Ra choices on choice trials and the proportion of "solo victors." To obtain the latter, solo trials were matched in pairs: the first solo trial for Ri with the first solo trial for R2 , and so on through all solo trials of each session. For each pair, that solo trial with the shorter latency was declared the victor.  For the purpose of this analysis we eliminated all solo trials on which a subject pressed an unlit key prior to his first press to the lit one. Such trials were relatively infrequent; the number per session was rarely greater than three. Not surprisingly, they always occurred on solo trials to the side away from the subject's current preference. (A separate analysis was conducted with these trials kept in. The overall results were substantially the same as the ones reported here.)  FiG. 3. Percentage Rl choice plotted against percentage Rl solo victor in Experiment 1. (Each data point is based on two consecutive sessions of one subject. Open symbols represent subjects in Group FR-5; closed symbols, subjects in Group FR-15.)  432 CATLIN AND GLEITMAN  Figures 3 and 4 present scattergrams in which the percentage Rl for choice trials and the percentage Rl solo victor are plotted against each other for Experiments 1 and 2, respectively. Each point is based on the performance of one subject on two sessions. (Blocks of two sessions were used to allow a more stable estimate of choice performance; after all, there were only six choice trials per session.) The diagonals, equality of the two measures, represent the outcome predicted by the simple horse-race model.  U 60  O x v  Z 40 w  v w d  20  100  80  0  r  20 40 60 80 100  PERCENT R1 SOLO-VICTOR  Fig. 4. Percentage R1 choice plotted against percentage R1 solo victor in Experiment 2. (Each data point is based on two consecutive sessions of one subject. Open symbols represent subjects who were never reinforced on choice trials; closed symbols represent subjects who were always reinforced on choice trials.)  As the figures show, there is obviously a correlation between the two scores. This correlation was found for most subjects in both experiments. Of course, a considerable degree of scatter is to be expected due to sampling fluctuations, given that the choice proportions are based on only 12 trials.  CHOICE AND LATENCY IN SELECTIVE LEARNING 433  The simple horse-race model does quite well by these data. For both experiments we calculated the slope of the best-fitting straight line of PA on P[LSA < LS$] which passes through (.5, .5), by the criterion of minimizing the sum of the deviations oPA from the line. Compared with the model's prediction that the slope equals one, the obtained slope of the best-fitting line equals 1.06 for Experiment 1, and .99 for Experiment 2. These data give no cause to reject the model.  The results of Experiment 3 were analyzed in much the same manner described for the preceding experiments. To obtain solo victors, solo trials were matched in pairs holding spatial position constant: the first solo trial for Red on the right was compared with the first solo trial for Green on the right, and so on through the session. This procedure helped to factor out any possible masking effects due to position preference. The results are presented in Fig. 5, in which the percentage Rl choice is dotted  PERCENT R1 SOLO VICTOR  Fzc. 5. Percentage Rl choice plotted against percentage Rl solo victor in Experiment 3. (Each data point is based on two consecutive sessions oone subject. Open symbols represent subjects who were never reinforced on choice trials; closed symbols represent subjects who were always reinforced on choice trials.)  4801513-5  434 CATLIN AND GLEITMAN  against the percentage RI solo victor as before. The pattern is very similar to that obtained in Experiments 1 and 2. In Experiment 3, the obtained slope of the bestfitting straight line equals 1.14, again quite close to the model's prediction. The apparent tendency for PA to take on more extreme values than P[LSA < Ls,] is not at all strong enough to warrant rejection of the simple horse race model. The results of this experiment indicate that the systematic relationship between PA and P[LSA < LSB] cannot be due to a position preference in which the favored side is approached first whatever alternative is available.  Choise latency and latency of solo victors. The model predicts that the mean latency for a given response on choice trials (LCA) will be equal to the mean latency of those solo trials to the same response which were victorious over their appropriate solo-trials mates to the other response in the solo-trial pairings set up before (LVA). To determine whether this prediction held up, LCA and LvA were determined for all experiments, in blocks of two sessions and for dominant responses only. The results for Experiment 1 are presented in Fig. 6, which shows Lc, plotted against LvA . As the  MEAN SOLO-VICTOR LATENCY (SEC)  FIG. 6. Mean choice latency plotted against mean solo victor latency in Experiment 1, for dominant alternatives. (Each data point is based on two consecutive sessions of one subject. Open symbols represent subjects in Group FR-5; closed symbols, subjects in Group FR-15.)  CHOICE AND LATENCY IN SELECTIVE LEARNING 435  figure clearly shows, the mean solo-victor latencies are shorter than the mean choice latencies. Identical results were obtained in Experiments 2 and 3. The second prediction of the simple horse race model fails.  DISCUSSION  At the grossest empirical level, the results of our studies show that there is a transfer of response preference from a solo to a choice situation, and thus a monotonic relationship between the primary measures appropriate to each situation, latency and choice. This effect appears whether the subjects are rats or pigeons, whether the response alternatives are two positions or two colors, or whether the choice trials are always or never reinforced. To this extent, the results substantiate those obtained over 15 years ago by Logan (1952a), and indicate that Logan's essential findings were not due to artifacts of his particular procedure.  When we consider the results as they bear on the simple horse-race model, we must conclude that this model is quite inadequate. The plot of PA against P[Ls, < LsB] follows the main diagonal closely , in agreement with the horse-race model's prediction that PA = P[LSA < Ls,]. But, whereas the simple horse-race model predicts that E[LCA] = E[LvA], we found choice latencies to be systematically slower than solovictor latencies.  The simple horse-race model is clearly false. Does the same hold for a more complex version of this class of models? In the simple model, simultaneous and successive races are identical, for the two alternatives do not interact at all. Several models have been proposed in which such an interaction does occur and in which the subprocesses leading to choice of a given alternative interfere with those that lead to the other. Audley and Pike (1965) designate this class of models "accumulators subject to interference." Perhaps the most fully elaborated model of this class has been suggested by Audley (1960). This model can easily be extended to make predictions about relationships between performance measures on choice and solo trials. To get an initial indication whether complex horse-race models might account for such data, we worked out one such extension of Audley's model, and then considered the resemblance between the model's predictions and our own data.  According to Audley's model, that response wins out which first succeeds in achieving an uninterrupted string of K implicit responses appropriate to it: one of the horses takes a lead, but the one behind it may bite the leader's tail and drag it back to the starting gate. More precisely, the model is based on two main assumptions (Audley, 1960, p. 264):  Assumption l: for given stimulus and organismic conditions, there is associated with each possible choice response a single parameter. This parameter determines the probability that in a small interval of time (t, t -I- At), there will occur an "implicit" response of the kind with which the parameter is associated.  436 CATLIN AND GLEITMAN  Assumption 2: a final choice response is made when a run of K implicit responses of a given kind appears, this run being uninterrupted by occurrences of implicit responses of other kinds.  Taking the continuous case with two choice alternatives (A and B), this gives us density functions for their respective implicit responses of ae at and fe-01, a and R being the parameters of the model. Implicit responses are thus generated randomly in time. The interference between alternatives is provided for in Assumption 2, whereby a single implicit response to A can reset to zero an all-but-completed run of implicit responses to B, and vice versa.  We will get predictions from the model with no restrictions on the value of K (the number of consecutive implicit responses required to win the race), and then plot how the model's predictions vary with changes in the value of K. (For K = 1, the Audley model reduces to a variant of the simple horse-race model already shown to be inadequate.) The model as developed by Audley (1960) says nothing about what happens on solo trials. We will assume simply that implicit responses occur only to the alternative present; since implicit responses from the other alternative cannot occur, there is no process that resets progress toward a run of K. This assumption is a variant of what Luce (1959) has designated the independence-from-irrelevant-alternatives idea. In conjunction with the density functions for implicit responses, this determines that solo latencies must have gamma distributions (McGill, 1963) with density functions   .~'    ASA(t) ax    = (3)   /K tK-Ie`at    - 1).    ASB(t) PK    = (4)   (K t e    - 1)!   Working with the probability generating function for the first occurrence of a run of K implicit responses to a given alternative, as derived by Audley and Pike (1965), Audley (personal communication; June, 1967) has derived that  PA = P(1)  P(1) +Q(1) (5)  and  (a + P) P(1) P(1) + Q(l) I '  P(1) =pKq/(1 -pK), PI(l) =pK(Kq -p +pK+1)/(1 -pK)2. Analogous expressions obtain for Q(1) and Q'(1), and, in turn, p = (x/(a + (3) and q = fl/((X + fl). To make predictions relating choice- and solo-trial performance, we further need expressions for three solo trial measures: E[LSA], P[LSA < LSB], and E[LVA]. If we let FLSB(t) = fo fL,,B(x) dx, then all we have to do is get explicit expressions for  where  CHOICE AND LATENCY IN SELECTIVE LEARNING 437  E[LSA] = (' tf'SA(t)dt, ,0  P[LSA < Lsa] = f -fLSA(t)[l - FLSB(t)] dt, 0  and  f ' tfLsA(t)[1-FLSa(t)] dt ~.~ tfLSA(t)[1-FLSe(t)] dt 0  0  E[LvA] (9)  _ ~ _  f fLSA(t)[1 -FLSB(t)] dt P[LsA < Lsa] 0  First, E[LSA] is just the mean of the gamma distribution with density function  fLSA(t), so that  E[Lstt] = Kla. (10)  To evaluate the other two quantities, it is useful to first get an explicit expression for FLsB(t). By continued integration and re-grouping of terms, we obtain  K-1 2 r  FLSB(t) _ -e"X ~ ( X p) = 1 - -at  i=o Z ] o  Putting (8) and (11) together gives  oo aK  P[LSA LsB] = t% lt? at f o (K - 1)!  e_at  (0) 2  dt.  (12)  Before going further, note that, for any positive integer n,  f - tne-(-+a)t dt = - n!  o (-+0)"+"  (13)  Applying (13) and some algebra to (12) yields  (14)  One can attack the numerator of (9) by the same strategy, yielding  f o tf,(t)[1 - FLSS(t)] dt - ( a + ) (p)K ~1 (K + a) KK ' 1 i=o  (4)z. (15)  438 CATLIN AND GLEITMAN  so that  1 K K-1 i=o  i=o K - 1  We can now calculate appropriate predictions from the model. We cannot attempt a quantitative fit to our present data, for this would require choice and latency measures obtained from individual subjects at stable performance levels with different degrees of preference for each alternative. Our experiments did not yield stable performance levels of this kind. But while a strict quantitative fit cannot be assayed, rough comparisons may still be made. These can show us whether the data resemble the predictions of the model, and this will give us some clue to help decide whether complex horse race models are worth exploring further.  Equations 5, 6, 10, 14, and 16 allow us to plot three theoretical curves: PA against P[LsA <LsB], against E[Lva]/E[LCA], and against E[LCA]IE[LsA]. These curves are presented in Figs. 7, 8, and 9, respectively, for K = 1, K = 2, K = 3. Inspection of the relevant equations indicates that none of the quantities here plotted against one another depend upon the absolute magnitudes of a and R.  Consider first the theoretical curves of PA against P[LsA < LsB] in Fig. 7. The model  FIG. 7. The Audley model's theoretical predictions for the relationship between PA and P[LSA < LSB], for K = 1 (the dotted diagonal), 2, and 3.  CHOICE AND LATENCY IN SELECTIVE LEARNING 439  predicts systematic deviations from the main diagonal: PA takes on more extreme values than does P[LsA < Ls,]. These deviations become larger with increasing values of K. For K = 2, the Audley model predicts only very small deviations from the main diagonal, certainly small enough that the Audley model with K = 2 gives an equally good account of this aspect of our data as does the simple horse race model (see Figs. 3, 4, and 5).  Second, consider the theoretical curves of PA against E[LvA]IE[LCA] presented in Fig. 8. The model predicts that E[LvA] < E[LCA]. Here there is an important resem  PA  MG. 8. The Audley model's theoretical predictions for the relationship between E[LvA]/E[LcA] and PA , for K = 1 (the dotted line), 2, and 3.  blance between model and data (see Fig. 6); both show clear deviations from the predictions of the simple horse race model that go in the same direction. The Audley model assumes interference between the subprocesses speeding toward this or the other response alternative: it is evidently because of this that it makes predictions in the right direction at precisely the point where the simple horse race model breaks down. In terms of the comparisons possible, the Audley model is faring pretty well.  Finally, consider the theoretical curves of PA against E[LCA]IE[LsA] presented in Fig. 9. For K = 2, the model predicts that E[LCA] is approximately equal to E[LsA] when A is dominant, but that E[LCA] < E[LsA] when A is nondominant. For K --- 3, the model predicts that E[LCA] > E[LsA] for A dominant; for values of K larger than 3, the model predicts that E[LCA] > E[LsA] over virtually the entire range of PA . Thus,  440 CATLIN AND GLEITMAN  FIG. 9. The Audley model's theoretical predictions for the relationship between E[LcA]1E[LSA] and PA, for K = 1, 2, and 3.  for relating latencies on choice and solo trials, the model's predictions only resemble the data for K = 2 (see Table 1); but for this value of K the resemblance is close. The similarities we were looking for between our data and the predictions of the Audley model do seem to exist.  In conclusion, our experimental results, which unequivocally reject a simple horse race model, bear enough resemblance to the present extension of Audley's model to suggest that we are on the right track in further exploring the class of accumulators with interference. This warrants a strong attempt to get stable individual performance data at a number of different levels of relative preference for the two alternatives. Such data would make it possible to carry out quantitative tests of the accuracy of various complex horse-race models in relating choice and latency measures in selective learning.  REFERENCES  AUDLEY, R. J. A stochastic model for individual choice behavior. Psychological Review, 1960, 67,1-15.  AUDLEY, R. J., AND PIKE, A. R. Some alternative stochastic models of choice. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 1965, 18, 207-225.  CHOICE AND LATENCY IN SELECTIVE LEARNING 441  HULL, C. L. Principles of behavior. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1943.  LOGAN, F. A. The role of delay of reinforcement in determining reaction potential. Journal oExperimental Psychology, 1952, 42, 393-399. (a)  LOGAN, F. A. Three estimates of differential excitatory tendency. Psychological Review, 1952, 59, 300-307. (b)  LUCE, R. D. Individual choice behavior. New York: Wiley, 1959.  MCGILL, W. J. Stochastic latency mechanisms. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical psychology. Vol 1. New York: Wiley, 1963.  SPENCE, K. W. Behavior theory and conditioning. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1956.  RECEIVED: August 28, 1967