10.1016/0022-2496(68)90075-8
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 5, 260-280 (1968)  Learning of Two-Choice, Differential Reward Problems with Informational Constraints on Payoff Combinations'  MICHAEL S. HumPHREYS, GORDON A. ALLEN, AND W. K. ESTES  Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305  To obtain evidence concerning the dependence of choice probability upon anticipated reward, as opposed to the cumulative effects of previous rewards, college student subjects were run on two successive sets of two-choice, differential reward problems under a noncorrection procedure. Relations between the two sets were such that transfer from first to second set learning could occur only via the learning of probabilistic contingencies between reward values. Significant transfer was observed, and error frequencies on the second problem set were monotonically related to differences in anticipated reward values rather than to differences in reward magnitudes actually received for particular responses. A four-state Markov model, embodying the assumption that reward values affect performance, especially in the intermediate states, but not the rate of associative learning, accounts reasonably well for the observed learning curves and several statistics of error data for the second problem set.  The theoretical notions leading to this research assume that the learning underlying the observed changes in performance during acquisition of differential reward problems is a matter of the establishment of stimulus-outcome associations. Performance is predicted, not from differences in response strength built up as a function of differential reward values over a series of trials, but rather on the basis of differences in the expected reward values associated with the stimulus alternatives of a given problem. One of the most critical problems in evaluating this type of theory is to distinguish experimentally between predictions based on differential anticipated rewards and predictions based on differential response strengths. In the present study we have proposed to accomplish this by having subjects learn two successive sets of problems under conditions such that transfer of training from the first set to the second could occur only via modification in expectations of reward.  In a study by Keller, Cole, Burke, and Estes (1965) a model embodying these notions was applied to two-choice learning as a function of differential rewards. In  1 The experimental and theoretical components of this research, respectively, were supported in part by Grant GB 3878 from the National Science Foundation and Contract Nonr-225(73) between the Office of Naval Research and Stanford University. Further reproduction of this report, in whole or in part, is permitted for any purpose of the United States Government.  260  LEARNING REWARD PROBLEMS 261  the type of learning situation involved, the subject receives training concurrently on a set of "problems," a problem comprising a stimulus and two response alternatives, with a different reward value being assigned to each alternative. In the standard, "noncorrection" procedure, the subject upon each occurrence of a particular stimulus is permitted to choose one of the two responses, then receives the reward value assigned to the response he has made, but no information concerning the reward that would have been given for the other possible response to the stimulus. Training continues until the subject meets some criterion of correct responding to each stimulus in the set, a correct response to any stimulus being defined as a choice of the higher paying alternative.  The model applied to the situation assumes that the relationship between the subject's response to a given stimulus and the associated reward value is learned in accordance with the one-element model for paired associate learning (Atkinson and Estes, 1963; Bower, 1961). However, each problem involves two such relationships which must be learned on different trials, since on any one trial the subject receives information only concerning the reward belonging to the response he has made. Once such learning has occurred, the subject on each trial scans, covertly, the set of possible outcomes and responds on the basis of the reward values associated with the various alternative responses. Hence the designation "scanning model." The rules for response selection are: (i) before any learning has occurred on a given problem, the subject guesses with probabilities of one-half for both alternatives; (ii) when the subject has learned both of the reward values belonging to a given problem he always chooses the higher; and (iii) when the subject has learned exactly one of the reward values belonging to a given problem, he has some fixed probability ai , where i denotes the given reward value, of choosing that alternative on any trial and probability I - a, of shifting, i.e., choosing the unknown alternative.  Within the present theory it is only by way of the parameters ai that reward values influence performance. It should be emphasized, first of all, that ai can be assumed to be constant over trials only under rather special circumstances. It is the sense of the original theory (Estes, 1962), that over a series of trials the subject will learn the probability that shifting from any given response with a known reward value will yield a higher reward value. In the experiment by Keller et al., each subject was cycled repeatedly through a set of 25 problems, involving 25 distinct stimuli and all combinations of 1, 2, 4, 6, and 8 units as associated reward values. The subjects were initially told nothing about the set of reward values; but over a series of trials had an opportunity to learn the distribution of the available reward values and therefore the likelihood of gaining or losing by shifting from a known to an unknown reward value. However the values of ai must have changed, at least over the early trials of the experiment, as the subject learned the distribution of reward values and therefore the model could be expected to apply only to a rough approximation. Under the circumstances the reasonably good quantitative account of the data obtained was  262 HUMPHREYS, ALLEN, AND ESTES  taken to be encouraging for the theory but clearly applications under more favorable conditions are desirable.  A secondary purpose of the present study was to provide such an application under conditions which might be expected to yield relatively constant values of ai . To do this, subjects were given training on two successive sets of problems involving different sets of stimuli but the same sets of reward combinations, the expectation being that the subjects' acquisition of information concerning distribution of reward values would approach asymptote during the learning of the first problem set and that then the values of ai might be approximately constant throughout the learning of the second problem set. Henceforth the two problem sets will be denoted List I and List 11.  The primary purpose of the present study was to investigate the effects of constraints upon the reward combinations which might be expected to bear especially upon the distinctive differences between the present theory and those which assume differential strengthening of associations by different reward values. Reward combinations were formed from the numbers 0-8 inclusive, but rather than using all combinations, or random pairings, we introduced certain constraints, the most conspicuous one being that one of the higher absolute values, 5, should be the lower member of a pair three-fourths of the time, whereas one of the lower absolute values, 3, should be the higher member of a pair three-fourths of the time. According to the present theory, once the subject has had opportunity to learn these relationships, the tendency to shift away from a response with a known reward value of 3 should be lower and the probability of shifting away from a response with a known reward value of 5 should be higher than would be the case if the subject were influenced only by absolute values of the rewards. Thus, in particular, we are led to predict that the difficulty of learning a problem involving the reward combination 5-3 should increase from List I to List II under these conditions.  The structure of the set of reward combinations permits some rather general qualitative predictions concerning changes in standard measures of learning from List I to List II. During the learning of List I, it would be expected, on the basis of any theory known to us, that measures such as mean total errors (choices of an inferior alternative) per problem should be monotonically related to the difference, AR, in value between the two associated rewards. If this function were the result of differential increments in response strength for different reward-pairs, then presumably a similar relationship should hold for List II, although there might be an overall shift in level of correct responding.  A monotonic relation between error frequency and dR would similarly be expected on the basis of the scanning model for List I. But in the course of experience with List 1, the subjects would be expected to learn the structure of the set of reward combinations, i.e., the probability that any value i is paired with any value j. Then from the outset of the series of trials on List 11, the subjects would respond on the basis of these learned relationships. Since the differences in expected reward value  LEARNING REWARD PROBLEMS 263  with respect to the two alternatives of a problem would be imperfectly correlated with the values of 4R, we would no longer expect error rate to be monotonically related to this variable. Rather, if the basic notions of the theory are correct, error rate should be monotonically related to a quantity we denote by R, the difference in expected reward values for the two response alternatives associated with a given problem.  To illustrate the computation of the JER values, listed in Table 1 for each reward combination used, let us consider the 3-0 combination. The value 3 is paired with 0, 1, 2, and 5 equally often; thus if for a given problem 3-x, only the alternative associated with 3 has been learned, the expected difference between the values of known and the unknown outcomes is 3 - (0 + 1 -,' 2 -;- 5)/4 = 1. The value of 0 is paired with 3 and 8 equally often, so if the 0 alternative of an x-0 problem has been learned, the expected difference in reward values is (3 -j- 8)/2 - 0 = 5.5. The probabilities are equal that the 3 or the 0 alternative of a 3-0 problem is learned first, and consequently the expected difference in reward values when only one has been learned is JER = (1 -}- 5.5)/2 = 3.25. The remaining values in Table 1 are calculated similarly, in each instance JER being the expected gain, from the subject's viewpoint, if he chooses the alternative actually bearing the higher reward when he has learned only one member of the pair.  TABLE 1  ACTUAL AND EXPECTED REWARD DIFFERENTIALS   Reward AR AER : H R : L R  combinations       8-0 8 5.5 5.5 5.5   3-0 3 1 5.5 3.25   8-5 3 5.5 1 3.25   7-5 2 1.5 1 1.25   5-3 2 -1 -1 -1   3-1 2 1 1.5 1.25   7-6 1 1.5 0 .75   6-5 1 0 _ .5   3-2 1 1 0 .5   2-1 1 0 1.5 .75  By observing how principal statistics of the data relate to JR and to JER during first and second list learning, we hope to obtain a parameter free test of the class of models in which differential response strengths are the critical determiners of choice versus the class in which differential anticipations of reward are critical. Since, as may be seen in Table 1, the rank order of JER values differs considerably from that of  264 HUMPHREYS, ALLEN, AND ESTES  AR, it must be predicted from the latter type of theory that during learning of List II. error rate should no longer be monotonically related to AR. More specific predictions concerning various statistics of the data in relation to reward combinations will be developed in a later section for the specific model utilized earlier by Keller et al (1965).  METHOD  Subjects. Forty paid subjects were run. All were college age; most were associated with Stanford University and most had participated in other psychological experiments. Data for two subjects were discarded-one because of equipment failure, the other because of a procedural error.  Apparatus. The subject sat by himself at a table in a soundproofed, air-conditioned room which contained only the stimulus-response apparatus. On the table in front of the subject was a panel containing two response keys 3 in. apart. The keys were unmarked and could be illuminated to remind the subject which response he had made. On a second table, 5.5 ft. in front of the subject, were two stimulus display boxes, one on top of the other, masked by a black screen so that only the relevant portions of the displays could be seen. Alpha-numeric characters could be displayed in each box. The top display had a 2 X 12-in. window, through which the trigram-pairs were displayed. The trigrams appeared at the extreme left and right ends of the display, with 6 in. separating them. The bottom display had a 2 X 1-in. window, located halfway between the trigrams, through which the payoffs were displayed.  A second room, adjoining the subject room, contained an IBM Summary Punch and associated storage and timing equipment. The sequence of stimulus-response-payoff trials was generated by a pre-programmed input to the apparatus by IBM cards. For further details concerning the apparatus, see Izawa (1966).  Stimuli and Reward Combinations. A pool of 20 pairs of consonant trigrams was constructed by having 10 graduate students rate the ease of discriminability of various trigram-pairs. Their task was to sort a list of 55 arbitrary trigram-pairs into five piles in order of difficulty of discrimination. The ratings were averaged over the 10 raters. The 20 pairs chosen by this procedure were approximately in the middle of the distribution, and had a relatively low variance. The pool of 20 trigram-pairs was divided into two lists, List I and List II.  The reinforcing payoffs were the combinations of point values listed in the left-hand column of Table 1. Within each list, each trigram-pair was paired with one of these payoff combinations, without replacement. Each trigram in a trigram-pair was associated with one of the members of the assigned payoff combination. The result was two lists of 10 trigram-pairs with identical point distributions.  In order to construct the trigram-pair lists, 10 were drawn without replacement from the pool of 20 trigram-pairs; these formed List I, which was the list presented to the subject first; the remaining 10 formed List 11. The trigram-pairs in List I were randomly associated without replacement with the payoffs from the set of point combinations. Two variations of List I were made: List I A, in which the trigram-payoffs were arranged so that half of them had their lower payoff value on the left side of the display screen; and List I B, which was the same as List I A except those pairs in which the lower value was on the right. The same was done for List II.  The two lists, and their variations, formed the input for a computer program that generated  LEARNING REWARD PROBLEMS 265  and randomized the IBM cards that controlled the stimulus-payoff sequences. Each subject deck consisted of 16 presentations of List I, 8 of I A and 8 of I B, and 16 of List II. Eight times, different Lists I and 11 were constructed from the pool of trigram-pairs and were inputted to the computer which generated five subject decks for each input list; thus subsets of five subjects received the same stimulus-response list except for ordering. The randomization process was as follows: for the first presentation oList 1, with probability one-half, either List I A or 1 B was selected. On presentation two, the one not selected on the first was presented. This process of selecting the left-right sequence of the trigram-pair randomly on the odd numbered presentations was continued. The order of trials within each presentation was randomized.  The result of the randomization process was stimulus response decks for eight groups of five subjects which were randomized for trigram-inclusion in List I or 11, and associations between trigram-pair and payoffs. In addition, for each subject the left-right sequence and the trial order within a presentation were randomized.  Procedzere. Thirty-eight subjects were run in the experiment, each being presented with the two lists successively. Each list was presented 16 times. The average presentation time was 20 min per list, and there was a 5 min rest period between sessions.  The instructions given the subject indicated that when a trigram-pair appeared on the top display, the subject was to respond by pushing the response key which was on the same side of the display as the trigram he believed to be associated with the larger number of points. It was made clear to the subject that the amount of money he earned was a function of the total number of points he obtained. Since the total number of points obtained during a session was not accessible to the experimenter until the IBM cards had been processed, a sample of each subject's responses and rewards during the trials 21-50 on List II was recorded by hand (without the subject's knowledge) and payments were calibrated so as to be linearly related to points obtained during these trials. The amount of money earned per session ranged from $1.50 to $2.25, with $1.75 as the average.  An anticipation paradigm was used with simple contingent reinforcement. The sequence of events for each trial was as follows: the trigram-pair appeared on the top display screen and remained on until after the subject made his response. As soon as the subject pressed a response key, this key was illuminated. After 1.5 sec, the number of points earned on that trial appeared in the lower window. After 1 sec, the point value, the trigram-pair, and the illuminated key were turned off together. In 1 sec the next trial began.  RESULTS  Mean errors per subject-item over the 16 trials on each list are summarized in Table 2 for each reward combination. For convenience, the combinations have been ordered from top to bottom as a decreasing function of JR, and, within combinations having the same JR, as a decreasing function of the higher reward value of the pair. As anticipated, and in agreement with the findings of Keller et al (1965), mean errors on List I line up approximately in the order of the reward combinations, reflecting primarily an inverse relation between difficulty of an item and the associated JR,  On List 11 the ordering of mean errors changes considerably, the trend on the whole being a shift from a ranking in terms of JR values toward a ranking in terms  266  HUMPHREYS, ALLEN, AND ESTES  TABLE 2 MEAN TOTAL ERRORS PER SUBJECT-ITEM FOR EACH REWARD COMBINATION   Reward List I SE, List 11 SE,,  cornbination M  M    8-0 2.500 .357 1.316 .214   3--0 3.711 .362 1.895 .213   8-5 4.737 .709 3.868 .762   7-5 5.184 .728 5.000 .864   5-3 5.263 .511 5.000 .599   3-1 5.132 .403 3.447 .359   7-6 6.289 .828 4.684 .743   6-5 4.763 .748 3.974 .610   3-2 6.184 .504 4.737 .613   2-1 7.868 .615 3.737 .400  of the AER values shown in Table 1. The nature of the shift is brought out more clearly in Fig. 1. Excluding the 8-0 combination, for which no intermediate state of learning should exist in terms of the scanning model (see below), mean errors have been averaged for all combinations having the same AR to generate the curves in the upper panel of Fig. 1, and for all combinations having the same AER to generate the  FIG. 1. Mean total errors per item on each list as a function of actual reward differential (upper panel) or expected reward differential (lower panel).  LEARNING REWARD PROBLEMS 267  curves in the lower panel. The function relating mean errors to 4R is essentially linear for List 1, but nonlinear, and in fact nonmonotonic for List II. Contrariwise, mean errors vary nonmonotonically with JER for List I but the function approaches linearity for List 11.  With one exception, the large shifts in rank order on total errors from List I to List 11 conform to predictions based on Table 1. Thus, in particular, the 5-3 item is relatively much more difficult and the 2-1 item relatively easier in List 11. The exception is the 7-5 item, whose relative difficulty in List II is appreciably greater than that predicted from its rank on JER. As might be surmised on the basis of the large SEm for this item, this deviation is largely attributable to a few protocols containing very large numbers of errors (two subjects never sampling the higher-reward alternative during the entire 16 trials on List II).  Although the changes in performance from List I to List 11 seem clearly to imply that 4ER is a better predictor of choice than JR, the conclusion does not follow that choices are fully determined by expectations of reward. It may be noted, for example, that there are appreciable differences in total error scores between members of the pairs 3-0 and 8-5, 7-5 and 3-1, 7-6 and 2-1, 6-5 and 3-2, each of which involves zero difference in dER.  Because the total error score is heavily influenced by cases in which a subject fails to try the higher reward alternative for an item, we have taken as a supplementary measure the mean number of errors between the first two successes. This statistic, presented in Table 3, reflects rate of learning for all subject-items whose protocols include both errors and successes (i.e., those cases in which the subject has experience with both of the reward values associated with the item). Further, this statistic should be espe  TABLE 3  MEAN ERRORS BETWEEN FIRST Two SUCCESSES   Reward List I - List 11  combination observed Observed ----     Theoretical   8-0 .526 .211 .326   3-0 .737 .421 .407   8-5 1.222 .757 1.012   7-5 .889 .879 1.058   5-3 .649 1.868 1.310   3-1 1.105 .868 .701   7-6 .687 .743 1.254   6-5 .778 .895 1.094   3-2 .921 .816 1.094   2-1 1.371 .632 .721  268 HUMPHREYS, ALLEN, AND ESTES  cially sensitive to the type of probability learning with respect to reward combinations assumed by the scanning model. In particular, if in the course of experience with List I, subjects learn that a reward value of 5 is usually paired with a higher value whereas a reward of 3 is usually paired with a lower value, their tendency to shift from an alternative with reward 5 and to persist in choosing an alternative with reward 3 should both increase from List I to List II; and both effects should lead to increases in the number of errors between the first two successes on the 5-3 item.  The predicted effect is clearly evident in Table 3. Only the 5-3 item exhibits any appreciable or significant (p < .05 by sign test) increase from List I to List II. The substantial shift in the opposite direction predicted for the 2-1 item is also evident, and in general the shifts in rank order from List I to List II are toward the order expected on the basis of the JER values. On this measure, it may be noted, the disparity in the case of the 7-5 item does not appear.  DISCUSSION  It may be useful to recapitulate briefly the rationale for our interpretation of the major results. We are concerned primarily with the possibility of systematic changes in relative difficulty of items with differing reward combinations from List I to List II as a function of the subjects' experience with a particular outcome structure in List I. Since the stimuli in the two lists were entirely different, no direct transfer of training on the basis of response strengths or strengths of stimulus-response associations built up during first list learning was possible. The only basis for transfer would be learned associations between pairs of outcomes associated with particular problems.  If associations of this type did form during first list learning, then the subject would have been in a position to anticipate reward values for unlearned alternatives during the early phases of experience on List II with greater than chance success. For example, suppose that during the learning of List I the subject learned that the reward value of 5 was usually (three-fourths of the time) paired with a larger value (thus had negative AER); then in the early stages of List II, when for some particular problem the subject had learned only that one of the stimuli was associated with the reward value of 5, he would have been more likely to explore the other alternative on a subsequent trial (and thus, if the item were actually a 5-3 combination, to make an error) than would have been the case at the same stage in List I learning. If performance is a function of differential response strengths generated by the cumulative effects of differential rewards, the relative difficulty of items with various reward combinations should be the same in List I and List II, whereas if performance is determined by expected reward values, the relative difficulties should change in a predictable fashion.  The results presented in the preceding section appear to provide substantial confirmation of our theoretical assumption. In the learning of List I, error frequencies  LEARNING REWARD PROBLEMS 269  line up in the order of dR values of the problems. This finding, taken by itself, could be attributable either to differential response strengths or to differential reward expectations, since if at the outset of learning the subject knows only the range of reward values, values of JER would be perfectly confounded with values of JR. However, we found that in the learning of List II error frequencies vary monotonically as a function, not of dR but of the values of JER calculated on the assumption that the subjects have learned the possible outcome-outcome associations. Thus, the ordering of observed learning rates for different reward combinations in the two lists taken together can be interpreted only on the assumption that 4ER is the primary determiner of performance, as required by the present theory.  Having evidently obtained an answer to the main question at issue, whether rates of acquisition in differential-reward learning are determined at least in part by learning othe reward structure, we wish to ascertain how well principal trends in the data are accounted for by the specific model in the literature that embodies our general assumptions. Since the model has previously had only a very elliptical presentation (Keller et al, 1965), we shall spell out the assumptions of the model and derive some basic results in the following section.  A FOUR-STATE MODEL FOR TWO-CHOICE, DIFFERENTIAL REWARD LEARNING  For our present purposes it will suffice to develop the model in terms of a single problem, involving a choice between stimuli with associated reward values i and j, with only one of the two outcomes occurring on each trial.  The Learning Process. With respect to the learning of either of the constituent stimulus-outcome associations, the system may be in either a learned state, L, or an unlearned state, U. It is assumed that learning of these associations occurs only on trials when the given outcome occurs and then in accord with a one-element process having the transition matrix  Ek = \c 1 O cl' (1)  where k = i, j; 0 < c G 1; and the first and second rows and first and second columns refer to states Lk and Uk , respectively.  Taking together the two stimulus-outcome associations that must be established during learning of a given problem, we have the four states L,L; , Li U; , UiL; , and Ui U; , according as both, one, or neither of the constituent associations has been learned. In terms of these states, henceforth denoted Sl , S2 , S3 , and S4 , respectively, the learning process can be represented by transition matrices Ti and T; , applying  270 HUMPHREYS, ALLEN, AND ESTES  on trials when outcomes i and j occur, respectively. These matrices can be written in the form  Tk = (1 - C)I + CCk , (2)  where I is the 4 X 4 identity matrix; k = i, j;  1 0 0 0 C_ 0 1 0 0  i 1 0 0 0 ' (0 1 0 0  1 0 0 0 _ 1 0 0 0 C' (0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0  and in each case rows and columns correspond to states S, to S4 in order. Since Ci2 = Ci and C j2 = C; , the transition operators Tk have the simple property that the effect of a sequence of n trials on which outcome k occurs is given by  TO = (I - C)nI + [I - (I - c)n]Ck.  If now, a series of training trials were given under a forced-choice procedure, with outcomes i and j each occurring once per trial block, the transition matrix T = TiT; would apply on each block, and from Eqs. 2, 3, and 4  1 0 0 0  T C 1-C 0 0 ()  C 0 1 -C 0  (C2 C(1 - C) C(I - C) (I - C)2  The effect of n such blocks would, then be given by  1 Tn - ( 1 - (1 - C)n 1 - (I - C)n [1 -(I -C)n]2   0 0 0   (1 - C)n 0 0   0 (I - C)n 0  (I -C)n[I -(I -C)n] (I -C)n[I -(I -C)n] (I - C)2n  If a correction procedure is used, so that on each trial the subject makes a free choice, but then is given information not only as to the reward for that choice but also  LEARNING REWARD PROBLEMS 2'71  as to the reward that would have been given for the other alternative, we assume that the "learning parameter" c applies to the learning of the relation between the stimulus pair and the outcome pair as a unit. That is, the learning process reduces to the transitions between the two states L,L; and UiU; , with the transition matrix  Ti' -1_ (1 0  c 1-c)  In the study by Keller et al (1965), this two-state process provided a quite satisfactory account of learning under a correction procedure for a variety of reward combinations. When training is given under a noncorrection procedure, as in the present study, with the subject receiving information only as to the reward associated with the stimulus chosen on each trial, the probabilities of application of the learning operators Ti and T; (Eq. 2), depend on the subject's responses. Consequently, derivation of the learning function for this case must be deferred until we have considered the responseselection processes associated with the various states.  The remaining aspect of the learning process to be treated is that of relations between the two outcomes belonging to a given problem. Here, our assumption is that if either (1) outcomes i and j are both presented on a trial (which may occur under a correction procedure), or (2) if one outcome has been learned and the other is presented (which may occur under a noncorrection procedure in states Li U; or UL;), an association between i and j is established with probability c. Thus, under the noncorrection procedure of the present study, an i j association may be learned on the trial on which the system goes into state LZL; or on any subsequent trial. The import of this type of learning is that if a subject has learned the association i j during training on List I of the present study, then at some point on List II has learned the relation between one of the stimuli and outcome i (i.e., has entered state L., U;) he will expect a choice of the unlearned stimulus to lead to outcome j.  Response Selection. Our assumptions concerning the process of response selection in the various states of learning derive from previous analyses of choice behavior in differential reward situations (Estes, 1960, 1962). The general features of the process are that upon presentation of the stimulus alternatives of a given problem, all stimulusoutcome and outcome-outcome relations of that problem that have been learned are recalled; the outcomes expected to follow each stimulus choice are scanned; and the alternative with the larger anticipated reward is selected.  When the system is in state Ui U; , a response must be selected at random, and under the present experimental conditions, the alternatives are assumed to be equally likely. When the system is in state LiL; , if i -A j the larger is chosen. If i = j, a condition included in the study of Keller, et al. (1965) but not in the present experiment, the response last made on the problem is repeated; the notions leading to this rule are discussed in Estes (1960).  272 HUMPHREYS, ALLEN, AND ESTES  When only one of the stimulus-outcome relations of a problem has been learned, say the one involving outcome i so that the system is in state Li U; , the probability that the stimulus associated with i will be chosen is assumed to have a value ai which, in general, depends on the subject's state of information about the structure of the experiment.  It was provisionally assumed by Keller et al. (1965) that if the subject's information were complete, ai would simply be the probability that he would gain choosing i over j. Under the conditions of the present study, we might assume that early in training on List I, when the subject's information about the reward structure is limited to the range of values used (D), the value of a, , for an alternative with any given reward k, will be directly related to k/D.  As learning proceeds and the various outcome-outcome relations are learned, values of the parameter a, on this interpretation, should change in the direction of the a priori theoretical values listed under a.z in Table 4. Each entry in this listing is simply  TABLE 4  PROBABILITIES OF GAIN BY ACCEPTING KNOWN REWARD'   AND ESTIMATES OF REWARD ACCEPTANCE PARAMETERb   Reward value (i) ai  ai   8 1.00 1.00 1.00   7 .86 1.00 .85   6 .71 .50 .75   5 .57 .25 .70   3 .43 .75 .75   2 .29 .50 .70   1 .14 .00 .50   0 .00 .00 .00  ' aQ , a priori, given reward set; a" , a priori, given full information. b ai , estimated from data.  the probability, given full information about the reward structure, that the reward value i associated with a learned alternative exceeds value of an unlearned alternative paired with it. Owing to imperfections of learning and retention, and perhaps also to aspects of subject's decision strategy falling outside the purview of the present model, we can not expect values of ai estimated for List TI data to approach the theoretical values closely in general, but if the assumption is essentially correct, the estimates should at least approximate the rank order of the a priori values.  Considering a problem involving outcomes i and j, with i > j, the correct response probabilities associated with the states of learning are given by the probability vector,  (li  , ai,1-aj >2),  LEARNING REWARD PROBLEMS 273  the order of the components being that of the states LiL;, Li U; , UiL;, Ui U, , as in the transition matrices (2) and (6). In order to reduce subscript notation in the following derivations, we define a = 1 - ai and (3 = 1 - a;; a and fl are, then, the probabilities of exploring an unlearned alternative if only the higher, or only the lower reward value, respectively, associated with an item has been learned.  Learning Functions. Aside from a correction procedure, for which the present model reduces to the familiar one-element process, the simplest experimental arrangement to handle theoretically is one in which training on a problem is given in a series of cycles, each cycle including forced trials on each alternative, with free choice test trials interspersed between cycles. Assuming that no rewards are presented on the test trials, the course of learning, in terms of state probabilities, is given by (7). Letting uk,n denote the state probabilities following the n - 1st training cycle, with k = l, 2, 3, 4 denoting the states of learning in the usual order, probability of a correct response on the nth test is given by  pn - n1, n + (1 - a) n2, n + 9U3, 11 2u4, n - tt,Tn-1V1'  where uo is the row vector of initial state probabilities, T is given by Eq. 6, and v' is the column vector  `Faking uo in this case to be (0, 0, 0, 1), substituting for Tn-1 from (7), and simplifying, we have  pn - 1 - (1 - fl + -Al - C)n-1 - (1 -' C) 2(n-1)] - ~(1 C)2(n-1)  (10)  from which in turn we obtain for expected total errors during learning  TE - Y  (1 - pn) - ~2 + (1 -" c)(1 - R + a)j/C(2 - C) n=1  In an unpublished study by M. L. Ramsey2, a group of college student subjects were given training under conditions approximating those described with a set of problems having different reward combinations. Since at the outset the subject knew only the  2 Master's research, Stanford University, 1966.  480/5/2-4  274 HUMPHREYS, ALLEN, AND ESTES  range of reward values, we should expect the a-values to be directly related to the reward values. For AR values of 5, 10, and 15, observed mean total errors were 8.0, 4.7, and 2.8, respectively, in rough agreement with the decreasing linear function implied by Eq. 11 under our assumptions.  To deal with performance changes during learning under the noncorrection procedure of the present study is a bit more complicated since the transition matrix which applies on any trial depends on the subject's response. However, a number of statistics can be derived by means of an "expected operator," i.e., the transition matrix   1 0 0 0    Ox 1 - ac 0 0 (12)   c)    C 0 1 -PC 0    0 c/2 c/2 1 -   (1 - c) I -(- CP, (13)  where P is the "performance matrix"  1 0 0 0 oc 1 - a 0 0  0 1 - 0'' 0 1 1 01)  y 2  whose cell entries give the probabilities of transitions between various pairs of states on trials when learning occurs (it being understood that learning an already learned relation produces no change of state).  Probability of a correct response on trial n is, then, given by Eq. 9 with T replaced by T. Derivation of such standard performance functions as the learning curve are facilitated by the fact that the powers of the performance matrix take the simple form  1 0 0 0  (1 - a)n 0 0  Pn = I - (1 - R)n 0 (1 - NR)n 0 . (14)  1 - (1 - _)n-1 +N(1 - g)n-1 (1 - a)n-1 (1 - 9)n=1 0  2 2 2  Some of the standard statistics of learning data can be obtained relatively directly from inspection of the transition matrix (12). Consider, for example, total errors. If the series of learning trials is long enough so that all items reach the absorbing state, Sl , then: (i) the expected number of trials in the unlearned state, S4 , is 1/c, of which one-half are errors. (ii) With probability one-half, the system goes through state S3 , which can be left only on a correct response trial; the expected number of  LEARNING REWARD PROBLEMS 275  trials in S3 is 1/c/3, and subtracting from this the expected number of success trials, 1/c, yields (1 -(3)/cg errors. (iii) With probability one-half, the system goes through S2 , which can be left only on an error, of which the expected number is l /c, Thus we have, assuming a # 0,  1 1 ~ 1 -R~ - 1 1 +(3  2c + 2 c + 1c/3 2c  (15)  (if a = 0, TE = 112cg), with the rather strong, and perhaps counterintuitive, prediction that expected total errors over a sufficiently long training series should be independent of the parameter a, and therefore of the higher of the two reward values associated with a problem. Unfortunately, neither the study by Keller et al. (1965) nor the present experiment provides a sufficiently large number of training trials to test this prediction adequately.  More generally, the state probabilities on are  any trial n of a noncorrection experiment (15a) (15b)  u3, n - {1 - RC)n-1 - (1 - C)n-1 s 2(1 - (3)  u2, n - (1 - ac)n-1 - (1 J c)n-1 2(1 - a)  n4,n = (1 - C)n-1 n  (15c)  and  1 (1 - aC)n_1 (1  ul,n 1~2 1-a + 1-(3 - {2aR -- ~) (1 - C)n_lr 2(1 - -)(I  - R)  from which we have for the probability of an error on any trial  (15d)  qn - 2 1 - a {1 - aC)n-1 - l1 - C)n_  Summing both sides of Eq. 16 over a series of N trials yields the expression for mean total errors:  if a 0,  2c~1 g-R -(1-flc)N- (11 a)rr  (17a)  if 0,  TE(N) - 2cQ [1 - 0 - 41.  (17b)  276 HUMPHREYS, ALLEN, AND ESTES  A second frequently used statistic, frequency of alternations between correct and incorrect responses, is derivable directly from the state probabilities together with the observation that probabilities of alternations from any trial n to n + 1, starting in states S1 - S4 , respectively, on trial n, are 0, a(2 - 2a + ac), (3(1 - X3)(2 - c), and 2(1 - c + ac -}- /3c). For mean frequency of alternation over a series of N trials, we obtain  N-1 1  y [2 (1 - C + ,,, + Rc)(1_ c)--l + R(1 - N)(2 - C) n=1  X (1 - Oc)n_1 - (l - C)n_1 -I- a(2 - 2a + aC) (1 - aC)n_1 - 2(1 - (3) 2(1 - a)  2c [[1 - c + ac - 2g + 2Rc_ a(2 1 2a aC) ] [1_ - (1 - C)N-1]  + (2 - c)[1 - (1 - e)N-11 + 2 12cx a+ ac [l - (1 - cYC)N_1 (18)  The theoretical expression for mean errors between the first two successes proves similarly cumbersome, and for the same reason, namely that runs, like alternations, may start in one state and terminate in another. The result for N --* oo is  TSES - 1 ac + (1 -c)2 (1_ 2~) + C(1 -C) (1 - g) [?(l -~) + c]  1 + c [1 - a --F ac (l + c)(1 -2R + c) g (1 -2N + c) J. (19)  Finally, we include expressions for the frequently useful statistic, mean trial of the last error, although it will not be applicable to the present data.  For a 7~: 0,  and for a = 0,   - -   Ti 1 +N R2C 02 1 a2    E (20a)   2gc(1 + ,    - g + gc) -2--cu---a)   TLE    2gc(1 R2 P, + Rc) + (20b)   2c(1 Tc) '   Application of the Model to Present Data. The theoretical values for various statistics of the List 11 data presented in this section are all computed under the simplifying assumptions that a single value of the conditioning parameter, c, holds for all items, that the value of a for each reward value is constant throughout the series of trials on List 11, and that the values of a for the extreme reward values 8 and 0 are 1 and 0, respectively.  LEARNING REWARD PROBLEMS 277  Equating mean total errors for the 8-0 item of List 11 to the right-hand side of Eq. 17b and solving for c, we obtain the estimate c = .38. To estimate the parameters ai , a set of theoretical values for TE was computed, using the c estimate of .38 in Eq. 17a, and combinations of a-values varying in stages of .05; then by visual inspection of the resulting table, values of a were selected which approximately minimized the average absolute deviations of theoretical from observed values of TE over all items. For the nine items, excluding 8-0, values of  TE(obs.) - TE(th.) - SEnr _ ,  where the estimated standard errors are taken from Table 2, ranged from -1.22 to 0.63 with a mean of -0.12. The estimates of ai so obtained are listed in Table 4 for each reward value, along with a priori probabilities that an unlearned alternative paired with one having known reward i has a reward value less than or equal to i given information as to the range of available reward values (a') or given full information concerning the set of reward combinations (aj ). The estimates reflect the main trend of the a," values, decreasing monotonically with i except for the predicted inversion between i = 5 and i = 3. Particularly at the lower reward values, the ai estimates are substantially larger than the a priori a2 and a" values. The reason for the disparity between the present data and those of Keller et al. (1965), in which estimates of ai for small reward values were smaller than a priori "gain-stay" probabilities is not clear. It may have to do with the fact that the present study included a number of items involving pairs of low reward values, and consequently small AR, and at the same time had a much shorter training series than that of the Keller, et al. study. Results of Estes (1966) indicate that under these conditions, subjects will not learn and retain reward values precisely enough to avoid considerable confusion between expected outcomes for low reward, low 4R items.  Taking the c estimate of .38 together with the appropriate pairs of a-values from Table 4, we have computed expected learning curves by means of Eq. 16 for each item (except 8-0, which was the basis of the c-estimate); these curves are presented together with the empirical plots of error proportions per trial in Fig. 2. These results appear generally in harmony with the assumption that, once differences in performance probabilities associated with the different states of learning are allowed for, rate of learning is independent of reward values. Of some special interest is the appearance of the predicted horizontal initial limb of the learning curve for the 5-3 combination. Also, averaging the appropriate subsets of theoretical TE values, we can readily verify that the model predicts the trend for TE as a function of  and as a function of JIER exhibited in Fig. 1 for the List II data. Computed theoretical values of TE for the dR values of 1, 2, and 3, respectively, are 4.48, 4.40, and 3.02; those for AER values of 1, .5, .75, 1.25, and 3.25, respectively, are 5.24, 4.71, 4.25, 3.98, and 3.02.  278 HUMPHREYS, ALLEN, AND ESTES  Theoretical values of the other principal statistic examined in our presentation of results, mean errors between the first two successes, were computed for List 11 by substituting the same set of parameter estimates into Eq. 19. The correspondence in rank order between theoretical and observed values is fairly satisfactory (p = .70). The small overall absolute error in the direction of underpredicting lengths of error runs appears, upon inspection of individual protocols, to reflect primarily the great heterogeneity of performance on the items with two relatively high rewards.  0 4 8 12 16 0 4 8 12 16 0 4 8 12 16 TRIALS  FIG. 2. Observed and theoretical learning curves for List II in terms of mean proportion of errors per trial.  Finally we include a comparison of theoretical and observed values for another commonly used statistic, mean frequency of alternations between correct and incorrect responses over the series. With the same set of parameters being used again, Eq. 18 yields the predictions for List 11 data presented in Table 5. The correspondence of theoretical and observed rank orders is close (p = .88) and there is very little overall constant error [TA(obs.) - TA(th.) = 0.15].  Evaluation of the descriptive adequacy of the present model is difficult, owing to the lack of competing quantitative formulations. Some features of the data are handled quite satisfactorily by the four-state model, but the detailed account of various statistics is not up to the standard now almost routinely achieved in treatments  LEARNING REWARD PROBLEMS 279  TABLE 5 MEAN ALTERNATIONS ON LIST II  Observed   Reward Mean SEM Theoretical  combinations   mean   8-0 1.684 .295 1.315   3-0 2.395 .298 2.913   8-5 2.184 .401 2.111   7-5 2.474 .375 3.370   5-3 4.211 .352 3.742   3-1 4.500 .416 3.639   7-6 3.132 .425 3.322   6-5 3.316 .364 3.709   3-2 4.526 .359 3.709   2-1 4.632 .288 3.721  of simple paired associate and concept identification learning (Atkinson, Bower, and Crothers, 1965). We have little doubt that some suitable variation on Atkinson's weak-strong conditioning model (Myers and Atkinson, 1964) could be fitted to the statistics of the present study about as well as the four-state model. The weak-strong model would, however, provide no rational, a priori basis for predicting the striking difference between learning under correction and noncorrection procedures observed by Keller et al. (1965) or the changes in problem difficulty from List I to List II of the present study. Considerable evidence is accumulating in support of the basic conception that stimulus-outcome (Si Oz) and outcome-outcome (0j -0i) relations of differential reward problems are learned in a simple paired-associate fashion and then provide the basis for response selections at various stages of training.  We see two principal limitations on the present model. Firstly, all details of the response-selection process assumed are not securely pinned down by independent sources of evidence. In particular, little support has been forthcoming for the provisional assumption that a subject's probability of choosing an alternative of unknown over one of known reward value depends only on the probability of gain (as distinguished, e.g., from expected amount of gain). Further progress on this problem may depend on our contriving means to permit more direct experimental identifications of the assumed intermediate states of learning. Secondly, the present model assumes precise learning of outcome values. The bi-directional gradient of uncertainty around recalled outcome values that has been demonstrated in a previous study (Estes, 1966) would account for some of the larger disparities between theory and data in the present study. However, it does not seem feasible to incorporate these uncertainty, or generalization, functions into a formal model until more is learned as to how they change during the course of learning.  280 HUMPHREYS, ALLEN, AND ESTES  REFERENCES  ATKINSON, R. C., BOWER, G. H., AND CROTHERS, E. J. An introduction to mathematical learning theory. New York: Wiley, 1965.  ATKINSON, R. C. AND ESTES, W. K. Stimulus sampling theory. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical psychology, Vol. 2. New York: John Wiley, 1964. Pp. 121-268.  BOWER, G. H. Application of a model to paired-associate learning. Psychometrika, 1961, 26, 255-280.  ESTES, W. K. A random walk model for choice behavior. In K. J. Arrow, S. Karlin, and P. Suppes (Eds.), Mathematical methods in the social sciences, 1959. Stanford: Stanford Univer. Press, 1960. Pp. 265-276.  ESTES, W. K. Theoretical treatments of differential reward in multiple-choice learning and two-person interactions. In Joan Criswell, H. Solomon, and P. Suppes (Eds.), Mathematical methods in small group processes. Stanford: Stanford Univer. Press, 1962. Pp. 133-149.  ESTES, W. K. Transfer of verbal discriminations based on differential reward magnitudes. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1966, 72, 276-283.  IZAWA, Chizuko. Reinforcement-test sequences in paired-associate learning. Psychological Reports, 1966, I8 (Monograph Supplement 3-V18).  KELLER, L., COLE, M., BURKE, C. J., AND ESTES, W. K. Reward and information values of trial outcomes in paired-associate learning. Psychological Monographs: General and Applied, 1965, 79, No. 12 (Whole No. 605).  MYERS, J. L. AND ATKINSON, R. C. Choice behavior and reward structure. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1964, 1, 170-203.  RECEIVED: March 20, 1967