10.1016/0022-2496(68)90060-6
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 5, 123-162 (1968)  Explorations with a Discrimination Net Model for Paired-Associate Learning'  DOUGLAS L. HINTZMAN2  Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305  A computer simulation model for paired-associate learning is presented. The model emphasizes stimulus discrimination learning, and is based on an EPAM-type discrimination net which grows according to stochastic processes. Group data are simulated for comparison with human data. Three versions of the model are presented. The simplest, SAL I, was first run in several single-list experiments and evaluated on such topics as: intralist similarity, number of response alternatives, probability learning, spacing of item repetitions, whole vs part learning, and the effects of list length. SAL II, a slightly modified version of the model which allows overlearning, was run in retroactive interference experiments varying interlist similarity and degrees of original and interpolated learning, and is discussed in relation to studies of predifferentiation and transfer. Finally, SAL III, which stores multiple associates, was run in experiments on recognition vs recall, second and third guesses, unlearning and modified free recall, retroactive vs proactive interference, distributed practice, and response latencies.  Gibson (1940), in a now classic paper applying conditioning principles to verbal learning, emphasized the differentiation among stimuli as an important sub-process in paired-associate (PA) learning. Although this theory provided a long-acting stimulus for research in verbal learning, recent appraisals (Noble, 1961; Underwood, 1961) have noted that the theory has declined in its usefulness and become somewhat barren of relevant implications regarding modern problems. Thus modern workers in verbal learning have concentrated increasingly on analysis of response integration, availability, associative learning, pre-experimental habits, mediation, etc. as these factors operate in PA learning. And increasingly, stimulus discrimination learning has come to be relegated to a smaller role.  1 This paper is based on a dissertation submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements of the Ph.D. degree at Stanford University. The work was done while the author was a Graduate Fellow of the National Science Foundation, and was supported in part by grant HD-00954 from the Institute of Child Health and Human Development to Dr. Gordon Bower, NSF grant GB-2791 to Dr. James Greeno, and grants to the author from the Stanford Computation Center. The author is especially grateful to Dr. Bower for his encouragement and for his assistance in preparing the manuscript.  I Now at the University of Texas.  123  124 HINTZMAN  Without denying the potency of these additional factors in PA learning, the thesis of this paper is that stimulus discrimination concepts may have been bypassed before their explanatory power has been fully explored. This paper reports a simple model of stimulus discrimination in PA learning which accurately simulates results from a diversity of experiments. These simulated results include several beyond the original scope of Gibson's theory, as well as some which have been cited as evidence against her theory. In addition, the model proposed here is written as an elementary computer program, so that theoretical predictions for learning experiments can be "derived" (by simulated runs) in an unambiguous manner. It is not claimed that PA learning is "nothing but" stimulus discrimination learning, since that is patently false. The approach taken here is to explore the range of experimental results which can be explained by this process acting alone, eliminating in the model those factors related to response learning, response generalization, mediation, and so forth. Further processes are added only when necessary to expand the generality of the theory.  The model, dubbed SAL (for Stimulus and Association Learner), is based on some simple assumptions about the processes underlying the acquisition, storage, and retrieval of paired associates. The basic memory construct of the model is the discrimination net, which will be described in detail below. In addition to exploring the general usefulness of discrimination learning concepts for verbal learning theory, the present work can be considered a further test of the usefulness of the discrimination net as a specific model of the processes responsible for discrimination learning.  The SAL model is closely related to the EPAM theory of verbal learning developed by Feigenbaum and Simon, which is also based on the discrimination net. EPAM has gone through several stages of development and has been applied with considerable success to increasingly complex phenomena in both serial and PA learning (Feigenbaum, 1959, 1963, 1965; Feigenbaum and Simon, 1961, 1962, 1963a, 1963b; Simon and Feigenbaum, 1964). The discrimination net, the central memory construct of both EPAM and SAL, is a system of tests or choice points and branches through which a stimulus item is sorted in order to retrieve the correct response. The learning of a PA list involves the elaboration of the net until it is capable of correctly sorting (discriminating among) all the items of the list.  Despite the common assumption of the discrimination net, SAL differs from EPAM in several respects. First, learning in SAL is a stochastic process, while in EPAM it is deterministic. If an investigator gives EPAM a list to learn, erases the memory and then presents the same list again, he will obtain two identical (or nearly identical) protocols. Thus, if one wants to know the predicted shape of a precriterion learning curve, for example, he must run EPAM on a number of different lists, use different presentation rates, or use some other laborious method to obtain "group" data. The SAL model, in contrast, is governed by stochastic processes, and can generate any number of unique protocols for the learning of a given list. The resulting data can then be submitted to the same types of analysis as data from groups of human subjects,  DISCRIMINATION NET MODEL 125  and direct comparisons can be made. It should be mentioned here that stochastic processes are used in SAL only to facilitate the derivation of predictions. They are intended as statements of ignorance, rather than assertions that learning is basically probabilistic.  Second, in SAL all processes which are not necessary in order to do running simultations of PA learning have been eliminated. "Macroprocesses," such as those in EPAM concerned with allocation of processing effort, have been greatly simplified. Also, SAL does not make use of "stimulus images" or of a scan for differences between the image and the presented stimulus, as does EPAM (cf. Feigenbaum, 1963). It is hoped that, since there are fewer postulated processes in SAL, it will be easier to identify specific processes or combinations of processes with specific resulting predictions. Thus, it should be easier to understand why the model makes a correct or incorrect prediction, and to make appropriate changes when needed.  Third, SAL uses the discrimination net only for stimulus discrimination learning, while EPAM uses it for both stimulus learning and response integration. Accordingly, the "task environment" of SAL consists only of lists of trigram-digit pairs, where the responses are already well known, and only the stimuli are unfamiliar. The purpose of this restriction is simple. It is felt that if stimulus discrimination learning is to be understood, it should be isolated from possible confounding processes, such as those concerned with response integration, and so on. Despite these restrictions, SAL makes predictions that can be meaningfully applied to a wider variety of materials in similar experimental situations. This will become evident in the experiments and discussions which follow.  The present paper is divided into three main sections, describing and evaluating three versions of the SAL model. SAL 1, the simplest version, is first described in detail and applied to several single-list experimental situations. SAL 11, the overlearning model which involves a slight alteration in SAL I, is then presented along with some data on retroactive interference. Finally, SAL III, the "push-down stack" model is described and data from several relevant experimental situations are presented. It should be noted that the three versions of SAL represent progressive steps in elaboration of the same model. The major findings concerning the behavior of SAL I and II also hold for SAL III.  SAL I. THE BASIC MODEL  SORTING  When a stimulus trigram is presented, the model sorts it through the discrimination net to retrieve a response. The discrimination net can be represented as a "sorting tree"-a hierarchy of binary choice points called test nodes, and descending branches. Each pathway through the net leads eventually from the initial test node to a terminal  126 HINTZMAN  node at the base of the net, where a response image may be stored. At each test node, some characteristic of the stimulus is noticed and subjected to a matching test; the branch chosen at that point depends on the outcome of the test, either positive or negative. In SAL, test nodes are based on letter units, although this was an arbitrary decision; phonemic, visual, or possibly semantic features of the stimuli could also be used. The sorting process in SAL is essentially the same as that of EPAM II (Feigenbaum, 1963).  a)  FIG. 1. A SAL discrimination net (a) before and (b) after growing a new test node. For explanation see text.  Figure l a represents a discrimination net consisting of three test nodes-one first-letter test and two second-letter tests-leading to four terminal nodes. A stimulus trigram would be sorted in this net by submitting it to a series of matching tests. Imagine, for example, the sorting of the trigram XBN. Sorting begins at the topmost test node, which tests the first position for X. The test is positive, leading to another test node which tests the second position for F. The trigram fails this test, leading to a third test node which tests the second position again, this time for Q. The negative outcome of this test leads to the terminal node containing an image of the response 1, which can now be retrieved and output. The net illustrated in Fig. la would perform without error on the list: XBN-l, RGP-2, XFM-3, XQL-4.  LEARNING  Discrimination learning consists of the elaboration of the discrimination net by adding new nodes and branches as they are needed. Suppose that the net of Fig. la is confronted by a new pair, LCS-5. The trigram is sorted and the response 2 retrieved. The information that an error has been committed triggers the growing of a new test node and two new terminals. At this point, a theoretical question must be answered: how is the model to decide which letter to incorporate into the new test node ? EPAXI bases this decision on a scan for differences between the stimulus and an internal image. In SAL, the answer is simply an unchanging left-right noticing order. If in sorting the stimulus the first letter has not been positively identified, then the first  DISCRIMINATION NET MODEL 127  letter will be learned. If the stimulus has already passed a first-letter test but has not been identified by a second-letter test, then the second letter will be learned, and similarly for the third letter. Thus, since the trigram in our example did not pass a first-letter test during sorting, the first letter of the stimulus just presented is used in the new test node. The new (reinforced) response, 5, is stored at the positive terminal, and the old response, 2, is stored at the negative terminal. The net can now be represented by the diagram in Fig. lb. It will perform without error on all five pairs which it has learned.  Note that if instead of LCS-5 we presented RCS-5 as the fifth pair in the list, one new test node would not be sufficient. For, after constructing a new first-letter test for R, the model would err on RGP on the next trial, responding with 5 instead of with 2. Although the response 2 would be present in the net, it would be stored at a negative terminal, and would therefore be inaccessible when its stimulus, RGP, was sorted in the net. The two stimuli beginning with R would interfere with each other until an appropriate second-letter test was added. This example illustrates the manner in which a discrimination net produces oscillation and retroactive interference (cf. Feigenbaum, 1963).  If learning were to take place after every error, acquisition would be much too fast. In SAL, therefore, the creation of a new test node is characterized as an all-or-none event which has probability a of occurring after an error. The learning parameter a can be considered an unspecified function of such variables as exposure time, responsereinforcement interval, motivation, and so on; it is the major determinant of the rate of acquisition of a list.  Stating that discrimination learning does not always occur following an error raises an additional question. What should take place when an error is made and (with probability 1 - a) the appropriate test node is not added to the net ? There are several possible alternatives: the new, reinforced response could replace the old one at the terminal node; the old response could be erased leaving an empty terminal; both responses could coexist at that terminal, interfering with each other; or the old response could simply remain. In version I of SAL it is assumed that the reinforced response replaces the old one at the terminal node with probability b, the old response remaining with probability I - b (a slightly different process is assumed in SAL III). The value of b affects the tendency to perseverate, or to continue giving the same incorrect response to a stimulus for several trials. However, b affects the acquisition rate only in transfer situations. The functions of the parameters a and b in learning are summarized in Fig. 2.  In the work done with SAL to date, no attempt has been made to "fit" data quantitatively. There are two reasons for this: first, no economical methods of parameter estimation have been developed for SAL. Second, even if such methods were available, the model still could not be applied quantitatively to the range of experiments reported here, simply because SAL learns only trigram-digit pairs, while actual  128 HINTZMAN  Adds New Test Node.  Net Inadequate for Perfect Performance; Produces Incorrect Response.  -a  Replaces Old Response at Terminal Node with Reinforced Response.  No New Test Node Added.  No Change.  Fic. 2. The functions of parameters a and b in SAL I.  experimental materials vary widely. For these reasons, the work reported in this paper has centered on obtaining good qualitative agreement with human data in a wide variety of experimental tasks; the primary purpose is to demonstrate the range of phenomena consistent with the assumption of a discrimination-net based memory structure.  The performance of SAL I is evaluated in the following section.  APPLICATION OF SAL I TO SINGLE-LIST SITUATIONS  In learning a PA list, SAL typically produces learning curves which are negatively accelerated exponential functions. However, the shape of the curve depends partly on whether presentation order is randomized from trial to trial. If a restriction is made that items appearing near the end of one trial cannot appear near the beginning of the next, or if items are in the same order on every trial, SAL produces an S-shaped learning curve, with an initial period of positive acceleration lasting two or three trials.  Data from groups of simulated subjects show a great deal of variability in performance, even though parameters are the same for each subject. For example, a simulated group of size 20 learned a 9-pair list of mixed stimulus similarity, with parameters a = .40 and b = .50. Total errors per subject from trial 2 until mastery was used as the measure of learning. The number of errors ranged from 3 to 35, with a mean of 15.0 and SD of 6.62. Similarly, there is considerable variability in acquisition rate for different pairs in a list. Part of this variability can be attributed to actual differences in interference produced by intralist stimulus similarity, and part is due to the stochastic processes involved in learning. A sample SAL protocol from the  DISCRIMINATION NET MODEL 129  group of 20 described above is presented in Table 1. Several phenomena characteristic of human subjects can be seen here, including stimulus confusions or generalization (especially between ZXK and ZHJ), perseverative errors (e.g., repetition of the response 8 to stimulus ZHJ), and oscillation (e.g., the alternation of correct and incorrect responses to ZXK). These phenomena are also found in EPAM protocols (Feigenbaum, 1963). There are no failures to respond because SAL I does not deal with response latencies, and therefore assumes there is always enough time for the response to occur.  Generally, SAL protocols look much like human protocols, though some discrepancies can be detected. One discrepancy is that while human subjects will often reach a criterion of one errorless trial only to follow this with one or more errors, SAL I never does. One perfect trial means perfect mastery of the list, and hence perfect subsequent performance. Another discrepancy can be traced to SAL's fixed and rigid noticing order. Human subjects have difficulty learning to discriminate pairs of trigrams such as LQF and QFL, since the same letters are used in both. SAL, on the other hand, would not confuse these two trigrams very frequently because its letter-matching tests are all position specific.  TABLE 1  A SAMPLE SAL PROTOCOL       Trial       Pair 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10   GXJ-7 2 2 + + + + - + +   ZXK-8 4 6 6 + 6 + 6 + +   GXK-4 2 + + + + + ~- + +   LQF-5 9 + + + + + ~_ + +   GXF-2 1 + + + + -f- -f- + +   LXJ-9 + + + + + + ~- + +   ZHJ-6 4 4 8 8 8 1 8 + +   MBW-3 4 + + + + + + + +   GQK-1 4 + + + + + + + +  Total errors 8 3 2 1 2 1 2 0 0  EXPERIMENT 1. INTRALIST STIMULUS SIMILARITY  It is well known that the higher the degree of similarity among stimuli of a PA list, the more difficult the list is to learn (e.g., Restle, 1964; Underwood, 1953a). As SAL learns discriminations by sorting on the basis of distinctive letters, the  48o/5/I-9  130 HINTZMAN  amount of overlap among stimuli should affect list difficulty (this is true of EPAM; cf. Simon and Feigenbaum, 1964). The following experiment was done to determine the effects of intralist similarity on various measures of the model's performance.  Three 8-pair lists varying in intralist stimulus similarity were constructed, each pairing 8 trigrams with the first 8 digits. The stimuli for condition Hi were generated from 6 different letters, 2 alternatives for each position. There was zero redundancy in this set, perfect performance requiring letter tests for all three positions. Stimuli for condition Med were generated from a set of 4 possible letters at each position; those for condition Lo used 8 different letters at each position. In the latter condition, learning is possible on the basis of first (or second or third) letter position alone. Condition Lo is of special theoretical interest because all stimuli are completely distinctive, representing the ideal situation for comparing SAL with the one-element model (Atkinson, Bower, and Crothers, 1965; Bower, 1961, 1962). Twenty subjects were simulated in each of the three conditions; a = .40, b = .50.  H f i  W m 0  z 0 m 0 d 0 m a.  .4  .3  .2  0  0 1 2 3 4 S 6 7 8 9  TOTAL ERRORS PER SUBJECT - ITEM  FIG. 3. Distributions of total errors per subject-item sequence, Experiment 1. Inset: Bower-Levine data, from Restle, 1964.  Stimulus similarity had the expected effect on learning rate. Mean number of trials per subject to mastery were: Lo, 4.60; Med, 5.50; Hi, 6.75. Further evidence of the effect of similarity is shown in Fig. 3. Here, the total number of errors (from trial 2  DISCRIMINATION NET MODEL 131  until mastery) was determined for each subject-item sequence, and the relative frequency of each count plotted. It can be seen that the entire curve flattens and shifts toward more errors as similarity increases. These distributions compare favorably with similar data from human subjects reported by Restle (1964).  We next turn to precriterion curves. The precriterion phase in the learning of a subject-item sequence is defined as those responses from trial 2 up to, but not including, the last error in that sequence. All precriterion responses can be averaged together to obtain the precriterion proportion correct for each trial, plotted as a precriterion curve. These curves for conditions Hi, Med, and Lo are presented in Fig. 4.  V GC GG O V  Z O m 0 d 0 m d  z 0 m m  V a  .s  .4  .3  .2  TRIAL NUMBER  FIG. 4. Precriterion curves from the three similarity conditions of Experiment 1.  All three precriterion curves rise as trial number increases. Curves for conditions Hi and Med appear to be negatively accelerated, asymptoting below .50. The Lo curve appears to be positively accelerated, although the small number of observations makes it quite variable beyond trial 3. These precriterion predictions can be directly contrasted with those of the one-element model, which predicts a horizontal curve, stationary at the value 1/(number of responses), in this case, .125 (Suppes and Ginsberg, 1963). SAL does not exhibit stationarity because its increased ability to discriminate is accompanied by a restriction in the range of possible responses it will make to a given stimulus. That is to say, the more test nodes a stimulus has been sorted through, the more likely it is that the correct response image is stored at the  132 HINTZMAN  terminal node. That this should also be true of the condition Lo precriterion curve may at first seem paradoxical, as the stimuli in this list bear no formal similarity to one another. Nonetheless, some stimuli are "confused" because they are as yet unlearned; SAL has not yet constructed first-letter tests appropriate to them, and consequently is sorting several stimuli to the same negative terminal node. The number of "unlearned" items sorted to negative terminals decreases as learning progresses, thus increasing the probability of a correct precriterion response.  Another interesting feature of the precriterion curves of Fig. 4 is that, compared to the ease of learning, there is a curious reversal of performance among the three conditions. Condition Hi has the highest precriterion proportion correct, condition Lo the lowest. The reason for this can readily be seen if one considers the effect in each condition of building one test node. In condition Hi, this test node sorts the stimuli into two groups of equal size-in effect, doubling the probability of a correct response. In condition Lo, the test node isolates one stimulus from the others. This pair no longer contributes to the precriterion curve, since it is now learned. At the same time, the number of unlearned items has been decreased by one. This increases the probability of a correct precriterion response, but the increase is small compared to that in condition Hi. Thus, one added test node increases precriterion performance more in condition Hi than in condition Lo; condition Med falls between.  EXPERIMENT 2. NUMBER OF RESPONSE ALTERNATIVES  An easily testable prediction of the one-element model is that of precriterion stationarity (Atkinson et al., 1965; Bower, 1961, 1962, 1967; Estes, 1964a; Suppes and Ginsberg, 1963). It was seen in Experiment 1 that SAL did not exhibit precriterion stationarity on any of the three lists learned. Bower (1967), in reviewing the evidence for the one-element model, has suggested that the critical variable for producing stationarity may be the number of response items in the PA list. If there are only two (well-integrated) responses, the precriterion curve is usually stationary. If there are more than two, it rises as learning progresses. Clearly, the results of Experiment 1 do not contradict this analysis, as 9 different responses were used in each list SAL learned. On the other hand, it seems reasonable to expect SAL to exhibit stationarity on a 2-response list, since the subprocesses (building test nodes) involved are all-ornone events. The following experiment was run to determine the effects of the number of unique responses on SAL's performance.  One condition (9-R) consisted of 20 simulated subjects learning the list shown in Table 1-the critical factor here being that the 9-stimulus trigrams of mixed similarity were paired with 9 unique responses. The other condition (2-R) randomly paired the same 9 trigrams with the digits 1 and 2, four stimuli to one response and five to the other. All simulated subjects were run to mastery, with the parameters a = .40, b = .50.  DISCRIMINATION NET MODEL 133  V   .25  F OC 0 6 O m s  1.00  9- R  FIG. 5. Learning and precriterion curves from the 9-response and 2-response conditions of Experiment 2. Insets from Hintzman, 1967.  Learning and precriterion curves are plotted in Fig. 5. Comparing the learning curves of the two conditions, it can be seen that, while the 2-R condition started with higher performance because of the higher initial guessing probability, 9-R performance was actually slightly better by trial 6. Obviously, the 9-R list was learned more quickly than the 2-R list. These differential learning rates resulted from the fact that the model learns-that is, builds a new test node-only after committing an error. In the 9-R condition, errors have a higher precriterion probability than in the 2-R condition. Therefore, the necessary discrimination net is built more rapidly, and learning is more efficient. This prediction is contradicted by Bower's (1962) finding that the same learning parameter could be used to fit learning curves for lists having different numbers of responses; however, the prediction was confirmed by Smith, Jones, and Thomas (1963), and in an experiment summarized below (Hintzman, 1967).  Of greater theoretical interest is the model's precriterion performance in the two conditions (Fig. 5). The 9-R curve is consistently above chance (e) and increasing over trials. However, the 2-R curve does not deviate significantly from the a priori  .75  .50  1.00  .75  .50  .25  0  TOTAL PERFORMANCE*----* PRECAITERION o- ---o  2 3 4 5 6 7 8 TRIAL NUMBER  134 HINTZMAN  guessing rate of 2. This finding can be explained as follows. An error by SAL indicates that at least two stimuli are still being confused; therefore the probability of a correct response prior to the last error cannot exceed .50. This value is a theoretical upper limit for precriterion curves. Hence, as learning progresses, the 9-R curve rises, approaching .50, while the 2-R curve, which begins at .50 on early trials, remains stationary.  Note that the precriterion stationarity in the 2-R condition does not mean that SAL is not learning prior to the last error. It means only that learning is not evidenced in performance on that item. Learning appears in performance only with the building of the final critical test node-the one that can discriminate that stimulus from all other stimuli in the list. An attempt to fit the one-element model to SAL's 2-R data was fairly successful except for the one-element model's prediction of independence of precriterion responses. SAL produced longer response runs than the independence assumption would predict. Failures of the one-element model to fit human 2-R data have often involved the prediction of precriterion independence, rather than that of stationarity (e.g., Kintsch, 1965). It should be noted also that in the present experiment SAL predicted stationarity even though one assumption of the one-element modelthat of perfect stimulus discriminability-was violated. SAL predicts 2-R stationarity regardless of the degree of stimulus similarity.  Some Experimcntal Confirmation. A PA study with human subjects was done to test several of the above predictions (Hintzman, 1967). Both intralist stimulus similarity (high vs low) and number of responses (2 vs 14) were varied in a 2 X 2 design involving 4 different lists of 14 pairs each. Stimuli were trigrams and responses were numbers between 1 and 14; subjects learned by the anticipation method, and were always allowed time to respond. The basic findings were in agreement with SAL's predictions: (1) low similarity lists were learned faster than high similarity lists; (2) 14-response lists were learned faster than 2-response lists; (3) precriterion curves for both 2-response lists were stationary and those for both 14-response lists were nonstationary; and (4) precriterion stationarity was not accompanied by trial-totrial response independence.  EXPERIMENT 3. PROBABILITY LEARNING  Voss, Thompson, and Keegan (1959) report a study of probabilistic PA learning, in which a stimulus could have two different associates, Rr and R2 . The probability of an Rl reinforcement was controlled, and varied systematically over the pairs in the list. Thus, subjects learned several different probabilistic associations simultaneously. The following study was patterned after that of Voss et al. (1959), to determine how SAL would perform in a similar situation.  Twelve stimulus trigrams of minimal similarity were paired with 11 different numbers as responses. Two of the stimuli (100% associates) were paired with the  DISCRIMINATION NET MODEL 135  same response on all 10 trials in each block of 10. Two other stimuli (90-10%) were paired with one response (Rl) on 9 trials and with the other (R2) on one trial in each block. Similarly, two stimuli were assigned to each of the remaining possible RI-R2 splits: 8-2, 7-3, 6-4, and 5-5. Ten simulated subjects (a = .30, b = .50) were run for 60 trials each. The first 10 acquisition trials were discarded, leaving 5 blocks of 10 trials per subject. There were thus 500 trials in all, each associative split occurring twice per trial, for a total of 1000 observations per condition.  Response proportions were calculated as a function of reinforcement probabilities. These data are presented in Table 2. Clearly, none of the obtained values deviate significantly from the reinforcement probability; there is nearly perfect matching. Given probabilistic associations, SAL matches probabilities in its responses. The reason for this is simple. After about 10 trials, the net has elaborated sufficiently to discriminate all stimulus terms, so that item interactions are no longer occurring. Thus only the response images in terminal nodes are being altered. If SAL responds correctly, it keeps the same association; if it responds incorrectly, it changes to the reinforced response with probability b. Thus, asymptotically SAL I is the same as the one-element model for this situation (Suppes and Atkinson, 1960), and it will have the same defects regarding sequential statistics-for example, predicting perfect repetition of a response which was given and reinforced on the previous trial.  TABLE 2  RESULTS OF EXPERIMENT 3. PROBABILITY LEARNING A SAMPLFS,SAL PROTOCOL   Input Response  probability proportion   0.0 0.00   0.1 0.10   0.2 0.21   0.3 0.30   0.4 0.38   0.5 0.50   0.6 0.62   0.7 0.70   0.8 0.79   0.9 0.90   1.0 1.00  Actually, the Voss et al. (1959) study obtained considerable "overshooting" at high probabilities and "undershooting" at low probabilities, showing that humans do not  136 HINTZMAN  strictly probability match, as SAL I does. It is not clear what kind of modifications would enable SAL to predict overshooting. It should be noted, however, that this phenomenon poses problems for other models as well (Estes, 1964b).  EXPERIMENT 4. MASSED VS SPACED ITEM REPETITION  An experiment by Greeno (1964) has shown that the amount of PA learning produced by the second exposure of a pair depends on how many other items intervened between the two presentations. If the second exposure of the pair took place immediately after the first, later, long-term retention was not much better than it was following only a single exposure. If the second exposure was delayed, on the other hand, later retention of the pair was enhanced. Greeno concluded that spaced repetitions resulted in better learning than massed repetitions. In the following experiment, SAL was presented with a PA task similar to the one used by Greeno.  Eight stimulus trigrams having maximal similarity were paired with the first 8 digits. Four of these pairs were assigned to the Massed condition and 4 to the Distributed condition. On each trial, every Massed item appeared twice, the second exposure immediately following the first. Each Distributed item appeared only once per trial. Presentation order was the same on all trials. Thus, on any given trial, the Massed pairs had been exposed twice as often as the Distributed pairs, and, if learning were a function only of frequency of repetitions and not of their spacing, one would predict superior performance on the massed items. Parameters were a ---- .30, b = .50.  The results are presented along with Greeno's data in Fig. 6. For the Massed items, two percentages are plotted for each trial; proportion of errors on first presentations and on second presentations (which immediately followed). It can be seen that performance on first presentations of items was not consistently better than performance on Distributed items. Despite the fact that the Massed items were exposed twice on each trial, about the same number of trials were needed to reach mastery in both conditions. Figure 6 also shows the effect of Massed presentation 1 on presentation 2 performance. A considerable drop in number of errors occurred on the second exposure, but the number increased again on presentation 1 of the next trial. These results are remarkably similar to those of Greeno (1964).  The fact that SAL behaves much like Greeno's subjects tends to confirm his discrimination-learning interpretation of his results. SAL's performance on Massed items improves greatly from presentation 1 to presentation 2 because either discrimination learning or replacing the old response at the terminal node results in a correct presentation 2 response given an error on presentation 1. In fact, the true error probability on presentation 2 is just (1-a)(1-b) times the error probability on presentation 1 (note that the SAL data would look more like Greeno's if SAL's Massed presentation 2 performance could be improved; this could be done by simply raising the value of parameter b-in effect, boosting the model's short-term retention).  DISCRIMINATION NET MODEL  137  ~ .8 0  oe  ... , 6  z 0 r 0 d 0 m a  .4  .2  0  z 0  s s < s 6 , e 9 io DISTRIBUTED ' - MASSED PRESENTATION 1 p ~9 PRESENTATION 2 b'-  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 TRIAL  FIG. 6. Distributed vs massed presentation data, Experiment 4. Inset from Greeno, 1964.  The subsequent drop in Massed item performance between trials occurs because of interference from interpolated items. Finally, performance on Massed presentation 1 is about the same as performance on Distributed items because SAL learns a list as a whole. No pair can be "learned" independently of the other pairs in the list, since learning depends on errors, and these are contributed by other, similar items.  Experiments 5 and 6 demonstrate two situations in which SAL fails to make the correct prediction.  EXPERIMENT 5. WHOLE VS PART LEARNING  Experiments using a variety of materials have been done to determine whether a task is more efficiently learned as a whole or in parts which can then be integrated into the whole (McGeoch and Irion, 1952). In order to determine SAL's predictions concerning the whole and part methods, the model was run in a simulation of a recent study using PA lists (Postman and Goggin, 1966) which compared three learning methods, Whole, Part, and "Repeated Part" (explained below). That study found the Whole and Part methods to be of about equal difficulty, but both inferior to the Repeated Part method. The essential variables were duplicated in the following experiment with SAL.  The 9-pair list shown in Table I was again used. The list was subdivided into three equal parts or sublists: PI , P2 , and P3 . In the Part condition these sublists were mastered successively, followed by learning of the integrated 9-pair list, i.e., (Pl 1 P2 1 P3 1 Pl + P2 + P3). In the Repeated Part condition, the length of the list  138 HINTZMAN  was gradually increased by adding a new sublist each time mastery was attained, i.e., (Pl , Pl + P2 , Pl -}- P2 + P3). In the Whole condition, the entire list was learned in the normal manner, i.e., (Pl -} P2 + P3). There were 15 simulated subjects in each condition with parameters a = .30, b = .50.  The total number of errors made, including all stages of learning, was used as the measure of difficulty. Mean errors by conditions were: Whole, 33.2; Part, 29.0; Repeated Part, 31.2. None of the differences were significant. The model thus failed to predict the superiority of the Repeated Part method found by Postman and Goggin (1966). Apparently, a fixed number of confusions must occur before SAL can discriminate among a given set of stimulus items. The order in which particular confusing items are encountered is not an important variable.  EXPERIMENT 6. LIST LENGTH  A powerful determinant of the difficulty of a PA list is list length or the number of pairs (Calfee and Atkinson, 1965; Runquist, 1965, 1966; Sand, 1939). In order to determine the effects of this variable on SAL's performance, two design problems first have to be dealt with. The first is that in many experiments, list length and number of response alternatives are confounded. This problem was handled simply by holding constant the number of responses (as did Calfee and Atkinson, 1965). The second problem is that when trigrams are used, it is impossible to manipulate list length without either increasing the number of letters or increasing the degree of similarity of the trigrams. It was decided in this case to hold the number of letters constant, allowing similarity to vary.  Condition 8-P consisted of the data of condition Med in Experiment 1 above. The eight trigrams used, it will be recalled, were generated from a set of 4 alternative letters for each position. In condition 16-P, the same sets of 4 letters per position were used to generate 16 different trigrams. Number of responses was equated in the two conditions by randomly pairing two 16-P trigrams with each of the first 8 digits. All simulated subjects (20 per condition) were run to mastery, with a = .40, b = .50. Mean number of errors per pair were: 8-P, 1.59; 16-P, 1.55. Clearly, list length is not the important variable to SAL that it is to human subjects. The fact that more test nodes are required to learn a longer list is apparently counteracted by the fact that there are more opportunities per trial for the test nodes to be grown.  The fact that long lists are not more difficult than short lists for the model to learn can be considered a major failing, for the effect of list length on human learning is very consistent and must reflect some basic feature of the memory mechanism. Two possible solutions to this problem have suggested themselves. One possibility would be to postulate a kind of "cognitive strain," such that the larger the discrimination net becomes, the smaller is the probability a of adding a new test node. This notion is clearly ad hoc, however, and might result in undesirable side effects, such as distortions  DISCRIMINATION NET MODEL 139  in the learning curve. The other possible solution would involve adding a short-term memory mechanism. Calfee and Atkinson (1965) have shown in their work on the "trial-dependent-forgetting" model that a short-term mechanism helps explain the list-length effect. It might also clear up the difficulties encountered in handling whole vs part learning (Experiment 5) and errors occurring after an errorless trial.  Other human learning phenomena which we have not yet considered, such as overlearning, proactive interference, etc. are clearly outside the scope of the simple version of SAL presented above. However, they can be dealt with by some slight modifications of SAL I. The remainder of this paper presents two elaborations of the SAL model.  SAL II. THE OVERLEARNING MODEL  In extending application of SAL to the problem of retroactive interference (RI), the model was found to be inadequate without at least one additional assumption. In version II of SAL, it is postulated that learning can take place following a correct response, as well as following an error. The probability of this occurring is c, where c can take on values between 0 and a. It can be seen that the simpler version of SAL is a special case of this model, where c = 0. Also, note that if c = a, that is, if learning is equally likely following correct and incorrect responses, the difference in learning rates between conditions 9-R and 2-R in Experiment 2 would disappear.  The parameter c can be considered an "overlearning" parameter, which allows discrimination learning to continue even though performance may show complete mastery of the list. Following a correct response, with probability c, SAL constructs a new test node. This test node incorporates the letter of the presented trigram which is next in the noticing order. The correct response is stored at the positive terminal of the new test node, while nothing is stored at the negative terminal. Because the negative terminal is left blank, an empty terminal node may be encountered during a later attempt at recall of some pair. When this happens, SAL guesses randomly from the set of responses appropriate to the list and then stores the reinforced response at the empty node with probability 1.  Experiments 7-9 were run with SAL II as subject.  EXPERIMENT 7. INTERLIST SIMILARITY AND RETROACTIVE INTERFERENCE  The operations for producing and testing retroactive interference (RI) are: learn list 1, then learn list 2, then relearn list 1. These steps will be designated original learning (OL), interpolated learning (IL), and relearning (RL), respectively. Since SAL II does not spontaneously forget over time, the amount of RI can be determined directly by counting the number of errors made on trial 1 of relearning (RL-1). This is only true, of course, in situations in which list 1 was originally learned to mastery-  140 HINTZMAN  otherwise a control condition is needed (as in Experiment 8 below). The following experiment was done to demonstrate RI and to determine how RI varies with interlist stimulus similarity. With human subjects more RI is found the more overlap there is between stimuli of the original and interpolated lists (McGeoch and Irion, 1952).  There were three conditions varying in degree of interlist stimulus similarity. List 1 was identical in all three conditions, consisting of 9 trigrams of medium similarity paired with the numbers 11 through 19. In list 2, the first 9 digits were paired with stimuli which differed in each condition. For every list 1 trigram, list 2 of condition High contained a trigram having the same first two letters. List 2 of condition Medium repeated only first letters from list 1. Those of condition Low were generated from an entirely different set of letters. Both lists were learned to mastery by 10 simulated subjects in each condition. Parameter values were: a = .40, b=.50,c=.20.  V  Z .50  0  o .25 a  0 m o.  0  MEDIUM LOW  2 3 4 5 6 1 8 1 2 3 4 5 TRIALS ORIGINAL LEARNING RELEARNING  FIG. 7. Effects of three degrees of interlist stimulus similarity on Rl, Experiment 7.  Performance on list 1 in the three conditions, both original learning (OL) and relearning (RL), is shown in Fig. 7. The chance variation among conditions in OL was about the amount which could be expected with human subjects run in groups of 10. The effects of the interpolated learning (IL) differed considerably, as can be judged from performance decrements on RL-1 (Fig. 7). As expected, condition High suffered the greatest retention loss, and condition Low the least. Mean number of errors on this trial were: Low, 0.1; Medium, 2.2; High, 4.6.  The RL curves of conditions High and Medium demonstrate another interesting fact about SAL's behavior. The RL rates are higher than OL rates (this has also been found with EPAM, cf. Feigenbaum, 1959). This finding agrees with the literature regarding relearning following RI (Thune and Underwood, 1943; Underwood, 1945) and following a forgetting interval (Underwood and Schulz, 1961). The reason that  DISCRIMINATION NET MODEL 141  SAL's RL rates are higher is that the discrimination net built up during OL is entirely adequate to discriminate among the list 1 stimuli. Thus, the relationship between intralist and interlist (retroactive) interference can be characterized as follows. During OL, SAL must deal with confusions from within the list. The confused pairs recur, trial after trial, so that the list cannot be mastered until all the proper discrimination tests have been incorporated into the net. Interference caused by interpolated learning, while due to the same mechanisms as intralist interference, does not recur during relearning. The learning system can dispose of interference from list 2 responses both by building new test nodes and by replacing the list 2 responses with list 1 responses in terminal nodes. Relearning can proceed rapidly because intralist interference was dealt with during original learning.  SAL escapes the chief criticism Underwood (1961) has aimed at Gibson's theory for the same reason. Gibson (1940) proposed that generalization among stimulus items could recover, causing forgetting. It follows that high intralist similarity should lead to poorer retention than low intralist similarity, a prediction that Underwood was not able to confirm. Although SAL is similar to Gibson's theory in many respects, it does not predict recovery of intralist generalization, for the discrimination net is a permanent structure, and once a list has been mastered, forgetting can be caused only by interference from external (e.g., interlist) sources.  A positive relationship is generally found between number of "reinforcements" during original learning and resistance to RI or forgetting (Runquist, 1957; Underwood, 1953a, 1953b, 1964). In general, pairs which have been correctly anticipated most often during OL are least susceptible to interference. Such findings are extremely difficult to reconcile with simple all-or-none learning notions; the interpretation has always been that associative strength can vary, and that reinforcing a response strengthens the S-R bond, making the association more permanent.  SAL 11, with its overlearning feature, offers an alternative interpretation in terms of stimulus discrimination learning. A stimulus which has been discriminated from the others in its list can continue to be learned while the more troublesome pairs are being mastered. Thus, with uniform intralist similarity, SAL will have learned more about the stimuli of rapidly learned pairs than about stimuli of pairs which have been barely mastered by the end of original learning. The effects can be demonstrated in the data of condition High. Proportion correct on RL-1 was .36 for pairs correctly anticipated 1 to 3 times during OL, and was .68 for those correctly anticipated 4 to 6 times.  EXPERIMENT 8. RI AND AMOUNT OF ORIGINAL LEARNING  An effect similar to the one just described shows up in investigations into the effects of various degrees of original learning on RI. The parameter c allows SAL 11 to learn more about the stimulus items than is necessary for perfect performance on the list. To the extent that the additional_ test nodes so created help to differentiate list 1 stimuli  142 HINTZMAN  from those of list 2, increased learning of list 1 should make it more resistant to RI. This is true of human learning of both serial (McGeoch, 1929) and PA lists (Briggs, 1957).  For this simulation, lists 1 and 2 of condition Medium Experiment 7, were used. Three conditions were run, 10 simulated subjects per condition. Groups 4-OL, 8-OL, and 12-OL received 4, 8, and 12 trials of original list 1 learning, respectively. List 2 was learned to mastery, followed by relearning of list 1. Parameter values were: a=.40,b=.50,c=.20.  In order to determine how many of the errors on trial RL-1 were due to RI, it was first necessary to arrive at an indication of what the performance in each condition would have been on an additional OL trial, had one been given. This was done by using 8-OL performance on trial 5 as control for 4-OL, and 12-OL performance on trial 9 as control for 8-OL. All errors in condition 12-OL were due to RI, as perfect performance was reached by trial 10. Subtracting these correction values gives the mean numbers of errors due to RI on RL-1. They were: 4-OL, 2.7; 8-OL, 1.3; 12-OL, 0.5. RI is thus a decreasing function of the number of OL trials.  We may state as a general principle of SAL II's learning that the amount of RI produced by an interpolated list is inversely related to the amount of stimulus discrimination learning which has gone on during list 1 acquisition. Since one way of assuring a high degree of OL is to have high intralist similarity, the following prediction may be made: if intralist similarity on list 1 is manipulated and interlist similarity held constant, the amount of RI should be inversely proportional to the degree of intralist similarity. This prediction could easily be tested.  EXPERIMENT 9. RI AND AMOUNT OF INTERPOLATED LEARNING  In a similar manner, one can manipulate the number of trials on the interpolated list. Experiments with both serial (Melton and Irwin, 1941) and PA learning (Briggs, 1957; Thune and Underwood, 1943) have produced complex results. In general, as IL increases: (1) total RI increases exponentially; (2) the number of actual intrusions from list 2 first increases, reaches a maximum at intermediate degrees of IL, then decreases with overlearning of list 2; and (3) as a consequence, the amount of RI which cannot be explained by specific response interference rises. In addition, it has been found that the shape of the RI function depends on what measure is being used. The exponential increase in RI just mentioned holds only for errors on RL-1; if the number of RL trials needed to master the list is taken as the RI measure, it is found first to increase and then to decrease with the number of trials on list 2. The following experiment was run to determine to what extent SAL II could match this complex pattern of findings.  The lists used were lists 1 and 2 of condition High, Experiment 8. Five conditions were run, 15 simulated subjects per condition. In all cases, list 1 was first mastered. List 2 was then presented for 1, 2, 4, 7, or 12 trials, followed by relearning of list 1.  DISCRIMINATION NET MODEL 143  Number of errors on RL-1 is plotted as a function of trials of IL in Fig. 8. It can be seen that as IL increases, total RI increases rapidly at first, then more gradually. The number of these RI errors which were intrusions from list 2, on the other hand, shows a sharp initial increase followed by a considerable decline. The difference between these two curves, the number of RI errors which cannot be attributed to list 2 intrusions, thus gradually increases with trials of IL, as shown in the third curve of Fig. 8. These results compare favorably with those presented by Briggs (1957) and by Thune and Underwood (1943). The obtained discrepancy between the curves of total RI and intrusions is the same as that which inspired the "twofactor" theory of RI (Melton and Irwin, 1941) by showing that response competition alone cannot account for all RI. The additional factor in RI was assumed to be "unlearning" or extinction of list 1 responses during IL. The unlearning theory has been criticized on the grounds that intrusions during IL are rare and are concentrated in the first few trials (this is also true of SAL's data), while the unexplained RI factor increases most at high degrees of IL (McGeoch and Irion, 1952).  0  TOTAL R I INTRUSIONS --o DIFFERENCE  0 2 s IO 20  0  z 0  f e  z s  S 4 3 2  1-1  s  DJW 1 2 4 7 12 TRIALS OF INTERPOLATED LEARNING  FIG. 8. The RI errors as a function of degree of IL, Experiment 9. Inset from Thune  and Underwood, 1943.  The feature of SAL 11 which is essential for producing these results is the empty negative terminal node created whenever learning takes place following a correct response. After small amounts of IL, the model confuses list 1 and list 2 stimuli,  144 HINTZMAN  thus producing response intrusions, With increased differentiation of list-2 stimuli during overlearning, however, the discrimination net grows more and more empty negative terminal nodes. Thus, when tested for RI, the list-1 stimulus becomes more likely to be sorted to an empty terminal, an event which will not produce a list 2 intrusion, but one which will produce either an omission or a random error. The old list-1 associations are no longer available because they have been bypassed by the continued elaboration of the discrimination net.  The paradoxical finding that relearning is faster with high than with intermediate degrees of IL is also predicted by the model. Stated simply, SAL finds it easier to fill an empty terminal node than to deal with an interfering response, and empty terminals are more frequent after high degrees of IL. In the present experiment, the mean numbers of trials to relearn for conditions 1, 2, 4, 7, and 12, respectively, were: 1.67, 1.93, 2.07, 2.13, and 1.27. Thus, whether 7 or 12 trials of IL appear to produce more RI depends on whether RI is measured by errors on RL-1 or by the number of RL trials required to regain mastery of the list; and this was the effect to be explained.  Another finding which is consistent with SAL has been reported by Underwood (1945). Holding the number of IL trials constant, he found that the more IL lists were presented, the greater was the resulting RI. It can be seen in Fig. 8 that the amount of RI produced by one interpolated list reaches a maximum in a few trials. This happens because a point is reached early in IL at which interlist confusions have been completely eliminated. Further practice on the interpolated list beyond that point has no effect on list-1 retention. This would not be true, however, if during IL several lists were presented, all of high similarity to list 1. In such a case, one would expect RI to increase with the number of IL lists, as Underwood (1945) found.  The List Identification Problem. It should be noted that the overlearning results of Experiments 8 and 9 would not have been obtained if the A-B, A-C paradigm had been used-that is, if the stimuli of the two lists had been identical. Overlearning is only effective for SAL insofar as it increases differentiation between list-1 and list-2 stimuli, and SAL cannot discriminate stimuli which are formally identical.  To make the model applicable to overlearning in the A-B, A-C situation, one would have to assume that the model can add to a stimulus some kind of identifying tag or label which serves to differentiate the two lists. This identifying label could be incorporated into the discrimination net much as letter tests are. But list identification would ultimately have to be derived from temporal cues or from "context cues"-stimuli not obviously part of the immediate nominal stimulus situation (other pairs in the list, etc.). Indeed, there is much evidence that a complete model of verbal learning would have to make use of context cues (e.g., Bilodeau and Schlosberg, 1951), but it is not clear how a mechanism to do this efficiently could be incorporated into the present model.  DISCRIMINATION NET MODEL 145  EXPERIMENT 10. PREDIFFERENTIATION OF STIMULI  Like Gibson's theory (Gibson, 1940) and EPAM (Simon and Feigenbaum, 1964), SAL predicts that prior discrimination training with the stimuli will facilitate subsequent acquisition when these same stimuli are used in a standard PA task. The effect should be stronger the greater is the degree to which the prior task requires elaboration of the discrimination net. Thus, prior PA learning or free recall of the stimulus terms (predifferentiation) would be expected to have more consistent positive effects than would mere observation or pronunciation of the stimulus terms (prefamiliarization).  In his review of the predifferentiation literature, Arnoult (1957) concludes that such "Relevant S" pretraining does indeed usually produce positive transfer to the second task, especially when the responses in the two tasks come from entirely unrelated classes. In discussing theories of the predifferentiation effect, Arnoult notes that one prediction of Gibson's theory has not been borne out in experiments: that transfer should be negative after a few pretraining trials and positive after many trials. In situations where a predifferentiation effect is obtained, it increases monotonically with pretraining trials to an asymptote. This is the outcome predicted by SAL.  An alternative explanation of predifferentiation effects, offered by Miller and Dollard (1941), states that learning to respond to stimuli with distinctive labels reduces generalization and thereby produces positive transfer. Thus, transfer should be greater the greater the specificity of the responses learned to the stimuli in the predifferentiation training. Regarding this prediction, an experiment by Hake and Eriksen (1955) found no effect of pretraining response specificity. Their subjects were pretrained to label each of 16 random patterns (5 lights in a 5 X 5 matrix) with one of either 2, 4, or 8 labels. The labels were assigned at random to the 16 stimuli, with no simple "concept" rule to describe the pairings. Subsequent learning of a new set of labels for the 16 patterns was independent of the number of labels in pretraining.  Similar independence from pretraining response specificity was shown by SAL in a simulation of the Hake and Eriksen study using trigrams instead of light patterns. Using the 8 trigrams of Experiment 1 having high intralist similarity, one group of 15 simulated subjects learned a PA task with 8 responses; another group of 15 learned with 2 responses. In the latter case, the 2 responses were so assigned to the stimuli that no single letter or pair of letters would enable complete discrimination. This was taken to approximate the random, unstructured pairings used in the Hake and Eriksen study. Following initial training to mastery, both groups learned a new set of 8 responses to the stimuli. There were no differences between groups on the transfer task; subjects pretrained with 8 responses made an average of 11.8 errors on the second task; those pretrained with 2 responses made 13.0 errors (t = 0.44). Thus, SAL can simulate the Hake and Eriksen results when the task 1 responses are assigned so that no simple rule describes the pairings. If, on the other hand, a simple  485/1-10  146 HINTZMAN  conceptual rule had characterized the 2-response pairs in task 1 (e.g., "all stimuli beginning with `X' are paired with 2"), then SAL would expect less positive transfer than in the 8-response condition. This suggests repeating the Hake and Eriksen paradigm with variations in the complexity of the rule describing the S-R pairs in task 1.  TRANSFER PARADIGMS  At this point, it would seem reasonable to extend application of SAL to paradigms of transfer as related to similarity, such as those summarized by the Osgood transfer surface (Osgood, 1949). This has not been done, for two reasons. First, SAL does not deal with response similarity or associative mediation between two responses, so the model would be applicable only to changes on the stimulus similarity dimension. Second, it is quite clear that SAL would not always behave as human subjects do, since SAL never produces negative transfer. With low interlist stimulus similarity, transfer may be nearly zero, but with medium or high similarity, transfer is positive. In fact, SAL shows maximum positive transfer in the A-B, A-C paradigm, due to the predifferentiation of the stimuli in the A-B task; the "response competition" inherent in the design is dealt with by SAL without difficulty, and is a minor factor in relation to the positive effects of predifferentiation. Apparently, a simple discrimination net cannot account for the complexities of the transfer literature. In order to get negative transfer, special assumptions must be made-assumptions which weigh response competition more heavily than stimulus-discrimination learning. The fact that EPAM III can predict negative A-B, A-C transfer (Simon and Feigenbaum, 1964) apparently arises from the way time charges are assigned to certain EPAM subprocesses; the end result is that the time taken to replace a terminal node response image with a new image is great relative to the time consumed growing new test nodes.  The experimental literature is still incomplete regarding what kinds of terms can be substituted in the A, B, and C locations so that the A-B, A-C paradigm produces positive, negative, or zero transfer. For example, if A is a nonverbal stimulus and B and C come from entirely unrelated response classes (e.g., a motor response and a CVC), then the predifferentiation literature shows that transfer is predominantly positive (cf. Experiment 10). Similarly, transfer has been reported to be positive when the A, B, and C terms were unrelated nouns (Postman, 1963), negative when they were unrelated adjectives (Postman, 1962), and positive when B or C were either similar CVCs or associatively related adjectives (Barnes and Underwood, 1959; Young, 1955). Studies by Goulet (1965), Houston (1965), Jung (1963), and Merikle and Battig (1963) have shown a complex pattern of negative and positive transfer effects depending on the meaningfulness (m) of the B and C response terms. It has also been shown that if the C items are the first-list B responses, re-paired with the stimuli (the A-B, A-Br paradigm), negative transfer is even more pronounced (cf. Postman, 1962). Factors  DISCRIMINATION NET MODEL 147  related to response integration, associative mediation, and list differentiation seem to be important for understanding these complex results. It is clear that SAL is deficient in just such factors. It is also deficient in not showing nonspecific transfer effects, such as learning-to-learn or warm-up, for which controls are routinely introduced in the standard transfer paradigms.  SAL III. THE PUSH-DOWN STACK MODEL  Version III of SAL eliminates a major flaw in SAL I and SAL II. In those two versions of the model, only one response could be associated with a stimulus at any given time. Evidence from studies of proactive interference (PI) and from "modified free recall" procedures demonstrates that several associations to the same stimulus can and often do coexist. Accordingly, another slight modification was made in SAL, involving the addition of a "push-down stack" at each terminal node.  Items are stored in a push-down stack (PDS) in their order of recency. That is, the most recent item is always stored at the topmost position in the stack, the next most recent item is stored in the second position, and so on. Storage of a new item involves pushing the other items in the stack down, making a place for the new one. In the present model, the PDS replaces the single-occupant terminal nodes of versions I and II as the response storage mechanism. At any terminal point in the net, there may now be stored a response hierarchy, with the most available associate in the topmost position.  Little modification of SAL II was needed to incorporate the PDS feature. Whereas in SAL I and II an error was followed, with probability b(1 - a), by the reinforced response replacing the old response at the terminal node, SAL III assumes that with the same probability the reinforced response is stored at the top position of the PDS. The new model differs from SAL II only in the fate of the old response. It is not lost, but is merely pushed down from the number one position by the new response. SAL III is thus able to store a hierarchy of associations at each terminal node, arranged in their order of recency. The topmost response is assumed to be the most available; it will be the first response retrieved, and unless special procedures such as modified free recall, second guess, or recognition are used, it will be the only response retrieved.  As a list is mastered and the depth of the net increases, PDS's located at the bottom of the net are found to contain fewer and fewer response images, reflecting the decrease in confusions that accompanies net growth. Like the two simpler versions of the model, SAL III can "lose" responses due to growth of the net around a terminal node. An entire PDS hierarchy can thus become unavailable for cued recall by a stimulus item which once could elicit that hierarchy.  Having introduced a mechanism for simultaneous storage of associates, we next consider the question of "recovery" of old responses; how do they get back to the  148 HINTZMAN  top of the hierarchy once they have been displaced from that position? The assumption adopted in SAL III is that responses at lower levels in the PDS tend to "rise" over time, pushing the higher or more recent responses out the top of the PDS, and thereby causing them to be lost from memory. This means that any terminal node which contains more than one response image is in an unstable condition. As time passes, it becomes more and more likely that only the oldest response will remain at a terminal node, in the topmost position of the PDS.  In the SAL III program this assumption takes the form of a stochastic process. For any PDS containing more than one response image existing over time interval At, there is a probability d that the topmost response will be lost and each response lower in the hierarchy will rise one level. The probability of retaining the topmost response for T such time intervals, therefore, is a decreasing exponential function, (1 - d)T. Since At is undefined, specific values of T and d are meaningful only relative to other values.  The following experiments demonstrate some of the consequences of the PDS addition to the model.  EXPERIMENT 11. RECOGNITION vs RECALL  Recognition measures generally lead to higher estimates of retention of verbal materials than do recall measures (Brown, 1964, 1965; Luh, 1922; Postman, Jenkins and Postman, 1948; Postman and Rau, 1957). This finding poses a problem for simple all-or-none retention theories which allow only one associate per stimulus. In SAL III, more than one response may be associated with a stimulus, and the correct response need not be the most available. With scanning of the response alternatives stored at the PDS, therefore, recognition can often succeed where recall fails. The following experiment demonstrates this fact.  Fifteen simulated subjects (a = .30, b = .50, c = .15) learned the 9-pair mixed similarity list of Table 1. On each presentation, a recognition test was given, followed by the usual recall (anticipation) test. Thus, for each subject-item on every trial, there were two retention measures, recognition and recall, which could be directly compared. On the recognition test, the stimulus was presented along with a response digit which was either correct (50% of the time) or incorrect. Incorrect pairings were drawn randomly from the other 8 digits. The model determined its recognition response by sorting the stimulus to a terminal node and searching the PDS at that terminal for the presented response. If the presented response was found at any level of the PDS, SAL responded "yes," otherwise "no." In the recall test which followed immediately, SAL always responded with the topmost response in the PDS. Following the recall test, learning took place in the usual manner. Recognition tests had no effect on learning.  Results on trials 2 through 5 were analyzed. Recognition responses were tallied in 4 categories: hits ("yes" I correct pairing), false alarms ("yes" I incorrect pairing),  DISCRIMINATION NET MODEL 149  correct rejections ("no" I incorrect pairing), and incorrect rejections ("no" I correct pairing). These categories were further analyzed according to whether the recall attempt was correct or incorrect. Pr(H), the probability of a hit, and Pr(F), the probability of a false alarm, were then computed. Summing over both correct and incorrect recalls, these values were Pr(H) _ .72, Pr(F) _ .12. For items recalled correctly, Pr(H) = 1.00, Pr(F) = .05; and for items recalled incorrectly, Pr(H) = .41, Pr(F) _ .22. Note that Pr(H) > Pr(F) on pairs which were recalled incorrectly, indicating the superiority of recognition to recall. This superiority can also be shown by applying a correction for guessing to the proportions correct obtained by both measures. Corrected proportions correct were: recognition, .60; recall, .49.  SAL III is thus able to explain the qualitative difference between recognition and recall without the ad hoc assumption of different "thresholds" for the two measures.  EXPERIMENT 12. SECOND AND THIRD GUESSES  Similar to studies of recognition vs recall are experiments which give the subject more than one try at recalling the correct response (Binford and Gettys, 1965; Bower, 1967; Bregman, 1966; Brown, 1964, 1965). A simple all-or-none association model predicts that second and third attempts at recall will be no better than chance. Experimental results unanimously refute this notion. The following experiment shows what happens when SAL III is given more than one attempt at recall on each presentation.  The list and parameters were the same as Experiment 9. Learning was by the anticipation procedure, but if the first response given was incorrect, the model was allowed a second or third attempt at recall before being shown the correct response. Thus, the stimulus was sorted to a terminal, and the first, second, and third responses in the PDS were retrieved and output if needed. If any of these levels were unoccupied a random guess (a digit between 1 and 9) was output instead. The chance probability of a correct response was therefore s, or .11 on all 3 attempts (lower than for human subjects, who are able to eliminate earlier incorrect guesses).  TABLE 3  PROPORTION CORRECT ON FIRST, SECOND AND THIRD GUESSES, EXPERIMENT 12  Trial no.  Attempt    1 2 3   2 .172 .161 .144   3 .350 .256 .287   4 .561 .418 .283   5 .750 .489 .348   6 .822 .531 .467   7 .894 .526 .111  150 HINTZMAN  The proportions correct on first, second, and third attempts for trials 2 through 7 are presented in Table 3. Performance on all 3 attempts was above chance, and improved as the list was learned. First attempts were more accurate than second, and second were more accurate than third and these differences increased as the list was mastered.  EXPERIMENT 13. "UNLEARNING" AND MODIFIED FREE RECALL  Very similar to the second guess technique for the study of single list learning is the "modified modified free recall" (MMFR) method developed by Barnes and Underwood (1959) for the study of interlist transfer and interference. By asking the subject to give both B and C responses in an A-B, A-C transfer paradigm, they were able to trace the changes in availability of the two response sets which take place during list 2 learning. As list 2 responses became more available, list 1 responses became less available, but this drop in availability was never complete. The commonly accepted interpretation of these findings (extinction or unlearning of list 1 associations) will be discussed after we see what SAL III predicts in this situation.  An A-B, A-C paradigm was used. The stimuli were of high intralist similarity, and both lists were 9 pairs in length. Responses for the A-B list were the numbers 11 to 19; those for list A-C were 1 to 9. Ten simulated subjects were run (a = .30, b = .50, c = .15); each learned A-B to mastery and then transfered to list A-C. During the learning of A-C, the model retrieved 2 responses whenever possible, by sorting the stimulus and then responding with both the first and second items stored in the PDS. If no second response was present, only the first was given.  Responses made during the learning of A-C were categorized as either B or C items. The frequencies of B and C items are shown as a function of the number of trials on A-C in Fig. 9.  These results are in substantial agreement with those of Barnes and Underwood (1959). As A-C availability increased and reached its maximum, A-B availability declined, but the decline was much slower than the A-C increase. Even after most of the simulated subjects had performed perfectly on list A-C for 2 trials in succession, nearly I of the first-list responses were still available.  SAL III is also consistent with other features of MMFR results. First, when SAL recalls both responses to a stimulus, they are emitted in the order C, then B, which is the predominant order used by human subjects. Second, order of responses in the PDS could be used to identify list membership of a response, and human subjects are capable of highly accurate list identification in MMFR (e.g., Ceraso and Henderson, 1965). Third, ithe A-B and A-C lists are both originally learned to a criterion of mastery, then in MMFR SAL never recalls a response to an incorrect stimulus; in human data involving mastery of both lists (e.g., Ceraso and Henderson, 1965), such misplaced responses in MMFR are quite infrequent, less than 1 % on an immediate test, less than 6 % on a 24-hour retention test.  DISCRIMINATION NET MODEL 151  9 8 z 7 a  d  6  W K ,.. 5 0  4  m  f 3 z 2 z  W  1  0 1 2 3 4 5 TRIALS ON LIST A-C  FIG. 9. The MMFR results, Experiment 13. Inset from Barnes and Underwood, 1959.  A list I response which remains available to SAL throughout the learning of list 2 does so by residing in the second level of a PDS, the list 2 response for the same stimulus having taken over the first position. Why, then, do many B items become unavailable? This is caused by continued discrimination learning. If during A-C acquisition SAL responds with a B item (an error), then with probability a a new test node will be built, and the B response will be stored at the negative terminal of this test node. Thereafter, sorting stimulus A through the net will lead to response C alone, and B will be bypassed. A similar occurrence is possible if B has been pushed down one level in the PDS by response C. Now, a correct response is given, but with probability c (the overlearning parameter) a new test node is added which, again, isolates the B response in the net. It is no longer possible to retrieve B by sorting stimulus A. Thus, availability of B responses in MMFR will gradually decline, even after list A-C has been mastered and is being overlearned. Note that the level of MMFR A-B performance by SAL will depend greatly on the parameter values. If a is very high, A-B recall will be low. If a is low, A-B recall will be an increasing function of b.  The most common interpretation of the Barnes and Underwood (1959) study has been that A-B associations are "unlearned" as the A-C associations are learned (Postman, 1961). The idea is that occurrences of response B during A-C learning are consistently nonreinforced and hence eventually unlearned, or extinguished. There have been several difficulties with this particular account. First, overt intrusions of B during A-C learning are in fact infrequent and are concentrated within the first few  152 HINTZMAN  trials, while the unavailability of B responses grows progressively with trials, long after overt B intrusions have ceased. This discrepancy has been handled by supposing that B responses occur implicitly but are withheld by a "selector mechanism" that checks their list membership. A second difficulty for the unlearning theory is to account for the many B responses which remain available even after the A-C list has been practiced well past mastery; why has the unlearning not been complete ? This has been explained by supposing that the A-C associate becomes so dominant that B stops occurring (even implicitly), and unlearning of B responses therefore ceases.  Perhaps the critical test of the unlearning theory comes with application of the MMFR technique to the study of long-term changes in availability of the B and C responses. Unlearning theory predicts that A-B associations will spontaneously recover, and the B responses will therefore increase in MMFR availability. SAL III, on the other hand, predicts no such increase in MMFR availability. Only those B responses which are available to MMFR at the end of A-C learning will be available on later tests. Therefore, the number of B items recalled should remain approximately constant with changes in time. The availability of C responses, in contrast, should show a sharp drop, as they are being displaced from the PDS's by recovery of the remaining B responses. Thus, contrary to the unlearning theory, a delayed MMFR test should show proactive interference. These predictions are more in line with experimental results (Birnbaum, 1965; Ceraso and Henderson, 1965; Houston, 1966; Koppenaal, 1963; Slamecka, 1966) than are those of the unlearning hypothesis.  We noted earlier that A-B will become unavailable to MMFR during interpolated learning if a new test node is grown for sorting the A stimulus. This happens with probability a following an error or with probability c following a correct response, and we have assumed throughout that a is larger than c. The difference in these parameters suggests that for a fixed period of interpolated learning, the A-B association would be less available following those procedures which maximize errors to the A stimulus. One such procedure is to present several successive interpolated lists. This was done in a study by Postman (1965). All experimental subjects had a total of 16 IL trials, but these 16 trials were divided among 1, 2, or 4 different lists, each bearing an A-B, A-C relationship to the first. A later MMFR test showed less availability of A-B the more interpolated lists used. Also, with amount of learning held constant, the availability of responses from a given list varied directly with its recency to the MMFR test. These results are as expected by SAL III.  EXPERIMENT 14. RETROACTIVE VS PROACTIVE INTERFERENCE  The operations for producing and testing for proactive interference (PI) are: learn list 1, then learn list 2, then rest, and finally, relearn list 2. As with RI, the amount of interference can be measured on trial 1 of relearning. The purpose of the present experiment was to simulate varying lengths of the rest interval-in the SAL III program, varying values of T-to determine how this variable affects the amount  DISCRIMINATION NET MODEL 153  of PI produced when an A-B, A-C paradigm is used. Since SAL does not censor its responses according to their list membership, the experiment can also be interpreted as a test of the effects of rest interval on the amount of RI. That is, if stimulus A were presented and it elicited response C, this could be called RI of list 1; alternatively, if it elicited response B, we could interpret this as PI of list 2. The amount of PI for SAL III is therefore the amount of RI subtracted from the total number of opportunities to respond, and RI and PI for any rest interval of length T can easily be compared. The following experiment is thus roughly comparable to studies by Briggs (1954) and by Underwood (1948).  Lists were the same as those of Experiment 13. Parameters were: a = .30, b = .70, c = .15, d = .30. Four conditions were run, with T (the number of opportunities for recovery) taking on values 1, 4, 16, and 64. Ten simulated subjects in each condition mastered list A-B, followed by A-C. Then, after T opportunities for old responses in each PDS to recover the topmost position, list A-C was relearned.  Mean numbers of B responses (PI) given on trial RL-1 in conditions T = 1, 4, 16, and 64, respectively, were: 1.2, 3.0, 3.8, and 4.2. Since each subject had an average of 9 opportunities to respond, corresponding numbers of C responses (RI) were: 7.8, 6.0, 5.2, and 4.8. At T = 64, the difference between PI and RI was not significant (p > .25). Thus, as the retention interval lengthened RI decreased and PI increased, so that at the longest interval the two effects were approximately equal. This pattern of outcomes is in substantial agreement with the results reported by Briggs (1954) and Underwood (1948). The study by Briggs is fit especially well by SAL's simulation since he used the MFR procedure ("give the first response that comes to mind") which circumvents the selector mechanism that withholds recall of responses from an incorrect list.  SAL III will also show an accumulative PI effect, such that, in an A-B, A-C, A-D,... paradigm, the more prior lists have been learned, the poorer will be the delayed recall of the last list in the series. This agrees with Underwood's (1957) findings concerning the relationship between forgetting and the number of prior lists learned. In SAL III, the discrimination net becomes progressively elaborated with the learning of each successive list. Consequently, it becomes more and more likely that mastery of an item will require use of the PDS rather than elaboration of the net. That is, there is a limit to the number of features of a given stimulus item which can be noticed, and once all these features have been used in sorting the stimulus, a new response can be associated with it only through use of the PDS. And, of course, it is the response stored in the PDS which is subject to forgetting during a retention interval. Thus, it follows that PI will increase with the number of prior lists learned.  EXPERIMENT 15. DISTRIBUTED PRACTICE AND PI  One of the few consistent effects to be found in verbal learning studies comparing distributed practice (DP) and massed practice (MP) has been reported by Keppel  154 HINTZMAN  (1964) and by Underwood, Keppel, and Schulz (1962). If the last of a series of lists having an A-B, A-C relationship is learned by DP (i.e., having relatively long intertrial intervals), it is learned more slowly and retained better than if learned by MP. In the following experiment, a DP condition was simulated with SAL III by allowing recovery to take place between trials.  Lists A-B and A-C of Experiment 13 were again used. Parameters were: a = .30, b = .50, c = .15, d = .30. List A-B was mastered in the usual manner (MP), followed by either MP or DP (20 subjects each) during the learning of list A-C. In the DP condition, recovery was possible between learning trials (T = 1), but not in the MP condition. Mastery of the second list was followed in both conditions by a long retention interval (T = 9), and then by relearning of list A-C.  The mean numbers of errors per subject during the original learning of list A-C, trial 2 until mastery, were: MP, 5.90; DP 11.55. This shows a clear superiority for MP in acquisition. The mean errors due to PI on trial RL-1 were: MP, 2.75; DP, 1.15showing that learning by DP increased resistance to PI. Thus, the major effects of DP on acquisition and retention of an A-C list were simulated by the model.  Again, SAL III may be compared with unlearning theory as an explanation for the findings. According to the unlearning or extinction hypothesis (Underwood et al., 1962), A-B associations are extinguished during A-C learning. Intertrial rest intervals in the DP condition allow the extinguished associations to recover, interfering with A-C acquisition. But because of this interference, the A-B associations must repeatedly be extinguished, and this results in a more permanent extinction for condition DP than for condition MP. Hence, spontaneous recovery of A-B associations (PI) is greater after MP than after DP learning of the A-C list.  In SAL 111, the same results are produced by stimulus discrimination learning. In the MP condition, perfect A-C performance can be achieved either by building new test nodes to bypass interfering B responses or by displacing B responses from the topmost PDS positions. The latter method is inefficient in the DP condition, however, as there is some probability that suppressed B responses will recover between trials. When a B response recovers, it causes an error, interfering with A-C acquisition. The error, in turn, may produce (with probability a) further discrimination learning. A-C learning by DP thus results in a more elaborate discrimination net and fewer PDS hierarchies that contain more than one response image. More PI is possible after MP because there are more B responses available to recover and displace A-C associates.  The present hypothesis, then, is that DP results in better retention because it produces more stimulus learning. From this analysis, three further predictions can be made. In the A-B, A-C paradigm, if one group learns the A-C list by DP and another learns it by MP, DP learning should result in: (1) poorer A-B recall in MMFR, (2) better backward recall of the A-C list, and (3) more resistance of A-C to RI from subsequent learning.  DISCRIMINATION NET MODEL 155  EXPERIMENT 16. RESPONSE LATENCIES  In EPAM, response latencies are determined chiefly by sorting time (Feigenbaum, 1959). The more tests made during the sorting of a stimulus, the longer it takesEPAM to retrieve the response. This assumption leads to the prediction that, as a PA list is mastered and the discrimination net grows deeper, mean response latency will increase exponentially. In fact, human data (Millward, 1964; Suppes, Groen and Schlag-Rey, 1966) show only a sharp initial increase in mean latency; this is followed by a gradual and consistent decrease. Obviously, mere sorting time in a growing net cannot account for these findings. Although SAL was not intended as a model of response latencies, it happens that the PDS mechanism of SAL III provides an unexpected explanation. This is illustrated by the following experiment.  Thirty simulated subjects were run on the list shown in Table 1. Parameters were: a = .20, b = .50, c = .10, and the maximum PDS depth was arbitrarily set at 4. Each time the model sorted a stimulus to a terminal node it output the response at the top level of the PDS, and also indicated the depth of the PDS--that is, the number of levels occupied by stored responses. Mean PDS depth is plotted as a function of trial number in Fig. 10. The sharp initial rise occurs as PDS's are being filled; the subsequent decline, approaching a limit of 1.0, results from growth of the net, gradually approaching a one-to-one stimulus-response mapping. By manipulating the maximum possible PDS depth one could raise or lower the curve somewhat, but this would not change its general shape. The curve of Fig. 10 looks much like the mean latency curve obtained by Suppes et al. (1966). Moreover, an analysis of mean PDS depth conditionalized on errors and successes showed error values to be considerably larger than success values, and this corresponds to differences observed in latency data.  From these results, it appears that SAL III may be applicable to PA response latencies without the addition of a new mechanism. However, some rationale is needed for identifying latency with PDS depth. Several rationales are possible; perhaps the simplest is to assume that before the response is produced an exhaustive scan of all occupied PDS levels takes place. Alternatively, the correspondence between more responses in a PDS and longer response times could be attributed to competition and partial blocking among these responses at the time of retrieval. Whichever interpretation one chooses, he must assume that the process takes more time than does stimulus sorting.  DISCUSSION  The computer simulation approach to theory construction used here may be briefly contrasted with "verbal" and with "mathematical" theories of human learning. On the one hand, verbal theories, which have predominated in the functionalist tradition, have developed a rich collection of explanatory concepts to deal with the  156 HINTZMAN   2.0             1.4     SY~ \  r        v     ! \  W i.s     1 \      1.8  1 \  I \    1        1 G\  I        1.2     1   z    x  1 \  W I 1       I    a  !  ~ f 1.1 w   c 1.6  1           \\ ,.0 5 10 15 20  0     0   o. }    q\\    1.4 0       Z         a      \  f         1.2              tip        11-o   1.0      L_ i ----L- I   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13  TRIAL  Fic. 10. Mean PDS depth as a function of trial number, Experiment 16. Inset: latency data from Suppes et al., 1966 (session 2).  phenomena of human learning. The most prevalent theoretical approach to verbal learning, the Hullian-interference approach (e.g., Postman, 1961, 1963), has evolved through the interaction of theory and experimentation more as a set of working hypotheses than as an integrated theory. Such "verbal" theories have been criticized on several grounds: (a) lack of criteria for deciding which of several explanatory concepts are relevant to a particular result, (b) a consequent lack of parsimony, and (c) lack of demonstration that the explanations are internally consistent, complete or adequate. In contrast, a theory specified as a computer program can be "run" to see whether it will behave properly, whether enough parts and their operations have been specified in sufficient detail, whether there are any unsuspected contradictions, etc. The assumptions must be complete and precise, and the derivations necessarily follow unambiguously from the assumptions. It is interesting that several of the present model's successes (and some of its failures) came as a surprise to those working with SAL-a fact which points out some of the flaws inherent in the "verbal" method of deriving predictions.  On the other hand, mathematical models, while well specified and quantitatively precise, seem at present to lack generality and scope. Typically, a particular model has a very restricted range of application-it is "situation specific"-and several different models would be needed to deal with the range of situations considered in this paper. Mathematical models for verbal learning are also often unable to deal with  DISCRIMINATION NET MODEL 157  many of the complexities of a given situation. For example, acquisition of a single item is usually considered in vacuo, and there are no very convincing ways to represent item interactions, which enter into so many of the predictions of the SAL program.  Finally, we may contrast the theoretical work presented here with other simulation attempts. The computer, of course, makes it possible for the theorist to postulate an extremely complex system of interacting mechanisms; predictions can be generated no matter how complicated the program. For this reason, simulation models are often constructed with little regard for parsimony. Points of ignorance are routinely filled in with fanciful details for which there is no evidence, and which are virtually untestable as part of the program. One consequence has been that programs tend to become very lengthy and complicated, to the point where communication to nonspecialists in computer programming has been hindered (cf. Hilgard and Bower, 1966; Reitman, 1965). In the SAL model, an attempt has been made to avoid these problems; points of ignorance are stated as probabilities, and new mechanisms are added only when tests of the model have found them necessary. It is hoped that the simplicity of the model will facilitate communication and make the theoretical notions more accessible to others.  It was suggested earlier that stimulus-discrimination learning processes had been relegated to a minor theoretical role before their explanatory power had been fully explored. It is primarily these processes, represented by the discrimination net, which allow SAL and EPAM to account for oscillation, stimulus generalization, retroactive interference, and the effects of stimulus similarity on list difficulty. EPAM contains assumptions not present in SAL, which make it applicable to problems of serial learning, response integration, and presentation rate, and which allow it to predict negative transfer. At the same time, SAL is able to simulate some phenomena that present versions of EPAM cannot, mainly through the use of overlearning assumptions (SAL 11) and the storage of multiple associations (SAL III). Although all subprocesses in SAL are all-or-none, it is consistent with a number of facts (such as the effects of overlearning on retention) which have always seemed to prove that an incremental habit strength notion was needed. At least qualitatively, SAL seems to agree with the main findings on both sides of the "incremental vs all-or-none" controversy, including the response patterns obtained in the RTT studies of Estes (1960), the increasing conditional probability that repeated reinforcements will produce a first correct response to a failed item (Battig, 1962; Underwood and Keppel, 1962; Wollen, 1962), and the outcomes of recognition vs recall and second guess experiments, as well as the successes and failures in finding precriterion stationarity.  In the 16 experiments reported in this paper, a number of predictions were derived from three versions of the SAL model. Not all of these predictions, of course, can be traced directly to the discrimination net structure; some result from specific learning assumptions of SAL I or 11; others are produced by the PDS mechanism of SAL III; and still others arise from interactions among different processes. It should be instruc-  158 HINTZMAN  tive, therefore, to summarize by indicating which processes are responsible for each of the major predictions. This information is presented in the following outline. Each prediction is described only briefly, with reference to the section of the paper where a more detailed discussion may be found. In addition, each prediction is followed by a (+) or (-), indicating whether or not it is consistent with results reported in the verbal learning literature.  Predictions Arising Primarily from the Discrimination Net Memory Structure  1. Increase in list difficulty with increase in intralist stimulus similarity [Experiment 1] (+).  2. Effects of the number of response alternatives on precriterion stationarity [Experiment 2] (-}-).  3. Effects of the spacing of item repetitions on learning and retention [Experiment 4] (+).  4. No differences in efficiency of whole, part, and repeated part learning methods [Experiment 5] (-).  5. No effects of list length on learning rate [Experiment 6] 6. Effects of interlist similarity on RI [Experiment 7] (+).  7. Faster relearning than original learning [Experimental 7] (+). 8. Positive transfer in A-B, A-C paradigm [Transfer Paradigms]  Predictions Arising Primarily from Learning Assumptions of SAL I  1. Effects of number of response alternatives on learning rate [Experiment 2] (+). 2. Probability matching in probabilistic PA task [Experiment 3] (-).  Predictions Arising from the Interaction of the Discrimination Net and the Overlearning Assumptions of SAL 77  1. Effects of degree of original learning on retention [Experiments 7, 8] (+).  2. Pattern of findings relating degree of interpolated learning to total RI, types of errors, and relearning rate [Experiment 9] (+).  Predictions Arising Primarily from the PDS Mechanism of SAL III  1. Increase in PI and decrease in RI with time [Experiment 14] (+).  2. Superiority of retention following distributed practice [Experiment 15] (+).  Predictions Arising from the Interaction of the Discrimination Net and the PDS Mechanism  1. Superiority of recognition to recall [Experiment 11] (+).  2. Evidence of learning on second and third recall attempts [Experiment 12] (-f). 3. General pattern of findings in studies of unlearning with the MMFR procedure [Experiment 13] (+).  4. Changes in response latencies during learning [Experiment 16] (+).  DISCRIMINATION NET MODEL 159  REFERENCES  ARNOULT, M. D. Stimulus predifferentiation: Some generalizations and hypotheses. Psychological Bulletin, 1957, 54, 339-350.  ATKINSON, R. C., BOWER, G. H., AND CROTHERS, E. J. An introduction to mathematical learning theory. New York: Wiley, 1965.  BARNES, J. M., AND UNDERWOOD, B. J. "Fate" of first-list associations in transfer theory. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1959, 58, 97-105.  BATTIG, W. F. Paired-associate learning under simultaneous repetition and nonrepetition conditions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1962, 64, 87-93.  BILODEAU, E. A., AND SCHLOSBERG, H. Similarity in stimulating conditions as a variable in retroactive inhibition. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1951, 41, 199-204.  BINFORD, J. R., AND GETTYS, C. Nonstationarity in paired-associate learning as indicated by a second guess procedure. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1965, 2, 190-195. BIRNBAUM, I. M. Long-term retention of first-list associations in the A-B, A-C paradigm, Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1965, 4, 515-520.  BOWER, G. H. Application of a model to paired-associate learning. Psychometrika, 1961, 26, 255-280.  BOWER, G. H. A model for response and training variables in paired-associate learning. Psychological Review, 1962, 69, 34-53.  BOWER, G. H. Notes on a descriptive theory of memory. In D. P. Kimble (Ed.), Learning, remembering, and forgetting: Proceedings of the Second Conference. New York: New York Academy of Science, 1967.  BREGMAN, A. S. Is recognition memory all-or-none? Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1966, 5, 1-6.  BRIGGS, G. E. Acquisition, extinction, and recovery functions in retroactive inhibition. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1954, 47, 285-293.  BRIGGS, G. E. Retroactive inhibition as a function of the degree of original and interpolated learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1957, 53, 60-67.  BROWN, J. Two tests of all-or-none learning and retention. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1964, 16, 123-133.  BROWN, J. A comparison of recognition and recall by a multiple-response method. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1965, 4, 401-408.  CALFEE, R. C., AND ATKINSON, R. C. Paired-associate models and the effects of list length. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1965, 2, 254-266.  CERASO, J., AND HENDERSON, A. Unavailability and associative loss in RI and PI. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1965, 70, 300-303.  ESTES, W. K. Learning theory and the new "mental chemistry." Psychological Review, 1960, 67, 207-223.  ESTES, W. K. Probability learning. In A. W. Melton (Ed.), Categories of human learning. New York: Academic Press, 1964. Pp. 90-129. (a)  ESTES, W. K. All-or-none processes in learning and retention. American Psychologist, 1964, 19, 16-25. (b)  FEIGENBAUM, E. A. An information processing theory of verbal learning. Report P-1817. Santa Monica, California: The RAND Corporation, 1959.  FEIGENBAUM, E. A. The simulation of verbal learning behavior. In E. A. Feigenbaum, and J. Feldman (Eds.), Computers and thought. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1963. Pp. 297-309. FEIGENBAUM, E. A. Information processing in memory. Paper presented at the Third Conference on Learning, Remembering, and Forgetting. Princeton, New Jersey, 1965.  160  HINTZMAN  FEIGENBAUM, E. A., AND SIMON, H. A. Forgetting in an association memory. Reprints of the 1961 National Conference of the Association for Computing Machinery, 1961, 16, 202-205. FEIGENBAUM, E. A., AND SIMON, H. A. A theory of the serial position effect. British Journal of Psychology, 1962, 53, 307-320.  FEIGENBAUM, E. A., AND SIMON, H. A. Brief notes on the EPAM theory of verbal learning. In C. N. Cofer, and B. S. Musgrave (Eds.), Verbal behavior and learning: Problems and processes. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1963. Pp. 333-335. (a)  FEIGENBAUM, E. A., AND SIMON, H. A. Performance of a reading task by an elementary perceiving and memorizing program. Behavioral Science, 1963, 8, 72-76. (b)  GIBSON, ELEANOR J. A systematic application of the concepts of generalization and differentiation to verbal learning. Psychological Review, 1940, 47, 196-229.  GOULET, L. R. Interlist response meaningfulness and transfer effects under the A-B, A-C paradigm. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1965, 70, 264-269.  GREENO, J. G. Paired-associate learning with massed and distributed repetitions of items. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1964, 67, 286-295.  HAKE, H. W., AND ERIKSEN, C. W. Effect of number of permissible response categories on learning of a constant number of visual stimuli. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1955, 50, 191-167.  HILGARD, E. R., AND BOWER, G. H. Theories of learning. New York: Appleton, 1966. HINTZMAN, D. L. Some tests of a discrimination net theory: Paired-associate learning as a function of stimulus similarity and number of responses. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1967, 6, 809-816.  HOUSTON, J. P. Supplementary report: Transfer as a function of meaningfulness. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1965, 4, 339-340.  HOUSTON, J. P. First-list retention and time and method of recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1966, 71, 839-843.  JUNG, J. Effects of response meaningfulness (m) on transfer of training under two different paradigms. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1963, 4, 377-384.  KEPPEL, G. Facilitation in short and long-term retention of paired associates following distributed practice in learning. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1964, 3,91-111.  KINTSCH, W. Habituation of the GSR component of the orienting reflex during paired-associate learning before and after learning has taken place. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1965, 2, 330-341.  KoPPENAAL, R. J. Time changes in strengths of A-B, A-C lists; spontaneous recovery? Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1963, 2, 310-319.  LuH, C. W. The conditions of retention. Psychological Monographs General and Applied: 1922, 31, No. 142.  McGEocH, J. A. The influence of degree of learning upon retroactive inhibition. American Journal of Psychology, 1929, 41, 252-262.  MCGEOCH, J. A., AND IRION, A. L. The psychology of human learning. (2nd. ed.). New York: McKay, 1952.  MELTON, A. W., AND IRWIN, J. McQ. The influence of degree of interpolated learning on retroactive inhibition and the overt transfer of specific responses. American Journal of Psychology, 1941, 54, 157-173.  MERIKLE, P. M., AND BATTIG, W. F. Transfer of training as a function of experimental paradigm and meaningfulness. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1963, 2, 485-488. MILLER, N. E., AND DOLLARD, J. Social learning and imitation. New Haven: Yale Univer. Press, 1941.  DISCRIMINATION NET MODEL  MILLWARD, R. Latency in a modified paired-associate learning experiment. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1964, 3, 309-316.  NOBLE, C. E. Comments on Professor Underwood's paper. In C. N. Cofer (Ed.), Verbal learning and verbal behavior. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1961. Pp. 217-221.  OSGOOD, C. E. The similarity paradox in human learning: A resolution. Psychological Review, 1949, 56, 132-143.  POSTMAN, L. The present status of interference theory. In C. N. Cofer (Ed.), Verbal learning and verbal behavior. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1961. Pp. 152-178.  Postman, L. Transfer of training as a function of experimental paradigm and degree of first-list learning. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1962, 1, 109-118.  POSTMAN, L. Does interference theory predict too much forgetting? Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1963, 2, 40-48.  POSTMAN, L. Unlearning under conditions of successive interpolation. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1965, 70, 237-245.  POSTMAN, L., AND GOGGIN, J. Whole versus part learning of paired-associate lists. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1966, 71, 867-877.  POSTMAN, L., AND RAU, L. Retention as a function of the method of measurement. University of California Publications in Psychology, 1957, 8, 217-270.  POSTMAN, L., JENKINS, W. O., AND POSTMAN, D. L. An experimental comparison of active recall and recognition. American Journal of Psychology, 1948, 61, 511-519.  REITMAN, W. R. Cognition and thought. New York: Wiley, 1965.  RESTLE, F. Sources of difficulty in learning paired-associates. In R. C. Atkinson (Ed), Studies in mathematical psychology. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Univer. Press, 1964. Pp. 116-172.  RUNQUIST, W. N. Retention of verbal associates as a function of strength. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1957, 54, 369-375.  RUNQUIST, W. N. Order of presentation and number of items as factors in paired-associate verbal learning. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1965, 4, 535-540. RUNQUIST, W. N. Intralist interference as a function of list length and interstimulus similarity. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1966, 5, 7-13.  SAND, M. C. The effect of length of list upon retroactive inhibition when degree of learning is controlled. Archives of Psychology, New York, 1939, 33, No. 238.  SIMON, H. A., AND FEIGENBAUM, E. A. An information processing theory of some effects of similarity, familiarization, and meaningfulness in verbal learning. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1964, 3, 385-396.  SLAMECKA, N. J. Supplementary report: A search for spontaneous recovery of verbal associations. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1966, 5, 205-207.  SMITH, T. A., JONES, L. V., AND THOMAS, S. Effects upon verbal learning of stimulus similarity, number of stimuli per response, and concept formation. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1963, 1, 470-476.  SUPPES, P., AND ATKINSON, R. C. Markov learning models for multiperson interactions. Stanford: Stanford Univer. Press, 1960.  SUPPES, P., AND GINSBERG, ROSE. A fundamental property of all-or-none models, binomial distribution of responses prior to conditioning, with application to concept formation in children. Psychological Review, 1963, 70, 139-161.  SUPPES, P., GROEN, G., AND SCHLAG-REY, MADELEINE. A model for response latency in pairedassociate learning. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1966, 3, 99-128.  THUNE, L. E., AND UNDERWOOD, B. J. Retroactive inhibition as a function of degree of interpolated learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1943, 32, 185-200.  480/5/1-11  162 HINTZMAN  UNDERWOOD, B. J. The effects of successive interpolations on retroactive and proactive inhibition. Psychological Monographs: General and Applied, 1945, 59, No. 3.  UNDERWOOD, B. J. "Spontaneous" recovery of verbal associations. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1948, 38, 429-439.  UNDERWOOD, B. J. Studies of distributed practice. VIII. Learning and retention of paired nonsense syllables as a function of intralist similarity. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1953, 45, 133-142. (a)  UNDERWOOD, B. J. Studies of distributed practice. IX. Learning and retention of paired adjectives as a function of intralist similarity. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1953, 45, 143-149. UNDERWOOD, B. J. Interference and forgetting. Psychological Review, 1957, 64, 49-60. UNDERWOOD, B. J. An evaluation of the Gibson theory of verbal learning. In C. N. Cofer (Ed.), Verbal learning and verbal behavior. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1961. Pp. 197-216. UNDERWOOD, B. J. Degree of learning and the measurement of forgetting. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1964, 3, 112-129.  UNDERWOOD, B. J., AND KEPPEL, G. One-trial learning? Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1962, 1, 1-13,  UNDERWOOD, B. J., AND SCHULZ, R. W. Studies of distributed practice. XX. Sources of interference associated with differences in learning and retention. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1961, 61, 228-235.  UNDERWOOD, B. J., KEPPEL, G., AND SCHULZ, R. W. Studies of distributed practice. XXII. Some conditions which enhance retention. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1962, 64, 355-363.  Voss, J. F., THOMPSON, C. P., AND KEEGAN, J, H. Acquisition of probabilistic paired associates as a function of S-R, , S-R2 probability. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1959, 58, 390-399. WOLLEN, K. A. One-trial versus incremental paired-associate learning. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1962, 1, 14-21.  YOUNG, R. K. Retroactive and proactive effects under varying conditions of response similarity. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1955, 50, 113-119.  RECEIVED: November 29, 1966