10.1016/0022-2496(68)90077-1
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: S, 300-310 (1968)  The Role of Cue Validity in Stimulus Compounding'  MORTON P. FRIEDMAN, HOWARD ROLLINS, AND GILBERT PADILLA  University of California, Los Angeles, California 90024  Several alternative models for cue selection and responding in stimulus compounding situations are discussed. All models assume that the previous validities of the component cues of a compound are the principal determiners of cue selection and transfer, where the validity of a cue may be defined as the accuracy of the predictions which can be made on the basis of that cue alone. In an experiment designed to test the models, fifty human subjects received probablistic reinforcement training on a set of five component cues. They were then tested on novel two-element compounds of the training cues. Two variants of a "scanning model" were found to give a good account of cue selection on the compounding tests.  INTRODUCTION  A familiar theme in perceptual theory and in discrimination learning theory is that the past validity of cues is used in making judgments (e.g., Brunswik, 1956; and Restle, 1955). The aspect of this theme that concerns us here is the specification of the "transfer rule" by which cue validities control responding in novel stimulus situations. Discussion will be centered on the "stimulus compounding" experiment (Pavlov, 1927).  In the "stimulus compounding" experiment, subjects first receive training on single component cues, and are then tested on novel compounds of these cues. In the present research, the single cues are reinforced on noncontingent "probability learning" schedules. The schedules differ in both the number of responses assigned to a cue and the probability with which a response is reinforced. Each trial of the training series begins with the presentation of component cue Si from the set of cues {S}. The subject then makes the response he expects to be correct on that trial. The response A; is chosen from the set {A). The trial ends with the presentation of Ek , one of the set of feedback events {E}, where Ek is the event that Ak is designated correct. The probability that Ex occurs to Si on any trial is 7Tik and is independent of trial number and response occurrance. Following the training series, the subject is presented with  'Supported by N.I.M.H. Grant No. MH-07809.  300  CUE VALIDITY IN STIMULUS COMPOUNDING 301  a series of novel compound (Si , S;), drawn from the set {S} with i # j, and is asked to again respond from the set A.  Cue Validity  It is expected that responding on the compounding tests will be determined by the validities of the component cues, where the validity of a cue may be defined as the accuracy of the predictions which can be made on the basis of that cue alone. The specific definition of cue validity assumed here is that the validity vi of a cue Si is the probability of a correct response to that cue at the end of training. vi is given by  Vi = E 77ijpi; ,  where pi; is the probability of response A; to stimulus Si at the end of training. The rationale for Eq. 1 is simply that, in the stimulus compounding experiment, the probability of a correct response to a cue is a direct index of the accuracy of the predictions based on that cue.  Stimulus Compounding Models  All models to be presented assume that in responding to a novel compound, the subject first selects a cue, and then selects a response from the set of responses associated with that cue. The response assumption common to all models is that once a component, say Si , is selected from the compound (Si , S;), the probability of response Ak to that component is Pik , the probability of response Ak to Si at the end of training. Since all models assume the same response selection rule, only the cue selection assumptions for the various models need be presented. The probability that component S; is selected when the compound (Si, S;) is presented will be denoted by si; .  Model I (High Validity). Model I assumes that the component cue of a compound which has the highest validity is always selected;  1, if vi > v;  Model I: si; _ .5, if vi = v; . (2)  0, if vi < v;  Model H (Proportional Weight). According to Model II, the probability that a cue Si is selected from the compound (Si , S;) is proportional to its validity relative to S;:  Model 11:  302 FRIEDMAN, ROLLINS, AND PADILLA  Although Eq. 3 is intuitively compelling in itself, a psychological interpretation of Bower's Random Walk Model A (Bower, 1959) can be developed which implies Eq. 3. It should be also noted that Model II is a special case of Luce's choice model. (See Atkinson, Bower, and Crothers, 1965, Ch. 4, for a discussion of these models.)  Model III (Scanning Model). This model was suggested by the analysis of choice experiments in terms of a "scanning model" (Estes, 1962, 1966; Friedman, Padilla, and Gelfand, 1964). As applied to the stimulus compounding situation, it is assumed that the subject scans both cues of the compound and generates an expectancy (prediction) about whether responding to each cue would yield a correct or incorrect response. The final choice of a cue is determined by the pattern of expectation of the components. The probability of an expectancy of being correct by selection of Si is assumed to be vi as given by Eq. 1, and it is assumed that the expectancies on the two cues are generated by independent processes. When an unambiguous pattern of expectancies is generated, i.e., when only one cue is expected to lead to a correct response [probability = vi(1 - va) or (1 - viva], then that cue which is expected to lead to a correct response is chosen. Three special cases of the model arise from different assumptions about responding when ambiguous patterns of expectancies occur. [Ambiguous patterns of expectancies are: both cues will be correct (probability = viva); or, both will be incorrect (probability = (1 - vi)(1 - va).] One possibility is that when ambiguous patterns occur, new patterns of expectancies are generated until an unambiguous pattern obtains. This assumption leads to Model IIIa:  Model IIIa: sia = vi(I - vi) VP - vi) + (1 - vi)(vi) ' (4)  An alternative assumption is that when ambiguous patterns of expectancies occur the cues are selected equiprobably, giving:  Model IIIb: si9 = .5 + .5(vi - va).  Equations 4 and 5 can also be developed as special cases of Bower's Random Walk Models A and B (Atkinson, et al., 1965, Ch. 4; Bower, 1959). Model IIIc combines the assumptions of the preceeding two models: If both cues are associated with expectations of being correct, the cues are selected equiprobably; however, if both cues are associated with expectations of being incorrect, then new patterns of expectancies are generated until an unambiguous pattern obtains. These assumptions lead to Model IIIc:  Model IIIc:  Sij = vi - .5vivi vi + Va - Viva  CUE VALIDITY IN STIMULUS COMPOUNDING 303  Comparison of the Models  Equation 2 given by Model I may be regarded as a rule which aims to maximize expected correctness. It is unlikely that Model I by itself will yield accurate predictions, However, recent work on novel test situations similar to those of the compounding experiment (Friedman, Trabasso, and Mosberg, 1967) suggests that subjects use a mixture of cue selection rules which include maximizing rules like that of Model 1. "Weighted average" models which average the predictions of Model I with the other models will be considered in a later section.  Models II and III yield qualitatively similar patterns of predictions. However, some experimental conditions for differentiating among the models are suggested by some special cases of the various equations for sij First, consider the case where vi = 1, and 0 < v; < 1. In this case, Model Illa predicts that si7 = 1 for all values of v; , while Models II, Illb, and IIIc predict that sij < 1. The difference between the predictions of IIla and the other model's increases as v; increases. It is also true that for vi = 1, Models IIlb and IIlc yield identical predictions and that the greatest difference between their predictions and those of Model II occurs when v; 1. In this case, sij = .72 for Model 11 and .80 for Models IIlb and IIIc.  Another special case ointerest for comparing the models occurs when 0 < vi <, 1, and v; is varied from vi to 0. For Models II and IIIc, sij goes from .5 to 1.0, while for Model IIIb, sii goes from .5 to .5 + .5vi, Thus, small values of vi and v; would help to differentiate among the models.  Although a sizable literature on stimulus compounding exists, there appears to be only one published set of data to compare with the predictions of the models. Atkinson, Calfee, Sommer, Jeffrey, and Shoemaker (1964) reported an experiment on stimulus compounding using fifth and sixth grade students as subjects. However, their data show considerable regression towards chance responding when the stimulus compounds were introduced, and it is difficult to use their results to compare the models. The present research was designed to allow for a clearer assessment of the various models.  METHOD  The experiment consisted of a series of discrimination training trials in which single component stimuli received probablistic reinforcement, followed by a series of nonreinforeed test trials on two-element compounds of the training cues. The reinforcement schedules on the various cues differed in both the number of alternative responses and the probabilities of reinforcement of these responses. A given response was correct for only one cue, but each cue had either one, two, or three responses associated with it. Disjoint set of responses were associated with the cues in order to simplify the interpretation of cue selection on the compounding tests. On each trial of the training series, one of five different cues was presented, and the subject gave the response he thought would be correct. He was then told which response was actually  304  FRIEDMAN, ROLLINS, AND PADILLA  designated correct on that trial. The five component cues were paired with the ten responses according to the following reinforcement schedules: (The cues will be labeled by their reinforcement schedules.) (i) 1.0-the same response was reinforced on all trials; (ii) 75-25-two responses were paired with this cue, one of them being designated correct on 75% and the other response designated correct on 25% of trials; (iii) 50-50; (iv) 50-5013-this cue occurred twice as often as the other cues during training; (v) 50-25-25-three responses were associated with this cue. The schedules were chosen to allow for a differentiation among the models using the earlier discussion of the behavior of the various equations for si; as a guide.  There was a total of 192 training trials. The 50-5013 cue was presented on one-third of the trials, and each of the other four cues was presented on one-sixth of the trials. Pilot work indicated that this was more than enough training to reach stable levels of responding on all cues. Immediately following the training series, subjects received two test trials on each of the ten possible two-element compounds of the training cues. Following the test trials, a retention test was given on the training cues in which subjects were asked to give the responses associated with each cue and to estimate the reinforcement probabilities.  Training and Test Lists. Five reinforcement sequences were constructed for each training cue. The sequences were random with the restriction that the obtained reinforcement proportions equal the expected proportions over the whole training series. Reinforcement sequences for each cue were randomly selected for each subject. The total training sequence for each subject was constructed by assigning the reinforcement sequences for each cue randomly to positions in successive 24 trial blocks with the restriction that a given cue be presented on no more than three successive trials. The sequence of test stimuli was constructed for each subject by arranging the 20 test stimuli (2 of each of the 10 compounds) in random order.  Stimulus Materials. The cues presented to the subjects were Greek letters selected for ease of discriminability. Stimuli were typed on 3 X 5 inch white cards. Two examples of each cue were always presented with two identical, irrelevant letters as part of a diamond-shaped array. The two identical, irrelevant letters were the same on all cards. Eight random permutations of the positions of the cues on the card were constructed for each stimulus in the training list, and the eight permutations appeared in random order in the actual training sequences. Cards for the test stimuli were constructed in a manner similar to the training cards. The two letters comprising a compound appeared with the two identical, irrelevant letters in a diamond-shaped array. Two test cards with different random arrangements were constructed for each compound. The 10 responses that were employed were the first 10 letters of the alphabet (A through J). Cues and responses were randomly assigned to the five cues for each subject.  Procedure. Subjects were run individually. The subject sat at a table facing a small wooden screen which separated him from the experimenter. The stimulus cards were placed in a groove on top of the screen for presentation to the subject. The instructions to the subject were designed to give the subject a "diagnostic" frame of reference. They were told that the experiment studied the development of clinical intuition. Each stimulus card was said to represent a different patient displaying one of five symptoms (the cues), and that the responses represented diseases which were associated with the symptoms. Their task was to learn these symptom-disease associations. Subjects were told that more than one disease might be associated with a particular symptom, and that they should respond with the disease they thought would be correct on each trial. The instructions also informed the subjects about the irrelevant cues and told them to ignore the position of the cues on the cards. After the subject responded to each card, the experimenter gave the correct response verbally. The intertrial interval was about 2 sec. Following the presentation of the training series, the subjects were told that they would now  CUE VALIDITY IN STIMULUS COMPOUNDING 305  be tested on combinations of the symptoms that they had seen before, and they should give the diagnosis they thought would be correct. The 20 test cards were then presented without feedback. Following the presentation of the test cards, the subjects were tested on each of the training cues without feedback, and they were asked to give all of the diseases associated with each symptom, and the relative percentages of occurrences of the diseases.  Subjects. The subjects were 50 students recruited from the Introductory Psychology course at UCLA.  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  Responding to Component Cues  Discrimination learning was quite rapid; stable levels of responding were reached by the twentieth presentation on all cues. Subjects quickly learned to select only "appropriate" responses; i.e., responses from the set associated with each cue. Over the last 12 training trials, there were fewer than 4 % "inappropriate" or error responses. A comparison of the learning rates on the various cues was made by computing a total error score for each subject for each component cue. The mean total errors per cue during discrimination training was 3.80 and the largest difference among the cues was only .25 errors. An F test indicated that the slight differences among the cues were not statistically reliable (p > .10).  Table 1 is a summary of how subject responded to the individual cues on the training, compounding, and retention tests. Proportions for each of the alternative responses associated with each cue are shown. The data for the training series are the proportions of the appropriate responses over the last 12 training trials on each cue. These values will be regarded as estimates of the pi;'s. The values for the compounding tests are obtained by combining the appropriate responses to all compounds containing each cue. The proportions for the retention tests are the averages of the subjects' estimates of the reinforcement probabilities. There were only 3 % inappropriate responses on the retention tests. Table 1 shows a very similar pattern of responding to the component cues for all phases of the experiment, and the response proportions for all of the cues are close to the reinforcement probabilities. Thus, the earlier assumption that responding to component cues on the compounding tests is given by the pi;'s appears tenable, and it further seems reasonable to assume a "probability matching" hypothesis; i.e., pi; _ vi1 .  Assuming the probability matching hypothesis and applying Eq. (1), the validity vi of a cue is given by  `oi = y 7 ?; (7)  Values of vi calculated by Eq. 7 are shown in Table 1 for each cue. Values calculated by Eq. 1 using the estimates of p.i; in Table 1 differ by less than .01 from the listed estimates.  480/5/2-6  306  FRIEDMAN, ROLLINS, AND PADILLA  TABLE 1  RESPONDING TO COMPONENT CUES ON THE TRAINING, COMPOUNDING, AND RETENTION TESTS'  Component cue   Response  Cue validity (v,)     proportion  using Eq. 7   1.0 Training 1.0   1.0   Compounding -      Retention 1.0      75-25 Training .71 .29  .62   Compounding .74 .26     Retention .73 .27     50-50 Training .48 .52  .50   Compounding .50 .50     Retention .54 .46     50-50D Training .53 .47  .50   Compounding .50 .50     Retention .51 .49     50-25-25 Training .51 .25 .24 .38   Compounding .53 .24 .23    Retention .54 .24 .23   a The proportions for the training series are for the final 12 training trials (24 trials on the 50-50D cue). The proportions for the compounding tests are obtained by combining the responses for all compounds containing each cue. The proportions for the Retention Test are the average of the Subjects' estimates of the reinforcement probabilities.  Stimulus Compounding  There were less than 3 % inappropriate responses on the compounding tests. There did not appear to be any systematic differences between the results for the first and second tests on each compound, so the data were pooled in all analyses.  The important results concerning cue selection on the compounding tests are summarized in Table 2, which shows observed and predicted values of sij for each compound (Si , S;). The estimates of si; are the proportions of the total responses to (Si, S;) appropriate to the component Si. Thus, for the (1.0, 50-50) compound, Table 2 shows that 79% of the appropriate responses to that compound had been paired with the 1.0 component cue during training. The entries in the table are arranged so that for each compound (Si , S;), vi > v; .  Before considering the theoretical predictions, two qualitative results of interest in Table 2 will be noted. For the compounds containing the 50-50 and 50-50D cues,  CUE VALIDITY IN STIMULUS COMPOUNDING 307  both cues had identical reinforcing contingencies during discrimination training, but the 50-50D cue was presented twice as often as the 50-50 cue. The results for comparable compounds containing these cues were very similar. When the 50-50 and 50-50D cues were paired, the observed estimate of sia was .48, indicating that the cues were being selected equiprobably. Thus, the overall frequency of presentation of a cue (and the responses paired with that cue) did not appear to introduce any bias in cue selection. This finding is consistent with the results of Friedman (1966) for a pattern-vs-component discrimination task, and Friedman et al. (1967) for a  TABLE 2  OBTAINED AND PREDICTED VALUES OF THE CUE SELECTION PROBABILITIES sip FOR THE TEST COMPOUNDS  Predicted si;   Test compound Obt. II Models 11Ic Weighted average models   (Ss , si) sii  IIIa IIlb  II IIIb 111c  (1.0, 75-25) .71 .62 1.0 .69 .69 .69 .72 .72  (1.0, 50-501) .79 .67 1.0 .75 .75 .74 .78 .78   (1.0, 50-50D) .80 .67 1.0 .75 .75 .74 .78 .78  (1.0, 50-25-25) .85 .73 1.0 .81 .81 .78 .83 .83   (75-25, 50-50) .60 .56 .62 .56 .57 .64 .61 .62  (75-25,50-50D) .58 .56 .62 .56 .57 .64 .61 .62   (75-25,50-25-25) .69 .62 .62 .62 .66 .69 .66 .69  (50-50,50-50D) .48 .50 .50 .50 .50 .50 .50 .50   (50-50, 50-25-25) .63 .57 .62 .56 .59 .65 .61 .63  (50-50D, 50-25-25) .59 .57 .62 .56 .59 .65 .61 .63   X2 "  29.7- 8.8 5.2 10.3 1.9 2.5  The df for the X2 values are 10 for the models alone and 9 for the weighted average models. b p < .01  training and transfer task involving overlapping compounds. However, Binder and Estes (1967) have reported some work very similar to Friedman et al. in which they obtained a cue selection bias in favor of the least frequently occurring component of a novel compound. It is not yet obvious how to account for this disparity. The second general result is the clear effect of cue validity on responding to the novel compounds. It may be seen that the more valid cue is selected in every test, and the disparity in the cue selections increases as a function of the differences in the validities of the cues.  308 FRIEDMAN, ROLLINS, AND PADILLA  Compounding Model Tests  All predicted values in Table 2 assume the probability matching expression for vi (Eq. 7), so that the predictions of the various models do not involve any parameters estimated from the data. The first four columns of predicted values in Table 2 are for Model II (proportional weight model) and the three versions of Model III (scanning model). Predictions for Model I are not shown, since it predicts that sij = 1.0 for all compounds in Table 1 except the (50-50, 50-50D) compound, where it predicts that sij = .50. Obtained values of X2 goodness of fit tests are also shown in Table 2.  It may be seen that Model IIIa yields the poorest fit. This is mainly because it predicts that sij = 1 whenever Si is a sure (1.0) cue, while the obtained estimates of sit are consistently less than 1. The fit of Model II is also none too good, since its predictions consistently fall short of the obtained values. Note that the maximum difference between the observed and predicted values for Model II occurs for the (1.0, 50-25-25) compound. The obtained estimate of sij was .85, and the predicted values were .73 for Model II and .81 for Models IIIb and IIIc. The cue validities for the components of this compound, 1.0 and .38, are close to the values 1.0 and \/2 - 1, where the maximum difference between the predictions of Model II and Model IIIc occur. Relatively good fits are obtained for the two scanning Models IIIb and IIIe. The XI-values for both models are quite small, and it is difficult to choose between them. However, note that in all cases where the two models yield different predictions, the predictions of Model IIIc are closer to the obtained proportions than are those of Model IIIb. A clearer differentiation between the two scanning models requires smaller values of vi and v; than those of the present study.  Table 2 indicates that the best models slightly underpredict the obtained proportions. One interpretation of this result is that some subjects used a mixture of cue selection strategies which included the Model I "maximizing" rule, or alternatively, that some subjects were using the "maximizing" rule and other subjects were using other rules. To assess this hypothesis, predictions for a set of "weighted average" models were computed and are shown in Table 2.  The weighted average models averaged the predictions of Model I with the other models. For example, for Model II, the expression for si? for the weighted average model is wsi; -} (1 - w)s'; , where s?; is the prediction for Model I, s'; is the prediction for Model 11, and w is the weighting factor. The three rightmost columns of Table 2 are the predicted values for the weighted average versions of Model II, Model IIIb and Model IIIc. These predictions were obtained using least-squares estimates of w for each model. The fit of Model II is improved, and again the fits of Models IIIb and IIIc are excellent. The estimates of the weighting parameter w were .19, .11, and .10 for Models II, IIIb, and HIc, respectively.  The results for the weighted average models are interesting, but more research is necessary to decide whether the data require them and to differentiate them from  CUE VALIDITY IN STIMULUS COMPOUNDING 3  reasonable alternative models. An analysis of the behavior of individual subjects would be of interest, but the number of tests on each subject was too scanty and the obtained values of w too small to evaluate the present results on individual subjects. An example of an alternative model which might be considered is a version of Model IT (proportional weight) which assumes a definition of cue validity different from Eq. 1. We note that maximum-likelihood estimates of the cue validities for Model IT without assuming Eq. 1, using the present data yield an excellent fit to the obtained proportions (x2 = .98, 6 df ). However, we can as yet suggest no alternative to Eq. 1 which predicts these results. The weighted average models would certainly appear more plausible if there were some experimental variation which affected the value of w. In this regard, some of our preliminary data in a similar situation with compounds of three and four components suggests that as the compound size increases, the value of w increases.  Other Cue Validity Problems. The present analysis of the stimulus compounding experiment is straightforward because the task offers good control over both the reinforcing contingencies and the subject's reception of the cues. The definition of cue validity is thus natural and relatively simple. This does not appear to be the case for some other situations we have considered. Consider the training situation used by Friedman et al. (1967) and Binder and Estes (1966) in which a small number of overlapping training patterns receive deterministic reinforcement during training. Here the analysis of "what is learned" is considerably more complex than the compounding experiment, and the explanation of transfer effects more difficult. Some of the problems of theory in this situation are considered in the Friedman et al. (1967); and Binder and Estes (1966). A second troublesome experimental situation (thought one of great interest) involves probablistic reinforcement of a relatively large number overlapping patterns of cues as in the experiments of Beach (1964). Here again, a variety of subject-defined coding and abstracting operations must be taken into account in defining the validity of a cue and specifying the transfer rule.  REFERENCES  ATKINSON, R. C., BowER, G. H., AND CROTHERS, E. J. An introduction to mathematical learning theory. New York: Wiley, 1965.  ATKINSON, R. C., CALFEE, R. C., SOMMER, G. R., JEFFREY, W. E., AND SHOEMAKER, R. A test of three models for stimulus compounding with children. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1964, 67, 52-58.  BEACH, L. Cue probabilism and inference behavior. Psychological Monographs: General and Applied, 1964, 78, No. 5 (Whole No. 582).  BINDER, A. AND ESTES, W. K. Transfer of response in visual recognition situations as a function of frequency variables. Psychological Monographs: General and Applied, 1966, 80, No. 23 (Whole No. 631).  310 FRIEDMAN, ROLLINS, AND PADILLA  BOWER, G. H. Choice point behavior. In R. R. Bush and W. K. Estes (Eds.), Studies in mathematical learning theory. Stanford: Stanford Univer. Press, 1959, Pp. 109-124.  BRUNSWIK, E. Perception and the representative design of psychological experiments. Berkeley, California: Univer. of California Press, 1956.  EsTEs, W. K. Theoretical treatments of differential reward in multiple choice learning and two-person interactions. In J. Criswell, H. Solomon, and P. Suppes (Eds.), Mathematical methods in small group processes. Stanford: Stanford Univer. Press, 1962, Pp. 133-149.  EsTEs, W. K. Transfer of verbal discriminations based on differential reward magnitudes. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1966, 72, 276-283.  FRIEDMAN, M. P. Transfer effects and response strategies in pattern-vs.-component discrimination learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1966, 71, 420-428.  FRIEDMAN, M. P., PADILLA, G., AND GELFAND, H. The learning of choices between bets. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1964, 1, 375-385.  FRIEDMAN, M. P., TRABASSO, T., AND MOSBERG, L. Tests of a mixed model for paired-associates learning with overlapping stimuli, Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1967, 4, 316-334. LucE, R. D. Individual choice behavior. New York: Wiley, 1959.  PAVLOV, I. Conditioned reflexes. New York: Oxford Univer. Press, 1927.  RESTLE, F. R. A theory of discrimination learning. Psychological Review, 1955, 62, 11-19.  RECEIVED: March 20, 1967