10.1016/0022-2496(69)90009-1
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 6,312-325(1969)  Test of a Conflict Model for Preference Judgment'  JAMES C. SHANTEAU AND NORMAN H. ANDERSON  University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92037  Subjects rated their preference between pairs of sandwiches, drinks, or sandwichdrink combinations. Use of factorial designs  allowed simple tests of a subtractive model for preference. The results gave considerable support to the model, although some  discrepancies were obtained. These seemed to stem partly from idiosyncratic discrepancies in a few subjects, partly from  certain number preferences by the subjects as a group. In addition, two methods of estimating the scale values of the  preference alternatives were compared. Model-based estimates appeared to be superior to independent ratings of the single  alternatives. Finally, it was noted that the results tended to validate the use of rating scales to measure preference and,  more generally, to support a functional theory of measurement.  This experiment tests a simple model for preference judgments. The model derives from a more general conflict model (Anderson,  1962b) which assumes that the strength of an overt response depends on the difference in the strengths of the competing  responses. For the present application, the subjective values of the preference alternatives are identified with the strengths  of the competing responses. Moreover, numerical ratings of the degree of preference are obtained rather than some measure of  conflict such as response speed. Formally, the conflict model then reduces to a simple subtractive model of preference.  It seems natural to relate the overt preference response to the difference in the values of the preference alternatives, and  models based on this idea have been proposed by numerous investigators. However, most work on preferences has used categorical  (choice) response measures with the subtractive axiom applied in a weak ordinal form (see Luce and Suppes, 1965).  Only a few investigators have proposed subtractive models that employ a numerical dependent variable and there is very little  evidence on the validity either of the model or of the response scale. The most important work is that of Scheff6 (1952) who  developed estimation methods and tests of fit for a triangular, paired-comparisons  1 This investigation was supported by Public Health Service Fellowship MH-36, 963-01 from the National Institute of Mental  Health, and by National Science Foundation Grant GB-6666. We wish to thank David Rubin for his help in the preliminary stages  of this work.  312  MODEL FOR PREFERENCE JUDGMENT 313  design. This model has been discussed further by Snell (1964) and Bechtel (1967), and some illustrative data are considered in  all three articles. More extensive data on preferences among typewriter carbon papers (Fleckenstein, Freund, and Jackson,  1958) and in confectionary taste tests (Read, 1964) have given support to a subtractive formulation. A somewhat different  approach by Greenberg (1963), who tested three formulations on some reaction time data, was found to oppose a subtractive  model.  In the present experiment, subjects rated their degree of preference between two sandwiches, or two drinks, or two  sandwich-drink lunches. For each of these three stimulus classes, the pairs of alternatives were constructed according to a  factorial design. The subtractive model then implies that the interaction should be zero (Anderson, 1962b), so that ordinary  analysis of variance may be applied to test goodness of fit and estimate parameters.  In addition to the preference task, subjects also rated the desirability of single sandwich-drink combinations. For this test,  an additive model seems natural and a factorial design may be employed in the same way as in previous work on personality  impressions (Anderson, 1962a). It was thought that this task would, among other things, provide a comparative baseline for the  possibly more difficult preference task.  Since exact tests of fit are desired for both models, it might appear that their fate would be entirely dependent on the  validity of the rating scale responses. This is not a fundamental difficulty, however, since the cited conflict paper includes  a method for rescaling the dependent variable. As it happened, the simple rating responses worked quite well and it was not  necessary to apply this scaling technique.  METHOD  In a preliminary session, each subject rated the 29 sandwiches and 19 drinks listed in Table 1. These preliminary ratings were  made on a scale with 11 categories defined by verbal labels ranging from Extremely Favorable to Extremely Unfavorable. Two  additional ratings, Unfamiliar With, and Would Not Eat or Drink, were also allowed. The items rated Neutral or higher were  used in the construction of the experimental stimuli as described below. Each subject also indicated his favorite sandwich and  favorite drink and these were used as anchors for the preference scales.  The preliminary session was also used to give practice on the preference task. Instructions for the preference judgments were  given, and all subjects then rated a common set of 60 stimuli with 20 examples of each preference condition. These judgments  were made on the 0-20 numerical scale defined below.  Stimulus Construction. A 3 x 4, A x B, factorial design was used to define 12 preference pairs in each stimulus condition. For  the Drink condition, one group of three drinks defined Factor A and one group of four drinks defined Factor B of the design.  Each group was selected to cover the range from neutral to most desirable. To obtain the Drink pairs, each item of Factor A  was paired with each item of Factor B.  A similar 3 x 4 design was constructed for the Sandwich condition in exactly the same way. These Drink and Sandwich designs  were then superposed to produce the Lunch design. This last 3 x 4 design thus provided 12 pairs of lunches for preference  judgments.  314  SHANTEAU AND ANDERSON  TABLE 1  SANDWICHES AND DRINKS USED IN THE EXPERIMENT  Sandwiches  Drinks  American cheese sandwich Lettuce sandwich Apple juice Milk  Bacon and tomato sandwich Meat loaf sandwich Buttermilk Orange drink  Bacon sandwich Pastrami sandwich Chocolate milk Plain water  Bologna sandwich Peanut better sandwich Coca cola Punch drink  Bread and butter sandwich Roast beef sandwich Coffee Root beer  Chicken sandwich Salami sandwich Grape drink Seven-up  Chicken salad sandwich Salmon salad sandwich Hot chocolate Skim milk  Corned beef sandwich Sardine sandwich Ice water Tea  Cream cheese sandwich Steak sandwich Iced tea Vanilla malt  Egg salad sandwich Swiss cheese sandwich Iced coffee (used for one  Fried egg sandwich Tuna fish sandwich  subject)  Grilled cheese sandwich Turkey sandwich    Ham salad sandwich Two pieces of bread    Ham sandwich Wiener sandwich    jelly sandwich     In addition to the above three preference tasks, a condition in which subjects rated the desirability of Sandwich-Drink  combinations was included. This was also a 3 x 4 design, obtained by combining Factor A of Drinks and Factor B of Sandwiches.  The design provided 12 sandwich-drink combinations to be rated singly, all of which were different from the lunches in the  preference judgments.  Instructions. The preference judgments were made on a numerical scale anchored at 0 and 20. The 0 point was simply defined as  no preference for either item. The 20 point was defined as the amount of preference between the favorite item and a neutral  item for each subject. There was such an anchor for each of the three stimulus conditions, and the items that defined each  anchor were typed on cards that lay in front of the subject as each condition was run.  The Sandwich-Drink combination judgments were made on a 15-point scale. To avoid possible interference between the two types  of judgments, the steps of this scale were labelled alphabetically, A to 0, and a sheet listing the 15 categories lay in front  of the subject when this condition was run. For the analyses, the responses were converted into a numerical score by letting A  = l, B = 2, etc.  In addition, subjects rated the individual alternatives of the pairs used in the preference judgments. These ratings were made  on the 15-step alphabetic scale just described.  There were, then, three types of judgments: preferences between pairs of Sandwiches, Drinks, or Lunches; ratings of  Sandwich-Drink combinations; and ratings of the choice alternatives used in the preference pairs. The subjects were told to  base each rating on their present feelings, to avoid round number responding, and to spread their responses over the whole  scale as much as possible.  Procedure. The complete group of experimental stimuli was presented three times, in successive replications separated by rests  of about 3 minutes. Within each replication, the stimuli were presented in a different semi-random order.  MODEL FOR PREFERENCE JUDGMENT  315  Each stimulus to be judged was typed in capital letters on a 3 x 5 card with the alternatives displaced vertically. Each class  of stimuli was presented as a group in a separately shuffled order for each of the three replications. Presentation rate was  self-paced, with an average interval between stimuli of 7 seconds.  Subjects. The subjects were 22 undergraduates who were fulfilling a course requirement. They were run in groups of one, two,  or three in the preliminary session, and individually in the main experimental session. Two subjects were eliminated when some  of the stimulus items were inadvertently omitted.  Statistical Analysis. The test of the model is given by the interaction term in the analysis of variance. This was tested both  for the group data, and for each individual subject. The error term for the group analysis was the Subjects x A x B  interaction. For the single-subject analyses, the three replications of each 3 x 4 design provide 24 df for within-cell  variability. However, 2 df were used to test for temporal changes over the successive replications leaving 22 df for error.  The tests for temperal change were largely nonsignificant and will not be further considered. All row and column main effects  were significant and only the interaction terms will be reported.  RESULTS  Preference Judgments  Group Analyses. The overall mean preference judgments for each stimulus condition are shown in Fig. 1. The three curves in  each panel correspond to the three levels of Factor A in the design.  The model predicts that the three curves in each panel will be parallel and it can be seen that this is nearly true. The F  ratios for the interaction-, listed in each panel, are nonsignificant. Far comparative purposes, the group correlations  between the observed responses and those predicted by the model are also listed.  SANDWICH  DRINK  SANDWICH + DRINK]  m  W 0 a  W 0  U Z W W a  z a W  15 10 5 -5 -10 -15  F=2.00 F=0.57 r = .998 r = .999  LEVELS OF FACTOR 8 IN EACH CONDITION  FIG. 1. Overall mean preference judgments for each stimulus condition; the three curves are the levels of Factor A.  316 SHANTEAU AND ANDERSON  Figure 1 would seem to provide very promising support for the subtractive model. There is little indication of systematic  deviations in the group data for any of the three stimulus conditions. It is possible, however, that the individual subjects  show deviations that cancel out in the pooled data. Accordingly, a rigorous test of the model requires analysis of the  individual data.  Single Subject Analyses. These analyses showed some discrepancies from the model. A preliminary view of the nature and range  of individual differences is given in Fig. 2 which plots the preference judgments for three selected subjects.  0 0  w U z  W a z  20 10 0 -10 20 10 0 -10 20 10 0 -10 -20  ~ANUWII.H DR u1 N SANDWICH + DRINK  S6 ~ S6~ S6   r  ~,~ Or    F=0.10 F=204 "/ F=099   d  =.998 r =.968 r =.991  SIO SIO SIO  F 024 F=343* u'   r -F=2.22  r= 997 r= 983 ~/ r=-983  SI9 ~SIg SI9  I F=373*' F=4.91`  ~r F=334~ -.996* 1  j r = 994  = 993   r I  LEVELS OF FACTOR B IN EACH CONDITION  Fic. 2. Mean preference judgments for three selected subjects.  The top panel of Fig. 2 shows one of the better subjects. None of his interactions was significant which means, in graphical  terms, that each set of three curves is parallel up to sampling fluctuation. These curves show more irregularity than the  group curves, of course, since the amount of data is much less. The middle panel of Fig. 2 shows a median subject with one  significant interaction, and the subject with the most significant discrepancies is shown in the bottom panel.  Table 2 summarizes the single-subject analyses. In each preference condition, about one-fourth of the subjects show  significant interaction Fs. These are scattered fairly uniformly, and only two subjects show more than one such discrepancy  over the three preference conditions.  Table 2 suggests that the model applies best to the Sandwich data, and that the largest discrepancies occur for Lunch  preferences. This would be reasonable, of course, since Lunches are more complex stimuli than Sandwiches or Drinks. On the  whole, however, the differences among these three classes of stimuli are not large.  MODEL FOR PREFERENCE JUDGMENT  317  TABLE 2 INTERACTION F RATIOS FOR EACH CONDITION FOR EACH SUBJECT Preference condition  Subject Sandwich Drink Lunch Combinations  no.    Sandwich-Drink  1 2.771 .83 .86 8.956  2 .79 2.22 4.176 3.656  3 .88 3.796 1.28 .95  4 .77 1.77 1.06 1.23  5 1.07 2.35 1.72 1.22  6 .10 2.04 .99 4.756  7 1.98 .44 .56 2.40  8 1.21 1.46 3.446 1.88  9 .51 3.856 1.02 1.10  10 .24 3.436 2.22 .87  11 2.736 1.72 2.03 1.76  12 .57 1.62 .67 .60  13 2.23 3.776 9.236 3.406  14 .43 1.73 3.726 .21  15 2.826 1.53 1.31 1.94  16 2.03 1.61 .66 .64  17 .64 .21 .59 1.09  18 .32 .24 1.12 .52  19 3.346 3.736 4.916 2.21  20 .95 .35 4.336 2.986  MS error 10.44 7.17 8.83 1.12  r .988 .986 .983 .970  Notes: Each listed F has 6/22 df; critical value at.05 level is 2.55; entries in last two rows are averages over subjects.  6 Significant interactions.  The model provides estimates of the scale values of the preference alternatives for each single subject, and from these the  predicted response may be computed. The correlations between predicted and observed then give a rough index of the amount of  discrepancy from the model. These 60 correlations ranged from .937 to .998 with a mean of .986. The mean for each class of  judgments is listed in the last line of Table 2. Although these values are high, they must be interpreted with care (Anderson,  1962a). In Fig. 2, for instance, Subject 19 actually shows the highest correlations together with the most significant  discrepancies.  Follow-Up Analyses. On the whole, the model appears to work reasonably well although it is not able to give a complete account  at the level of the single subject. Accordingly, certain further analyses were made to track down the source of the  48o/6/2-10  318 SHANTEAU AND ANDERSON  significant interactions. It was thought that they might be localized by considering just those subjects who showed  interactions in each preference condition. To the extent that these interactions had a common locus, they should reappear more  clearly in the aggregated data. Such an analysis was made for each preference condition, but in no case was the interaction  significant. This result is of substantive interest since it indicates that the discrepancies observed in Table 2 are largely  idiosyncratic. From a statistical view, it should perhaps be noted that real A X B interactions whose locus differs across  subjects simply increase the Subjects X A X B error term in the group analysis.  As a corollary to the above, group analyses were also run for those subjects in each preference condition who did not show  interactions. Quite unexpectedly, the group interaction was significant for two of the three conditions. In retrospect, this  result is less surprising since omission of those subjects with significant individual interactions would tend to reduce the  error term in the group analysis. This would allow a smaller real effect to manifest itself, although of course it would need  to be fairly consistent across subjects.  The data for the subjects who did not show individual interactions are plotted in Fig. 3 which also lists the F ratios. Two  obvious sources of common interaction were looked for in Fig. 3. First, there could be a response ceiling effect, so to speak,  relative to the upper anchor stimulus. This would show up as a flattening to the right in the top curve relative to the two  lower curves, and similarly as a flattening to the left in the bottom curve relative to the upper two curves. There is some  slight suggestion of this in Fig. 3, but it is not very strong.  A second potential source of interaction was the zero anchor. Logically, this might appear either as a bias for or against the  use of 0 as a response. In fact, there is some  SANDWICH  DRINK  SANDWICH + DRINK  m w 0 w 0 w z w Q i= a w  15 10 5 0 -5 -10 -15  F = 3.17" r = .996  F = 1.72 r = .998  LEVELS OF FACTOR 8 IN EACH CONDITION  Ftc. 3. Mean preference judgments for subjects not showing individual interactions.  MODEL FOR PREFERENCE JUDGMENT 319  evidence that subjects may tend to avoid equality judgments (e.g., Anderson and Whalen, 1960). Evidence that this latter bias  was present will be seen below; however, it is difficult to detect it in Fig. 3.  The next step was to plot frequency histograms of the responses, and these are shown in Fig. 4. Both Drink and Sandwich data  seem to show fairly strong response preferences. The Sandwich curve shows a high peak at 3 and another peak at 15. The Drink  curve shows peaks at 4, 10, and 15. These response biases, if they are real, might produce the slight amounts of  nonparallelism that are seen in Fig. 3 by introducing small, local nonlinearities in the response scale. This interpretation  of the interaction is naturally very tentative. However, it is consistent with the Lunch data since these do not show an  interaction in Fig. 3, and at the same time have a much more uniform distribution of responses in Fig. 4.  Z 0 U  W W W a O r U Z W f W  0 4 8 12 16 20 PREFERENCE JUDGMENTS  40 30 20 10 0  FIG. 4. Frequency histograms of responses for subjects not showing individual interactions; ordinate for Sandwich-Drink curve  appears to the right.  Similar histograms for the subgroup of subjects with significant interactions in each condition showed fairly uniform  distributions of responses. This is, of course, in agreement with the failure to find an interaction in the corresponding  group analysis.  Judgments of Combinations  The subjects also judged their liking for Sandwich-Drink combinations that constituted a single lunch. Figure 5 plots the mean  response for the 3 X 4 design used to construct the combinations. According to an additive model, the three curves will be  parallel. The graph shows that the curves are nearly parallel, and in fact the interaction in the group analysis did not  approach significance, F(6,114) = .91.  320 SHANTEAU AND ANDERSON  w  J  0 5 m  c  4 z c  3  2  COMBINATIONS SANDWICH- DRINK  LEVELS OF FACTOR B  Fic. 5. Overall mean desirability judgments of single lunches.  The rightmost column of Table 2 shows the interaction F ratios for the individual subjects. Five of these are significant, and  inspection of the table suggests that the prevailing discrepancies have about the same magnitude for the preference judgments  as for the judgments of combinations.  Follow-up analyses were run in the same way as with the preference data. Group analyses were made for the five subjects who  showed signficant interactions and for the 15 subjects who did not. In neither case did the interaction approach significance.  A frequency breakdown revealed no obvious response bias. On the whole, these follow-up analyses indicate that what  interactions were obtained were idiosyncratic.  The error variabilities for the single-subject analyses, consisting mainly of response unreliability, also deserve  consideration. The means over subjects are listed in the next to last line of Table 2. The entries for the three preference  conditions are roughly equal, but markedly larger than the entry of 1.12 for the Combination judgments. However, this  comparison must take the range of judgments into account. Figures 3 and 5 show that this is about four times greater for the  preference judgments, so that the size of the error term relative to the range of responses is smaller for preference  judgments. If anything, therefore, the preference data might be expected to be a little more sensitive to interactions of a  given size. This is consistent with the lower mean correlation for Combinations listed in the last line of Table 2.  The range of error mean squares across subjects was of the order of 10 to l, a figure in line with previous work (Anderson,  1962a). The range was somewhat less for the Combinations for which there were no very large values, the largest mean square  being 2.39. In contrast, 6 of the 60 error terms in the preference analyses were greater  MODEL FOR PREFERENCE JUDGMENT 321  than 16, and these particular tests probably have low power and limited value. This heterogeneity of unreliability deserves  careful consideration; it is one of the factors that limits the usefulness of group analyses. Inspection of the data suggested  the higher unreliabilities arose in part from shifts in felt preference during the course of the experiment. This suggests  that more practice might be helpful in future work.  Scale Values  There are two general methods that can be used in estimating the scale values of the stimulus items, and in testing goodness  of fit. In the model-based method, used here and in previous work (Anderson, 1962a,b), the marginal response means of the  factorial design provide estimates of the scale values. They are best estimates in a least squares sense, and although the  zero and unit of the value scale are arbitrary, these estimates are otherwise unbiased and may be employed directly in the  test of goodness of fit.  In the present experiment, the subjects also made separate judgments of the single stimulus items. These single ratings could  also be treated as scale values from which to predict and test goodness of fit. This method of single ratings is in many ways  more natural, and it is of interest to compare it with the model-based method. First, however, it should be noted that the  method of single ratings does not allow a strict test of the model. If xi and x; are the single ratings of the stimuli in Row  i and Column j of the design, the predicted response would be as -}- arxi + a,x; , where the as are constants. Clearly, the  interaction in such a prediction scheme is zero. Of course, the same would hold if the scale values were estimated in some  other way, or if they were transformed by an arbitrary function.  With any such prediction scheme, therefore, the interaction in the set of deviations between predicted and observed is  identical with the interaction in the set of observed responses. To test this interaction, it is necessary to have recourse to  the model-based method or some statistical equivalent. Thus, the method of single scale values does not provide a strict test  of the model.  Nevertheless, it is still possible to compare the two estimation methods on their prediction of the row and column means. This  was done as follows. Consider the column means of the Sandwich judgments for a given subject. For each replication, a separate  linear regression was run between the observed preference judgments and the individual judgments of the single stimulus items.  Each regression then yields predicted column means from which a 3 x 4, Replication X Column, table of deviations-frompredicted  may be obtained. Analysis of variance may then be applied to these tables, subject to the following modification. In each  replication, 2 df have been used in the regression. The Replication main effect is accordingly zero, and the df for Column and  Replication X Column are reduced to 2 and 4, respectively.  Significance of the Column main effect implies real discrepancies between the  322  SHANTEAU AND ANDERSON  observed column means and those predicted from the single stimulus judgments. But the observed column means are, in effect,  the scale values as estimated by the present preference model. Significance of Columns will thus imply real differences  between the two sets of estimates.  This procedure was applied to the row and to the column means for each of the four classes of judgments for each subject.  Separate analyses were made for each subject and for all subjects pooled. A summary of the results is given in Table 3.  TABLE 3  SUMMARY COMPARISON OF TWO METHODS OF ESTIMATING SCALE VALUES4  Item - -- -- ----- --- Combinations  Sandwich Drink Lunch Sandwich-Drink  Column F 2.93 1.92 2.69 1.95  Row F 3.99 8.16 2.01 4.15  Column n 10 9 12 14  Row n 9 10 11 6  crating rmodel  Preference conditions  .903 .927 .928 .885  .988 .986 .983 .970  a Note: Column Fs have 38/76 df with critical value 1.56. Row Fs have 19/38 df with critical value 1.87. Column and Row ns are  number of single-subject Fs less than 2.00.  The first line of Table 3 gives an overall test of Columns x Subjects against its interaction with Replications for each class  of judgments. Each of these four Fs is greater than the critical value of 1.56 with 38/76 df. This means that, on the average  over subjects, the differences between the two estimation methods were real. The Row Fs in the second line of Table 3 tell a  similar story.  In the single-subject analyses, nearly 20% of the individual Fs were significant. Unfortunately, this figure is difficult to  interpret since these tests have few df and low power. The individual Column Fs, for instance, have only 2/4 df. Inspection of  the distribution of these individual Fs showed that about half were relatively small, and the rest were distributed in a long  tail. The number of Fs less than 2.00 is given in the third and fourth lines of Table 3. These figures, together with the  relatively small size of the overall Fs in the top two lines, suggest that the single ratings may be reasonably good  predictors for many subjects.  A final comparison between the two methods of scaling the single items is given by the last two lines of Table 3. Each entry  is a mean correlation between predicted and observed judgments, averaged over subjects and replications. The last line gives  the correlation based on use of the model, while the next-to-last line gives the correlations  MODEL FOR PREFERENCE JUDGMENT 323  based on the use of single ratings. The single ratings give substantially lower correlations, about .91 to .98. This reduction  in correlation comes from two sources: real differences between the two sets of scale values, and unreliability in the single  ratings.  The above analyses show that there are moderate differences between the scale values given by the two methods. A vital feature  of the comparison is that the error term in the analysis of variance includes the unreliabilities of both sets of estimates.  Consequently, the difference between them must result from lack of validity. To the extent that the model is successful, that  success validates the estimates based on the use of the model. Accordingly, the data suggest that the single ratings give less  valid estimates than those supplied by the model.  One source of invalidity in the single ratings would be shortcomings in experimental procedure, in particular, in the category  scale used for the single stimulus items. However, this source of difficulty seems to be largely ruled out by the judgments of  the Sandwich-Drink combinations. These judgments were made on the same category scale, yet the model fit these data relatively  well, which could hardly happen if the scale was invalid. In addition, it should be noted that the single item ratings were  obtained at the same time and in the same experimental setting as the other judgments. Thus, adventitious shifts in scale  value over time or from incidental stimuli, especially physiological in nature, can also be ruled out.  A more fundamental invalidity would arise if the single ratings were only partly relevant to the preference task. For  instance, the subject's orientation might be somewhat different in the two tasks, especially if they were separated in time.  This could produce a systematic discrepancy between the values of the items judged singly, and the values of the items judged  in the context of, say, the preference task. This would disqualify the single rating method for many purposes.  Further comparison of the two methods of estimation may b e ointerest, so it should be noted that the present 3 X 4 design  is not the best for this purpose. With a 2 X 6 design, for instance, three independent replications would provide 4/8 df for  error for the above test of Columns for each subject. From the same amount of data, therefore, the 2 X 6 design would provide  more reliable estimates of the differences between the two methods of estimating scale values.  DISCUSSION  On the whole, the conflict model has given a reasonably good account of the data. This supports the basic assumption that  subjects can make valid ratings of the difference in preference value of two alternatives. Further, it suggests that the value  of any alternative is largely independent of the other alternatives with which it is compared.  Nevertheless, it must be admitted that the model did not give a complete account of the behavior. Analysis at the  single-subject level showed that about a quarter of the  324 SHANTEAU AND ANDERSON  subjects had small but significant discrepancies. Follow-up analyses suggested that the model discrepancies were of two kinds.  First, those individual subjects who had significant discrepancies showed no common pattern. This indicates that these  discrepancies were idiosyncratic, possibly resulting from specific experiences with certain pairs of the food items. The  present data, however, do not afford any clear interpretation of these idiosyncratic discrepancies. Tracking them down might  be facilitated by obtaining component ratings concurrently with the preference judgments.  There was also some suggestion of discrepancy in the pooled analysis of those subjects who did not show interaction at the  individual level. This discrepancy was quite small, and further study of the data suggested that it arose from number  preferences in responding. If this is so, having the subject indicate his preference on a continuous response scale, as by  marking off an interval on a line, may provide a superior response system. Perhaps the best method would have subjects locate  both components of the preference pair on the line. Preference would then be measured as the distance between the two marks,  of course. The component ratings themselves might provide useful information on within-pair interaction. If, moreover, the  alternatives themselves were combinations, as the present Lunches, the combination rule could be tested at the same time, in  the manner used for the present judgments of Combinations.  The present results and analyses also bear on the general problem of psychological measurement in two respects, technical and  fundamental. At the technical level, the present data and analyses bear on the scaling of both the dependent, response  variable, and the independent, stimulus variables. For the stimulus variables, the model-based estimates appear to have  certain advantages over the direct ratings of the single alternatives. Since the single ratings do not predict interactions,  the interaction test of fit must in any case be made by a separate application of the model. Of course, the single ratings can  be used to test fit in one-way designs to which the present method does not apply. In such tests, however, any unreliability  of the single ratings adds to the error term and decreases the power of the test. In addition, the present analyses suggest  partial invalidity in the ratings of the single alternatives, possibly owing to a somewhat different orientation in that task  than in the judgments of preference differences. Further work may improve the single rating procedure, but at present the  model-based method has both technical and substantive advantages in scaling the stimulus variables.  This stimulus scaling is derivative from and depends on the scaling of the response. To the extent that the model is  successful, it validates the response scale that was used. Simple rating methods appeared to be adequate to measure preference  differences here, as in some of the papers cited earlier, and in agreement with work on similar models for other tasks  (Anderson, 1968). There is thus some basis to anticipate that response scaling may turn out to be fairly simple, at least in  certain tasks. However, the essential justification for this approach depends on the underlying theory of measurement.  MODEL FOR PREFERENCE JUDGMENT  325  At the fundamental level, the measurement logic of this work is straightforward. Basically, measurement and scaling depend on  the establishment of a behavioral law. Models of the present kind are at once substantive hypotheses about behavior, and  scaling procedures (Anderson, 1962a,b). In operation, this functional approach rests squarely on both the quantitative model  and also on a monotone scaling procedure (Anderson, 1962b) for the response variable. A model that was correct in itself would  naturally tend to fail if an invalid response scale was used. If the model is correct, however, the cited scaling procedure  provides a routine method for obtaining a valid response scale under fairly general conditions. The scaling of the stimulus is  then given directly by the model analysis as already noted. This functional measurement approach is in harmony with the  present theory and the empirical results.  REFERENCES  ANDERSON, N. H. Application of an additive model to impression formation. Science, 1962, 138, 817-818. (a)  ANDERSON, N. H. On the quantification of Miller's conflict theory. Psychological Review, 1962, 69, 400-414. (b)  ANDERSON, N. H. A simple model for information integration. In R. P. Abelson, E. Aronson, W. J. McGuire, T. M. Newcomb, M. J.  Rosenberg, and P. H. Tannenbaum (Eds.), Theories of cognitive consistency: A source book. Chicago: Rand McNally, 1968.  ANDERSON, N. H., AND WHALEN, R. E. Likelihood judgments and sequential effects in a twochoice probability learning situation.  Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1960, 60, 111-120. BECHTEL, G. G. The analysis of variance and pairwise scaling.  Psychometrika, 1967, 32, 47-65. FLECKENSTEIN, M., FREUND, R. A., AND JACKSON, J. E. A paired comparison test of typewriter  carbon papers. Tappi, 1958, 41, 128-130.  GREENBERG, M. G. J scale models for preference behavior. Psychometrika, 1963, 28, 265-271. LUCE, R. D., AND SuppFs, P.  Preference, utility, and subjective probability. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical  psychology, Vol. 3, New York: Wiley, 1965, 249-410.  READ, D. R. A quantitative approach to the comparative assessment of taste quality in the confectionary industry. Biometrics,  1964, 20, 143-155.  SCHEFFI3, H. An analysis of variance for paired comparisons. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 1952, 47,  381-400.  SNELL, E. J. A scaling procedure for ordered categorical data. Biometrics, 1964, 20, 592-607.  RECEIVED: April 12, 1968  Printed in Belgium