10.1016/0022-2496(69)90023-6
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 6, 541-575 (1969)  Probability Learning with Noncontingent Success'  JOHN 1. YELLOTT, JR.  University of Minnesota Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455  A noncontingent success (NCS) reinforcement schedule for binary prediction is one in which the subject has the same  probability (8) of being correct regardless of which response he makes. These schedules may be contrasted with the more  commonly studied noncontingent event (NCE) schedules in which the event probabilities are not contingent on the subject's  choice of response, but the probability of his being correct is. The NCS schedules are examined here in connection with the  problem of deciding experimentally between the linear and N element models for probability learning. It is shown that for  mathematical reasons there is essentially no possibility of making such a decision on the basis of experiments with NCE  schedules. Predictions for NCS schedules are then derived from the two models, and an experiment with two such schedules (8 =  .8 and 8 = 1.0) is reported. The results unequivocally support the N element model over the linear model, but under 8 = 1  contingencies subjects generate patterned response sequences-"superstitious solutions"-that cannot be explained by any of the  current models.  The present paper is concerned with a class of "noncontingent success" reinforcement schedules for binary prediction  experiments. The original motivation for studying this class of schedules was provided by a problem that arises in attempting  to evaluate the two most widely studied models for probability learning: the N element pattern model (Atkinson and Estes,  1963) and the linear model with experimenter controlled reinforcing events (Bush and Mosteller, 1955). Briefly stated, that  problem is as follows. Although the N element and linear models are similar to the extent that both are simple  path-independent conditioning models, they make very different assumptions about the nature of the learning process. According  to the N element model, changes in a subject's response probabilities can occur only on trials when the subject makes an  incorrect prediction. That is, learning occurs only on errors. According to the linear model, on the other hand, response  probability can change on any trial,  1 This paper is based on a PhD dissertation submitted to Stanford University (Yellott, 1965). I thank William K. Estes, who  served as advisor and made many valuable suggestions, and also the other members of the dissertation committee: Richard C.  Atkinson, James G. Greeno, and Patrick Suppes. Support for this research has been provided by the U. S. Public Health Service  (Predoctoral Fellowship 5-FL-MH-19386-03, Grant MH-6154), the National Science Foundation (Grant GB-3878) and the University  of Minnesota Center for Research in Human Learning.  541  542 YELLOTT  regardless of whether the subject's prediction is correct or incorrect. In view of these different assumptions one might  expect that the two models would make quite different predictions about behavior, and that consequently an experimental  decision could be made between the two without much difficulty. Surprisingly, this is not the case if one employs the most  commonly studied class of reinforcement schedules-schedules with noncontingent events. Under schedules of this sort the two  models turn out to be very similar, and in fact it can be shown (see Sect. 2) that in these cases the N element is for all  practical purposes indistinguishable from a simple generalization of the linear model. Consequently, to achieve an  experimental decision between the two models one must look to some other class of reinforcement schedules. Noncontingent  success schedules turn out to be nicely suited to this purpose. Under these schedules the linear and N element models make  dramatically different predictions about observable behavior, and consequently a straightforward experimental comparison can  easily be achieved.  The organization of the paper is as follows. Section 1 describes the various models and reinforcement schedules and discusses  the background of the comparison problem. Section 2 contains a proof that the N element and linear models, and also a third  model called the N element-linear model, are all "practically" indistinguishable from one another under reinforcement  schedules with noncontingent events. Section 3 gives the predictions of the various models for experiments with noncontingent  success reinforcement, and Sec. 4 describes an experiment in which noncontingent success schedules were employed. To  anticipate the results of that section, it was found that the N element model is clearly superior to the linear model in a  simple comparison between the two, but that both models fail to account for certain rather charming results that one obtains  under a noncontingent success schedule in which any response the subject makes is reinforced with probability one.  1. LINEAR AND PATTERN MODELS FOR BINARY PREDICTION  REINFORCEMENT SCHEDULES  Throughout the paper we will be concerned with a standard binary prediction experiment in which the subject is required on  each trial to predict which one of two events, el or e2 , will occur. Following each prediction the experimenter causes one or  the other event to occur. (A reference experiment is Friedman, Burke, Cole, Keller, Millward, and Estes, 1964.) Let al and a2  denote the responses associated with the prediction of el and e2 , respectively, Ai,n and E;,,, the occurrence of ai and e; on  trial n, and let Aand E,z denote indicator random variables corresponding to the events ALand El, A= 1 if Al,occurs,  and zero otherwise; En = 1 if El,n occurs, and zero otherwise. A reinforcement schedule then is simply a sequence of functions  {arn},  PROBABILITY LEARNING 543  where or,, determines the conditional probability of E1,,, as a function of the observable history of the experiment up  through the response on trial n. This paper deals with two kinds of schedules. The first is the well-known case of  "noncontingent reinforcement" in which e1 occurs with a fixed probability a on each trial independent of the previous history  of responses and events:  P(E1,n I A.E.-1A.-1 ... EIA1) ~ -. (1.1)  We will refer to schedules satisfying (1.1) as noncontingent event (NCE) schedules. This terminology underlines the fact that  in this case it is the events Ei,,z which are independent of the subject's predictions, rather than "reinforcements" in the  sense of rewards for correct responses. The distinction is emphasized because in the second class of schedules that concern us  here it is the case that correct predictions (and hence rewards) are independent of the subject's choice of response. By a  noncontingent success (NCS) schedule with parameter 8 we mean a schedule satisfying the following condition:  P(E,.n I A1.nHn_1) = P(E2,n I A2..Hn-1) = 8, (1.2)  where H,n-1 is any history of the form En_1A1 --- E1A1. In other words, under an NCS schedule the probability that the event  on any trial n will agree with the prediction on that trial is 8, regardless of which prediction is made, and regardless of  the history of the experiment up through trial n - 1. Obviously in this case there is no way for the subject to increase or  decrease his percentage of correct predictions, so the situation is quite different than that which obtains under NCE  schedules, where the probability of a correct response is directly proportional to the probability of predicting the event  having the higher probability of occurrence. The NCE and NCS schedules are equivalent only in the special case it = 8 = .5.  MODELS FOR BINARY PREDICTION  Within the class of stochastic learning models introduced by Bush and Mosteller the model which has had the widest application  to binary prediction experiments is the linear model with experimenter controlled reinforcing events (Bush and Mosteller,  1955, Ch. 10; Estes and Suppes, 1959). Letting pn denote A1 response probability (for a single subject) on trial n, this model  can be written  pn+1 = (1 - B) pn. + OE. .  Throughout the paper we use the term "linear model" to refer specifically to (1.3). Historically the linear model has been by  far the most widely studied model for probability learning, and in a good number of experiments (e.g., Estes and Straughn,  1954; Friedman et al., 1964; Suppes and Atkinson, 1960) its predictions for a broad  544 YELLOW  range of statistics were surprisingly accurate. In one respect, however, the linear model is consistently deficient: it  seriously under-predicts the intersubject variance in asymptotic response probabilities. A model which does a great deal  better in this respect, and which also has certain computational advantages, is the N element pattern model (Atkinson and  Estes, 1963; Estes, 1959). As applied to binary prediction situations, (Atkinson and Estes, 1963) this model assumes that the  effective stimulus on each prediction trial can be represented by a fixed set of N stimulus elements. Each element is  conditioned either to al or a2 . On each trial the subject samples exactly one of the elements and makes the response  conditioned to that element. The probability of sampling any element is assumed to be 1/N. If the response on a trial is  correct the conditioning state of the element sampled on that trial remains unchanged. If the response is incorrect (i.e.,  disagrees with the event) the conditioning state of the sampled element changes, with probability c, to agree with the event  that occurred, while with probability 1 - c the conditioning state of the element remains unchanged. In either case the  sampled element is returned to the pool of stimulus elements and the same process is repeated on the next trial. Letting k. denote the number of elements conditioned to al on (at the beginning of) trial n, we have  P(Al, I k., H,,-,) - k1V'  (where H,,_1 is any history up through trial n - 1), and  N +N if A2,. El.. C.   kn+l k,,    __ _ _I if Al.. E2,n Cn , (1.4)  N N N    kotherwise   N    where Cn is an "effectiveness of conditioning" event which has probability c of occurring on trial n independent of the rest  of the process.  Although comparisons of the N element and linear models for NCE schedules have found the N element model to be somewhat  superior (Friedman et al., 1964, p. 271; Suppes and Atkinson, 1960, Ch. 10), the issue between the two models has not been  resolved by these experiments. To begin with, the N element model has two free parameters: c and N, while the linear model has  only the learning rate parameter 0. A natural way to equate the number of parameters in the models is to weaken the linear  model's assumption that the occurrence of an event always leads to a change in the p value. In place of this assumption we can  suppose that the events E,,,, and E2,,n lead to the transformations (1 - 0) pn + 0 and (1 - 0) p., only with some probability  PROBABILITY LEARNING 545  c, while with probability I - c, p,, regardless of the event on trial n. In this case we have  (I - 6)p,, + 0 if E,,,,, C,,  pm+1 _ (I - 9) p. if E'2.n C,, , (1.5)  p. otherwise  where C,is defined as in (1.4). In terms of Estes and Suppes' formulation of the linear model (1959) this is equivalent to  assuming that with probability 1 - c the outcome on any trial leads to an Eo reinforcing event. The effects of such an  assumption in the context of paired associates learning have been studied by Norman (1964), who called this extended linear  model the random trial increment (RTI) model. In paired associates learning the reason for introducing the parameter c is to  account for the relatively small changes observed in precriterion response probabilities. From the standpoint of probability  learning, however, it is clear that this extension does not change anything important in the structure of the linear model, or  reduce the fundamental conceptual differences between that model and the N element model. In particular the RTI model retains  the assumption that changes in response probability can occur on any trial regardless of whether the subject's prediction is  correct or incorrect. Intuitively, the only effect of introducing the parameter c is to increase the number of possible sample  paths in the pm process, and thereby increase the variance in the response process. Nevertheless it can be shown that the RTI  model and the N element model are virtually identical for experiments using NCE reinforcement schedules. Specifically, it will  be shown in Sec. 2 that in the case of NCE reinforcement the two models imply exactly the same functional relationships among  the expectations of a large class of statistics, including all those normally considered in the analysis of binary prediction  experiments. A consequence of this result is that if any pair of statistics in this class is used (via the method of moments)  to estimate the parameters of both models, the two models will predict exactly the same values for every other statistic in  the class. From a practical point of view this result all but eliminates the possibility of differentiating between the two  models on the basis of results from experiments using NCE schedules.  The fact that it is so difficult in principle to compare the N element and RTI models under NCE reinforcement is not  altogether surprising, since a schedule of this sort does not exploit the fundamental difference between the two models. The  situation under NCS reinforcement is quite different. Consider the case 5 = 1. Since the subject is always "correct" in this  condition the N element model predicts that no change will occur over trials in individual subject response probabilities. If  a subject begins a sequence of S = 1 trials with k of the N elements conditioned to al his subsequent responses will form a  sequence of Bernoulli trials with parameter k/N. Under the assumptions of the RTI model, on the other hand, a sequence of such  trials will  546 YELLOW  cause an individual subject's sequence of pn values to converge to zero or one as n -> oc. This convergence follows from the  fact that when 8 = 1, (1.5) implies that {p is a martingale, i.e.,  E(pn., pn, pn_1 ,..., pl) = X  It is well known that every bounded martingale converges with probability one to a limiting random variable-which we call pa  here. (An accessible proof is provided in Khinchin, 1957.) In the case of the RTI model the distribution of p. is concentrated  at zero and one, with  p(p. = 1 pi =P) =P.  To prove (1.7) it is sufficient to note first that (1.6) implies E(p.) = E(pl), and second that if c0 > 0, the probability of  a pn sequence converging to a point in the open interval (0,1) is zero. Since every sequence converges to some point in [0,1],  every sequence must converge to zero or one.  The convergence of individual p, sequences in the case 8 = 1 is reflected at the level of responses by a decrease over trials  in the probability of an alternation-i.e., of a response which differs from the preceding response. It will be shown in Sec. 3  that this probability decreases geometrically as (1 - c02)n-1. The N element model, of course, predicts that the probability  of an alternation remains constant over any number of 8 = 1 trials. Thus the NCS schedule 8 = 1 provides a situation in which  the N element and RTI models make sharply different predictions.  The case 8 = 1 is not the only NCS schedule which permits a clear comparison of the N element and RTI models. For any 8 the  RTI model predicts that the probability of an alternation following m consecutive "success" trials (that is, trials on which  the schedule generates events agreeing with whatever response the subject happens to make) decreases geometrically with m,  whereas the N element model implies that this probability does not depend on m. If 8 is relatively large, so that the event "m  consecutive success trials" occurs a substantial number of times for several values of m, the observed conditional proportions  for m = 1, 2,... can be used to compare the two models.  Previous experimental studies of NCS schedules for binary prediction appear to be confined to the cases 8 = .5 and 8 = 1. A  good number of experiments have employed sequences of 8 = .5 trials, but this has always been regarded as the rr = .5 case of  NCE reinforcement, and no one seems to have reported sequential data that would permit a comparison of the sort mentioned in  the previous paragraph. The only experiment in which the reinforcement schedule was NCS : 8 = 1 appears to be one reported by  Arima (1965). In this experiment 40 subjects were run through 30 consecutive 8 = 1 trials as part of a larger study dealing  with the effects of free versus forced choice trials in probability learning. Before beginning the 8 = 1 phase all subjects  had fifty a = .5 trials as a warm-up. The nature of the results in the 8 = 1  PROBABILITY LEARNING 547  phase is suggested by Arima's comment: "Closer inspection of the performance of the 40 free-choice control [5 = 1] subjects  revealed that 10 subjects perseverated positi on responses [i.e., made the same response on all 30 trials] and 10 subjects  perseverated patterns of single, double, and triple alternations over the 30 trials." Arima's results appear to be quite  consistent with those obtained in the present study, as will be seen in Sec. 4.  2. NCE SCHEDULES: PROBLEMS IN COMPARING MODELS'  Roughly speaking, the object of this section is to show that in practice it is virtually impossible to distinguish between the  N element and RTI models on the basis of experiments with NCE schedules of reinforcement. "Virtually" is a necessary qualifier  here because strictly speaking it is not the case that the two models are identical (i.e., "equivalent" in Greeno and  Steiner's, 1964, terminology) under NCE reinforcement. What can be shown instead is that the two are strictly identical so  long as one confines his attention to a certain class of statistics E, and in addition that the differences between their  predictions for statistics outside the set E are so small as to be essentially undetectable in any feasible experiment. From a  practical standpoint these results effectively rule out the possibility of making any unambiguous decision between the two  models based on NCE reinforcement, even though the two are not actually identical under such schedules.  The results of binary prediction experiments are usually analyzed in terms of a number of summary statistics. These generally  include the mean learning curve and various "asymptotic sequential statistics." The latter are the averages (across subjects)  of the averages (over trials) of such random variables as (AnE,,A,,+1). Normally these are evaluted for n > n*, where n* is  relatively large, say 100, in order that they may be assumed to be estimates of corresponding asymptotic probabilities, e.g.,  limn-. P(A.E1) (see, for example, Friedman et al., 1964). Typically a model specifies the expectations of these statistics  as functions of its parameters. The parameters are estimated by equating a sufficient number of observed statistics to their  theoretical expectations and solving these equations for the parameters. The estimates obtained in this way are then used to  predict the remaining statistics by substituting into the expressions for their expectations. In this sense evaluation  involves using the model to predict relationships between observed statistics; the model fits the data to the extent that the  observed statistics satisfy the predicted relationships between their expectations. Other estimation methods can be used,  e.g., least squares minimization and pseudo maximum likelihood techniques (Suppes and Atkinson, 1960), but these achieve  essentially the same result. A comparison between two models involves exactly the same procedure; predictions are computed for  both models and compared  2 1 thank J. L. Myers for suggesting a very helpful simplification of the results of this section.  548 YELLOTT  to the data; one model is judged superior to another if its predictions are substantially closer to the data.  Clearly the results of the sort of comparison procedure just described depend on the class of statistics considered. To take  an extreme example, if only the mean learning curve is examined in an NCE experiment, the one element case of the N element  model cannot be distinguished from the RTI model, since in both cases the appropriate theoretical expression is  P(Al.n) = - + (I - a)n-1 (P(A1,1) - -),  where a equals c for the one element and ce for the RTI model. However, the two models are easily distinguished on the basis  of the sequential statistic P(A,,n+1 I A1,n , E1,n). This suggests that the more statistics considered the better. In  practice, however, the number of statistics employed in evaluation is limited by the amount of computation involved in  obtaining theoretical expressions, and, more significantly, by the requirement that statistics used for this purpose be based  on a substantial number of cases. Consequently, in practice, the evaluation of models for the NCE case of binary prediction  has almost always been confined to a fairly restricted class of statistics-in particular, statistics corresponding to the  quantities:  P(A,,m); n = 1, 2,...,  lim P(A,,n I Ei,n-1Aa,n-1),  lim P(A,,n+na I Aj,n),  n-, m  lim P(A,,n+m I Ei,n), n1 co  lim Var (Y A""), n-  k=1  lim P(A,,n+m I Ei,n ... Ei,n+m-1),  n-, w  (2.1.1)  i = 1, 2;j = 1, 2, (2.1.2)  j = 1, 2; m = 1, 2,..., (2.1.3)  j = l, 2; m (2.1.4)  m = 1, 2,..., (2.1.5)  z = 1, 2; m = 1, 2,.... (2.1.6)  We are aware of only one study which has considered statistics other than those corresponding to (2.1) (Suppes and Atkinson,  1960, Ch. 10). Now let E denote the class of statistics having as their expectations the quantities (2.1.1)-(2.1.6), and let s  denote an arbitrary member of E. The following result shows that the N element and RTI models are indistinguishable over E:  Let ns(c, N) denote the value of s predicted by the N element model as a function of its parameters c and N, and rg(c, 0) the  value predicted by the RTI model as a function of its parameters c and 0. Then for every s in E there exists a function ps(U,  V) such that  ns(c, N) = ps(U, V) = rs(c, 0), (2.2.1)  PROBABILITY LEARNING 549  where   U = N , V= Nc , (2.2.2)  in the N element model, and   U = c0, V = 0(2 , (2.2.3)  - C)   in the R TI model.   In other words, the predictions of the N element and RTI models within Z depend on their respective parameters c, N and c, 0  only through U and V, and they are the same functions of U and V in all cases. This implies, first of all, that the two models  will make identical predictions throughout E whenever  _c = c'0 1 - ` = 0(1 - c'O) . (2.3)  _9 N 2-0 )  (The parameter c of the RTI model is denoted here by c'.) In addition, (2.2) implies that if the same pair of E statistics is  used in estimating the parameters of both models (via the method of moments), then their predictions based on these estimates  will agree for every other E statistic. This follows from the fact that a pair of statistics which generates separate  estimates of c and N, and c' and 0, must generate separate estimates of U and V, and since these estimates (by 2.2.1) will be  the same for both models, (2.3) will hold and their remaining predictions will be identical.  The proof of (2.2) involves simply showing that the theoretical expressions for (2.1.1)-(2.1.6) satisfy (2.2.1)-(2.2.3) under  both models. In order to do this it is convenient to consider a very general and rather cumbersome model for binary prediction  which we call the c-O-N model. This model contains as special cases the linear model, the N element model, the RTI model, and  a third two-parameter model: the N element-linear model, which is equivalent to the other two over the class E. The c-O-N  model was originally suggested by Estes as a device for comparing these special cases. By estimating all the parameters of the  general model from the results of an experiment one could, hopefully, determine which of the special cases came closest to the  data without having to perform a separate analysis for each case. The difficulties which arose in attempting to carry out this  program led to the result which is the subject of this section.  In the N element model we assume that each of the stimulus elements is conditioned in an all-or-none fashion to al or a2 . The  c-O-N model generalizes this notion by assuming that corresponding to every element Wi(i = 1, 2,..., N) there is a number 0 <  wi <_ 1 which represents the probability of making response al when Wi is  550 YELLOTT  sampled. Let mi,n(i -- 1, 2,..., N) denote the al response probability attached to element Wi at the beginning of trial n. We  assume that:  Al. On every trial the subject samples exactly one element; the probability of sampling any element is I /N.  A2. If Wi is sampled on trial n, the probability of Al,n is wi,n .  A3. If Wi is sampled on trial n, then regardless of the response on trial n,  wi,n+l =_ (I - B) Zvi,+ BE,, with probability c,  and  with probability 1-c,  where c is a constant for all n and i.  A4. If Wi is not sampled on trial n, then with probability one  wi,n+l = wi,-n  Relevant special cases of the c-B-N model arise when c = N = 1 (the linear model); N = 1 (the RTI model); B = 1 (the N element  model); and c = 1 (the N elementlinear model). Occasionally, below, we refer to the three two-parameter cases in terms of  their free parameters:  The c-0 model - RTI model,  c-N model ti N element model,  B-N model - N element-linear model.  The following expressions can be derived from the c-9-N model for a binary prediction experiment with NCE reinforcement and el  probability Tr (Yellott, 1965, App. B):  P(A,,n) = (I - U)n-l P(A1,l) + rr[I - (1 - U)n-l], (2.4.1)  lim P(Al,n+l J El, A,.n) (I - .7r)(U + V) + or, (2.4.2)  lim P(A,,n+l I E2.n A,,n) _ (I - 7r) V + 7r(1 - U), (2.4.3)  lim P(A,,n+,. El, = -(I - U - + U, (2.4.4)  n, co A2,n) V)   lim P(A,,n+l E2,n A2,n) = -(I - U - V), (2.4.5)  li (2.4.6)  m P(Al.n+rn A,,n) = (I - ~r) V(1 - U)m-l + T,   lim P(Al.n+m I = 7 - - (2.4.7)  n~oo A2,n) WV(I U)m-1,   PROBABILITY LEARNING 551  n lm P(A,.n+m El,,,) ='T + (I - 7T) U(I - U)m-1, (2.4.8)  lim P(A,,n+,m E2,n) = - _U(1 - U)m-1, (2.4.9)  lim Var Y, An+x = ma(1 - -a) + 27r(1 - w) U [m U (I - (I - U)m),, (2.4. 10) ?Z,. k=1  lim P(A,,n+m I El .n ,..., El,n+m-,) = (1 - U)-7r + [I - (I - U)m], (2.4.11)  n  lim P(Al.n+m I E2 .n ,., E2.n+m-1) = X7(1 - U)m,  (2.4.12)  where  c0 V - 0(1 - c0)  U = N , N(2 - 0)  A comparison of (2.1.1)-(2.1.6) and Eqs. 2.4 will show that this list contains theoretical expressions for all of the  statistics in E. Since all of the expressions in (2.4) are functions of U and V alone, specialization to the appropriate  two-parameter cases of the c-O-N model completes the proof of (2.2). In addition it follows immediately from Eqs. 2.4 that  within E the O-N model is identical to the N element and RTI models in the sense of (2.2).  It remains now to show that the N element and RTI models are not strictly identical under NCE reinforcement. Earlier we  mentioned that there is one type of asymptotic sequential statistic that has been used to evaluate models for NCE experiments  (Suppes and Atkinson, 1960, Ch. 10), but is not in E. This is the set of second order sequential statistics corresponding to  lim P(AI En-1 An-1 En-2 An-2) n  These quantities were excluded from E because (2.2) does not, in fact, hold for them. A moment's thought will indicate the  reason for this. It will be recalled from Sec. 1 that the conditional probability of an alternation following m success trials  under NCS reinforcement is a constant for all m in the N element model, but declines geometrically with m in the RTI model  whenever e0 > 0. In particular consider the quantities  lim P(A,, 0 An-, I An-, = En-,), (2.5)  lim P(A. # An-1 I An-1 = E.-,, An-2 = En-2)' (2.6)  Under NCS reinforcement with 0 < 8 < 1 the RTI model implies that (2.6) is strictly less than (2.5) if cO > 0: the ratio (2.6)  over (2.5) is (1 - c02). The N element  48o/6/3-r5  552 YELLOW  model, on the other hand, implies (2.6) _ (2.5) for all values of c and N, if c > 0 (see Sec. 3). Since the NCS schedule 8 =  .5 is equivalent to the NCE schedule 7 __ .5 it is clear that the N element and RTI models are not strictly identical for all  NCE schedules. In particular, (2.2) cannot hold if Z includes statistics whose expectations are equal to (2.5) and (2.6).  Since (2.6) is a compound of the second order sequential probabilities P(AI E,,-,A,,-,E2A,,-a), it is clear that these  quantities must be excluded from 2; if (2.2) is to hold. However it should be noted that, for the range of parameters normally  encountered in practice, the ratio of (2.6) to (2.5) implied by the RTI model will be very close to 1, i.e., (1 - cO2) will be  on the order of .95 (using parameter estimates based on asymptotic sequential statistics, cf. Sec. 4). Consequently, we would  not expect the second order sequential statistics of a 7r = .5 experiment to support a clear choice of one model over the  other. One could, of course, consider longer runs of successes, calculate the corresponding probabilities analogous to (2.6),  and compare these to (2.5). But the number of observations contributing to these estimates would decrease by one-half for each  additional success, while the relevant comparison ratio would decrease each time by a factor of only .95. This seems at best  an inefficient procedure; certainly it would require a fairly massive experiment. The next section deals with NCS  reinforcement and shows that for these schedules the N element and RTI models make nonparametrically different predictions  which can easily be compared in an experiment of reasonable dimensions.  3. PREDICTIONS FOR NONCONTINGENT SUCCESS SCHEDULES  This section describes the predictions of the N element, RTI, and N element-linear models for noncontingent success schedules.  For the most part the results presented here have been obtained by methods commonly employed with these models (Atkinson and  Estes, 1963; Estes and Suppes, 1959; Sternberg, 1963), and consequently most of the derivations have been omitted. They can be  found in Yellott (1965, pp. 32-59). The predictions of primary relevance to the purposes of this paper are those describing  the effects of consecutive 8 = 1 trials on response alternation probability, since as indicated in Sec. 1, these differentiate  between the models in a nonparametric fashion. To deal with these predictions some additional notation is required. The NCS  schedules can be thought of as generating Bernoulli sequences of "successes" and "failures" in the same way that NCE schedules  generate Bernoulli sequences of el's and e2's. We will_ use d n to denote the event corresponding to a noncontingent success  on trial n, and 4 n to denote the occurrence of a noncontingent failure on trial n. We define indicator random variables  {S,,}' , by  Sn = AX - An-I) + An-Al - An).  Clearly S= 1 if a response alternation occurs on trial n (i.e., if A# An-,), and  PROBABILITY LEARNING 553  Sn = 0 otherwise. We will be concerned with the conditional probability of an alternation given m consecutive success trials:  P(Sn = 1 I An_1 --- Occasionally the intersection An_1An_2 An_m will be denoted by A'1 ; in this case we write P(S" = I I A-1).  Since NCS schedules are a special case of simple contingent schedules, and the latter have been widely studied, we can make  use of a number of previous results. In particular, whenever 0 < 8 < I and the learning rate parameter is greater than zero  (i.e., cO > 0, clN > 0, BIN > 0 in the c-0, c-N, O-N models, respectively) the response probability random variables p,,,,  knIN, and W(n) have asymptotic distributions that depend only on 8 and the learning parameters. In the case of the N element  model this is shown in Atkinson and Estes (1963). For the RTI model it follows from a theorem of Lamperti and Suppes (1959,  Theorem 4.1) if we let the events CnE1,n and CnE,,n correspond to the events "En = 1" and "En = 2" in their formulation, and  interpret the event Cn (Cn complement) to be their "En = 0" event. A proof for the N element-linear model follows from the  ergodicity of the RTI model. Consider the process {wi,,,) 1 corresponding to stimulus element Wi. If Wi is sampled (with  probability 1/N),then wi,n+1 = (1 - 0) wi,n + OE,,, otherwise wi,n+1 = wi,n . Since En depends only on A,, the change in  {wi,n} when Wi is sampled depends only on the current value of that subprocess. It is clear then that {wi,n} is an RTI  process, with c = I IN. And it is clear that as n-oo, the random variables wi,n , i _--- 1, 2,..., N, become independent and  identically distributed, so that  N  Jim P(w1,n < (D1,-, WN.n ~< CON) = Fj lim P(w1,n < ('i).  The case 8 = 1 leads to a non-ergodic process in all of the models considered. Consequently we deal with it as a special case,  beginning with the N element model. Before considering the various models separately, however, we note that the mean learning  curve under 8 = 1 contingencies is a nonparametric prediction of the c-O-N model, and hence is common to all three of its  two-parameter specializations. Let wn denote the mean of the N A1 response probabilities wi,n . Then P(A1,n) = E(Qvn). When 8  - 1, an easy calculation shows that  E(wi,n) = E(E(wi.n I wi,n-1)) = E(wi,n-1)  (where the inner expectation is over the possible events on trial n - 1 and the outer one is over possible values of wi,n_1).  Consequently, under 8 = 1 contingencies the c-O-N model predicts  P(A1,n) = P(A1,1),  for all n. This common prediction of the c-O-N models has been referred to as marginal constancy. Some implications of  requiring that a model predict marginal constancy  554 YELLOTT  under 8 = 1 reinforcement have been explored by Rose (1965), and Norman and Yellott (1966).  8 = 1: The N Element Model  As before, k,, denotes the number of elements conditioned to al at the beginning of trial n. Clearly in the case 8 = 1, kn =  kl , since no element can change its conditioning state on a success trial. Consequently, for a fixed value of kl the sequence  {An ; n = 1, 2,...} is a Bernoulli sequence, with P(A, = 1) = k11N. The probability of an alternation in such a sequence is  P(S. = 1 I kJ = 2 N k,(1 - N kll n = 2, 3,.... (3.2)  In general we regard kl as a random variable, with V, = (1/N) E(kl), IT2 = (1/N2) E(k12). In this case P(A,, = Vl , and  P(S. = 1) = 2(V1 - V2). (3.3)  Suppose, in particular, that a group of subjects is run for a large number of trials on an NCE schedule with el probability  7r,, and then shifted to an NCS : 8 = 1 schedule. The asymptotic distribution of the number of conditioned elements in the NCE  phase will be binomial with parameters "u and N (Atkinson and Estes, 1963), so this will also be the distribution of kl in the  8 = 1 phase. If An and Sn denote the proportions of A1 responses and alternations over the group on trial n, then E(A,,) = 7ro  , and  E(,.) = 2-0(1 - "'o) NN 1 .  (3.4)  8 = 1: The RTI Model  Rose (1965) provides a very thorough treatment of the case c = 1 (the linear model). We will confine our discussion to a few  predictions on which the RTI and N element models disagree. Let Vl = E(pl) = P(A1,1), V2,n = E(pn2), and V2 = V2,,. Then it is  easily shown that  V2,n = V1 -I- (V2 - Vl)(1 - C92)n-1. (3.5)  The convergence of the pn random variables can be measured by E(p- pn_1)2. Using (3.5),  E(pn - p.-1)2 = (VI - V2) CB(1 - CB2)n-2, (3.6)  i.e., the convergence is geometric in (1 - CB2). At the level of responses this geometric convergence is reflected in a  geometric decrease in alternation probability:  P(S= 1) = 2(1 - ce)(V, - V2)(1 - CB2)n-2. (3.7)  PROBABILITY LEARNING 555  Note that in (3.7) the quantities V1 and V2 can be regarded either as moments of a nondegenerate pl distribution, or as p and  p2 in the case of a particular sequence with initial al probability pl = p.  A comparison of (3.7) and (3.3) indicates a clear difference between the RTI and N element models. According to (3.7) the  expected proportion of alternations per trial should decrease geometrically to zero whenever the learning rate cB is positive,  whereas according to (3.3) there should be no trend at all over a sequence of success trials of any length.  8 = 1 : The N Element-Linear Model  The asymptotic behavior of the B-N model under double reward is determined by the fact that each of the response probability  processes {wi,n}, i = 1, 2,..., N, is in effect an RTI process, consequently a martingale, and hence converges to one or zero,  with  P(lim wi,n = 1 I wi.l) = wi.i .  In the limit then, each of the wi will be zero or one, and the behavior of the subject will be determined by random sampling  from a collection of what amount to conditioned elements, just as it is in the N element model. The difference between the two  models is that in the 9-N model the probability of an alternation decreases to the asymptotic value, whereas the N element  model implies that this probability is a constant over the entire sequence of success trials.  In computing P(Sn = 1) it is convenient to assume that {wi,l}N, are identically distributed and pairwise uncorrelated. This  will be true if the distribution of (wi,l is the asymptotic distribution corresponding to any NCE schedule (e.g., if the  subjects are run to asymptote on an NCE schedule before starting the 8 = 1 series), so the assumption is not unduly  restrictive. Its motivation is the fact that when the {wi,n} are initially uncorrelated they remain uncorrelated over a 8 = 1  series, which simplifies things considerably. The assumption also allows us to write V2 = E(w2,1) for i = 1, 2,..., N. To  compute P(Sn) one can show first that regardless of the initial distribution  E(A.A.-J = E[(wn-1 )2] + E (y(3.8) N2 i  and from (3.8) and the assumption just mentioned it follows that  2 n-2  E(A.A._i) = N + N _ N I V12 + (I - 6) (V2 _ N VJ) (I - JV) (3.9)  556 YELLOTT  where V1 = P(A1,1). Using (3.9), (3.1), and the definition of S,, , it follows that  P (S,, = 1) = 2V1(1 - 1"TI) \' Nil + 2 (i N B) (V, __ V2) ( 1 - v )v--2 (3.10)  The second term in (3.10) vanishes geometrically as n - oo, so that in the limit the probability of an alternation is simply  2V1(1 - Vl)[(N- 1)IN]. Assuming prior training to asymptote on an NCE schedule with rr = 'r0 , this limit becomes 2-0[(1  -'r0)(N -- l)/N], which is exactly P(S,, = 1) for the N element model under the same assumption.  This completes the discussion of the case 8 = 1. We next consider NCS schedules with 8 < 1, starting with the RTI model.  8 < 1: The R TI Model  For any c-O-N model with 0 < (cOIN) < 1, the mean learning curve in the case NCS: 8 < 1 is  P(A,.n) = 2 + (1 - A)n-1 (171,1 - 2), (3.11)  where d = [2cO(1 - 8)/N], and Vl,l = wl = P(A,,l).  Equation 3.11 follows from the fact that, for any c, 0, N:  E(wi,n+1) = 1 - 2c(1N 8)0 E(wi,n) -I- c0(1N 8) .  When 0 < cOIN < 1 this has the solution  E(wi.n) = 2 + (1 -A)n-1 [E(wi,l) -'1-2]>  and, since P(A,,n) = E(w, (3.11) follows. If c = 0 = N = 1, (3.11) holds provided 0 < 8 < 1. If 8 = 0 and c0/N is 1, the  predicted response-outcome process is an alternating sequence of the form (a,, e2), (a., el), (al , e2), -, and An is  determined by A1 . In experimental applications the learning rate is never close to one, and it is convenient to have (3.11)  hold for all 8 < 1, so in the remainder of the section we will assume 0 < cOIN < 1. In this case for every 8 < 1 (3.11) implies  lim P(A,,n) = 2. (3.12) n'.  The learning curve for the RTI model is given by (3.11) with A = c0, and Via = E(pl) = P(A,,j). Generalizing the V notation,  let Vj,n = E(pnj) and  Vj,- = limn-,. Vj,n .  To compute the conditional probability of an alternation given m consecutive success trials, note that P(S. = 1 I d n_1 ---  dn_mpn_m = p) is simply the probability  PROBABILITY LEARNING 557  of an alternation on trial m + 1 of a 8 = 1 sequence, with Vl = p. Using (3.7), it follows that  P(S. = I I An-1 ... A.,) = 2(l - c0)(1 - c02)m-1 (Vl,n_m - V2, n,), (3.13)  so that asymptotically  lim P(S,, = 1 j An_1 . Anna) = 2(1 - CO)(1 - C02)--1(2 - V2,W). (3.14)  where V2,,, can be obtained from the following difference equation:  V2.n+1 = V2,n{l - cO[4 - 30 - 48(1- 0)]}  + Vl.,n{0(28 -1) + 2(1 - 8)(1 - 0)} + C(1 - 8) 02.  (3.15)  This has the asymptotic solution:  V2,~ = 2(1 - 0)(1 - 8) + 0  2[4 - 30 - 48(1 - 0)] ' (3.16)  The conditional probability of an alternation given m successive failure trials can be shown to be  llm P(S. = I I dn_1 . do-m)  = l - 2(1 - c0){(l - x)m-1(V2,m - y) + y}, (3.17)  where  x = c0(4 - 30),  _ (2 -6)  y 2(4 - 30)  Let s(m) denote the right side of (3.17) as a function of m. Then for any 8 > 0, (V2,~ - y) > 0, and s(m) is increasing in m.  In other words, the conditional probability of an alternation, given m consecutive failure trials, increases with m. It will  be shown below that this is not the case in the N element model; there the probability is independent of m.  The last results we will present for the RTI model are the asymptotic first order sequential probabilities. These are useful  in parameter estimation.  lim P(A,,,a+1 E1,.Al,n) = 2(1 - c0)V2,. + c0,   n (3.18)     lim P(Al.n+1 E2..Al,n) = 2(l - c0)V2,., (3.19)  lim P(A,,n+1 I E2,.A2.n) = (l - c0)(1 - 2V2,.), (3.20)  lim P(A,,n+1 I E1.,,A2.n) = 1 - 2(1 - c0) V2,~ . (3.21)  558 YELLOTT  8 < l : The N Element Model  The learning curve is given by (3.11), with A = c/N and V,, --- (1lN) E(k1). The asymptotic distribution of kcan be shown to  be binomial and independent of 8   (3.22)  lim P k - k -- - k .2   Let V;,= (1/Ni) E(k,i), and 1;;_,x = lim V;" . Equation 3.22 implies   VI, 1 N+1 3+N   = (3.23 )  2 i V2.w = L3,x =   -   4N 8N   Then using (3.2) it is easily shown that   P(S. = I I An-1 ... An-m) = 2(Vl,n-m - V2,n-m),   so that asymptotically   l im P(S. 1   = 1 I A,,,-1 ... (3.24)  An-m) = I - 2 V2,~ = ZN .   Note that for the N element model, in contrast to the RTI model, the asymptotic conditional probability of an alternation  given m consecutive success trials is independent of m. (cf. Eq. 3.14.) This also holds for the conditional probability of an  alternation given m consecutive failure trials; for any m  PS N-1 c  lim  li ( n - 1 do-1 ... Jn-m) - 2N + N  (3.25)  For our purposes (3.24) and (3.25), and the corresponding Eq. (3.14) and (3.17), provide the major points of comparison  between the N element and RTI models for the case 8 < 1. The remaining results to be presented in this section are the  asymptotic first and second order sequential probabilities of the N element model for 8 < 1, and the asymptotic variance of  the total number of a1 responses in blocks of M trials. These are primarily useful in evaluating the goodness of fit of the N  element model, apart from its comparative merits vis-a-vis the RTI model. Following standard practice the trial indices are  omitted, and the sequence of events in the conditionalization is given in decreasing time order from left to right. Thus:  P(Ai I E,AkE,A,) = lim P(Ai.n I Ei,n-1Ax,-1Es,n-2Ar,n-2)'  V2 and V3 are used to denote V2,. and V3,, as given by (3.23).  P(A1 I EIA1) = 2V2, (3.26)  PROBABILITY LEARNING 559  P(Al I E2A1) C   = 2V2 - (3.27)  VV ,   P(A1 I V3 (3.28)  1 EA1E1A1)=   z   -   P(Al I E,A,EsA2) 2(V2 V3) (3.29)  =   1 -2V,   -   P(Al I E2A,ElA1) (V3 (cl (3.30)  = N)V2)   V2   -   P(Al I EjA1E2A1) V3 (2clN)V2 + (cl2N2) (3.31)  =   V2 - (cl2N)   -   -   P(Al I EjA2EjA1) (V2 Va) + (clN)(1l2 V2) (3.32)  -   _ 2   1 -2V2   - -   P(Al I EjAjEjA2) 2(V2 V3) +(4clN)(1l2 V2) + (cIN2) (3.33)  _ =   '   1 - [2V2 - (cl N)]   -   P(Al I E.AjE2A1) V3 + (cIN2)(1 + 2c)(1/2 2V2) (3 .34)  -_   V2 - (C/-'V 2N )   -   - -   P(A1 I EjA2E2A1) V2 V3 + (1 IN) cV2 (1/2N2) c(1 c) (3.35)  =   7   1/2 + (1 /2N) - V2   n+M (3.36)  lim var A; = 4 + 2Q [V2 - 4 (1 + A)],   n-> -   i=n+1   where  _ [_1- PM-1 ] - L+1 Ni_1~  1 - ~ i=1 Z -1- 2c(1-8). N  Note that this list contains only 10 of the 20 possible first- and second-order sequential probabilities. The remaining 10 can  be obtained from those given by substituting A2 for A1 , A1 for A,, E2 for El , and El for E2 , in each of the Eqs. 3.26-3.35.  Thus, for example,  P(A2 I EjA2) = P(Al I E2A1) (Eq. 3.27), P(A2 I E2A2ElA2) = P(Al I EjAjE2A1)  (Eq. 3.31), etc.  560 YELLOTT  8 < 1: The N Element-Linear :VZodel  The learning curve is given by (3.11) with c = 1 and 61,1 = E(wl) = P(Al,l).  The asymptotic probability of an alternation given ni consecutive success trials is  - . 1  lim P(Sn = 1 dn_1 .. do 1 (1 - B) 1 e2 N _- 2N + 2 N (2 - f'2,)(1  n-> x  (3.37)  where  V2,. = lim E(w,). n  Equation Equation (3.37) indicates that the asymptotic conditional probability of an alternation decreases geometrically to  the N element model value of [(N - 1)12N]. It is clear that V2,. for the B-N model will be the same function of B and 8 as  V2,, in the RTI model (Eq. 3.16), since the latter is independent of c and we have already seen that {w2,n}n 1 can be regarded  as an RTI process with c = 1/N.  The following results are useful in parameter estimation:  lim P(A,,n I Al.n-,E'l.n-1) = n  lim P(A,,n I Al,n-jE2,n-1) = n  2 (1 B   - (3.38)  N ) z. +   N,   2 (1 - (3.39)  N ) z. ,   where  z. = lim E[(ffn)2]. n, x  4. AN EXPERIMENT WITH NONCONTINGENT SUCCESS SCHEDULES  The last section contained a number of predictions for NCS experiments based on the N element, RTI, and N element-linear  models-the three two-parameter specializations of the c-B-N model. It was shown that each of these models predicts marginal  constancy in the case 8 = 1, and, in the case 8 < 1, each of them predicts that P(A,,n) --* 2 as n -~ oc, regardless of the  initial distribution of response probability. In addition, it was shown that the models disagree in certain of their  first-order predictions; most importantly, in their predictions concerning the effects of a sequence of success trials on the  probability of a response alternation. We now report an experiment designed, first of all, to test the common implications of  the c-B-N family, and secondly, assuming that the common predictions do well, to determine whether any one of the  two-parameter members of that family is differentially supported.  PROBABILITY LEARNING  561  EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN  Two NCS schedules were studied: 8 = .8 and 8 = 1. Each of these schedules was employed in a single block of trials, with the  two NCS blocks forming two phases of a standard binary prediction experiment. The subject's task was to predict which of two  letters, "X" or "Y", would appear in a display window. Each trial began with the occurrence of a "ready" signal; as soon as  this signal appeared the subject made his prediction by pressing one of two keys, and following his response either "X" or "Y"  appeared briefly in the display window. The experiment consisted of 450 such trials and took about 45 min. Subjects were paid  a fixed amount for participation, but there were no payoffs for correct responses, or penalties for errors.  From the experimenter's point of view the 450 prediction trials were divided into six phases, each phase corresponding to a  particular reinforcement schedule. The schedule and number of trials in each phase are indicated in Table 1.  TABLE 1  REINFORCEMENT SCHEDULES IN PHASES I THROUGH VI  Phase Schedules Trials  I NCE: 7T = .5 1-20  II NCE: 7T = .8 21-70  III NCE: Tr = .2 71-150  IV NCS: 8 = .8 151-350  V NCE: 7r = .8 351-400  VI NCS: 8 = 1.0 401-450  The Y event was arbitrarily designated eI , so that in the NCE phases, 7r refers to the probability of a Y event. The  randomizations in each schedule were constrained by phase length; in each NCE phase the proportion of Y events was exactly 7r,  and in each NCS phase the proportion of successes was exactly 8. For each phase, every subject's outcome sequence was an  independent random permutation of a fixed sequence of events; either X's and Y's, or successes and failures.  The subjects were given no indication of the existence of distinct phases in the experiment, except what could be learned from  the response-event sequence itself. The trial format was exactly the same on NCE and NCS trials, and the transitions between  phases were not marked in any way. In running himself as a subject, the experimenter could not determine with any certainty  where one phase had ended and another begun. It was expected that the fact that all trials were ostensibly the same would lead  subjects to employ the same strategies in both the NCE and NCS phases of the experiment.  562 YELLOTT  Apparatus. The experiment made use of an automated verbal associative learning apparatus at the Institute for Mathematical  Studies in the Social Sciences, Stanford University. The subject sat alone in a soundproofed, air-conditioned room which  contained stimulus display and response recording equipment. An adjoining room contained an IBM 526 Summary Punch and  additional storage and timing equipment. On a table directly in front of the subject was a response panel containing two ;1 x  l -in. response keys, 3 in. apart. These keys could be illuminated to remind the subject which response he had made. The left  hand key was labeled X, the right hand key, Y. On a second table 5.5 ft away were two stimulus display boxes, one on top of  the other. The front of each box was a 2 x 12 in. display window in which alphanumeric characters (Sylvania Electroluminescent  displays) could be made to appear to serve as the ready signal and event stimulus. The ready signal on each trial was a minus  sign "-" in the center of the upper display window; the event stimulus was an "X" or "Y" appearing in the left-most position  of the lower display window.  Procedure. The sequence of events on every trial was as follows: At the beginning of each trial both response keys and both  display windows were dark. The trial began with the ready signal appearing in the upper display window. The apparatus then  waited for the subject's response. As soon as the subject pressed a response key this key was illuminated, and the apparatus  processed the response to determine which event (X or Y) to present. The event stimulus was then displayed. The delay between  the response and the appearance of the X or Y event was 1.5 sec. The event stimulus remained on for 1 sec. At the end of this  time both it and the illuminated response key went off, and after a 1.25-sec interval the ready signal appeared to begin the  next trial. Assuming a 2-sec latency, the time between one ready signal onset and the next was 5.75 sec.  On arrival at the experimental room a subject was seated in front of the response panel and asked to read the following  instructions:  "This experiment consists of a series of trials. On each trial exactly one of two possible events, "X" or "Y", will occur.  Every trial will begin with the appearance of two small illuminated lines in the upper display window in front of you, as  shown in Fig. 1 below. [Note: Figs. 1 and 2 were schematic drawings of the stimulus displays.] This is the signal for you to  indicate your prediction by pressing either the X or the Y button on your response panel. After you make your prediction it  will be automatically recorded by the IBM equipment, and the actual trial event-either an X or a Y-will appear in the lower  display window as shown in Fig. 2. If the trial event agrees with your prediction you have made a correct response. The upper  and lower display windows will extinguish after a brief period, and the next trial will begin shortly thereafter. It is  important that you indicate your prediction as rapidly as possible after the signal light appears at the start of the trial,  otherwise the experiment may run overtime.  PROBABILITY LEARNING 56)3  We will not give you any information on how best to make correct predictions, except to urge you to pay close attention to the  event on each trial. If you have any questions about the procedure, please ask the experimenter. There will be two short  breaks during the session."  After the subject finished reading, he was asked if he had any questions. If he did, these were answered by paraphrasing the  appropriate section of the instructions. The experimenter then ran through several practice trials (NCE: iT = .5 trials; not  part of Phase I) to make sure that the task was completely clear to the subject. As soon as this was certain the experimenter  reminded the subject to respond "as quickly as possible," and then returned to the control room. The sequence of experimental  trials began immediately and continued without interrruption for at least 250 trials. At a variable point between trials 250  and 280 the sequence was stopped to allow a 2-min rest period. The trial sequence then began again and continued without  further interruptions through trial 450. As soon as the last trial had ended the subject was questioned to determine whether  he had become suspicious of the task as a result of the final 8 = 1 phase. This interview was quite informal, but it always  began with, "I'd like you to tell me on what basis you were making your predictions." This question appeared to be sufficient  to partition the subjects into two distinctly different groups: those who had recognized that their responses (in Phase VI)  were actually determining the outcomes (5 out of 55), and those who either had not noticed anything especially different at  the end of the experiment, or who thought that they had finally solved the problem (50 out of 55). Subjects in the first group  were questioned further to try to determine what had caused them to become suspicious; subjects in the second group were asked  if they had managed to find any "pattern" in the outcome sequence "especially towards the end of the experiment." (Some  volunteered this information before being asked.) If a subject answered that he had, he was asked to describe the pattern and  the information was recorded. Finally, the experimenter explained the actual nature of the task, paid the subject, and  dismissed him.  Subjects. Fifty-five subjects were obtained from the student employment offices of Stanford University and a nearby junior  college. Each subject was paid $ 1.75 for his participation. The subjects were students; they ranged from first quarter  freshmen to graduate students (none in psychology). Five subjects' data were not included in the analysis because they  indicated in the postexperimental interview that they had recognized the 8 = 1 contingencies in Phase VI.  RESULTS  Data bearing on the predictions common to all c-B-N models are examined first. Figure 1 shows the mean learning curve for the  entire experiment. Each point re-  564 YELLOW  presents the proportion of al responses made by all 50 subjects in a given 10-trial block. To a first approximation the data  are consistent with the predictions of the c-B-N model: The learning curve begins in the neighborhood of .5 in Phase I, rises  toward the probability matching value of .8 in Phase II, decreases towards the matching value of .2 in Phase III, and then  moves back to .5 as predicted in Phase IV. In Phase V the curve rises again towards .8, this time somewhat more smoothly, and  then remains quite constant during Phase VI. The data for Phases IV and VI are of particular  PHASE, PHASE PHASE 11 PHASE' PHASE  I II III Y 1  =5~~ 7r=.8 7r=2 d=.8 7r=.B 3=1.0  40- 90- 140- 190- 240- 290- 340- 390- 44050 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450  TRIALS  FIG. 1. Proportion of a, responses in 10-trial blocks: broken vertical lines separate phases; horizontal lines indicate the  predicted asymptote in each phase.  interest. Over the five 10-trial blocks of Phase VI the al proportions were (starting with the first block) .73,30,32,33, and  .72. These values clearly support the prediction of marginal constancy under 8 = l contingencies (Eq. 3.1); there is no trend  in response probability over trials and all the values are satisfactorily close to the mean of .72 (the predicted line in Fig.  1 is at .72). The prediction lim,,,. P(A,, n) = .5 for 8 = .8 was also confirmed to a good approximation; the overall  proportion of al responses in the last 100 trials of Phase IV was .486, and in the last 50 trials, .494. Individual subject  response probabilities were distributed fairly symmetrically  PROBABILITY LEARNING  565  around .5: Over the last 100 trials 21 subjects had al probabilities in the interval .41-.50, 15 in the interval .51-.60, and  the remaining 14 subjects were scattered fairly evenly over the other eight intervals. To anticipate a bit, the variance of  this distribution was quite accurately predicted by the N element model.  Turning now to results which ought to differentiate between the c-0, c-N, and O-N models, it is first necessary to estimate  the learning rate parameter [i.e., the appropriate specialization of (cO/N)] for each model. On the basis of Eqs. 3.18 and  3.19, 3.26 and 3.27, and 3.38 and 3.39, this parameter can be estimated for all the models by taking the difference between  the asymptotic sequential statistics is(AI I EiAI) and P(A, I E,AI) in Phase IV. The last 100 trials of Phase IV were assumed  (both for this purpose and in subsequent analyses) to be asymptotic, and the estimate obtained on this basis was  (cO N) = .175. This value is comfortably close to estimates obtained in other experiment: Suppes and Atkinson (1960) estimated  a learning rate of .174 from data generated by an NCE: rr = .6 schedule, and Friedman et al. (1964) reported an estimate of  .172 based on an NCE: Tr = .80 sequence. (These estimates were also based on asymptotic sequential statistics.)  Now, since c02 >  ~_ C202, according to the RTI model (Eq. 3.7) the probability of an alternation on the nth trial of Phase VI should decrease  at least as fast as (.97)n-2, i.e.,  at least as fast as [1 - (CO)2]n-2. Consequently, according to the RTI model the proportion of alternations on Trial 50 of  Phase VI should be no more than 23 % of the  TABLE 2  PROPORTION OF ALTERNATION RESPONSES IN 7 TRIAL BLOCKS: PHASE VI  Trials Proportion  of alternations  402-408 .257  409-415 .271  416-422 .226  423-429 .283  430-436 .242  437-443 .223  444-450 .242  corresponding proportion on the second trial. According to the N element model, of course, there should be no tendency for  alternations to decrease over these trials. Table 2 shows the proportion of alternations in Phase VI averaged in seven-trial  blocks. The data are clearly inconsistent with the RTI model: The maximum deviation of any proportion from the mean of .250 is  .03, and the last entry is .242, whereas  566 YELLOTT  according to the RTI model it should be around .06. Moreover there is no evidence of any consistent decrease over trials; the  rank order correlation between block number and ordinal position in a ranking based on proportion of alternations is .43,  which is not significant (p > .10). Consequently there is no evidence to support the B-N model's prediction of a monotonic  decrease in alternation probability (Eq. 3.10).  Examination of the effects of consecutive success trials in the 8 = .8 Phase IV leads to the same conclusion. The RTI model  prediction here is given by Eq. 3.14. On the basis of this equation and the parameter estimate ce = .175 the RTI model implies  that P(Sn = 1 do I) (.97)--l P(Sn An _I). For m = 10 this implies that the estimated asymptotic conditional probability of an  alternation given 10 success trials ought to be no more than about 75 % of the corresponding estimate for 1 success trial.  Table 3 gives the asymptotic proportions of alternations following m consecutive success trials for m = 1, 2,..., 10. On the  basis of the entry .313 for m = 1, the RTI  TABLE 3  OBSERVED CONDITIONAL ALTERNATION PROBABILITIES: PHASE IV, LAST 100 TRIALS  m P(SI dn_1) Observations  1 .313 4021  2 .322 3200  3 .326 2555  4 .335 2039  5 .330 1637  6 .326 1317  7 .329 1062  8 .317 871  9 .312 711  10 .311 578  AV .322   model predicts that the entry for m = 10 should be on the order of .23; the observed value is .311. The rank order correlation  between m and P(S~ J,'-1) is .3, which is not significant, and none of the entries differs from the mean of .322 by more  than .013. These results are entirely consistent with the N element model prediction of a constant alternation probability  (Eq. 3.24), and quite inconsistent with the RTI model prediction of a geometric decrease with m.  It appears then that the RTI model can be rejected as incompatible with the results of Phases IV and VI. The case against the  N element-linear model is naturally not as strong, since the issue between that model and the N element model is less sharp.  However, there is no evidence in Tables 2 and 3 for the decreases in alternation probability predicted by the B-N model, and  these would be the only justification for  PROBABILITY LEARNING  567  accepting it in preference to the N element model. Consequently we reject it also, and proceed to a more detailed evaluation  of the N element model. For this purpose the parameters c and N have been re-estimated in a manner that uses somewhat more of  the data than our earlier estimation. To estimate N we make use of the fact that each of the entries in Table 3 is an estimate  of (N - 1)l2N, (cf. Eq. 3.24); taking the average of these values leads to the estimate N = 2.78. This is to be interpreted as  an estimate of the average value of (the integer) N across subjects. (We note by way of comparison that the estimates of N  obtained in the previously cited experiments by Suppes and Atkinson, and Friedman et al., were 3.48 and 1.84, respectively.)  To estimate c, we use the fact that for 8 < 1, the difference between P(S,n = 1 I d re_I) and P(S= 1 I dn_1) is equal to c/N  (Eqs. 3.24 and 3.25). The observed asymptotic value of P(S,z = 1 1 d1) was .494 (based on 979 observations). From this we  obtain a c/N estimate of.173, which is virtually identical to the previous estimate of.175. Combining these c/N and N  estimates we have c = .48. These estimates will be used in subsequent computations of predicted values.  Table 4 shows the predicted and observed values of a number of asymptotic sequential statistics from Phase IV. All first and  second order sequential probabilities are included, except those for which the observed proportions in the last 100 trials of  Phase IV were based on fewer than 125 observations.  TABLE 4  N ELEMENT MODEL PREDICTIONS AND OBSERVED SEQUENTIAL DATA:  100 TRIALS (c/N = .173, N = 2.78)  PHASE IV, LAST Pred. Obs. No. of    observations  P(Al ( EIAI) .680 .674 1918  P(Al E2A1) .507 .499 493  P(Al EIA2) .493 .488 486  P(Al I E2A2) .320 .301 2103  P(Al E1A,EIA1) .760 .730 1012  P(Al E2A2E2A2) .240 .254 1165  P(A1 ElAIE2A2) .500 .538 507  P(Al E2A2EIA1) .500 .438 516  P(A, I E2A,EIA1) .580 .500 264  P(Al ElA2E2A2) .420 .473 294  P(Al E1A1E2A1) .681 .677 198  P(AlI E2A2EIA2) .319 .282 195  P(Al EIAIEIA2) .675 .740 181  P(Al E2AzE2A1) .325 .257 206  350     Var Y A206. 233. 50  n=251  480/6/3-I6  568 YELLOTT  By and large the fit between predicted and observed values in Table 4 is quite good; the largest deviation is .08, and as the  number of observations increases the deviations tend to become smaller. The fact that the model predicts a variance of the  proper order of magnitude is particularly impressive; this prediction is very sensitive to small changes in the parameter  values. (If the variance prediction were computed in terms of the proportion of al responses over the 100 trial block it would  be .021, as compared to an observed value of .023.) In evaluating the goodness of fit of the model to the Phase IV data, it  should be recalled that Table 3 also contains relevant asymptotic sequential statistics: P(S, = 1 I A,'J for 10 values of m.  The model predicts all 10 of these values with a maximum deviation of .02.  A persistent problem in fitting c-B-N models to binary prediction data has been that the learning rate parameter estimated  from asymptotic statistics normally does not permit a good prediction of the acquisition portion of the learning curve (see,  e.g., Friedman et al., 1964). Typically (although not always) it has been found that the learning rate parameter needed to fit  the learning curve is about one-third the value of the same parameter as estimated from asymptotic sequential statistics. In  this respect the present experiment is something of an exception; the asymptotic estimate clN = .173 fit the learning curve  for Phase IV relatively well: Except for two points which could not be fit by any choice of parameters the discrepancies  between predicted and observed values in the first 11 blocks of Phase IV were all <_ .02. Interestingly, however, and more in  line with previous research, cIN = .173 would not fit the learning curves in the NCE phases (11, 111, and V). There the  required value was, in fact, about one-third of .173: an adequate fit of the first four points of the Phase V curve was  obtained with c/N = .058. This is the value that was estimated from the acquisition phase of the 77 = .8 series of the  Friedman et al. experiment-the same series which yielded an asymptotic cIN estimate of .174.  We turn next to an evaluation of the N element model predictions for Phase VI-the 3 = 1 phase. We saw earlier that the trial  by trial proportions of al response and alternations computed over all subjects (Fig. l and Table 2) were consistent with the  N element model. At the individual subject level the model makes the very strong prediction that each subject's response  sequence is a Bernoulli process. To evaluate this prediction chi-square tests were performed on the Phase VI data to test for  stationarity over trials in the individual subject response probabilities, and to determine whether the individual response  sequences exhibited the predicted trial by trial independence. In the test for stationarity (df = 1) six subjects had X2  values significant at the .05 level. The total X2 for all subjects was 58.52, which is not quite significant at the .05 level  for df = 40. (Ten subjects made all X's or all Y's in Phase VI and hence did not figure into this test.) The test for response  independence led to somewhat sharper results. The total X2 for all subjects (df = 80) was 208, and six subjects had X2 's  significant at the .01 level. The total X2 for these six alone (df = 12) was 122. These results suggest a more serious  deviation from the model on the part of some subjects.  PROBABILITY LEARNING 56)9  As it turns out, these deviations can be observed quite directly in the response protocols themselves, and in the relationship  between these protocols and the subjects' descriptions of their own behavior.  In the interview at the end of Phase VI, several subjects volunteered the information that they had solved the prediction  problem "near the end of the experiment" by discovering a "pattern" in the event sequence. By this they meant either that the  sequence appeared to be formed by repeating a fixed cycle of events-e.g.,  ... elele2 elele2 ...  or that the events came in runs which were of increasing, but predictable length, e.g.,  ea e, 72e2 el ~e2e2 el  We will refer to reported patterns of the first type as periodic patterns, and to the others as aperiodic patterns. (The cycle  of a periodic pattern may contain more than two runs, e.g.,  Of course the patterns discovered by these subjects were entirely their own creations, since the event sequence in Phase VI  was simply a reflection of their responses. For just this reason they are of particular interest; we would expect the subject  to create a pattern of some sort if his behavior in the prediction situation were determined by an effort to find such a  pattern, i.e., if he were trying out plausible patterns in an attempt to find one that fit the event sequence.  Figure 2 shows each subject's Phase VI response protocol as a sequence of 1's and 0's. The 1's denote Y predictions, the 0's X  predictions. Subject 10 reported that towards the end of the experiment he discovered the periodic pattern <5Y, 2X> ... (i.e.,  the periodic pattern consisting of a repeating cycle of five consecutive Y's followed by two X's.) Figure 2 shows that his  responses followed this pattern throughout trials 7-50 of Phase VI. Using a bit more ingenuity, subject 12 discovered the  periodic pattern (10Y, X, 9Y, X,..., 2Y, X, Y, X>, and his responses correspond to this pattern beginning with trial 17 of  Phase VI. (He starts at 5Y). Altogether 26 subjects claimed to have discovered some pattern in the event sequence "near the  end of the experiment." (This does not include subjects who reported "all X" or "all Y.") These reports were made with varying  degrees of conviction and precision; some were volunteered and others came only after the experimenter specifically mentioned  the possibility of patterns. The protocols of these 26 subjects were examined to determine whether they had actually responded  according to the patterns they claimed to have discovered. A subject's pattern was classified as confirmed if the last two  complete runs of responses in his protocol, together with the final run (i.e., the run terminated by the  570 YELLOTT  TRIALS  Sub 1 25 50  1 10 L 110 110 10100 1000 LOOOOO 10000000 1000000000 10000000 2 10010001000010000010000001.000000010000000010000000 -3  111.11111110100111111111101001111111111010011111111 4 110111111111U1111111110111111111011111111101111111 5  11111111111011o0111.1111111011111111101111110111101 6 10010101111111111111111111111111111111111111111111 7  11111111111111111101111111111111111111101111111111 8 111111011001oo000000001010011011111111101001101000 9  10111111111111111110111111111011l11111101111111111 10 11111011111o0111110o11111o011111001111100111110o11 11  11101111111011111o11111110111111111110111111111111 12 11010111111111101111101111011101101011111111110111 13  11111111010111111111101111111110111111011110110100 14 01111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111 15  01101011011011011010110110110110110110110110110110 16 11111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111 17  00110000111100000000011111111100000000001111111111 18 00000000001000010101010101001110000111111100000011 19  00110011001100110011001100110011001100110011001100 20 11111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111 21  10011110101011111111101010101010101010101010101010 22 11111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111 23  00001111111111000111111111000000011111111110000000 24 110101000000000101011.11111111010100000000000010101 25  11111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111 26 11010100100001000000000010000000000100000100000000 27  00010001110000000001011110000101011111100011000111 28 0011110011101110011101110011101110011101110U111o11 29  00000000001111000111111100111111001111110011111001 30 10010111111100101111110010111110010111111001011111 31  10111011111111111100000000011111111000001111011111 32 11111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111 33  11111111111011001001110111111111111111110100101111 34 10011111111111111101110011111111111111011100111111 35  11111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111 36 11101010010110110100001001010110100000011011010111 37  11111111111111111101011011111111111111010111111111 38 11111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111 39  11111011111100111110011111110011111110011111100111 40 01111011111011111101111111011111111011111111110111 41  11111111101011011101111011111011111101111111011111 42 11111111010101111111111110101011111111111101010111 43  10101111100010111111001011111110101000111101000001 44 11111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111 45  F1c. 2. Phase VI response protocols: 1 = Y, 0 = X.  end of the experiment) formed a sequence consistent with any portion of the reported pattern. Thus, for example, subject 39  claimed to have discovered the periodic solution <6Y, 2X>, and this was confirmed; subject 34 reported the periodic pattern  <2Y, 3X>, and this was not confirmed. On this basis 18 of the 26 reported patterns were confirmed. The patterns themselves  covered a wide range of complexity and sophistication. Subject 21, for example, reported solving the problem with a simple  alternation YXYX..., while subject 1 reported a periodic pattern based on the first six prime numbers: <X, Y, 2X, Y, 3X, Y,  5X, Y, 7X, Y, 11X, Y>. (In the protocol it appears he either miscounted at 11X or mistook 9 for a prime.) An example of an  PROBABILITY LEARNING 571  aperiodic pattern is provided by subject 2: he reported X, Y, 2X, Y, 3X, Y... and this describes his protocol.  It would be difficult to give any summary characterization of the various patterns that subjects reported. Some idea of the  range of complexity is provided by examples already cited. In the case of the periodic patterns the proportion of Y's in the  repeating cycle could be calculated; the mean of these proportions across all reported patterns (including confirmed and  nonconfirmed) was .68. With "all X" and "all Y" included as patterns; the proportion of Y's across all reported patterns was  .76. It will be recalled that the schedule in Phase V was NCE: 7r = .8; consequently there is a suggestion that the patterns  discovered by the subjects, or at least the patterns that seemed plausible to the subjects, tended to probability match in the  mean. This would be expected if the effect of an NCE schedule were to restrict subjects "working hypotheses" to those that are  consistent with the observed sequence of (noncontingent) events; either in a general sense (e.g., matching the observed  proportions of el and e2 events), or specifically in the sense of being compatible with the actual sequence of previous events  over the last few trials. However, it should be noted that there was a good deal of variability in the proportions; they  ranged from zero to 1.00.  DISCUSSION  The results of the experiment can be summarized as follows. First, the mean learning curve predictions common to all c-B-N  models were confirmed for the NCS schedules 8 = .8 and 8 = 1.0. Second, under NCS reinforcement consecutive success trials did  not produce any decrease in the probability of a response alternation. In this respect the predictions of the N element model  proved to be correct and those of the RTI model incorrect. Third, the N element model predicted the asymptotic sequential  statistics of the NCS: 8 = .8 phase with considerable accuracy using an estimate of the learning rate parameter cf N (.173)  which was virtually identical to estimates obtained in previous experiments by Friedman et al. (1964; c/N = .172) and Suppes  and Atkinson (1960; c/N = .174). Fourth, under NCS : 8 = 1 contingencies a number of subjects fixated on deterministic  response patterns consisting of runs of al's and a2's. In some cases these patterns formed periodic sequences (e.g., <5a1 ,  2a2 , 5a1 , 2a2 ...>), in other cases aperiodic sequences (e.g., <al , a2 , 2a1 , a2 ,..., nal , a,,...>). For convenience in  the balance of the discussion we refer to these structured response patterns which emerged under 8 = 1 contingencies as  "superstitious solutions." The analogy to superstitious behavior in operant conditioning does not seem too farfetched: In both  cases reinforcement is not contingent on any particular configuration of responses, but subjects nevertheless fixate on more  or less complex, idiosyncratic, response patterns (Skinner, 1948).  As far as the original problem of deciding between the N element and linear (i.e.,  572 YELLOW  RTI) models is concerned, these results are unequivocal: the N element model is clearly superior. The data of Phase IV (8 =  .8) are particularly relevant to the conclusion, since the experimental conditions in that phase were similar to those in an  ordinary prediction task with noncontingent events and the N element model was able to provide a good account of all aspects  of the data. The fact that the parameter estimates from Phase IV were equal to those obtained under NCE reinforcement in other  experiments suggests that the behavior observed in this experiment was generated by learning mechanisms common to all  prediction experiments with simple contingent schedules. On these grounds it seems reasonable to expect that the N element  model will in general be superior to the RTI model in any direct comparison. One basis for comparison which was not exploited  in this study is provided by Eqs. 3.17 and 3.25. These give the respective predictions of the RTI and N element models for the  probability of a response alternation following m consecutive noncontingent failures. A comparison similar to that provided by  Phase IV of this experiment could easily be achieved using, e.g., an NCS : 8 = .2 schedule.  The results of Phase VI (8 = 1), however, raise some doubts as to the usefulness of further comparisons between models of the  c-B-N family, except perhaps in the context of psychophysical experiments. The highly structured response sequences produced  by a number of subjects in that phase clearly cannot be explained by any of the c-B-N models (cf. in particular subjects 2, 3,  4, 10, 15, 19, 21, 28, 34, and 41). They suggest instead that the underlying learning processes in even this very simple  prediction task are fairly complex, and that the good fit of the N element model under certain schedules is not so much the  solution to a problem as a problem in itself. It has, of course, always been recognized that path independent models of the  c-B-N variety cannot provide a general theory of probability learning because they do not permit the subject to learn  deterministic event sequences involving alternations. But one might have hoped that these models, or something similar, would  be at least asymptotically adequate for experiments with simple contingent schedules in which there is no reinforcement  pressure to support more complex strategies. The results of Phase VI suggest instead that the mechanisms which enable subjects  to learn deterministic sequences remain active throughout any prediction experiment, even when the reinforcement schedule does  not allow them to be of any use to the subject. Of course, it is not clear whether this is true for all subjects, since not  every subject fixated on a superstitious solution during the 50 8 = 1 trials of Phase VI. Further investigation will be  required to determine whether this is due to individual differences, or simply to a random selection caused by the relatively  small number of 8 = 1 trials.  The occurrence of superstitious solutions under 8 = 1 contingencies is not entirely surprising. Arima's experiment (1965)  apparently led to the same result, although his description (cf. Sec. 1) suggests that the solutions generated after 50 Tr =  .5 trials were somewhat simpler than those which appeared here after 400 trials on a variety of schedules. It has often been  reported that subjects in binary prediction tasks claim  PROBABILITY LEARNING 573  to be searching for patterns in the event sequence (e.g., Jarvik, 1951; Nies, 1962), and Feldman (1963) has attempted to  account for binary prediction behavior with a simulation model based solely on hypothesis testing mechanisms. Feldman's  experimental situation is somewhat different than the standard prediction task, since his subjects were required to provide a  rationale for each response. The results of Phase VI make it unlikely that hypothesis testing alone can account for ordinary  probability learning, since not all subjects fixated on superstitious solutions, and even those who eventually fixated did not  always do so as soon as S = 1 contingencies were introduced (e.g., subject 21). It may be that sporadic hypothesis testing can  account for this variability, but in that case some supplementary mechanism would be required to account for responses that  occur between hypotheses.  As an alternative to hypothesis testing, one might suppose that superstitious solutions arise simply as the result of  straightforward conditioning processes such as those suggested by Burke and Estes (1957) and, more recently, Gambino and Myers  (1967). In these models probability learning involves simply the conditioning of al and a2 responses to event sequences of a  fixed length (the "K-span" model in Rose and Vitz's, 1966, terminology), or to runs of homogeneous events (in Gambino and  Myers' extension of a model proposed originally by Restle, 1961, Ch. 6). Neither of these models can account for the entire  range of periodic solutions observed in Phase VI, and they are also known to be inadequate for experiments with deterministic  (Restle, 1967) and quasi-deterministic (Rose and Vitz, 1966) event sequences. But it is not difficult to imagine that a model  similar to that of Gambino and Myers could be devised which would account for periodic solutions and also predict the standard  statistical results of experiments with simple contingent schedules (i.e., probability matching, positive recency, and so on).  In fact, it can be shown that if the model proposed by Gambino and Myers is altered to allow generalization only after  incorrect responses, simulated subjects fixate on periodic superstitious solutions of the form anal , nag , Mal , nag ,...) in  a way that closely resembles the behavior of human subjects. (Generalization can be permitted to occur only on errors because  generalization on successes precludes fixation on patterns other than "all al ," "all a2 ," and "ala,ala2...... ) However it  is difficult to see how any such model could account for fixation on aperiodic solutions, even if we allow sequences of runs  to operate as the effective stimuli, as Restle (1967) has suggested. For if we suppose that, for example, subject 41 would  have continued with the aperiodic sequence <a, , a2, 2a1 , a2 ,..., nal , a2...> for an indefinite number of trials, then it  is necessary to assume that the appropriate responses must somehow have become conditioned to run sequences which the subject  had never previously experienced. Considerations of this sort suggest that a complete theory may need to include mechanisms by  which the subject can make long range predictions, perhaps in the form of hypothesized algorithms capable of generating  infinite sequences of events.  One other point seems worth mentioning. Restle (1966) reported experiments in  574  YELLOTT  which the event sequences contained both random and deterministic features. In one version the sequence consisted entirely of  runs of length 2 and length 5. After a run of 2e7 events the run either continued (with probability .5) or broke off. In this  experiment then subjects could learn to always predict an e2 following 5e1's, to always predict an e1 following a run of  4e1's, and so on. They could not learn anything useful about what to do after a run of 2e1's. Rather surprisingly, subjects  did not learn to perform perfectly on runs of length 5; even after 600 trials the probability of incorrectly predicting  another e1 after 5e1's remained greater than .3 and the learning curve appeared asymptotic. One way to explain this failure is  to suppose that subjects were not able to discriminate perfectly between runs of length 5 and shorter runs. But in this case  subjects could not maintain stable periodic superstitious solutions of the form <5a1 , 2a2>, and the results of Phase VI  suggest that in fact they can (e.g., subject 10). This discrepancy may simply be due to individual differences in memory span.  Another possibility is that prediction errors, which were unavoidable in Restle's experiment because of the random choice  point at runs of length 2, have a particularly disruptive effect on memory. According to this interpretation a subject could  have essentially perfect recall for the current run if he had predicted all of its events correctly, but incorrect predictions  could cause him to lose track of the actual current run length.  REFERENCES  ARIMA, J. K. Human probability learning with forced training trials and certain and uncertain outcome choice trials. Journal  of Experimental Psychology, 1965, 70, 43-51.  ATKINSON, R. C., AND ESTES, W. K. Stimulus sampling theory. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of  mathematical psychology. Vol. 2. New York: Wiley, 1963. Pp. 121-268.  BURKE, C. J., AND ESTES, W. K. A component model for stimulus variables in discrimination learning. Psychometrika, 1957, 22,  133-145.  BUSH, R. R., AND MOSTELLER, F. Stochastic models for learning. New York: Wiley, 1955.  ESTES, W. K. Probability learning. In A. W. Melton (Ed.), Categories of human learning. New York: Academic Press, 1964.  ESTES, W. K., AND STRAUGHAN, J. H. Analysis of a verbal conditioning situation in terms of statistical learning theory.  Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1954, 47, 225-234.  ESTES, W. K., AND SuppEs, P. Foundations of linear models. In R. R. Bush and W. K. Estes (Eds.), Studies in mathematical  learning theory. Stanford: Stanford Univer. Press, 1959. Pp. 137-179.  FELDMAN, J. Simulation of behavior in the binary choice experiment. In E. A. Feigenbaum and J. Feldman (Eds.), Computers and  thought. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1963. Pp. 329-346. FRIEDMAN, M. P., BURKE, C. J., COLE, M., KELLER, L., MILWARD, R. B., AND  ESTES, W. K. Two-choice behavior under extended training with shifting probabilities of reinforcement. In R. C. Atkinson  (Ed.), Studies in mathematical psychology. Stanford: Stanford Univer. Press, 1964. Pp. 250-316.  GAMBINO, B., AND MYERS, J. L. Role of event runs in probability learning. Psychological Review, 1967,74,410-419.  PROBABILITY LEARNING 575  GREENO, J. G., AND STEINER, T. E. Markovian processes with identifiable states: general considerations and application to  all-or-none learning. Psychometrika, 1964, 29, 309-333. JARVIK, M. E. Probability learning and a negative recency effect in  the serial anticipation of alternating symbols. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1951, 41, 291-297.  KHINCHIN, A. 1. Mathematical foundations of information theory. New York: Dover, 1957. LAMPERTI, J., AND SUPPES, P. Chains of  infinite order and their applications to learning theory. Pacific Journal of Mathematics, 1959, 9, 739-754.  NIEs, R. C. Prediction of sequential two-choice decisions from run events. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1962, 64,  430-433.  NORMAN, M. F. Incremental learning on random trials. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1964, 1, 336-350.  NORMAN, M. F., AND YELLOTT, J. 1. Probability matching. Psychometrika, 1966, 31, 43-69. RESTLE, F. Psychology of judgment and  choice. New York: Wiley, 1961.  RESTLE, F. Run structure and probability learning: Disproof of Restle's model. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1966, 72,  382-389.  RESTLE, F. Grammatical analysis of the prediction of binary events. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1967, 6,  17-25.  ROSE, R. M. Models for experiments with two complementary reinforcing events. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of  Pennsylvania, 1965.  ROSE, R. M., AND VITZ, P. C. The role of event runs in probability learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1966, 72,  751-760.  SKINNER, B. F. "Superstition" in the pidgeon. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1948, 3, 168-172.  STERNBERG, S. H. Stochastic learning theory. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical  psychology. Vol. 2. New York: Wiley, 1963. Pp. 1-120.  SUPPES, P., AND ATKINSON, R. C. Markov learning models for multi-person interactions. Stanford: Stanford Univer. Press, 1960.  YELLOTT, J. I., JR. Some effects of noncontingent success in human probability learning. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,  Stanford University, 1965. (Available also as Technical Report No. 89 of the Institute for Mathematical Studies in the Social  Sciences, Stanford University.)  RECEIVED: May 26, 1968