10.1016/0022-2496(69)90003-0
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 6, 209-239 (1969)  Embedding Fields: A Theory of Learning with Physiological Implications'  STEPHEN GROSSBERG  Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139  A learning theory in continuous time is derived herein from simple psychological postulates. The theory has an anatomical and  neurophysiological interpretation in terms of nerve cell bodies, axons, synaptic knobs, membrane potentials, spiking  frequencies, transmitter production and release, etc. In particular, a new hypothesis concerning transmitter production is  presented. Backward learning, a connection between reaction times and learning speeds, learning without neural reverberation,  and the variation through time of contexts in response to shifting environmental demands are discussed. Some qualitative  connections with the work of Guthrie, Hull, Pavlov, and the Gestaltists are noted. Linear vs nonlinear, as well as Markovian  vs nonMarkovian properties of the theory's mathematical formalism are mentioned.  1. INTRODUCTION  Some recent papers (Grossberg, 1967, 1968a-e, 1969a-h) have introduced a new theory of learning in a rigorous setting. In its  simplest form, this theory provides a mathematical description of the following kind of experiment. An experimenter E,  confronted by a machine (or learning subject) M, presents M with a list of "letters" or "events" to be learned. Suppose, for  example, that E wishes to teach M the list of letters AB, or to predict the event B given the event A. E does this by  presenting A and then B to M several times at prescribed instants of time. To find out if M has learned the list as a result  of these list presentations, the letter A alone is then presented to M. If M responds with the letter B, and M does this  whenever A alone is said, then we have good evidence that M has indeed learned the list AB.  Our learning theory thus concerns itself with a description of the stimuli and responses of an individual subject through  time. It is a deterministic theory, and not a statistical one.  Surely the construction of machines which "learn" in a sufficiently naive sense is not a difficult task. On the other hand,  the machines which we have discussed can be derived from plausible psychological axioms, and once derived exhibit some  1 This work was supported in part by NONR Contract 1841/38.  209  210 GROSSBERG  properties of learning. For example, our simplest machine (Grossberg, 1967, 1968a, b) has, among others, the following  properties:  (1) Practice Makes Perfect. The more often AB is practiced, the better is the machine's prediction of B given A at a  prescribed later time, and the prediction becomes as good as we please after a sufficient amount of practice. One can modify  the machine in a trivial way to guarantee that the learning of a short list such as AB seems to occur in an "all-or-none"  fashion. Practice is by respondant conditioning.  (2) An Isolated Machine Suffers No Memory Loss. Once learning trials end, our simplest machine remembers what it has been  taught without any memory loss. This is not true of all our machines. Some of them spontaneously forget at an approximately  exponential rate if they do not practice continuously. These various machines all obey the same laws, however. They differ  only in the way in which their several components are interconnected. We are led to a study of the "geometry of learning,"  namely, a study of how to interconnect the components of our machines to guarantee that they learn and remember special tasks  in the best possible way.  (3) An Isolated Machine Remembers Without Practicing Overtly. After learning trials cease, our simplest machine also stops  producing guesses for the experimenter. Even when the machine produces no overt behavior after learning, its memory of the  preceding experiment remains unimpaired.  (4) The Memory of an Isolated Machine Sometimes Improves Spontaneously Without Practice. After the simplest machine receives a  moderate amount of practice, and shortly after practice ceases, we find that its memory is better on a recall trial than it  was at the instant practice stopped. The magnitude of this improvement depends on the degree to which practice is massed or  distributed when the learning trials cease. This effect strikingly resembles the experimental phenomenon of "reminiscence,"  otherwise known as the Ward-Hovland phenomenon (Osgood, 1953).  (5) All Errors Can Be Corrected. If a list such as AB is learned to an arbitrary degree of accuracy, we can nonetheless teach  the machine the new list AC.  (6) Response Interference Sometimes Occurs. The rate with a list AC can be taught to replace a previously learned list AB  depends on the degree to which AB had been learned, as well as on the number of other response alternatives. However, this is  not true of error correction in long lists. One can change a long list in its middle after the first few learning trials  without substantially delaying the rate with which the new items are learned. The effect of other response alternatives also  depends on list length, on list position, on the rate of list presentation, and on the degree of learning at any time.  These properties do not exhaust the list of mathematical effects which arise in our machines, and one can find formal analogs  of such familiar empirical phenomena as  EMBEDDING FIELDS 211  backward learning, bowing, chaining, and chunking (Jensen, 1962; Miller, 1956; Osgood, 1953). It is also possible to interpret  the mathematical variables of the machines in a way that permits us to compare them with known neural facts. Geometrical  objects exist in them that readily call to mind nerve cell bodies, axons, endbulbs, and synapses (Crosby, 1962). Processes  occur within these objects that remind one of the generation of cellular potentials in cell bodies, of the fluctuation of  spiking frequencies in axons, of transmitter production and release at the endbulbs, and of various trophic and plastic  effects (De Robertis, 1964; Eccles, 1957, 1964).  Our machines, therefore, provide a single mathematical picture within which at least formal analogs of both psychological and  neural phenomena of some interest can be discussed. All of these phenomena, or at least their formal analogs, are a  consequence of a rather simple mathematical mechanism. Since these machines do learn and can, at least roughly, be interpreted  in a neural way, they embody a definite proposal concerning the manner in which real neural structures might learn.  Because of these various facts, it seems desirable to try to analyze the psychological principles which give rise to these  machines. This paper aims at such an analysis and, in particular, at a description that is as intuitive and nontechnical as  possible to emphasize the simplicity of the basic ideas. We begin by discussing in a rather philosophical way some  psychological facts known to all of us from daily life, and then gradually translate these facts into definite mathematical  terms until we have explored enough facts to construct a well-defined mathematical system. We cannot, of course, hope by such  a one-sweep procedure to "construct a brain," teeming with representations of countless macromolecules and ions interwined in  exotic combinations of variable duration and strength. Nor should we want to, since such a representation would blind the  unprepared beholder with complexities. Three later papers (Grossberg, 1968e, 1969b, c) will continue this task by successive  approximation.  2. THE EXISTENCE OF BEHAVIORAL ATOMS  LANGUAGE SEEMS TO BE SPATIO-TEMPORALLY DISCRETE  Consider the vocabulary of a standard English-speaking adult. This vocabulary contains 26 letters and no more than several  thousand words of various sorts, of which only several hundred are most frequently used in daily discourse. Consider the way  in which we hear and say the simplest verbal units of daily discourse, such as single letters like A. An obvious feature of  this usage is that we never try to decompose A into two or more finer subparts, as for example we can with a word consisting  of more than one syllable. Yet even complicated words may be decomposed into no more than finitely many simple parts, and  clearly there are only a finite number of simple pieces in any one person's vocabulary.  212 GROSSBERG  If we wish to understand our usage of such simple verbal units as A, we must take seriously our impression that A is a single  unit that is never decomposed in actual speech. We do this by assuming that A is represented in M by a single state. That is,  we assign to A a single point PA in Al. We also assign a point pB to B, pc to C, and so on. In more mathematical terminology,  given any n simple behavioral units r; , i = 1,2,..., n, we define n points p2 in M, i = 1, 2,..., n, to stand for these  units, as in Fig. 1.  M  r2  P2  rn  Pn  FIG. 1  The reader interested primarily in our mathematical postulates can proceed to the next section, but we will linger momentarily  to discuss our impressions of simple behavioral units, since these reveal a rather deep property that any theory of learning  might profitably have, and which the present theory has.  When a standard English speaking adult hears a word spoken or speaks a word himself, the word seems to occur at a single  instant in time. That is, we can say either that the word has, or has not, been said at a given time in a perfectly definite  way. Moreover, no more than a finite number of words are spoken in a lifetime. Thus, both "spatially" (the number of verbal  units) and "temporally" (the number of time instants at which verbal units occur), language seems to have many properties of a  finite, or discrete, phenomenon.  THE REPRESENTATION OF SENSORY CONTINUA BY DISCRETE SYMBOLS  One of the most vital uses of language is to report our sensory experiences, such as variations in tactile pressure, light  intensity, loudness, taste, etc. Many of these sensory impressions seem to vary in a continuous way both in space and in time.  A basic characteristic of much sensory experience is that it seems to be spatio-temporally continuous.  Yet we successfully use language, which seems to be quite spatio-temporally discrete, to express-or to represent-sensory  experience, which seems to be spatiotemporally continuous. The representation by language of sensations requires that the two  kinds of phenomena interact, and so, mathematically speaking, we must envisage the interaction of spatio-temporally discrete  and continuous processes of  EMBEDDING FIELDS 213  such a kind that the relatively discrete process provides an adequate representation of the relatively continuous process.  Moreover, although each sensory modality seems to provide us with essentially different varieties of experience, the very same  language tools are adequate for describing at least the rudiments of all of these various modalities. Thus, the discrete  representation of continuous processes must be a universal representation of some kind. For this reason, we expect conclusions  about the dynamics of language behavior to generalize to many other psychological phenomena.  LEARNING AS A BRIDGE FROM CONTINUITY To DISCRETENESS  The centrality of the connection between relatively discrete and continuous phenomena in behavior is better understood by  considering several simple examples. Consider the phenomenon of walking for specificity. When a child begins to learn how to  walk, he must concentrate much effort on the endeavor, and must attend continually to his efforts. An observer is struck by  the many motions of the child that are inessential to the walking process, and by the total absorption of the child in the  process. In an adult, walking takes on a different appearance. A first step is automatically followed by a second, the second  by a third, etc. Once the decision to walk is made, the walk essentially takes itself, and one can pay attention to other  matters so long as a minimal amount of obstacle avoidance is accomplished. After walking to one's destination, one "decides"  to stop walking and the walk comes to an end. Whereas a child must continuously attend to the walking process until he has  mastered it, the adult attends essentially only to starting and stopping the walk, and the mechanics of walking are entirely  automatic. Starting and stopping are "on"-" off" responses, which are discrete. Thus, walking requires continuous attention  before its mechanism is mastered, but only discrete attention thereafter. The very process of learning how to walk involves a  passage from a relatively continuous representation of voluntary efforts at walking to a relatively discrete representation of  these efforts.  A comparable example can be found in language learning. When a young child first begins to learn a letter such as A, an  observer is aware of the relatively slow and seemingly continuous juxtaposition of complicated lip, tongue, and associated  motions governing pronunciation of the letter. Once A is learned, A can be emitted rapidly and in a seemingly simple  integrated motion occurring at a given instant of time. Saying the letter A becomes after learning a simple and discrete act.  This situation is analogous to the example of walking, where again an initial state that is continuous both in space and time  converges (or contracts) to an asymptotic state, approximately discrete both in space and time. Examples can be drawn from  many varieties of learning experience. The fundamental conclusion is that learning often involves a passage from continuous  representations of the control of a given act to a more discrete representation of this control.  214 GROSSBERG  THE PYRAMID OF DISCRETE ACTS  The intuitive significance of such a passage is easy to see. Once the saying of a verbal unit seems to the performer to be a  simple act rather than a tremendously complicated juxtaposition of delicately poised muscular motions, he can proceed to  integrate several of these units into more complicated composite units constructed from sequences of seemingly simple acts.  After these composite units also seem to be simple, the composite units themselves can be organized into still more  complicated composites, and so on. Without the reduction of continuous (and complicated) acts to discrete (and simple) acts,  the integration of more complicated behavior based on these acts would seem hopelessly complicated. We would be doomed to  paying attention day and night to walking and other menial endeavors. The passage from initially continuous representations of  behavioral controls to asymptotically discrete representations is thus no casual event. It makes possible the emergence of new  organized behavior patterns, and is a prerequisite for effective learning.  THE CONTINUOUS AND DISCRETE PICTURES COEXIST  Since different behavioral sequences in different stages of learning can often coexist, all intermediates between continuity  and discreteness can in principle coexist at any time.  The pervasiveness of the coexistence of discrete and continuous representations can be seen from the following example. When a  single letter, such as A, is said to a standard English speaking adult, his impression is that A is presented at a single  instant of time and that A seems to be a simple behavioral unit. Nonetheless, if scalp electrodes are placed on his head when  A is presented, there will ensue a temporally prolonged and spatially widespread alteration in his brain waves (Walter, 1953).  Thus the impression that A is spatio-temporally discrete must be reconciled with the fact that A's presentation simultaneously  causes spatio-temporally continuous alterations in neural potentials. This conclusion is not surprising if only because of the  representation of the sound of A as it travels through the air as a complicated series of waves.  Properties of discreteness and continuity coexist at every stage of learning. The continuous background is never wholly  eliminated. We must study how certain processes superimposed on this background become increasingly discrete relative to an  initially prescribed standard of continuity, and will have at our disposal at least two different levels of dynamical graining  such that the degree of continuity of one level takes on meaning only relative to the degree of continuity of the other.  To postulate that A is represented by a single point PA in M amounts to the hypothesis that A, as a simple behavioral unit,  has already been learned by M. We therefore enter the learning process in the middle, and seek to know how known simple  behavioral units are integrated into more complicated units, such as the alphabet  EMBEDDING FIELDS  215  ABC ... Z. Once we see how new units are formed from old, whether we call our original points pA , pB ,..., etc., or by  another name will seem irrelevant.  3. THE TIME SCALE OF THE MACROSCOPIC WORLD SEEMS CONTINUOUS  The impression from daily experience that time flows continuously is taken for granted in all physical theories. Since we wish  to maintain as close a contact to daily experience as possible, we too will suppose that both E and M have a continuous time  scale t.  A theory constructed in continuous time has the substantial formal advantage of being able to consider arbitrary input spacing  without ad hoc changes in parameter values. For example, suppose that E tries to teach M the alphabet ABC ...Z by presenting  the letters with an intratrial interval of w. As w approaches 0 or oo, the list becomes impossible to learn, whereas the list  can more readily be learned at some intermediate value of w. The explanation of even this fact can be cumbersome when  discussed in terms of a model in discrete time, but it is trivial in the continuous time theory to be discribed.  4. THE EXISTENCE OF CONTINUOUSLY DIFFERENTIABLE STATE FUNCTIONS  The word "see" and the letter "C" sound alike in daily discourse. If I say "see" to someone, he might well reply, "See what?"  But if I say "ABC" to him, it is far more likely that he will reply by saying "D."  To make this latter assertion with confidence, we must specify the rate w at which A, then B, and then C are said. If w is a  few seconds, then D is certainly a likely reply to ABC. If w is 24 hours, then "See what?" is a more likely reply. And as w  varies smoothly from seconds to hours, the effect of the "context" AB gradually wears off in the determination of a reply to  C. This is only one example of many where the effects of prior events linger and then gradually fade away.  We must be able to represent in M that an event such as A has occurred at a recent time. The point pA alone does not suffice  to do this, since there is no time variation in PA . There must exist some function, or functions, of time t that do this for  M. Since we have, in Sec. 2, emphasized that A seems simple in daily experience, we should try to restrict ourselves to just  one function of time at PA . We denote this function by XA(t). Thus to every simple behavioral unit ri , we postulate the  existence in M of a point pi , and a function xi(t) representing a process taking place at pi , i = 1, 2,..., n. We now  discuss several properties of xi(t).  xi(t) is continuously differentiable. xi(t) was introduced to represent within M the occurrence and gradual fading away  through time of the event ri presented to M at a  216 GROSSBERG  given time. This is a question about the rate of change of xi(t) through time, or about .xi(t)(= dxi(t)ldt). Since the effect  of an event wears off gradually, we assume that .ti(t) is continuous.  xi(t) is Nonnegative (M is Observable). The data available to a psychological experimenter E is of two kinds: either a  stimulus or response does not occur at a given time, or it does. We are predisposed to express the occurrence of "nothing" by  a statement that some quantity is zero. Thus, if A is never presented to M, we set x,(t) - 0. Suppose A is presented to M for  the first time at t = t(A). Then surely XA(t) = 0, for t < t(A). But XA(t) cannot remain zero for all t > t(A), since xA(t)  was, after all, introduced to represent the occurrence of A. When something occurs, we are predisposed to assign a positive  weight to the quantity representing the event, and therefore we suppose that xA(t) becomes positive when t > t(A).  As t increases, the effect of A's occurrence at time t = t(A) gradually wears off. Thus XA(t) must gradually return to the  level signifying that A has not recently occurred, namely zero. The graph of xA(t), given exactly one occurrence of A at time  t = t(A), thus takes on approximately the form described in Fig. 2.  0  t (A)  FiG. 2  In particular xA(t) is nonnegative for all t. (By a change in our sign conventions, we could have just as well assumed that  xA(t) is nonpositive for all t.)  To express Fig. 2 mathematically, we need a way to translate the occurrence of A at time t = t(A) into mathematical terms.  There is a standard mathematical way of doing this. That is, let an input IA(t) perturb XA(t) at time t = t(A). XA(t) grows  most quickly when IA(t) is large, and decays towards zero when IA(t) is zero. The simplest mathematical way of saying this is  xA(t) = --XA(t) +IA(t), (1)  where a is a positive constant, and the initial data of xA , say XA(0), is nonnegative.  We can readily determine some of the basic properties of IA(t) from (1) and our previous remarks. Since both xA(t) and xA(t)  are continuous, (1) implies that IA(t) is also continuous. XA(t) is nonnegative to represent the effect on M of the occurrence  or nonocurrence of A. Since IA(t) is E's way of presenting A to M, (1) shows that IA(t) should be nonnegative. In the present  example, IA(t) stands for the presentation of  EMBEDDING FIELDS 217  A to M at time t = t(A). Thus, IA(t) becomes positive once t exceeds t(A). Since this presentation takes only a finite amount  of time to occur, IA(t) becomes zero once again after a finite amount of time. We summarize these conclusions about IA(t) in  Fig. 3.  A OCCURS AT TIME t = t(A)  0  t(A)  i t  FIG. 3  Equation 1 describes a machine in which x,(t) can become as large as we please if IA(t) is taken sufficiently large. In a  machine within which XA(t) has a fixed maximum MA, (1) is replaced by  xA(t) = --XA(t) + (MA - XA(t)) IA(t), (Y)  where 0 < XA(0) < MA . It is obvious that XA(t) < MA for all t > 0 no matter how large IA(t) becomes. That is, XA(t) saturates  at MA . Throughout the following discussion, we will always consider (1) for specificity, but all our conclusions apply to  (1') as well with obvious modifications.  Let us consider experiments in which E presents A to M at more than one time instant. Suppose that A occurs at the times tlA),  t 2A),.... t (A), where t?A~ G ti+i , i = 1, 2,..., NA - 1. Our previous discussion of IA(t) can be extended to this situation  if we suppose that IA(t) becomes large momentarily at all the times t = t?A1, 2,..., NA , as we show in Fig. 4.  A OCCURS AT TIMES 1=1(A)  ,  i =1,2,..., NA  1A (t)  0  FIG. 4  Figure 4 can be expressed mathematically in the following way. Let JA(t) be a fixed nonnegative and continuous function which  is positive in an interval of the form (0, AA), AA > 0. Then Fig. 4 can be expressed as  NA  IA(t) - j,(t - tkA))r k=1  480/6/2-4  218 GROSSBERG  that is, as a succession of input pulses J,,(t - t1,;A') at the times t =- t;A'. The waveform described by a particular choice  of JA(t) is the "signature" of the given event A in 111. The above remarks are true for all simple behavioral units ri , i =  l, 2,..., n, and not merely A. We can therefore generalize (1) and (2) by writing  where  -ti(t) = --vi(t) -}- Ii(t), i = 1, 2,..., n,  h(t) _ I Ji(t - tli'), k=1  and each J(t) is a nonnegative continuous function that is positive in an interval (0, az), Ai > 0. Equation 3 translates the  occurrence of any sequence of symbols chosen from rl , r2 ,..., r, and occurring at any times t~,i), into a definite choice  of inputs delivered to M.  Having defined the input Ii(t) to pi , we remark in passing that the output Oi(t) from pi will ultimately be given by  Oi(t) = max{xi(t) H(t) - ri, O},  where ri is a positive "response threshold" and  with  H(t) = 1 + ~k=1 Xk(t) In, Xk(t) in,, n '  Xk(t) = xk(t) I x,n.(t) m-1  The mathematical properties of this definition are discussed in Grossberg (1968b). In brief these properties are as follows.  H(t) is closely related to the familiar entropy function of probability theory, which is defined for any probability  distribution P1, p2 ,..., pn by  since  n  H(p1,.. pn) - - Y- pk ln2 pk , k=1  H(t) - 1 - H(XI(t), X2(01..., X.(t)_) . ln2 n  It is well known (Khinchin, 1957) that (i) H achieves its maximum of ln2 n if and only if all pi = l 1n; (ii) H achieves its  minimum of 0 if and only if, for some fixed i, pi = 1 and all p; = 0, j # i; and (iii) H is a continuous function. Therefore,  (i) H(t) approximates its minimum of 0 if and only if all stimulus traces xi(t) are approximately  EMBEDDING FIELDS 219  equal; and (ii) H(t) approximates its maximum of 1 if and only if one stimulus trace xi(t) is much larger than all other  stimulus traces.  By (i ), it is clear that all outputs Oi(t) equal 0 if all stimulus traces are approximately equal. That is, if there exists  no preference within the machine for any symbol at time t, then no guess is made at time t. In this sense, equal stimulus  traces, no matter how large, inhibit each other away before an output can be generated by them. By contrast if, as in (ii'),  only one stimulus trace xi(t) is large at time t, then  whereas  Oi(t) - max(xi(t) - ri , 0)  OP) = 0, j Z4 i.  Thus, no output will arise from the weak stimulus traces x;(t), j # i. An output will arise from the strong stimulus trace  xi(t) just so long as xi(t) > ri ; that is, if pi has been excited recently by a sufficiently large input that the output  threshold ri is achieved. The onset of a positive output at time t from vi is translated as the occurrence of the guess ri by  the machine at time t. The input pulses Jilt) which create these outputs are fixed once and for all in a given machine before  an experiment begins. Many of our qualitative conclusions hold for any choice of continuous Jilt) with a single maximum and a  duration less than -r, as Grossberg (1968e) shows.  The function H(t) expresses a kind of mutual inhibition of associations in the production of outputs, whereas the constants ri  describe output thresholds. Grossberg (1969b) shows how to improve these inhibitory and threshold effects using a simple  formal argument, and thereby derive equations which agree, at least formally, with empirically measured physiological  mechanisms of lateral inhibition (Ratliff, 1965) and spiking thresholds (Eccles, 1957). The empirical Hartline-Ratliff  equation for lateral inhibition is also derived as a special case. The main heuristic point of these deductions is that the  physiological mechanisms can then, at least formally, be discussed as provisions needed to make perfect learning and efficient  guessing possible.  The discussion above shows that Oi(t) reduces essentially to xi(t) minus a constant threshold shift ri if only a couple of  stimulus traces are large at time t. Since our thought experiments in this paper involve only a couple of xi(t) functions at a  time, the assumption that the output from pi is xi(t) is quite satisfactory.  5. THE PRODUCTION OF OUTPUTS BY INPUTS AFTER LEARNING HAS OCCURRED  Our remarks to now have discussed only how the presentation of an ri to M is represented within M by suitable fluctuations of  xi(t) at pi ; that is how M "recognizes" or "perceives" these events. We have said nothing about how M learns. We now begin to  fill this gap.  220 GROSSBERG  Consider M after it has learned the list AB. Suppose AB has been presented many times by E to M in the past. Since Al now  knows AB, if E presents A alone to M, then M must reply a short time later by saying B. We now ask how this can happen.  The presentation of A to M at time t = t1A) has been conceptualized as the occurrence of an input JA(t - t(A)) delivered by E  to PA at time t(A). Thus, M's reply to E a short time later should be an output delivered by pB to E. This output arises from  pB at (say) time t = t(A) + TAB, where TAB is some positive reaction time. The TAB is positive simply because responses to  stimuli take some time to arise. Which function at pB is the output? Only one function, namely XB(t), is associated with pB.  We suppose for simplicity that xB(t) is the desired output. In summary, after AB has been learned, an input to PA at time t =  t(A) gives rise to an output from pB at time t = t(A) + TAB .  An input to PA at time t = t(A) creates a momentary increase in XA(t). Thus presenting A to M at time t = t(A) and receiving B  in reply at time t = t(A) + TAB has the effect on M which we have diagrammed in Fig. 5.  XA(t)  t(A)  i t  xg (t)  40 t  0 '0 PA P B FiG. 5  E causes only the increase in XA(t). The mechanism of M itself must cause the increase in xB(t) TAB time units later. Figure 5  shows, however, that the only possible cause of this increase in xB(t) is the prior increase in XA(t). A signal from PA is  thus carried to pB with a delay of TAB time units, and this must be true whenever XA(t) is large after AB has been learned.  Since the signal reaching pB from PA is large at time t if and only if XA(t - TAB) is large, we suppose for simplicity that  the signal is proportional to XA(t - TAB), and choose positive proportionality constants fl and PAB such that the signal  equals #PABXA(t - TAB).  To write this conclusion in mathematical terms, we need only observe that the signal from PA to pB is an input to pB, just as  1B(t) is an input to pB . We therefore replace the equation  xB(t) _ -  by the slightly more complicated equation  (t) + IB(t),  xB(t) = -a'x'B(t) + IBM + NYABXA(t - TAB), which also takes into account the signal from PA to pB .  EMBEDDING FIELDS 221  The previous argument must hold when the list AB is replaced by any list rir; which M can learn. Thus, after M learns rir; ,  'x7(t) _ -ax;(t) + h(t) + Npi.ixi(t - Ti9),  where, just as in the special case ri = A and r; = B, pi; and Ti; are positive constants. How is the signal from PA to pB  carried to pB ? We will envisage some pathway over which the signal travels without decrement at a finite velocity so as not  to reach pB until TAB time units after it is emitted by PA. We denote this pathway by eAB . Since the list AB is not the same  list as the list BA, eAB # eaA . That is, eAB is a directed pathway from PA to pB . We denote it by an arrow facing from PA to  pB. Thus, for every list rir; which M can learn, an arrow ei; will face from pi to pi in order to carry the signal Npijxi(t -  -ri;) after rir; has been learned. Figure 6 diagrams this situation.  xi It-rij) apij xi (t-rij) xj (t)  Pi e ij Pi  FIG. 6  If it is impossible for M to learn rir; , then no signal can reach p; from pi , and we set pii - 0.  6. THE MECHANISM OF LEARNING  Equation 4 holds for any sequence rir; which has already been learned by M, say AB. Before learning AB, on the other hand,  there must exist other possible lists AC, AD, etc., which M could learn instead of AB, for if B were the only possible reply  to A, then by definition, AB would have already been learned. This means that PA must be able to send signals to all points pB  , PC , PD ,..., which stand for possible successors of A, or else no possible connection between PA and these alternatives  could ever be established. In particular, the points p; , j = B, C, D,..., could never possibly satisfy (4).  We are thrown, therefore, into the following dilemma: After learning occurs, we want pA to send a signal such as (4) only to  the correct point pB so that a presentation of A to M creates the reply B. Before learning occurs, PA must be able to send  signals to all the points p; which correspond to symbols r; that might be learned. The process of learning thus eliminates the  signals from PA to all incorrect points PC , PD ,..., at the same time that it preserves and strengthens the signal from PA to  pB .  222 GROSSBERG  This can happen in essentially only one way in the picture we have thus far constructed. The only effect on M of saying AB  several times, say at a rate w, is to make both XA(t - w) and x,(t) large during and shortly after the times IA(t - w) and  I,6(t) are large, respectively. Saying AB more often ensures that XA(t - w) and x,(t) are both large more often. If AC were  said instead, XA(t - w) would sometimes be large, but x,(t) would always remain small. If only B were said, x,(t) would  sometimes be large, but XA(t - w) would always remain small. If nothing were said to M, then both XA(t - w) and x,(t) would  always remain small. Thus, the learning of AB occurs if and only if the product  XA(t - w) XB(t), (5)  is often large, and all other products xA(t - w) x;(t), j = C, D,..., remain small, where w > 0 is some "reasonable" learning  rate.  In order for M to be capable of learning, a mechanism exists in M which computes these products, or else M would have no way  of distinguishing one ordering of inputs from another. Therefore, we postulate the existence of a process zAB(t) somewhere in  M which grows only if x,(t - w) xB(t) is large. z,B(t) can only take place at some position in M where both the values XA(t -  w) and XB(t) are simultaneously present, but there is only one place in Fig. 6 at which past xA values (such as XA(t - w)) and  present xB(t) values are simultaneously present. This place is at the arrowhead NAB of e,.,, since only here is the signal  gPABXA(t - TAB) from PA contiguous with the x,(t) value of pB . We therefore replace the product (5) by the product  RPABXA(t - TAB) XB(t),  and say that zAu(t) grows if and only if (6) is large. The simplest way to express this mathematically is to say that ZAB(t)  grows at a rate equal to (6), minus perhaps a spontaneous decay (or "forgetting") term UZAB(t). That is, we let  -'AB(t) _ --UZAB(t) + #PABXA(t - TAB) XB(t).  In the same way, we can define a zi;(t) function at the arrowhead Ni; of each ei; by  '2'dt) = -uzij(t) T NCijXz(t - Tij) x,(t), (7) where P > 0, u > 0, pi; > 0, Tii > 0, and zi;(0) > 0. Figure 6 now becomes Fig.  7.  Xi(t-rij ) __iaPij Xi (t-rij)-- zij(t) XjM Pi eij Pi  FIG. 7  EMBEDDING FIELDS 223  If zi; has a fixed finite maximum Mi;, then we can replace (7) by  tij(t) = -uzii(t) + Npii(Mii - zii(t)) xi(t - 'i7) XAt),  just as we replaced (1) by (1'). In summary, the functions zi;(t) exist at the arrowheads because this is the only place where  past signals from pi and present signals from p; coexist, and the past signal from pi is needed so that an input to pi will  give rise after a short pause to a correct output from p; once rir; has been learned.  We have defined functions such as ZAB(t) not only to record whether or not AB has been frequently presented to M, but also to  guarantee that after AB has been learned, an output to PA generates an output only from pB TAB time units later. To achieve  this mathematically, note the following heuristic requirements.  If A is said but AB has not been learned, then B will not be said in reply TAB time units later. If A is not said, then B will  not be said TAB time units later even if AB has been learned. And if A is not said and AB has not been learned, then surely B  will not be said in reply. Saying A amounts to momentarily increasing XA(t). Saying B in reply amounts to momentarily  increasing xB(t + TAB). And having learned AB amounts to keeping ZAB(w) large at least for w chosen within the times that  XA(t) and XB(t + TAB) are large. Since XB(t + TAB) will become large in this situation only if the signal received by pB from  PA is large, our heuristic requirements show that ZAB(w) must influence the size of the signal #PABXA(t) while it is being  transferred through the arrowhead NAB from eAB to pB. This occurs at time w = t -f- TAB . Indeed, our heuristic requirements  imply that xB(t -f- TAB) becomes large only if both gPABXA(t) and ZAB(t + TAB) are large, or only if the product  9PABXA(t) 2'AB(t + TAB),  is large. In terms of arbitrary indices i and j, this means that the input to p; from pi at time t is  Npiixi(t - To) Zii(t).  Equation 4 is therefore replaced by  xi(t) - --xi(t) + Ii(t) + ppijxi(t - -i4) ZiAt),  and Fig. 7 is replaced by Fig. 8.  xi(t-rij) apij xi0-rij)_-i,ePijxi(t-rij)zij(t)  xj(t)  Pi eij Nij Pj  FiG. 8  224 GROSSBERG  7 THE INDEPENDENCE OF LISTS  Consider now a machine M in which the lists AB and CB can both be learned; that is, PAB > 0 and PCB > 0. We want to be able to  learn AB independently of C if C is never said during the learning process, and to be able to learn CB independently of A if A  is never said. (We temporarily ignore higher order conditioning effects. Some of these will be an automatic consequence of our  considerations.) That is, we want the two inputs 9PABXA(t - TAB) ZAB(t) and 9PCBXC(t - TCB) ZCB(t) to combine independently at  pB . Mathematically speaking, combining two quantities in an independent way means: add them. Thus, the total input received  by PB from PA and pC at time t is  9IVA(t - TAB) PABZAB(t) + XC(t - TCB) PCBZCB(t)]  Or more generally, the total input received by r; from all rk , k = 1, 2,..., n, at time t is  and (8) is replaced by  n  Xk(t -Tki)pkjZki(t),  k=1  n  `x7(t) = -ax,(t) + Y, Xk(t - Tk.i) pkjZkj(t) + Ii(t)  for every j = 1, 2,..., n.  Equations 7 and 9 together form a mathematically well defined proposal for a learning machine M. The next section shows how to  modify such a machine slightly to make it learn much better. This modification is suggested both by a heuristic oversight in  our derivation and by a corresponding formal difficulty. The modification is made without observability. It then suggests a  deeper set of equations with further physiological implications in Grossberg (1969b).  8. THE NORMALIZAT10N OF p;;z;;  Consider the problem of learning AB vs AC once again. The letters B and C are heuristically thought of as a "set of response  alternatives" to A, and the strengthening of B as a reply to an isolated presentation of A carries with it the weakening of C  as a reply to A. Otherwise expressed, the choice of B as a response to A is made only relative to the strength of other  response alternatives, or response alternatives compete with one another.  We will show that by overlooking this rudimentary fact, we have constructed a system with some unpleasant formal properties.  Then we will include the competition between response alternatives in a simple way, and simultaneously, automatically overcome  the formal difficulties. Grossberg (1969h) studies a related case.  Consider the problem of learning AB vs AC once again, and suppose for simplicity that no other lists can be learned, so that  only PA, and PAC are positive. We assume for  EMBEDDING FIELDS 225  simplicity that all Ti? = r > 0, so that M has a well defined "reaction time" r. Then (9)  becomes  xB(t) _ -a1XB(t) -f- NXA(t - r) PABZAB(t) + IB(t),  and  xc(t) _ --XC(t) + RXA(t - r) PACZAC(t) + IC(t). (10) We assume that A, B, and C have occurred at least once in the remote past  of (10). By (7), we can therefore suppose that ZAB(t) > 0 and zAc(t) > 0 for all the times t which we will consider. In this  setting, we reinvestigate the task of teaching AB to M, and observe the following technical difficulties:  a) ZAc Remains Too Large. When A occurs, the signal PXA(t - r) PAC from PA along eAC grows. Since ZAC(t) > 0, a positive  signal 9XA(t - r) PACZAC(t) reaches PA and causes, by (10), a momentary increase in the value of xc(t). Consequently 9PACXA(t  - r) xc(t) also grows momentarily, and so, by (7), ZAC(t) is momentarily boosted in its value as well. Then the cycle repeats  itself, with the net effect that saying A alone helps to keep ZAC(t) from decaying at an exponential rate, even though C is  never said. Of course, ZAB(t) grows much faster than ZAC(t) during this time. We can surely guarantee that ZAB(t) > ZAC(t) as  a result of saying AB sufficiently often, but we cannot guarantee that only the flow from PA to PB eventually survives the  learning process. This is the main formal deficiency of the process (7) and (9). A related secondary difficulty is the  following one:  (b) Instability of the Transformation from inputs to outputs. If AB has occurred very often in the recent past, then ZAB(t)  can grow very large. Even a very small input IA(t) to PA can therefore create a very large output XB(t + r) from PB , because  the signal 9XA(t) PABZAB(t + r) from PA to PB will be large even though XA(t) is small. We desire, however, an equation such  as (4) after learning has occurred, in which an input generates a correct output of comparable size.  These examples suggest that we replace the functions pi;zi;(t) which control the size of the flow from pi to p; by new  functions yi;(t) which avoid the formal difficulties of (a) and (b), and which express the intuitive idea that response  alternatives compete. Then (9) is replaced by  -ax,(t) + 9 Y- xk(t - r) ykJ(t) + I,(1),  j = 1, 2,..., n. We now list several properties which yi; should have, and then exhibit a simple function that realizes all of  these properties.  Consider YAB(t) for Specificity- YAB(t) should be a function only of PABZAB(t), PACZAC(t),..-, and PAZZAZ(t), since only these  functions control the size of the flow from PA to possible response points PB , PC ,..., Pz . That is,  .YAB(t) = fAB(PABZAB(t), PACZAC(t).... 3 PAZZAZ(t)) for some as yet unknown fAB .  226 GROSSBERG  Consider now a learning experiment in which only AB occurs, and C, D,..., Z have occurred only in the remote past. Then we  should be able to lump together the nonoccurring letters C, D,..., Z, since they are never distinguished one from the other by  any experimental operation. That is  YAB(t) - 9AB(PABZAB(t), PACZAC(t) + "- + PAZZAZ(t)), (12)  for some as yet unknown function gAB = 9AB(u, v) of u ~>_ 0 and v _>- 0. We now itemize various desirable properties Of gAB .  gAB is nonnegative since the function PABZAB which it replaces is nonnegative. To avoid the problem of (b) we also assume that  gAB is bounded from above. Since an as yet unspecified positive constant P multiplies YAB in (11), we can take this bound to  be 1 without loss of generality. That is,  0<9AB<1. (13)  As M learns AB better and better, we want pABZAB , and thus yAB , to grow. That is,  9AB(u, v) is monotone increasing in u. (14)  Similarly, if the incorrect alternatives PACZAC + "' + PAZZAZ get to be learned better, then learning of AB is jeopardized and  yAB decreases. That is,  9AB(u, v) is monotone decreasing in v. (15)  The difficulty in (a) shows that, at best, saying AB very often implies for t sufficiently large that  PABZAB(t) > PACZAC(t) + "' + PAZZAZ(t) We also want YAB(t) to be very close to its maximum 1 at such times. That is,  u > v implies 9AB(u, v) - 1. (16) Similarly, if AB has been very poorly learned, then  PABZAB(t) G PACZAC(t) + "' + PAZZAZ(t) and also YAB(t) is very close to its minimum 0. That is,  u << v implies 9AB(u, v) - 0. (17)  And certainly,  9AB(u, v) is continuous in u and v. (18)  We now ask if a function satisfying all the conditions (12)-(18) exists. The answer is "yes" and perhaps the simplest such  function is given by  YAB(t) = - PABZAB(t)  PABZAB(t) + PACZAC(t) + "' + PAZZAZ(t)  That is, we need merely change PABZAB(t) into the ratio of PABZAB(t) compared with  EMBEDDING FIELDS 227  all the functions PAiZAi(t) that control a flow from PA to a possible response point pi, i = 1, 2,..., n. This definition  ofYAB(t) immediately generalizes to  n lI 1  yii(t) = Pi9'2i7(t) PikZik(t)J k-1  for all i, j = 1, 2,..., n. This definition of yi;(t) clearly embodies the idea that the choice of B given A is made only  relative to other response alternatives. For example, if B and C are the only response alternatives to A, thenPAA = PAD =PAE  ="' = PAZ =0, so that  and  YAB(t) _ () ZAB(t) PABZAB t + PACZAC(t)  .YAC(t) _ (A) ZAC(t) PABZAB t + PACZAC(t)  By nonnegativity of PABZAB(t) and PACZAC(t), an increase in B given A (i.e., in YAB(t)) implies a decrease in C given A (i.e.,  in YAC(t)), and achieves this competition between alternatives by "relativizing," or dividing, PABZAB(t) by the sum of  PABZAB(t) and PACZAC(t). The conditions (12)-(18) can therefore be thought of as some formal prerequisites for competitive  choices among response alternatives to occur in our machines. In Grossberg (1969b), this competition between choices is shown  to be closely related to the physiological process of lateral inhibition in much the same way that the outputs Oi(t) are. We  have hereby derived the following system of nonlinear difference-differential equations to describe M.  -qt) = --xi(t) + ~, xm(t - T) ymi(t) -I- h(t), m=1  (19)  and  n 1 Yjk(t) = P1k29k(t) Pj.Z9m(t)J > m-1  ~'ik(t) = -UZ9k(t) -I- gPikxj(t - T) xk(t),  (20)  (21)  for all i, j, k = 1, 2,..., n. This completes our derivation of the mathematical laws governing the machines M. We now single  out a particularly important collection of the machines that are currently undergoing a systematic mathematical analysis. If  the yi.i's are not used, then the numerical parameters in Eqs. (7) and (9) must be carefully chosen to avoid (a) and (b)  (Grossberg 1969h).  9. LOCALLY UNBIASED MACHINES  If p;k = 0, then (21) becomes .z;k = -uz;k , or Zjk(t) = Zjk(0) e-ut, and Z k(t) decays to zero at an exponential rate. Since  Pik = 0 also implies that y;k(t) - 0, or that no  228 GROSSBERG  flow whatsoever passes from p; to pk , we can for convenience set Z;k identically equal to zero without changing M in any  nontrivial way. We therefore replace (21) by  (t) - -UZ;k(t) ._ Rpjkxj(t - T) xk(t), if  ik  0, if  Pik > 0 Pik = 0,  (2 1 ')  and by the initial condition that Zik(0) > 0 if and only if Pik > 0.  Our mathematical studies of these machines (Grossberg, 1967, 1968a-d, 1969a, d-f) consider only cases where the positive  values of p;k have the form  ~h 1  Pik = > 0. ~.  That is, the positive weights leading from a fixed point to all other points are the same. We then call the geometry of M  locally unbiased. In this case, (20) and (21) can be simplified by letting Z;k(t) = A;Z;k(t) for all j, k = 1, 2,..., n, and  noting that  and  Y7k(t) - pjkZjk(t) YJm.Z9m(t)J -1, m-1  (20')  Zik(t) _ -UZ;k(t) + Rxi(t - T) xk(t), if  0, if  Pik > 0 Pik = 0  (21")  The main advantage of using Z;k instead of Z;k is that the coefficients p;,,, now occur only in (20'). Since all common  factors can be divided out of the positive values among p;l , p;2 ,..., and p;,, which appear in (20'), we can assume without  loss of generality that  n  Y_ p;,,, = 0 or 1, j n. m=1  10. THE NEURON HYPOTHESIS  A considerable amount of anatomical and physiological investigation has gone into the demonstration of the existence of nerve  cell bodies, axons, endbulbs, synapses, and the directed transmission of neural impulses from the nerve cell body towards the  synapse (Crosby, 1962; Eccles, 1957, 1964). These investigations show that membrane potentials at the cell body give rise to  spikes traveling down the axon in frequencies that vary systematically with variations in membrane potential. Once these  spikes reach the endbulb they cause a release in transmitter that travels across the synaptic cleft and influences the  postsynaptic potential.  Striking analogs of all these processes exist in our machines M. Each point p; can  EMBEDDING FIELDS 229  roughly be thought of as a collection of cell bodies, each edge ei; can roughly be thought of as the collection of axons  leading from cells in pi to cells in p; , each arrowhead Ni; as the endbulbs attached to these axons, and the gap between Ni;  and p; as the corresponding synapses. Given this obvious candidate for a neural interpretation of the geometry of M, the  following interpretation of the dynamical variables of M is readily suggested. xi(t) roughly corresponds to the average  membrane potential over the cells corresponding to pi , Nxi(t) is the spiking frequency in the axons corresponding to eii ,  and yi1(t) is the state of transmitter production in the endbulbs corresponding to Ni; . Once these identifications are made,  then the flow of Nxi(t) to Ni; followed by the input Nxi(t) yi;(t + 'r) to p; reads: after the membrane potential generates a  spike, it travels along the axon to the endbulb, where it activates the transmitter control process at the endbulb and  releases a quantity that increases both with increases of spiking frequency and with the amount of available transmitter. This  statement has a very familiar neurological ring to it. See Grossberg (1969b) for a more detailed physiological account.  In a clear sense, therefore, we have been led, from purely psychological postulates to some of the basic qualitative facts of  the neuron hypothesis, in particular the existence of directed transmissions along a network-like structure, the existence of  a process at the network arrowheads, and the interaction of the transmissions and arrowhead processes to produce inputs to the  recipient "cell bodies." These conclusions are independent, moreover, of the detailed functional form of Eqs. 19-21. They  follow quite readily from our remarks concerning the existence of reaction times, and the places at which processes could  possibly exist to distinguish one ordering of inputs from another.  11. A POSSIBLE MECHANISM OF NEURAL LEARNING  We have also been led to a new idea of how learning occurs. Thus, the functions zi;(t) grow only if both the presynaptic  influence from pi via the signal Npa;xi(t - T) and the postsynaptic value x;(t) are large. That is, a coupling of both pre-  and postsynaptic influences is needed to increase the level of transmitter production and, thereupon, the strength of the  connection from pi to p; .  In forthcoming papers, we explore the possible physiological means whereby such a "trophic" effect of postsynaptic influences  on the endbulb can take place by replacing the postulate of observability by a more realistic one (Grossberg, 1969,b c).  12. REACTION TIMES AND LEARNING RATES  In Sec. 3, we observe that a variation from 0 to co of the presentation rate w of a long list takes us from an impossible  learning task to a more tractable task, and back again to an impossible task. We now show that our machines also have this  230 GROSSBERG  We begin with a locally unbiased machine M in a state of "maximal ignorance." Suppose, for example, that  i _L j  pij _ {n-I  0, i -j,  that M's initial data satisfies xi(v) = y(v), vE[-r, 0], where y is continuous and nonnegative, and that z;k(O) = 8p;, where S  > 0, and i, j, k = 1, 2,..., n. Let us present the list rl , r2 ,..., r. to M at a rate w. Thus I,(t) = J(t), I,(t) = J(t -  w), I3(t) = J(t - 2w),..., and In(t) = J(t - (n - 1) w), where J(t) is some input pulse. Suppose w = 0. Then Il(t) = I2(t) = =  I,(t), and by symmetry, xi(t) = x;(t) and zi;(t) = zkm(t) for all i # j, k # m, and t > 0. Thus M remains in a state of  maximal ignorance for all t _>- 0, and nothing is learned. Similarly, if w is very small relative to the duration of J(t),  then again by symmetry, we will expect M to remain close to a state of maximal ignorance.  Now suppose w = T > 0. Then for any i = l, 2,..., n - l, the signal created by Ii at pi reaches pi,, at the same time that  Ii,, becomes large at pi,, . This means that the product xi(t - T) xi+l(t) will become large relative to all the products xi(t  - -r) x;(t), j # i + 1. By (21), the function zi,i+i will be given a strong boost in its values as compared to the functions  zik , k # i + 1. Thus yi,i+i will grow considerably, whereas all yik , k ~ i + 1, will decay. Substantial learning therefore  occurs. The same argument manifestly holds for values of w which are of the order of T.  If w > T > 0, then the signal created by Ii at pi reaches pi,, long before Ii+i becomes large at pi+i . Since Ii becomes zero  long before Ii+i occurs, the signal from pi to p; also becomes very small before I;+, becomes large. Thus, all the products  xi(t - r) x;(t) are always either equal or very small, and so the function zi,i+i grows little more than the functions zik , k  # i + 1. All the functions yik remain approximately equal, and little learning occurs.  This argument shows that the maximal learning rates in M are of the order of magnitude of its reaction time T. Once we decided  that M's reply to an input should be delayed in time, we tacitly prescribed the places in M where functions zi; could possibly  be computed, and thus in turn the relative timing of inputs which could lead to efficient learning. Grossberg (1969b)  describes machines which can effectively predict items at a rate somewhat faster than the rate at which they learned them.  13. STIMULUS TRACES, ASSOCIATIONAL STRENGTHS, AND SPACE-TIME CONTEXTS  The functions yi9 determine the strength of M's reply r; to an isolated presentation of ri . We therefore call yi;(t) the  associational strength of rir; at time t, by analogy with classical theorizing, such as that of Hull (Hilgard, 1956). The  associational strengths yi;(t) collectively contain M's memory of past experiments.  EMBEDDING FIELDS 231  The size of xi(t) determines how actively pi has been perturbed by recent inputs, including presentations of ri . xi(t) thus,  in part, plays the role of a stimulus trace (Hilgard, 1956).  Equations 20 and 21 show that changes in associational strength are due to changes in the stimulus traces. Equation 19 shows  that changes in the associational strengths alter the stimulus traces. Insofar as the stimulus traces are "perceptual" or  "recognition" variables, and the associational strengths are "learning" variables, we see that processes of learning and  perception in M form a single unified process rather than being two qualitatively different aspects of M's experience.  Because of this strong binding between perception and learning in M, we can see how M automatically forms an appropriate  "perceptual set," or "learning set," or "space-time context" in response to particular experiences. For example, suppose that  only a small subset of points pi are perturbed by inputs Ii during a time interval that is long compared to the rate of decay  of the xi's. These xi's will grow as a result of the inputs, and will send large signals only to the points x; whose yi;  values are large, i.e., only to those states that are "contextually" related to the xi's by past experiences. In this way, a  "spatial context" is automatically created by the inputs. This context changes continually as time goes on and new inputs I;  perturb new points p; while the previously perturbed xi values decay. That is, a "space-time context" is automatically carved  out by the inputs.  Suppose that a time interval exists that is long relative to the decay time of the xi in which only a few points Pi are  perturbed in rapid succession. Then only the yi; values which connect these points to one another will grow, so that even as a  space-time context is being formed by the mere distribution of inputs, the "learned" contextual associates of given points  also change. Hence, the space-time context formed by the very same distribution of inputs might well change if these inputs  are repeated again and again.  These facts illustrate one way by which a machine which stores a very large vocabulary can call upon small subsets of this  vocabulary as experiences demand without activating all of its repertoire unnecessarily. The inputs automatically carve out  those channels in M which correspond to the experiences, and the remembrances of related past experiences, that the inputs  represent. These channels fluctuate through time as the demands of experience do.  14. MARKOVIAN AND NON-MARKOVIAN  The context which is formed at any time in M depends on the rate at which inputs are presented. Suppose, for example, that  ABCD is presented once at rate w. That is IA(t) = IB(t + w) = Ic(t + 2w) = ID(t + 3w). If w is not large compared to T and to  the rate of decay of the xi's, then all of the point strengths x,,(t), x,(t), xc(t), and xD(t)  232 GROSSBERG  will be large right after D is presented. XD(t) will often be largest since D has just occurred, and x,(t) will often be  smallest since A occurred some time before, but all these point strengths will have some influence on the determination of the  nodal strengths yi;(t), the magnitude of their influence depending on their relative size at any time. Events which occur  prior to D (i.e., ABC) will influence the behavior of 111 after D occurs, and so the "past" affects the "future." In the  mathematical literature such an effect is said to be "non-Markovian" (Kemeny and Snell, 1960).  Now let w increase. Suppose w is chosen far larger than both T and the decay time of the point strengths xi(t). Again let ABCD  be presented at rate w, and consider M shortly after D has occurred. Then each of XA(t), xB(t), and xc(t) will be very small  when x,(t) is large, because their inputs occurred so long ago that they have decayed back to their resting position.  Therefore, only D determines the future behavior of M when D is presented to M, i.e., the "future" depends only on the  "present." Such a dependence is mathematically called "Markovian."  We see in this simple way that our systems can behave in both a Markovian or non-Markovian fashion depending on the particular  choices of inputs to which they are exposed. This fact suggests that our systems can also behave in an "all-or-none" or  "gradualist" fashion, depending on the particular experiment, since all-or-none learning is distinguished from gradual  learning by different effects of past on future events. In a later paper we show that this is the case. See Grossberg (1969d),  for example.  15. LINEAR AND NONLINEAR  Our systems combine linear and nonlinear effects in an unusual way. For example, consider (19)-(21) when _m=1Yim = 1 for all i  = 1, 2,..., n; i.e. every point pi sends an edge to some point p; . Then it is seen by summing over i = l, 2,..., n in (19)  and dividing by n that the average output x = (I In) _n=1 xk is related to the average input I = (1ln)_k=1Ik by a linear  equation  x(t) = -O~X(t) + Px(t - T) + I(t),  even though the interaction of the xi(t)'s along the edges eik is nonlinear. Thus our systems are often "linear in the large"  although they are "nonlinear in the small." This linear behavior in the large is independent of the yik's, and thus of all  learning effects.  Consider (19)-(21) when all associational strengths yi?(t) have approached limiting values Bi; as a result of a learning  experiment; that is, yi?(t) = Bi? for times t > T, where T is some large time after practice has been going on for awhile.  Then (19) becomes  n  -04xi(t) + 9 Y, xk(t - T) Oki + Ii(t), k=1  EMBEDDING FIELDS 233  which is approximately a system of linear equations for the outputs xi(t) in terms of the inputs Ii(t). If the inputs to M are  sufficiently regular in time that learning occurs, then M's behavior automatically passes from a nonlinear phase to a linear  phase. Since M's output will seem linear after a sufficient amount of practice has occurred in an experiment, it is tempting  to try to model M's mechanism in a linear way. Nonetheless, the learning mechanism of M is nonlinear, so that such an  extrapolation will work well only after M has already learned. Thus linearizing in the present situation destroys the very  mechanism of learning that we wish to study. This is proved rigorously in Grossberg (1969e).  16. GESTALT, GUTHRIE, AND PAVLOV  Consider a machine M before it has learned anything. Suppose that M is capable of learning any list chosen from rl , r2 ,...,  r,, in which no symbol ri occurs more than once. Suppose also that M is unbiased for specificity. Then  1  pi; = n-1' Z J  0, i = j.  Since M begins in a state of maximal ignorance, all xi(v) are equal, i = 1, 2,..., n, for ve[-T, 0]. All z;,(0) are also  equal, j # k, and are positive. Now let any symbol be presented to M, say rl . Then xl grows momentarily and large signals are  transmitted to all the other points p; , j # 1. If r2 then occurred, pa sends large signals to all the other points p; , j #  2. And so on. Before learning occurs, therefore, the entire "field" of points is influenced by an event at a single point,  i.e., a kind of "Gestalt" effect "in space" occurs (Hilgard, 1956).  Similarly, if the list rlr2...r.,, is presented to M at a rate w which is not large compared to -r and the decay rate of the  point strengths, then several point strengths will determine together the alterations in nodal strength at that time, as  pointed out in Sec. 14, i.e., a Gestalt effect "in time" occurs. In summary, if M begins in a state of ignorance, then M  exhibits Gestalt effects in space-time whenever it is exposed to a long and rapidly occurring list of symbols.  Let us now consider M after it has learned the list rlr2,...r. Then, by definition,  Y12(t) - Y2s(t) = Y34(t) - ... - Y.-l,n(t) - I  for all times t during which M knows the list, and all other yi7(t) are approximately zero. Thus, a chain of associational  strengths leads from pi to p2 , from p2 to p3 , and so on until p.,_1 and pare reached. This chain has been embedded into  the field of M's alternatives-hence the name "embedding fields" for our theory.  48o/6/z-5  234 GROSSBERG  We can now readily see that M's behavior after learning is qualitatively different from its behavior before learning. After  learning, an input top, creates a large signal r time units later only at p2 , and so only p2 delivers a large output to F, at  this time. Similarly a large input to p2 creates a large signal T time units later only at p3 , and so only p3 delivers a  large output to E at this time. This is so for every pt and pr+i with i = 1, 2,..., n - 1, and the Gestalt effect in  space-time has been substantially eliminated. It has been replaced by a simple succession of "stimuli" and "responses," and  the response which occurs depends on the contiguity of the stimulus in the list rlr2...r. This kind of behavior is often  associated with the name of Guthrie (Hilgard, 1956).  We have, therefore, at our disposal a machine which would be a delight to the Gestaltists before learning occurs and a  discomfort to them after learning occurs. The same machine would be a comfort to Guthrie after learning and a stranger in his  house before.  Before learning occurs, M is a complicated network of transitions representing the many possible alternative choices at M's  disposal. After learning occurs, M becomes a simple chain, or circuit, in which no choices remain. That is, M's behavior is  reduced to a series of reflexes, or to a "Pavlovian circuit" (Hilgard, 1956).  We wish to suggest by these examples that our machines contain within them formal properties that are highly suggestive of  various theoretical movements drawn from the history of psychology. As in the case of Gestalt vs Guthrie, these formal  properties can sometimes appear at different times during the very same experiment, and a learning or perceptual mechanism  which seems adequate to describe the effects of one kind of experiment often seems hopelessly unsuitable for the description  of a closely related experiment. We wish to suggest that this difficulty arises when theorizing is done by tacitly or  explicitly assuming mathematical properties, such as linearity and locality, which are simply not generally valid but which  nonetheless work quite well for specific kinds of experiments. Our machines also exhibit some of these properties for one kind  of experiment (i.e., initial data and inputs) and different properties for another kind of experiment. It will be of interest  to test whether these changes in formal properties correspond, at least qualitatively, to sources of controversy in classical  psychological theories.  17. BACKWARD LEARNING  Consider an unbiased machine which can learn both AB and BA, for example, the machine M depicted in Fig. 9. Thus, PAB = PAC =  PAD = PBA = PBC = PBD = 13, and all other pz; = 0. Let M begin in a state of "maximal ignorance" and "at rest." That is,  XA(v) = XB(ti) = XC(v) = XD(v) = 0, ve[-T, 0],  EMBEDDING FIELDS  235  FIG. 9  and  ZAB(0) = ZAC(0) = ZAD(O) = ZBA(O) -' ZBC(O) - ZBD(O) We now show that teaching the machine AB at a speed w = T automatically teaches the machine BA, but to a lesser extent; i.e.,  backward learning occurs. Thus, learning BA given only the occurrence of AB follows from the mere possibility of learning BA  at all! The list BA is certainly a short list. Grossberg (1969d) shows that this conclusion must be substantially qualified in  the case of long lists. We now show how BA is learned given only the occurrence of AB.  When A occurs at time t = 0, XA(t) grows and equal signals are sent along eAB , eAC , and eAD towards pB , pc , and PD ,  respectively. As these signals reach, the arrowheads NAB, NAc, and NAD at time t = T, B occurs. pc and PD thereafter receive  only signals from NAc and NAD . pB, on the other hand, receives a signal from NAB as well as an input IB . Thus, ZAB > ZAC -  ZAD for all times after B occurs. Consequently YAB > YAC = YAD as well, and at least partial learning of AB has occurred.  After B occurs, XB(t) sends out equal signals along eBA , eBc , and eBD to PA , pc , and PD , respectively. These signals  begin to reach their destination at time t = 2T, PA has, however, also received the input IA 27- time units earlier. Although  the effect of IA has partially worn off by time t = 2T, xA is still larger than xc(t) and XD(t). After the signal from pB  arrives at PA , pc , and PD , therefore, YBA(t) > YBC(t) = YBD(t), and thus at least partial learning of the backward list BA  occurs. Whereas the overlap in time of the signal from pA to pB and the input IB(t) to pB is perfect, the signal from pB to  p,4 arrives only after the effects of IA(t) have partially worn off at PA . Thus we expect YAB(t) > YBA(t), or learning in the  forward direction is better than learning in the backward direction.  236 GROSSBERG  As the speed u! of saying AB is allowed to approach zero, the asymmetry between the states p,, and pB due to differences in  the timing of the inputs IA and IB gradually vanishes. Indeed, when w -- 0, YAB(t) = y,,,(t) for all t --- 0, by symmetry.  Thus, the relative advantage of forward learning over backward learning in 31 arises simply because the relative timing of  inputs from E to 111 and of signals within M favors the forward direction when the presentation speed w is sufficiently close  to the optimal learning speed T.  If ABAB... is presented very often to M at a periodic speed w = T, then clearly the initial bias of saying A first will  gradually wear off, and the difference y,B(t) -YBA(t) will decrease as t increases. By contrast, if ABC is presented to M,  then the forward association YBt^ will competitively diminish the backward association yBA , so that the rudiments of a  forward "arrow in time," namely, YAB > yBA and YBC > .YCB, will be established within M.  18. LEARNING WITHOUT REVERBERATION  In his classic book, Hebb (1949) discusses the possibility that neural memories are preserved by a form of persistent  reverberation within neural networks. We now remark that reverberation is quite unnecessary for memories to be preserved in  our machines. Indeed, reverberation is one of the processes most destructive of M's memory that can occur.  Reverberation in M means that large xi signals pass cyclically between the points pi . Firstly, we show that M's memory is  perfect if all tae signals are maximally small; that is, if all xi(t) are identically zero.  Suppose xi(t) - 0, i = 1, 2,..., n. Then by (21), if Pik > 0, then ,z;k = -uz;k, or z,k(t) = z,k(0) e ut. Thus by (20),  plkZik(O) eut yik(t) - Ymz-1 p~z,m(0) eut  _m=1 p7m2'inato)  - Y7k(0) The associational strengths remain constant for all time, and M's memory is perfect. Hence, reverberation is surely  unnecessary for M to remember very well. Reverberation harms M's memories because whenever too many xi's have large values,  the values of many yii's will also change, just as in the formation of spatiotemporal contexts. Changes of the yi;'s mean  changes in M's memory.  Moreover, we want the values xi(t) to become small whenever the inputs Ii(t) are zero over long time intervals, because these  values, or at least a subset of them, are the  EMBEDDING FIELDS 237  outputs of M, and we would like M to be able to remember without persistently spelling out its memories in large outputs to  the outside world. Small outputs are often desirable, and small outputs imply little reverberation and good memory within M.  19. BRAIN AND BEHAVIOR  We now have two ways by which we can, at least roughly, interpret our mathematical variables: one psychological and one  neurological. The point strength xi(t) stands both for a stimulus trace and for an average membrane potential. The nodal  strength y;k(t) stands both for an associational strength and for the average state of transmitter production in a collection  of endbulbs. To the extent that our machines M are realistic models of simple behavioral systems, we can now translate a  psychological fact into a neural property, and conversely. We have at our disposal at least a partial proposal for a language  to suggest how "brains control behavior." This translation table between neural and psychological variables will be extended  systematically in later papers of this series.  20. M IS NOT ENTIRELY OBSERVABLE  We constructed M with nonnegative states xi(t) to try to guarantee that the states be observable to E. Nonetheless the  functions z;k(t) cannot be directly measured by E, and these functions contain the heart of M's learning mechanism. z;k(t) is  a hidden or intervening variable, and our mathematical papers prove rigorously that various fundamental features of M's  behavior are not directly measurable by E, in spite of all our efforts to maximize M's observability to E. In particular, the  protocol of M's stimuli and responses does not provide a complete picture of M's learning mechanism.  21. INPUTS AND OUTPUTS VS STIMULI AND RESPONSES  Much psychological theorizing is based on the use of the concepts of stimulus and of response to a stimulus. In complicated  experimental situations, one is then sometimes forced to discuss stimuli which share some response properties, and responses  which share some stimulus properties, the degree of sharing depending or. the situation. We believe that the stimulus-response  terminology is often an inconvenient one because it does not correspond in a simple way to the way in which we learn. This is  clear even in our simple machines M.  A stimulus ri to M is an input to pi . Then pi sends out signals to other p; . These signals reach the p; as inputs also. Are  these inputs stimuli to p; ? Since p; can distin-  238  GROSSBERG  guish only the size of an input and not its source, our answer must be "yes," using the "principle of sufficient reason." Thus  a stimulus becomes identical with any input that a point receives. In a similar fashion, a response becomes identical with any  output that M emits. But this is certainly not the customary way in which S-R terminology is used.  It is well known that realistic behavioral systems benefit substantially from the feedback created by their own behavior; for  example, we can organize our speech better when we can hear our words. In M, this means that an Output from a state should  create a subsequent input to that state via some form of feedback through the physical medium surrounding M. By virtue of our  previous remarks, this means that every response also has stimulus properties. To avoid a terminology which does not clearly  distinguish the process that decides how important the stimulus or response aspects of an event are, we propose instead that  one simply classify the inputs and outputs which occur, and study systemically the mechanisms that connect them.  REFERENCES  CROSBY, E. C., HumPHREY, T., AND LAUER, E. W. Correlative anatomy of the nervous system. New York: Macmillan, 1962.  DE ROBERTIS, E. D. P. Histophysiology of synapses and neurosecretion. New York: Macmillan, 1964. ECCLES, J. C. The physiology  of nerve cells. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1957.  ECCLES, J. C. The physiology of synapses. New York: Academic Press, 1964.  GROSSBERG, S. Nonlinear difference-differential equations in prediction and learning theory. Proceedings of the National  Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 1967, 58, 1329-1334.  GROSSBERG, S. Global ratio limit theorems for some nonlinear functional-differential equations, 1,11. Bulletin of The American  Mathematical Society, 1968, 74, 95-105. (a)  GROSSBERG, S. A prediction theory for some nonlinear functional-differential equations. 1. learning of lists. Journal of  Mathematical Analysis and Applications, 1968, 21, 643-694. (b) GROSSBERG, S. A prediction theory for some nonlinear  functional-differential equations. ll. learning of patterns. Journal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications, 1968, 22,  490-522. (c) GROSSBERG, S. Some nonlinear networks capable of learning a spatial pattern of arbitrary complexity. Proceedings  of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 1968, 59, 368-372. (d)  GROSSBERG, S. Some physiological and biochemical consequences of psychological postulates. Proceedings of the National Academy  of Sciences of the United States of America, 1968, 60, 758-765. (e)  GROSSBERG, S. On the global limits and oscillations of a system of nonlinear differential equations describing a flow on a  probabilistic network. Journal of Differential Equations, 1969, 5, 291. (a) GROSSBERG, S. On learning, information, lateral  inhibition, and transmitters. Mathematical Biosciences, 1969, in press. (b)  GROSSBERG, S. On the production and release of chemical transmitters and related topics in cellular control. Journal of  Theoretical Biology, 1969, 22, 325. (c)  GROSSBERG, S. On the serial learning of lists. Mathematical Biosciences, 1969, in press. (d)  EMBEDDING FIELDS 239  GROSSBERG, S. On the variational systems of some nonlinear difference-differential equations. Journal of Differential  Equations, 1969, in press. (e)  GROSSBERG, S. Some networks that can learn remember, and reproduce any number of complicated space-time patterns, 1. Journal  of Mathematics and Mechanics, 1969, in press. (f) GROSSBERG, S. On learning of spatiotemporal patterns by networks with  ordered sensory and motor components, I - excitatory components of the cerebellum. Journal of Mathematics and Physics, 1969,  in press. (g)  GROSSBERG, S. Some networks that can learn, remember, end reproduce any number of complicated space-time patterns, II. SIAM  Journal of Applied Mathematics, 1969, submitted for publication. (h)  HEBB, D. O. The organization of behavior. New York: Wiley, 1949. HILGARD, E. R. Theories of learning. New York: Appleton,  Crofts, 1956. JENSEN, A. R. An empirical theory of the serial position effect. Journal of Psychology, 1962, 53, 127.  KEMENY, J. G., AND SNELL, J. L. Finite Markov chains. Princeton, New Jersey: Van Nostrand, 1960.  KHINCHIN, A. I. Mathematical foundations of information theory. New York: Dover, 1957. MILLER, G. A. The magic number seven,  plus or minus two. Psychological Review, 1956, 63, 81. OSGOOD, C. E. Method and theory in experimental psychology. New York:  Oxford Univer. Press, 1953.  RATLIFF, F. Mach bands: quantitative studies on neural networks in the retina. San Francisco: Holden-Day, 1965.  WALTER, W. G. The living brain. New York: Norton, 1953.  RECEIVED: November 10, 1967