10.1016/0022-2496(69)90011-x
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 6, 356-358 (1969)  A Note on the Strong Convergence of the Relative Observed Score in Mental Test Theory'  MELVIN R. NOVICK  Educational Testing Service, Princeton, New Jersey 08540  Sufficient conditions for the strong convergence of the relative observed score are given and it is shown how this question  differs from that of determining the expected value of the corresponding error score.  1. THE EXPECTED ERROR SCORE  It seems useful to discuss a technical mathematical point that has some test theoretic relevance. The point concerns  conditions under which the relative observed score will converge strongly to the (relative) true score. This point is distinct  from that covered in Part I of Theorem 2.7.1. in Lord and Novick (1968) and the corresponding theorem in Novick (1966), which  is concerned only with the expected value of the error score.  Theorem 2.7.1a. states that &E, - 9(&Ega) = 0 where, by definition, EQ, is the random variable corresponding to values  obtained by randomly selecting a person a and then determining the value of the error random variable E, for the selected  person a. [An elementary discussion of the generic use of this kind of double expectation may be found in Freeman (1963.)] Now  for all a, &E, = 0, by construction, hence for a randomly selected a it will be zero. Let Z be a random variable taking values  z = 6 Ega . Then Z is a random variable that takes the value zero with unit probability and hence its expected value is zero,  i.e., &Z - &[SE9a] _-_ 0.  It is perhaps worth noting that with the assumption o2(Eg.) G oo made prior to Theorem 2.7.1. we may freely interchange the  order of expectation (integration) should there ever be a desire to do this.  2. STRONG CONVERGENCE  The point worth stressing is that the above theorem does not relate directly to the limiting behavior of the sequence  n  S'n = 9t-1 ~, Ei , i=1  I The need for clarification of Dr. Novick's earlier paper was kindly pointed out by  Dr. Stig Fhaner. (Editor)  356  STRONG CONVERGENCE 357  say, of random variables for sampling over persons corresponding to the sample relative error scores.  The question of whether or not that sequence converges strongly rather than just weakly to zero is a valid mathematical  question of some test theoretic interest. The distinction between these two questions, however, is fundamental.  For strong convergence and with the assumption of experimental independence it will be instructive to look carefully at the  assumption concerning the variances a2(E9a). Initially, the assumption taken was a2(Esa) < oo for all a. Unfortunately, just  what was meant by this statement was not made entirely precise in the previous paper and in the Lord and Novick book. However,  although we shall show that the point is irrelevant for the theory, it may be helpful to discuss it briefly. Most (but perhaps  not all) mathematicians would not take this to mean that there exists a number M < oo such that Q2(E9a) < M < oo, for all a.  Thus the assertion a2(E9a) < 00 would admit of the possibility a2(E9a) = a, for all a. In this case each variance is finite  but the set of variances is not uniformly bounded.  Using the assumption (E9,,) < M for all a, the most convenient theorem in this situation is the Kolmogorov criterion  (Feller, 1957, p. 243) which states that the convergence of the series Z(aa2ta2) is sufficient to guarantee the strong  convergence of the series of partial Sums. If Q2(Ega) = a, this condition is not met and the strong law, it appears, might not  hold. For most testing applications, however, the assumption Q2(E,,,) < M for all a is justifiable because E9a itself is  bounded and a single number M' exists such that P{I E9a I < M'} = 1 for all a. If this is the case, then the Kolmogorov  criterion is satisfied and strong convergence is guaranteed. For sampling within a fixed person Q2(X9a) = Q2 (E9a), and it is  clear that  n  n-1 Xeak k=1  converges strongly to the true score, T, , and the corresponding sequence of partial sums of relative error scores converges  strongly to zero.  Actually, the assumption of uniformly bounded error variances within person is unnecessary. Assuming experimental independence  the elements of the sequence of random variables X,,,, X9*2 ,... are mutually independent and identically distributed (because  of the random sampling of persons). Then the explicit assumption 92(Xn*k) < oo, k = 1, 2,..., i.e. (X9*k) = 02(X9*), taken  by Novick (1966) and Lord and Novick (1968), implies that fXg*k = lax = PT Say is finite for all k. Hence we may use a  corollary of the Kolmogorov criterion (Feller, 1957, p. 244) and conclude that  _kn =1 Xg+k n  converges to the mean true score with probability one and similarly that the relative  358 NOVICK  error score converges strongly to zero. It is perhaps worth noting that the assumption 62(Xg,) < oc rules out the possibility  that 62(E) = a, for all a = 1, 2, 3,..., which concerned us earlier.  Of course, when repeated observations are taken on a fixed individual, the application of the strong law is immediate when  experimental independence is assumed. Again, to make the distinction quite clear, Theorem 2.7.1. does not apply to a sequence  of random variables but only to the expected value of a single random variable. For this reason no assumption of experimental  independence is required.  3. SOME COMMENTS ON THE FOUNDATIONS OF MENTAL TEST THEORY  Most psychological statistics and test theory books are based on the Von Mises axiomatization of probability theory.  Mathematical statisticians have long abandoned this approach in favor of a measure theoretic foundation. In this approach the  concepts of measure and expectation are the basic entities of the theory and limit theorems are derived properties. Only by  abandoning the Von Mises approach and adopting an essentially (though not necessarily an entirely detailed) measure theoretic  approach was it possible to clarify the conceptual difficulties which have plagued test theory.  Having completed this work, the writer now recognizes that his work here and his work on Bayesian inference (Novick and Hall,  1965) rests most comfortably on the explication of measure theory due to Renyi (1962) and detailed in very readable fashion by  Lindley (1965). These treatments emphasize conditional rather than absolute probabilities and make possible the definition of  improper probability measures, thus providing a convenient basis for the kind of sampling expectation which the author has  applied to mental test theory.  REFERENCES  FELLER, W. An introduction to probability theory and its applications. (2nd ed.) New York: Wiley, 1957.  FREEMAN, H. Introduction to statistical inference. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley, 1963.  LINDLEY, D. V. Introduction to probability and statistics from a Bayesian viewpoint. London and New York: Cambridge, Univer.  Press, 1965.  LORD, F. M., AND NOVICK, M. R. Statistical theories of mental test scores (with contributions by A. Birnbaum). Reading,  Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley, 1968.  NOVICK, M. R. AND HALL, W. J. A Bayesian indifference procedure. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 1965, 60,  1107-1117.  NOVICK, M. R. The axioms and principal results of classical test theory. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1966, 3, 1-18.  RENYI, A. Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung. Berlin: Veb Deutschen Verlag der Wissenschaften, 1962.  RECEIVED: September 9, 1968.