10.1016/0022-2496(69)90010-8
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 6, 327-355 (1969)  Stimulus-Response Theory of Finite Automate  PATRICK SUPPES  Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305  The central aim of the paper is to state and prove a representation theorem for finite automata in terms of models of  stimulus-response theory. The main theorem is that, given any connected finite automaton, there is a stimulus-response model  that asymptotically becomes isomorphic to it. Implications of this result for language learning are discussed in some detail.  In addition, an immediate corollary is that any tote hierarchy in the sense of Miller and Chomsky is isomorphic to some  stimulusresponse model at asymptote. Representations of probabilistic automata are also discussed, and an application to the  learning of arithmetic algorithms is given.  1. INTRODUCTION  Ever since the appearance of Chomsky's famous review (1959) of Skinner's Verbal Behavior (1957), linguists have conducted an  effective and active campaign against the empirical or conceptual adequacy of any learning theory whose basic concepts are  those of stimulus and response, and whose basic processes are stimulus conditioning and stimulus sampling.  Because variants of stimulus-response theory had dominated much of experimental psychology in the two decades prior to the  middle fifties, there is no doubt that the attack of the linguists has had a salutary effect in disturbing the theoretical  complacency of many psychologists. Indeed, it has posed for all psychologists interested in systematic theory a number of  difficult and embarrassing questions about language learning and language behavior in general. However, in the flush of their  initial victories, many linguists have made extravagant claims and drawn sweeping, but unsupported conclusions about the  inadequacy of stimulus-response theories to handle any central aspects of language behavior. I say "extravagant" and  "unsupported" for this reason. The claims and conclusions are supported neither by careful mathematical argument to show that  in principle a conceptual inadequacy is to be found in all standard stimulus-response theories, nor by systematic presentation  of empirical evidence to show that the basic assumptions of these theories are empirically false. To cite two recent books of  some importance, neither theorems nor data are to be found in  1 This research has been partially supported by the National Science Foundation and the U. S. Office of Education. I am  indebted to Kenneth N. Wexler for a number of helpful comments on the manuscript.  1969 by Academic Press, Inc.  327  48o/6/3-1  328 SUPPES  Chomsky (1965) or Katz and Postal (1964), but rather one can find mane useful examples of linguistic analysis, many  interesting and insightful remarks about language behavior, and many incompletely worked out arguments about theories of  language learning.  The central aim of the present paper and its projected successors is to prove in detail that stimulus-response theory, or at  least a mathematically precise version, can indeed give an account of the learning of many phrase-structure grammars. I hope  that there will be no misunderstanding about the claims I am making. The mathematical definitions and theorems given here are  entirely subservient to the conceptual task of showing that the basic ideas of stimulus-response theory are rich enough to  generate in a natural way the learning of many phrase-structure grammars. I am not claiming that the mathematical  constructions in this paper correspond in any exact way to children's actual learning of their first language or to the  learning of a second language at a later stage. A number of fundamental empirical questions are generated by the formal  developments in this paper, but none of the relevant investigations have yet been carried out. Some suggestions for  experiments are mentioned below. I have been concerned to show that linguists are quite mistaken in their claims that even in  principle, apart from any questions of empirical evidence, it is not possible for conditioning theory to give an account of  any essential parts of language learning. The main results in this paper, and its sequel dealing with general context-free  languages, show that this linguistic claim is false. The specific constructions given below show that linguistic objections to  the processes of stimulus-conditioning and sampling as being unable in principle to explain any central aspects of learning a  grammar must be reformulated in less sweeping generality.  The mathematical formulation and proof of the main results presented here require the development of a certain amount of  formal machinery. In order not to obscure the main ideas, it seems desirable to describe in a preliminary and intuitive  fashion the character of the results.  The central idea is quite simple-it is to show how by applying accepted principles of conditioning an organism may  theoretically be taught by an appropriate reinforcement schedule to respond as a finite automaton. An automaton is defined as  a device with a finite number of internal states. When it is presented with one of a finite number of letters from an  alphabet, as a function of this letter of the alphabet and its current internal state, it moves to another one of its internal  states. (A more precise mathematical formulation is given below.) In order to show that an organism obeying general laws of  stimulus conditioning and sampling can be conditioned to become an automaton, it is necessary first of all to interpret within  the usual run of psychological concepts, the notion of a letter of an alphabet and the notion of an internal state. In my own  thinking about these matters, I was first misled by the perhaps natural attempt to identify the internal state of the  automaton with the state of conditioning of the organism. This idea, however, turned out to be clearly wrong.  STIMULUS-RESPONSE THEORY 329  In the first place, the various possible states of conditioning of the organism correspond to various possible automata that  the organism can be conditioned to become. Roughly speaking, to each state of conditioning there corresponds a different  automaton. Probably the next most natural idea is to look at a given conditioning state and use the conditioning of individual  stimuli to represent the internal states of the automaton. In very restricted cases this correspondence works, but in general  it does not, for reasons that become clear below. The correspondence that turns out to work is the following: the internal  states of the automaton are identified with the responses of the organism. There is no doubt that this "surface" behavioral  identification will make many linguists concerned with deep structures (and other deep, abstract ideas) uneasy, but  fortunately it is an identification already suggested in the literature of automata theory by E. F. Moore and others. The  suggestion was originally made to simplify the formal characterization of automata by postulating a one-one relation between  internal states of the machine and outputs of the machine. From a formal standpoint this means that the two separate concepts  of internal state and output can be welded into the single concept of internal state and, for our purposes, the internal  states can be identified with responses of the organism.  The correspondence to be made between letters of the alphabet that the automaton will accept and the appropriate objects  within stimulus-response theory is fairly obvious. The letters of the alphabet correspond in a natural way to sets of stimulus  elements presented on a given trial to an organism. So again, rougly speaking, the correspondence in this case is between the  alphabet and selected stimuli. It may seem like a happy accident, but the correspondences between inputs to the automata and  stimuli presented to the organism, and between internal states of the machine and responses of the organsim, are conceptually  very natural.  Because of the conceptual importance of the issues that have been raised by linguists for the future development of  psychological theory, perhaps above all because language behavior is the most characteristically human aspect of our behavior  patterns, it is important to be as clear as possible about the claims that can be made for a stimulusresponse theory whose  basic concepts seem so simple and to many so woefully inadequate to explain complex behavior, including language behavior. I  cannot refrain from mentioning two examples that present very useful analogies. First is the reduction of all standard  mathematics to the concept of set and the simple relation of an element being a member of a set. From a naive standpoint, it  seems unbelievable that the complexities of higher mathematics can be reduced to a relation as simple as that of set  membership. But this is indubitably the case, and we know in detail how the reduction can be made. This is not to suggest, for  instance, that in thinking about a mathematical problem or even in formulating and verifying it explicitly, a mathematician  operates simply in terms of endlessly complicated statements about set membership. By appropriate explicit definition we  introduce many additional concepts, the ones actually used in discourse. The fact remains, however, that the reduction to the  single  330 SUPPES  relationship of set membership can be made and in fact has been carried out in detail. The second example, which is close to  our present inquiry, is the status of simple machine languages for computers. Again, from the naive standpoint it seems  incredible that modern computers can do the things they can in terms either of information processing or numerical computing  when their basic language consists essentially just of finite sequences of 1's and 0's; but the more complex computer  languages that have been introduced are not at all for the convenience of the machines but for the convenience of human users.  It is perfectly clear how any more complex language, like ALGOL, can be reduced by a compiler or other device to a simple  machine language. The same attitude, it seems to me, is appropriate toward stimulus-response theory. We cannot hope to deal  directly in stimulus-response connections with complex human behavior. We can hope, as in the two cases just mentioned, to  construct a satisfactory systematic theory in terms of which a chain of explicit definitions of new and ever more complex  concepts can be introduced. It is these new and explicitly defined concepts that will be related directly to the more complex  forms of behavior. The basic idea of stimulus-response association or connection is close enough in character to the concept  of set membership or to the basic idea of automata to make me confident that new and better versions of stimulus-response  theory may be expected in the future and that the scientific potentiality of theories stated essentially in this framework has  by no means been exhausted.  Before turning to specific mathematical developments, it will be useful to make explicit how the developments in this paper  may be used to show that many of the common conceptions of conditioning, and particularly the claims that conditioning refers  only to simple reflexes like those of salivation or eye blinking, are mistaken. The mistake is to confuse particular  restricted applications of the fundamental theory with the range of the theory itself. Experiments on classical conditioning  do indeed represent a narrow range of experiments from a broader conceptual standpoint. It is important to realize, however,  that experiments on classical conditioning do not define the range and limits of conditioning theory itself. The main aim of  the present paper is to show how any finite automaton, no matter how complicated, may be constructed purely within  stimulus-response theory. But from the standpoint of automata, classical conditioning represents a particularly trivial  example of an automaton. Classical conditioning may be represented by an automaton having a one-letter alphabet and a single  internal state. The next simplest case corresponds to the structure of classical discrimination experiments. Here there is  more than a single letter to the alphabet, but the transition table of the automaton depends in no way on the internal state  of the automaton. In the case of discrimination, we may again think of the responses as corresponding to the internal states  of the automaton. In this sense there is more than one internal state, contrary to the case of classical conditioning, but  what is fundamental is that the transition table of the automaton does not depend on the internal states but only on the  external stimuli presented according to a schedule fixed by the  STIMULUS-RESPONSE THEORY 331  experimenter. It is of the utmost importance to realize that this restriction, as in the case of classical conditioning  experiments, is not a restriction that is in any sense inherent in conditioning theory itself. It merely represents  concentration on a certain restricted class of experiments.  Leaving the technical details for later, it is still possible to give a very clear example of conditioning that goes beyond  the classical cases and yet represents perhaps the simplest nontrivial automaton. By nontrivial I mean: there is more than one  letter in the alphabet; there is more than one internal state; and the transition table of the automaton is a function of both  the external stimulus and the current internal state. As an example, we may take a rat being run in a maze. The reinforcement  schedule for the rat is set up so as to make the rat become a two-state automaton. We will use as the external alphabet of the  automaton a two-letter alphabet consisting of a black or a white card. Each choice point of the maze will consist of either a  left turn or a right turn. At each choice point either a black card or a white card will be present. The following table  describes both the reinforcement schedule and the transition table of the automaton.  L R  LB LW RB RW  Thus the first row shows that when the previous response has been left (L) and a black stimulus card (B) is presented at the  choice point, with probability one the animal is reinforced to turn left. The second row indicates that when the previous  response is left and a white stimulus card is presented at the choice point, the animal is reinforced 100 % of the time to  turn right, and so forth, for the other two possibilities. From a formal standpoint this is a simple schedule of  reinforcement, but already the double aspect of contingency on both the previous response and the displayed stimulus card  makes the schedule more complicated in many respects than the schedules of reinforcement that are usually run with rats. I  have not been able to get a uniform prediction from my experimental colleagues as to whether it will be possible to teach rats  to learn this schedule. (Most of them are confident pigeons can be trained to respond like nontrivial two-state automata.)2  One thing to note about this schedule is that it is recursive in the sense that if the animal is properly trained according to  the schedule, the length of the maze will be of no importance. He will always make a  s Indeed, Phoebe C. E. Diebold and Ebbey Bruce Ebbesen have already successfully trained two pigeons. Sequences of several  hundred responses are easily obtained, and the error rate is surprisingly low-well under 1%.  332 SUPPES  response that depends only upon his previous response and the stimulus card present at the choice point.  There is no pretense that this simple two-state automaton is in any sense adequate to serious learning. I am not proposing,  for example, that there is much chance of teaching even a simple one-sided linear grammar to rats. I am proposing to  psychologists, however, that already automata of a small number of states present immediate experimental challenges in terms  of what can be done with animals of each species. For example, what is the most complicated automaton a monkey may be trained  to imitate ? In this case, there seems some possibility of approaching at least reasonably complex one-sided linear grammars  (using the theorem that any one-sided linear grammar is definable by a finite-state automaton). In the case of the lower  species, it will be necessary to exploit to the fullest the kind of stimuli to which the organisms are most sensitive and  responsive in order to maximize the complexity of the automata they can imitate.  If a generally agreed upon definition of complexity for finite automata can be reached, it will be possible to use this  measure to gauge the relative level of organizational complexity that can be achieved by a given species, at least in terms of  an external schedule of conditioning and reinforcement. I do want to emphasize that the measures appropriate to experiments  with animals are almost totally different from the measures that have been discussed in the recent literature of automata as  complexity measures for computations. What is needed in the case of animals is the simple and orderly arrangement on a  complexity scale of automata that have a relatively small number of states and that accept a relatively small alphabet of  stimuli. The number of distinct training conditions is not a bad measure and can be used as a first approximation. Thus in the  case of classical conditioning, this number is one. In the case of discrimination between black and white stimuli, the number  is two. In the case of the two-state automaton described for the maze experiment, this number is four, but there are some  problems with this measure. It is not clear that we would regard as more complex than this two-state automaton, an organism  that masters a discrimination experiment consisting of six different responses to six different discriminating stimuli.  Consequently, what I've said here about complexity is pre-systematic. I do think the development of an appropriate scale of  complexity can be of theoretical interest, especially in cross-species comparison of intellectual power.  The remainder of this paper is devoted to the technical development of the general ideas already discussed. Section 2 is  concerned with standard notions of finite and probabilistic automata. Readers already familiar with this literature should  skip this section and go on to the treatment of stimulus-response theory in Sec. 3. It has been necessary to give a rigorous  axiomatization of stimulus-response theory in order to formulate the representation theorem for finite automata in  mathematically precise form. However, the underlying ideas of stimulus-response theory as formulated in Sec. 3 will be  familiar to all experimental psychologists. In Sec. 4 the most important  STIMULUS-RESPONSE THEORY 333  result of the paper is proved, namely, that any finite automaton can be represented at asymptote by an appropriate model of  stimulus-response theory. In Sec. 5 some extensions of these results to probabilistic automata are sketched, and an example  from arithmetic is worked out in detail.  The relationship between stimulus-response theory and grammars is established in Sec. 4 by known theorems relating automata to  grammars. The results in the present paper are certainly restricted regarding the full generality of context-free languages.  Weakening these restrictions will be the focus of a subsequent paper.  Some results on tote hierarchies and plans in the sense of Miller, Galanter, and Pribram (1960) are also given in Sec. 4. The  representation of tote hierarchies by stimulus-response models follows directly from the main theorem of that section.  2. AUTOMATA  The account of automata given here is formally self-contained, but not really self-explanatory in the deeper sense of  discussing and interpreting in adequate detail the systematic definitions and theorems. I have followed closely the  development in the well-known article of Rabin and Scott (1959), and for probabilistic automata, the article of Rabin (1963).  DEFINITION 1. A structure 21 = <A, E, M, s,, F> is a finite (deterministic) automaton if and only if  (i) A is a finite, nonempty set (the set of states of 91), (ii) E is a finite, nonempty set (the alphabet),  (iii) M is a function from the Cartesian product A x E to A (M defines the transition table of W),  (iv) so is in A (sa is the initial state of 21),  (v) F is a subset of A (F is the set of final states of 21).  In view of the generality of this definition it is apparent that there are a great variety of automata, but as we shall see,  this generality is easily matched by the generality of the models of stimulus-response theory.  In notation now nearly standardized, E* is the set of finite sequences of elements of Z, including the empty sequence A. The  elements of E* are ordinarily called tapes. If al ,..., or, are in E, then x = al ... a, is in E*. (As shown below, these  tapes correspond in a natural way to finite sequences of sets of stimulus elements.) The function M can be extended to a  function from A X E* to A by the following recursive definition for s in A, x in E*, and a in E.  M(s, A) = s,  M(s, xa) = M(M(s, x), a).  334 SUPPES  DEFINITION 2. A tape x of _'* is accepted by 9( if and only if M(so , x) is in F. A tape x that is accepted by 2C is a  sentence of 2I.  We shall also refer to tapes as strings of the alphabet 1.  DEFINITION 3. The language L generated by 21 is the set of all sentences of ,1 C, i.e., the set of all tapes accepted by 2X.  Regular languages are sometimes defined just as those languages generated by some finite automaton. An independent,  set-theoretical characterization is also possible. The basic result follows from Kleene's (1956) fundamental analysis of the  kind of events definable by McCulloch-Pitts nets. Several equivalent formulations are given in the article by Rabin and Scott  (1959). From a linguistic standpoint probably the most useful characterization is that to be found in Chomsky (1963, pp.  368-371). Regular languages are generated by one-sided linear grammars. Such grammars have a finite number of rewrite rules,  which in the case of right-linear rules, are of the form  Whichever of several equivalent formulations is used, the fundamental theorem, originally due to Kleene, but closely related  to the theorem of Myhill given by Rabin and Scott, in this.  THEOREM ON REGULAR LANGUAGES. Any regular language is generated by some finite automaton, and every finite automaton generates  a regular language.  For the main theorem of this article, we need the concepts of isomorphism and equivalence of finite automata. The definition  of isomorphism is just the natural set-theoretical one for structures like automata.  DEFINITION 4. Let u = <A, E, M, so , F> and W' = <A', E', M', so', F'> be finite automata. Then % and 4I' are isomorphic if  and only if there exists a function f such that  (i) f is one-one,  (ii) Domain off is A v E and range off is A' v E', (iii) For every a in A V E  a e A if and only if f (a) E A',  (iv) For every s in A and a in E  f (M(s, a)) = MV (s), f (a)),  (v) f (so) - so',  (vi) For every s in A  s c -F i f and only if f (s) e F'.  STIMULUS-RESPONSE THEORY 335  It is apparent that conditions (i)-(iii) of the definition imply that for every a in A U Z  a E E if and only if  and consequently, this condition on E need not be stated. From the standpoint of the general algebraic or set-theoretical  concept of isomorphism, it would have been more natural to define an automaton in terms of a basic set B = A U E, and then  require that A and Z both be subsets of B. Rabin and Scott avoid the problem by not making E a part of the automaton. They  define the concept of an automaton 2C = <A, M, so, F> with respect to an alphabet E, but for the purposes of this paper it is  also desirable to include the alphabet Z in the definition of 2C in order to make explicit the natural place of the alphabet  in the stimulus-response models, and above all, to provide a simple setup for going from one alphabet E to another E'.In any  case, exactly how these matters are handled is not of central importance here.  DEFINITION 5. Two automata are equivalent if and only if they accept exactly the same set of tapes.  This is the standard definition of equivalence in the literature. As it stands, it means that the definition of equivalence is  neither stronger nor weaker than the definition of isomorphism, because, on the one hand, equivalent automata are clearly not  necessarily isomorphic, and, on the other hand, isomorphic automata with different alphabets are not equivalent. It would seem  natural to weaken the notion of equivalence to include two automata that generate distinct but isomorphic languages, or sets  of tapes, but this point will bear on matters here only tangentially.  A finite automaton is connected if for every state s there is a tape x such that M(so , x) = s. It is easy to show that every  automaton is equivalent to a connected automaton, and the representation theorem of Sec. 4 is restricted to connected  automata. It is apparent that from a functional standpoint, states that cannot be reached by any tape are of no interest, and  consequently, restriction to connected automata does not represent any real loss of generality. The difficulty of representing  automata with unconnected states by stimulus-response models is that we have no way to condition the organism with respect to  these states, at least in terms of the approach developed here.  It is also straightforward to establish a representation for probabilistic automata within stimulus-response theory, and, as  is apparent in Sec. 5, there are some interesting differences in the way we may represent deterministic and probabilistic  automata within stimulus-response theory.  DEFINITION 6. A structure 2T = <A, E, p, so , F> is a (finite) probabilistic automaton if and only if  (i) A is a finite, nonempty set,  336 SUPPES  (ii) Z is a finite, nonempty set,  (iii) p is a./unction on .4 X Z such that for each s in _-1 and a in Z, p,,.o is a probability density over A, i.e.,  (a) for each s' in A, p,.o(s') :-::~ 0, (b) 1,'cAP,,a(s') - 1,  (iv) so is in A,  (v) F is a subset of A.  The only change in generalizing from Definition 1 to Definition 6 is found in (iii), although it is natural to replace (iv) by  an initial probability density. It is apparent how Definition 4 must be modified to characterize the isomorphism of  probabilistic automata, and so the explicit definition will not be given.  3. STIMULUS-RESPONSE THEORY  The formalization of stimulus-response theory given here follows closely the treatment in Estes and Suppes (1959) and Suppes  and Atkinson (1960). Some minor changes have been made to facilitate the treatment of finite automata, but it is to be  strongly emphasized that none of the basic ideas or assumptions has required modification.  The theory is based on six primitive concepts, each of which has a direct psychological interpretation. The first one is the  set S of stimuli, which we shall assume is not empty, but which we will not restrict to being either finite or infinite on all  occasions. The second primitive concept is the set R of responses and the third primitive concept the set E of possible  reinforcements. As in the case of the set of stimuli, we need not assume that either R or E is finite, but in the present  applications to the theory of finite automata we shall make this restrictive assumption. (For a proper treatment of phonology  it will clearly be necessary to make R, and probably E as well, infinite with at the very least a strong topological if not  The fourth primitive concept is that of a measure p on the set of stimuli. In case the set S is finite this measure is often  the number of elements in S. For the general theory we shall assume that the measure of S itself is always finite, i.e., p(S)  < oo.  The fifth primitive concept is the sample space X. Each element x of the sample space represents a possible experiment, that  is, an infinite sequence of trials. In the present theory, each trial may be described by an ordered quintuple <C, T, s, r,  e), where C is the conditioning function, T is the subset of stimuli presented to the organism on the given trial, s is the  sampled subset of T, r is the response made on the trial, and e is the reinforcement occurring on that trial. It is not  possible to make all the comments here that are required for a full interpretation and understanding of the theory. For those  wanting a more detailed description, the two references already  STIMULUS-RESPONSE THEORY 337  given will prove useful. A very comprehensive set of papers on stimulus-sampling theory has been put together in the  collection edited by Neimark and Estes (1967). The present version of stimulus-response theory should in many respects be  called stimulus-sampling theory, but I have held to the more general stimulus-response terminology to emphasize the  juxtaposition of the general ideas of behavioral psychology on the one hand and linguistic theory on the other. In addition,  in the theoretical applications to be made here the specific sampling aspects of stimulusresponse theory are not as central as  in the analysis of experimental data.  Because of the importance to be attached later to the set T of stimuli presented on each trial, its interpretation in  classical learning theory should be explicitly mentioned. In the case of simple learning, for example, in classical  conditioning, the set T is the same on all trials and we would ordinarily identify the sets T and S. In the case of  discrimination learning, the set T varies from trial to trial, and the application we are making to automata theory falls  generally under the discrimination case. The conditioning function C is defined over the set R of responses and Cr is the  subset of S conditioned or connected to response r on the given trial. How the conditioning function changes from trial to  trial is made clear by the axioms.  From the quintuple description of a given trial it is clear that certain assumptions about the behavior that occurs on a trial  have already been made. In particular it is apparent that we are assuming that only one sample of stimuli is drawn on a given  trial, that exactly one response occurs on a trial and that exactly one reinforcement occurs on a trial. These assumptions  have been built into the set-theoretical description of the sample space X and will not be an explicit part of our axioms.  Lying behind the formality of the ordered quintuples representing each trial is the intuitively conceived temporal ordering of  events on any trial, which may be represented by the following diagram:  State of      state of  conditioning  presen-  sampling  conditioning  at -> tation ~- of -~ response -> reinforce- -~ at  beginning  of  stimuli ment beginning of  of trial  stimuli    new trial  Cn  Tn ---). sn rn en Cn+1  The sixth and final primitive concept is the probability measure P on the appropriate Borel field of cylinder sets of X. The  exact description of this Borel field is rather complicated when the set of stimuli is not finite, but the construction is  standard, and we shall assume the reader can fill in details familiar from general probability theory. It is emphasized that  all probabilities must be defined in terms of the measure P.  We also need certain notation to take us back and forth between elements or subsets of the sets of stimuli, responses, and  reinforcements to events of the sample space X.  338 SUPPES  First, ris the event of response r on trial n, that is, the set of all possible experimental realizations or elements of X  having r as a response on the nth trial. Similarly, e,,,is the event of response is being reinforced on trial n. The event  e,,, is the event of no reinforcement on trial n. In like fashion, Cn is the event of conditioning function C occurring on  trial n, Tis the event of presentation set T occurring on trial n, and so forth. Additional notation that does not follow  these conventions will be explicitly noted.  We also need a notation for sets defined by events occurring up to a given trial. Reference to such sets is required in  expressing that central aspects of stimulus conditioning and sampling are independent of the pattern of past events. If I say  that Y,, is an n-cylinder set, I mean that the definition of Ydoes not depend on any event occurring after trial n. However,  an even finer breakdown is required that takes account of the postulated sequence C, T,, -> s-> r, eon a given trial,  so in saying that Yis a C,,-cylinder set what is meant is that its definition does not depend on any event occurring after  C,z. on trial n, i.e., its definition could depend on T1 or C, for example, but not on Tor sn . As an abbreviated  notation, I shall write Y(C,,) for this set and similarly for other cylinder sets. The notation 1'n without additional  qualification shall always refer to an n-cylinder set.  Also, to avoid an overly cumbersome notation, event notation of the sort already indicated will be used, e.g., e,.,, for  reinforcement of response r on trial n, but also the notation a E Cr,for the event of stimulus a's being conditioned to  response r on trial n.  To simplify the formal statement of the axioms it is assumed without repeated explicit statement that any given events on  which probabilities are conditioned have positive probability. Thus, for example, the tacit hypothesis of Axiom S2 is that  P(T) > 0 and P(T > 0.  The axioms naturally fall into three classes. Stimuli must be sampled in order to be conditioned, and they must be conditioned  in order for systematic response patterns to develop. Thus, there are naturally three kinds of axioms: sampling axioms;  conditioning axioms; and response axioms. A verbal formulation of each axiom is given together with its formal statement. From  the standpoint of formulations of the theory already in the literature, perhaps the most unusual feature of the present axioms  is not to require that the set S of stimuli be finite. It should also be emphasized that for any one specific kind of detailed  application additional specializing assumptions are needed. Some indication of these will be given in the particular  application to automata theory, but it would take us too far afield to explore these specializing assumptions in any detail  and with any faithfulness to the range of assumptions needed for different experimental applications.  DEFINITION 7. A structure Y = <S, R, E, p, X, P> is a stimulus-response model if and only if the following axioms are  satisfied:  STIMULUS-RESPONSE THEORY  339  SAMPLING AXIOMS.  S1. P(I,(sn) > 0) = 1.  (On every trial a set of stimuli of positive measure is sampled with probability 1.) S2. P(s. I T.) = P(s. I Tn).  (If the same presentation set occurs on two different trials, then the probability of a given sample is independent of the  trial number.)  S3. If s V s' C T and j(s) = tL(s') then P(sn I Tn) = P(sn' I Tn).  (Samples of equal measure that are subsets of the presentation set have an equal probability of being sampled on a given  trial.)  S4. P(s. I T., Y.(Cn)) = P(s. I Tn).  (The probability of a particular sample on trial n, given the presentation set of stimuli, is independent of any preceding  pattern Yn(Cn) of events.)  CONDITIONING AXIOMS:  C1. If r, r' E R, r 0 r' and C, n C,v~ 0, then P(Cn) = 0.  (On every trial with probability 1 each stimulus element is conditioned to at most one response.)  C2. There exists a c > 0 such that for every o, C, r, n, s, er , and Yn  P(v E C,,n+l I o 0 Cr,., a E Sn , er,n ) Yn) = C.  (The probability is c of any sampled stimulus element's becoming conditioned to the reinforced response if it is not already  so conditioned, and this probability is independent of the particular response, trial number, or any preceding pattern Yn of  events.)  C3. P(Cn+1 I Cn , eo.n) = 1.  (With probability 1, the conditioning of all stimulus elements remains the same if no response is reinforced.)  C4. P(a E Cr,n+l I o E C,.n , a 0 Sn , Yn) = 1.  (With probability 1, the conditioning of unsampled stimuli does not change.)  RESPONSE AXIOMS:  R1. If U,rR Cr n s - 0 then  I'(rn I C., S., 1'(s.)) = ((s !) Cr) .  (If at least one sampled stimulus is conditioned to some response, then the probability  of any response is the ratio of the measure of sampled stimuli conditioned to this response  340 SUPPES  to the measure of all the sampled conditioned stimuli, and this probability is independent of any preceding pattern 1'(s of  events.  R2. If U,B C, rl s = 0 then there is a number p, such that  P(r,, ' C, s,z , V(SO) - P, .  (If no sampled stimulus is conditioned to any response, then the probability of any response r is a constant guessing  probability p, that is independent of n and any preceding pattern Y(sn) of events.)  A general discussion of these axioms and their implications for a wide range of psychological experiments may be found in the  references already cited. The techniques of analysis used in Sec. 5 of the present paper are extensively exploited and applied  to a number of experiments in Suppes and Atkinson (1960).  4. REPRESENTATION OF FINITE AUTOMATA  A useful beginning for the analysis of how we may represent finite automata by stimulus-response models is to examine what is  wrong with the most direct approach possible. The difficulties that turn up may be illustrated by the simple example of a  two-letter alphabet (i.e., two stimuli Q1 and Q2 , as well as the "start-up" stimulus vo) and a two-state automaton (i.e., two  responses r1 and r2). Consideration of this example, already mentioned in the introductory section, will be useful for several  points of later discussion.  By virtue of Axiom S1, the single presented stimulus must be sampled on each trial, and we assume that for every n,  0 < P(ao E SO, P(61 E sn), P(v2 E sn) < 1.  Suppose, further, the transition table of the machine is:  rl r2  r1Q1 ria2 r2a1 r2(72  which requires knowledge of both ri and o; to predict what response should be next. The natural and obvious reinforcement  schedule for imitating this machine is:  P(e1,n Q1,n x1,n-1) = 1> P(e2.n a1,n,r2.n-1) - 1,  STIMULUS-RESPONSE THEORY 341  P(e2,n a2,n rl,n-1) - if P(el,n a2,n r r2,,,-I) - 1,  where ai,n is the event of stimulus ai's being sampled on trial n. But for this reinforcement schedule the conditioning of  each of the two stimuli continues to fluctuate from trial to trial, as may be illustrated by the following sequence. For  simplification and without loss of generality, we may assume that the conditioning parameter c is 1, and we need indicate no  sampling, because as already mentioned, the single stimulus element in each presentation set will be sampled with probability  1. We may represent the states of conditioning (granted that each stimulus is conditioned to either rl or r2) by subsets of S  = {a, , al , a2}. Thus, if {al , a2} represents the conditioning function, this means both elements al and a2 are conditioned  to rl ; Jail means that only al is conditioned to rl , and so forth. Consider then the following sequence from trial n to n +  2:  <{a27, a2 E s, rl , e2> __* (01 a2 E s, r2 , e2> - <01 a2 E S, r2 , el>.  The response on trial n + 1 satisfies the machine table, but already on n + 2 it- does not, for r2,n+la2.n.+2 should be  followed by rl,n+2 . It is easy to show that this difficulty is fundamental and arises for any of the four possible  conditioning states. (In working out these difficulties explicitly, the reader should assume that each stimulus is conditioned  to either rl or r2 , which will be true for n much larger than 1 and c = 1.)  What is needed is a quite different definition of the states of the Markov chain of the stimulus-response model. [For proof of  a general Markov-chain theorem for stimulusresponse theory, see Estes and Suppes (1959).] Naively, it is natural to take as  the states of the Markov chain the possible states of conditioning of the stimuli in S, but this is wrong on two counts in the  present situation. First, we must condition the patterns of responses and presentation sets, so we take as the set of stimuli  for the model, R x S, i.e., the Cartesian product of the set R of responses and the set S of stimuli. What the organism must  be conditioned to respond to on trial n is the pattern consisting of the preceding response given on trial n - 1 and the  presentation set occurring on trial n.  It is still not sufficient to define the states of the Markov chain in terms of the states of conditioning of the elements in  R X S, because for reasons that are given explicitly and illustrated by many examples in Estes and Suppes (1959) and Suppes  and Atkinson (1960), it is also necessary to include in the definition of state the response ri that actually occurred on the  preceding trial. The difficulty that arises if r2,n_1 is not included in the definition of state may be brought out by  attempting to draw the tree in the case of the two-state automaton already considered. Suppose just the pattern rlal is  conditioned, and the other four patterns, ao , rla2 , real , and r2a2 , are not. Let us represent this conditioning state by  Cl , and let Tj be the noncontingent probability of 6j , 0 < j < 2, on every trial with every Tj > 0. Then the tree looks like  this.  342 SUPPES  The tree is incomplete, because without knowing what response actually occurred on trial n -- 1 we cannot complete the  branches (e.g., specify the responses), and for a similar reason we cannot determine the probabilities x, y, and z. Moreover,  we cannot remedy the situation by including among the branches the possible responses on trial n - 1, for to determine their  probabilities we would need to look at trial n - 2, and this regression would not terminate until we reached trial 1.  So we include in the definition of state the response on trial n - 1. On the other hand, it is not necessary in the case of  deterministic finite automata to permit among the states all possible conditioning of the patterns in R x S. We shall permit  only two possibilities-the pattern is unconditioned or it is conditioned to the appropriate response because conditioning to  the wrong response occurs with probability zero. Thus with p internal states or responses and m letters in 2;, there are (m  -;- I) p patterns, each of which is in one of two states, conditioned or unconditioned, and there are p possible preceding  responses, so the number of states in the Markov chain is p2(m+1)P. Actually, it is convenient to reduce this number further  by treating ao as a single pattern regardless of what preceding response it is paired with. The number of states is then  p2mD+'. Thus, for the simplest 2-state, 2-alphabet automaton, the number of states is 64. We may denote the states by ordered  mp -}- 2-tuples  <r7 , Zo, Z0,1 >..., Zo m ,...,  where ikc is 0 or 1 depending on whether the pattern rkva is unconditioned or conditioned with 0 < k < p - 1 and 1 < 4 < m; r;  is the response on the preceding trial, and iQ is the state of conditioning of a,. What we want to prove is that starting in  the purely unconditioned set of states <r;, 0, 0,..., 0>, with probability 1 the system will always ultimately be in a state  that is a member of the set of fully conditioned states <r; , l, 1,..., 1>. The proof of this is the main part of the proof of  the basic representation theorem.  Before turning to the theorem we need to define explicitly the concept of a stimulusresponse model's asymptotically becoming  an automaton. As has already been suggested, an important feature of this definition is this. The basic set S of stimuli  corresponding to the alphabet E of the automaton is not the basic set of stimuli of the  STIMULUS-RESPONSE THEORY 343  stimulus-response model, but rather, this basic set is the Cartesian product R X S, where R is the set of responses. Moreover,  the definition has been framed in such a way as to permit only a single element of S to be presented and sampled on each  trial; this, however, is an inessential restriction used here in the interest of conceptual and notational simplicity. Without  this restriction the basic set would be not R X S, but R X P(S), where P(S) is the power set of S, i.e., the set of all  subsets of S, and then each letter of the alphabet Z would be a subset of S rather than a single element of S. What is  essential is to have R X S rather than S as the basic set of stimuli to which the axioms of Definition 6 apply.  For example, the pair (ri , (7;) must be sampled and conditioned as a pattern, and the axioms are formulated to require that  what is sampled and conditioned be a subset of the presentation set T on a given trial. In this connection to simplify  notation I shall often write Tm = (ri,_1 , a;,J rather than  T = {(ri, aj)J,  but the meaning is clear. Tn is the presentation set consisting of the single pattern (or element) made up of response ri on  trial n - 1 and stimulus element a; on trial n, and from Axiom Sl we know that the pattern is sampled because it is the only  one presented.  From a psychological standpoint something needs to be said about part of the presentation set being the previous response. In  the first place, and perhaps most importantly, this is not an ad hoe idea adopted just for the purposes of this paper. It has  already been used in a number of experimental studies unconnected with automata theory. Several worked-out examples are to be  found in various chapters of Suppes and Atkinson (1960).  Secondly, and more importantly, the use of R X S is formally convenient, but is not at all necessary. The classical S-R  tradition of analysis suggests a formally equivalent, but psychologically more realistic approach. Each response r produces a  stimulus a,. , or more generally, a set of stimuli. Assuming again, for formal simplicity just one stimulus element ar ,  rather than a set of stimuli, we may replace R by the set of stimuli SR , with the purely contingent presentation schedule  P(ar, I rn-1) = 1,  and in the model we now consider the Cartesian product SR X S rather than R X S. Within this framework the important point  about the presentation set on each trial is that one component is purely subject-controlled and the other purely  experimentercontrolled-if we use familiar experimental distinctions. The explicit use of SR rather than R promises to be  important in training animals to perform like automata, because the external introduction of ar reduces directly and  significantly the memory load on  48o/6/3-a  344 SUPPES  the animal.3 The importance of SR for models of children's language learning is less clear.  DEFINITION 8. Let <9" - <R X S, R, E, Nt, X, P > be a stimulus-response model where  S = {QO r .., Qretlr E _ {eo ,..., e,_1 1,  and It(S) is the cardinality of S' for S' C S. Then .So asymptotically becomes the automaton +u(~) = (R, S - {vol, M, ro , F>  if and only if  (i) as n --* oo the probability is 1 that the presentation set Tn is (ri.n_I , -j,n) for some i and j,  (ii) M(ri, Qj) = rk if and only if limn_ P(rk,, I Tn - (ri,n-i Qj,n)) - 1 ,for 0<i<p-landl<j<m,  (iii) limn,, P(r,,n I Tn = (ri.n-1 1 for 0 < Z < p - 1,  (iv) F C R.  A minor but clarifying point about this definition is that the stimulus Qo is not part of the alphabet of the automaton W(Y),  because a stimulus is needed to put the automaton in the initial state ro , and from the standpoint of the theory being worked  out here, this requires a stimulus to which the organism will give response ro .4 That stimulus is ao . The definition also  requires that asymptotically the stimulus-response model Y is nothing but the automaton 21(`.x). It should be clear that a  much weaker and more general definition is possible. The automaton 21(Y) could merely be embedded asymptotically in .So and be  only a part of the activities of Y. The simplest way to achieve this generalization is to make the alphabet of the automaton  only a proper subset of S - {a,} and correspondingly for the responses that make up the internal states of the automaton; they  need be only a proper subset of the full set R of responses. This generalization will not be pursued here, although something  of the sort will be necessary to give an adequate stimulus-response account of the semantical aspects of language.  3 Exactly such a procedure has proved very successful in the pigeon experiments with Diebold and Ebbesen mentioned in Footnote  2.  4 Two other points about the definition are the following. First, in this definition and throughout the rest of the article ep  is the reinforcement of response ro, and not the null reinforcement, as in Sect. 3. This conflict arises from the different  notational conventions in mathematical learning theory and automata theory. Second, strictly speaking I should write (2CF Y)  because F is not uniquely determined by Y.  STIMULUS-RESPONSE THEORY 345  REPRESENTATION THEOREM FOR FINITE AUTOMATA. Given any connected finite automaton, there is a stimulus-response model that  asymptotically becomes isomorphic to it. Moreover, the stimulus-response model may have all responses initially unconditioned.  Proof. Let % = <A, E, M, so , F> be any connected finite automaton. As indicated already, we represent the set A of internal  states by the set R of responses; we shall use the natural correspondence si-ri , for 0 < i < p - 1, where p is the number of  states. We represent the alphabet Z by the set of stimuli of ,..., o , and, for reasons already made explicit, we augment  this set of stimuli by Qo , to obtain  S = {QO ' a1 ~..., am}.  For subsequent reference let f be the function defined on A V Z that establishes the natural one-one correspondence between A  and R, and between E and S - {so}. (To avoid some trivial technical points, I shall assume that A and E are disjoint.)  We take as the set of reinforcements  E = {eo , e1 ~..., eD-1},  and the measure IL(S') is the cardinality of S' for S' C S, so that as in Definition 8, we are considering a stimulus-response  model Y = (R X S, R, E, t,, X, P>. In order to show that Y asymptotically becomes an automaton, we impose five additional  restrictions on .So. They are these.  First, in the case of reinforcement eo the schedule is this:  P(eo,n I -0.n) - 1, (1)  i.e., if a,,,, is part of the presentation set on trial n, then with probability 1 response ro is reinforced-note that the  reinforcing event eo,,, is independent of the actual occurrence of the event ro,n .  Second, the remaining reinforcement schedule is defined by the transition table M of the automaton 2I. Explicitly, for j, k  :7~- 0 and for all i and n  P(ek,n Q7.nri,n-1) = 1 if and only if M(f-1(ri),f-1(a;)) = f-1(rk). (2)  Third, essential to the proof is the additional assumption beyond (1) and (2) that the stimuli uo,..., una each have a  positive, noncontingent probability of occurrence on each trial (a model with a weaker assumption could be constructed but it  is not significant to weaken this requirement). Explicitly, we then assume that for any cylinder set Y(.,,) such that P(Y(C)  > 0  P(Qi,.) = P(-i.. I Y(C")) > Ti > 0 (3)  for 0 < i < m and for all trials n.  346 SUPPES  Fourth, we assume that the probability pi of response ri occurring when no conditioned stimuli is sampled is also strictly  positive, i.e., for every response r  which strengthens Axiom R2.  Fifth, for each integer k, 0 < k <_ mp - 1, we define the set Qk as the set of states that have exactly k patterns  conditioned, and Qkk,, is the event of being in a state that is a member of Qx on trial n. We assume that at the beginning of  trial 1, no patterns are conditioned, i.e.,  P(QO,l) = 1. (5)  It is easy to prove that given the sets R, S, E and the cardinality measure p, there are many different stimulus-response  models satisfying restrictions (1)-(5), but for the proof of the theorem it is not necessary to select some distinguished  member of the class of models because the argument that follows shows that all the members of the class asymptotically become  isomorphic to 91.  The main thing we want to prove is that as n --, oo  P(Q.+1,n) = 1.  We first note that if j < k the probability of a transition from Qx to Q; is zero, i.e.,  moreover,  P(Q7,n I Qk,n-1) = 0, (7) P(Qj,n I Qk,n-1) = 0  even if j > k unless j = k + 1. In other words, in a single trial, at most one pattern can become conditioned.  To show that asymptotically (6) holds, it will suffice to show that there is an E > 0 such that on each trial n for 0 G k < mp  < n if P(Qk,n) > 0,  P(Qk+l,n+l I Qk,n) i E  To establish (9) we need to show that there is a probability of at least E of a stimulus pattern that is unconditioned at the  beginning of trial n becoming conditioning on that trial. The argument given will be a uniform one that holds for any  unconditioned pattern. Let r*o* be such a pattern on trial n.  Now it is well known that for a connected automaton, for every internal state s, there is a tape x such that  M(so , x) = s (10)  STIMULUS-RESPONSE THEORY 347  and the length of x is not greater than the number of internal states. In terms of stimulus-response theory, x is a finite  sequence of length not greater than p of stimulus elements. Thus we may take x = Oil ,..., Oiv with a.P = O*. We know by  virtue of (3) that  min Ti - T > 0. (11) 0<icm e  The required sequence of responses ril ,..., rim, will occur either from prior conditioning or if any response is not  conditioned to the appropriate pattern, with guessing probability pi . By virtue of (4)  min pi=p >0. (12) 0<i-p-<-1  To show that the pattern r*O* has a positive probability E, of being conditioning on trial n, we need only take n large enough  for the tape x to be "run," say, n > p -}- 1, and consider the joint probability  P* = P(a,* , r,*,-, , Oip-1 , n - 1, rip-2, n - 2) ..., Oil n-ip r r0.n"iP 1 , u0.n-i, 1)' (13)  The basic axioms and the assumptions (1)-(5) determine a lower bound on P* independent of n. First we note that for each of  the stimulus element a,, Oi,  by virtue of (3) and (11)  *  P(an I ...) i T ,.., P(OO n-iP ,) i T.  Similarly, from (4) and (12), as well as the response axioms, we know that for each of the responses ro , ri ,..., r*  P(rn-1 ...) ] p,,.., P(ro.n-iy l OO.n-iy 1) i P  Thus we know that  and given the occurrence of the event an rn , , the probability of conditioning is c, whence we may take  E = CPPTP+l > 0,  which establishes (9) and completes the proof.  Given the theorem just proved there are several significant corollaries whose proofs are almost immediate. The first combines  the representation theorem for regular languages with that for finite automata to yield:  COROLLARY ON REGULAR LANGUAGES. Any regular language is generated by some stimulus-response model at asymptote.  348 SUPPES  Once probabilistic considerations are made a fundamental part of the scene, we can in several different ways go beyond the  restriction of stimulus-response generated languages to regular languages, but I shall not explore these matters here.  I suspect that many psychologists or philosophers who are willing to accept the sense given here to the reduction of finite  automata and regular languages to stimulusresponse models will be less happy with the claim that one well-defined sense of the  concepts of intention, plan, and purpose can be similarly reduced. However, without any substantial new analysis on my part  this can be done by taking advantage of an analysis already made by Miller and Chomsky (1963). The story goes like this. In  1960 Miller, Galanter and Pribram published a provocative book entitled Plans and the Structure of Behavior. In this book they  severely criticized stimulus-response theories for being able to account for so little of the significant behavior of men and  the higher animals. They especially objected to the conditioned reflex as a suitable concept for building up an adequate  scientific psychology. It is my impression that a number of cognitively oriented psychologists have felt that the critique of  S-R theory in this book is devastating.  As I indicated in the introductory section, I would agree that conditioned reflex experiments are indeed far too simple to  form an adequate scientific basis for analyzing more complex behavior. This is as hopeless as would be the attempt to derive  the theory of differential equations, let us say, from the elementary algebra of sets. Yet the more general theory of sets  does encompass in a strict mathematical sense the theory of differential equations.  The same relation may be shown to hold between stimulus-response theory and the theory of plans, insofar as the latter theory  has been systematically formulated by Miller and Chomsky.5 The theory of plans is formulated in terms of tote units ("tote" is  an acronym for the cycle test-operate-test-exit). A plan is then defined as a tote hierarchy, which is just a form of oriented  graph, and every finite oriented graph may be represented as a finite automaton. So we have the result:  COROLLARY. Any tote hierarchy in the sense of Miller and Chomsky is isomorphic to some stimulus-response model at asymptote.  5. REPRESENTATION OF PROBABILISTIC AUTOMATA  From the standpoint of the kind of learning models and experiments characteristic of the general area of what has come to be  termed probability learning, there is near at hand a straightforward approach to probabilistic automata. It is worth  illustrating this approach, but it is perhaps even more desirable to discuss it with some explicitness in order to show why it  is not fully satisfactory, indeed for most purposes considerably  s After this was written Gordon Bower brought to my attention the article by Millenson (1967) that develops this point  informally.  STIMULUS-RESPONSE THEORY 349  less satisfactory than a less direct approach that follows from the representation of deterministic finite automata already  discussed.  The direct approach is dominated by two features: a probabilistic reinforcement schedule and the conditioning of input stimuli  rather than response-stimulus patterns. The main simplification that results from these features is that the number of states  of conditioning and consequently the number of states in the associated Markov chain is reduced. A two-letter, two-state  probabilistic automaton, for example, requires 36 states in the associated Markov chain, rather than 64, as in the  deterministic case. We have, as before, the three stimuli co , al , and az and their conditioning possibilities, 2 for QO as  before, but now, in the probabilistic case, 3 for of and o2 , and we also need as part of the state, not for purposes of  conditioning, but in order to make the responsecontingent reinforcement definite, the previous response, which is always  either rl or r2 . Thus we have 2 - 3 - 3 - 2 = 36. Construction of the trees to compute transition probabilities for the  Markov chain follows closely the logic outlined in the previous section. We may define the probabilistic reinforcement  schedule by two equations, the first of which is deterministic and plays exactly the same role as previously:  P(el.n I -0,n) = 1,  and  P(el.n Qi.nrl.n-1) - vii,  for 1 G i, j G 2.  The fundamental weakness of this setup is that the asymptotic transition table representing the probabilistic automaton only  holds in the mean. Even at asymptote the transition values fluctuate from trial to trial depending upon the actual previous  reinforcement, not the probabilities 7Ti; . Moreover, the transition table is no longer the transition table of a Markov  process. Knowledge of earlier responses and reinforcements will lead to a different transition table, whenever the number of  stimuli representing a letter of the input alphabet is greater than one. These matters are well known in the large theoretical  literature of probability learning and will not be developed further here.  For most purposes of application it seems natural to think of probabilistic automata as a generalization of deterministic  automata intended to handle the problem of errors. A similar consideration of errors after a concept or skill has been learned  is common in learning theory. Here is a simple example. In the standard version of all-or-none learning, the organism is in  either the unconditioned state (U) or the conditioned state (C). The transition matrix for these states is  C U  350 SUPPES  and, consistent with the axioms of Sec. 3,  P(Correct response C) = 1 P(Correct response j U) = p  and  P(U,) = 1,  i.e., the probability of being in state U on trial I is 1. Now by changing (2) to  P(Correct response I C) = 1 - e,  for e > 0, we get a model that predicts errors after conditioning has occurred. Without changing the axioms of Sec. 3 we can  incorporate such probabilistic-error considerations into the derivation of a representation theorem for probabilistic  automata. One straightforward procedure is to postulate that the pattern sampled on each trial actually consists of N  elements, and that in addition M background stimuli common to all trials are sampled, or available for sampling. By  specializing further the sampling Axioms Sl-S4 and by adjusting the parameters M and N, we can obtain any desired probability  e of an error.  Because it seems desirable to develop the formal results with intended application to detailed learning data, I shall not  state and prove a representation theorem for probabilistic automata here, but restrict myself to considering one example of  applying a probabilistic automaton model to asymptotic performance data. The formal machinery for analyzing learning data will  be developed in a subsequent paper.  The example I consider is drawn from arithmetic. For more than 3 years we have been collecting extensive data on the  arithmetic performance of elementary-school students, in the context of various projects on computer-assisted instruction in  elementary mathematics. Prior to consideration of automaton models, the main tools of analysis have been linear regression  models. The dependent variables in these models have been the mean probability of a correct response to an item and the mean  success latency. The independent variables have been structural features of items, i.e., arithmetic problems, that may be  objectively identified independently of any analysis of response data. Detailed results for such models are to be found in  Suppes, Hyman, and Jerman (1967) and Suppes, Jerman, and Brian (1968). The main conceptual weakness of the regression models  is that they do not provide an explicit temporal analysis of the steps being taken by a student in solving a problem. They can  identify the main variables but not connect these variables in a dynamically meaningful way. In contrast, analysis of the  temporal process of problem solution is a natural and integral part of an automaton model.  An example that is typical of the skills and concepts encountered in arithmetic is column addition of two integers. For  simplicity I shall consider only problems for which the two given numbers and their sum all have the same number of digits. It  will  STIMULUS-RESPONSE THEORY 351  be useful to begin by defining a deterministic automaton that will perform the desired addition by outputting one digit at a  time reading from right to left, just as the students are required to do at computer-based teletype terminals. For this  purpose it is convenient to modify in inessential ways the earlier definition of an automaton. An automaton will now be  defined as a structure 21 = <A, Zr , Eo , M, Q, s,> where A, Z, and Eo are nonempty finite sets, with A being the set of  internal states as before, X, the input alphabet, and Eo the output alphabet. Also as before, M is the transition function  mapping A X E, into A, and s, is the initial state. The function Q is the output function mapping A X Z, into Z'o .  For column addition of two integers in standard base-10 representation, an appropriate automaton is the following:  A = {0, 1},  E, _ {(m, n): 0 < m, n < 9) E, = {0, 1,..., 9}  M(k, (m, n)) = ~0 if m -}- n + k < 9.  f1 if m+n+k>9, for k=0,1. Q(k, (m, n)) = (k + m -}- n) mod 10.  so = 0.  Thus the automaton operates by adding first the ones' column, storing as internal state 0 if there is no carry, 1 if there is  a carry, outputting the sum of the ones' column modulus 10, and then moving on to the input of the two tens' column digits,  etc. The initial internal state so is 0 because at the beginning of the problem there is no "carry."  For the analysis of student data it is necessary to move from a deterministic to a probabilistic automaton. The number of  possible parameters that can be introduced is uninterestingly large. Each transition M(k, (m, n)) may be replaced by a  probabilistic transition 1 - ex.zn.n and ex.mr , and each output Q(k(m, n)), by 10 probabilities for a total of 2200  parameters. Using the sort of linear regression model described above we have found that a fairly good account of student  performance data can be obtained by considering two structural variables, Ci , the number of carries in problem item i, and Di  , the number of digits or columns. Let pi be the mean probability of a correct response on item i and let  zi = log 1 -Pi  ,  pi  The regression model is then characterized by the equation  Z'= ao + a1Ci + a2Di, (1)  and the coefficients ao , al , and a, are estimated from the data.  352 SUPPES  A similar three-parameter automaton model is structurally very natural. First, two parameters, E and q, are introduced  according to whether there is a "carry" to the next column.  P(M(k, (m, n)) = 0 k + m -}- n ~ 9) = 1 - E  and  P(M(k, (m, n)) = 1 I k + m -- n > 9) = 1 - q.  In other words, if there is no "carry," the probability of a correct transition is 1 - E and if there is a "carry" the  probability of such a transition is 1 - n. The third parameter, y, is simply the probability of an output error. Conversely,  the probability of a correct output is:  P(Q(k, (m, n)) _ (k + m + n) mod 10) = 1 -  Consider now problem i with Ci carries and Di digits. If we ignore the probability of two errors leading to a correct  response-e.g., a transition error followed by an output error-then the probability of a correct answer is just  P(Correct Answer to Problem i) = (1 - y)D'(1 -'7)Ci(1 - E)Di-oi 1. (2)  As already indicated it is important to realize that this equation is an approximation of the "true" probability. However, to  compute the exact probability it is necessary to make a definite assumption about how the probability y of an output error is  distributed among the 9 possible wrong responses. A simple and intuitively appealing one-parameter model is the one that  arranges the 10 digits on a circle in natural order with 9 next to 0, and then makes the probability of an error j steps to  the right or left of the correct response 5j. For example, if 5 is the correct digit, then the probability of responding 4 is  S, of 3 is 51, of 2 is 83, of 1 is 84, of 0 is S5, of 6 is 5, of 7 is 82, etc. Thus in terms of the original model  y = 2(8 + 82 + 83 + 84) + 85.  Consider now the problem  47 + 15.  Then, where di = the ith digit response,  P(di = 2) = (1 - y),  P(d2 = 6) _ (1 - y)(1 - "1) -I- -q8.  Here the additional term is 778, because if the state entered is 0 rather than 1 when the  STIMULUS-RESPONSE THEORY 353  pair (7,5) is input, the only way of obtaining a correct answer is for 6 to be given as the sum of 0 -+- 4 + 1, which has a  probability 8. Thus the probability of a correct response to this problem is (1 - y)[(1 - y)(1 -,q) +,78]. Hereafter we shall  ignore the ,q& (or E8) terms.  Returning to Eq. 2 we may get a direct comparison with the linear regression model defined by Eq. 1, if we take the logarithm  of both sides to obtain:  log pi = Di log(1 - y) -I- Ci log(1 - 7) -}- (Di - Ci - 1) log(1 - E),  and estimate log 1 - y, log 1 -77, and log 1 - E by regression with the additive constant set equal to zero. We also may use  some other approach to estimation such as minimum X2 or maximum likelihood. An analytic solution of the standard  maximumlikelihood equations is very messy indeed, but the maximum of the likelihood function can be found numerically.  The automaton model naturally suggests a more detailed analysis of the data. Unlike the regression model, the automaton  provides an immediate analysis of the digit-by-digit responses. Ignoring, the E8-type terms, we can in fact find the general  maximum-likelihood estimates of y, E, and q when the response data are given in this more explicit form.  Let there be n digit responses in a block of problems. For 1 < i < n let Xi be the random variable that assumes the value 1 if  the ith response is correct and 0 otherwise. It is then easy to see that  (1 - y) if i is a ones'-column digit  P(Xj = 1) = (1 - y)(1 - E) if it is not a ones' column and there is no carry to the ith digit  (1 - y)(1 -,q) if there is a carry to the ith digit,  granted that E8-type terms are ignored. Similarly for the same three alternatives  Y  P(Xj = 0) = ~ I - (I - Y)(I - E) I - (I - Al - 7).  So for a string of actual digit responses xl ,..., x,, we can write the likelihood function as:  L(xl ,..., xn)  _ (I - Y)Yb(I - E)o (I - ~)d [I - (I - Y)(I - E)]e [I - (I - Y)(I - I)]f, (4)  where a = number of correct responses, b = number of incorrect responses in the  354 SUPPES  ones' column, c = number of correct responses not in the ones' column when the internal state is 0, d = number of correct  responses when the internal state is 1, e = number of incorrect responses not in the ones' column when the internal state is  0, and f = number of incorrect responses when the internal state is l. (In the model statistical independence of responses is  assured by the correction procedure.) It is more convenient to estimate y' = 1 - y, e' = 1 -- E, and 1 -'7. Making this  change, taking the log of both sides of (4) and differentiating with respect to each of the variables, we obtain three  equations that determine the maximum-likelihood estimates of y', e', and q':  a b eE A'  8L = - -  ay y - 1 _ Y; 1 ;    - Y,E, I - Y,71  8L c ey' 0'   -Y E   aL d fY' =0.  a7' n, 1 - Y~,7~   Solving these  equations, we obtain as estimates:  a-c-d  Y -a+b-c-d'  _ c(a+b-c-d) s (c+e)(a-c-d) '  _ d(a+b-c-d) (d+f)(a-c-d)  The most interesting feature of these estimates is that y' is just responses to total responses in the ones' column. The two  equations that yield estimates of e' and q' are especially transparent if they are rewritten:  the ratio of correct  (I -Y)(I - e) = Y, E = c -+e  Additional analysis of this example will not be pursued here. I do want to note that the internal states 0 and 1 are easily  externalized as oral responses and most teachers do indeed require such externalization at the beginning.  To many readers the sort of probabilistic automaton just analyzed will not seem to be the sort of device required to account  for language behavior. Certainly the automata that are adequate to analyze arithmetic are simpler in structure than what is  needed  STIMULUS-RESPONSE THEORY 355  even for the language output of a 2-year-old child. On the other hand, I have already begun constructing probabilistic  automata that will generate the language output of young children and the preliminary results are far from discouraging.  Probabilistic automata and their associated probabilistic grammars seem likely to be the right devices for such language  analysis.  REFERENCES  CHOMSKY, N. Review of B. F. Skinner, Verbal behavior. Language, 1959, 35, 26-58. CHOMSKY, N. Formal properties of grammars. In  R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical psychology. Vol. 2, Ch. 12. New York: Wiley, 1963.  CHOMSKY, N. Aspects of the theory of syntax. Cambridge, Massachusetts: M.I.T. Press, 1965. ESTES, W. K., AND SUPPES, P.  Foundations of statistical learning theory. II. The stimulus sampling model. Technical Report. 26, Institute for Mathematical  Studies in the Social Sciences, Stanford Univer., 1959.  KATZ, J. J., AND POSTAL, P. M. An integrated theory of linguistic descriptions. Cambridge, Massachusetts: M.I.T. Press, 1964.  KLEENE, S. C. Representation of events in nerve nets and finite automata. In C. E. Shannon and J. McCarthy (Eds.), Automata  studies. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton Univer. Press, 1956. Pp. 3-41.  MILLENSON, J. R. An isomorphism between stimulus-response notation and information processing flow diagrams. The Psychological  Record, 1967, 17, 305-319.  MILLER, G. A., AND CHOMSKY, N. Finitary models of language users. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook  of mathematical psychology. Vol. 2, Ch. 13. New York: Wiley, 1963.  MILLER, G. A., GALANTER, E., AND PRIBRAM, K. H. Plans and the structure of behavior. New York: Holt, 1960.  NEIMARK, E., AND ESTES, W. K. (Eds.), Stimulus sampling theory. San Francisco, California: Holden-Day, 1967.  RABIN, M. O. Probabilistic automata. Information and Control, 1963, 6, 230-245; reprinted in E. F. Moore (Ed.), Sequential  machines. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley, 1964. Pp. 98-114.  RABIN, M. O., AND SCOTT, D. Finite automata and their decision problems. IBM Journal of Research and Development, 1959, 3,  114-125; reprinted in E. F. Moore (Ed.), Sequential machines. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley, 1964. Pp. 63-91.  SKINNER, B. F. Verbal behavior. New York: Appleton, 1957.  SUPPES, P., AND ATKINSON, R. C. Markov learning models for multiperson interactions. Stanford: Stanford Univer. Press, 1960.  SUPPES, P., HYMAN, L., AND JERMAN, M. Linear structural models for response and latency performance in arithmetic on  computer-controlled terminals. In J. P. Hill (Ed.), Minnesota symposia on child psychology. Minneapolis, Minnesota: Univer. of  Minnesota Press, 1967. Pp. 160-200.  SUPPES, P., JERMAN, M., AND BRIAN, D. Computer-assisted instruction: Stanford's 1965-66 arithmetic program. New York: Academic  Press, 1968.  RECEIVED: July 7, 1968