10.1016/0022-2496(69)90032-7
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 6, 139-167 (1969)  The Algebra of Group Kinship  JOHN PAUL BOYD  University of California at Irvine, Irvine, California 92650  Group theory and the theory of relations are used to study the kinship of certain kinds of primitive societies. It will be  shown that these societies partition their members into classes that are permuted by the relations "class X has fathers  (mothers) in class Y" so as to form a regular permutation group. A mathematical characterization of the conditions under which  groups become relevant for the study of kinship is given and is related to the theory of structural balance. It is argued that  the concept of group extension and its specialization to direct and semidirect products determine the evolutionary sequences  and the coding of these kinship systems. These predictions are found to be consistent with certain observed changes,  geographical distribution, and habits of usage of the kinship systems under consideration. Generalizations to aspects of  behavior outside of kinship are briefly discussed.  INTRODUCTION  In recent years, many formal descriptive techniques have been developed for naturally occuring human behavior. See Hammel's  (1966) special issue of the American Anthropologist on "Formal Semantic Analysis." The three descriptive techniques which are  discussed in this paper include grammars that recursively generate kinship systems, the use of abstract group theory to  describe a subclass of kinship systems called marriage class systems, and the "componential analysis" of kinship systems.  As is the case with most innovations, there has been much criticism of these new techniques. From the mathematical point of  view, criticism is easiest to make on the most formal of these new areas, the use of abstract groups to model marriage class  systems. This line of work was fathered by Levi-Strauss (1949) and continues through Kemeny, Snell, and Thompson (1957) to  White (1963). This work has restricted itself largely to definitions and the verification that given societies satisfy these  definitions. Little use has been made of the mathematical theory of groups. Particularly conspicuous by its absence is the  concept of homomorphism, which relates different groups to each other. It will be argued that if a group Gl evolves into a  group G2 , then Gl will be a homomorphic image of G2 , but that the remnants of Gt will be revealed in the coding of GZ in its  everyday use. Another question which arises is why groups are relevant instead of some of the other closely related  mathematical systems such  139  as groupoids, semigroups, monoids, loops and so on. The group partition theorem gives a partial answer to this problem and  also relates the marriage class system to Cartwright and Harary's (1956) theory of structural balance.  The kinship grammars of Lounsbury (1964) are inspired by the formal grammars of Chomsky (1963). There are differences,  however, between the syntactic structure of a language and the structure of a kinship system. These differences appear to be  understood informally, but are not as explicitly stated as they could be. A fuller treatment of kinship grammars is given in  Componential analysis as studied by Goodenough (1956) and others seems to be a valuable tool in the study of meaning. The idea  is to represent a relatively large set of discrete concepts as a subset of a Cartesian product of smaller sets. For example,  English kinship terms might be represented as elements of the Cartesian product of the sets "generation" = {+2, -I-1, 0, -1,  -2}, "sex" _ {male, female}, "linearity" _ {lineal, nonlineal}, etc. Thus, the term "mother" would be represented by the list  (+1, female, linear,...). Burling (1964) pointed out, however, that there is little objective justification for choosing one  representation rather than, say, a random permutation of this representation. This paper attempts to explain why some  representations allow colorful names like "sex" to be assigned to the components and why others defy such verbal descriptions.  Perhaps the strongest criticism of these three areas is that they are viewed as distinct. If this criticism is valid, it is  partly due to a lack of rigor in their formulations. The value of the abstract mathematical approach to problems is that it  can transform superficially different problems into special cases of a general theory. This article succeeds in doing  something less than this in that it restricts its attention to marriage class systems. What is attempted is to relate the  theory of group structure to the concepts of kinship grammar and componential analysis. The formalisms have been carefully  constructed, however, so as to generalize easily to general kinship systems and other semantic structures. An outline of this  generalization is given in the conclusions of this article. It was felt, however, to be useful to present a complete article  illustrating these concepts in the relatively simple and familiar context of finite groups.  GROUPS, MARRIAGE CLASSES AND STRUCTURAL BALANCE  This section will attempt to characterize societies which have what anthropologists have sometimes called "marriage classes."  The classic example of such a society is the Arunta tribe of central Australia as described, for example, by Elkin (1964). The  set of basic Yankee kinship terms f, m, b, z, s, d, h, w is often not sufficient for "primitive" kinship systems, which may  make more distinctions. In particular, the Arunta distinguish between older and younger siblings. In addition, the sex of the  speaker makes a difference in the kinship term that the Arunta use.  ALGEBRA OF GROUP KINSHIP 141  The set .A of one-word Arunta kinship terms are: "a man's father," "a man's mother " "a woman's father " "a woman's mother "  "elder brother " "elder sister," "younger brother," "younger sister," "a man's child," "a man's son." "a man's daughter," "a  woman's son," "a woman's daughter," "wife," and "husband." Other relatives are described by compound expressions from this  basic set.  Before continuing it is necessary to summarize the concepts and notation of binary relations that will be used here to  describe kinship relations. For further details consult Clifford and Preston (1961). The Cartesian product of two sets E and F  is denoted by E1 X E2 and is defined to be the set of all ordered pairs (x1 , x2), where x1 e El and x2 e E2 . A (binary)  relation on a set E is is a subset of E X E. If A is a relation on E, then xAy means (x, y) e A. The symbols xA = {y : xAy}.  Thus xA is the set of all element that are A-related to x. Conversely, Ay = {x : xAy} is that subset of E to whom y is  A-related. For example, if < is the usual ordering of the integers, then 0 < and <0 denote the set of positive and negative  integers, respectively. If X C E then XA = U {xA : x e X} and AX = U {Ax: x e X}.  The composition of two relations A, B on E is denoted by AB and is that relation on E defined by xABy iff there is a u E E  such that xAu and uAy hold. That is, AB = {(x, y) : xA n By # 0 }. Since (AB)C = A(BC) for all relations A, B, C on E,  composition is associative and the set ,93(E) of all relations on E forms a semigroup under the operation of composition. In  fact, %(E) is a monoid (semigroup with identity) since the identity (or equality) relation lE defined by x1Ey iff x = y and x  e E satisfies the definition of an identity element : IEA = AIE = A. An = AA ... A (n occurrences of A). Composition is  expressed in everyday English by the possessive constructions as in "mother's brother" or "brother of the mother."  The converse A-1 of a relation A is formed by reversing all the ordered pairs in A so that xAy iff yA-1x. The converse of  "less than" is "greater than," and ("mother")-1 _ "a woman's son."  Since relations are sets, the set theoretic notions of inclusion, union, and intersection are already defined. Thus, we can  make the following definition.  A relation p on E is an equivalence relation on E iff (i) lE C p (reflexity); (ii) p C p-1 (symmetry); and (iii) p2 C p  (transitivity) hold.  A partition Tr on a set E is a collection of nonempty subsets of E such that each element of E is an element of exactly one  element of rr. If 7r is a partition on E, then the set {C X C : C e 7r} is an equivalence relation on E and is called the  equivalence relation naturally associated with -rr. Conversely, if p is an equivalence relation, the collection {xp : x e E}  is a partition and is denoted by Elp.  A relation from E into F, (i.e., a subset of E X F) is a function iff lE C pp-1 and p-1 p C 1F (i.e., iff xq9 is a singleton  for all x e E). A function 9? is said to be one-to-one iff the first inclusion is an equality and onto iff the second is an  equality. If 4P is a one-to-one function from E onto itself then 9) is a permutation.  The practice of writing the name of the function 99 after the argument as in x(p is  called "suffix" notation as opposed to the more common "prefix" notation, 9)(x) or px. Suffix notation is used here since it  agrees with the order in which English-speaking anthropologists write kinship terms. That is, "a man's mother's brother" is  usually written d MoBr instead of BrMo (d). If T is a function, we shall usually write xT = y instead of xipy.  The Arunta kinship system can be succinctly described in this terminology. Let E be the set of people belonging to the Arunta  tribe. The E is partitioned into eight marriage classes. Let I be the equivalence relation associated with this partition and  denote the partition by EII. The Arunta culture has some very definite cultural norms with respect to these classes.  Specifically, all the fathers of children in a given class come from the same class. Conversely, all the children of men in a  given class belong to the same class. Thus, the fatherhood relation on E induces a permutation F on Ell in a natural way: XF =  Y iff there is a father of an X in Y. Similarly, the relation "mother of" induces a permutation M on Ell. From these two  permutations, others can be derived by composition and taking converses. For example, let us express in terms of F and M the  two permutations that White (1963) uses, C and W. C is the permutation defined by XC = Y iff there is a man in X whose child  is in Y, and W is defined by XW = Y iff there is a man in X married to a woman in Y. Each pair of permutations can be  expressed in terms of the other. Thus, F = C-1 and M = C-1W hold on the one hand, and on the other hand we have C = F-1 and W  = F-1M. The use of F and M will result in slightly more elegant formulas, but is otherwise equivalent to the C, W  representations.  It is easy to verify that the composition of two permutations is again a permutation. Thus, the set of all possible (finite)  compositions of the permutations F and M form a set of G of permutations and is called the permutation group generated by F  and M. Recall that a group is a set G together with a function * from G x G into G such that (i) (Associativity) a*(b*c) _  (a*b)* c for all a, b, c E G; (ii) (Identity) There is an element 1 E G such that 1 *a = a* 1 = a for all a E G; and (iii)  (Inverses) For every a E G there is an a-' e G such that a*a-1 = a -'*a = 1.  We shall write ab instead of a*b. Note that the inverse of a permutation is its converse.  The Arunta permutation group G generated by F and M has the additional property that for any X, Y E Ell there is exactly one  permutation P E G such that XP = Y. Such a permutation group is called (right) regular and has the property that every element  P E G can be written uniquely in the form XP for some fixed X E Ell. This means that a new binary operation - can be defined  on Ell by (XP,) - (XP,)! = X(P1P2). The group Ell, - is isomorphic to G under the correspondence XP F-4 P.  This results in a curious property when we "graph" a regular permutation group. The Arunta marriage class system is graphed in  Fig. 1. The dots represent the elements of Ell. Thus, each dot corresponds to a class of people in E. An arrow is drawn from  point X to point Y with its head at Y and labeled with F (or M) iff XF = Y  ALGEBRA OF GROUP KINSHIP  143  (or XM = Y). Since F = F-1 for the Arunta, the arrow is given two heads, to suggest the symmetry. By convention M-arrows will  be solid; and F-arrows dotted since paternity is conjectural.  4 2  >0 m r.  >i fm2  FIG. 1. The graph of the Arunta marriage class system. M-arrows are solid; and F-arrows, dotted.  Since G is regular, we can choose an arbitrary point and label it 1. Then the other points can be labeled with their unique  representations P E G. This has also been done in Fig. 1. Table 1 is the "Cayley multiplication table" for the group G of the  Arunta tribe.  TABLE 1  THE ARUNTA MULTIPLICATION TABLE'  1 M M2 M3 F FM FM2 FM3  1 1 M M2 M3 F FM FM2 FM3  M M M2 M3 1 FM3 F FM FM2  M2 M2 M3 1 M FM2 FM3 F FM  M3 M3 1 M M2 FM FM2 FM3 F  F F FM FM2 FM3 1 M M2 M3  FM FM FM2 FM3 F M3 1 M M2  FM2 FM2 FM3 F FM M2 M3 1 M  FM3 FM3 F FM FM2 M M2 M3 1  ' Row elements are multiplied on the right by column elements. That is, z = xy is the entry of row x, column y.  Since only two of the set .A of basic Arunta kinship terms have been used thus far, we must now investigate how the entire  network of relations on E relates to G. Recall  that the set 93(E) of relations on E forms a monoid under the operation of composition since composition is associative and  the identity relation lE is the identity element. A submonoid A of a monoid 93 is a subset 93 such that A contains the  identity and is closed under composition. That is, A, B c -A imply that AB E A. If .A is just a subset of a monoid 95, then  the intersection of all submonoids of 93 containing A is the smallest submonoid A* containing A and is called the submonoid  generated by .+t. .A* may be constructed by taking all possible compositions of elements in A and adding in the identity. Note  that if G is a finite group and S C G, then S* is also a group and is called the subgroup generated by S. Let  * - o be the  submonoid of 93(E) generated by .A but excepting the empty relation o. Suppose T is a function from A* - o onto G. It is  reasonable to require that the structure of G should "approximate" the structure in A*. That is, if A, B, and AB are members  of A* - o', then (A(p)(Bg)) _ (AB) (p. If 9) satisfies this requirement for all A, B E .A* - o, then 9) is said to be a  homomorphism. This is a slight generalization of the standard concept of monoid homomorphisms which, however, do not exist in  any nontrivial form between .+1;* and G if 0 E .A*.  TABLE 2  A TABLE OF THE HOMOMORPHISM 9) MAPPING A* - PI ONTO THE ARUNTA GROUP G  AE.it*- o ATeG  "elder brother" - 1, the group identity "elder sister"  "younger brother" "younger sister"  "a man's father" = F = F-1 "a woman's father"  "a man's child" "a man's son"  "a man's daughter"  "a man's mother" - M "a woman's mother"  "a woman's son" - M-1 "a woman's daughter"  "wife" - F-1M = M-1F = FM "husband"  Assume that 9) is a homomorphism from A* - 0 onto G and that "a man's father" _ "a woman's father" T = F and that "a man's  mother" (p = "a woman's mother" cp = M. It will be shown that under certain conditions if A, B are relations and if  ALGEBRA OF GROUP KINSHIP 145  A C B, then Aa = Ba and A-la = (Aa)-1, where A-1 denotes the converse of the relation A, defined by xA-ly iff yAx. Assuming  these conditions to hold for the moment, we have Table 2 which shows to what element in G each element of the list of basic  relatives given above corresponds.  It should be noted that the set of relations .A* changes from generation to generation as new members are added to the  population E and as the distant dead are forgotten. The only thing that remains constant is the abstract group G.  The question now arises as to how vital is it that G be a group rather than, say, a monoid. It is conceivable that social  structures of the form P : A* - 0 -> G can exist, where G is a monoid and 9) is a homomorphism. The "group partition theorem"  to be proven below shows under what conditions G must be a group. Recall that a set .+of relations on E is said to be  strongly connected on E iff UA* = E x E.  GROUP PARTITION THEOREM. Let .A be a set of relations on a finite set E that is strongly connected. Let T be a homomorphism  from et* - Qs onto a monoid G. Then the following statements are equivalent:  (i) For any A e .A*, if xAx for some x in E, then AT = 1, the identity element of the monoid G.  (ii) The relation UIT 1, which we shall denote by I, is an equivalence relation on E, and .h* - 0/9'T 1 is a regular  permutation group on the 1-classes with the definition (Ix)(ATT 1) = I(x(UATT 1)).  (iii) For all A, B E .A*, if xAy and xBy for some x, y e E, then AT = Bp.  Proof. We first show that (i) implies (ii). To show that .A* - 0 /q'9'-1 is a group, it is necessary to prove that G is a  group. That is, we must show that for any element in G, which we can assume to be of the form AT for some A e .A*, an element  A' e .A* called a T-inverse of A exists such that ATA'T = 1. To show this, suppose that xAy holds for some x, y in E. By  strong connectivity, there is an A' E .h* such that yA'x. Thus, vAA'x holds and by (i), (AA') T = 1. But (AA') T = ATA'T, so  that A'T is the inverse of AT. Thus, A' is a T-inverse of A iff A'T = (Age)-1. Note that the converse A-1 is always a  T-inverse for A.  To show that I is an equivalence relation, we must prove that I is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive. Since E is strongly  connected, there is an A e .A* for every x e E such that xAx holds. By hypothesis (i), Age = 1 so that xIx, proving I to be  reflexive. Now suppose xly, so that xAy holds for some A such that AT = 1. By strong connectivity, there is a B such that yBx.  Therefore, we have xABx and by (i), (AB) T = 1. But (AB) T = ATBT = 1BT = BT = 1, and hence yIx holds, showing the symmetry of  I. If xIy and yIz, then there are A, B e .+ such that xAy and yBz hold and AT = BT = 1. Therefore, we have xABz. But (AB) T  = ATBT = 11 = 1, showing transitivity and completing the proof that I is an equivalence relation.  Let us denote each equivalence class of relations Agxp-1 with the symbol [A]. To  480/6/1-10  show that each class [A] is a permutation on the 1-classes, we will show that each [A] is a one-to-one relation on the  I-classes. Suppose that Ix[A] Iy and Ix[A] Iz, where Ix[A] Iy means, of course, that there are relations Il , Al , Iv E A*  such that x(1144) y hold, hT = I,T = 1, and A,T = AT. By strong connectedness, there is a B E A* such that yBz, and hence (Ix)  [A][B][A'](Ix). But by (i), 1 =([A][B][A'])9)=ATBTA'T where A' is a T-inverse of A from which we can conclude that BT = 1 so  that y1z holds. This shows that whenever [A] is defined, it is many-to-one. By a similar argument on [A'], we can show that  [A] is one-to-many. Thus, [A] is one-to-one when defined.  To show that [A] is everywhere defined, let us choose a minimal set of generators S for G that includes AT. That is, every  element in G can be expressed as a product of elements of S, and if any element is removed from S, this is no longer true. We  claim that E is not strongly connected under the set Al = (S - AT)* T-1 C h* that map into the subgroup of G generated by S -  AT. This is true since xAy holds for some x, y in E, and if E were connected under .A1 , then there would be a B E .A1 such  that yBx. But then (Ix)[A][B](Ix) would hold, so that by the uniqueness of group inverses AT = (BT)-1, contradicting the  assumption that G was a minimal generating set. Now if xl is an arbitrary point in E, then for any xi E E, there is by strong  connectivity a relation Bi E .A* such that xl(Bi) xi holds. There must exist a k such that [A] = [Bk] for otherwise E would be  connected under A,. More explicitly, for any xi , x; E E, we would have xi(B'B;) x; where Bi is a 41-inverse of Bi .  Therefore, we have shown that A* - 0 /TT-1 is a permutation group on I-classes. This permutation group is obviously regular  since if Ix and ly are any elements of Ell, there is by strong connectivity an A E .A* such that xAy which implies (Ix)[A] =  (Iy). We have already seen above that xAy and xBy imply that AT = BT, so that this permutation group is regular.  (ii) implies (iii). Suppose xAy and xBy hold for some x, y in E and A, B E A*. Then (Ix)[A] _ (Iy) and (Ix)[B] _ (Iy), and by  regularity [A] = [B].  (iii) implies (i). Because T is onto G, there is an A E .A* such that AT = 1. Therefore, 1 = AT _ (AIE) 9) = (AT)(1ET) = 1 ET,  so that I ET = 1. Since XIEx holds for all x in E, if A E .A* and xAx for some x E E, then by (iii) AT = IET = 1. Thus, (iii)  implies (i), and the proof of the theorem is complete.  One of the purposes of a theorem of the form, "the following are equivalent," in a science is to improve one's intuition about  some of the conditions. For instance, condition (ii) in the Group Partition Theorem may be regarded as the basic or most  direct formalization of what anthropologists mean by a marriage class system. For the theorem to be useful, the other  conditions should have definite, and perhaps surprising, sociological interpretations. For example, the general assumption  that E is strongly connected can be interpreted as meaning that the society is closely knit and homogeneous. That is,  everybody is related to everybody else. This assumption would not be met in societies with "endogamous" classes of people,  which do not intermarry. Statement (i) can be interpreted in two stages. First, it requires that for any x e E,  ALGEBRA OF GROUP KINSHIP 147  there be some relation A such that xAx (this follows from strong connectivity) and A is mapped onto the identity element 1 of  G. This can be interpreted by noting that the identity relation lE is mapped onto the identity of G. Therefore, any relation A  which is mapped onto 1 can be considered to be an extension of, or an approximation to, the equality relation lE since A is  also represented by 1. The second half of the interpretation is that since all A such that xAx must be mapped onto the same  element 1, the individual must have, in a sense, a consistent self-image. Lest this sound too fanciful, it should be noted  that for a society with a marriage class system, it is empirically true that a mapping of a relation onto G implies an entire  set of very definite social obligations, forms of etiquette, and attitudes, as well as describing marriage possibilities. With  this in mind, the social interpretation of (iii) becomes clear: the relations between any two individuals must be consistent.  That is, though there may be many paths (elements of .A*) relating x and y, they are all mapped onto the same element in G and  hence equivalent modulo Tq) l. This condition is obviously unlikely to be met in a large complicated society with many  different kinds of roles.  Various examples of societies that satisfy all the hypotheses of the group partition theorem will be fully discussed later.  Perhaps at this point it would be useful to introduce examples that fail to satisfy the hypotheses in various interesting ways.  Example 1: American society is traditionally partitioned into three socioeconomic classes by sociologists. Let A be the  relation defined by xAy iff x can legally marry into y's class. Since there is no formal restriction on interclass marriages,  A is the universal relation, E x E. Let 1 be the identity relation on social classes. The relation A is everywhere defined,  and 99 is one to one onto the monoid given by the following multiplication table:  1 A  1 A A A  All the general hypotheses are satisfied, but (i), (ii), and (iii) all fail to hold.  Example 2: Consider an imaginary society consisting of three persons. Let A consist of all possible one-to-one functions  between the three people. .A* = A and is isomorphic to the so-called symmetric permutation group S3 on three objects. S;; has  six elements in it. Again, all the general hypotheses are satisfied, but the three conditions fail together as they should.  Example 3: Many societies partition their members into classes called "clans" or "sibs" with the rule that individuals can  marry anyone not in their own clan but that children belong to their father's clan. Any such system with three or more clans  and with the appropriate choices for A forms a monoid that is not a group since the universal relation E x E is quickly  generated in .A*.  It should be noted that when G is a group of two elements, the graph of .A is what  148  BOYD  Cartwright and Harary (1956) call a balanced graph, where a line is called positive if it is mapped onto the identity 1. In  this case the Group Partition Theorem can be rephrased in terms of balance theory if we specialize our terminology to the case  G = {1, a}. Let .A = {N, P} be the set of "negative" and "positive" lines, respectively, where Np = a and P9) = 1. A walk from  x to y is a relation A E {N, P) * such that xAy. A closed walk at x is a walk from x to x. A walk A is positive if AT = 1 and  negative if Ap = a. Note that, since we have not required G to be a group, it is possible that "positives" and "negatives"  multiply as follows: as = a. Of course, since 1 is an identity, the equations la = al = a and 11 = l are forced to hold. In  these more restricted terms, the Group Partition Theorem takes the following form:  THEOREM. If E is strongly connected and if T : {N, P}* - k~ -~ G is a homomorphism onto G = {1, a}, then the following are  equivalent:  (i) Every closed walk is positive.  (ii) Pluses and minuses multiply as usual; and the society can be partitioned into two non-empty subsets such that negative  relations hold only between persons of different subsets, and positive relations hold only between persons of the same subset.  (iii) Any two walks between points x and y have the same sign.  The best example of balanced graphs in kinship systems is the "moiety" system. Societies which possess a moiety system are  partitioned into two halves, or moieties. Marriage is restricted to couples belonging to different moieties. If a child  belongs to the same moiety as his father, then the system is called patrilineal; if he belongs to the same moiety as his  mother, matrilineal. Since in both kinds of moiety systems marriage takes place between individuals of different moieties,  this relation must be interpreted as the "negative" relation. In a patrilineal moiety system, the relation between father and  child is "positive"; and the relation between mother and child, "negative." In a matrilineal moiety system the signs of the  relation between parents and children is reversed. If one is distracted by the informal meanings of the words, "positive" and  "negative," then it would be better to use the paraphrases, "group identity" and "nonidentity group element." Of course, there  are a whole set of beliefs and behaviors associated with the "positive" and "negative" relations in any given moiety system  culture, but they will in general have little to do with the English words, "positive" and "negative." See Flament (1963) for  an elementary discussion of balance theory as applied to kinship. We now leave the study of .A, relations on the set E of  people, and direct our attention to the study of the group G.  THE EVOLUTION OF GROUP SYSTEMS  The eight-class Arunta system is quite complicated and certainly is well-structured. While it is not inconceivable that once  in operation, the people could maintain the  ALGEBRA OF GROUP KINSHIP 149  system from generation to generation, it is difficult to understand the origin of the Arunta system. If the system could be  broken down into different parts which act independently, or almost independently, of each other, then it would be possible to  imagine that these parts, or components, evolved piece by piece in relatively small steps. The problem of specifying the  components of a system and the interrelationships among such components may be called the "inside problem." A solution to the  inside problem should tell us how an individual or culture has coded the system in question. Such a solution should give  predictions about the kind of mistakes that are likely to occur and about the probable direction of change. The approach to  the inside problem used here will be to specify a "componential analysis" which represents the System as a Cartesian product.  Although our solution will not in general be unique, the class of componential analyses that satisfies the a priori criteria  to be presented below will be in some cases very much smaller than the class of all possible componential analyses.  Another kind of problem is how to specify the system itself and how to distinguish a given system from all the other systems  in a given category. This might be called the "outside problem" for such systems. The solution suggested here for the outside  problem is closely related to the inside solution. A system will be specified by a "grammar," which will be a system of  defining relations that uniquely specify the system. This outside problem has been more extensively studied than the inside  problem. For example, a "grammar of a language" as defined by Chomsky (1963) is similar to an outside grammar in our terms.  White (1963) deals with the defining relations of group societies. In addition, Lounsbury (1964) and others have described  "kindship grammars," which specify the kindship system in question. Note that for finite systems, like the group societies,  the outside problem can be solved by simply enumerating all the elements and their interactions in a "multiplication table" as  in Table 1. However, such an enumeration is uninteresting and does not generalize to the infinite case.  Before we can discuss defining relations, however, we have to introduce the concept of a "free monoid on a set S." Usually, S  will consist of the letters F and M. The free monoid on S denoted by FM(S), consists of all "words," (al ,..., an) using the  "letters" ai E S. If (al ,..., a,,) and (b. ,..., b,,) are elements of FM(S), then we define their product by "juxtaposition":  (al ,.._, a,rz)(bl ,..., bn) = (al ,..., a , bl ,..., bn).  The FM(S) with the operation of juxtaposition is called the free monoid on .A, where the identity element 1 is interpreted to  be the empty word.  Suppose S = {F, M) and that we wish to impose some "generating relations" on some of the elements of FM(S) such as  F2 = 1, M4 = 1, MF = FM3,  which will uniquely define the Arunta group system. In general, we may wish to  impose the generating relations xi = yi for i in an index set land where xi, yz E FM(S). Let g _ {(xi , yi) : i E I). We wish  to associate the largest possible monoid with l3 which has S as a set of generators and yet where all the relations in /3  actually hold. In order to efficiently describe this monoid generated by /3, we need some more terminology and notation.  If G is a monoid a E G and B C G, then aB = lab : b in B} and Ba = {ba : b in B}, where the product of a and b is written ab.  If A and B are subsets of G,  AB = U{Ab : b in B} = U{aB : a in A}.  Thus, if A C G, A is a submonoid iff AA C A and 1 E A.  A homomorphism of a monoid G is a function T mapping G into another monoid H such that (ab) q) = (acp)(bq)) for all a, b E G.  Intuitively, a homomorphism is a "structure preserving" map, and the image Gq) of a homomorphism 9) is an "approximation" of  G. A one-to-one onto homomorphism is called an isomorphism. 9N4' 1 is an equivalence relation on G of a special kind because  it has the "substitution property." The following statements about an equivalence relation p on a monoid G are equivalent  definitions of the substitution property:  (i) apb implies (xa) p(xb) and (ax) p(bx) for all a, b, x E G  (ii) the product of any two p-classes is a subset of some other p-class; i.e., (ap)(bp) C (ab) p for all a, b E G  (iii) and alpbl and a,pb2 implies (ala2,) p(blb2) for al , a2 , bl , bz E G.  Equivalence relations with the substitution property are also called congruence relations. For reasons of style, both  terminologies will be used. If p is a congruence on G, then a new binary operation * can be defined on Glp by (ap)* (bp) =  (ab) p. Glp together with * is called the quotient monoid mod p. Thus, an equivalence relation with the substitution property  may be thought of as a "structure preserving" equivalence in the same sense that a homomorphism is a structure preserving  function. If p is a congruence relation, instead of apb we often write a - b (mod p), or perhaps we say, "a equals b modulo  p." For groups a congruence p is completely determined by its kernel, the p-class containing the identity. This result will be  used in the next section to simplify the componential analysis (i.e., coordinate representation) of group societies.  Returning to the congruence W-1 induced by a homomorphism (p, if ip is onto H (i.e., if G(p = H), then the quotient monoid Glq  1 is isomorphic to H under the "natural" mapping which sends each class aryg)-1 onto the element agg in H. This mapping is  "natural" since aq)T iT _ fag,).  Returning now to the set # of generating relations on S, let fl* be the intersection of all congruence relations on FM(S) that  contain /3. In symbols,  #* = n{p : p is a congruence on FM(S) and p 2 g).  ALGEBRA OF GROUP KINSHIP 151  This definition makes sense because (i) there always exists at least one congruence, the universal relation cu = FM(S) X  FM(S), which contains the relation g, and (ii) the intersection of any number of congruence relations is again a congruence  relation. FM(S)JP* is called the monoid generated by S subject to the generating relation P.  Suppose S = {xi : i E I}. Let S-1 = {xi 1 : i E I} be a set disjoint from S. The free group on S, denoted by FG(S), is the  monoid generated on FMCS V S-1) by the relation y:  xixz 1 = 1 for all i E I.  The free group is a formalization of White's (1963) "kinship role trees," and the formation of fl* from the relation 0  corresponds to his concept of "closing trees."  If S = {F, M}, then a group kinship system, or simply, a group system, is a congruence on FG(S). Note that this definition of  group society correctly distinguishes some systems whose groups are isomorphic. For instance, the "matrilineal moiety system"  is generated by the relations  F2 = 1, M = 1,  and is distinguished from the "patrilineal moiety system" generated by the relations  F = 1, M2 = 1,  even though the corresponding quotient groups are isomorphic, as are all groups of order two.  Since a congruence relation is also an equivalence relation, #* is fully specified if we can enumerate all the elements in the  equivalence class containing an arbitrary element x E FM(S). Since P C fl*, sgt or tgs implies sfl*t. By the definition of a  congruence relation, ss*t implies (usv) P*(utv), where u and v may be empty words. This property is the origin of the term  "substitution property," because it suggests that if sflt or tgs, one can "substitute t for s" in any word x = usv and obtain  an equivalent word. Thus, the equivalence class containing x is the set of all elements that can be obtained from x by a  finite sequence of fl-substitutions.  The defining relations for a large class of group systems are discussed in White (1963). These relations sometimes can be very  useful for gaining insights. For example, suppose one of the relations is  FM = MF.  To the mathematician this means the quotient group will be commutative, but to the anthropologist it means "matrilateral  marriage" (if F-1M ~ M-1F). Levi-Strauss (1949) has discussed at length the implications of matrilateral marriage to the  social and economic structure. Generating relations can also be used to classify kinship systems.  152  BOYD  Usually, it is very easy to find a set of defining relations for a given monoid. For a finite monoid FM(S)/p one can employ  the following algorithm to obtain a finite relation po such that po* = p. The length lg(x) of a word x E FM(S) is the number  of letters in it different from 1. That is, lg(1) = 0, and lg(xa) = lg(x) + 1, where x E FM(S) and a E S. Let xl ,..., xn be a  set of representatives from the p-classes of minimal length. That is, for each class xp there is exactly one xi E xp, and y E  xp implies lg(xi) G lg(y). Let po be defined by  (xia) pox; iff (xia) px;  for all a E S and i = 1,..., n. It is easy to show that po* = p.  The construction described above is very inefficient. Usually, a much smaller generating relation can be found by inspection.  For example, the Kariera group system, which is of order four, can be defined by the equations  F2=M2=1, FM =MR  We now consider the problem of evolutionary sequences. The problem is to determine from the group system of a given society  what group systems were likely to have preceded it, and what are the systems into which it may evolve in the near future.  Intuitively, one would expect that a group system would change into systems not very different from itself. That is, one would  expect evolution to take place in small steps. The difficulty is the word "small." How do we tell a "small" step from a "big"  one?  This question is of fundamental importance for the study of algebraic or combinatoric models of behavior. The similarity  structure on such systems has far reaching implications as to how the systems are evolved, learned, coded, and processed. To  many social scientists, however, the concepts of similarity and nearness suggest a metric space or perhaps even Euclidean  n-space. This does not seem to be the proper approach when the phenomena do not have natural and nontrivial metrics. On the  other hand, note that in a metric space, two points are identical if and only if their distance is zero, whereas in an  algebraic category two structures are considered "identical" if and only if they are isomorphic. By analogy, two algebraic  structures are "similar" if and only if one is a homomorphic image of the other. Since the concept of a homomorphism is not  symmetric, a word better than "similar" is the more asymmetric "approximates."  In our category of congruences on FG(S) the admissible homomorphisms are just those induced by inclusion. That is, if pi C ps  , then T : pl , p2 is defined by (xpl) T = xp2 . We say that the group structure p2 "approximates" pl iff p2 D pi . p2 is said  to be a "closer" approximation than pa if p3 :) p2 D pl , where ":)" denotes proper inclusion. In order to understand the  interpretation pl C p2 , note that pl C ps is true if and only if every p,-class is contained in some p,-class. Either of  these two conditions imply that the quotient group defined on FG(S)/pi can be homomorphically mapped onto FG(S)/p2 . The index  of an equivalence relation p2 with respect to another  ALGEBRA OF GROUP KINSHIP 153  equivalence p1 , where p2 D p1 , is the average number of p1-classes contained in each p2-class. For finite groups the index  is always defined and equal to an integer. The order of an equivalence p is equal to the index of p relative to the universal  relation w. That is, the order of p is the number of p-classes. Obviously, a smaller index indicates a better approximation.  A congruence v is said to cover a congruence p iff v D p and there is no other congruence 7T "between" v and p. That is, there  is no 7r such that Q D v D p.  To generate a congruence p2 from a congruence p1 , where p2 covers p1 , we need only adjoin one ordered pair (x, y) to p1 ,  where xply holds, but xp,y does not. Because p1 C (p1 V (x, y)) C pz , we have p1 C (p1 V (x, y)) * C p2 . Since p2 covers p1  , we must have equality in the last expression so that p2 = (p1 v (x, y)) *. In the next section it will be shown that covers  are intimately connected with group extensions and componential analysis. Figures 2 and 3 list the one class society w plus  those congruences  Patrilineal Moieties  (4 cycle)  m2=1  Matrilineal Moieties  a  'a v Murngin (?) fm=mf m4=f2=1  a  p  r  ---------------  Y_r P~9  (dihedral) Aiunta~dihedral) (fm)f=f(fm)3 (fml4=f2=1 mf=fm m4=f2=1  FIG. 2. These are the group systems of orders G 8 which are of index two with respect to their covers and which FZ = M4 = 1.  Also, it is required that F 7~ M except for the 1-class system. A line joining two systems indicates the higher system covers  the lower. The equations on the lines generate the higher from the lower system. The equations below the lowest systems  generate those systems. The data are taken from Lane (1960).  p on FG(S) with the following properties: (i) p has order G 8 (i.e., p has G 8 equivalence classes); (ii) p has a cover of  index ~ 3; (iii) F2 = 1 (mod p) and either M4 or M3 - 1 (mod p); and (iv) F # M (mod p).  Patrilineal Moieties  1-class system  Matrilineal Moieties  0-0 0 Karadieri Ambrym  0=f2=1 f3=f2=1  fm=mf fm=n-1f  FIG. 3. These are the group structures of order G 6 which are of index G 3 with respect to their covers. Also, we require that  Fz = 1 = M3 and F :,L M except for the 1-class system. The data are taken from Lane (1960).  Restrictions (i) and (iii) are purely arbitrary and are made solely for the purpose of reducing the number of group systems to  be drawn. When (iii) holds, but where F2 E~t 1 (mod p), the society is said to "equate alternating generations." The only  justification for (i) and (iii) is that no group societies were found which violated them. On the other hand, the group  systems in Fig. 2 labeled "4-cycle" and "dihedral" do not exist to my knowledge.  Restriction (ii) is more interesting theoretically because the number 3 is small relative to the number 8 found in (i). This  means that all existing group systems of order 6 or greater have nontrivial homomorphic images. Thus, certain evolutionary  sequences are suggested, which will be examined later. Thus, a five-class system is excluded because it has no nontrivial  homomorphic image. This contradicts the  ALGEBRA OF GROUP KINSHIP 155  intuitively plausible argument that it is a simple matter to insert an extra clan into a cycle as in Fig. 4. Restriction (iv)  implies that husbands and their wives are in different classes. This is almost part of the meaning of a "marriage class  - Le  FIG. 4. This plausible evolutionary sequence is not evolvable under the present restrictions.  It would be evidence against the point of view presented here if group systems existed of large order that were covered only  by the universal relation Co. Groups covered only by W are called simple, and our theory would offer no explanation as to how  they could evolve by stages. An elementary result of group theory shows that all groups of prime order are simple, so that all  group systems of prime order greater than 3 are not evolvable from uj under restriction (ii).  Returning to Fig. 3, notice that the Ambrym system can only evolve from matrilineal moieties. This is a strong prediction  which could be tested if we had definite evidence on histrorical sequences in the New Hebrides where the island of Ambrym is  found. The best that can be done, however, is to look at the social structure of closely related cultures. Lane and Lane  (1958) observed that the areas in Ambrym and nearby South Pentecost that have the six-class system are precisely those areas  in contact with the matrilineal areas to the north. Furthermore, the names given to the matrilineal moieties in the six-class  system are the same names used in these northern areas. Some areas in Ambrym are patrilineal, however, so that the Ambrym case  gives  encouragement instead of proof. In fact, Barbara Lane uses this same evidence to support evolutionary sequences that disagree  with our theory. For example, she suggests that this six-class Ambrym system evolved from the six-class Karadjeri system. From  our point of view, however, the change from Karadjeri system to the Ambrym system is a big jump that includes several steps.  Fig. 3 shows that this change requires first losing the split or distinction between 1 and M2. This leaves the society at the  matrilineal moiety system. Next, the society must create a distinction between FM and MF so as to arrive at the Ambrym system.  Another even more implausible route would be to go to the 18-class society which is the intersection of the Karadjeri and  Ambrym societies and then to erase the appropriate distinctions to arrive at the Ambrym system. In short, it is argued that it  is more plausible that the Ambrym came from matrilineal moieties since this only involves making distinctions, whereas the  shortest jump from the Kariera system includes making these same distinctions after breaking some others. It seems reasonable,  then, to suppose that the matrilineal moiety system is a necessary intermediate step in any slow evolution between the  Karadjeri and Ambrym systems.  On the other hand, when a society is the homomorphic image of its successor, there is no dislocation since the earlier society  is an approximation of the later structure. Therefore, the change can take place gradually over many generations. Kroeber  (1952) reports instances of four-class systems of the Kariera type which seemed almost to have an eight-class system of the  Arunta type, except that the new distinction or "component" had not been given a name. One would suspect that violations of  the four-class rule would be taken less seriously than a marriage which was incestuous under the four-class (and hence  necessarily a violation of the eight-class rule), even with relatives equally distant from ego. Eventually, one would also  expect that the eight classes would be given names. The point is that it is not critical when the names are given. Sentiment  for this system can evolve slowly and can be codified when convenient. For instance, this could be done when there are no  living married couples whose marriages would be defined as incestuous under the new eight-class system. One would suspect that  such a situation would arise more easily where there are fewer total marriages. This may correspond to the negative  correlation found by Service (1960) between the number of classes and population density in Australia.  Note that in Fig. 2 there are two different ways to evolve the four-class Kariera system. This reflects the various arguments  in the literature as to the origins of this system. Our theory has nothing to say on choosing between these allowable  COMPONENTIAL ANALYSES AND GROUP EXTENSIONS  In its simplest form, the current anthropological technique of "componential analysis" attempts to represent the meaning of a  word or concept as a point in a Cartesian product. A slightly more general method requires that meanings be coded  ALGEBRA OF GROUP KINSHIP 157  as short "words," possibly of variable length, in an "alphabet" of distinctive feature. For example, the Yankee kinship term  "mother" can be said to denote a relative that is female rather than male, blood rather than by marriage, lineal rather than  collateral, and of the first ascending generation. There are, however, many other less satisfactory ways of distinguishing all  the Yankee kinship terms. Thus, a description of the word "mother" as a relative whose spelling begins with the letter "m,"  followed by the letters "o ""t ""h ""e ""r" would be correct but trivial. We will introduce some formal criteria to  distinguish "meaningful" Cartesian representations from "silly" ones.  In order to estimate the magnitude of the problem, let us restrict ourselves to binary representations, where each dimension  of the Cartesian product has only two values. We wish to distinguish k objects by means of n binary dimensions. The values on  these dimensions might be interpreted as the presence or absence of n attributes. Obviously, k must be smaller than 2n since a  coding of the k objects is some mapping from the 2n points onto the k objects. However, let us grant that n is as small as  possible so that k = 211. Then there are (2n)! = k! possible codings. If k is only 8, for example, the number of binary  codings of these 8 objects is 8! = 8 - 7 - 6 - 5 - 4 - 3 - 2 - 1 = 40,320. This is a large number, even though some of the  codings are "essentially" the same. That is, many of these codings are "equivalent" in the sense that they can be obtained  from each other by exchanging 0's and 1's at every point for a fixed set of components. For instance, if we are given any  code, we can obtain a new code by using the old code on all components except the first where we use a one where the old code  had a zero and a zero where the old had a one. Thus, given an n-dimensional binary code, there are two possible isomorphisms  on the first component (including the identity mapping). Given the mapping on the first component, we can choose independently  whether or not to interchange zeros and ones on the second component. In addition, any of the n! permutations on the  components yield equivalent codes. Thus, there are n!2n codes isomorphic to any given code. So the total number of  nonequivalent codes is (2n)! 2-n/n! = (k - 1)!/n! In the case considered above where k = 8, and n = 3, the number of  nonisomorphic codings is 840, which is still a large number of codings to choose among.  This discussion motivates the following definition of equivalence between codes. A coding of G is a one-to-one function a from  a Cartesian product A1 x ... x An onto G. A coding a of G induces a set of n equivalence relations on G called projections  defined by rule that for any i = 1,..., n and g, g' E G, g - g' (mod i) iff (g--') i = (g'a i) i. That is, two elements of G  are equivalent mod i iff they agree on their ith component. Two codings a and P of G are said to be equivalent iff they have  the same set of projections.  The problem of coding groups is made sharper by the requirement that not only the set, but the group operation must be coded.  That is to say, a given group G must not only be represented as the Cartesian product Gl x G2 of sets, but in addition at  least one of the sets G1 and Gz must possess a group operation that somehow is related to the operation in G. In order to make  these ideas precise, more terminology has to be introduced from elementary group theory as in MacLane and Birkhoff (1967).  Recall that the kernel K of a group homomorphism 9> : G -. H is the set 19)-1 of elements mapped onto the identity. The kernel  is a subgroup of G since it is closed under products and inverses. For if x, y E K, then (i) (xy) 9' = (x(P)(y9)) = 1 - 1 = 1.  which shows xy E K, and (ii) 19' = (xx 1) 9' = (xT)(x 14,) = 1(x 19)) = x -'(P which shows x-1 E K. Note also that any element  g E G "commutes" with the kernel in the sense that Kg = gK. To show Kg = gK is equivalent to proving that g -'Kg C K. The  latter condition holds because if k E K, then  (g-'kg) 9, = (g19,)(kq,)(gp) = (g9,)-1 1(g9') = 1  so that glkg E K. Thus, g-'Kg C K.  Any subgroup N of G such that Ng = gN for all g E G is called a normal subgroup of G. It can easily be seen that the relation  p on G defined by xpy iff Nx = Ny is a congruence. Furthermore, the quotient group GIp has N as the kernel of the "inclusion"  homomorphism that assigns each x E G its p-class. Since N determines p, GIp is usually denoted by GIN. The p-classes are all  of the form Ng for some g E G and are usually called cosets of N.  In group theory the "coding" problem referred to previously is known as the "extension problem," where a group G is described  in terms of smaller groups. More precisely, a group G is said to be an extension of N by K iff N is a normal subgroup of G and  GIN is isomorphic to K.  If N is a minimal normal subgroup of G generated by the element g, then the congruence corresponding to GIN covers the  congruence of G and is generated from G by the equation 1 = g (see Figs. 2 and 3).  For each x E GIN choose exactly one x E G such that x E x. The set {x : x E GIN) is called a system of representatives for  GIN. For a given system of representations, any y E G can be represented uniquely as the product xn where x - y (mod N) and  where n E N. That is, y can be expressed as the product of a representative equivalent to y and an element of the normal  subgroup N.  The relationship of a group extension with our first statement of componential analysis as the representation of an element as  a point in a Cartesian product is that there is a one-to-one mapping from the Cartesian product (GIN) X N onto G given by (x,  n) +-* xn. Let us see how this representation behaves with respect to the group operation.  Note that by the substitution property in GIN, x E x and y E y imply xy E xy, and hence xy - xy (mod N). This means there is  for each x, y E GIN a unique n.,., E N such that xy = xynx,b. Thus, we can write (xa)(yb) = xyy-layb = xy(n.,y layb). The  product ylay is an element of N because N is normal. Therefore, the whole  ALGEBRA OF GROUP KINSHIP 159  expression n,,,y-layb is also an element of N, so that the right-hand side of the equation above is again of the form zc where  z E GIN and c c- N. The set of n,,,,, c- N is called the factor set.  Arabic notation is an example of group extension. Let Z be the group of integers under addition, and let Zk , where k E Z,  denote the quotient group with respect to the subgroup generated by k. Then Zlao can be represented as an extension of Zla by  Zlo . Let the normal subgroup N of Zioo be {0,10,..., 90} and let the system of representatives R = {0, l, 2,..., 9}. Then for  x, y E R.  f 0, if x -+ y <_ 9  nx'v - 10, if x -+ y > 9.  So, for example,  (9+10)-+(8+20)=7+(10+10+20)=7+a0.  Thus, nx, plays the role of determining the "carry digit" into N. Note that our notation has the information flowing from left  to right, which corresponds to English word order, but which contrasts with Arabic notation and word order. Also, notice that  since addition is commutative, every subgroup of the integers is normal.  A group extension of N by GIN is called a direct product when a system of representatives N' can be found that is also a  normal subgroup. In this case, elements nx,,, = 1 for all x, y E GIN and xa = ax for all a E N and x E N'. The group operation  can then be computed, independently for each component:  (xa)(yb) = (xy)(ab)  for all x, y E N' and a, b E N. The roles of N and N' are symmetric in the sense that G is also an extension of N'.  Furthermore, GIN is isomorphic to N' and GIN' is isomorphic to N. If G is the direct product of N by N', we write G = N x N' =  N' x N. MacLane and Birkhoff (1967) give the following necessary and sufficient conditions for a group G to be a direct  product of subgroups N and N' : (i) N n N' = 1; (ii) NN' = G; and (iii) nn' = n'n for all n E N and n' E N'.  Note that in this useful characterization of direct products, it is not necessary to check for the normalcy of N or N'.  Another way of characterizing direct product codes is the condition that all projections be congruences.  In the Kariera group of Fig. 5, there are three subgroups {1, F}, {1, M}, and {l, MF}, any two of which satisfy the conditions  for direct products. This gives rise to exactly three distinct representations, or codings, of the Kariera group system. These  three representations are shown in Fig. 5. The representation using {1, F} and {1, M} is the combination of patrilineal and  matrilineal moieties because of the natural projections onto these moiety systems. In fact, a Cartesian product of a group G,  considered as  a set, is a direct product extension if and only if the projection mappings (x, y) , x and (x, y) > y are both homomorphisms.  Unfortunately, there is no formal criterion for choosing among the three direct product representations. Empirically, however,  the generational system is not found in Australia so the generators {F, M} were chosen so as to make it look bad in the sense  of requiring a longer word to generate the subgroup {1, FM}. On the other hand, White's (1963) choice of generators, C = F-1  and R' = F-IM, favors the patrilineal  Kariera  f0-0 fm  Matrilineal x Matrilineal x  Patrilineal Generational  Generational x Patrilineal  FIG. 5. The Kariera group system and its three direct product representations.  generational representation. The most discouraging aspect of our analysis of the Kariera is that group theory has not at all  reduced the number of possible codings since the number of arbitrary codings is 4!/(2! 2! 2!) = 3, all of which are allowable  direct product extensions.  The concept of direct product extension works like a charm, however, for the sixclass Karadjeri system. There is only one pair  of normal subgroups, {1, F} and {1, M, M2}, which satisfy the conditions for the direct product. This coding is shown in Fig.  6. Thus, we have chosen one out of the 6!/(2! 3! 2!) = 30 possible codings of six items as the Cartesian product of a two- and  a three-element set.  Next, we turn our attention to the Ambrym system shown in Fig. 7. A quick check, however, shows that there does not exist a  pair of subgroups satisfying the conditions for a direct product. But there is exactly one normal subgroup N = {1, M, M2} and  a system of representatives {1, F) that has the property of being a subgroup S. Such an extension is called the semidirect  product of N by S. Any element of the Ambrym group G can be uniquely represented as the product xn where n E N and x E S, but  since the system of representatives {x I x e GIN} form a subgroup S, xy = xy so that  ALGEBRA OF GROUP KINSHIP 161  the elements of the factor set nx,,, = 1 for all x, y E GIN. Thus, the product of two elements, xa and yb in a semidirect  product can be written in the relatively simple form  (xa)(yb) = (xy)(y-Iayb).  IM  FIG. 6. The Karadjeri as the direct product of matrilineal moieties and the cycle (1, M,M$).  This representation for the Ambrym is shown on the right in Fig. 7. The elements of G can also be represented in the form nic  with the elements n E N on the left instead of on the right. Since the Ambrym group is noncommutative, a somewhat different  representation is obtained and is shown on the left in Fig. 7.  Therefore, group theory has accomplished something for the Ambrym. It has selected two out of the 30 different codings of the  six classes in the Ambrym system. The two remaining codings are formed from the same subgroups with either a lefthand or a  righthand bias. To be precise, for the right-hand coding of elements in the form xa, the equivalence relation p defined by  xa - yb(mod p) iff a = b  is a right congruence in the sense that multiplication on the right preserves p-equivalence. That is,  u - v(mod p) implies uw - vw(mod p)  48o/6/r-ii  for all u, v, w c G. To show p is a right congruence, suppose that u _ xa, v = ya and w = zb for x, y, z c S and a, b E N.  Then uw = (xa)(zb) = (xz)(z-iazb) and vw = (ya)(zb) = (yz)(z-lazb) which shows by the definition of p that uw -- vw(mod p). On  the other hand, the equivalence relation A defined by  ax - by(mod A) iff a = b  is a left congruence in the opposite sense. Which coding is superior depends upon the handedness of the problem. Thus, if an  Ambrym native were asked to what class the mothers or fathers of members of a given class belonged, he would want to use the  Left Right 11 Il '4'  1m2  fm 2  FIG. 7. The Ambrym group system and its right and left semidirect product representations.  right-hand coding, since the computations could be carried out independently on both components. He would want to use for  similar reasons the left-hand coding for the question of to what class belong his mother or father's relative of a given type.  Another way of looking at the left and right codes is to consider the problem of finding the appropriate representative for a  word in the free monoid FM({F, M}). That is, for the right-hand code, one must reduce a string of F's and M's to the form FMj  for i = 0, 1 and j = 0, 1, 2. For a right-hand code, the most efficient procedure is to start decoding at the left and proceed  by multiplying on the right. For example, if the word x = xlx2 --- x,, where xi = F or M, first put xl into the proper form  and then multiply the right by x2 . In general, after xlx2 --- xi , i < n has been coded,  ALGEBRA OF GROUP KINSHIP 163  multiply on the right by xi+i . In this process, it is useful to have a right code since the components can be computed  independently of each other. This independence has two consequences. First, it simplifies the computation by making the ith  component of xF or xM a function only of F or M and the ith component of x. In an actual performance of this calculation, this  would reduce the probability of error at any stage. The second consequence of this independence is that an error on one  component does not propagate to other components. Thus, even with an error early in the process, the final answer will still  be "close" under any reasonable metric that puts items "close" to each other that agree on "many" components.  Although careful empirical work is needed, we can nevertheless entertain the hypothesis on the basis of the a priori arguments  presented above that the Ambrym use both the right and left semidirect product codes, depending on whether they want to work  from left to right or vice versa. This directional bias may be related to Yngve's (1961) "depth hypothesis" concerning right-  and left-branching sentence constructions for speakers and hearers. This raises the speculation that one Ambrym code is used  for the speaker and the other for the listener. See Chomsky and Miller (1963), however, for a criticism of the depth  hypothesis. Finally, it should be noted that although the right code in Fig. 7 appears to be more natural in the sense that it  is easier to check out that p is a right congruence. This is only because the drawings are right regular representations of  the groups.  Turning now to the Arunta system, we see that the coding is already half done because of our previous arguments showing that  the Arunta arose from the Kariera system. The only normal subgroup N such that the Arunta system G is an extension of N by the  Kariera system is N = {1, M2}. There is no system of representatives K for GIN such that K is a subgroup. Therefore, G is not  the direct or even the semidirect product of N by GIN. If, however, we take as representatives the best coding K = {1, F, M,  FM} of the Kariera system, then we obtain an extension whose factor set contains a minimal number of nonidentity elements as  shown in Table 3. Thus, we obtain a code of the form FiMiM2k for i, j, k = 0, I . As with the Ambrym code, if we commute all  the elements of the code, we obtain a different handed code. Both such codes for the Arunta are shown in Fig. 8. Note that the  equivalence relation p defined by  1MjMk - FMjMk(mod p)  is a right congruence and the reversed code is a left congruence. Thus, similar remarks apply concerning the use of both codes  according to the situation. For the Arunta, then, use of group theory has done a significant job in reducing the number of  codes to two out of the total of 8!/(3! 23) = 840 equivalence classes of binary codes.  The Arunta codes were constructed with the idea that the Arunta system developed from one of the Kariera type by merely adding  on the third component to the Kariera system. Elkin (1964) has actually observed this process taking place. He has seen  164  BOYD  TABLE 3  TABLES OF THE FACTOR SETS {nx,t IN THE RIGHT AND LEFT REPRESENTATIONS OF THE ARUNTA GROUP SYSTEM AS THE EXTENSION OF {l, M2)  BY THE KARIERA GROUP SYSTEM WITH THE TWO SYSTEMS OF REPRESENTATIVES { 1, M, F, FM} AND {1, M, F, MF}  Right  y  n, 1 M F FM  1 1 1 1 1  M 1 M2 M2 1  F 1 1 1 1  FM 1 M2 M2 1  nx,v 1 M F MF  1 1 1 1 1  M 1 M2 1 M2  F 1 M2 1 M2  MF 1 1 1 1  em  =1-4.. ~ m3  Arunta  Left  f m2  -0fm3  Right  !m2(11) !m2(ml) i(11)m2 A(lm)m2  0010 e  j~ (lm)1  m2(lf) m2(mf) (fl)m2 (fm)m2  FIG. 8. The Arunta group system and its right and left extensions of 1, M2 by the Kariera system (represented in parentheses  as the direct product of matrilineal and patrilineal moieties).  ALGEBRA OF GROUP KINSHIP 165  tribes with the four-class Kariera system change over to the eight-class Arunta system. Obviously, this only shows that the  transition can take place, not that it must occur in this particular manner. However, the regional distribution of the class  systems suggests that these systems are in fact historically related. See Service (1960).  SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS  The Group Partition Theorem is a generalization of the theory of structural balance, where the labels of the arrows are  elements of an arbitrary group instead of just pluses and minuses under the usual multiplication. The homomorphism that  connects the set of nonempty relations generated under composition and the group means that the group gives an approximation  of these relations which is invariant under the creation of new relations by marriage and birth and the forgetting of old  relations among the dead.  The group system of the Arunta of central Australia has been coded with three binary digits such that when the third component  which depends on the other two for its computations is eliminated, the resulting quotient group is isomorphic to the Kariera  group system. The Kariera group societies geographically surround the Arunta system. In addition, the transition from the  Kariera system to the Arunta system has been observed by anthropologists. The Kariera systems are adjacent to matrilineal and  patrilineal systems which extended in pre-European times to the coast. This may correspond to the fact that the two digits of  the Kariera direct product code are independent and can be dropped in either order. Thus, in Australia there is historical and  geographical evidence consistent with the interpretation of the mathematical statement "N is an extension of G by K" as the  empirical hypothesis "G evolves from K by adding on N."  The other geographical area studied is the group of islands around Ambrym in the New Hebrides. Here the Ambrym group system is  coded so that when the cycle {l, M, M2) is dropped, there remains a matrilineal system on which the three-cycle subgroup  depends for its calculations. Here, again, matrilineal moiety systems are found nearby with the same names for the moieties as  the Ambrym have for their moiety components. Here is evidence for the relation between coding in everyday use and the  evolutionary sequences based on perturbations of that code.  The approach taken here is a result of the heuristic that a structural description of a behavioral phenomena should also  account for the dynamics of its use and its changes through time. This principle has the dual virtue of forcing one to explain  more and also of making the original structural description more unique since descriptions incompatible with the operations  and the evolution (or learning) of the system can be eliminated.  It is hoped that this paper will be considered as a behavioral science application of  166  BOYD  abstract algebra in its broadest sense as opposed to group theory. It is believed that the use of groups as models of behavior  will continue to be extremely limited. On the other hand, groups are present in any model in the sense that the automorphisms  of any structure (i.e., isomorphisms of a structure onto itself) form a group. These automorphism groups can be very useful in  a variety of ways. For example, the mappings between "equivalent" codes, as defined in this paper, form an automorphism group  for each code.  The essential idea for the coding of systems is the existence of homomorphisms between systems of the same type. Thus, if E is  a set with some structure and 9) is a structure-preserving function, E may be identified with a subset of (E/TP I) x F, where  F is some set of cardinality equal to the largest class in gxp-I. These ideas are particularly well worked out for a finite  automata. See for example Hartmanis and Sterns (1965), who discuss the "information flow" between components of finite  automata. In short, the mathematical tools are already available for the coding of many interesting classes of social science  models.  REFERENCES  BIRKHOFF, G. Lattice theory. (3rd ed.) Providence: American Mathematical Society, 1966. BOYD, J. The algebra of kinship.  Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Michigan, 1966.  BURLING, R. Cognition and componential analysis: God's truth or hocus-pocus? American Anthropologist, 1964, 66, 20-28.  CARTWRIGHT, D., AND HARARY, F. Structural balance: A generalization of Heider's theory. Psychological Review, 1956, 63,  277-293.  CHOMSKY, N. Formal properties of grammars. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical  psychology, Vol. 2, New York: Wiley, 1963. Pp. 323-418. CHOMSKY, N., AND MILLER, G. Finitary models of language users. In R.  D. Luce, R. R. Bush and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical psychology, Vol. 2. New York: Wiley, 1963. Pp. 419-492.  CLIFFORD, A., AND PRESTON, G. The algebraic theory of semigroups. Providence: American Mathematical Society, 1961.  COHN, P. M. Universal algebra. New York: Harper, 1965.  ELKIN, A. P. The Australian aborigines. New York: Doubleday, 1964.  FLAMENT, C. Applications of graph theory to group structure. Translated by M. Pinard, R. Breton, and F. Fontaine. Englewood  Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1963.  GOODENOUGH, W. H. Componential analysis and the study of meaning. Language, 1956, 32, 193-216.  HALL, M. The theory of groups. New York: Macmillan, 1959.  HAMMEL, E. A. Formal semantic analysis. American Anthropologist, 1966, 67.  HARTMANIS, J., AND STERNS, R. E. Algebraic structure theory of sequential machines. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey:  Prentice-Hall, 1965.  KEMENY, J., SNELL, J. L., AND THOMPSON, F. L. Introduction to finite mathematics. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall,  1957.  KROEBER, A. L. The nature of culture. Chicago: Univer. of Chicago Press, 1952.  ALGEBRA OF GROUP KINSHIP 167  LANE, B. S. Varieties of cross-cousin marriage and incest taboos: structure and causality. In G. E. Dole and R. L. Carneiro  (Eds.), Essays in the science of culture. New York: Crowell, 1960. Pp. 288-301.  LANE, B. S., and LANE, R. B. Implicit double descent in South Australia and the Northeastern New Hebrides. Ethnology, 1962, 1,  46-52.  LANE, R. B., AND LANE, B. S. A reinterpretation of the `anomalous' six-section marriage system of Ambrym, New Hebrides.  Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, 1958, 12, 406-14. LEVI-STRAUSS, C. Les structures elementaires de la parente. Paris:  Presses Universitaires de France, 1949.  LOUNSBURY, F. G. A formal account of the Crow- and Omaha-type kinship terminologies. In W. H. Goodenough (Ed.), Explorations  in cultural anthropology: Essays in honor of George Peter Murdock. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964. Pp. 351-393.  MAcLANE, S., AND BIRKHOFF, G. Algebra. New York: Macmillan, 1967.  SERVICE, E. R. Sociocentric relationship terms and the Australian class system. In G. E. Dole and R. L. Carneiro (Eds.),  Essays in the science of culture. New York: Crowell, 1960. Pp. 416436.  WHITE, H. An anatomy of kinship. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1963.  YNGVE, V. H. The depth hypothesis. In R. Jakobson (Ed.), Structure of language and its mathematical aspect. Proceedings of  12th Symposium in Applied Mathematics. Providence: American Mathematical Society, 1961. Pp. 130-38.  RECEIVED: December 8, 1967  Printed in Betgum