10.1016/0022-2496(69)90008-x
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 6,294-311 (1969)  Some Information Measures for Testing Stochastic Models'  JOSEPH F. HANNA  Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48823  The sorts of models which are currently being developed in mathematical psychology are more sophisticated and often contain  more free parameters than earlier models; as a result, it is especially difficult to evaluate the performance of these models.  In the present paper an information-theoretic approach to model testing is proposed as a supplement to existing techniques.  Among other things, the present approach provides a measure of the information taken from (or transmitted by) the data in  estimating parameters. It turns out that the "effect" of parameters is not related in a simple way to their number. In fact,  an example is presented in which more information is required to estimate the one free parameter of a particular model than is  required to estimate the two free parameters of a more general model of which the former model is a special case. This  counter-intuitive result points up the danger of overemphasizing the "number of free parameters" in comparing alternative  models.  There is a trend in mathematical psychology toward increasingly complex stochastic models to account for behavioral processes.  This trend has resulted in models that are mathematically less tractable than early stochastic models, and therefore less easy  to test against data. There has also been a trend toward a larger number of free model parameters, further complicating the  task of assessing goodness-of-fit. As a consequence of these trends there is a need for new approaches to model testing, to  complement and supplement existing techniques. The present paper presents one such approach, based on concepts from  information theory.  This paper is divided into two parts; Part I is devoted to the formal definition of several information measures, and  culminates in the definition of a dominance relation which makes possible the comparison of alternative models irrespective of  their relative numbers of free parameters. These measures are illustrated in Part II in terms of several relatively simple  stochastic models. Although the measures are likely to be most useful in evaluating complex models with many parameters, their  application to these simple models is illuminating. In fact, they lead to several seeming paradoxes  1 I am indebted to the participants of the Stanford Conference on Mathematical Models of Learning and Perception (summer,  1967) for stimulating discussions of the ideas presented in this paper. I am especially indebted to Jerome Myers for his  helpful comments and criticisms. This research was supported by NSF grant GS-1448.  294  INFORMATION MEASURES FOR TESTING 295  which dramatically illustrate the dangers inherent in treating parameters as "degreesof-freedom" and, in general, raise  questions regarding the adequacy of hypothesis testing as a method of evaluating models.  Roughly speaking, the two basic measures presented in Part I can be interpreted as the information content of a model before  and after estimation of parameters, respectively. Together, they provide a measure of the "information taken from the data by  the estimation process." The principal advantage of this information-theoretic approach to model testing is that it permits an  objective comparison of models with different numbers of "free" parameters. In fact, from this point of view, the number of  free parameters is a misleading and largely irrelevant factor in testing models.  One consequence of this information-theoretic approach to model testing is that statistically rejected models may be judged  more adequate empirical theories than statistically accepted models; specifically, a model which cannot be statistically  rejected on the basis of given evidence may provide less information about the empirical variables influencing behavior than  an alternative model which can be statistically rejected. Thus, on the assumption that theories are intended to provide  information about these underlying causal factors (i.e., to explain as well as to describe), the more informative model is  preferable regardless of whether it can be statistically rejected. Ideally, of course, we would like to have statistically  acceptable models which can at the same time function as tools of explanation.  I. INFORMATION MEASURES  Let 52 = {co. ,..., cw,j be a set of mutually exclusive and exhaustive outcomes of some experiment. For instance, if the  experiment consists of running a subject for N trials in a binary choice task (in which response latencies, etc., are not  measured), then S2 contains 2N outcomes, corresponding to the possible sequences of N binary responses.  In general, the elements of the outcome space will depend on a particular analysis or reduction of the data as well as on the  physical design of the experiment. For instance, a binary choice model might be tested against the pooled trial-by-trial data  from several subjects, the mean learning curve, asymptotic characteristics of the data, etc. Thus, in the following, S2 might  be the set of possible values of some statistic (or combination of statistics) of the data.  Let M be a model, with parameter space , defined for the experimental situation represented by Q. For each a E 9, M. is the  instance of model M determined by the parameter value a, and for each w E S2, M(w) is the probability assigned by model  instance M. to outcome co. If cu* E 0 is an observed outcome of the experiment-for instance, the protocol of a particular  subject-then Ma(w*), a E.1, is the likelihood function. In general, a may be a vector of parameters, a = <a l ,..., a,>.  296 HANNA  DEFINITION l. The coefficient of predictive power of model instance M. relative to outcome w* is  pa - 1 - log, 1/M.(-*)r  where r is the (finite) number of elements in the outcome space.  The motivation for adopting predictive power as a basis for evaluating models is implicit in the following characteristics of  the measure:  i. The coefficient pa is a monotone, increasing function of the likelihood.  ii. Following Kullback (1959, p. 5), p, is a measure of the information (in units r) in the observation w* for discriminating  in favor of model instance M. against a random model instance (where a random model instance is one that assigns equal  probability to all possible outcomes).  iii. From a slightly different point of view, p. is a measure of the information content of model instance M. relative to  outcome oj* (cf. Hanna, 1966, p. 371).  iv. For co E S2, let f(w) be the "true" relative frequency of outcome cu (i.e., the expected frequency of w in a infinite  number of replications of the experiment2), then (a) the expected value of pa is a maximum when Mjoj) =f(W), for all w. Thus,  the true model instance (i.e., the one which assigns to each outcome its limiting relative frequency) has the greatest  expected predictive power; and (b) the only monotone functions of the likelihood which satisfy Condition (a) have the form K +  k - log Mw*). Thus, the coefficient of predictive power is unique up to a log-linear transformation of the likelihood (cf.  Hanna, 1966, p. 370).  v. The predictive power coefficient is normalized: its range is -oo <_ pa <_ 1, with p. = 1 if and only if the likelihood is  1, and p. = 0 if and only if the likelihood equals that of a random model instance. As a result of normalization, coefficients  of predictive power associated with different experiments or different statistics of the data can be meaningfully compared.  Definition 1 provides a means of comparing model instances, but it does not contain sufficient machinery for handling the  complications introduced by free parameters whose values must be estimated from the data. The following definitions provide  the required machinery for evaluating parameterized models.  DEFINITION 2. The coefficient of descriptive power of model M relative to outcome is  8m = Max p.. .E9  2 This formulation presupposes some method of deciding what constitutes a replication of a given experiment. The question  clearly depends in large part on the theoretical framework in which the experiment is embedded.  INFORMATION MEASURES FOR TESTING 247  Notice that Sm equals the predictive power of the instance(s) of model M whose parameter values are maximum likelihood  estimates. By analogy with Condition ii above, SM is a measure of the information in the observation co* (after estimation of  parameters) for discriminating in favor of model M against a random model instance. Or by analogy with Condition iii, an  equally plausible interpretation of SM is as a measure of the a posteriori information content of model M relative to outcome  w*. The dependence of SM on "information taken from (or transmitted by) the data" motivates the term descriptive power; its  value clearly does not reflect predictive or explanatory power.  Let g(a), ci E Y, be a probability distribution reflecting a priori information about the true (or best) value of parameter a  (in the absence of any information concerning the value of a, let g be the uniform distribution)3. We may think of g as the  output of a higher level (meta) model. In actual practice, the a priori distribution may be inferred from independent  observations (previous data) or derived from an identification of parameters with aspects of the environment that can be  independently measured (i.e., measured prior to the actual experiment). In any case, the expected likelihood determined by  model M (in conjunction with distribution g) is  M(co*) = f g( - MIX(.*) da, (1.1) ace  provided that the integral exists. Now, treating M as a model instance (since it no longer has free parameters), we have by  analogy with Definition 1 the following:  DEFINITION 3. The coefficient of predictive power of model M relative to outcome w* and a priori distribution g is  Par = I - logr 1/M(w*).  Again by analogy with Condition ii above, the coefficient of predictive power is a  ' In response to an earlier draft of this paper James Greeno observed that the notion of a "uniform probability distribution"  is ambiguous in this context. A given model can be parameterized in various ways, resulting in distinct "uniform" a priori  probability distributions and, therefore, resulting in different values of the coefficient of predictive power (cf. Definition  3 below). However, the present approach presupposes that such decisions as to how the model is to be parameterized and the  exact form of the a priori probability distribution have been made prior to any consideration of the data used to test the  model. These decisions are arbitrary in the same sense that the original choice of one rather than another model is arbitrary.  The point is to distinguish between those decision processes (such as parameter estimation) which depend on information taken  from the data and those decision processes (such as the parameterization of the model) which are independent of the data. Of  course, such distinctions are never absolute; the researcher who systematically alters the manner of parameterizing a model in  order to obtain a better fit (by some measure) to given data is certainly using information from the data. In effect, the  "form of parameterization" itself functions as a parameter in such cases.  48o/6/z-9  298 HANNA  measure of the information in observation co* (before estimation of parameters) for discriminating in favor of model M against  a random model instance. Or by analogy with Condition iii, it is a measure of the a priori information content of M relative  to W*. The independence of pm from the data, the fact that it can function as a prediction, motivates the term predictive  power.  Although Definition 3 is a natural extension of the concept of predictive power as applied to model instances, there is an  alternative measure of the predictive power of models, namely,  DEFINITION 4. The coefficient of mean predictive power of model M relative to outcome w * and a priori distribution g is  Pm = J g(a) pIX da, IXE.~  where pIX is the coefficient of predictive power of model instance MIX relative to outcome W*.  Intuitively, p,,s is a measure of the expected information content of the model instances MIX , a E 9, while pm is a measure  of the information content of a model instance which is defined as the expectation of the model instances MIX . In some  respects, pm is a more sensitive measure than pvr, since for a given value of the likelihood M(W*), ply > pm, with equality  holding if and only if the likelihood function MIX(W *), a E .9, is a constant. Moreover, in contexts requiring nonanalytic  parameter estimation procedures (e.g.,.bill climbing), the measure pm is more stable than pm : its value can be more reliably  estimated from small samples of points in the parameter space. The differences between pay and ply are illustrated by the  examples presented in Part II. In the following definitions I will use the symbol pm indifferently to denote either predictive  power or mean predictive power. In effect, each definition introduces two measures with essentially the same intuitive  interpretation.  Since the co0Ficients p,,1 and 8m are, respectively, measures of information content before and after estimation of  parameters, their difference reflects the contribution of the parameters themselves. To be precise, 8M - pay is a measure of  the information in the observation w* (resulting from the parameter estimation process) for discriminating in favor of model M  against a random model instance, i.e., a measure of the information "absorbed from (or transmitted by) the data in estimating  parameters." If our goal is to maximize the information transmitted by the environment, it is important to have such a measure  in order to isolate the source of information, so to speak. It might be supposed that the "number of free parameters" would be  an adequate index of information transmitted by the data: the more free parameters one estimates, the greater the transmitted  information. As we shall see, however, the quantity of transmitted information is generally a nonmonotonic  INFORMATION MEASURES FOR TESTING 299  function of the number of free model parameters. For this reason, the measure 8M - pm is more adequate than the familiar  notion of "degrees-of-freedom" as an index of the effect or power of parameters. Thus we have:  DEFINITION 5. The coefficient of parameter effect of model M relative to outcome ` and a priori distribution g is  em = SM-PM Notice that 0 5 EM < co, with cm = 0 when the likelihood function is a constant. Like the coefficients of predictive and  descriptive power, the coefficient of parameter effect is normalized. Thus it makes sense to compare relative parameter  effects for different statistics of the data4.  It is often convenient to have a measure of the power or effect of individual model parameters. Such a measure is presented in  the following generalization of Definition 5. Consider a k-dimensional parameter space with parameters al ,..., ak . Let g((Xl  ,..,, ) be the a priori probability distribution over 9, and let  Aa2 ,..., ak) = f g(-1 )**,) 01k) dal  be the marginal probability of the k - I tuple <012 ,..., elk>. Further, let w* be an observed outcome and 012 ,..., cah be  fixed values of parameters 012 ,..., ak , then M(a2 ,..., ca*) is a model with a single parameter al . In short, we are  representing a k parameter model M as a one parameter model M* = M(a2 ,..., cc*) by fixing the values of the last k - I  parameters. Thus, Definition 5 can be applied to yield the coefficient of parameter effect Em* of model M* relative to outcome  w * and a priori distribution g. In effect, em. is a measure of the effect of parameter al at the point <a2 ,..., * >.  Finally, we can compute the mean parameter effect of al by weighting its effect at individual points in the parameter space  according to the a priori distribution g. The precise statement is given by  DEFINITION 6. The coefficient of mean parameter effect of parameter al relative to outcome w* and a priori distribution g is  E.1 f 9(012 ,..., ) EM (012 ,..., ak) da2 ...  a The measure iM is a form of likelihood ratio test. Specifically, let &j be the maximum likelihood estimate relative to  outcome w; , for j = 1,..., n, and & be the maximum likelihood estimate relative to the conjoint outcome consisting of wl  ,..., w, then by a simple algebraic transformation im = 1 - log (II; M&;(-,I)/II; M(;(w*)). Thus, iyr is a monotone function  of the likelihood ratio.  480/6/2_9*  300 HANNA  Similar definitions can be formulated for the joint (mean) parameter effect of any subset of the parameters al ,..., a,,. .  As a further application of the basic information measures, consider the concept of parameter invariance. The coefficients of  predictive and descriptive power yield a natural measure of the invariance of parameters both across different statistics of  the data and across different experimental conditions. Thus, let 81 ,..., 8.be the coefficients of descriptive power of  model M relative to observed outcomes wi ,..., a.n (these may involve different experimental conditions, different statistics  of the data, or both), and let  1  P = M~ (IIn - i Pjal~ =1  where p;, is the coefficient of predictive power of model instance Ma relative to outcome r.O*. Finally, let  n  = lln - Y 8; , then =1  DEFINITION 7. The coefficient of parameter invariance of model M relative to  outcomes co*, ,..., wn and a priori distribution g is  Notice that -oo < iM <_ l, with iM = 1 if and only if some parameter value a is a maximum likelihood estimate relative to each  outcome w'. This measure of parameter invariance is closely related to the above measure of parameter effect. Specifically, if  (by analogy with Definition 5) we define the mean parameter effect of model 111 relative to outcomes w*_., w* to be E = 8 - p,  then im = 1 - e. Intuitively, this means that parameter invariance is inversely related to average parameter effect. Finally,  it should be noted that iM does not depend on the stability of the maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters themselves;  rather, it depends on the stability of the coefficients of predictive power of the model instances associated with these  maximum likelihood estimates. Thus, a model may have a high degree of parameter invariance, despite the fact that the best  estimates under different experimental conditions are far apart in the metric of the parameter space: that is, even though the  best estimates lie in different regions of the parameter space.  The coefficients of descriptive and predictive power together provide an objective means of comparing alternative models-a  means which is independent of the number of free parameters. In fact, the two basic measures give rise to a number of distinct  preference (dominance) relations, reflecting the different emphasis which might be placed on descriptive power, predictive  power, and parameter effect. For example,  INFORMATION MEASURES FOR TESTING 301  one model may be preferred to (dominate) another because it has greater predictive power, or because it has greater  descriptive power, or because it has greater descriptive power, but less parameter effect, etc. The three dominance relations  presented in+the following definition illustrate the spectrum of possibilities.I  DEFINITION 8. Let Ml and M2 be models defined for outcome space 0, then (relative to outcome w * and a priori distributions gI  and gz)  (a) Ml weakly dominates M2 if Sm, > Sm, and pml > pm2 ; (b) Ml dominates M2 if 8M1 > 8M2 and Em, < EM2 ; and  (c) Ml strongly dominates M2 if pml > Sm..  As suggested by the terminology, the above relations form a sequence of increasingly difficult hurdles for a given model to  surmount in competition with alternative models. This is clear as regards dominance and weak dominance, since (b) logically  implies (a) but not vice versa. Similarly, (c) is logically stronger than (a), so that strong dominance entails weak  dominance. Conditions (b) and (c) on the other hand, are logically independent: neither entails the other. It is easily seen,  however, that strong dominance is a more stringent comparative test than dominance. For instance, if Ml strongly dominates M,,  then Ml strongly dominates a model (instance) which dominates M2 namely, that model (instance) defined by the expected  likelihood of Ml (cf. Eq. 1.1). On the other hand, Ml may dominate M2 without dominating any model which strongly dominates  M,.'  The distinction between conditions (a) and (b) reflects a basic opposition in the goals of model building. The primary goal is  to accurately describe and predict (or explain) behavior. Thus, if a given model has both greater descriptive power and  predictive power than a competing model, it comes closer to achieving this goal, regardless of the relative number of free  parameters in the models. This is the intuitive import of the weak dominance relation. On the other hand, accurate description  of observed behavior is not a significant feat if the model could have given an equally accurate description of any other  behavior that might have occurred; in short, descriptive power is only significant to the extent that a model is descriptively  falsifiable. The usual emphasis on the number of free parameters reflects this latter concern: it is commonly felt that,  because it can fit any arbitrary data, a model with many free parameters is unfalsifiable and, consequently, uninformative.  However, in actual practice, the relative number of free parameters is not an adequate index of the relative falsifiability of  competing models. Perhaps the most adequate measure of falsifiability in the present context is the expected descriptive  power, given by  oM = L0 SM(W) - dw. (1.2)  To be precise, $M measures nonfalsifiability, since the difficulty in falsifying a model  302 HANNA  increases with its expected descriptive power; in the limit, when 8M = 1, every possible outcome can be described perfectly  (cf. Example 2 of Part II).  It would be difficult to calculate 8,,z in practice, since Eq. 1.2 involves an expectation over the outcome space as well as a  search of the parameter space. In this respect, the dominance relation, condition (b), represents a compromise: it is  sensitive to the relative falsifiability of competing models (by virtue of its dependence on the coefficient of parameter  effect), but it does not require computing an expectation over the outcome space. In effect, the dominance relation places a  premium on predictive power, for condition (b) is equivalent to the following condition:  (b') SMl SM2 and  5M, - SM2 ~< PM, - PM2 ,  which requires that Ml surpass M2 by a larger margin in predictive power than in descriptive power.  Notice that the dominance relations are only partial orders (i.e., reflexive and transitive, but not symmetric or connected).  Hence, it may happen that neither of two competing models weakly dominates the other. The choice between models which are  "incomparable" relative to the dominance relations must be based on additional considerations, e.g., the relative priorities  of predictive (explanatory) and descriptive power, the degree of parameter invariance, or the degree of falsifiability (which  is inversely related to parameter effect).  It follows from Condition iv (following Definition 1) that in the long run (i.e., when sufficient data have been collected) a  false model cannot (weakly) dominate a true model. In effect, Condition iv states that a true model has maximum possible  descriptive power. On the other hand, a false model may very well have greater predictive power, hence also less parameter  effect, than an alternative true model. In other words, a false model may be more informative regarding the influence of  experimental variables on behavior, than an alternative "true" model. It is for this reason that statistically rejected models  are sometimes preferable to statistically acceptable models. The above information measures are illustrated in Part II by  means of several simple models of binary-choice data.  II. EXAMPLES  Consider a learning experiment in which a subject is asked to predict a series of binary events. The events are represented by  El and Ez and the associated responses by A1 and A2 . The occurrence of event E; , j = 1, 2, on trial n is represented by E;,  , and the occurrence of response A; is represented by A;,n . Table 1 contains some representative data from such an  experiment, consisting of the responses of two hypothetical subjects to a sequence of 25 events. These artificial data provide  a concrete application of the various information measures defined in Part I.  INFORMATION MEASURES FOR TESTING  303  TABLE 1  ARTIFICIALLY GENERATED BINARY-CHOICE DATA  Event sequence  El El El E2 E, El El E2 E2 El El El E2 E2 El El E2 El El El El E2 El El El  Response sequences Q11: A2 A, A, A, A, A, A2 A, A, A, A, A2 A2 A, A2 A, A, A2 A, A, A, A2 A, A, A2 w2:  A,A2A,A,A2A,A,A,A,A,A,A2A,A,A,A,A2A,A,A,A,A,A2A,A,  Example 1. Let M, be the "constant" Bernoulli model defined by:  Pr(A,,,) = a, for n = 1, 2,...,  where a, 0 < a <_ 1, is a parameter and where Pr(A,,,,) is the probability of response A, on trial n. It is a relatively  straightforward matter in this instance to obtain closed expressions for the coefficients of descriptive power, predictive  power, and parameter effect relative to an arbitrary outcome w*. Suppose, for example, that in N trials response A, occurs n  times and response A2 occurs m = N - n times, then the likelihood function is given by:  M.(_) = an . (1 - a)m.  Since this function has a maximum at a = n1N, the coefficient of descriptive power is  s = 1 + log, N[(nl N)n . (mlN)ml. (2.1)  The expected likelihood is given by  I  Ml = f an - (1 - a)m - da, (2.2) 0  where the uniform a priori distribution of parameter values is assumed.  This integral can be evaluated as follows:  I l an (1 - a),m ' da = f l an [ ~ (-1)' (m)  0 0 ;=0 i  m 1 oa i=a  (-1)i 1/(n +1 + 1)  = 1/(N + 1) ( ~ ),  da  304 HANNA  where (~) = N!/n! - m! . Hence, the coefficient of predictive power is:  p=1-log,N[(N +1).(ln ]. (2.3)  It is easily seen that p achieves its maximum value, 1 - [loge (N + 1)/N - loge 2], when n = 0 or n = N (i.e., when the same  response occurs on every trial). On the other hand, the minimum value of predictive power (which approaches zero for large N)  occurs when n = Nl2.  A convenient expression for the coefficient of parameter effect follows directly from Eqs. 2.1 and 2.3: namely,  e = log,,v[(N -{- 1) - B(N, n/N, n)],  where B(N, n1N, n) is the probability of n successes in N Bernoulli trials with constant probability n1N.  Turning next to the coefficient of mean predictive power, we have:  p = 1 -}- f log2NM, da 0  i  = I + (N loge 2) f loge[an(1 - a)m] do  1  -F- (N loge 2) n [f loge a da + m f loge(1 - a) dal 0 0  - (1 /loge 2),  since both integrals in the next-to-last line equal -1 and n -}- m = N. Thus,  p = -.44.  It is noteworthy that the mean predictive power of this constant Bernoulli model is independent of the observed outcome.  Example 2. Let M2 be the "variable" Bernoulli model defined by:  Pr(A,,, = an, for n = 1, 2,..., N,  where an , 0 < an G 1, is a parameter associated with trial n. The general form of the likelihood function is  M,(w) = H ai H (1 - aj),  INFORMATION MEASURES FOR TESTING 305  where the first product is over the n trials on which response A1 occurs and the second product is over the m = N - n trials  on which response A2 occurs.  This model clearly has maximum possible descriptive power (8 = 1) relative to every outcome in Sl. In effect, this N-parameter  model is descriptively unfalsifiable by any single outcome. Of course, the model could be falsified if the coefficient of  descriptive power were computed relative to data comprising many experimental outcomes.  The expected likelihood of this variable Bernoulli model is given by:  I I  MZ= f ... f llai'll(I -aj)da1...da, 0 0 i i  _~ flai-dai-fl f1 (I-aj)daj i 0 j 0  I 1 - "2 M  - 12N - '  Hence, the coefficient of predictive power is p = 0. It follows that this N-parameter model has the same predictive power as a  random model instance; it takes no information (either good or bad) from the environment.  Similarly, the mean predictive power is given by:  1 1  p _ 1 + ... - ...  N loge 2) f floge 1fj ai H (I aj)J dal daN  0 0 i j  1 + -  N loge 2) f loge a2 da2 + f loge(1 aj) daj  = 1 - 1 /loge 2  = -.44.  Notice that the N-parameter Bernoulli model has the same mean predictive power (and in most cases approximately the same  predictive power) as the one-parameter Bernoulli model. Moreover, the descriptive power of the N-parameter model is at least  as great as that of the one-parameter model; indeed, the latter model is a special case (i.e., when al = a2 = ". = ac,) of the  former model. Hence, it follows that M2 weakly dominates Ml with respect to most outcomes in S2. In fact, if the dominance  relations are based on the coefficient of mean predictive power (cf. Definition 4), then M2 weakly dominates Ml relative to  every outcome in S2. On the other hand, it is evident that the N-parameter model is less falsifiable than the one-parameter  model; this intuition is confirmed by the fact that the former model has a much larger  306 HANNA  coefficient of parameter effect than the latter model. In short, if only predictive and descriptive power are taken into  account (weak dominance relation) then model M2 is preferable to model Ml under almost all circumstances; however, the models  are incomparable if relative falsifiability is also taken into account (dominance relation).  In one important respect, neither of the preceding models is a typical stochastic learning model. In general, likelihood  functions depend to some extent on experimenter controlled variables (e.g., the structure of the event sequence), but  Bernoulli likelihood functions depend only on the parameter values and observed outcome. The following  modified-relative-frequency model illustrates the way in which models can take information (or misinformation) from the  environment as well as from the data.  Example 3. For n = 1, 2,..., N, let Fbe the relative frequency of Ei events in the first n trials, then the parameter-free,  relative-frequency model is given by  Pr(A,,,,) = F,, .  The one-parameter modification, M,, is given by:  Pr(A,,,,) = Fn + all - Fn) Fn , for n = 1, 2,..., N,  where a, -1 < a < 1, is a parameter. For simplicity, we let Fl = z. The likelihood function associated with model M3 is  MW) = H Vi -I- (1 - Fz) FA - H [ 1 - (Fj -I- (1 - FI) FA],  where the first product is over A1 trials and the second product is over A2 trials. If N is moderately large and if the event  sequence is stationary, the subscripts i, j may be dropped, yielding the following approximate expression for the likelihood:  M.(-) = (a + ba)n [I - (a + ba)]  where n is the number of A1 trials, m = N - n is the number of A2 trials, a = Fn and b = (1 - Fn) F, . The maximum likelihood  estimate for a is  -1 if 0<n/N<a-b,  a = (n - aN)/bN if a - b < n/N < a + b,  1 if a -{- b < n/N < 1.  The corresponding expression for the coefficient of descriptive power is  1 + log2N[(a - b)n . (1 - (a - b))m], if 0 < n/N < a - b,  S - 1 + log2N[(n/N)n - (m/N)nz], if a - b < n/N < a -}- b,  1 + log2N[(a + b)n - (1 - (a -{- b)),n], if a + b < n/N < l.  INFORMATION MEASURES FOR TESTING 307  Notice that when a - b < nIN < a + b, the descriptive power of (this approximation to) model M3 equals that of model Ml.  The expected likelihood of this modified-relative-frequency model is given (approximately) by  The substitution P = a + ba yields  M3 = 2 b J +b gn(1 - R)na dg. "-b  (2.4)  Equation 2.4 is similar to the corresponding expression (Eq. 2.2) for the expected likelihood of the one-parameter Bernoulli  model, which suggests that the models are more closely related in concept than is apparent from their formulations. This  relationship is clarified by the following considerations from probability theory (cf. Uspensky, 1937, p. 68): suppose the  unknown probability p of an event (response) Al may have any value between 0 and 1 and the a priori probability of its being  contained between limits a - b and a + b is a + b - (a - b) = 2b, then after N trials in which A1 occurred n times, the a  posteriori probability of p being contained between a - b and a + b is given by  P - J a an(1 - a)- da  f o e (l - ac)- da  Thus, it follows from Eqs. 2.2 and 2.4 that the a posteriori probability of the modifiedrelative-frequency model is given by  P = 2W3/Ml .  Since this a posteriori probability converges (with increasing N) to either 0 or 1, accordingly as M3 is a true or a false  model, it follows that pma >, pm, whenever a - b < nIN < a + b. Moreover, since SM3 = SMl in this interval, it follows that  EM3 < E,yl , hence the modified-relative-frequency model dominates the one-parameter Bernoulli model with respect to such  outcomes. In short, under a wide range of circumstances, the modified-relative-frequency model takes more information from the  environment (i.e., the event sequence) and less information from the data than the Bernoulli model, despite the fact that both  models have one free parameter. Thus, this example provides support for my observation in Part I that the number of free  parameters is not an adequate index of either parameter effect or degree of falsifiability. The following example provides  additional evidence in support of this point.  308 HANNA  Example 4. Let M4 be the two-parameter, linear operator model defined by  Pr(AI,I) = ao , 0 < a, < 1, and  Pr(A ) - 1(I - -I) Pr(AI,n) -1- aI if EI.n  I,,+, - ((I - aI) Pr(AI,) if E2,n .  Two special cases of model M4 are of particular interest. If the "learning rate" aI is zero, then the linear operator model is  equivalent to the one-parameter Bernoulli model, while if the "initial response probability" ao equals 1, a one-parameter,  linear operator model results. In the following, the latter model will be designated Al', .  The likelihood functions associated with models 11, and MS are strongly dependent on the structure of the event sequence,  making it difficult to obtain closed expressions for the associated coefficients of predictive power and mean predictive  power. This limitation of the linear operator model is shared by all but the most trivial models, and the only solution is to  obtain numerical approximations by use of a computer. This was done in the present case and the resulting coefficients,  presented in Table 2, are summarized below.  TABLE 2  COEFFICIENTS OF DESCRIPTIVE POWER, PREDICTIVE POWER, PARAMETER EFFECT, MEAN PREDICTIVE POWER, AND MEAN PARAMETER EFFECT FOR  MODELS Ml M5 RELATIVE TO OUTCOMES awi AND w2  Models  Modified 2-Parameter 1-Parameter  Constant Variable relative linear linear  Outcome w Bernoulli Bernoulli frequency operator operator  M1 M2 M3 M, M5  Descriptive power .096 1.000 .121 .096 .065  Predictive power .011 .000 .093 -.031 -.013  Parameter effect .085 1.000 .028 .127 .078  Mean pred. power -.444 -.444 .064 -.537 -.515  Mean parm.effect .540 1.444 .057 .633 .580  Outcome cue       Descriptive power .205 1.000 .224 .219 .211  Predictive power .110 .000 .181 .138 .154  Parameter effect .095 1.000 .042 .081 .057  Mean pred. power -.444 -.444 .152 -.093 -.052  Mean parm. effect .649 1.444 .072 .312 .263  INFORMATION MEASURES FOR TESTING 309  Summary. Figures 1 and 2 provide a concise summary of the dominance relations among the five models Ml M5 . An arrow  connecting two models indicates that the dominance relation (at some strength) holds between those models; a small w beside  the arrow indicates weak dominance, no letter indicates dominance, and a small s indicates strong dominance. Arrows have been  omitted where their presence can be inferred from the property of transitivity. In Fig. l b, for instance, model M3 dominates  M3  a  b  FIG. 1. Dominance relations among models Ml_., M6 relative to outcome W*  1: (a) deter  mined by predictive power; and (b) determined by mean predictive power.  FIG. 2. Dominance relations among models Ml,..., M6 relative to outcome coz: (a) determined by predictive power; and (b)  determined by mean predictive power.  310 HANNA  (and model 1122 weakly dominates but does not dominate) models '1'74 and Al.. Similarly, in Fig. 2b model M3 dominates model  Ml.  Figures 1 a and 2a specify the dominance relations determined by the coefficient of predictive power relative to outcomes w1  and w2, while Figs. lb and 2b specify the dominance relations determined by the coefficient of mean predictive power relative  to outcomes wi and w2 . It is noteworthy that the directed graphs associated with these different measures of predictive power  are almost identical. The only differences relative to outcome wi involve the relations between models M3 and M; and models M2  and Ml ; the only difference relative to outcome w* involves the relation between models M2 and Ml . This close agreement  between the directed graphs determined by these alternative measures of predictive power provides further evidence that the  choice between them is largely a matter of convenience. In this regard, the coefficient of mean predictive power has several  advantages; for instance, it is easier to calculate, more stable for small samples from the parameter space, and its value  relative to data obtained by pooling outcomes wi ,..., wh is simply the average value for the individual outcomes.  It must be admitted, however, that when the measures of predictive power and mean predictive power yield conflicting results  there is an element of arbitrariness in deciding between competing models on the basis of one measure rather than the other.  The issue is not easily resolved because on the one hand the coefficient of predictive power has the more natural  information-theoretic interpretation, while on the other hand the coefficient of mean predictive power is more convenient to  work with in practice.  Notice that the modified-relative-frequency model (M3) dominates all other models, except the N-parameter Bernoulli model  (M2). In fact, M3 has greater predictive power and less parameter effect than any other model considered; only model M2 has  greater descriptive power.  Perhaps the most surprising feature of these directed graphs is the fact that relative to cwt the two-parameter, linear  operator model dominates the one-parameter, Bernoulli model. This is surprising because the latter model is a special case of  the former model. Of course, it follows necessarily that the general model must exceed (or equal) its special case in  descriptive power. But one would surely not expect a priori that the linear operator model would have a smaller parameter  effect than the Bernoulli model; indeed, one would intuitively expect just the opposite since the linear operator model  provides a greater range of parameter values than the Bernoulli model. In effect, the general model is more falsifiable than  its special case: estimation of the two parameters of model M4 takes less information from the data (W*) than estimation of  the single parameter of model Ml. Thus, it surely makes little sense in comparing such models to treat parameters as  "degrees-of-freedom." The linear operator likelihood function depends on the event sequence (an experimental variable) as well  as on the parameter values and observed outcome. As a result, the effect of the parameters is "washed out" to a great extent.  In fact, it is well known that by  INFORMATION MEASURES FOR TESTING 311  increasing the number of trials, the effect of both the initial response probability and the learning rate can be made  arbitrarily small. This fact has frequently been overlooked in discussions of the linear operator model.  The above "paradoxical" result admittedly may depend on the particular manner in which the linear operator model is  parameterized. However, from the present point of view (cf. footnote 3) the manner of parameterizing a model and the choice of  a priori probability distribution are characteristics of the model; to alter these characteristics in order to obtain a better  fit to given data is to alter the model. One might think of model testing as a form of gambling: in presenting a model for  consideration a researcher is gambling that the assumptions he has incorporated in his model (including the form of  parameterization and the a priori probability distribution over the parameter space) convey positive information regarding the  behavioral processes under investigation. He can greatly increase the potential information content of his model by adopting a  peaked a priori probability distribution (or in the limit by concentrating all the weight on a single parameter value), but to  follow this strategy is to greatly increase the risk that the model is misinformative. In short, from the present point of  view the parameterization of a model and the choice of an a priori probability distribution do not introduce arbitrariness  into the application of the above information measures unless these aspects of the model are manipulated in order to obtain a  better fit to the data against which the model is being tested.  The examples considered in this section illustrate the points made at the beginning of this paper: namely, that the number of  free parameters is a misleading and largely irrelevant factor in comparing stochastic models, and that the statistical  acceptability of a model is often a less significant factor than its information content. This does not constitute a claim,  however, that the measures and relations proposed in this paper can serve the same function as current methods of testing  models; their roles are complementary. Comparisons made by means of standard techniques can be rendered more objective and,  consequently, more meaningful by investigating the dominance relations holding among the competing models.  REFERENCES  HANNA, J. F. A new approach to the formulation and testing of learning models. Synthese, 1966, 16, 344-380.  KULLBACK, S. Information theory and statistics. New York: Wiley, 1959.  USPENSKY, J. V. Introduction to mathematical probability. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1937.  RECEIVED: January 2, 1968