10.1016/0022-2496(70)90050-7
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 7, 293-316 (1970)  A Hypothesis Sampling Model for Conjunctive Concept Identification  IRWIN D. NAHINSKY  University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri 65201  A Markov chain model for conjunctive concept identification in a two-category task is presented. Its basic assumptions involve  sampling a subset of hypotheses compatible with an initial positive instance and eliminating untenable hypotheses with  incoming information. Predicted values are compared with observed values for a number of statistics including error-run data  and hypothesis-sample states for various trials. The model was found to fit fairly well.  This paper represents an attempt to incorporate complex information processing assumptions in a stochastic model for concept  identification. Mathematical models for concept learning have in general contained axioms which have implied an acquisition  process depending in some way upon the information presented in successive stimuli. However, the link between axioms and  predicted stimulus-classification patterns has often not been explicit. As an example, Restle (1962) presented a cue learning  model in which he assumed sampling of hypotheses with replacement after an error. His model does provide for a process by  which a given subset of sampled hypotheses might be reduced to a correct one in accordance with increasing information.  However, he goes on to show that his predictions would not distinguish among various strategies which a subject might employ.  Thus, a model of this type would require additional elaboration before a fine analysis of the concept learning process could  be achieved. The model to be presented will state explicit relationships between the subject's strategy and the informational  relationships among stimuli presented in a series.  The foremost concept-learning formulations involve all-or-none assumptions about the nature of acquisition. Bower and Trabasso  (1964) presented a model which is applicable to concept identification with one relevant stimulus dimension. These  investigators assumed that the subject samples hypotheses about the correct cue, e.g., "squares," randomly and that he  maintains the given hypothesis until he errs,  293  294 NAHINSKY  whereupon he resamples with replacement from the total hypothesis population. This process was assumed to continue until the  subject selects the correct hypothesis. Thus a two-stage all-or-none learning process is postulated. Subsequently, Trabasso  and Bower (1966) presented evidence which cast some doubt upon a strict all-or-none interpretation. As a result, they weakened  the sampling with replacement axiom to allow for memory for the error trial and the trial preceding it. The postulated process  entailed temporary elimination of hypotheses inconsistent with response assignments on these two trials.  Recent evidence presented by Erickson (1968) and Nahinsky and Slaymaker (1969) throws serious doubt upon even the weakened  sampling with replacement axiom. Levine (1966) and Nahinsky and Slaymaker (1969) have reported evidence that subjects do  process information about possible hypotheses even on correct response trials. In the present paper the author attempts to  present a model for concept identification which includes assumptions more compatible with recent evidence.  The model to be presented is designed to predict performance in a conjunctive concept identification task in which two  stimulus dimensions are relevant for solution. For example, in a problem in which the form and color dimension are relevant,  the concept to be discovered might be, "red squares." The subject's task would then be to learn that all stimuli containing  red squares should be classified as positive instances of the concept and that all other stimuli should be classified as  negative instances. (Here the term instance applies to a stimulus presentation.) The results of an experiment on such a  conjunctive concept problem reported by Nahinsky and Slaymaker (1969) provided the major motivation for axioms of the model to  be described. Each subject was presented with a positive instance of the concept upon the first trial followed by a randomly  presented series of stimuli. Each positive instance was followed by a series of stimuli for which responses were not followed  by feedback. Such "blanktrial" series were used to assess the pattern of the subject's hypothesis selections. A detailed  analysis of the data suggested that subjects sample randomly and independently some subset of possible hypotheses compatible  with information provided by the first stimulus and then narrow down their tentative hypotheses on the basis of information  provided by succeeding stimuli. Each hypothesis is represented by a combination of two cues. For example, if the positive  instance, "three red circles," is presented, the three cue combinations, "three red," "three circles," and "red circles,"  correspond respectively to three hypotheses about the classification rule. There was evidence that subjects tried other  hypotheses when they found that none of their initial possibilities were tenable. These results were used to generate the  axioms of the model to be presented. Quantitative predictions were then derived for the data reported above and will be  presented later in the article. Although the data were not ideally suited to the resulting analyses, the comparisons between  observed and predicted values do suggest that the model is potentially fruitful. Furthermore, the approach provides a useful  bootstrap for modifying the model, as it will be shown.  CONJUNCTIVE CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 295  DEFINITIONS  The following are definitions of terms which will be used in development of the model:  l . An attribute is defined as some dimension along which a set of stimuli may vary. For example, if a set of stimuli contains  stimuli varied with respect to three different shapes, shape is an attribute which may be used to describe the stimuli.  2. An attribute value is defined as some specific value an attribute may assume for a particular stimulus. In the above  example, if one of the stimuli contains squares, "square" is the value assumed by the shape attribute for that stimulus.  3. A hypothesis is a combination of two attribute values, each for a different attribute, that a subject may consider as the  basis for classification of stimuli. For example, "red square," may represent a subject's hypothesis.  4. A positive instance refers to the presentation to a subject of a stimulus that contains the two attribute values associated  with the hypothesis representing the correct classification rule. A negative instance refers to a stimulus presentation that  does not contain the two correct attribute values.  5. A stimulus is said to be compatible with a hypothesis if the stimulus contains the attribute value pair associated with the  hypothesis.  MODEL  The model is derived to describe conjunctive concept identification tasks in which two attributes are relevant. A random  sequence of stimuli, which assumes different values over k attributes, is presented with the first stimulus always a positive  instance. The subject is asked to classify each stimulus as a positive or as a negative instance, whereupon he is informed of  the correctness of his response.  Sampling and Rejection Axioms  1. Each subject samples attribute value pairs (hypotheses) from the population of (s) pairs present on the initial positive  instance. The sampling of each pair is done randomly and independently of the other with probability a. Thus, each subject  samples y hypotheses with probability (v) ay(1 - a)Y-11, y - 0, 1, 2,..., Y, where Y = (2). The constant a will be referred to  as the "hypothesis-sampling rate parameter." If no hypotheses are sampled upon the initial instance, Axiom 1 applies to the  next positive instance, etc.  2. If, on a subsequent informed positive instance, at least one attribute value on an initially sampled hypothesis is changed  from the initial positive instance value, the hypothesis is rejected from the sample.  296 NAHINSKY  3. If on a subsequent informed negative instance an attribute value pair is the same as a pair initially sampled, the  associated hypothesis is rejected from the sample.  4. If the conditions of neither Axiom 2 nor Axiom 3 are met for a given stimulus presentation with respect to a sampled  hypothesis, the hypothesis remains in the sample.  5. If the number of hypotheses in the sample is reduced to zero on an informed negative instance on trial n, the subject  samples attribute value pairs upon the next informed positive instance as specified by Axiom 1. If no hypotheses are sampled  upon that instance Axiom 1 applies to the next informed positive instance, etc.  6. If the number of hypotheses in the sample is reduced to zero on an informed positive instance on trial n, the subject  samples attribute-value pairs on that positive instance from the complement of the subject's hypothesis sample on trial n. The  complement is defined as the set of attribute value pairs of the initial positive instance exclusive of those hypotheses in  the subject's sample on trial n. Let y be the number of hypotheses in the sample on trial n. Then hypotheses are sampled from  the complementary set randomly and independently with probability a' = min{[Y/(Y - y)] a, 1}. Thus the fewer the hypotheses  left to be sampled from the total population, the greater is the probability one of them will be sampled. If no hypotheses are  sampled as specified, then Axiom 1 applies to resampling on subsequent informed positive instances as stated in Axiom 5.  7. If the sample contains the correct hypothesis, and all other hypotheses remaining in the pool are rejected on a given  trial, the problem is said to be solved, and the system is in the absorbing state.  Response Axioms  1. If a stimulus is compatible with at least one hypothesis remaining in the sample, the stimulus is classified as a positive  instance. Otherwise, the stimulus is classified as a negative instance.  2. If no hypotheses are in the sample on a given trial, then every stimulus is classified as a negative instance with  probability one.  A few comments about the axioms are in order. First, Axiom 6 states that a subject who initially fails to sample the correct  hypothesis returns to the first positive instance to sample hypotheses he failed to sample on the first trial. This assumption  implies a strong primacy effect. It would perhaps be more reasonable to assume that a subject focuses upon those hypotheses  associated with the positive instance on the resampling trial. Then, assuming that he does not sample hypotheses held on that  trial, he would sometimes sample from a larger set and sometimes from a smaller set than the set of Y - y remaining hypotheses  associated with the first positive instance. At any rate, the remaining hypotheses would always contain the correct one  whenever resampling  CONJUNCTIVE CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 297  is necessary. Thus, the strong primacy assumptions result in a tractable approximation of the more reasonable assumption. The  empirical evidence strongly suggested that subjects do not sample with replacement after exhaustion of the initial sample. An  attempt to fit a model which incorporated such a sampling with replacement axiom also demonstrated a very poor fit.  The axioms do not specify how the parameter, a, may vary with parameters of the experimental situation. However, Axiom 6  states that resampling takes place at a rate inversely proportional to the size of the hypothesis set from which the sample is  drawn, an assumption in accord with the experimental evidence above. This assumption suggests that a might decrease as the  number of attributes in the problem increases. Blank-trial evidence reported by Slaymaker and Nahinsky (1969) indicates that  this is the case. Results for conjunctive concept problems with stimuli varied with respect to three, four, or five attributes  indicated that subjects sampled between 1.5 and 2 hypotheses on the average for all conditions. Thus, for given Y, a  reasonable estimate of a might lie between 1.51Y and 2/Y. At any rate, a must be estimated for experimental conditions to  11Tarkov Chain  The preceding axioms define a Markov chain which starts after the subject samples hypotheses upon presentation of the initial  positive instance. The initial state vector has elements consisting of probabilities for drawing different samples, and states  of the chain correspond to samples which contain certain combinations of hypotheses. The states may be divided into three  subsets: BI -states corresponding to samples which contain the correct hypothesis, B2 states corresponding to samples which  contain at least one hypothesis, but not the correct hypothesis, and B3 the state in which the sample contains no hypotheses.  It follows from the sampling and rejection axioms that Bl is an absorbing set while B2 and B3 are transient sets.  Let C = 1 if the correct hypothesis is in the pool, and let C = 0 otherwise. If y represents the number of hypotheses sampled,  then the initial state probabilities are as follows:  T  P(y> C = 1) = (y - 11) -y(1 - -)Y-Y, y = 1, 2,..., I >  Y' -  P(y, C = 0) = y 1 ( ) -J(1 - a)"', y = 1, 2,..., Y - 1; P(y = 0) = (1 - a)Y.  Define the following row vectors:  and  Pi =[p(y=1,C=1) ...p(y=1 ',C=1 )l P2=1P(y=1,C=0)...Xy=Y-1,C=0)l.  298 NAHINSKY  Then the initial state vector of the entire system is:  P = LPi P2 I p(y = 0)],  which contains 2Y elements. The rows and columns of the transition matrix, P, will correspond to the order of elements in p.  Thus states in BI are represented by rows and columns one through Y, states in B2 by rows and columns Y -}- 1 through 2Y - 1,  and the lone state B3 by row and column 2Y.  Before proceeding with the derivation of transition probabilities, certain task parameters which determine these transition  probabilities must be defined. Let p be the probability that a positive instance will be presented, and let q be the  probability that a negative instance will be presented for any trial in the random sequence. Let I be the number of irrelevant  attribute values which two positive instances do not have in common, and let p(I = i) be the probability that i irrelevant  attribute values will be varied from one positive instance to another. By the same token, let I' be the number of attribute  values which a positive instance and a negative instance have in common, and let p(I' = i') be the probability that i'  attribute values will be held constant from a positive instance to a negative instance. An analysis of the stimulus set for a  given experiment will allow the experimenter to calculate the distributions of I and I'.  When i irrelevant attribute values are varied from a positive instance to a subsequent positive instance, the number of  disappearing attribute-value pairs is given by  (i 2) + i(k - i), i(k - i),  2 <i Gk-2;  Here (2) is the number of pairs which involves only the i changed values, and i(k - i) is the number of pairs which involves a  varied value and a value not varied. By similar reasoning, if i' attribute values overlap a positive instance and a subsequent  negative instance, the number of attribute-value pairs held constant from the positive instance to the subsequent negative  instance is  The axioms are applicable only to an experimental situation in which the first instance presented is a positive instance.  However, the model can easily be extended to cover presentations of negative instances before the first positive instance. A  natural extension would involve the assumption that subjects have no hypotheses during these initial negative instances. The  transition probabilities from this state to other states described above would then be p times the corresponding values in the  initial state vector, and there would be no return to this state from other states. One additional response axiom would  distinguish this state from the (y = 0) state described above.  CONJUNCTIVE CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 299  Unpublished data indicate that subjects respond at a chance level before the first positive instance is presented. Hence, it  might be assumed that the probability of a positive classification would be one-half rather than zero for the state involving  initial negative instances.  It is possible to compute transition probabilities for the various states using the values defined above. First, consider the  Y X Y submatrix, Pl , for transitions between states in Bl . The first state, (y = 1, C = 1), is the absorbing state. Hence,  the first entry in Pl is one followed by zeros in the first row. The probability that there is a transition from state (y, C =  1) to (y - z, C = 1) is the probability that either of the two following events occurs: (a) a positive instance is presented  and exactly z of the Di hypotheses varied from the preceding positive instance are still in the hypothesis sample; and (b) a  negative instance is presented and exactly z of Ci, incorrect hypotheses held constant from the preceding positive instance  are currently in the pool. To illustrate transitions, consider a problem in which k = 3 and the initial positive instance is  "three red squares." Suppose that "three squares" is the correct hypothesis and that a subject samples "three squares" and  "red squares" as hypotheses. The tree diagram shown in Fig. 1 illustrates possible transitions contingent upon the stimulus  sequence over two trials following the initial positive instance. In this example, if the second stimulus presented is either  "three blue squares," a positive instance, or "two red squares," a negative instance, the one incorrect hypothesis in the  subject's sample is eliminated and learning takes place on that trial. On the other hand, the stimulus, "one blue square,"  results in no change of state and at least one more stimulus is required for learning. If we note that hypotheses are sampled  independently of each other and with equal probability at the outset, the transition probabilities for states in Bl , p~l~ z  ,are given by the equation  PM  1 Y- I-i 1 h- I z  =pm12,- -I -1 +4mYZ, -- ~.-1, -  z z  =0, y Gy-z.  y _>_ y - z, y = 2, 3,..., y'; (6)  For a given i, the probability of eliminating z hypotheses on a positive instance is the hypergeometric probability shown,  that exactly z of the Di hypotheses changed belong to the set of y - 1 incorrect hypotheses sampled. A similar hypergeometric  probability obtains for negative instances. In the prior three-attribute example, it would be necessary to survey the stimulus  population for probabilities associated with different values of I and I' and then find the corresponding values for fixed z  and y in order to compute transition probabilities. In the example, I may assume the values 0 or 1 with corresponding Di  values of 0 or 2. The possible values of I' are 0, 1, and 2 with corresponding C; , values of 0, 0, and 1.  300 NAHINSKY  Positive Resulting Second Resulting Third Resulting  Instance State Stimulus State Stimulus State  Three blue squares - (y-,ACJ) (positive instance,  0 ii 2,2; 1)  Three red squares - (y,2,C,l) -  Two red squares (y-z:I,C:I) (negative instance,  Ci:UZI)  _Three red circles (y-i:2,C,) (negative instance,  CiIALO)  Lone blue square - (y-t,2,C,l)(negative instance,  Ci,41A)  Lone red square (y-zl,C,l) (negative instance,  Cil;l,c_I)  Fvc. 1. Transitions for subject who samples the hypotheses, "three squares" and "red squares," on the first instance.  Next consider the Y - 1 X Y - I submatrix, P2 , which contains as elements the probabilities for transitions within states of  B2 . A transition from (y, C = 0) to (y - z, C = 0) for z <- y can be made in one of three ways. Conditions (a) and (b)  described above for Bl transitions also apply to B2 transitions. In addition, the specified transition may be made by  elimination of all hypotheses upon a positive instance followed by sampling of y - z hypotheses provided y - z G Y - y -- 1.  It follows that for y - z < Y - y - 1  h-2 p(2) 7f,Y-z mini, Di=z  (y Y-y-1 _ (y Y'-y-I  \z) ( Di - z P(I - Z) '' 1z) Ci, - z ) P(I _  Di 1~ ~_ niz (YCi. 1  (Y_y-1  ) a'(U-z)(I - ')(Y-2Y+z)  y -'z l mini, Di=Y  y=1,2,...,Y-1, y-z>.0; = 0 otherwise,  -y-1  (Y. ) P(I = i) Di -.y  CONJUNCTIVE CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 301  where a' is as defined in Axiom 5, and the superscript, (2), denotes probabilities for transitions within B2 . In the  three-attribute value example shown above, if the subject had sampled the two hypotheses, "three red" and "red squares,"  initially, presentation of the negative instance, "two red squares," on the next trial would result in elimination of the  hypothesis, "red squares." The corresponding transition would be from (y = 2, C = 0) to (y - z = 1, C = 0), a transition in B2  . If the subject had sampled the single hypothesis, "red squares," a presentation of the positive instance, "three blue  squares," would result in its elimination. If he then samples the hypothesis, "three red," the transition is from (y = 1, C =  0) to (y - z = 1, C = 0), a transition in B. . Next consider transitions from (y, C = 0) to (w, C = 0), where y < w <_ Y - y -  1. This transition can occur only when all hypotheses in the pool are eliminated followed by a resampling. Therefore, it  follows that  y=1,2,...,Y-l,  y<  p(t) = p (Y -y - 1) a~)Y-v-u. ' u~ w  (IT-y-1)p(I=z) Di -T  Di  w<_I'-y-1.  mini, D i= ri  Consider the Y - I X Y submatrix P21 , which contains probabilities for transitions from states y in B2 to state w in Bl .  Such transitions can be made only upon positive instance trials which involve elimination of all hypotheses followed by  sampling of a subset containing the correct hypothesis. Thus the probability is represented by  11 Y'-y-1  p(2i) = p ( .Y - ) a"(1 - a,)Y-v-,u. Y .Y  w - 1 mini, Y. - 1 Di=?i  ( Di )  yw Y, wGY-y, = 0 otherwise.  Next consider state (y = 0) to which escape can be made from B2 and from which transition can be made to states in Bl and B2 .  For transitions from (y = j, C = 0) in B2 to (Y = 0)  Y-j-1  ( D. _ ) p(I = i) 1 - a' Y-i Z 1  hi, (U=o) = ( ) p  -  mini, Y 1  Di=i ( Di  +4  mini', CiJ  (Y  1  .1 ) p(I, = z') Y - 1)  -,  ( C  j = 1, 2,..., I' - 1. (10)  Denote by d2 the column vector formed by the above Y - I transition probabilities,  302 NAHINSKY  starting with p, (,-0) as the top element and progressing to PY_1, (y-o) as the bottom element. This vector will form the  elements in the last column of P which corresponds to the position of P2 in P.  Note that transitions from (y = 0) to states in B1 and B2 result from repetition of the initial sampling process upon a  positive instance presentation. Therefore, multiplication of the vectors p1 and p2 by the scalar p produces elements in the  last row of P, with the resulting values equal to transition probabilities from (y = 0) to states in B1 and B2 , respectively.  Finally, the probability that the system remains in (y = 0) on a given trial is  P(y=o),(y=o) = q + p(1  The preceding submatrices and vectors can be arranged to make matrix, P, as follows:  up the partitioned  (y=Y, C=1) (y=1, C=O)  (y=Y-1, C=0) (y=o)  (y=1, C=1) li (y=1, C'=0) (y=0)  ... (y=Y, C=1) ... (y=Y-_l, C=O)  I I I  P(1) 0 0  I I  I I  ____________I ___ ______I_______ (12)  I I  P(21) P(2) III d2  I I  I I  _ ______-_____ __  PP1 j PP2 q+P(1-a) Y.  Entries in ppn are thus expected probabilities that the system is in a given state on the nth informed trial. These  probabilities are equivalent to expected proportion of subjects with various sized hypothesis samples, including or not  including the correct hypothesis.  The expected probabilities for classification errors can be derived readily from the axioms. For states in B1 an error cannot  occur on a positive instance. A correct response on a negative instance can occur in B1 if and only if none of the incorrect  value pairs in the current sample remain unchanged from the preceding instance. For (y=1, C=1), this probability is one for a  negative instance. The above facts lead to the following probability: -  (Y-y ~C. 2  k-1  P(II = i')  pa) (E) = q I 1 - L  Z a Y - 1 ) Ci where p(1)(E) is the probability of an error in (y, C = 1) and the summation term in brackets is the probability of a correct  response on a negative instance in (y, C = 1).  CONJUNCTIVE CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 303  Similar reasoning for states in B2 results in  p121(E) = p Y z Ly_ 1 + 4 1 -  mini, i'=o Di-_Y  ~Y-y-1~p(I,=z,) Ci.  y = 1, 2,..., Y - 1; (14)  where p(2)(E) is the probability of an error in (y, C = 0), the first summation is the probability of a positive-instance  error in (y, C ---- 0), and the summation in brackets is the probability of a correct negative-instance response in (y, C =  0). Finally, note that ph-o>(E) = p.  Let eI be the column vector of Y elements, with the top element pi )(E) and with values progressing to p'Y)(E) as the bottom  element. In similar fashion, let e2 be the column vector of Y - 1 elements, with the top element p(')(E) and progressing to  p(y0) 1(E) as the bottom element. Finally, let e be the column vector of order 2Y, with the top Y elements corresponding to el  , the next Y - 1 elements corresponding to e2 , and the bottom element p(,o)(E). If P is the matrix obtained from P by  deleting row one and column one, p' the vector obtained by deleting the first element of p, and e' the vector obtained by  deleting the top element of e, then the expected number of total errors is provided by the equality  E(T) = p,(I - P,)_i e'. (15)  Another derivation of the transition matrix is desirable for computation of other statistics, even though the approach results  in a substantial increase in the number of states of the chain. Suppose state occupancy on any trial is defined not only in  terms of the subject's hypothesis pool, but also in terms of his response on that trial. If the subject is in state (y, C = m)  on trial n as defined above, and he makes a correct response, we say he is in state (y, C = m, R), m = 0, 1. Conversely, if he  makes a wrong response, we say he is in state (y, C = m, W) on that trial. If this distinction among states is used, the  number of transient states is doubled, but computation of certain sequential statistics is facilitated.  Consider p' as defined for (15). Multiply each element by the probability of a correct response for the state represented by  the element to get the vector pc'. In analogous fashion, multiply each element of p' by the probability of an error for the  state corresponding to the element to get the vector pE'. These operations result in  p~ = [p(y = 2, C = 1) p2l>(C) ... p(y = Y, c = 1) pY'(C)  p(y = 1, C - 0) p12>(C) ... p(.Y = 0) q],  PE _ [p(y = 2, C = 1) p211(E) ... p(y = Y, C = 1)p"I((E) p(y = 1, C = 0) p121(E) ... p(Y = 0) p],  (16)  4801712-8  304 NAHINSKY  where pym,(C) is the probability of a correct response in state y of B,,, , and p("Z)(E) is the corresponding error  probability. The new initial state vector, p", is defined as follows:  P"=Ip(y= 1,C= 1) 1 PC' I PEI (17)  a vector of 4Y - 1 elements.  Now consider P, the matrix for transitions within transient states. It is important to note that for certain states the  occurrence of an error or correct response upon trial n is totally dependent upon whether the stimulus for that trial is a  positive or a negative instance. Thus for any state, (y, C = 1), an error can occur only if a negative instance is presented,  because the axioms would dictate a positive classification of all positive instances when the sample contains the correct  hypothesis. By similar reasoning, for (y = 0), an error implies a positive instance on trial n, and a correct response implies  a negative instance on that trial. Consequently, a modification of certain transition probabilities in P is in order when the  expanded transition matrix is derived. Let PEw. y-z equal the second of the two terms in (6) divided by q. This value is the  conditional probability of transition in Bl given a negative instance. Next substitute p for the last row of P. The resulting  values are the conditional probabilities of transitions from (y = 0) on a positive instance and, hence, on an error. If all  other transition probabilities remain the same and each value, p , in the transformed P is multiplied by the probability of  an error for the state represented by column j, the resulting matrix is PEE , the matrix for transitions from an error on  trial n to an error on trial n -{- 1. If elements, pi; , of transformed P are multiplied by correct response probabilities for  the state represented by column j, the resulting matrix is PE, , a matrix for transitions from an error on trial n to a  correct response on trial n -}- 1.  Next let all elements of the last row of P be zero except for the last element, which becomes unity. The values which result  are conditional probabilities of transitions from (y = 0) on a negative instance, and hence, on a correct response. If all  other entries in P are unchanged, multiplication of values by error probabilities as described above results in PE_,, the  matrix for transitions from a correct response to an error. A multiplication of the same transformed P by correct response  probabilities as described in the preceding paragraph, results in PA,, the matrix for transitions from a correct response to a  correct response.  Finally, consider the elements in the first column of P, defined in (12). Let the bottom element be zero, with all other  values unchanged. This new column vector will be called r,A . Next change the first column of P in the following manner.  Change each P(') as indicated in the derivation of PEE , and let the bottom element be the first element of p. Leave all other  values unchanged, and label this column vector rEA . In view of the definition of p", the transition matrix for the chain, P",  is defined by the following partition:  CONJUNCTIVE CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 305  (y=1, C=1) (y=2, C=1, R) (y=2, C=1, W)   ...   (y-o, R) ...   (y-0, W)   (y=1, C=1) - - -   1 II 0 II- 0   ______ _______   _ _____ _I_   I   (y=2, C==1, R) I I   rCA ICI PI (18)  CC PC'   I   (y=0, R) --------------------      (y=2, C=I, W)    YEA j PEC PEE   (y=0, W) I I   I   a matrix of order 4Y - 1.  Millward (1967) has shown how a partition of the type shown can be used to derive a number of statistics of interest. Formulas  for some of these statistics will be presented, but the reader is referred to Millward's article for an elaboration of the  methods used. The statistics which follow may be defined for protocols of subjects for a fixed number of trials or of subjects  run to a strict criterion. For the sake of generality, we define the following matrices:  Ncc_ (I - Pcc) 1(I - Pcc) rn N,, = (I - Pt Pt n),  (19)  where Pt is the matrix obtained by deleting the first row and first column of P". Further, let  Ncc = lim Ncc" = (I - PCc)-1, n  N N = lim Nn = (I - Pt)-1.  (20)  Consider the distribution of total errors, T, for protocols involving learning to a strict criterion. It can readily be shown  that  7,=k p(y=1,C=1)+pcNccrCA, k=0, (21)  where D = pc NCCPcE + pE , F = PEE + PEcNccPcE , and G = PECNccrCA -}- YEA The expected value for total errors is shown in  (15). To find the variance of total errors, note that  E(T2) = D.(I -F)-3 (I +F).G, (22)  and Var(T) = E(T2) - [E(T)]2.  306 NAHINSKY  Computations for the error distribution for the finite trials case may be derived easily and will not be shown.  The distribution for the trial of the last error, L, is shown for the infinite trials case:  P(L - k) -_ I P(y = 1, C = 1) + Pc NcCrCA , k = 0,  ~ WE'(PEcNccrCA + YEA), k > 1, (23) where WEk- is the subvector of p" P"k. which corresponds to error states on trial k.  Further,  E(L) = [Pc PE ] N2H(PEcNccrCA -I- YEA), (24)  where  H = (- 0J0  a square matrix of order 4Y-2 with I of order 2Y-1. (Allow the first 2Y-1 zero entry columns of the product, [PC' I pE ] N2 H,  to be eliminated so that postmultiplication by succeeding matrices may be performed.) Computation of Var(L) follows directly  if we note that  E(L2) = [PC PE] _ N3(I + Pt) H(PECNCCYCA + YEA)(25)  In order to derive the error runs statistics, it is necessary to consider U-tuples of consecutive errors. Let Uf,k, be the  random variable equal to one if f consecutive errors occur starting on trial k and zero otherwise. Then  P(Uf,k. = 1) -_ SW,' HPEE1 J; k = 2, 3,...;  ~pE PEE J, k - 1,  (26)  where J is a column vector which contains all ones, and W` Consider the statistic, Uf where  = [PC' I PEI Pt"-'-'  Uf  n-f+1  Uf.k  Uf,k, for the finite n-trial protocols.  for the infinite trials case,  (27)  (In view of the fact that (26) defines P(Uf,k = I) for both the finite and infinite trials  CONJUNCTIVE CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 307  cases, Uf may also be defined for both cases.) The sum of expectations of U,,, is given by the equation  E(Uf) f W,(IHPP,) ~ (I_ f p"n the HPEE l J is for the finite n-trial protocols. (28)  Next let Ri be the number of runs of errors of length i, and let R be the total number of runs of any length. Bush (1959) has  proved the following identities:  E(Ri) = E(Uj) - 2E(Ui+1) + E(LTj+a),  E(R) - E(Ul) - E(U2).  (29)  Parameter Estimation  Before testing hypotheses about concordance between theoretical and observed values, it is necessary to develop an approach to  estimate the sampling rate parameter, a. In view of the fact that all other constants of the equations are task parameters and  determined by the experimenter, an estimate of a is all that is necessary to provide predictions. The formula for an estimator  can be derived from response distributions during a blank trial procedure. Suppose each subject is presented with a series of  stimuli following the initial positive instance, and suppose his responses to these stimuli receive no feedback. Further,  suppose that each of these blank-trial stimuli overlaps the initial positive instance by exactly one pair of attribute values.  The subject's response to such a stimulus will be a positive classification if and only if he initially samples the hypothesis  which corresponds to the overlapping pair, if the sampling axioms can be assumed. Thus, if all Y = (k2) possible overlapping  pairs are presented in corresponding stimuli, it is possible to ascertain whether or not each attribute value pair on the  initial instance is sampled. If Y is very large, a subset of Y' stimuli corresponding to Y' < Y of the possible hypotheses may  be used for a blanktrial series, with the correct hypothesis included in the subset. Levine, Leitenberg, and Richter (1964)  have presented evidence which indicates that the subject's hypotheses about solution remain quite stable during blank trials  for a variety of tasks. Hence it seems likely that determination of sampled hypotheses using blank trials will be fairly  reliable. However, care should be taken to avoid very lengthy series of such trials because of possible distortions which may  take place over time.  Let y, be the number of hypotheses sampled by subject i, and let Li be the likelihood function for subject i, i = 1, 2,..., N;  letL be the likelihood for the entire sample. Then  Li = a"i(1 - a)Y-vi, yi = 0, 1, 2,..., 1';  N 1  L = H ayi(1 - (x)Y->!i - aziyi(1 - a)NY-EiYi. i=1  (30)  308  NAHINSKY  where yi is the number of hypotheses sampled by subject i. It easily follows that the maximum likelihood estimate of a is  (31)  The statistic in (31) is the average of N independent binomial variables, each with an expectation of a. Thus a is a minimum  variance unbiased estimator, since it is based on a sufficient statistic. Its variance is all - a)INY.  Another approach to estimation would involve the response protocols for all informed trials. Consider the random variable xik  , defined for subject i such that  if an error is made on trial k,  11  xik -  w if a correct response is made on trial k.  (32)  Then consider the response sequence for subject i denoted by the joint event (xi, , 'xi2,..., 'xik ,...). The outcome may be  represented by a vector with an infinite number of elements or with a fixed number of elements depending upon whether subjects  are run to a strict learning criterion or for a fixed number of trials. It follows that the likelihood function for a set of N  subject-problems can be written as  N L - H X xi1 , i=I  ,..., xik. ,. ,  (33)  some polynomial function of a. The usual procedure of taking the logarithm of L and maximizing with respect to the parameter  value would be practically impossible. However, it is possible in principle to compute the maximum likelihood estimate of a. A  detailed consideration of the estimation problem for complete protocols is beyond the scope of this paper. Suffice it to say,  an estimation procedure based upon the entire sequence would in general be optimal. Further, statistical comparisons between  observed and expected frequencies of subject-response sequences provide a very powerful overall test of the model. The reader  is referred to Holland (1967) and Millward (1967) for a more extensive treatment of this problem.  EMPIRICAL TEST OF THE MODEL  Data from two conditions, described below, were used to test the model. The subjects in each of the conditions were presented  with a two-category conjunctive concept identification problem with two relevant attributes. The stimuli were geometric  figures varied with respect to three attributes. In each condition, the subject was presented with a series of stimuli and was  asked to classify each stimulus as a positive or as a negative instance of the concept to be learned. The subject was informed  about the correctness of his classification following certain stimuli. These will be referred to  CONJUNCTIVE CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 309  as "feedback" stimuli. Following presentation of certain other stimuli the subject received no feedback. These stimuli will be  referred to as "blank-trial" stimuli.  The first stimulus presented was always a positive instance and the subject was so informed. This positive instance was  followed by a series of three blank-trial stimuli, with each blank-trial stimulus overlapping the initial positive instance by  exactly two attribute values. Thus, each of the three possible hypotheses associated with the initial positive instance was  compatible with just one of the blank-trial stimuli. The blank-trial series was then followed by a random series of stimulus  presentations meeting certain specifications. There were five feedback stimuli, one of which was another positive instance  with the other four negative instances. The feedback positive instance was followed immediately by a three-stimuli blank-trial  series with the blanktrial stimuli overlapping that positive instance as described in the preceding paragraph. After the  random cycle described, all six feedback stimuli, including the first positive instance, were presented in a random cycle,  with each positive instance followed immediately by its associated blank-trial series. Thus after the first positive instance  and its associated blank-trial series, there were I 1 feedback trials, with three positive instance presentations, each  followed immediately by an associated blank-trial series. The only restriction upon randomization was that the first feedback  stimulus of the second cycle could not be the last feedback stimulus of the first cycle. No blank-trial stimuli were the same  as any feedback stimuli.  The two conditions referred to in the first paragraph of this section differed with respect to overlap between positive and  negative instances. For the first condition, each negative instance overlapped just one positive instance by exactly one  attribute value, an irrelevant value, and did not overlap the other positive instance by any value. Two negative instances  overlapped one positive instance in the manner described and the other two negative instances overlapped the other positive  instance as specified. The first condition will be referred to as the "one-value overlap" condition. For the second condition,  three of the four negative instances overlapped some positive instance as in condition one. The fourth negative instance  overlapped one of the positive instances by two values, a relevant and an irrelevant value, and it did not overlap the other  positive instance. Hence, two negative instances overlapped one of the positive instances by one value, and the other positive  instance overlapped one of the two remaining negative instances by one value and the other by two values. The second condition  will be referred to as the "two-value overlap" condition. There were 60 subject-problem protocols for each condition.  The data presented here involve conditions of an experiment reported in greater detail by Nahinsky and Slaymaker (1969). The  conditions selected were those which involved reasonably long sequences of informed trials. The experimental findings provided  qualitative evidence for the axioms of the model, with results favoring the notion of independent sampling of cue-combinations  as well as the information processing assumptions presented in the present paper.  310  NAHINSKY  In order to make quantitative fits of the model, the sampling rate parameter was estimated for each condition from the  responses on the initial blank-trial stimulus set. The values of S were .56 and .52 for the one-value overlap and the  two-value overlap condition, respectively. These estimates were used to generate predictions for data following the initial  blank-trial sets. Thus, predictions were made for data not involved in estimating the parameter. It should be noted that p was  .200 for informed trials one through five but was .333 for the last six informed trials. Hence, two transition matrices, one  for each of the above sets of trials, were derived to make predictions.  Figure 2 shows a comparison between observed and predicted frequency-perprotocol of error runs of length one through five for  each condition. It was necessary  100  yo  80  20  10  Two-Value Overlap  Run length  Observed Predicted  Frc. 2. Observed and predicted frequencies of runs of different lengths.  to use the expanded transition matrix shown in (18) and the expanded initial state vector shown in (17) to derive the error  run statistics. Since Y = 3 for the experimental tasks, the expanded matrix was 11 X 11, with a 10 X 10 submatrix for  transitions within transient states. The finite trials formula for error sequences shown in (27) and the error runs formula of  (29) were used to derive predicted values. The graphs show a good fit for all runs save those of length one, where predicted  values undershoot  CONJUNCTIVE CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 311  for both conditions. The variance of number of length-one runs was computed for each condition and a t test comparing the  observed average with predicted average was performed for each condition. The one-value overlap condition revealed a  significant discrepancy, t(59) = 3.31, p G .01, while the two-value overlap result was nonsignificant, t(59) = 1.44, p > .10.  Hence the error runs data provide some equivocal evidence for deviation from the model.  A major comparison involved the sizes of hypothesis samples during feedback trials 6 through 11. Hypothesis sample size was  measured by the number of positive blanktrial responses for the blank-trial set following a feedback positive instance, a  procedure which follows from the rationale presented in the section on parameter estimation. Although the axioms of the model  apply to sequences of feedback trials, the blanktrial response patterns provide for an assessment of the subject's hypothesis  sample on the immediately preceding feedback trial.  Hypothesis sample size was assessed following the second occurrence of the positive instance presented on the first trial. The  blank-trial stimuli for this measure were the blank-trial stimuli which followed the first positive instance. Therefore, this  stimulus set corresponded to possible hypotheses which the axioms state could have been sampled on the first trial or on some  subsequent trial. Each subject was presented the initial positive instance for the second time on some one of the last six  feedback trials, the trial depending upon the random sequence. Hence the measure was made for a certain subset of subjects  following trial six, for a second subset of subjects following trial seven, etc. Since relatively few protocols were measured  for each of the trials, and since shifts in the distribution of hypothesis samples were small during these later trials,  observed frequencies for hypothesis sample sizes were pooled for trials 6 through 11 for each condition. Predicted  probabilities for the different hypothesis samples were derived for each of these six trials. In order to arrive at predicted  values for the pooled data, the predicted probabilities for each trial were multiplied by the number of subjects assessed for  that trial, and resulting values were pooled over these trials for each hypothesis sample size.  The transition matrix shown in (12) and the related initial state vector shown in (3) were used for deriving the predicted  values. The matrix was of order 6 X 6 in this case, and p times the appropriate powers of transition matrices produced  predicted probabilities for each of the six states for the different trials. Probabilities for the state pairs, (y = 1, C =  1)-(y = 1, C = 0) and (y = 2, C = 1)-(y = 2, C = 0), were combined to get, respectively, the probabilities for samples of size  one and samples of size two. Predicted probabilities for states (y -- 0) and (y = 3, C = 1) provided values for samples of  size zero and size three, respectively.  A comparison between observed and predicted proportions of hypothesis samples of various sizes is shown in Fig. 3. In view of  the fact that hypothesis samples were assessed after positive instances, transition probabilities, given a positive instance,  were used for these trials in making predictions. The one sample Kolmogorov-  312 NAHINSKY 1.00r  One-Value Overlap  90  90  10or  Two-Value Overlap  22  80  ,70  ,60  50  40  30  20  10  0041  0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3  Number of Hypotheses Number of Hypotheses Observed  Predicted uuuauununuunannu.  FIG. 3. Observed and predicted distribution of hypothesis sample sizes over the last six  trials.  Smirnov test showed a nonsignificant difference between predicted and observed distributions for each condition, d max = .116,  p > .20 for the one-value overlap condition, and d max = .115, p > .20 for the two-value overlap condition.  The proportion of hypothesis samples containing the correct hypothesis was computed from the blank-trial sets specified above  for each condition. (The sample was assumed to contain the correct hypothesis if the subject classified positively the  blanktrial stimulus with the two correct values.) The comparisons revealed nonsignificant  CONJUNCTIVE CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 313  departures of observed from predicted values in both cases, X2(1) = 2.10, p > .10 for the one-value overlap condition and  X2(1) _ .26, p > .50 for the two-value overlap case.  As a further check, observed and predicted proportions of hypothesis samples in the absorbing state were computed for both  conditions. There were significant discrepancies for these tests, X2(1) = 12.00, p G .001 for the one-value overlap condition  and X2(1) = 7.68, p G .01 for the two-value overlap condition. A trial-by-trial comparison of observed and predicted values  indicates a slight but consistent tendency for the model to overestimate the number of samples in the absorbing state. Thus,  the model provides a fair fit for the data except for the above small, but consistent, departure.  The discrepancies between observed and predicted values, although small, were consistent. A closer examination of the data  suggests that a good deal of the remaining variance may be attributable to correspondingly small but consistent types of  deviations from the process implied by the axioms. Accordingly, certain adjustments of predicted values were made to  investigate these hypothesized deviations.  Inspection of protocols for subjects who made no errors between the first and second presentation of the initial positive  instance revealed one type of deviation from the axioms. Since the sets of blank-trial stimuli following both of these  presentations are identical, comparisons between the first and second sets of blank-trial responses should show the changes in  hypothesis samples over the intervening trials. There were 89 protocols for which no errors intervened between the first and  second presentations of the initial instance. For eight of these protocols, the comparison between the first and second  blank-trial sets indicated that the subject either failed to eliminate an untenable hypothesis or added an additional  hypothesis in a manner not allowed by the axioms. In view of the fact that no errors were made during intervening trials,  which included a positive instance presentation, it might be assumed that subjects were processing information efficiently  without the necessity of resampling. The proportion of such discrepancies, 8/89, was used as the estimate of the probability,  g, of the described departure on any trial. The predicted hypothesis sample sizes would have to be corrected to allow for the  departures. Assume that the given departures occur randomly and independently over trials. Next note that f hypothesis samples  of any size less than three can be expected to show an increase of one hypothesis through the temporary addition on any trial.  Let p(y) be the proportion predicted by the model of hypotheses samples of size y, and let p'(y) be the predicted proportion  corrected for temporary additions to the sample. Then the predicted values are cor rected as follows:  p'(y = 0) = p(y = 0)(1 - ~)'  p'(y = 1) =p(y = 1) +Ap(y = 0) -p(y = 1)l, p'(y = 2) = p(y = 2) + Ap(y = 1) - p(y = 2)], p'(y = 3) = p(y = 3) + ~Lp(y = 2)l,  (34)  314 NAHINSKY  where ~ is the estimated value of /3. The corrected values improved the fits, with predicted curves and observed curves  virtually coinciding. Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests showed no significant discrepancies between predicted and observed  distributions, d max = .042, p > .20 for the one-value overlap condition, and d max = .024, p > .20 for the two-value overlap  condition.  The corrected predicted proportion of samples containing the correct hypothesis is equal to p(y, C == 1) + (0/3) p(y, C = 0).  The correction was very slight, and again there was no significant observed-versus-predicted discrepancy for this variable,  X2(1) = 2.129, p > .10 and X2(1) = .277, p > .50 for the one-value overlap condition and the two-value overlap condition,  respectively.  The corrected predicted proportion of samples in the absorbing state is equal to p(y = 1, C = 1) + ~13[p(y = 0) - 3p(y = 1, C  = 1)]. Observed frequencies were compared with the modified predicted frequencies with no significant discrepancies resulting,  X2(1) _ .414, p > .50 for the one-value overlap condition, and X2(1) = .314, p > .50 for the two-value overlap condition.  It is interesting to note that a tendency to lose hypotheses from the sample, other than through logical elimination, was not  in evidence. Thus subjects seemed to sample a limited number of hypotheses in keeping with memory limitations. However, they  apparently considered other initially unsampled hypotheses upon some subsequent trials.  The minimal overlap between positive and negative instances in the experiment would result in virtually no influence of the  surplus hypotheses just considered upon error statistics. Adding hypotheses would not result in increased errors on positive  instances and would result in a negligible increase in correct responses. In view of the fact that most negative instances  overlap the positive instance by only one value, the addition of a hypothesis from the initial focus would not increase  appreciably the probability of positive classification of a negative instance. Hence, consider another deviation from the  axioms which might account for the difference between observed and predicted error runs of length one.  The subjects revealed a slight tendency to respond positively to stimuli that overlapped the first positive instance by only  one value. To derive an estimate of the probability that a subject classifies a stimulus on the basis of one attribute value  only, all negative instances immediately following the first blank-trial set and overlapping the initial positive instance by  just one value were tabulated. There were four positive classifications for these 50 stimulus presentations. Therefore, the  estimated probability of such a deviation from the axioms was .08. Since just two negative instances, which were presented  twice in a problem, overlapped an initial positive instance by one attribute value, the corrected predicted number of error  runs of length one was obtained by adding (.08)(4) _ .32 to the previous values. There were no significant discrepancies  between resulting predicted and observed values, t(59) = .85, p > .30 for the one-value overlap condition, and t = .78, p >  .40 for the two-value overlap  CONJUNCTIVE CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 315  condition. The corrected predicted value for the one-value overlap condition was .699 as compared with the observed .633 runs  per protocol. For the two-value overlap condition, the corrected predicted value was .863 as compared with the observed .750.  It might be noted that the two-value overlap condition contained a negative instance overlapping one positive instance by  two-values, and that for such a stimulus the probability of positive classification should have been doubled in the  correction. This possibility was not accounted for in modification of predicted values. However, the model provides for a  certain percentage of errors for such stimuli. Hence modification for such stimuli would have produced a very slight  overcorrection. Although the modification shown is crude, it probably approximates the hypothesized process well enough for  present purposes.  No allowance was made in the preceding corrections for runs of length greater than one. However, the influence of the  hypothesized process upon runs of greater length would be negligible. For example, it would be necessary for the two negative  instances in question to occur in succession in order for the process alone to produce a run of length two. Even then, the  hypothesized deviation would occur with probability only (.08)1 = .0064. The process could also produce a run of length two  where one of the negative instances follows an error allowed by the model, an infrequent occurrence. The probability of the  above occurrence would be multiplied by .08 to get a very small predicted increment in runs of length two. Runs of length  greater than two would be affected even less.  The classification behavior not accounted for by the original axioms constituted a relatively small proportion of the total  variance. However, use of the model provided for an investigation of possible variations in strategy not initially postulated.  Inspection of other unpublished data for problems which involve more attributes suggests the model may be used profitably to  investigate hypothesis testing behavior for conjunctive concept tasks varied in a number of ways.  REFERENCES  BOWER, G., AND TRABASSO, T. Concept identification. In R. C. Atkinson (Ed.), Studies in mathematical psychology. Stanford:  Stanford Univer. Press, 1964. Pp. 32-96.  Buses, R. R. Sequential properties of linear models. In R. R. Bush AND W. K. Estes (Eds.), Studies in mathematical learning  theory. Stanford: Stanford Univer. Press, 1959. Pp. 215-227. ERICKSON, J. R. Hypothesis sampling in concept identification,  Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1968, 76, 12-18.  HOLLAND, P. A variation on the minimum chi-square test. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1967, 4, 377-413.  LEVINE, M. Hypothesis behavior by humans during discrimination learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1966, 71, 331-338.  LEVINE, M., LEITENBERG, H., AND RICHTER, M. The blank-trial law: The equivalence of positive reinforcement and  nonreinforcement. Psychological Review, 1964, 71, 94-103.  316 NAHINSKY  MILLWARD, R. B. Extension of matrix method derivations for absorbing Markov chains. Studies in Human Learning No. I, Walter S.  Hunter Laboratory of Psychology, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, June, 1967.  NAHINSKY, I. D., AND SLAYMAKER, F. L. Sampling without replacement and information processing following correct responses in  concept identification. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1969, 80, 475-482.  RESTLE, F. The selection of strategies in cue learning. Psychological Review, 1962, 69, 329-343. SLAYMAKER, F. L., AND  NAHINSKY, I. D. The effect of number of attribute values in conjunctive concept identification. Psychonomic Science, 1969, 15,  TRABASSO, T., AND BOWER, G. Presolution dimensional shifts in concept identification: A test of the sampling with replacement  axiom in all-or-none models. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1966, 3, 163-173.  RECEIVED: January 23, 1969