10.1016/0022-2496(70)90039-8
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 7, 540-553 (1970)  A Theory of Risk'  ALEXANDER POLLATSEK2  The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48104  AND  Amos TVERSKY  The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel  A psychological theory of perceived risk is developed. The theory is formulated in terms of an ordering of options, conceived  of as probability distributions with respect to risk. It is shown that, under the assumptions of the theory, the risk of an  option is expressible as a linear combination of its mean and variance. The relationships to other theories of risk and  preference are explored.  I. INTRODUCTION  The concept of risk has appeared in numerous investigations of decision making both as a descriptive and as an explanatory  construct. No generally accepted definition of risk, however, has emerged from these investigations, nor have there been  serious attempts to interrelate the various approaches to the study of risk. As a background for the present study, we sketch  briefly the more salient directions of research.  One approach to the study of risk is exemplified in the work of Coombs and his associates, (Coombs, 1964; Coombs and Huang,  1969; Coombs and Meyer, 1968; Coombs and Pruitt, 1960, Pruitt, 1962). Coombs has explored the variables affecting the  perception of the riskiness of gambles as well as the manner in which perceived risk affects preferences among them. Coombs'  theory postulates that each individual has an ideal (or most preferred) risk level and that in choosing among lotteries with  equal expectations the individual selects the lottery that is closest to his ideal risk level.  The subject of risk taking has been of great interest not only to students of decision making, but also to students of  personality and social psychology. Indeed, the tendency to seek or avoid risk has been investigated in numerous studies in  relation to other  1 This research was supported by PHS Training Grant GM-1231 and National Science Foundation Research Grant GB-6782.  z Now at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass. 01002  540  THEORY OF RISK 541  personality characteristics, situational variables, and group influences. For some reviews of this literature, see Cohen and  Hansel (1956), Kogan and Wallach (1964, 1967), and Slovic (1964).  A very different approach to the study of risk can be found in the economic and the business literature that is concerned  primarily with normative, rather than descriptive, issues. The problem of portfolio selection, for instance, is analyzed there  in terms of the risks involved in each of the available courses of action; there risk is defined either in terms of the  distribution of returns (e.g., Markowitz, 1959; Tobin, 1958) or in terms of properties of the utility function (e.g., Pratt,  1964).  The various approaches to the study of risk share three basic assumptions. 1. Risk is regarded as a property of options,  (e.g., gambles, courses of action) that affects choices among them. 2. Options can be meaningfully ordered with respect to  their riskiness. 3. The risk of an option is related in some way to the dispersion, or the variance, of its outcomes. (This  last point was made as early as 1906 by the economist I. Fisher, and later restated by Allais (1953) in his critique of  expected utility theory.) Beyond these basic assumptions, however, no general agreement concerning the nature of risk has been  reached. Although various assumptions about the perception of risk have been introduced, they have not been derived from more  basic principles, and they have typically been limited to restrictive contexts.  The present paper investigates the perception of risk from the standpoint of measurement theory. It provides a quantitative  explication of the concept of risk in the form of a psychological theory. The theory is formulated in terms of the ordering of  options, characterized as probability distributions, with respect to risk. In the next section we introduce several  assumptions about the risk ordering and show that they yield a ratio scale measure of risk. The implications of the results  and their relations to other theories of risk and preference are discussed in the last section.  II. MEASUREMENT OF RISK  The theory is formulated in terms of a set S - {A, B, C.... ). of probability distributions on the real line, interpreted as  options or lotteries with monetary outcomes. Let o denote convolution of probability distributions. Thus, if A and B are two  discrete distributions with values al ,..., a,, and bl ,..., bn obtained with probabilities pi ,..., PM and ql ,..., qn ,  respectively, then A o B is the distribution with values ai + b; obtained with probabilities piq; for i - 1,..., m, j = 1,...,  n. Considerable care should be taken in the empirical interpretation of o. The distribution A o B, for example, corresponds to  the lottery obtained by playing both A and B only if the two lotteries are independent. To illustrate, let A represent the  lottery where one wins $100 if heads comes up and loses $100 if tails comes up, and let B represent the lottery where one wins  $50 if heads comes up and loses $50 if tails comes up. Thus, A - (100, z; -100, 2)  542 POLLATSEK AND TVERSKY  and B = (50, z; -50, 1), consequently, A o B = (150, 4; 50, 4; -50, 4; -150, 4). On the other hand, if the outcomes of the  lotteries are both determined by a single toss of a coin, one must either win $150 or lose $150. Hence the distribution, (150,  2; -150, z), that corresponds to this joint lottery does not equal A o B.  The key concept of the present theory is a binary relation of comparative risk denoted >. Thus, A > B states that A is at  least as risky as B, while A - B states that A and B are equally risky. This relation can be obtained directly by asking an  individual to judge which of any pair of options is riskier, or by asking him to assign a number to each option reflecting its  perceived risk. Alternatively, the above relation can be inferred from preferences via an appropriate substantive theory. It  should be emphasized, however, that the risk ordering, which is the subject matter of our theory, need not be related to the  preference ordering in any simple way. The assumptions of the theory should, thus, be evaluated according to the selected  operational definition of >- whatever its relations to preference may be.  The axioms of the theory are incorporated into the definition of a risk system. Let S be the set of all probability  distributions on the real line, and let o denote the binary operation of convolution. Clearly, o is associative, commutative  and closed. Let > be a binary relation on S and define A > B whenever A ? B but not B ~>_ A, and A ti B whenever A >= B and B  > A. We use ~ to denote the distribution where the value zero is obtained with probability one. Clearly, A o 0 = A for any A.  The system (S, o, >) is a risk system if it satisfies the following axioms for all A, B, C, in S,  Al WEAK ORDERING. > is connected and transitive.  A2 CANCELLATION. A > B if and only if A o C > B o C.  A3 SOLVABILITY. (i) if A > 0 for all A in S, then for any A > B there exists some C in S such that A ti B o C.  (ii) If > A for some A in S, then for any A in S there exists some B in S such that A o B "  0.  A4 ARCHIMEDEAN. If A > B ? 0 then there exists some positive integer n such that n * B > A; where n *  B is defined inductively: 1 * B = B, n*B=[(n-1)*B]o B.  The first axiom is the usual ordering assumption which states that S can be weaklyordered with respect to risk. The second  axiom asserts that the risk ordering is compatible with the operation, in the sense that order between any pair of  distributions is preserved when a third distribution is convoluted with each of them. An equivalent version of the  cancellation axiom is: A o C > B o C if and only if A o D > B o D. The cancellation axiom asserts, therefore, that if A is  judged to be riskier than B in one  THEORY OF RISK 543  context (i.e., when combined with C), then it is judged to be riskier than B in any context. In particular, A2 implies that  the risk ordering is independent of one's financial position. Although the assumption that the ordering of options is  independent of financial position appears to be too restrictive with respect to the preference ordering, it appears to be much  more satisfactory with respect to the risk ordering. Axioms 1 and 2 are the more interesting axioms from an empirical  standpoint, since they capture basic ordinal properties that are readily testable.  The solvability axiom has two parts that apply to different types of risk ordering. In the case where all the elements of S  are at least as risky as ~, solvability states that when A is riskier than B then the risk of A can always be matched by  combining B with some appropriate C. In the case where S contains some elements that are less risky than 0, then solvability  states that for any A one can always find some appropriate B such that A o B and 0 are equally risky. Finally, the Archimedean  axiom is introduced to ensure that no option is infinitely riskier than any other one, provided both options are riskier than  0. Axioms 3 and 4, therefore, have a different status than Axioms 1 and 2 because of their existential nature and their more  technical character.  The following representation theorem shows that if Axioms 1-4 hold, then one can construct an additive ratio scale that  preserves the risk ordering.  THEOREM 1. If (S, o, >) is a risk system then there exists a real-valued function, R, defined on S, such that for any A, B in S  (i) A > B if and only if R(A) > R(B).  (ii) R(A a B) = R(A) + R(B).  (iii) If R' is another function satisfying (i) and (ii), then R'(A) = (A) for some a > 0.  Proof. Two cases are considered: (a) A } 0 for all A in S, (b) 0 } A for some A in S. In case (a) it is easy to verify that a  risk system reduces to an extensive system of measurement (see Krantz, 1968; Suppes, 1951; Suppes and Zinnes, 1963) whence  Theorem 1 follows from the standard representation theorem for extensive measurement. In fact, the only difference between the  systems, in this case, lies in the existence of zero elements, but it follows from the present axioms, that if A > A o B then  In case (b) we show that the system (S/,, o, >) is a fully-ordered Archimedean group, where Sl- denotes the set of equivalence  classes of S modulo -. Let [A] = {B in S : A - B} be the equivalence class containing A, and define [A] o [B] = [A o B], and  [A] > [B] if and only if A > B. It is readily seen that both - and > on Sl- are well-defined as they are independent of the  representative elements that were chosen to define the equivalence classes. Clearly, Sl - is closed under o which is, by  definition, associative and commutative. Furthermore, [0] is the  544 POLLATSEK AND TVERSKY  identity element because [A] o [~] = [A o 0] _ [A] for any A in S. Since for any A there exists a B such that A o B - 0, by  Axiom 3, we can define inverses by letting [A]-1 = [B]. To establish uniqueness, suppose [A] o [B] = [A] o [C] = [0]; hence,  by Axiom 2, [B] = [C] and the inverse is unique. Finally, ~ is a full (or a total) order on Sl-, which is Archimedean, by  Axiom 4, and satisfies the cancellation axiom. Consequently, (S/-, o, >) is a fully-ordered Archimedean group; hence, by  Holder's (1901) theorem (see Fuchs, 1963, p. 45) it is order-isomorphic to a subgroup of the additive group of real numbers  with the natural ordering. Moreover, the isomorphism can be shown (see Fuchs, 1963, p. 46) to be unique up to multiplication  by a positive real number, which completes the proof of Theorem 1.  Several comments about Theorem 1 are in order. First, it can be generalized by weakening some of the assumptions. In  particular, one can use the results of Krantz (1968) and Luce and Marley (1968) to extend the theorem to the case where the  operation is restricted to some subset of S. Furthermore, the present solvability and Archimedean axioms can be replaced by a  weaker though more complicated axiom, formulated by Roberts and Luce (1968), who obtained necessary and sufficient conditions  for extensive measurement. A necessary and sufficient condition for the existence of an additive risk scale can also be  derived following an approach developed by Tversky (1967a, b). Second, the proof of Theorem 1 is not based on the fact that  distributions are defined on the real line. In fact, the theorem applies to any set of probability distributions, defined on  an arbitrary sample space, (e.g., the results of an election, the outcome of a game) provided it is closed under a  well-defined operation of convolution.  The present system of risk is closely related to the classical extensive system that provides the axiomatic basis for the  measurement of physical properties such as weight, length, and time. Such a system is based on an ordering of physical objects  with respect to some property (e.g., weight) and on a physical operation of concatenation (e.g., placing two objects together  on a pan balance). Under this interpretation of the ordering and the operation, the present axioms reduce to the well-known  physical principles that govern the measurement of weight.  One essential difference, however, between a risk system and an extensive system is that the latter is typically nonnegative,  in the sense that A o B > A for all A and B, and the measurement scale is, consequently, nonnegative. The present system, on  the other hand, admits negative values since the convolution of two distributions may be less risky than either one of them.  The risk scale, therefore, may take both positive and negative values. In particular, since R(A o ~) = R(A) + R(0) = R(A) then  R( = 0. Consequently, any option that is less risky than the status quo must have a negative risk value.  As a corollary to Theorem 1 we show how the risk of degenerate distributions (i.e., distributions where a single value is  obtained with probability one) is determined. Let Kl and K2 denote degenerate distributions which yield the values kl and k2 ,  THEORY OF RISK 545  respectively, with probability one. Since KI o K, is a degenerate distribution that yields the value kl + k2 with probability  one, we can identify each degenerate distribution K with its value k. By the additivity of the risk scale R(K, o K,) - R(K,)  rt R(K2), hence R(kl + k2) = R(kl) + R(k2) for any real kl , k2 . Consequently, it can be shown that R(K) = gk for some real  g. If g = 0, then R(K) = 0 for any degenerate distribution K, and hence the risk measure is translation-invariant in the sense  that R(A o K) = R(A) + R(K) = R(A) for all A. If P :A 0, then degenerate distributions are bound to have negative or positive  risk values.  These aspects of the theory are somewhat at variance with ordinary usage of risk according to which there is no negative risk,  and sure-things (i.e., degenerate distributions) are regarded as having no risk. To illustrate the significance of negative  risks in our theory, note that the gamble A = (200, 2; -200, 2) is likely to be judged (by most people) as riskier than the  gamble B = (300, 2; -100, 2), which is constructed by adding a sure-thing to A. Consequently, the option of receiving 100 for  sure must have negative risk.  The above example suggests that the addition of a positive sure-thing to an option cannot increase its risk. Stated as a  formal assumption we obtain  A5 POSITIVITY. If K is a degenerate distribution with k > 0 then A >> A o K for all A in S.  In the following discussion, we introduce additional assumptions about the risk ordering and study the constraints they impose  on the risk scale. Let E(A) denote the expectation of A, and let to denote the distribution obtained by multiplying all values  of A by some real number t. (For continuous distributions the density function of to has to be normalized.) Using this  construct, we introduce  A6 MONOTONICITY. For all A, B in S with E(A) = E(B) = 0 and for any real t>1  (ii) A >~ B if and only if to ? tB.  Axiom 6 asserts that, for distributions with zero expectation, risk increases with multiplication by any t > 1, and that the  risk ordering is preserved upon multiplication by a positive real number. Thus, part (1) of the monotonicity axiom asserts  that any fair bet whose outcomes are dollars, for example, is riskier than the bet obtained from it by changing the dollars to  nickels. Similarly, part (ii) states that the risk ordering between gambles is independent of the denomination of the payoffs  (e.g., dollars, nickels) provided their expectations are zero. We regard part (i) of A6, like A5, as a necessary assumption  for any theory of risk. On the other hand, part (ii) of A6, like A2, is a more powerful assumption that is both appealing and  testable.  Our last axiom is more technical in nature. A sequence {An) n ---- 1, 2,..., of distri-  546 POLLATSEK AND TVERSKY  butions is said to approach a limiting distribution A, whenever Pr(x < An < y) approaches Pr(x < A < y) as n -* oo for any  real x, y.  A7 CONTINUITY. If {An} approaches A then R(A approaches R(A), provided E(An) = E(A) and V(An) = V(A) for all n, where V(A)  denotes the variance of A. Axiom 7 establishes the continuity of the risk scale in the sense that if all the distributions in  the sequence have the same mean and variance then lim R(A  = R(A) whenever lim{An} = A. To summarize the added assumptions  we introduce a new definition. A risk system (S, o, >) is called a regular risk system if it satisfies Axioms 5, 6, and 7.  To study the properties of a regular risk system, select some A, B in S such that E(A) = E(B) = 0, and V(A) > V(B). Let An =  (n * A)/,,In and B= (n * B)/N/n, see A4 for the definition of *. As n---, oo the sequences {A~} and {Bn} approach,  respectively, limiting distributions A' and B' which, by the central limit theorem, are normal with E(A') = E(B') = 0 and  V(A') = V(A) > V(B) = V(B'). Since A' = kB' for some k > 1, then, by Axiom 6(i), A'> B' and by Theorem 1, R(A') > R(B'). By  Axiom 7, however, there exists an n such that R(A,z) > R(B"), hence An > B.. Consequently, by Axiom 6(ii), n * A > n * B,  and by Axiom 2, A > B. Recalling Theorem 1, we write A > B if and only if R(A) >. R(B) if and only if V(A) >, V(B) for all A,  Thus, there exists a strictly increasing function, f such that, for any A in S with E(A) = 0, R(A) = f [V(A)]. Note that the  set of distributions with zero expectation is closed under o. Furthermore, it follows from the definition of variance and  Theorem 1, respectively, that both V and R are additive over o. Hence, if E(A) = E(B) = 0  then R(A o B) = f [V(A o B)] = f [V(A) + V(B)],  and R(A o B) = R(A) + R(B) = f [V(A)] -{- f [V(B)].  It follows from the above functional equation that f is linear; thus, there exists some a > 0 such that R(A) = f [V(A)] =  aV(A), whenever E(A) = 0.  Finally, for any A in S, define Ao by the equation A = Ao o [E(A)], where [E(A)] is the degenerate distribution where the  value E(A) is obtained with probability one. Consequently,  R(A) = R(A0 o [E(A)]) = R(A0) + R([E(A)]) = -V(A) + PE(A), since E(A0) = 0  and V(A0) = V(A), where (3 < 0, by Axiom 5. Since the unit of the risk scale is arbitrary we can divide the above equation by  a - P and let 0 = ala - (3. We have thus established  THEOREM 2. If (S, a, >) is a regular risk system, then there exists a unique 0 G 0 < 1  THEORY OF RISK 547  such that for all A, B in S (with finite expectations and variances) A > B if and only if R(A) > R(B) where R(A) = BV(A) - (1  - B) E(A).  Thus, in a regular risk system, the risk ordering is generated by a linear combination of expectation and variance. Put  differently, the risk of any option can be readily computed, once a single parameter, B, is determined. Furthermore, B is  attainable from a single judgment of risk-equality between two distinct distributions, and its value determines the relative  contribution of the expectation and the variance to the riskiness of an option.  The result established in Theorem 2 is surprisingly strong. Although the validity of the critical assumptions, A2 and A6(ii),  is not self-evident, they seem compatible with our intuitions of risk. Furthermore, the cancellation axiom (A2), for example,  is an appealing consistency principle that one may wish to impose on his risk ordering. In this sense, the cancellation axiom  may have normative application as a guideline in establishing a risk ordering, similar to the application of axioms of  expected utility theory in establishing a preference ordering.  The evaluation of the adequacy of the present theory is a difficult task, since our intuitions concerning risk are not very  clear and a satisfactory operational definition of the risk ordering is not easily obtainable. Indeed, the existence of a  meaningful risk ordering (that has been presupposed by all workers in the field) should not be taken for granted.  III. RISK AND PREFERENCE  The present results provide a quantitative explication of risk by demonstrating that, under the assumptions of the theory,  risk is expressible as a linear combination of expectation and variance. That expectation and variance, however, are two  essential components of risk has long been realized by many investigators.  In his monograph entitled "Portfolio Selection," Markowitz (1959, p. 129) defines a portfolio (i.e., a probability  distribution over monetary values) as inefficient if "it is possible to obtain higher expected (or average) return with no  greater variability of return." Markowitz does not offer any formal rationale for his definition of efficiency; instead he  describes various methods for finding efficient portfolios. To cast the above definition in the present framework, let T be a  subset of S. A distribution A in T is inefficient (with respect to T) if there exists a B in T such that R(A) > R(B) for any 0  G B ~< 1. Thus, a portfolio is inefficient (in T) if it is riskier than some other portfolio for all admissible values of B.  Additional applications and further discussions of criteria for preference among options that are based only on their  expectations and variances (or standard deviations) have been presented by Baumol (1963), Lintner (1965), Sharpe (1963), and  Tobin (1958); see also Hanoch and Levy (1969).  548 POLLATSEK AND TVERSKY  We are led now to the more general and basic problem of the relationships between risk and preference. In the economic and  business literature, it has been typically assumed that people wish to minimize risk, which can, therefore, be inferred from  preference. Some psychologists, on the other hand, have argued that the relationships between risk and preference are  considerably more complicated. Indeed, one advantage of an explicit theory of risk is that it enables one to investigate the  relationships between preference and risk in detail.  A preference function, f, is any real-valued function on S such that for all A and B, f (A) > f (B) if and only if A is  preferred to B. A preference function is, therefore, an ordinal utility scale, i.e., a numerical scale that reflects a given  preference order. A preference order is said to depend on the risk measure, or to be R-dependent if there exists a function g  satisfying f (A) = g[R(A)] = g[BV(A) - (1 - B) E(A)] for all A in S. Thus, preferences are R-dependent whenever any two  equally-risky options are indifferent. A preference order is VE-dependent if it depends only on the variance and the  expectation, i.e., if there exists a real-valued function, h, in two arguments such that f (A) = h[V(A), E(A)] for all A in S.  Thus, preferences are VE-dependent whenever any two options with equal variances and expectations are indifferent. Clearly,  any preference order that is R-dependent is also VE-dependent, but the converse is not true. Markowitz's (1959) model for the  selection of efficient portfolios provides one example of VE-dependent preferences.  The major theory of decision making under risk is the expected utility theory. According to this theory, which was formulated  by Bernoulli (1738) and first axiomatized by Von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944), there exists a real-valued function, u, that  assigns a utility to each outcome. An option A is preferred to option B, according to the theory, if and only if E(u,,) >  E(UB), where E(u,) is the expectation of the distribution u,, whose values are the utilities of the corresponding values of A.  What are the relationships between R-dependency, VE-dependency and the theory of expected utility?  We assume that utility theory is satisfied for any set of distributions and that the utility function is sufficiently regular  so that it can be expanded in a power series. Using these assumptions, it is possible to show, following Borch (1963),  Markowitz (1959), and Tobin (1958), that the quadratic utility function generates the only preference order that is  VE-dependent, and that no utility function generates a preference order that is R-dependent.  THEOREM 3. If expected utility theory holds, and u(a)  (i) a preference order is VE-dependent if and only if u(a) = to + tia + tsa', (ii) there exists no preference order that is  R-dependent.  then  THEORY OF RISK 549  Proof. (i) First, suppose u(a) = to -}- tla + t,a2, hence  E(UA) = E(to + t1A -}- t2A2)  = to + t1E(A) + t2E(A2)  = to + t1E(A) + t2[V(A) + E(A)2] = h[V(A), E(A)]  and hence the order is VE-dependent. Second, by assumption, u(a) _ Yn o taa?', hence E(UA) _ ~n o tnE(A"). Assuming the  preference order is VE-dependent, we can write E(UA) = h[V(A), E(A)] = h[E(A2) - E(A)2, E(A)]. Hence t= 0 for any n > 2, in  the power series expansion of u. Otherwise, we can always select some A, B with equal expectations and variances but unequal  expected utilities, contrary to our assumption. Consequently, E(UA) = to + t1E(A) -}- t2E(A2) and u(a) = to + tla + t2a2 which  completes the proof of part (i).  To prove (ii), suppose there exists a preference order compatible with expected utility theory that is R-dependent. Hence,  E(UA) = g[R(A)] = g[BV(A) - (I - B) E(A)], 0 G B <_ 1.  = g[BE(A2) - BE(A)2 - (I - B) E(A)].  But E(UA) = to + t1E(A) + t2E(A2), by part (i) since R-dependency implies VE-dependency. There is no g, however, satisfying  the above equation. To demonstrate, let E(A) = 0, hence g[BE(A2)] = to -}- t2E(A2) for any value of E(A2) and g must be  linear. Letting V(A) = 0, however, yieldsg[(B - 1) E(A)] - to + t1E(A) + t2E(A2). Hence t2 = 0 contrary to Axiom 6(i) which  completes the proof of the theorem.  The latter part of Theorem 3 shows that there is no utility function compatible with a preference order that is R-dependent.  This result may be taken, therefore, as evidence either against the present theory of risk or against expected utility theory.  Alternatively, one may accept both theories and reject the notion that preferences are R-dependent. It seems reasonable to  suppose that preferences do not depend solely on risk, and that an individual may not be indifferent between two options that  appear equally risky to him. Similarly, it seems plausible that an individual may perceive one option as riskier than another,  although he may be indifferent between the two. This does not mean, of course, that risk and preference are unrelated, only  that one ordering cannot be inferred from the order.  The first part of Theorem 3 shows that the only utility function that is compatible with a preference order that is  VE-dependent is of the general form u(a) = to -;- t1a + t2a2. The quadratic utility function, however, is not very  satisfactory. First, its domain must be bounded, since for u to be an increasing function,  550 POLLATSEK AND TVERSKY  a must be bounded by -tll2t2 from above or below depending on whether t2 is negative or positive. Second, it is inevitable  decreasing marginal utility must obtain for suitably large amounts of money that the utility function be concave (i.e., u" <  0) somewhere, hence t2 < 0. In this case, however, the degree of risk aversion (defined by -u"lu') increases with an increase  in assets as pointed out by Pratt (1964, p. 132). Hence, according to this function, the cash-equivalence (or the minimal  selling price) of a gamble decreases as one gets wealthier. This conclusion seems unacceptable on both empirical and  theoretical counts.  Returning to the relationship between the quadratic utility function and the function h(V, E), we note that for any fixed  value of E, h is either an increasing or a decreasing function of V depending on whether t2 > 0 or t2 < 0. Stated formally, we  obtain  COROLLARY. Suppose a preference order is VE-dependent and also satisfies expected utility theory. Then the preference order of  any set of options with equal expectation must either minimize or maximize variance.  The method employed in proving Theorem 3 can also be used to obtain a more general result. Suppose the risk of A is  expressible as some function of the first n (raw) moments of A. Theorem 3 can, then, be easily extended to show that if there  exists a utility function that is compatible with the proposed risk measure, then it must be a polynomial function of degree n.  One aspect of distributions that does not appear in the present theory is skewness. It may nevertheless be true that some  gambles with negative skewness appear riskier than gambles with positive skewness even when expectation and variance are held  constant. If skewness does, indeed, play an essential role in determining the perception of risk, then the range of  applicability of the present theory should be restricted, e.g., to symmetric or equally-skewed options. In this case, one may  attempt to generalize the present theory in order to account for the effects of skewness (or of other such factors) on the  perceived riskiness of options.  There have been several experimental studies (e.g., Coombs and Pruitt, 1960; Edwards, 1954; Lichtenstein, 1965, and Pollatsek,  1966) that examined the variance preference hypothesis. This hypothesis (which can be regarded as a special case of Coombs'  unfolding theory) states that, for any given expectation level, each individual has an ideal, or a most preferred, variance  level. In selecting among gambles with equal expectation, therefore, individuals select the gamble whose variance is closest  to their ideal variance level. The preceding discussion showed, however, that the minimization or the maximization of variance  are the only forms of variance preferences admissible under expected utility theory. Unfortunately, the empirical evidence for  systematic variance preferences is inconclusive. Yet, to the extent that the data provide evidence for consistent preferences  for intermediate variance levels, they also provide evidence against the theory of expected utility, contrary to the views  expressed by some writers.  THEORY OF RISK 55 1  In addition to research on the relationships between risk and preference, there has been some research on the perception of  risk per se. Recently, Coombs and Huang (1969) have developed a "psychophysical" theory of risk that expresses the riskiness  of a gamble as a composite function of its components. The authors have limited their discussion to two-outcome gambles of the  form G = (y, p; z, 1 - p), where one wins y with probability p and z with probability 1 - p. Three classes of transformations  of such gambles, denoted a, g, and y, were defined as follows. a(G) is a transformation that increases V(G) by increasing the  range of the outcomes, while leaving p and E(G) unchanged; g(G) is G o b, where b is some constant that is added to both  outcomes; and y(G) is c * G, that is, the gamble obtained by c independent plays of the gamble G. Starting from the zero  gamble (0, p; 0, 1 - p), one applies to it the transformations a, P, and y in turn. The result is a new gamble, G, that can be  characterized by a triple (a, b, c), where a is the increase in variance due to the transformation a, b is the increase in  expectation due to the transformation P, and c is the number of independent multiple plays of the resulting gamble. Coombs and  Huang have proposed a distributive polynomial model for the measurement of risk. According to this model, there exist  real-valued functions fi , f, , and fs such that the risk of (a, b, c) equals [fi(a) +fz(b)] f(c). Letting f(x) = tix for i =  1, 2, 3 with tl , t3 > 0 > t2 yields  Risk (G) = Risk (a, b, c)  = (tla + t,b) tic, by hypothesis  = tit3V(G) + t2t3E(G), since V(G) = ac and E(G) = be.  = tOV(G) - t(1 - B) E(G), where B = t ti t , t = ta(tl - t2 ).  Hence, for the special class of gambles considered by Coombs and Huang (1969), their theory reduces to the present theory  under the above linearity assumption. Furthermore, the supporting empirical evidence for the distributive model presented by  Coombs and Huang (1969), based on rank ordering of gambles with respect to risk, also provides empirical support for the  present theory.  The present theory of risk has two interrelated objectives. First, it provides a testable psychological model for the  measurement of risk. It is not, however, a fundamental measurement model in the classical sense, since it presupposes the  representation of options as distributions on the real line. On the other hand, it bypasses the measurement problem altogether  since, under the assumptions of the model, the risk scale, R, is known in advance except for a single parameter, 8.3 Second,  3 The present theory has been formulated in terms of probability distributions over monetary values. It is conceivable,  however, that the present axioms will fail to hold for this representation of the outcomes but will be satisfied when applied  to probability distributions over some other representation of the outcomes such as a nonlinear utility or subjective value  scale. In the latter case, the empirical interpretation of the convolution operation becomes more involved, since  552 POLLATSEK AND TVERSKY  it provides an explication of risk, that is, it offers a quantitative concept of risk as a substitute for the more familiar,  but vaguer, notion of degree of risk. Furthermore, the proposed concept of risk is not only precise, but it is also  sufficiently similar to the intuitive concept, so that it may capture most of its essential characteristics. The use of  Shannon and Weaver's (1949) information measure as a quantitative explication for the concept of the amount of information  (see Roberts and Luce, 1968) is a case in point. In both instances one starts with an ordering of probability distributions  with respect to some property (risk or information) and shows that, under certain assumptions, an essentially unique index, of  risk or information, can be derived.  The value of the present model depends, therefore, on the empirical validity of the axioms, as well as on the theoretical  usefulness of the derived measure.  REFERENCES  ALLAIS, M. Le comportement de 1'homme rationnel devant le risque: Critique des postulats et axiomes de 1'ecole Americaine.  Econometrica, 1953, 21, 503-546.  BERNOULLI, D. Specimen theoriae novae de mensura sortis. Commentarii academiae scientiarum imperiales petropolitanae, 1738, 5,  175-192. Translated in Econometrica, 1954, 22, 23-36. BAUMOL, W. J., An expected gain confidence limit criterion for portfolio  selection. Management Science, 1963, 10, 174-182.  BORCH, K. A note on utility and attitudes to risk. Management Science, 1963, 9, 697-700. COHEN, J., AND HANSEL, C. E. M. Risk  and gambling: The study of subjective probability. New York: Philosophical Library, 1956.  COOMBS, C. H. A theory of data. New York: Wiley, 1964.  COOMBS, C. H., AND HUANO, L. C. Polynomial Psychophysics of Risk. Michigan Mathematical Psychology Program, 1969. Technical  Report MMPP 69-1.  COOMBS, C. H., AND MEYER, D. E. Risk taking in coin tossing games. Michigan Mathematical Psychology Program, 1968. Technical  Report MMPP 68-1.  COOMBS, C. H., AND PRUITT, D. G. Components of risk in decision making: Probability and variance preferences. Journal of  Experimental Psychology, 1960, 60, 265-277.  EDWARDS, W. Variance preferences in gambling. American Journal of Psychology, 1954, 67, 441452.  FISHER, I. The nature of capital and income. New York: Macmillan, 1906.  FUCHS, L. Partially ordered algebraic systems. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1963. HANOCH, G., AND LEVY, H. Efficient  portfolio selection with quadratic and cubic utility. Unpublished manuscript, The Hebrew Univer. of Jerusalem, 1969.  H6LDER, O. Die Axiome der Quantitat and die Lehre vom Mass. Berichte fiber die Verhandlung der Koniglich Sdchsichen  Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig, Mathematisch-Physische Classe, 1901, 53, I-64.  the utility scale has to be known in order to identify the lottery corresponding to the convolution of two distributions. It  can be shown, however, that when Axioms 1-7 hold, the numerical representation of the outcomes is determined up to  multiplication by a positive constant. Hence, if the axioms are not satisfied relative to the monetary scale, one may wish to  search for that (essentially unique) utility scale relative to which the axioms are satisfied.  THEORY OF RISK  553  KOGAN, N., AND WALLACH, M. A. Risk taking: A study in cognition and personality. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1964.  KOGAN, N., AND WALLACH, M. A. Risk taking as a function of the situation, person, and the group. In New direction in  psychology. Vol. 3. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1967. Pp.111-281.  KRANTz, D. H. Measurement and psychophysics. In G. B. Dantzig and A. F. Veinott (Eds.), Mathematics of the decision sciences,  Part 2, Amer. Math. Soc. Lectures in applied mathematics, 1968, 12, 314-350.  LICHTENSTEIN, S. Bases for preferences among three outcome bets. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1965, 69, 162-169.  LINTNER, J. Security price, risk, and maximal gains from diversification. Journal of Finance, 1965, 20, 587-615.  LUCE, R. D., AND MARLEY, A. A. J. Extensive measurement when concatenation is restricted and maximal elements may exist. In S.  Morgenbesser, P. Suppes, and M. G. White (Eds.), Essays in honor of Ernest Nagel. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1968.  MARKOwiTz, H. M. Portfolio selection. New York: Wiley, 1959.  POLLATSEK, A. On the relation between subjective expected utility theory and the psychophysics of gambling. Michigan  Mathematical Psychology Program, 1966. Technical Report MMPP 66-1.  PRATT, J. W. Risk aversion in the small and in the large. Econometrica, 1964, 32, 122-136. PRUITT, D. G. Pattern and level of  risk in gambling decisions. Psychological Review, 1962, 69, 187-201.  ROBERTS, F. S., AND LUCE, R. D. Axiomatic thermo-dynamics and extensive measurement. Synthese, 1968, 18, 311-326.  SHANNON, C. E., AND WEAVER, W. The mathematical theory of communication. Urbana, Ill.: Univer. Illinois Press, 1949.  SHARPE, W. F. Capital assets prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of risk. Journal of Finance, 1964, 19,  425-442.  SLOVIC, P. The assessment of risk taking behavior. Psychological Bulletin, 1964, 61, 220-233. SUPPES, P. A set of independent  axioms for extensive quantities. Portugaliae Mathematica, 1951, 10, 163-172.  SUPPEs, P., and Zinnes, J. L. Basic measurement theory. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of  mathematical psychology. Vol. 1. New York: Wiley, 1963. Pp. 1-76.  TOBIN, J. Liquidity preferences as behavior towards risk. Review of Economic Studies, 1958, 26, 65-86.  TVERSKY, A. Additivity, utility and subjective probability. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1967, 4, 175-202. (a)  TVERSKY, A. A general theory of polynomial conjoint measurement. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1967, 4, 1-20. (b)  VON NEUMANN, J., AND MORGENSTERN, O. Theory of games and economic behavior. Princeton, N. J.: Princeton Univer. Press, 1944.  RECEIVED: June 11, 1969