10.1016/0022-2496(70)90038-6
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 7, 531-539 (1970)  Effects of Cue Validity Differences in Weighting Information'  SAMUEL HIMMELFARB2  University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts 01002  Two experiments were run to determine how cues varying in validity are combined in categorizing a person. Subjects learned the  validities of single facial cues and then responded to compounds of the cues. Three special cases of a generalized weighted  averaging model for combinatorial behavior were examined: a simple averaging model, a cue weighting model, and a complete  discounting model. The best fit was provided by the cue weighting model, but the discrepancies from the model indicated that  it was not giving sufficient weight to the most valid cue. No evidence for a summation process was obtained in cases of  nonconflicting cue compounds.  Several studies of impression formation suggest that information about a person is weighted in relation to its validity  (Anderson and Jacobson, 1965; Rosenbaum and Levin, 1968). In these studies, inconsistent adjective traits were supplied either  by persons who knew the person described less well than other informants or by less credible sources. Thus, the validity of  the information was manipulated by varying the reliability of the source of the information. But, the validity of the  information per se also can vary and be given more or less weight in forming an overall judgment of a person. That is, cues  vary in the degree to which they permit us to make accurate inferences about a person. To be sure, the trustworthiness of the  informants must be considered in social situations; but, given equal knowledge and trustworthiness, how will differences in  cue validity be used in determining the overall judgment ?  This paper reports the results of two experiments in which cues varying in validity were combined in forming a judgment of a  person. The concerns of the experiments were similar to those in impression formation research, but the method employed was  that used in studies of "stimulus compounding" (Atkinson, Calfee, Sommer,  I This paper was adapted from a dissertation submitted to the Department of Psychology of the University of California, Los  Angeles, 1964, in partial fulfillment of the requirements of the Ph.D. Degree. The research was supported in part by a  Predoctoral Research Fellowship from the National Insitute of Mental Health.  2 I am greatly indebted to Morton P. Friedman and Harold H. Kelley, members of my Dissertation Committee, and especially to  Michael J. Goldstein and Bertram H. Raven, Cochairmen, for their advice, guidance, and encouragement. Thanks are also due to  Elaine A. Himmelfarb for her research assistance and to Norman H. Anderson and Ivan D. Steiner for their comments on a draft  of this paper.  531  532 HIMMELFARB  Jeffrey, and Shoemaker, 1964; Friedman, Rollins, and Padilla, 1968). The models which follow make use of the formulations in  that area as well as the impression formation literature.  ANALYSIS OF SOME COMPOUNDING MODELS  Consider two cues, i and j, which are associated in a two-choice situation with the response alternative X with probabilities  77i and 7r; , respectively. The validity of a cue may be defined as the degree to which correct predictions may be made from  it. In general, a cue's validity will be some monotonic function of the amount a departs from equiprobability over the  response alternatives. After training on the single cues, the probability that an X response will be made to the cues is pi  and p; . At asymptote, the response to a single cue will approximately match the value of Tr and will be related to the cue's  validity. After learning the single cue validities, the subject is presented with a compound of the single elements. The  probability that he will make an X response to the compound will be denoted pi; . The theoretical problem is to relate pi) to  pi and p; .  Additive Model  This model assumes that the response strengths of the single cues summate in some fashion when the more frequently correct  response is the same for each of the single cues. Suppose that Cue i is associated with an X response with 7T= .8 and Cue j  with a = .6. Confronted with both cues, the subject may feel more certain that an X response is correct than if only one cue  were present. If so, pi; should be greater than pi or p; , if ai and 7r; are greater than .5. Similarly, pi; should be less  than pi or p; , if rri and a; are less than .5.  Weighted Averaging Models  Current literature on impression formation (Anderson, 1968; Manis, Gleason, and Dawes, 1966; Rosenbaum and Levin, 1968)  indicates that the process can be modeled by a generalized weighted averaging model of which a simple averaging model is but a  special case. At a very general level, then, we can write an equation which weights each cue as follows:  cipi + cipi p if = ci  where ci and c; are the weights assigned to Cues i and j. Three different cases of this general model are considered below.  Simple Averaging Model. This model assumes that the response probabilities to  CUE VALIDITY DIFFERENCES 533  the single cues are averaged to determine the response to the compound. That is,  the weights, ci and c; , are equal so that  pi; = pi 2p; . (2)  Theoretically, this model is a form of the Burke and Estes (1957) component model and is derivable also from the Estes (1962)  scanning model. The simple averaging model has received empirical support in studies of discrimination learning (Binder and  Feldman, 1960; Schoeffler, 1954).  Cue Accuracy Weighting Model. The simple averaging model weights the cues equally in determining the response to the compound.  To be sure, a less valid cue would contribute less to the response, but simply because it was less polarized. More generally,  however, the weight given to a cue might be related to its validity.  Previous studies (Atkinson et al., 1964; Friedman et al., 1968) have considered a weighted averaging model which assumes that  each cue is weighted by the probability that it had been correct during learning. Then the weight of Cue i would be,  Ci = pi-i + (1 -pi)(1 - 7T). (3)  Here pi7ri is the probability that an X response had been reinforced X, and (1 - pi)(1 - 7Ti) is the probability that a Y  response had been reinforced Y to Cue i. The values of ci and c; then would be substituted into Eq. 1.  Complete Discounting Model. It also is possible that the subject only uses the more valid cue in judging the compound, totally  disregarding cues of lesser validity. The complete discounting model predicts that  pij = pi , pi; = p> >  if I 7ri-.51 > l-;-.5I,  if Iai-.51<I7r;-.51.  In the case where cues are equally valid but in conflict, it may be assumed that the subject simply averages or chooses  randomly. If the most valid cue is the same in two different compounds, this model predicts the same response to both  compounds.  The three variants on a generalized averaging model essentially assume different assignments of weights to the cues. The  simple averaging model gives each cue equal weight, while the complete discounting model gives all the weight to the most  valid cue. The cue accuracy weighting model gives each cue a weight which varies positively with the cue's validity. Thus,  even in the absence of a rigorous test of goodness of fit, comparisons between the obtained responses to the compounds and the  responses generated by the models can provide information about the relative weighting of cues of different validities.  534 HIMMELFARB  METHOD  Procedure  Schematic line drawings containing the outline of a person's head, hairline, and facial features were used. The four single  cues were nose, mouth, eyes, and ears. The first three cues were used in Experiment I and all four cues were used in  Experiment II. (The physical dimensions of the stimuli as well as more detailed aspects of the procedure are given in  Himmelfarb, 1964). Subjects were exposed to the single cues in both the training and testing phases of the experiments, while  the compounds were shown only during testing. In Experiment I, all possible combinations of the three cues were presented;  Experiment II used only the two-cue compounds.  After presentation of each stimulus, the subject indicated whether the stimulus person belonged to "Tribe X" or "Tribe Y." He  also indicated his certainty on a 10-point scale which ranged from 1 (perfectly certain X was wrong) to 10 (perfectly certain  X was right). To control for postition and response preferences, the location and reinforcement probabilities were  counterbalanced with respect to X and Y over subjects.  During training, the subject was informed of the correct response on each trial. In Experiment I, the reinforcement  probabilities-i.e., the probabilities that the stimulus person was an X-were .8, .6, and .2; the reinforcement probabilities  in Experiment II were 1.0, .6, .3, and .1. Reinforcement probabilities were counterbalanced with the cues in latin-squares.  There were 100 learning trials on each cue in Experiment 1, and 80 learning trials on each cue in Experiment II. Cues were  presented in a random order and several different reinforcement sequences were used. Following completion of the learning  trials, subjects were tested without reinforcement on the single cues and compounds. Ten presentations of each test stimulus  were given in Experiment 1, and 20 presentations each were given in Experiment II. Test stimuli were arranged in two balanced  random orders.  Subjects  Subjects in both experiments were recruited from introductory psychology courses at UCLA and had volunteered to participate in  a 2-hour experiment as part of their course requirement. Twenty-four subjects served in Experiment 1. In Experiment II, 48  subjects were run originally, but the data of 8 were discarded because of too many response omissions. (Experiment II used a  timed response interval and not all subjects made both responses on every trial within the time allotted. The criteria used to  eliminate subjects are in Himmelfarb, 1964.) Five subjects were replaced subsequently; thus, the data reported are from 45  subjects in Experiment II.  RESULTS  The proportion of Tribe X responses and the mean certainty response within each block of 10 learning trials and on all test  trials served as scores in the analyses. The learning trial data of both experiments revealed highly significant effects due  to reinforcement probabilities on the response probability measure and the certainty scores. Responses to the single cues in  the test phase did not differ significantly from the response over the last few blocks of learning. Mean response to the  single cues in testing are given in Table 1. The table shows that both response measures, on the average, matched the  reinforcement probabilities reasonably well. However, there were large individual differences, particularly on the response  probability measure.  TABLE 1  Mean Obtained Response to Single Cues and Compounds and Mean Response Predicted by Simple Averaging (A), Cue Accuracy  Weighting (W), and Complete Discounting (D) Models'  Single cues Compound stimuli      Predicted means  Predicted means  Stimulus Response Certainty Stimulus Obtained - A W - Obtained - _ W D  probability   mean   D mean A    .8 .84 7.21 .8 &.6 .76 .75 .78 .85 6.62 6.68 6.83 7.38  .6 .66 6.13 .8 &.2 .37 .48 .47 .38 4.80 5.27 5.21 4.72  .2 .12 3.33 .6 &.2 .28 .39 .35 .14 4.04 4.73 4.52 3.30    .8, .6, & .2 .55 .54 .53 .39 5.34 5.56 5.53 4.84    1.0 & .6 .90 .79 .85 .96 8.03 7.71 8.11 9.14  1.0 .94 9.02 1.0 & .3 .86 .63 .69 .93 7.62 6.76 7.27 9.03  .6 .65 6.39 1.0&.1 .68 .53 .56 .91 6.24 5.86 6.10 8.83  .3 .30 4.51 .6 &.3 .51 .48 .47 .29 5.64 5.45 5.40 4.48  .1 .12 2.71 .6 &.1 .22 .39 .33 .11 3.89 4.55 4.18 2.66    .3 & .1 .14 .22 .18 .08 3.07 3.61 3.32 2.39  Response probability Certainty  - y b  The mean predicted values are the averages of the predicted values for each subject based upon his obtained scores to each of  the single cues.  536) HIMMELFARB  A predicted response on every compound for the three variants on the averaging model was generated based upon the subject's  responses to the single cues in testing. On the certainty data, the subject's mean certainty responses to the single cues, Ri  and R; , were substituted in place of pi and p; in the compounding equations. To determine the weight of a single cue in the  cue weighting model, the equation c.i = Ri-i + (11 - Ri)(1 - Tri) was used, since the bottom of the certainty scale was 1  rather than 0 as on the response probability measure. Predictions for the complete discounting model were based on the  subject's actual responses to the single cues rather than on 7r.  Means of the predicted values are given in Table 1 along with the mean obtained response to each compound. As shown, the  differences between the cue weighting and simple averaging models were not large, although the cue weighting model predictions  were closer to the obtained. The obtained response to the compound generally fell between the predictions of the simple  averaging model and the complete discounting model.  The data in Table 1 suggest in what ways the three models were inadequate. In general, the simple averaging and cue weighting  models made predictions which were lower than the obtained responses when the more valid cue was greater than .5, and  generated predictions which were too high when the more valid cue was less than .5. The predictions made by the complete  discounting model tended to overestimate the obtained response when the more valid cue was greater than .5 and tended to  underestimate the obtained response when the more valid cue was less than .5.  The complete discounting model did poorest, especially on the certainty response measure. Analysis of the individual responses  to the single cues indicated that the subjects were more likely to "optimize" on the response probability than on the  certainty response measure. The somewhat better fit of the discounting model on the former measure, therefore, was to be  expected. Nevertheless, the data show that the subjects were not simply ignoring the cue of lesser validity. Some weight was  given to the less valid cue; it was not entirely discounted.  The application of the additive model to the data was precluded by the lack of uniformity over subjects in response to the  single cues. However, the discounting model generates predictions most akin to the additive model: the discounting model  predicts that the response to the compound is equal to the response to the more valid single cue, while the additive model  predicts that the response to the compound is greater than the response to the more valid single cue. The poor fit of the  discounting model, therefore, discredits the additive model as well. Taken at face value, the results in Table 1 provide no  evidence for a summation process in the data of compounds based on single cues that were not in conflict.  The predicted and obtained responses to the compounds in Table 1 highlight some of the differences between the models. More  meaningful comparisons between the models require a measure of goodness of fit and this was provided by the mean squared  CUE VALIDITY DIFFERENCES 537  deviation between predicted and obtained response to each compound for the three models. By this criterion, the cue weighting  model provided a better fit to the data of all compounds than the other two models on both response measures. The differences  between the cue weighting and the simple averaging model were slight, but the differences between the cue weighting and the  complete discounting model were much larger, particularly on the certainty response data. On an individual compound basis for  both response measures, the cue weighting model did best or equaled one of the other models on 8 out of the 10 compounds used  in both experiments.  To determine how well these group averages reflected the compounding behavior of individual subjects, for every subject the  sum over the compound stimuli of the squared deviation scores for each model was calculated. The three sums for a subject then  were compared pairing each model with each of the other models in turn. There were a number of subjects for whom the simple  averaging or the discounting model did best on all compounds, but on both response measures the cue weighting model reflected  the compounding strategies of more subjects when paired against either of the other models.  DISCUSSION  The results of the two experiments suggest that the process by which subjects integrate information from cues varying in  validity can be modeled by a weighted averaging formulation. In general, the greater the validity of the cue, the more weight  it was given in determining the judgment to the compound stimulus.  The cue weighting model used in the present studies weighted each cue by the probability that it had been correct during  learning. Atkinson et al. (1964), in a study of stimulus compounding in children, also found support for a cue weighting  model. However, the models they used assumed that averaging, cue weighting, or discounting only occurred on a certain  proportion of the trials and that on the remaining trials the subject regressed toward random responding. The regression  notion not only made reasonable psychological sense since the subjects had not learned responses to the compounds, but also  was in accord with their data which showed that some of the obtained responses to the compounds were closer to chance than  would be expected on the basis of a simple averaging model. The data of the present studies did not exhibit any regression  tendencies. In fact, the discrepancies from the cue weighting model suggest that it did not give sufficient weight to the more  valid cue in the compound. Friedman et al. (1968) report similar findings in which the cue weighting model consistently  underestimated the weight given to the more valid cue, while the complete discounting model overestimated the weight of the  more valid cue. They suggested a number of "mixed strategy" models in which the subject on a proportion of trials employs  complete discounting and on other trials uses some form of weighted averaging. The alternative possibilities that subjects use  different combination rules  538 HIMMELFARB  on different compounds or that different subjects use different rules cannot be excluded by the present data. Rigorous tests  of all of these formulations, however, will require the development of more adequate theory and experimental means for  differentiating among them.  In impression formation, where the single elements are evaluative in nature, a number of studies have found that as the number  of traits of the same polarity increases, the response to the compound also increases (Anderson, 1967; Fishbein and Hunter,  1964; Manis et al., 1966). Manis et al. have suggested that summation effects may occur because the subject becomes more  confident that his judgment is correct as the number of elements which bolster the judgment increases. In the present research  there were compounds in which the single cues were more frequently associated with the same correct response during learning.  Certainty in judgments made to these compounds generally was not greater than to the more valid single cue. Indeed, the data  suggested that the less valid cue reduced certainty in cases of nonconflicting cue compounds [even when the best single cue  was perfectly valid. If confidence does] increase, it may occur only when the nonconflicting single cues are of equal  validity. Such instances were not studied in the present experiments.  Most studies of impression formation have used a paradigm in which differences between stimuli reflect naturally occurring  linguistic usage. The novelty of the present approach lies in the training phase of the studies in which differences between  stimuli are built into the subject experimentally. The technique would appear to be a promising one for manipulating cue  validities in impression formation research and for an experimental attack on the development of stereotypes.  REFERENCES  ANDERSON, N. H. Averaging model analysis of set-size effect in impression formation. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1967,  75, 158-165.  ANDERSON, N. H. A simple model for information integration. In R. P. Abelson, E. Aronson, W. J. McGuire, T. M. Newcomb, M. J.  Rosenberg, and P. H. Tannenbaum (Eds.), Theories of cognitive consistency: A sourcebook. Chicago: Rand McNally, 1968. Pp.  731-743.  ANDERSON, N. H., AND JACOBSON, A. Effect of stimulus inconsistency and discounting instructions in personality impression  formation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1965, 2, 531-539.  ATKINSON, R. C., CALFEE, R. C., SOMMER, G. R., JEFFREY, W. E., AND SHOEMAKER, R. A test of three models for stimulus  compounding with children. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1964, 67, 52-58.  BINDER, A., AND FELDMAN, S. E. The effects of experimentally controlled experience upon recognition responses. Psychological  Monographs, 1960, 74, No. 9 (Whole No. 496).  BURKE, C. J., AND ESTES, W. K. A component model for stimulus variables in discrimination learning. Psychometrika, 1957, 22,  133-145.  ESTES, W. K. Theoretical treatments of differential reward in multiple choice learning and twoperson interactions. In J.  Criswell, H. Solomon, and P. Suppes (Eds.), Mathematical methods in small group processes. Stanford: Stanford Univ. Press,  1962. Pp. 133-149.  CUE VALIDITY DIFFERENCES  539  FISHSEIN, M., AND HUNTER, R. Summation versus balance in attitude organization and change. Journal of Abnormal and Social  Psychology, 1964, 69, 505-510.  FRIEDMAN, M. P., ROLLINS, H., AND PADILLA, G. The role of cue validity in stimulus compounding. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 1968, 5, 300-310.  HIMMELFARR, S. The utilization and combination of cues in the perception of persons. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,  University of California, Los Angeles, 1964.  MANIS, M., GLEASON, T. C., AND DAWES, R. M. Evaluation of complex social stimuli. Journal of Personality and Social  Psychology, 1966, 3, 404-419.  ROSENBAUM, M. E., AND LEVIN, I. P. Impression formation as a function of source credibility and order of presentation of  contradictory information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1968, 10, 167-174.  SCHOEFFLER, M. S. Probability of responses to compounds of discriminated stimuli. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1954,  48, 323-329.  RECEIVED: May 9, 1969  480/7/3-11