10.1016/0022-2496(70)90058-1
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL, PSYCHOLOGY: 7, 37-59 (1970)  A Model for Cortical Memory'  ROBERT J, BARON2  Clarkson College of Technology, Potsdam, New York 13676  Received July 12, 1968  Information in the nervous system is coded into patterns of firing in specific collections of neurons. We assume without proof  that memorization is the conversion of these firing patterns into spatially distributed patterns (such as changes in the  transmission properties of the synapses or cell membranes). We also assume that recall is the synthesis of a copy of the  firing patterns which occurred during storage. It is the purpose of this paper to develop a network called a memory block  which can store, search for, and recall these firing patterns.  The storage mechanism of the memory block closely resembles the holographic storage process. Information which is stored in a  particular memory location is distributed throughout all the neurons of that location. Damage to large numbers of neurons in a  given memory location does not destroy the stored information but merely reduces the fidelity of the recalled patterns. When a  specific piece of information is required from the memory block, a similar information pattern is sent to every memory  location. Each memory location correlates the test pattern with its stored patterns and returns a signal which is proportional  to the similarity between the test pattern and the corresponding stored pattern. A high signal indicates a close match and  locates the stored information. Recall is immediately possible.  To convert between temporal firing patterns and spatial neuronal changes, a memory timing mechanism is introduced. This  mechanism is a wave of activity in the nonneuronal medium which inactivates all but a thin layer in the network. During  storage, the active layer moves through the appropriate memory location. In this way, the time of input is converted into  position within the storage network. During recall, the memory timing mechanism is again used, this time to convert between  position of storage and time of output.  A learning network is then presented which utilizes the memory block as a storage network. This network differs from other  learning models in several prominent ways. Not only are all input patterns permanently stored, but the memory traces remain  unchanged for the life of the system. Learning and forgetting are independent of the memory traces themselves but depend on  the threshold of recallability of information from the individual memory locations.  We conclude with a brief discussion of some physiological and biological questions posed by the model.  ' This work was supported in part under Air Force Contract AF-AFOSR-68-1402.  a The author thanks Professor H. D. Block and Dr. I. Faeder for their valuable help during the preparation of this report.  37  38  BARON  "Every individual forms a neuronal record of his own stream of consciousness. Since artificial re-activation of the record,  later in life, seems to re-create all those things formerly included within the focus of his attention, one must assume that  the reactivated recording and the original neuronal activity are identical" (Wilder Penfield, in Penfield and Perot, 1959, p.  54).  Neither the mechanisms of nor the logic behind the memory mechanism are understood, and although at the present time the  techniques of neurobiology have advanced to the point where the activity of a single neuron can be studied, the neuronal  changes which affect the memory process have not yet been experimentally observed. The purpose of this paper is to suggest in  detail a mathematical model of a biologically plausible memory network. We do not suggest any biological mechanism for the  memory process, nor do we guarantee the fidelity of the correspondence between the proposed model and the human brain. Our  intent is to suggest a possible structure of the memory stores in hopes that in the near future the logic and organization of  the memory system will be better understood.  MATHEMATICAL NEURONS  In 1943, McCulloch and Pitts described a mathematical neuron which has since gained great popularity. A McCulloch-Pitts neuron  is an element with m binary inputs, xI ,..., xm , and one binary output, such that if Zwixi > B, then its output equals 1.  Otherwise, its output equals zero. The coefficients wi are the coupling weights associated with inputs xi , and the number B  is the threshold of the neuron. Networks of McCulloch-Pitts neurons may be constructed and the activity of the networks may be  described by the rules of the logical calculus. The physical assumptions made by McCulloch and Pitts (1943, p. 118) for their  model are as follows:  1. The activity of the neuron is an "all-or-none" process.  2. A certain fixed number of synapses must be excited within the period of latent addition in order to excite a neuron at any  time, and this number is independent of previous activity and position on the neuron.  3. The only significant delay within the nervous system is synaptic delay.  4. The activity of any inhibitory synapse absolutely prevents excitation of the neuron at that time.  5. The structure of the net does not change with time.  Unfortunately, the theorems of classical analysis are difficult to apply to networks of this type. Another approach to neural  modeling which more readily lends itself to classical analysis will shortly be presented. First, however, a brief description  of the activity of biological neurons will be given.  CORTICAL MEMORY MODEL 39  Each biological neuron has four parts basic to our discussion: the cell body or soma, the dendrites, the axon, and the axon  tree (see Fig. 1). Dendrites are filamentous extensions of the soma which branch many times in the region surrounding the soma  forming the dendrite tree. One axon leaves each soma, extends a distance from the soma, and divides into the axon tree. Each  axon fiber of the axon tree terminates in a synaptic bouton which almost contacts a dendrite branch or soma of another (or the  same) neuron. Each such place of near contact is called a synapse, and the space separating the two neurons is called the  synaptic cleft. Synapses are essential for the information processing done by the neurons and will shortly be discussed in  more detail.  Biological neurons  Mathematical neurons  FIG. l. A comparison between the structures of biological and mathematical neurons.  A neuron normally maintains an ionic concentration gradient which produces an electric potential across its membrane. When the  membrane potential at the soma is sufficiently disturbed, a self-sustaining depolarization pulse (sometimes called impulse,  pulse, or spike) propagates along the axon and spreads throughout the axon tree. When a depolarization pulse reaches a  synapse, a chemical transmitter substance is released. (We consider only axo-dendritec and axo-somatic synapses.) After  diffusion across the synaptic cleft, the effect of the chemical transmitter substance on the postsynaptic neuron may be  excitatory (depolarizing), or inhibitory (hyperpolarizing). Within a short time after the chemical transmitters are released,  they are inactivated enzymatically, reabsorbed by the nerve terminals, or removed from the synaptic area by diffusion. The  neuron then returns to its resting potential.  The influence that one neuron has on the firing frequency of another is not exerted at one synapse alone, but through many  synaptic contacts that are distributed over parts of all of the dendrite tree and soma of the latter. When the presynaptic  neuron fires, the depolarization pulse causes the release of transmitter substance at each of its synaptic boutons. This in  turn causes slight fluctuations in the membrane potential  of the postsynaptic neuron in the region surrounding every such synapse. The individual fluctuations spread from each focus of  excitation and cause transient fluctuations in the membrane potential at the soma. These fluctuations sum and may be  sufficient to cause an impulse to propagate down the axon.  At a given synapse and at a given moment of time, the effect of the chemical transmitters depends on both the quantity and  type of transmitter substance released. The magnitude of the resultant potential fluctuation in the postsynaptic neuron  depends also on specific properties of the dendrite and surrounding region of the postsynaptic neuron. Long-term chemical or  hormonal effects, metabolic effects, and so forth, all influence the way in which one neuron contributes toward the frequency  of another. For a more detailed treatment, see, for example, Eccles (1957, 1964) or Ochs (1965).  We define a mathematical neuron (hereafter called simply "neuron") as consisting of four parts: (1) a soma, (2) a dendrite  field, (3) an axon, and (4) an axon field. The soma is a point whose geometric coordinates identify the neuron. The dendrite  field is a region in three-space containing the soma. The axon field is also a region in three-space (not necessarily disjoint  from the soma), and the axon is a line connecting the soma with the axon field (see Fig. 1).  When the axon field of one neuron (the presynaptic neuron) intersects the dendrite field of a second neuron (the postsynaptic  neuron), the intersection is called the coupling field. Consider two neurons with a non-void coupling field. Neuron a, the  presynaptic neuron, is said to synapse on neuron b, the postsynaptic neuron. The frequency of a neuron is a non-negative  valued function of time. Let P(a)(t) denote the frequency of neuron a at time t. Then we say neuron a fires at a frequency  P(a)(t).  When the frequency of neuron a is P(a)(t) and the medium containing the neurons is in the normal state, neuron a releases  transmitter susbtance to neuron b throughout their coupling field at a rate density (quantity of transmitter substance per  second per volume) given by P(a)(t) cba. The constants Ci,a are called coupling coefficients. Excitatory coupling is  represented by positive coupling coefficients, and inhibitory coupling is represented by negative coupling coefficients. We  call the medium containing the neurons non-neuronal medium. (We introduce transmitter substance as a conceptual aid to the  mathematics of the proposed model. The correspondence between (mathematical) transmitter substance and (biological) chemical  transmitters should be clear.)  When the non-neuronal medium is not in the normal state, it may influence the coupling between two neurons as follows. Let (x,  y, z) be the geometric coordinates of a point in the coupling field of neuron a and neuron b. Then the rate density of  transmitter substance arriving at the point (x, y, z) in the dendrite field of neuron b from neuron a is given by P(a)(t)  cbaE(x, y, z)(t). Notice that if E(x, y, z)(t) = 1, the net rate density of transmitter substance arriving at neuron b from  neuron a is the same as in the normal state. We will therefore understand that E(x, y, z)(t) = 1  CORTICAL MEMORY MODEL 41  whenever the non-neuronal medium is in the normal state, and use the expression P(a)(t) Cb"E(x, y, z)(t) in general.  The axon and soma of our neuron do not play a central part in our model. Transmitter substance which arrives in the dendrite  field of one neuron causes it to fire at a particular frequency (to be determined), and as a result, transmitter substance is  released to other neurons in the network. We may think of the soma as processing the incoming information and we may think of  the axon as delivering the outgoing information to the axon field (and hence to other neurons), but mathematically, neither  the soma nor axon will be considered.  Now consider neuron b. At time t, the net rate density of transmitter substance arriving at point (x, y, z) in its dendrite  field is given by  (y P(a)(t) Cba) E(x, y, z)(t) a  where summation is over all neurons with axon fields intersecting point (x, y, z). The contribution of the transmitter  substance arriving at point (x, y, z) to the frequency of neuron b is given by  kb(x, y, z)(t) (~ P(a)(t) cbal E(x, y, z)(t) (2) a  where kb(x, y, z)(t) is the local sensitivity of neuron b at point (x, y, z) and time t.  The frequency of neuron b at time t is given by  P(b)(t) = POS (J kb(x, y, z)(t) (y P(a)(t) Cba) E(x, y, z)(t) dx dy dz) (3) a  where integration is over the entire dendrite field of neuron b and POS(f ) = f if f - 0, and zero otherwise. Equation 3  specifies completely the frequency of neuron b in terms of the local sensitivity values throughout its dendrite field and the  net rate at which transmitter substance is received from all presynaptic neurons. In principle, once the geometry of a network  is specified and the coupling coefficients are chosen, the activity of each neuron in the network can be determined in terms  of the frequencies of all presynaptic neurons, the local sensitivity values throughout the dendrite fields, and the state of  the non-neuronal medium. In the following model, we will make simplifying assumptions which enable us to solve Eq. 3 under  very special circumstances.  The physical assumptions made for our neuron fall into three categories: (1) presynaptic, (2) inter-neuronal, and (3)  postsynaptic. The following remarks summarize our physical assumptions.  Those assumptions which ascribe properties to the presynaptic neurons fall into the first category:  I. The frequency of a neuron is a non-negative valued function of time.  2. The coupling coefficient between two neurons is independent of the position in their coupling field.  3. Only through their coupling field can one neuron directly influence the frequency of another.  4. The rate of release of transmitter substance by a neuron is proportional to its frequency.  In addition to the direct neuronal coupling, we assume that the non-neuronal medium may influence neuronal activity:  5. The non-neuronal medium may uniformly increase or decrease the coupling between all neurons whose coupling fields intersect  the region under consideration. The properties of the dendrite field of a neuron may also influence the quantitative effects  which transmitter substance has on that neuron's frequency:  6. The contributory effect which transmitter substance has at point (x, y, z) toward the frequency of a neuron is proportional  to the local sensitivity of the neuron at that point.  7. Only if the contributory effect of the transmitter substance is positive (excitatory) will a neuron fire.  The frequency of our neuron is a non-negative valued function of time. In contrast, the frequency of a biological neuron is  measured in terms of its rate of depolarization (averaged over a suitably short time interval). (See Fig. 2.) Although this  correspondence may not always be valid, we feel the correspondence is justified for cortical neurons with large numbers of  impinging synapses, low frequencies, and where the effects of transmitter substance add temporally and spatially.  INFORMATION OR FIRING PATTERNS  Information patterns in the human brain are predominantly two dimensional, the two dimensions representing the geometric  coordinates of the incoming sensory signals (position on the surface of the skin, position on the retina of the eye, etc.).  For this reason, each neuron will be described with two variables. (These variables do not necessarily correspond to the  geometric position of a given neuron within the network.) Consider a collection of JK neurons, (j, k), where j and k are  integer variables ranging between I and J, and 1 and K, respectively. Let P(j, k)(t) be the frequency of neuron (j, k) at time  t. (The functional notation P((j, k))(t) may be clearer than P(j, k)(t), but since no ambiguity will result, we will use the  shorter notation.) For the above collection of neurons, the firing pattern (also referred to as information pattern, or  CORTICAL MEMORY MODEL 43  E +40  -70  c E L  I I 1 I  1/10 2110 3110 4110 Time (seconds)  100  50  01 I I 1  0 1/10 2110 3110 4110 Time (seconds)  Fir. 2. A comparison between the depolarization pulses in the axon of a biological neuron  and the corresponding frequency in a mathematical neuron.  merely pattern) at time t is a non-negative valued function defined on JK points and denoted P(j, k)(t) : I < j < J, I < k <  K. The firing patterns in two different collections of neurons are equal if there is a one-to-one correspondence between the  neurons in the two collections and the frequencies of the neurons under this correspondence are equal. Thus,  P(j', k')(t') : 1 < j' < J, I < k' < K = P(j, k)(t) : I < j < J, I < k < K  provided there is a correspondence (j, k) H (j', k') and P(j, k)(t) = P(j', k')(t') for all J values of j and K values of k.  For brevity, we will replace the symbol P(j, k)(t) : 1 < j < J, I < k G K by P(j, k)(t). No confusion will result.  THE MEMORY BLOCK MODEL  Information patterns which represent the external environment are delivered to the brain through specific afferent neural  tracts. These primary information patterns (in the visual and auditory systems, the patterns delivered to the brain from the  retinal and cochlear networks) appear to be stored for short periods of time in networks  44 BARON  sometimes referred to as sensory registers (Atkinson and Shiffrin, 1968). Select portions of these primary information  patterns, those which occupy the focus of attention (Penfield and Perot, 1963), are delivered both to temporary and permanent  memory stores for further processing. In addition, information patterns which originate from within the brain (either as a  result of some transformation of the sensory patterns or as a result of recall from one of the various memory stores) may also  be delivered to the temporary and permanent memory stores for analysis and storage. Regardless of their origins, and  regardless of their terminal destination, we assume that every information pattern which is delivered to a particular memory  store is carried to that memory store by a particular collection of neurons, and similarly, every recalled pattern from a  memory store leaves that memory store through another specific collection of neurons.  The memory block model we will shortly present represents one of the distinct memory stores in the human brain. It may  represent either a temporary memory store or a permanent memory store depending on our choice of parameters, and likewise, the  memory traces within the memory block may be either temporary, permanent, or degrading in time. We will formulate in detail  the effects of all inputs to the memory block, and in terms of all current and past inputs, we will calculate all outputs from  the memory block.  A memory block is a collection of interconnected neurons together with the nonneuronal medium surrounding them (see Fig. 3).  It is divided into memory locations or  Typical Recognition and Recall Neurons  Memory Region Output Region  Output eurons  JK in Number  Input Neurons JK in Number  Memory Coordinating System  FIG. 3. A diagram showing the basic geometry of the memory block. (The memory neurons  are not indicated.)  Typical  Memory Effector  Memory Effector System  CORTICAL MEMORY MODEL 45  specific subcollections of neurons. We will show that each memory location can store the incoming information which arrives  during a particular time interval. To convert between temporal firing patterns and spatial neuronal changes, a memory timing  mechanism is introduced. This mechanism is a wave of activity which moves vertically upward at velocity v through the  non-neuronal medium. During storage, each level z in the active memory location receives transmitter substance for one instant  of time only. The local sensitivity values of the memory neurons are set proportional to this amount of transmitter substance.  Thus the temporal frequency patterns result in a spatial pattern of sensitivity in which time is encoded into vertical  position within a given memory location. During recall, the memory timing mechanism is agian used, this time to convert  between spatial and temporal patterns. We will show that the recalled pattern from a memory location is an exact copy of the  stored pattern in that location and it varies in time exactly as the incoming pattern did during storage.  When a memory location is neither executing storage nor recalling information, the memory timing mechanism does not function.  Each memory location automatically correlates the current incoming information with its stored pattern. The resulting  recognition signal is high only when the stored information is similar to the incoming information. This enables the memory  block to be searched associatively. Recall is then immediately possible.  The physical assumptions made for our memory block are as follows:  1. Information patterns to be stored arrive at the memory block through a specific collection of neurons.  2. These input patterns must be stored continuously in time.  3. Recall must be a non-destructive process.  4. The recalled patterns must be exact copies of the patterns which were stored; they must vary in time exactly as the input  patterns did during storage.  5. The location of information from within the memory block must be possible associatively.  6. Any changes which support the memorization process must be changes in the properties of the neurons themselves and not  changes in the structure of the memory system.  External to the memory block are two systems which control the flow of information to and from the memory block. The first  control system is called a memory effector system. It signals the memory block to execute storage. The second control system  is called a memory coordinating system. It signals the memory block to execute recall. Although we will consider in detail the  effects which inputs from these control systems have on the functioning of the memory block, we will not consider the  functional  details of the control systems themselves. We assume the following functional properties of the control systems:  1. All input patterns which are delivered to the memory block for storage are normalized:  I (P(1, k)(t))2 = I  where summation is over all neurons which deliver information to the memory block. This norm is essential for the specific  recognition algorithm demonstrated in this paper and can easily be realized by a network which uniformly increases or  decreases the frequencies of all input neurons until the condition is met. Memory networks with other norms and other  recognition algorithms, yet having the same structure as the proposed network, can easily be formulated.  2. When a normalized pattern is delivered to the memory block, an external control will inhibit the memory coordinating system  from signaling the memory block to recall any information. (Not both storage and recall are executed at the same time.)  3. When an input pattern arrives at the memory block, the memory effector system will signal the appropriate memory location  in the memory block to execute storage.  4. When a memory location is filled, the memory effector system will signal the next memory location to execute storage. (A  memory location is filled once the memory timing mechanism passes entirely through the memory location.)  THE MODEL  Before defining the structure of the memory block, some insight into its operation may be helpful. Input information is  delivered simultaneously to every memory location. Each memory location operates independently under the control of its memory  effector neuron and its recall neuron. Information which arrives at a memory location is transformed (according to Eq. 3) into  a new pattern of activity in the memory neurons. Similarly, the pattern of activity of the memory neurons is transformed into  a pattern of activity in the output neurons. The specific transformations which result depend, of course, on the particular  choices of coupling coefficients, local sensitivity values, and geometry.  For this presentation, we have chosen coupling coefficients which make the memory block store neuronal information in much the  same way that the Fourier hologram stores optical information. The input layer of the memory block Fourier-transforms the  input pattern. If the local sensitivity values of all memory neurons were unity, the firing pattern in the memory neurons  would represent the Fourier transform of the input pattern. Actually, the firing pattern for the memory neurons in a given  memory location represents the product of the Fourier transforms of the input pattern with the  CORTICAL MEMORY MODEL 47  spatial pattern of local sensitivity values of the memory neurons in that memory location. Memorization consists of changing  the local sensitivity values of the memory neurons in a given memory location. These values are changed so that the spatial  pattern of sensitivity values represents the complex conjugate of the Fourier transform of the input pattern. The memory  engram is, in a sense, a hologram of the input firing pattern. Compare this method of information storage to the methods  proposed by Beurle (1956, 1959) Kabrisky (1966), and van Heerden (1963a, 1963b). We note that the net amount of transmitter  substance which arrives at any point of a memory neuron is exactly proportional to the Fourier transform of the input pattern  (Baron 1968, p. 22). Storage is effected by setting the local sensitivity values proportional to the net amount of transmitter  substance which is present at each given point.  After memorization, the pattern of activity of the memory neurons in a given memory location is equal to the product of the  Fourier transform of the input pattern with the complex conjugate of the Fourier transform of the stored pattern. Therefore,  the output pattern is the crosscorrelation of the input pattern with the stored pattern. Recognition is implemented in this  way. On the other hand, when only the recall neuron to a memory location fires, uniform transmitter substance arrives at each  memory neuron. Therefore, the firing pattern in the memory neurons equals the transform of the stored pattern and the  resulting output pattern is a synthesized copy of the stored pattern.  We note that the Fourier transform of a positive pattern may be both negative and complex. In order to maintain our  assumptions that neurons fire at positive frequencies, and in order not to introduce negative sensitivity values, we introduce  two additional variables, r and s, for the memory neurons. The variable r corresponds to the possible complex components of  the Fourier transform, and the variable s distinguishes between positive and negative frequencies and positive and negative  sensitivity values.  We now formally develop the structure of the memory block. There are six types of neurons within the memory block: Input  neurons, output neurons, memory neurons, memory effector neurons, recognition neurons, and recall neurons. Input neurons  deliver the input patterns to the memory block. Output neurons carry the recalled patterns from the memory block. Memory  neurons are the neurons within the memory block whose property changes effect storage. The memory effector neurons signal the  memory block to execute storage. The recognition neurons indicate when the current input pattern is similar to previously  stored information, and the recall neurons cause the memory block to recall information.  Only those parts of the neurons which are contained within the memory block itself will be discussed in detail. In particular,  only the axon fields of those neurons making inputs to the memory block (input neurons, memory effector neurons, and recall  neurons) will be discussed, and only the dendrite fields of those neurons delivering information from the memory block  (recognition neurons and output neurons) will be discussed in detail. The soma and dendrite fields of neurons making inputs to  the  memory block and the axon and axon fields of neurons delivering information from the memory block are outside the scope of the  model.  As indicated in Fig. 3, the memory block is a thin three-dimensional network which consists of an upper or memory region and a  lower or output region. Each memory location is a vertical column extending from the top to the bottom of the memory block.  There are B memory locations in the memory block, each having an equal crosssectional area. The memory locations are indexed  by the integer variable b, b ranging from 1 to B.  There are JK different input neurons to the memory block. An input neuron will be labelled (j, k) and its frequency at time t  will be denoted by P(j, k)(t). The variables j and k are integer variables, J ranging from l to J, and k ranging from 1 to K.  The axon field of each input neuron is the entire memory region of the memory block, and the soma and dendrite field of each  input neuron are outside the memory block and will not be considered (see Fig. 4).  3  Output Neuron [j, kj  Input Neuron (j, k)  Recall Neuron (bl kecognition Neuron [b]  FIG. 4. The geometry of the axon and dendrite fields of neurons (Both sketches show the same region.)  Key: 1. Coupling field between input neuron (j, k) and memory neuron (p, q, r, s) 2. Axon field of input neuron (j, k)  3. Coupling field between memory neuron (p, q, r, s) and output neuron [j, k] 4. Dendrite field of output neuron [j, k]  5. Axon field of recall neuron (b)  6. Dendrite field of recognition neuron [b]  in memory location b.  CORTICAL MEMORY MODEL 49  There are JK different output neurons. An output neuron will be labelled [j, k] and its frequency denoted by P[j, k](t). We  will use square brackets ([]) to designate neurons which make outputs from the memory block and round brackets (()) to  designate neurons which make inputs to the memory block. The soma of an output neuron is within the output region of the  memory block, and the dendrite field of each output neuron is the entire output region of the memory block. The axon fields of  the output neurons are outside the memory block and will not be discussed (see Fig. 4).  There are 8JK different types of memory neurons. A memory neuron will be labelled by (p, q, r, s) and its frequency at time t  will be denoted by P(p, q, r, s)(t). The variables p, q, r and s are integer variables, p ranging from 1 to J, q ranging from  1 to K, r being either + 1 or --1, and s being either 1, 2, 3, or 4. The memory region of each memory location contains the  soma of one of each different type of memory neuron. Therefore, there are 8BJK memory neurons in the memory block. The  dendrite field of a memory neuron is the memory region of the memory location containing its soma, and the axon field of that  memory neuron is the output region of that memory location (see Fig. 4).  Each memory location contains the axon field of one recall neuron. The recall neuron whose axon field is in memory location b  will be denoted by (b), and its frequency at time t will be denoted by Rcl(b)(t). The axon field of recall neuron (b) is the  memory region of memory location b.  Each memory location contains one recognition neuron. The recognition neuron whose soma is in memory location b will be  labelled [b] and its frequency at time t will be denoted by Rgn[b](t). The dendrite field of recognition neuron [b] is the  output region of memory location b, and the axon field of recognition neuron [b] is outside the memory block and will not be  discussed.  Each memory location contains the axon field of one memory effector neuron. Memory effector neurons will not directly affect  the frequencies of the other neurons in the memory block but will make inputs to the memory block which signal the memory  neurons in the corresponding memory location to execute storage. The dendritic mechanism of the execute storage signal will be  beyond the scope of this model, but its effect on the memory neurons will be postulated later.  The coupling coefficients between neurons will be denoted as follows:  1. Cj rs between input neuron (j, k) and memory neuron (p, q, r, s) 2. c'n,r's between memory neuron (p, q, r, s) and output  neuron [j, k] 3. c', between recall neuron (b) and memory neuron (p, q, r, s)  4. Cl,r.s between memory neuron (p, q, r, s) and recognition neuron [b]  For all neurons other than the memory neurons, the local sensitivity values will remain fixed. Therefore, for simplicity, we  will assume them to be unity throughout. We note that although we have defined an extremely formal structure, such a  480/7/1-4  carefully defined structure is not necessary. Computer simulations of the memory block (Baron, 1968) have shown that the  presence of noise (such as spurious firing of neurons, death of neurons, or overlapping coupling fields among different memory  locations) does not severely hinder the functioning of the memory block. Even with a noise level of 30%, the fidelity of the  recalled image is only slightly reduced while recognition remains fairly acute.  The memory timing mechanism, a non-neuronal property of the memory block, is a wave of activity that inactivates all but a  thin horizontal layer in the memory block. Consider memory location b. We shall fix a cartesian coordinate system whose X- Y  plane is the interface between the memory and output regions and z is measured positive upward (into the memory region). Let  tb be the time when either the memory effector neuron or the recall neuron to memory location b began firing. Then E(x, y,  z)(t) = 8(z/v - (t - tb)), where 8(z/v - (t - tb)) is the Dirac delta function, v is the velocity of the timing wave, and z is  assumed greater than or equal to zero. Once the control neuron (either the memory effector neuron or the recall neuron) stops  firing, the memory timing mechanism resets; that is, the non-neuronal medium returns to the normal state. (The particular  linear form of the timing mechanism was chosen primarily for mathematical simplicity. Cylindrical, spherical or spiraling  waves of activity would be equally effective.)  Memorization consists of "setting" the local sensitivity values in the memory neurons. When the memory effector neuron to  memory location b fires, the local sensitivity values for the memory neurons in that memory location will be set proportional  to the net amount of transmitter substance present during the memorization process. Let (x, y, z) be a point in the dendrite  field of memory neuron (p, q, r, s) and let tba be the time when the memory effector neuron to memory location b began firing.  Then for tbf = tba -}- z/v, the local sensitivity values at point (x, y, z) will be set to an initial value given by  kvars(x, y, z)(tbf) = POS P(j, k) (v + tba) C qrs),  where the positive sign is chosen if s = 1 or 2, and the negative sign is chosen if s = 3  or 4.  A permanent memory network would be specified by the assertion that  k.rs(x, y, z)(t) - kpars(x,Y, z)(tb) (6a)  for all t greater than tbf. A temporary memory system with nondegrading memory traces would be specified by  kroars(x', .y, z)(t) = kvars(x, .y, z)(tbf) (6b)  where tb, corresponds to the most recent time that the memory effector neuron to  CORTICAL MEMORY MODEL 51  memory location b stopped firing. And finally, a memory store with degrading memory traces would be specified by  k,,,,, ,(x, y, z)(t) = kP,,r.G(x, Y, z)(tb,) D(t - tb,) (6c)  where D(t - tz,f) is a degrading function. [For example, if the memory traces decay exponentially, then D(t - tbf) = A  exp(-Q(t - tbf)), where A and u are constants.] When proving our assertions regarding recognition and recall, we will assume  nondegrading memory traces.  PROPERTIES OF THE MEMORY BLOCK  We require two fundamental properties of the memory block. First, it must be able to recall information. Second, it must be  able to locate stored information. The recall requirement can be stated as follows. Suppose memory location b stored  information beginning at time t,, , and suppose that recall from memory location b began at time t, . Then we require  P[j', k'](t) = P(j, k)(tb,, - (t - tb))  for all time between tb and tb + h/v, where h is the height of the memory region, and v is the velocity of the memory timing  mechanism, and h/v is the time it takes for the memory timing mechanism to pass upward through the memory location. The  correspondence (j, k) " [j', k'] is assumed.  The recognition requirement we have chosen is as follows. Let P(j, k)(b) be the average stored pattern in memory location b  defined by  h  P(J, k)(b) = h fP(1, k) (v + tb, d  and let C(P(j, k)(t), P(j, k)(b)) be the correlation between the average stored pattern  in memory location b and the current input pattern P(j, k)(t), where  C(P(1, k)(t), P(j, k)(b)) _ Y P(j, k)(t) P(j, k)(b) 7k  is the axial value of the crosscorrelation of the two functions. Then we require recognition neuron [b] to fire at a frequency  proportional to C(P(j, k)(t), P(j, k)(b)). When Rgn[b](t) is chosen in this way, it is much higher when a stored pattern is  presented than when a non-stored pattern is presented. It is maximum only when a stored pattern is presented (Baron, 1968 p.  24). This enables patterns which are similar to stored information patterns to be recognized.  There are many ways to choose the coupling coefficients so that recognition and recall will function as described above. We  will show that the following choices satisfy these requirements:  9k .7k _ ak _ 1k _ 1 P.1 qk r  CD9r1 _ - CPgr3 - -Cp9r2 - -CDgr4 - \IJK Cos ( + K + 8 ) 27f  C ~ rl _ CPk r2 - - ~D4r3 = -Cr4 = 1 COs ~lJx  qk _ _r 27r (10) K 8)  V4r1 Dg'r2 V4r'3 Dgr4 Dgrl. Cb - Cb - -~b - -Cb - X00  b b b _ b _ 00 Cngrl = Cpgr3 = -Cygr2 - -CDgr4 - Cygrl  Proof. Let the memory block be a permanent storage network, and suppose memory location b stored the information which arrived  at the memory block between tbo and tbf . Further suppose that recall neuron (b) began firing at tb . We will show that the  output pattern from the memory block is proportional to the pattern stored in memory location b, and i Rcl(b)(t) = 1/2JK(VAv)-l,  where A is the cross-sectional area of a memory location and V is the volume of the dendrite field of a memory neuron, then  the output pattern equals the stored pattern. Consider memory neuron (p, q, r, s). Its frequency, according to Eqs. 1 and 3,  is given by  P(p, q, r, s)(t) = POS J kPg,s(x, y, z)(t) F(x, y, z)(t) dx dy dz (11)  where integration is over its entire dendrite field, and F(x, y, z)(t) is the net rate density of transmitter substance  arriving at point (x, y, z) in its dendrite field. During recall, the only active neuron which connects to memory neuron (p,  q, r, s) is the recall neuron. Therefore,  F(x, y, z)(t) = Rcl(b)(t) cpg,SE(x, y, z)(t)  = Rcl(b)(t) c',,, 8 \v - (t - tb)),  so that  P(p, q, r, s)(t) = POS (f kvgrs(x,Y, z)(t) Rcl(b)(t) Cpg,,8 (v - (t - tb)) dx dy dz) (13) We assume that tb >1 tbf (recall  occurs after storage) so we may replace k,s(x, y, z)(t)  by kpgrs(x, Y, z)(tb,)  (12)  CORTICAL MEMORY MODEL 53  Integration then yields  P(p, q, r, s)(t) = POS(k,ar,(x, y, v(t - tb))(tbf) Rcl(b)(t) c',,vA). (14)  In terms of the frequencies of the memory neurons, the frequency of output neuron [j, k] is given by  P[j, k](t) = POS (f kik(x', y', z')(t) Y P(p, q, r, s)(t) c kr'E(x', y', z')(t) dx' dy' dz').  (15)  The local sensitivity values for the output neurons, kik(x', y', z')(t), have been assumed unity, and for the output region of  the memory block, E(x', y', z')(t) = 1. Therefore,  P[j, k](t) = POS (f Y P(p, q, r, s)(t) c-" d.,' dy' dz') (16)  is the frequency of output neuron [j, k] at time t during recall. Substituting Eq. 14 into Eq. 16 we obtain  P[j, k](t)  = POS (f Y POS(kPQ,,(x, y, v(t - tb))(tbf) Rcl(b)(t) cvA) C krs dx' dy' dz'Dgr, ). (17)  In this equation, integration is over the dendrite field of output neuron [j, k], summation is over all memory neurons in  memory location b, and A is the cross-sectional area of a memory location. We now expand the summation over s, and using the  relationships given by Eq. 10, eliminate all coupling coefficients where s # 1. Noting that kpgri(x, y, z)(t) = k.rn(x, y,  z)(t), and kpar2(x, y, z)(t) = k,Qr2(x, y, z)(t), and further noting that POS(a) - POS(-a) = a, we obtain  P[1, k](t) = POS (f I Cpkrl/kParl(x, y, v(t - tb))(tbf) Rcl(b)(t) warlvA  - kPar2(v(t - tb))(tb) Rcl(b)(t) cpgrlvA) dx' dy' dz'). (18)  From Eq. 5, we have  kvarl(x, y, v(t - tb))(tbf) = POS (Y P(1', k')(tbo + t - tb) Cj'k' jk'  Pqrl  and  kPar2(x, y, v(t - tb))(tbf) = POS -Y P(J', k')(tba + t - tb) wari). j'k'  54  BARON  Again using the fact that POS(a) - POS(-a) = a, we obtain  P U, k](t) = POS (f Y k Ti ~ P(j, f(too + t_ tb) cpQTivARcl(b)(t)cPgTi dx' dy' dz'1. Pqr 5'k'  (19)  The integrand is independent of (x', y', z') so we may integrate and obtain  P[j, k](t) = VAv (P OS (Y CPgT' Y P(j', k')(tbo -1- t - tb) cpglRcl(b)(t) cpgrl)), Pqr i'k'  (20)  where V is the volume of the dendrite field of output neuron [j, k]. We may now evaluate this expression using the particular  values of coupling coefficients given by Eq. 10. After substitution and a slight rearrangement of terms, we obtain  P[.1, k](t) = VAv Rcl(b)(t) POS (Y (P(j', k')(tbo + t - tb) ~/ JsKa .1'k'  r r  X Ycos(J +K- g)27Tcos(pJ -}- K + 8)2'rrcos( 4 ) . Pqr  (21)  Since we are summing p from 1 to J, q from 1 to K and r at 1 and -1, the second summation is precisely  JK8(nJ-(j-{-j'),mK-(k+k'))  where 8 is the Kronecker delta. We may therefore collapse the summation over j' and k'  and obtain  P[j, k](t) = VAv ~l(b~) POS(P(n j - j, mK - k)(tbo + t - tb)). (22)  The POS function may be eliminated since P(n j - j, nK - k)(tbo + t - tb) is an input pattern and therefore positive by  assumption. Under the neuron correspondence (J - j, K - k) - [j, k] the output pattern is proportional to the input pattern  which arrived between tbu and tbr . If t - tb is greater than h/v, there is no output from the memory block. Furthermore, if  Rcl(b)(t) = 1I2JK(VAv)-i,  the output pattern equals the stored pattern under the indicated neuron correspondence. Thus the recall requirement is proven.  CORTICAL MEMORY MODEL 55  A similar proof, which will not be given here, shows that the recognition requirement is also satisfied.  LEARNING WITH THE MEMORY BLOCK MODEL  At this time we would like to dispel the idea that the memory block model is any sort of a learning system. The memory block  can store, locate, and accurately recall information. During the operation of a permanent-storage memory block, no changes  occur to the "memory traces" and therefore the system neither learns nor forgets. On the other hand, we have suggested the  memory block as a model for human memory, and in particular, for cerebral information processing. Such a suggestion would be  absurd if in addition to the model already presented we could not at least suggest how the memory block might function in  conjunction with a learning system. The following model suggests how such an associative memory system might support learning.  A learning network is a network which according to a well-defined adaptation procedure learns to give the correct responses to  given inputs. (See for example, Block, 1962, 1963; Greene, 1962a, 1962b; Rosenblatt, 1962, 1964; and Von Foerster, 1965.) In  our system, an input will consist of the following: (1) an input information pattern, (2) a signal to indicate when an input  pattern is arriving, (3) a signal to indicate a request for information, and (4) a signal to indicate when the recalled  information is correct. (See Fig. 5.) A response is a recalled information pattern. Information is  THE LEARNING MODEL  Memory Block  EXTERNAL CONTROLS  Memory Effector  System  Memory Effector Neurons  R ecogn it io n and  Recall Neurons  Memory Coordinating  System  Input Information Recalled Information  Signal to indicatethat information is being delivered to the memory block  Signal to indicate that the recalled information is correct  Signal to indicate that information is desired  FIG. 5. A diagram of the learning model and its external controls.  56  BARON  requested associatively. First an input pattern is presented to the system for comparison and then the signal requesting  information is delivered to the system. (The decision procedure associated with recall will shortly be described.) We say the  system has learned the correct response to an information request when the system delivers the correct information.  Our learning system consists of a memory block together with a memory effector system and memory coordinating system. In our  model, we will not be concerned with the functional details of the memory effector system, but we will assume that it properly  signals the memory block to execute storage whenever an input pattern is presented. The memory block itself will be a  permanent storage system in which for every memory location, Rgn[b](t) <_ l. The memory coordinating system, in addition to  the recognition neuron inputs, will have three other inputs. First, it will receive the input which indicates that an input  pattern is being presented to the memory block. Second, it will receive an input which requests information from the memory  block. Finally, it will receive a signal which indicates when the recalled information is correct.  At any time t, we associate with each memory location in the memory block a positive real number (between 0 and 1) called the  threshold of recallability of information from that memory location. We denote the threshold of recallability from memory  location b at time t by TR(b)(t). During storage in memory location b, the threshold of recallability is set at an initial  value, TR(b)(tbo). The threshold of recallability from a memory location will increase at a rate dependent on its current  value and it will undergo a decrease whenever two conditions are satisfied: (1) information is currently being recalled from  that memory location, and (2) the information being recalled is the correct information. We may therefore express the  threshold of recallability as follows:  TR(b)(t) = TR(b)(tbo) + G(TR(b)(t), t) - H(tb, Y),  where G(TR(b)(t), t) represents the increase which occurs in time, H(tb , Y) is the decrease which occurs provided the  recalled information is correct and Y indicates if the recalled information is correct or incorrect. The specific functions G  and H are irrelevant for our argument. For recall, at least one association must be of sufficient strength. In particular,  information may be recalled from a memory location if and only if the recognition neuron from that memory location fired at a  frequency greater than or equal to TR(b)(t) at some time during the preceeding t,, seconds. We further assume that if several  memory locations satisfy the above requirement, recall is executed from that memory location from which Rgn[b](t) exceeded  TR(b)(t) by the greatest amount. If the recalled information is correct, the threshold of recallability from that memory  location is decreased, and if the recalled information is incorrect, recall will be executed from the memory location for  which Rgn[b](t) exceeds DR(b)(t)  CORTICAL MEMORY MODEL 57  by the second highest amount, and so forth until either the correct information is obtained or no more information is  available from memory.  We now briefly outline how the above system would respond in a given learning situation. Whenever information is presented to  the memory block, it is permanently stored. At the same time, the threshold of recallability of the stored information is set  at an initial value 1 R(b)(tbo). For our purposes, we will assume the initial threshold of recallability is set at one value  for all stored information. Suppose that at some later time information is requested from storage. The only memory locations  from which information may be recalled are those whose recognition-neurons recently satisfied the requirement Rgn[b](t) >  TR(b)(t). If several memory locations satisfied the above requirement, recall is executed as outlined earlier. If the correct  information is recalled, the threshold of recallability from that memory location is decreased and the probability of a  correct response at a later time is therefore increased. If the correct information is not obtained, no decreases in  recallability are executed. The system therefore tends toward giving the correct response to each request for information.  On the other hand, the system may give the correct response at one time and at a later time no longer give the correct  response. The system may forget the correct response for several reasons: (1) with disuse, the threshold of recallability of  the correct information may become so high that the past association is insufficiently strong, or (2) new information may be  stored in the memory block for which the association to the past request is stronger than for the correct response. In either  case, the correct response may again be relearned if the information presented for association is sufficiently similar to the  correct stored information for the system to again give the correct response.  CONCLUDING REMARKS  This paper has been concerned with a model for cortical memory. A few concluding remarks are in order.  Our neuron is substantially more complex than the McCulloch-Pitts binary neuron. We have introduced coupling coefficients,  local sensitivity values, transmitter substance, and so forth, with a specific implied correspondence. We have also introduced  the memory timing mechanism as a possible device for converting temporal to spatial patterns. We do not know how accurate the  implied correspondence is, nor do we know the true nature of the memory timing mechanism. Only an experimental investigation  can lead to a true understanding of these mechanisms.  In our model, the memory engram for a given instant of time is distributed among many neurons. For such a network, one cannot  make a direct measurement of a memory trace, but instead one would need to measure the response changes of a large number of  neurons. How one would make a direct experimental verification of a memory trace of this type is a problem for which we  suggest no answer.  It should be clear that the information which is stored permanently in the human brain is only a small portion of the input  sensory information. How is the primary information reduced for storage (both mathematically and functionally), and what are  the pre-memory attention processes which select meaningful patterns from the incoming sensory patterns ? Are the selection  mechanisms the same for temporary and permanent memory? Are the information patterns of experience first stored in temporary  memory and then delivered to the permanent memory stores, or do the two systems functioning simultaneously at all times? In  general, what is the organization of the various memory stores in the human brain ?  We have introduced the possibility that information in the human brain is organized first into time intervals which are stored  in individual memory locations and then into spatially distributed cellular changes which correspond to the exact moments when  inputs arrive. Under such an organization, a specific bit of information is not uniquely available but rather, the entire  record for the surrounding interval of time is also recalled. What evidence is there for such an organization ? For how long  an interval can one memory location store input of information ? Is it possible that the memory timing mechanism is a  never-ending wave of activity and that a continuous record of conscious experience is stored ? If so, what mechanism is  available for accessing specific pieces of information?  We note also that information which is organized into time intervals has two essentially different modes of association.  First, two patterns are associated if they have similar firing patterns, and second, two patterns are associated if they are  stored in the same memory location. How does this affect our current understanding of learning and forgetting ?  We have made a careful distinction between the neurons which process the information patterns and those which control the  activity of the network. Changes in the properties of the control neurons can easily influence the process of learning, and in  fact, such changes correspond to another type of memory which has not in the past been considered. For example, suppose the  firing patterns which are used in the vocalization of specific words are stored in different memory locations. Recalling the  patterns from one memory location might result in the utterance of one word, and recalling an appropriate sequence of such  patterns would therefore result in the utterance of a sentence. It would be a simple matter to store the control patterns for  sentences in a special memory system. In this way, large amounts of information can be organized into concepts which are  readily accessible for recall. Is this a genuine possibility ?  These are among the many questions which we have asked ourselves concerning the biology, psychology, and physiology of the  memory block model. At the present time they remain unanswered. We hope that answers to some of them soon will be found and  that other questions will be asked which will direct us toward a better understanding of the structure and functioning of the  human brain.  CORTICAL MEMORY MODEL  59  REFERENCES  ATKINSON, R. C., AND SHIFFRIN, R. M. Human memory: A proposed system and its control processes. In K. W. Spence and J. T.  Spence (Eds.) The psychology of learning and motivation: Advances in research and theory. Vol. 2. New York: Academic Press,  1968. Pp. 89-195. BARON, R. J. A locally-distributed associative memory network. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Cornell  University, June 1968.  BEURLE, R. L. Properties of a mass of cells capable of regenerating pulses. Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of  London, 1956, 240 (B), 55-94.  BUERLE, R. L. Storage and manipulation of information in the brain. Journal of the Institute of Electrical Engineers, 1959, 5,  75-82.  BLOCK, H. D. The perceptron: A model for brain functioning, I. Reviews of Modern Physics, 1962, 34, 123-135.  BLOCK, H. D. Adaptive neural networks as brain models. Proceedings of symposia in applied mathematics. Vol. XV. Experimental  arithmetic, high speed computing, and mathematics. American Mathematical Society, 1963.  ECCLES, J. C. The physiology of nerve cells. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1957. ECCLES, J. C. The physiology of  synapses. New York: Academic Press, 1964.  GREENE, P. H. On looking for neutral networks and "cell assemblies" that underlie behavior: I. A mathematical model. Bulletin  of Mathematical Biophysics, 1962, 24, 247-275. (a) GREENE, P. H. On looking for neural networks and "cell assemblies" that  underlie behavior: II. Neural realization of the mathematical model. Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics, 1962, 24, 395-411.(b)  KABRISKY, M. A proposed model for visual information processing in the human brain. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1966.  MCCULLOCH, W. S., AND PITTS, W. A logical calculus of the ideas immanent in nervous activity. Bulletin of Mathematical  Biophysics, 1943, 5, 115-133.  OCHS, S. Elements of neurphysiology. New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1965.  PENFIELD, W., AND PEROT, P. The brain's record of auditory and visual experience. Brain, 1963, 86, 595-696.  Penfield, W., AND ROBERTS, L. Speech and brain-mechanisms. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1959.  ROSENBLATT, F. Principles of neurodynamics: Perceptrons and the theory of brain mechanisms. Washington, D.C. : Spartan Books,  1962.  ROSENBLATT, F. A model for experiential storage in neural networks. In J. T. Ton and R. H. Wilcox (Eds.), Computer and  information sciences. Washington, D.C. : Spartan Books, 1964. VAN HEERDEN, P. J. A new method of storing and retrieving  information. Applied Optics, 1963, 2, 387-392. (a)  VAN HEERDEN, P. J. Theory of optical information storage in solids. Applied Optics, 1963 2, 393-400. (b)  VON FOERSTER, H. Memory without record. In D. P. Kimble (Ed.), The anatomy of memory. Palo Alto: Science and Behavior Books,  1965.