10.1016/0022-2496(70)90059-3
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 7, 60-96 (1970)  Construction of a Hypothesis Model for Concept Identification'  RACHEL FALMAGNE2  Centre Beige de Pedagogie de la Mathematique, Brussels, Belgium  Received July 29, 1968  The model to be presented assumes that the behavior of the subject in concept identification tasks is determined by his  current hypotheses about the concept; the fundamental learning process is the modification of the strength, or subjective  plausibility, of these hypotheses under positive and negative reinforcement. A major methodological choice in this paper was  to state a model involving (in principle) minimal assumptions and to use it as a framework in which inferences for additional  assumptions could be logically derived from the data. Quantitative predictions were furthermore generated from the initial  weak model. The model was applied in an experiment involving 256 subjects submitted to a 6-dimensional concept identification  task. Latency data supporting the notion of strength are presented. The weak model accurately accounted for detailed  sequential statistics involving the description of the stimuli presented. Empirical constraints for a stronger model were  furthermore established. Examples of specific models meeting these constraints are proposed.  I. INTRODUCTION  Concept identification performance can be viewed as the result of two partially independent processes: A fundamental memory  process by which the trace, if any, of past information is stored, and a decision process which generates the responses from  the data available in memory. While the specific decision process is necessarily related to the type of responses that have to  be given, one can reasonably assume (or hope) the memory process, or some aspects of it, to remain basically the same within  large classes of situations.  Current theories of concept identification (Restle, 1962; Bourne and Restle, 1959; Bower and Trabasso, 1963; Trabasso and  Bower, 1968) conceive of the behavior of  1 The earlier part of this study was conducted under the sponsorship of the Fonds National de la Recherche Scientifique  (Brussels). The research was also supported in part by Grant GB-3187 from the National Science Foundation to Professor R. R.  Bush through the University of Pennsylvania, and by Grant MH-14695 from NIMH to Professor R. C. Calfee.  a I am grateful to Professor R. R. Bush for his encouragements during the early part of the theoretical work. I am indebted to  J. C. Falmagne, whose suggestions helped improve the presentation of this material, and to R. C. Calfee, J. Theios, Marvin  Levine, and the referees for their helpful comments.  60  MODEL FOR CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 61  the subject as being determined by hypotheses about the nature of the concept to be learned or, equivalently, from selective  attention to some characteristics (cues) of the stimuli. This conception has become usual and shall be adopted here. In such  theories, the decision process can be identified with the rule according to which one or several hypotheses are selected on  each trial as a basis for the response; the parameters of the process are the sampling probabilities of the various  hypotheses. In this paper a model will be presented in which, contrary to the mentioned models, a memory process is explicitly  described. The model will associate to each hypothesis a "strength," or subjective plausibility, and will assume that the  fundamental learning process is the modification of the strengths as a consequence of the information provided by the  experimenter. When an explicit choice has to be made by the subject, a decision rule generates the values of the sampling  probabilities of each hypothesis from its current strength.  In the theoretical analysis, an inductive-type strategy (as opposed to the traditional hypothetico-deductive method) will be  adopted. As a starting point, the weakest possible model will be stated, i.e., a model whose level of specificity corresponds  to the current intuitions about the phenomenon and which is nevertheless strong enough to have some predictive value. The  analysis of data will concentrate on testing the model on the one hand and searching, on the other hand, for empirical  constraints for a stronger model. The approach will result in proposing a mathematically specified model consistent with these  data. By this approach we hope to dissociate, in statement and testing, the essential assumptions of the model from the more  technical constraints (usually psychologically irrelevant) that have to be introduced if the model is to be specified  completely.  The model in its present form is developed for concept identification stituations in which the instructions specify the  description of the stimulus set and of the possible concepts. It will be assumed that the basis of the subject's behavior and  learning is the use of hypotheses about the concept, and that the set of hypotheses of the subject is the set of possible  concepts specified by the instructions. When the subject makes hypotheses, he makes only one of them at a time, and this  active hypothesis determines the response. In the weak model, the strength of every hypothesis, either active or not, may be  modified on every trial according to whether the hypothesis is confirmed or not by the outcome of the trial. On the other  hand, when the active hypothesis is confirmed, it has a high probability of being kept for next trial; when it is  disconfirmed, with a high probability it is temporarily dismissed and a new sampling occurs. These two probabilities have not  been postulated to be equal to 1 in the weak model. Whether or not they have to equal unity is one of the points to be  examined in the analysis of data. When resampling occurs, the probability of each hypothesis depends upon its strength.  Finally, the weak model does not make the assumption that the subject always uses a hypothesis to give his response. Whether  such an assumption has to be made or has to be ruled out shall also be determined empirically.  62 FALMAGNE  The introduction of a variable "strength" in addition to the usual sampling probability is suggested by various results. One  of them is the well-known fast drop in latencies immediately after the last error, which has namely been observed by Erickson,  Zajkowski, and Ehmann (1966) and in the experiment to be reported here (Fig. la).  U  4.0  c  T  C 3.0 d  `o  c  , 2.0  5.0  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 1415 m  FiG. 1. a) Mean latency (in seconds) of the mth response after the last error. b) Mean latency (in seconds) of the mth  response in a sequence of consecutive correct responses before last error. Number of observations per point: from 1040 to 130.  It might be remembered that in the Bower-Trabasso model and in Restle's onehypothesis-at-a-time model no opportunities for  resampling occur after the last error. The whole process is stationary from that trial on so that nothing could explain the  decrease of latencies. A similar problem would arise for a somewhat weaker model in which resampling could occur after correct  responses with a low probability. This result stresses the need for a second intervening variable whose values change even  while the selection process is stationary. If the fundamental variable is the strength of hypotheses, it will be natural to  postulate that the latency of a response is inversely related to the strength of the current hypothesis. The decrease in  latencies during a sequence of correct responses generated by a single hypothesis would then result from the increment in the  strength of that hypothesis under positive reinforcement.  Another support for the notion of strength can be found in the evolution of latencies during a sequence of correct responses  prior to last error, that was obtained in the experiment to be reported here (Fig. lb): the mean latency regularly decreases  as the number of immediately preceding correct responses increases. Again this result can be interpreted in the weak model in  terms of an increase in the strength of the hypothesis used, when the same hypothesis is being used over the sequence. The  difference between the two curves can be accounted for by observing that the data after last error are likely to have been  generated by the correct hypothesis, whose strength (except for the first few trials) is greater than the other ones since it  is always reinforced.  MODEL FOR CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 63  Alternative assumptions to account for such data have been suggested by Trabasso and Bower (1968, p. 57). In the theory they  propose, on each trial the subject is assumed to direct his attention towards a subset of the possible hypotheses (called the  focus sample). The response probabilities only depend upon the hypotheses in the focus, which are also the only ones to be  affected by the outcome of the trial. An error initiates resampling of a new focus of fixed size N; after a correct response,  the hypotheses which are incompatible with that response are eliminated from the focus, without replacement. The size of the  focus thus decreases on the average during a sequence of correct responses. Assuming that the latency of a response is  positively related to the number of hypotheses currently in the focus would therefore give a qualitative account of both  curves shown in Fig. 1. It does not, however, account for the difference between them. Especially the initial points of both  curves correspond to trials following an error and hence (theoretically) to a focus sample of size N.  The weak model is stated and discussed in Sec. III. Section II introduces the notation and the theoretical notions to be used.  Section IV presents experimental results and their analysis with respect to the model. The implications of these results for a  stronger model are examined in Sec. V, which also proposes two examples of specific models consistent with these conclusions.  The remainder of this introduction is concerned with the theoretical consequences of an essential characteristic of concept  identification situations: the individuality of stimuli.  Coding of the Experimental Events: Level of Detail  Typically, in concept identification experiments the stimuli are made deliberately distinct. However, it is remarkable that in  the formal statement of the models mentioned above, and in most of the experimental studies they generated, a single stimulus  event is identified. The particular identity of the stimulus presented on a given trial is not taken into account, either in  the axioms or in the subsequent analysis of data.  This could reflect two distinct positions. The first one would be to postulate that all stimuli are functionally identical  with respect to the learning process and, consequently, that the particular sequence of stimuli presented is irrelevant  empirically. This assumption cannot be maintained seriously, as shown by the results of Kurtz and Hovland (1956), Detambel and  Stolurow (1956), Peterson (1962), Anderson and Guthrie (1966), Richter (1965).  In the Bower-Trabasso, Bourne-Restle and Restle models, the identification of a single stimulus event results from a quite  different position. The differential effect of individual stimuli is expressed in the underlying verbal rationale of the  models; however, the formal axioms are stated at an average level, under implicit conditions on the program of presentation o the stimuli. Let us examine this argument for each model specifically.  64 FALMAGNE  In the Bourne-Restle model the subject is assumed to give his response on the basis of a selective attention to some aspects  of the stimuli, or cues. The learning process consists both in the elemination of the irrelevant cues and in the selection of  the relevant ones. It is evident that in such a process the description of the stimuli presented is essential, since the only  possible grounds for eliminating irrelevant cues, as opposed to relevant ones, are the negative reinforcements resulting from  their use. Yet the axioms do not make this process explicit: The model simply assumes that the probability that an irrelevant  cue is eliminated increases linearly from trial to trial.  In the Bower-Trabasso and Restle models, the subject uses one cue (or hypothesis) at a time, keeps using it until it is  disconfirmed and then resamples from the total set of cues. The critical learning event is the selection of the relevant cue,  which can occur only after an error. Bower and Trabasso's axioms assume that the probability of the critical event is a  constant qc, where q is the probability of an error when the relevant cue has not been sampled yet and c is the probability of  the relevant cue when resampling occurs.  Actually, at the individual trial level, a consequence of the theory is that the response is determined knowing the hypothesis  the subject is using and the description of the stimulus presented. Let Ei, denote the event "the stimulus presented on trial  n is such that hypothesis i will generate the same response as the experimenter's concept," and let Ei.. be the complementary  event. Clearly, the probability qi of an error (averaged over n) when hypothesis i is used is equal to the probability of E;  and therefore depends upon the set of stimuli presented. This shows that the qi will be equal only if the probabilities of the  corresponding Pi are the same, which implies specific constraints on the set of stimuli. Consequently, either the probability  q of errors is a mean probability averaged over cues, or, if it is implicitly assumed that all qi are equal, the model is  restricted to situations involving partcular stimulus sets.  More importantly, it should be noticed that the probability of Ei,, and therefore the value of qi, will not, in general, be  constant over trials. Suppose that for all subjects, in the first N trials all red stimuli are triangles and all black stimuli  are circles, and in each of the M remaining trials the probability of being red is z for either shape. Let hypothesis i be  "the red stimuli are called A and the black ones are called B" and let the concept be "triangles are A, circles are B." Then  qi,. will be equal to 0 in the N first trials and equal to 2 for each n > N. This shows that, according to the (informal)  theory, qi,n can be postulated to be constant over trials only for a restricted class of programs of presentation. Hence,  corresponding restrictions apply to the postulate of a constant average q and to the postulate that the critical learning  event has a constant probability qc of occurrence, which is the main feature of the formal model.  From the fact that their axioms do not deal with the relationships between specific hypotheses and specific stimuli, the  models just described thus involve an intrinsic limitation to situations presenting some particular statistical properties. On  the other hand, the decision to average in the axioms of the theory over empirical alternatives  MODEL FOR CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 65  that have been made systematically distinct should be considered only as a temporary stage. In particular, results will be  presented in a later section, that will permit evaluation of the loss of predictive value resulting from such an averaging.  More recent studies either focused explicitly on the individuality of stimuli or indirectly took it into account. Richter  (1965) manipulated sequences of stimuli and used the differential results to test general assumptions of hypothesis models.  Trabasso and Bower (1966) proposed a revision of the sampling-with-replacement rule of the Bower-Trabasso model by including  in the memory the specific information from the immediately preceding trial and by postulating that when resampling occurs  immediately after trial n, only the hypotheses consistent with the joint information of trials n and n - 1 can be sampled. The  theory thereby deals with individual stimuli, since explicit predictions for different sequences of stimuli can be derived  from it. However, the argument developed above for the Bower-Trabasso model did not concern the sampling axiom but the  parameter q, and it is not clear from the statement of the revised model whether the same argument would apply here. Cotton  (1967) presented a model where the parameters of the transition matrix from trial n --- 1 to trial n depend upon the  description of the stimuli of both trials, and showed that it reduces to the Bower-Trabasso model for randomly selected  stimuli. Similarly, the model to be presented here will be (as the reader might have guessed) stated and developed at an  individual level, where the complete description of the stimuli presented is specified.  The scope of this paper is limited to situations in which the concept is unidimensional and the subject is aware of this fact.  The theoretical notions in Sec. II and the model are formulated according to this restriction.  II. PRELIMINARY NOTIONS AND NOTATION  Experimental Events  On each trial, the subject is presented a stimulus S sampled from a set S. Each "dimension" can be identified with a set Di  whose elements are the "values of the dimension." Let D = Dl x - X DN be the cartesian product of the Di and be referred to as  the description space. Each S E S can be identified with a point in D and we can write  S = <d, , .., di ,..., dN)  where di E Di . We call the projection of stimulus S on the ith dimension Si(S), and designate it in psychological terms as  the "description of stimulus S according to dimension i." Let Sn denote the stimulus presented on trial n.  Let R = {R, R') be the set of responses available and Rn be a variable which ranges over R and denotes the response given at  trial n.  480171=-5  66 FALMAGNE  Let T be a set of outcomes, or reinforcing events, and let T,, be a variable which ranges over T and denotes the outcome of  trial n. In the situation concerned here the outcome of a trial consists in telling the subject what the correct response was  so that T = R. The following notations are used frequently in the remainder of this paper:  R,n = Tn means that the response given at trial m is identical to the outcome of trial n, and in particular:  R= T,, means that Ris correct.  Next, let Vi,n.n+, be a random variable which takes on the value  1 if 8i(Sn) = Si(S.+,), i.e. if S,,, and S,,,, are similar with respect to dimension i ; 0 if MS.) # Si(Sn+x).  We then define a variable V.,.+, = Y-i Vi,n,n+, , whose value represents the number of dimensions according to which Sn and  Sn+, are similar. V.,.+, shall be referred to as "similarity between Sn and Sn+,". In principle, if the number of dimensions  in D is N, Vn.n+, ranges from 0 to N (respectively the cases where both stimuli are completely dissimilar and where they are  identical). In usual practice, however, each stimulus will be presented only once, so that Vn,n+, ranges from 0 to N - l .  Theoretical Notions and Events  Saying that the subject makes a hypothesis means that he is tentatively considering that one given dimension is relevant and  that one particular association between the values of that dimension and the responses is correct. Formally, a hypothesis is  thus a function  where  hii = c; o Si : D ----> R, 8i:D,Di  corresponds to the choice of a supposedly relevant dimension,  cii:Di--->. R  is the supposed response assignment, and o denotes the composition of functions.  In the case of binary dimensions, let hi; and hi;, stand for two hypotheses based upon dimension i, with the respective  response assignments being the reverse of each other. The model assumes that at most one hypothesis is used (or active) on any  trial as a basis for the response. When no hypothesis is used, the subject is said to be in state ho . A variable Hn can be  defined such that  _ hi; if hypothesis hi; is active on trial n ;  Hn - [ho if the subject is in state h, on trial n.  MODEL FOR CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 67  Finally, let K,, be a variable such that  1 if resampling occurs between the outcome of K~ = trial n - 1 and the beginning of trial n;  0 if no resampling occurs on trial n.  As an illustration of these notions:  hi;(S,,) is the response attributed by hypothesis hi; to the stimulus presented on trial n.  hi;(SJ = R means that the response attributed by hypothesis hi; to the stimulus presented on trial n is R.  hi;(Sm) = Tn means that the response attributed by hypothesis hi; to the stimulus presented on trial n is correct. This event  shall be referred to by saying that hi; has been confirmed on trial n. If hi;(Sn) # T, hi; shall be said to be disconfirmed  on trial n. It should be noticed that these two notions apply whether hi; is active or not on trial n.  Set-Theoretical Properties of Hypotheses  The two following properties can be derived from the above definition of a hypothesis. They will be used intensively in the  theoretical developments.  Property 1: For every i and every S,  hii(S) # hij.(S).  In other words, whatever the stimulus, two reverse hypotheses lead always to different responses.  Property 2: If 8i(S) = 8i(S'), then, for every j,  hsi(S) = hij(S').  According to this property, if two.stimuli are similar with respect to a given dimension, any hypothesis based upon that  dimension will generate the same response to both stimuli. Similarly, if 8i(S) # 8i(S'), then, for every j,  his(S) # hii(S').  III. THE WEAK MODEL  General Axiom  1. On each trial n, either the subject does not make any hypothesis (H,= ho) or he makes one hypothesis hi; , which is an  element of the set H described in the instructions (H,, = hi7)-  68 FALMAGNE  Strength Axioms  2. On every trial, to each hypothesis hi; is associated a number wn(hi;), which represents its strength.  3. For any n > l , wn(hi;) is only a function of w,(hi;), H,,_1 , Sn_1 , Tl. This function is such that  I wn(hi;) > w._1(hi;) if hi; has been confirmed on trial n - 1; wn(hi;) G wn_1(hi;) if hi; has been disconfirmed on trial n -  1.  Sampling Axioms  4. Sampling occurs on trial n (Kn = 1) with a probability  1 if n - I or if the subject was in state ho on trial n - 1;  a if Rn_1 was given on the basis of a hypothesis and was correct; b if Rn_1 was given on the basis of a hypothesis and was an  error.  5. When no sampling occurs on trial n (i.e. when Kn = 0), then H,' = Hn_1 .  6. On trial 1, the probability of state ho is po . When sampling occurs on trial n(n > 1), the probability of state ho is only  a function of n and of the events H,,_1 , R,_1 , Tn_1 .  7. When sampling occurs on trial n and ho is not sampled, then the probability of any hypothesis hi; is only a function of all  wn(h) (for h E H) and is increasing with respect to wn(hi;).  Response Axioms  8. If Hn = hi; , then response R occurs on trial n with a probability  I 1 if hi;(Sn) = R; 0 if hi;(S.) R.  9. If H,, = ho , then the probability of response R on trial n depends only upon R.-, and T.-1 .  DISCUSSION OF THE MODEL  The assumptions of the model are purposely minimal. Some of them therefore are weaker than intuitive theoretical ideas would  be. In particular the values of a and b are unconstrained; it will, however, be natural to suppose that when a hypothesis is  used, the probability a of resampling if the response is correct is low, and that this probability is high if the hypothesis  leads to an error. Although these interpretations are not used in the formal predictions, they may help to render the model  intuitive.  Similar comments apply to the strength axioms, which permit but do not impose the effect of outcomes on a hypothesis to be  quantitatively different when this hypothesis is  MODEL FOR CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 69  active and when it is not and which, moreover, do not impose the reinforcement to be effective. In any interpretation of the  weak model, one would nevertheless be inclined to suppose that the strength of active hypotheses strictly increases or  decreases, and that the strength of inactive hypotheses is modified to a smaller extent; these assumptions, however, are not  necessary for the predictions to be derived.  If reinforcement is assumed to be effective, then the sampling axioms imply that the probability of each hypothesis when  sampling occurs is related to its sequence of past positive and negative reinforcements. This assumption, in contrast to the  traditional assumption of equiprobability of the hypotheses, has gained credit in recent years, on both intuitive and  empirical grounds. In particular, Levine (1966), using a procedure in which the active hypothesis is identifiable, showed that  a just disconfirmed hypothesis is very unlikely to be resampled. Similarly, Trabasso and Bower (1966) obtained results  critical to the sampling-with-replacement assumption.  The interpretation of the strength as a memory trace can be stated more precisely now. The axioms show that the strengths of  hypotheses are "latent" variables, which intervene in determining the behavior only when resampling occurs, but whose value is  allowed to change on every trial. This is indeed illustrative of a memory process, in which the information is stored  unceasingly, and occasionally retrieved. The fundamental status of the strength axioms as compared to the other ones also  becomes evident: Clearly, the (qualitatively) same memory process can be postulated in a wide range of experimental  situations, each of which requires different types of response axioms, and some of which, where no choice has to be made, do  not entail the intervention of sampling axioms.  A model psychologically close to the weak model is proposed by Trabasso and Bower (1968, p. 226), which postulates that there  is a strength (interpreted as a measure of attention) attached to each hypothesis and that its value varies when the  hypothesis is confirmed or disconfirmed. The amplitude of this variation is a function of the rank of the hypothesis, if the  hypotheses are ordered according to their current strength. One hypothesis is used at a time, until it is disconfirmed. When  resampling occurs, the hypothesis whose strength is the highest is chosen. The sampling axioms of this model are a particular  case of the axioms of the weak model, with (1 - a) and b being equal to 1 and with the sampling rule being a degenerate case  of Axiom 7. This is not true, however, of the strength axioms, which are more general than the ones of the weak model, since  the variation in the strength of a hypothesis is not only conditional to its being active or passive but also to its rank.  IV. THE EXPERIMENT  The set S was composed of 64 stimuli. Stimuli were lines in a rectangle and were described by 6 binary dimensions: direction  (horizontal or vertical), size (small or  70 FALMAGNE  large), number (single line or double line), shape (straight line or curve), position in the rectangle (on the top or on the  bottom), kind of drawing (solid line or dotted line). Examples of the stimuli are presented in Fig. 2. One different stimulus  was presented at each trial on a translucent screen and remained there until the end of the trial. The subject responded by  pushing one of two keys, labelled H and W below the screen. Immediately after the end of his response, the correct response  appeared on the screen for approximately 2 sec. The events recorded on each trial were the description of the stimulus  presented, in terms of the 6 dimensions, the response, the latency of the response, and the outcome.  0  FIG. 2. Examples of stimuli. Real size of the rectangle: approximately 3" x 5".  One hundred and fifty undergraduates in psychology were run, each of them with a different random sequence of stimuli. All the  subjects learned unidimensional concepts. They were distributed in 6 groups of 25, each group learning a concept based on a  different one of the 6 dimensions. Each group included 2 subgroups according to the specific response assignment. The learning  criterion was a sequence of 20 consecutive correct responses, weakened by allowing one error to take place between the 11 th  and the 20th response of this sequence.  The subjects were told in detail the description of the set of stimuli and were shown several examples of the stimuli in the  instructions. They were told that the only  MODEL FOR CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 71  possible concepts would be unidimensional concepts, and were shown a list of the 12 possible classification rules, or  concepts. The instructions stressed the fact that it was useless to search among more complex concepts and that the rule to be  applied would necessarily be one of the 12 ones the subject had been shown.  RESULTS  Each step in this part involves the presentation of an empirical result, the corresponding predictions of the weak model and a  discussion of constraints for a stronger model. The results are summarized in Table 1 at the end of this section. The  derivations shall be stated and discussed verbally whenever possible. Parallel formal developments are given elsewhere  (Falmagne, 1969a) and in the Appendix.  All the results presented concern sequential data prior to last error. If we let e denote the trial number of the last error,  the general form of the basic results predicted by the model is  XXn I Y..n.-1),  for n G e,  where Xn is an event occuring on trial n, Yn,n_1 is a sequence of events occuring on trials n and n - 1, and p(X. I Yn,n-1) is  the probability of Xn given Yn,n-1. However, for obvious reasons, the pieces of data are pooled over trials prior to last  error. The analysis will thus be concerned with theoretical quantities of the form  -(X. I Y_ i<n<eP(Xn, Yn,n-1) ~',  Y1 <n <e p(Yn,n-1)  (where Y is the usual summation symbol).  These quantities have been estimated by the proportion  Nl<n<e (Xiz, Yn,n-1)  r(Xn I Yn.n-1) -  N1<n<e (Yn,n-1)  where N1<n<e (Yn.n-1) is the number of couples of trials (n, n - 1) prior to last error in which Yn,n-1 occurred, and N1<n<e  (Xn , Yn.n-1) is the number of couples, among these, in which Xn occurred.  1. Frequency of Reproduction of the Preceding Outcome as a Function of the Similarity Between Stimuli  This first result is presented as an introduction for the next ones. It concerns the probability (before last error) of giving  at trial n a response identical to the outcome of  72 FALMAGNE  trial n - 1, as a function of Vn.n_I , i.e. of the number of aspects common to the stimuli presented on trials n and n - 1.  Figure 3 shows that -r(Rn = Tn_1 I V,,,,-, = k) regularly increases with k. A similar result has been reported by Shaffer and  Remple (1966) and Cotton and Shanab (1968) in pseudo-concept identification tasks. This result will not be treated  theoretically here. It is compatible with several theories. In the present context, its meaning will become clear after the  results presented in Secs. 2 and 3, of which it is the average.  70  m c  w .50 Y  II '40 40 c H  x.30 c  CK 20  60  4 5  FIG. 3. Proportion of responses reproducing the preceding outcome, as a function of the similarity between both stimuli.  2. The Consistency Curve After a Correct Response  If the data involved in Fig. 3 are split by making them conditional to the correctness of the response on trial n - 1, it  appears (Fig. 4) that ir(R,, = Tn_I J R, , V.",_, == k) strongly increases with the similarity between S,, and Sn_I (i.e.,  V,~_1) when R,I was correct (Fig. 4a) but remains approximately constant after an error (Fig. 4b).  This result, in its qualitative features and in several quantitative respects makes theoretical sense in terms of the weak  model, as will be shown in Theorems 1 to 8. Its general meaning can be grasped intuitively if it is remembered that, as  pointed out in the discussion of the model, when the subject makes a correct response on the basis of a hypothesis hi; on  trial n - 1, most of the time he keeps the same hypothesis for next trial. In this case, if Vi,,,-, = 1, Property 2 shows that  Rn will be the same as R,z_1 (and hence the same as Tn_I). When Vn.n_I increases, there is an increasing probability that the  hypothesis made on trial n - 1, if any, is based upon a dimension i for which Vi,.,.-, = 1, which explains Curve 4a. The slope  of this curve thus mainly  MODEL FOR CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 73  so  FIG. 4. Proportion of responses reproducing the preceding outcome, as a function of the similarity between both stimuli; a)  after a correct response (Consistency curve); b) after an error. The numbers beside the points represent the number of  observations.  results from cases where the same hypothesis has been used on trials n - 1 and n, after confirmation on trial n - 1. For this  reason it is referred to as "the consistency curve." When, on the other hand, Rn_I was an error, most of the time resampling  occurs. This accounts for the difference in slope between both curves.  We now turn to a more precise statement of the predictions of the weak model. The consistency curve shall be discussed first.  Section 3 will next examine Curve 4b.  THEOREM 1. For any n < e, pk.n = p(Rn = T~_1 I Rn 1 = Tn_I , Vn,n_I = k) is a strictly increasing linear function of k.  This result can be best understood by examining separately the various cases upon which it is based. Figure 5 presents the  possible sequences of events from trial n - 1 to trial n (and their conditional probabilities given that Rn_1 was correct).  The following discussion will show that, given any of these paths, the conditional probability of reproducing the preceding  outcome (or, equivalently, the preceding response) is a linear function of Vn,n_1 .  In the first case, corresponding to the extreme left branch in Fig. 5, the correct response on trial n - 1 was given on the  basis of a hypothesis; no resampling occurred, so that the same hypothesis is used on trial n. Let xnl denote this sequence of  events and let oz,,, be the conditional probability p(R. = Tn_1 I Rn_1 = Tn_I , Vn,n_1 = k, x).  74 FALMAGNE Hn-Ixho  Hn-I=ho I Kn=1  Hn ho Hri ho Hnpho Hn=ho  2 ~3 Qa Q5  k,n / \k,n / \k,n / `k Rn=Tn-i Rn=Tn_t Rn=Tn-i Rn=Tn-i  Fio. 5. Possible paths from trials n - l to n, given that Ri was correct and that Vn,1 = k. The symbols pn and qn stand  for the probability of being in state ho on trial n after resampling occurred when the preceding response was correct and  when, respectively, a hypothesis had been made on trial n - 1, and the state on trial n - 1 was h,, .  Since ak.n is the probability of reproducing on trial n the response from trial n - 1 given that the same hypothesis is used  on both trials, Property 2 shows that, if Vn,1 = 0, i.e. if Sand Sn_1 are different according to every dimension, then,  whatever the common hypothesis is, it cannot lead to the same response on both trials. Consequently, a,', = 0. Symmetrically,  as,,, = 1.3 In general, Property 2 implies that, given the common hypothesis (call it h2;), the conditional probability of  generating the same response to both stimuli is either 1 or 0 according to whether Vi ,n,n_1 is equal to 1 or to 0. When  Vn,n_1 = k, the probability for any dimension to be among the ones for which V2,1 = 1 is equal to k/6. It follows that  1 k ak,n = 6  The detailed computation of oz'  k, is covered by the proof of Lemma 2 in the Appendix. Lemmas 3, 4 and 5 are respectively concerned with ak,, ak.n and both  ak,n and ak ,t . Their proof and the proof of Theorem 1 can be found in Falmagne (1969a).  As shown in Fig. 5, a"is the probability of repeating the preceding response when a hypothesis had been made on trial n - 1,  resampling occurred, and again a hypothesis is made on trial n (let this sequence of events be denoted x). This case is more  complex than the former one. (i) After resampling, the same hypothesis may be used again, in which case the reasoning  developed for ak.n can be applied directly. (ii) The  s The theory in this paper is stated for the 6-dimensional case. Generalization to the N-dimensional case can be done by  judicious substitution of N for 6 throughout the paper.  MODEL FOR CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 75  hypothesis sampled on trial n is the reverse of the one used on trial n - 1 (same dimension, say dimension i, reverse response  assignment). In this case, it is easy to see from Properties 1 and 2 that, in order for both responses to be identical, both  stimuli have to be different according to dimension i. Therefore, if V,_1 = k, a reasoning symmetrical to the previous one  shows that the probability of repeating the preceding response is equal to (1 - k/6). (iii) The hypothesis sampled on trial n  is based on another dimension than the one used on trial n - 1, so that, with probability I it has been confirmed on trial n  --- 1 (without being active) and (iv) with probability i it had been disconfirmed on trial n - 1. Clearly, for the hypotheses  that have been confirmed on trial n- 1 (i.e., hypotheses that led to a response identical to the outcome of that trial), the  probability of generating a response identical to the preceding outcome is equal to k/6, while it is equal to (1 - k/6), for  the just disconfirmed hypotheses. In all the cases of which ak,n is the average, the probability of repeating the preceding  outcome is thus equal either to k/6 or to (1 - k/6). Since the probabilities of these cases are independent of k, ak,n is a  linear function of k.  Next, ak.n is the probability of repeating the preceding outcome when the response on trial n - 1 had not been given on the  basis of a hypothesis, and a hypothesis is made on trial n (sequence xn4). This case thus only involves hypotheses that were  not active on trial n - 1, so that it reduces to cases (iii) and (iv) of the computation of ak,n .  Finally, az,n and ak2, are conditional probabilities ofrepeating the preceding outcome when the subject does not make any  hypothesis and when, respectively, he did (sequence xn3) and he did not (xn5) make a hypothesis on trial n - 1. Both  probabilities are, by Axiom 9, independent of k. We thus have shown that all the a'n (m = 1,..., 5) are linear functions of k.  On the other hand, it can be checked from the axioms that the probability of any xnn' is independent of k. Since  5  Pk,n = Y, p(x..m I R.-1 = Tn-1) -Mk., n1=1  it follows that Pk,1, is a linear function of k. The fact that it is strictly increasing can be verified from the expanded  formula of Pk,n . Schematically,  Pk,n = 6 [(1 - a) Ant + aA 2 + An3] + (1 6) [aA, -_ An5] + r[Ans], (1)  where r = p(Rn = Tn_1 I Hn = ho , Ra_1 = T~_1), the Anz (z = 1,..., 6) are independent of k, and the sum of the quantities  into brackets is 1.  In the computation of  .n and ak,,, , the term in k/6 is weighted by the probabilities of just confirmed hypotheses, while  (1 - k/6) is weighted by the probabilities of just disconfirmed hypotheses. This is reflected in (1): Ant and An4 on the one  hand, An3 and An5 on the other, are comparable quantities, involving the probabilities of hypo-  76 FALMAGNE  theses which have the same history except for their preceding reinforcement (respectively positive and negative), so that, by  virtue of the strength axioms,  Ant > An4 and Ana ~> Any.  As k/6 is furthermore weighted by (1 - a)Anl, whose value is expected to be high if we remember that (1 - a) is the  probability of not resampling after a correct response, it is obvious that pk,n rapidly increases.  The linearity Of Nn is a parameter-free result. It has been obtained from the most general form of the equation Of pk,,, , in  which the strength axioms have not been used and no assumption has been made about the hypothesis sampling rule. This is also  true for the positive slope of pk,n , except for very unnatural values of the parameters: pk,n would not be increasing if a,  the probability of resampling after a correct response, was equal to 1, and/or if the strength of a just disconfirmed  hypothesis was greater than the strength of a confirmed hypothesis. The same remarks hold for next theorem, which expresses  the corresponding result for the data pooled over trials.  THEOREM 2. Irk = ~r(Rn = Tn_1 Rn_1 = Tn-i , Un.n-i = k) is a strictly increasing linear function of k.  This is proved in the appendix by showing that ak is a weighted average of pk,n across n, for n < e. Theorem 2 is a direct  prediction of the consistency curve. It is undoubtedly verified by the data shown in Fig. 4a. Quantitative features of p,,,  and 7r, are examined in the next few theorems.  THEOREM 3. p3,n = z for any n < e.  This can be seen by referring back to (1). If it is admitted (which seems reasonable) that  p(R. = Tn-i I Hn = ho, Rn-i = Tn-i) = z>  i.e., that no response bias exists towards the preceding reinforcement when the subject does not make any hypothesis, then  p3,n only involves terms with a common factor and summing up to 1.  Again, this is a parameter-free prediction. Since it holds for any trial n such that n < e, it implies:  THEOREM 4. 7r, - 2 '  Figure 4 shows that Tr3 is equal to .47(X2 = 1.13, p > .25). Data thus support the prediction and establish at the same time  the legitimacy of the additional assumption that was made.  MODEL FOR CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 77  Theorem 4 permits a strong test of the model, since it can be written to hold for situations involving any number N of  dimensions. If N is even, the model predicts that 7TN,2 = 2. If N is odd, the prediction concerns the value interpolated  between 7T(,-,),, and 7T(N11) ,2 . Also, an immediate consequence of Theorems 2 and 4 together is that, for any N and for k =  0, 1,..., N,  THEOREM 5. po,n = 0 if and only if a = 0, p(H. = ho J R._1 = Tn-1) = 0, and p(Hn-1 = ho I Rn.-1 = Tn-1) = 0.  The explicit equation for po,n is:  po,n = ap(Hn._1 # ho I Rn.-1 = T_1) p(H. # ho I Kn. = 1, Hn.-1 ho, R.-1 = Tn-,)Fn p(Hn-1 = ho Rn-1 = T1) p(H. # ho I Kn  = 1, Hn-1 = ho, R1 = T,,-,)G. + 2 p(H. = ho Rn-1 = Tn-i), (2)  where Fn and Gn are bound to be nonzero. Obviously, the conditions stated in Theorem 5 are necessary and sufficient for the  three terms of (2) to cancel.  If it is assumed that the subject always makes a hypothesis, i.e., that there is no extra state beside the 12 hypotheses, then  both p(Hn = ho I R,-, = T,-,) and p(H,,-1 - ho I Rn-1 = T1) are zero, and  po,n =  The order of magnitude of a can then be inferred from po,after examining the range of variation of Fn . Explicitly,  remembering that hi; denotes the hypothesis based on dimension i and response assignment j,  Fn = YYp(H..=hi, I Hn:~L ho, Kn=1, Hn-1-hi,,, hi,(S.-1) # Tn-1, Rn-1=T,,-1)  x p(Hn-1 = h;;, I Hn-1 :?- h., R,,-1 = Tn-1)  + 2 E Y [p(Hn =hii I Hn # ho, Kn = 1, Hn-1 # hia, hij(S.-1) # 7,n-1, R.-1 = L-1)  X I I p(Hn-1 = h.r I Hn-1 ~ ho , Rn-1 = Tn-1)]  vn r  where m :~'- i.  Suppose that the probabilities of all hypotheses are the same on every trial (and hence are unaffected by the outcomes). Then,  Fn 12 1 120 72 1  144 + 2 144 44 2  78 FALMAGNE  In the general case where the strength and therefore the probability of just disconfirmed hypotheses decreases, Fwill be  smaller than 1, since it concerns hypotheses hi; for which hi;(S,,_1) :~L T1 . This, together with (3), shows that, under  the assumption that the subject always makes a hypothesis,  a > 2p0,  for any n G e.  THEOREM 6. 'ro ---- 0 if a = 0 and if the probability of ho is zero for any trial n G e.  This theorem is a direct consequence of the previous one. It is important in the framework of the present inductive-type  approach, since it permits, using the observed value 4o , to examine the adequacy of specific axioms about a and about the  probability of ho .  Figure 4 shows that the value of 40 is near .20, which implies that either a is nonzero, or there is an extra state ho beside  the 12 hypotheses, or both. The present result does not enable us to chose among these interpretations, which will be examined  later. One comment can nevertheless be made: If the only factor responsible for the value of iro is the fact that a is  nonzero, then, as shown in the discussion of Theorem 5, the value of fro is an estimate of a. More precisely, a > 2po, for  every n < e. Consequently,  a > 2 max po,,,  for n G e. Since Tro is a weighted average of po,n for n G e,  -o < maxpo,n  Therefore, under the assumption that the probability of ho is zero,  a > 27ro .  The probability of resampling after a correct response made on the basis of a hypothesis would then be greater than .38. This  value seems much too high intuitively, and one might wonder how the subject could ever, in that case, attain an (almost)  perfect performance. Hence, we leave temporarily the three interpretations open, with a strong skepticism against the first  one. Sections 4 and 5 will examine respectively the assumption of a nonzero value of a and of the existence of an extra state.  This extra state will be interpreted as a "passive state," where the subject does not make any hypothesis at all and simply  accumulates information in memory. An alternative interpretation would be that the subject sometimes makes hypotheses other  than the "official" ones, but this would be outside the framework of the weak model and moreover seems very unlikely from the  detailed instructions and from the subjects' reports.  MODEL FOR CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION  79  3. The Consistency Curve After an Error  Both the shape of Curve 4b and its slope can be predicted by derivations parallel to the ones concerned with pk,n . A tree  identical to Fig. 5 can be established for the case when the response on trial n - 1 was an error, with the appropriate  conditional probabilities being attached to each event (in particular with b being substituted for a) and with ak*,,. .,  a*', being substituted for ax,", ,..., a5 .  THEOREM 7. For any n < e, ph*. = p(Rn = T1 I R~-1 # T1 , V,,,,,-, = h) is a linear function of k.  Similar to pk,n , p*.n can be written as a conditional expectation of the form  5  / ,n ,kni  ,n - ~, plxn Rn-1 Tn-1) ak,n , ni=1  where the xn"I are the sequences of events represented in Fig. 5 and where p(xnm I Rn_1 # T.-j) is independent of k for any n  and m.  It may be useful to compare the following discussion with the corresponding steps of the discussion of Theorem 1. If the same  hypothesis hi; is used on trials n - 1 and n (xn1) and if Vi.n,n-1 = 1, hypothesis hi; will generate the same response on  trial n as on trial n - l , i.e., the response different from Tn-1 . Since the probability that Vi,n.n-1 = 1 when Vn,a-1 = k  is k/6 for every dimension i, the probability of giving at trial n a response different from Too-, increases linearly with k;  hence the probability ak*. ., of giving a response identical to Tn-1 is equal to (1 - k/6).  If resampling occurs on trial n and if a hypothesis hi; is sampled (x.1 or X,,4) the reasoning developed in the discussion of  Theorem 1 can be applied: If hi; has been confirmed (either while being active or not) on trial n - 1, i.e. if hi;(S,-1) =  Tn-1 , then hi; will generate on trial n a response identical to Tn-1 with a probability k/6 if Vn.n-1 = k. If hi; has been  disconfirmed on trial n - 1, the corresponding probability is (1 - k/6). It follows from this that both ak,n and a*,,' are  linear functions of k. Finally, if no hypothesis is made on trial n, the probability (either ak,n or ak* n) of repeating the  preceding outcome is independent of k. Hence, p*,n is a linear function of k.  The slope of pl*,,is not, as it was the case for Pk.n , determined nonparametrically. Schematically,  = 6 [bDn2 + Dn3] + ~1 - 6) [(I - b) Dnl + bDn4 + Dn5] + r*[Dnb], (5)  where r* = p(R, = Tn-1 I Hn = ho , Rn-1 # Tn_1), where Dnz(z = 1,..., 6) are independent of k and where the sum of the  quantities in brackets is 1.  80 FALMAGNE  Again, Dn2 and Dn4 on the one hand, Dn3 and Dn5 on the other, are comparable quantities for which the strength axioms yield  Dn2 > Dn4 and Drz3 > Dn5. (6)  But, contrary to the corresponding case for pk.n , if no resampling occurs, the probability of repeating the preceding outcome  has been shown to be a decreasing function of k [this case is covered by the term (1 - b) Dni in (5)].  The slope of p*,, thus depends on the balance between the value of (1 - b) and the value of the differences in (6). If the  efficacy of reinforcement upon the strength of hypotheses is high as compared to (1 - b), the differences in (6) are large and  pk n increases with k. This would be the case in particular if (1 - b) was zero, that is if the subject always resampled after  an error. Conversely, if the reinforcement has no effect at all on the strength and hence on the probabilities of hypotheses,  equality holds in (6) and, if (l - b) is nonzero, ph n will decrease.  A direct consequence of Theorem 7 is:  THEOREM S. rrk* = rr(R,, = Tn_1 Rn_1 Tn_1, Vn.n-1 = k) is a linear function of k.  The slope of 7Tk* is subject to the same constraints as the slope of p*, ,. The fact that 'hk* in Fig. 4b does not decrease  permits a stronger model to assume without contradiction that b = 1, i.e., that the subject always resamples after an error.  Although no quantitative discussion on this point is possible in the weak model, p*. n could be used for estimation purposes  in a specific model.  Another aspect of Curve 4b is interesting theoretically. In the same way as it was shown for pk,n , an immediate consequence  of (5), under the assumption that  p(R. = Tn-, I H= ho , Rn-, 7~: T4) 12,  would be that pa*,n = z, which implies that the curve representing -i~k* should cross the .50 line at the point k -- 3. Figure  4b shows, however, that -irk* is consistently above .50. Although the difference between 43* and .50 is not significant, one  might want, considering that the whole curve is above .50, to take this result into account in a specific model. In that case,  the only interpretation of the observed difference in the framework of the weak model is that  p(R. = Tn-4 I FIn = ho , Rn-1 # Tn-J > 12  since both k/6 and (1 - k/6) are bound to be equal to .50 when k = 3. This is intuitively plausible if the passive state is  interpreted as a "guessing state": It means that the probability, when the subject is in the passive state, to repeat a  response that proved to be erroneous at the trial just before, is less than .50. Some symmetry concerns might  MODEL FOR CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION  81  suggest that there also could be a bias towards repeating, in the passive state, a just reinforced response. The value of the  point k = 3 in Curve 4a should then be higher than .50, which is not the case. The bias thus seems to be specifically related  to errors.  4. The Passive State, Its Evolution  The next natural step is now to investigate whether the probability of the inferred passive state remains constant over trials  or changes, and in what way. The existence of the passive state has been asserted on two grounds: the slope of the consistency  curve (or, alternatively, the value of ho), and the response bias in TTk*. Its evolution will now be inferred from the  evolution of these two statistics over trials.  Figure 6 presents the consistency curves respectively for the first and second half of the vincentized precriterion data. Let  41 and -hk2 denote these two curves. It ought first to be noticed that the linearity predicted by the weak model is verified  in both curves. The slope of 4k2 is weaker than the slope of Trkl and correspondingly,  ,h02 > 'ho1. (7)  Following Theorem 6, the value of 7ro has been shown to be a consequence of either the value of a or the existence of a  passive state. Therefore, (7) implies both the existence of the passive state and an increase in its mean probability over  trials, since a is bound to be constant in the weak model.  .a0  70  60  s .50  30  20  0  k  3  Fic. 6. Proportion of responses repeating the preceding outcome, when the preceding response was correct, as a function of the  similarity between both stimuli, respectively, for the first and second half of the precriterion performance. The numbers  beside the points represent the number of observations.  480171 1 -6  82 FALMAGNE  Figure 7 shows irk* for the first and second half of the vincentized precriterion data (respectively it*1 and irk 2). It  appears that irk*' is lower than ir*2. Since the high value of irk* had to be attributed to a response bias in the passive  state, then, if we assume this bias to be constant, the difference between both curves implies that the mean probability of  the passive state increases over trials.4 Possible axioms yielding such an increment are discussed in Sec. V.  .80  70  60  N Y .50  .40  ~. Y 30  20  ____2nd half( j* )  0  Proportion of responses reproducing the preceding outcome when the preceding response was an error, as a function of  similarity between both stimuli, respectively, for the first and second half of the precriterion data.  Fic. 7.  5. The Value of a  We examine now the adequacy of the assumption that a is nonzero, which was inferred from the value of irfl .  Let be a variable which takes on values from 0 to 5 according to the number of irrelevant aspects in common between S,, and  S,_1 . Let then V.,,_1 be a variable such that  1 if S. and Sh_1 are similar with respect to the relevant dimension; [0 if S,, and Sn_1 are different with respect to the  relevant dimension.  4 Alternatively, the response bias could be assumed to increase over trials. This would be, however, an uneconomical  assumption since the first interpretation is sufficient to account for both the results of Figs. 6 and 7.  MODEL FOR CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 83  (Obviously,  Vn,m-1 + Vn,n-1 = V.,1).  The intuitive line of argument about empirical determination of the value of a is as follows. Let h,r denote the correct  hypothesis and h,,its reverse. The only cases in which V.".,-, can affect the probabilities of responses on trial n are  those in which either h.rc or h,,- is active on that trial. Under the assumption that a is zero, h,, cannot have been sampled  before last error, since no subsequent error could have occurred; if a = 0, the probabilities of responses on trial n are thus  affected by V.",n_l only when h,,is sampled on trial n. Obviously, this case is infrequent, since the probability of h,,, is  small as a result of its successive disconfirmations. If a = 0, the influence of Vn,n-1 on the response on trial n should thus  be (almost) nonexistent. Temporarily omitting the "almost" for clarity, a particular consequence of this is that Vn,n_1 should  not contribute to the consistency curve: If, instead of conditioning  p(R. = Tn-1 I Rn-1 = T.-I)  with respect to V.,.-l , we condition it with respect to V,,1 and establish two curves in which respectively V,;,n-1 = 0 and  Vn,n-l = 1, these two curves should be (almost) identical under the assumption that a = 0. Let  and  Pk',0,n = p(R. = Tn-1 I Rn-1 = T.-1 = = 0)  , Vn,n-1 k', V.`,.-1   pk',l,n = p(R. = Tn-1 I Rn-1 = Tn-1 - = 1).  , Vn,n-1 V, V.`,.-1   We now examine the above prediction more closely.  Since h,,was disconfirmed on trial n - 1, it will lead on trial n to a response different from T1 if Vn,1 -= 1. If  Vn,n-l --- 0, then h will generate on trial n a response different from the one it generated on trial n - 1; i.e., R,n will  be identical to T1 . Under the assumption that a = 0, the difference between pkO,n and pk1,n results, as pointed out,  from cases where h,,, has been sampled on trial n: consequently, the probability of giving on trial n a response identical to  Tn_1 should be greater if V.,n_1 = 0 than if V:,.-1 - 1. That is, pko.n should be greater than pk1,. This difference is  explicated in the next theorem (given here without proof).  THEOREM 9. If a = 0, then, for any n > e,  pk',0,n - pk',l,n = p(H. = h,,, Rn-1 = T.-1 , Hn h0 H.-1 = h0)  p(H1 = ho Rn-1 = T1) p(H. ho I H1 = ho , R1 = T1). (8)  Since pk',O,n > pkl,n for any n > e, Theorem 9 implies:  84 FALMAGNE  THEOREM 10. If a = 0, then 7Tu',o > 7Tx'.I -  Figure 8 shows that, in contradiction with the assumption, 4,,., is consistently higher than except for the points for which  k' --- 0, which are based upon a small number of observations. The difference between both curves is big, of the same order of  magnitude as the difference in ordinate of consecutive points in either curve. In the framework of the weak model, this result  implies that the correct hypothesis h, has been sampled on trials prior to last error, which is sufficient to reject the  hypothesis that a = 0. The stronger models to be proposed in the next section will be formulated according to that conclusion.  -80r  .70  .60  40  c  O  G .30  20  23  22  -L 0  L  2 3  k'  5  FIG. 8. Proportion of responses reproducing the preceding outcome when the preceding response was correct, as a function of  V;,,1 and V;;,, . The numbers beside the points represent the number of observations.  The assumption that no resampling occurred after correct responses has been made without being checked directly, in the  Bower-Trabasso and Restle models. These models are particular cases of the weak model with the strength of hypotheses  remaining constant, so that they are invalidated by the present result. Direct checks of this assumption have been performed,  in different situations, by Levine (1966) and Suppes and Schlag-Rey (1965). Levine's situation involved four blank trials  (without outcome) after each outcome trial. The data of the blank trials permitted identification of the hypothesis made, and  this information was used to study the effect of outcomes on the active hypothesis. Levine found that an active hypothesis,  when confirmed, is re-used on the next trial in 95 % of the cases, which would mean, in terms of the weak model,  MODEL FOR CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 85  that a is approximately equal to .05. Levine interpreted this value as a random deviation from a true value zero, while we  would interpret it by saying that a was, maybe, particularly small in that situation where the rate at which the subject had  to process information was low. Suppes and Schlag-Rey used a situation in which the subjects, on each trial, had to classify  exhaustively the set of stimuli, and the outcome was the indication of the correct class for one stimulus. Three different  procedures were used. The subjects modified their classification while it was compatible with the outcome, in a proportion  varying from .15 to .60 according to the procedure. In this situation, a would thus be large. Confrontation of these results  and of the present one shows that a model which is meant to have a certain level of generality must permit a to take on values  different from zero.  V. DISCUSSION  1. Summary of the Results and Inferred Model  Table 1 summarizes the predictions of the weak model for every piece of data presented, and the quantitative features of these  data from which stronger assumptions could be inferred. In this discussion the results are referred to by the corresponding  number in Table 1, Col. 2.  The predictions of the weak model concerned primarily the linearity of all consistency curves examined here and, in some  cases, the sign of their slope. These predictions were independent of the values of the parameters. All of them were clearly  verified.  The search for empirical constraints focused on two questions: the value of a and the existence, behavioral consequences and  evolution of the passive state. After Result 1 showed that either the probability of the passive state or the value of a were  different from zero, Result 7 confirmed the latter hypothesis, while Results 4 and 5 confirmed the hypothesis of existence of  a passive state, since their only possible interpretation was in terms of this hypothesis. Result 4 revealed a response bias,  which could only be assumed to occur in the passive state. Result 5 showed that the mean probability of the passive state  increases over trials. The remainder of this section will be a discussion of some problems or choices related to these results.  The first point concerns Axiom 9, according to which the probability of the various responses when the subject is in the  passive state does not depend upon the stimulus presented, and hence, upon the similarity between Sand S,,-,. This  assumption, which has been introduced on intuitive grounds, may seem stronger than what is wanted in a weak model. It  requires, moreover, a posteriori critical attention in the light of Result 4: The response bias in the passive state towards  the preceding reinforcement implies that the behavior in the passive state is affected by at least a one-trial memory. It  seems then coherent to admit, at least tentatively, that this memory involves the  Data Result Assumptions  number   Fig. 4a 1 weak model  Fig. 4a 2 weak model  Fig. 4a 3 weak model;   p =  Fig. 4b 4 weak model  Fig. 6 5 weak model  Fig. 7 6 (i) weak model   (ii) response bias inferred   from Result 4 is   constant over trials  Fig. 8 7 weak model  TABLE I Summary of Resul  Predictions  general equation for po, Pk.n is a strictly increasing linear function of k. So is 'Tk  ns = .50 Equivalently, 'Tk -i "(s-k) = 1  pk is a linear function of k. So is ~k*  Pk',o,. and Pk',k.n  are strictly increasing linear functions of k'. So are nk',and 7rk'.l  s   00    (ON  Additional     empirical -~ Theoretical Arbitrary   constraints assumptions interpretations   40 ~ 0 either a -A 0, or there extra state is   is an extra state or both a passive state     m    r    a  ,43* > .50 response bias in  z  the passive state  th  there is a passive state  irua > A mean probability this increment  of the passive state takes place only  ~k a > '9k I increases over trials after errors  ';k'.1 > '9k',a =A 0  p = p(R= T.-i I H= ho , Ri = T.-I)  MODEL FOR CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 87  preceding stimulus, and that the probabilities of response might depend upon Vn,1 . The altered Axiom 9 would then assert  that if Hn = h,, Rn depends upon Sn, S._1 , Rn-1 , Tn-1 .  Such a modification would affect the status of Results 2 and 3. The linearity of the consistency curve and the fact that -rs  -- .50, which were predictions of the original weak model, would now be empirical grounds for inferring, respectively, that  p(Rn = Tn-1 I Hn - ho , R.-1 = Tn-1 , V,,,.-1)  either is a linear function of Vn,n-1 or is constant, and that its value when Vn,n-1 = 3 is .50.5  Up to this point, the introduction of the altered axiom 9 amounts essentially to modifications at the logical level of the  approach but has little practical consequence. The only result whose interpretation will be directly affected is Result 7,  namely the difference between hbo and -ir,,,1 . In the original model, the necessary interpretation of this result was to  assume that a was nonzero. However, if it is asserted that the similarity between Sn and Sn-1 per se can affect the  probability of repeating the preceding outcome in the passive state, then the difference between "4%0 and i^7k',l can be  (partially) explained by a plain effect of the similarity between stimuli in the passive state. (Indeed, in every couple of  points corresponding to a given value of V.".-1 , the point belonging to curve 7Tk-,1 represents observations for which  V,,,,-, was 1 unit larger than for the point belonging to 77k-,o.) Nevertheless, it is important to realize that this effect  is not sufficient to explain the value of the difference between both curves, which is of the same order of magnitude as the  difference between two consecutive points in either curve. Hence, the suggested modification of Axiom 9 affects the  interpretation of Result 7 to a quantitative extent only.  The second point to be discussed here is how to characterize the modifications in probability of the passive state. A possible  axiom in agreement with Result 5 would be that the probability of the passive state increases (linearly, for example) from  trial to trial. This axiom is, however, untenable empirically in the present situation, since it means that the subject will  asymptotically get absorbed into the passive state, which renders perfect learning impossible. An alternative axiom is that  the probability of the passive state increases only after an error. Conjoint application of this axiom and of the axioms of  the weak model predict that during the presolution phase the probability of the passive state increases, but that it remains  almost constant once the correct hypothesis is being used repeatedly, since very few errors (caused by incidental resampling)  occur. Of course, in such a process the probability of the passive state also converges asymptotically to 1, but this  asymptote would be reached late, since few  5 According to the model, p(R= Tn_1 I R1 = T.-1, , H is a linear function of when the subject is making a hypothesis at  trial n, and its value in that case is .50 when Vn,~_1 = 3. Consequently, Results 2 and 3 imply that this be also the case  when the subject is in the passive state.  88 FALMAGNE  errors occur after the solution; on the other hand it is obvious that, by allowing the task to last indefinitely, the subject  will eventually fall asleep.  The plausibility of this axiom is furthermore supported by results of Byers (1965) in a situation in which the subject, beside  the anticipative response, had to indicate whether the response was given "at random" or on the basis of a hypothesis. Byers  reports that the tendency to offer a hypothesis decreases after errors, as if errors represented a punishment of this behavior.  On the other hand, one might want the probability of the passive state to be related either directly or not to the degree of  confidence of the subject about the correctness of his hypothesis. For this reason, the models to be presented in the next  section will assume that this probability decreases after a correct response generated by a hypothesis. The solution phase  would thus be characterized by the strength of the correct hypothesis increasing rapidly as it is being used, and the  probability of the passive state decreasing, so that when resampling occurs the correct hypothesis is almost always sampled  again.  2. Arbitrary Choices, Mathematical Constraints and Examples of Specific Models  The analysis of data left unanswered several questions in relation to the specification of a strong model. One of them  concerns the value of b. Does the subject always resample after an error generated by a hypothesis ? The results of Levine  (1966) indicate that b would be equal (or very close) to 1. But it appeared already, in our discussion of the value of a, that  Levine's results were not always transferable to the present situation. The value of b has not been investigated here because  no powerful relevant statistic, of the type used to investigate the value of a, has been thought of. We think, however, that  this is a matter of imagination rather than a limitation of the method. The only inference on this point, on the grounds of  the present results, was that b could be assumed to be equal to 1, since curve 4b did not decrease.  Other open questions are the ones which deal with the strength axioms, in particular the effect of outcomes on hypotheses that  are not active. Most predictions calculated were independent of the strength axioms so that no inference about the  specification of these axioms could be made. Most probably, relevant statistics for such a specification cannot be easily  established in the present experimental situation. Some more direct exploration of the problem could be provided by different  situations. In particular, in a pilot experiment (Falmagne, 1969b), it was possible, using an arbitrary specification of the  weak model, to draw trial-by-trial quantitative predictions of the performance of subjects working under (approximately) the  same conditions as in the present experiment, from the performance of another group, presented with the same sequence of  stimuli and outcomes, whose responses at each trial were confidence ratings of the various hypotheses and were used as  estimates of the corresponding strength. Within such a method, variation of the specific model used for the prediction and  choice of the  MODEL FOR CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 89  relevant statistics might yield answers to some of the questions raised in the present discussion.  The same remarks apply to the specification of the function which generates the sampling probabilities on a given trial from  the vector of strengths. The choice of that function is strongly constrained mathematically by the strength axioms.  Nevertheless, the solution will not, in general, be unique. Namely, one major, often unconstrained step is to decide whether  the choice axiom should be of the "choice of the dominant element" type, or whether there should be some proportionality  between the strength of each hypothesis and its probability. The first alternative is exemplified in the strength model  suggested by Trabasso and Bower (1968). A well-known example of a rule of the second type is found in Luce's (1959) model for  choice behavior.  Another basic choice, partially independent from the former one, applies to whether all hypotheses will be competing when  resampling occurs, or only some of them. In the latter case, the limitation of the scope of the choice can rest either in a  fixed number N of hypotheses being under consideration for each choice (the N ones whose strength is higher, for example) or  in a threshold notion.  Two examples of specific models compatible with the results obtained are given below. Both of them are (we think) realistic,  in spite of the fact that they have been deliberately made as different from each other as possible in terms of the choices  discussed above.  Additive Model with Dominant Hypothesis  General and response axioms: (i) On each trial, the subject is either in the passive state ho or in one of the active states  corresponding to each hypothesis hi; . If he is in state hi; , then  Rn = hij(S.).  If he is in the passive state, then, for either response R,  y(y < .50) if R was made at trial n - 1 and was an error;  p(Rn = R) = (1 - y) if R' # R was made at trial n - 1 and was an error;  1.50 if R was made at trial n - 1 and was correct or if n = 1.  Passive state axioms: (ii) On trial 1, the probability of being in the passive state is ql . Let qn denote the probability of  the passive state at trial n given that resampling occurs. Then, for n > l,  (1 - 0') qn_1 if Rn_1 was given on the basis of a hypothesis  and was correct;  q,, = (1 - 0) qn_1 + 0 if Rn_1 was given on the basis of a hypothesis  and was an error;  qn_1 if the subject was in the passive state on trial n - 1.  90 FALMAGNE  Strength axioms: (iii) At each hypothesis on each trial a number is attached which represents its strength. Let wa(hi;) denote  the strength of hypothesis hi; on trial n. wl(hi;) = 0 for every hi; . For n > 1,  wn(hii) -  w.-1(hi,) + a if Hn_1 = hij and hij(S1) = Tn-1  w.-1(hi7) - ai if Hn-1 = hij and hii(&-1) ~` T1  w.-1(hi1) + if H._1 # hii and hii(S.-1) = T,,-1  w.-1(hi;) -  if H.-1 # hij and hii(S.-1) Tn-1  where a, a', g, fl' are positive numbers.  Sampling axioms: (iv) When the subject entertains a hypothesis on trial n, either he keeps it for trial n + 1, with a  probability (1 - a) if the hypothesis was confirmed at trial n, with a probability (1 - b) if it was disconfirmed, or sampling  occurs between trials n and n + 1. When the subject is in the passive state on trial n, sampling always occurs. Sampling  occurs on trial 1.  (v) When sampling occurs on trial n and the subject does not enter the passive state, then, if hmax denotes the hypothesis  whose strength is the highest on trial n, any hypothesis hi; such that  wn(hmax) - wn(hii)  (where A > 0) can be chosen. If there are k such hypotheses then the probability of each of them is Ilk.  Discussion of the Model  The response axiom expresses exactly the bias inferred from Result 5. In specifying the passive state axioms, on the other  hand, it has been assumed arbitrarily that the value of q,, was modified only after trials where the subject made a  hypothesis. This belongs to an interpretation in which the hypothesis behavior is rewarded or punished according to its being  successful or not, but there is no reason for such reinforcements to occur in the passive state, where the subject knows he is  likely to make an erroneous guess. The constraint, inferred from Result 5, that the mean probability of the passive state  should increase during the precriterion phase can be fulfilled by the balance between 0 and 0'.  The sampling axiom involves a threshold A for ties, and has the interesting property that, if we assume A to be very large,  more precisely if  A > (+ P')N A > (a' -{- P)N  where N is the number of trials in the experiment, then no difference between two strengths will ever exceed the threshold,  and for every trial n < N all hypotheses will  MODEL FOR CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 91  be equiprobable when resampling occurs. This case reduces thus to the corresponding assumptions in the Bower-Trabasso (1963)  and Restle (1962) models. It is, of course, a radical departure from the basic ideas which led to the introduction of a notion  of strength. If, to remain in agreement with these ideas, A is assumed to be small, the conjunction of this axiom with the  strength axioms predicts that the incorrect hypothesis h,.,- will never be sampled after the first few trials. This might  yield a critical test of the model.  The learning process generated by this model can be sketched in the following way. The strength of the correct hypothesis h,.,  increases on every trial, more rapidly when it is being used. The strength of h,,- decreases on every trial. The strength of  irrelevant hypotheses, either remains approximately the same on the average if it is assumed that a = a and g = g', or  decreases on the average if it is assumed that a' > a and/or ~' > J3. If A is small enough, h,., will rapidly emerge as the  only dominant hypothesis. Let c denote the trial when this occurs. In relation with Result 7, it should be noticed that the  model permits errors to occur after trial c, since at each subsequent trial n resampling can occur with a probability a and  the subject can enter the passive state with a probability qn+1 . From trial c on, the process is thus an alternation of  sequences of trials where the correct hypothesis is used and of sequences of passive trials (which can be interpreted as  temporary forgetting), with the probability of the passive state converging to 0 at a rate depending on the value of 0'.  Linear Model  General and response axioms: (i) and (ii) as in the previous model.  Strength axioms: (iii) At each state on each trial a number is attached which represents its strength. Let wn(h) be the  strength of state h on trial n and be such that  0 < wn(h)  for every n and every h. At trial 1, w1(ho) = qo and, for every hi; , w1(hi;) = q. When n > 1, for every hi; ,  (I - 0) wn-1(hi;) + 0 if Hn_1 = hij and hii(S.-1) = Tn-1  (h) = (I_ 0) wn-1(hi7) if Hn-1 = hij and hi7(S,,-1)zA T.-1  wn Z' (I - 0') wn_1(hij) + 0' if H.-1 0 hij and hii(S.-1) = Tn-I  (I - 0') wn-1(hii) if Hn-1 zA hij and hi7(Sn-1) Tn-1  and, for the passive state ho ,  wn(ho) = C(I - 0") -n-1(ho) + 0" i f Hn_1 zA ho and R._1 zA T._1  wn_1(ho) otherwise.  92 FALMAGNE  Sampling axioms: (iv) as in the previous model.  (v) When resampling occurs on trial n, then, ,for every h,  p.(h) = "(h) Y-xex w.(k)  where K is the set of states.  Discussion of the Model  The distinctive feature of the model is that the passive state is dealt with in the same way as any other state. Since it is  attached a strength and is submitted to the same sampling axiom as the other states, its probability and the probability of  the hypotheses are now (opposite to the first model) interdependent. Hence a decrease in the probability of the passive state  during the solution phase, which has been discussed above, is insured.  The strength of the passive state increases during the precriterion phase, where errors are being made, and remains constant  after the last error. Consequently, if B" is large enough, the probability of the passive state will increase during the  precriterion phase, where the strength of irrelevant hypotheses remains constant on the average and where the correct  hypothesis is not often sampled. Once the correct hypothesis happens to be sampled repeatedly so that its strength rapidly  increases, the probability of the passive state decreases.  3. Evaluation of the Approach  This study is a limited attempt to build a model for concept identification by inferring necessary assumptions from  experimental results. The limitation holds in the role played by intuition in many places where a general theory of models  would have been necessary to make the desirable rigorous inferences.  In the context of such a strategy, if for no other reason, a detailed analysis of data, leading to strong experimental  results, was needed, in order for the inferred assumptions to be specific enough. The highly structured character of the  stimulus material commonly used in concept identification tasks permitted us to perform such an analysis. It appeared a  posteriori that this structure was quite relevant to the learning process and had to be taken into account explicitly in the  models to be used. The fact that the model proposed here can deal with such fine-grain statistics may compensate for its lack  of mathematical simplicity in the average predictions.  Its complexity is partly due to the multiplication of axioms as a consequence of the introduction of a notion of strength of  hypotheses. However this notion or its analogue appears to be necessary if the range of the model is to be extended to other  types of behavioral variables, such as latencies or confidence ratings.  MODEL FOR CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 93  APPENDIX  All the results are stated for the 6-dimensional case. Generalization to the N-dimensional case is immediate.  Let i and m range over {1,..., 6) and, restricting the results to the case of binary dimensions, let j, j' and r range over  {1, 2), with j # j'.  LEMMA 1. For any i and j,  p(hij('S.) = hij('Sn-1) I Vn.n-1 = k) = 6 .  Proof. It follows from Property 2 and definition of Vi.n.n-1 that, given any sequence of events x, for any i and j,  p(hi9('Sn) = hij('S.-I) I x) = p(Si(S.) = 8i(Sn-1)I x) = p(V,,n,n-1 = 1 I x).  Since the program of presentation is random, then, for any i,  P(Vi.n.n-1 = 1 1 V...-1 = k) = k 6'  and Lemma 1 follows immediately.  LEMMA 2.  ak.n - p(R. = Rn-1 Kn = 0, Hn-1 ~ ho, Rn-1 = Tn-1 , Vn,n-1 = k) = 6 .  Proof. If Kn = 0 and Hn-1 = hi;, then Hn = hi; by Axiom 5. Therefore,  ak,n = Y ~, p(H.-1 = hii I Kn = 0, Hn-1 # ho , R,.-, = Tn-1 , Vn,n-1 - k)  X p(R. = Rn-1 I Hn = hii, Hn-1 = hij, Rn-1 = T.-j, V"'.-1 - k). (2) By Axiom 8 and Lemma 1,  p(R. = Rn-1 I Hn = hii, Hn-1 = hii I Rn-1 = Tn-1 ~ Vn,n-1 = k) = p(hij('Sn) = hij(S.-1) I Vn,n-1 = k) = k .  By Axiom 1,  Y- I PA-1 = hi; 1. .., Hn-1 :~'- ho ,...) = 1, i j  so that substituting (3) into (2) yields (1).  94  FALMAGNE  LEMMA 3.  ak,n = p(R. = R.-1 I Hn # ho, Kn = 1, H.-1 # ho, R.-1 = T.-I, Vn,n-1 = k)  k  6 L, L, ~'~'1)  = J p(H. = hij I Hn # ho , Kn = 1, H.-1 = hij , Rn-1 = Tn-1 , i l`i  hij(S.-1) = T.-j) p(Hn-1 = hij I Hn-1 # ho, R,,-1 = Tn-1)  1 Hn z.7 =hi~ I Hn 0 ho , Kn - -1, Hn -1 hij , Rn-1 = T  2 Lp( ~ n-1  hii(Sn-1) # Tn-1) Y Y p(Hn-1 = lyre, I Hn-1 # ho, Rn-1 = T.-j)] nz r  +(I k) y, , )p(Hn = hij I Hn ho Kn = 1, H.-1 = hij', i ii  Rn-1 = T.-I, hij(S.-1) :7L-- Tn-1)p(Hn-1 = hij, I Hn-1 # ho, Rn-1 = T.-I) 1  + 2 fp(Hn hij I Hn # h0, Kn -1, Hn-1 # hz7 ij,Rn-1 = T.-l'  - - hij(Sn-1) T.-j) Y Y p(Hn-1 = hmr I Hn-1 # ho, R.-1 = Tn-1)]  ,  nd r  where m # i.  LEMMA 4.  ak,n = p(R. = R.-1 I Hn # ho, Kn = 1, Hn-1 = ho, Rn-1 = T.-I, Vn,n-1 = k)  = k p(Hn =hij IHn #h0, Kn - -1, Hn-1 = h0, Rn-1 = T.-j, hi7(Sn-1) =Tn-1) 12  i i  + 2 ( ] - k) y. Y p(H. = hii I Hn # ho , Kn =1,H.-1 = ho, Rn-1= T.-1, hii(S.-1) # T.-j). i j  LEMMA 5. ak n =  = p(Rn = Tn-1 I Hn = ho, Rn-1 = T.-1).  Proof of Theorem 2.  l1<n<e p(Rn - Tn-1, R.-1 = Tn-1, Vn,n-1 = k) Y-1 <n <e p(Rn-1 = Tn-1 , Vn,n-1 = k)  (Y-1<n<ep(Vn,n-1 = k)p(Rn-1 = Tn-1 I Vn,n-1 = k)  X p(Rn = Tn-1 I Rn-1 = Tn-1, Vn,n-1 = k)  F-1<n<eP(Vn,n-1 = k)p(R.-1 = Tn-1 I V...-1 = k)  MODEL FOR CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 95  Since Vn,n_1 is independent of n and since, by Axioms 8 and 9, Rn-1 is independent of Vn,n-1 ,  _ p(V..n-1 = k) Y_I Gn, p(R.-1 = T.-1) p(Rn = T.-1 I Rn-1 = Tn-1 , Vn,n-1 = k) p(V.,n-1 = k)YjGnGep(R.-1 = T.-1)  Y_1 <(Rep(Rn-1T n-1Tn-1) p"n].  1<n<e  Equation 4 shows that 7Tk is a linear combination of linear functions of k. Furthermore, since for every n, pk,n is strictly  increasing with respect to k, and p(Rn-1 = 1._1) IS positive, 77k is a strictly increasing function of k.  REFERENCES  ANDERSON, R. C., AND GUTHRIE, J. T. Effect of some sequential manipulations of relevant and irrelevant stimulus dimensions on  concept learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 166, 72, 501-504.  BOURNE, L. E., AND RESTLE, F. Mathematical theory of concept identification. Psychological Review, 1959, 66, 278-296.  BOWER, G. H., AND TRABASSO, T. R. Concept identification. In R. C. Atkinson (Ed.), Studies in Mathematical Psychology.  Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1963. Pp. 32-94.  Byers, J. L. Hypothesis behavior in concept attainment. Journal of Educational Psychology, 1965, 56, 337-342.  COTTON, J. W. A test of a concept identification model taking into account the sequence of stimuli presented. Abstract of a  paper given at the Psychometric Society meeting, September 1967.  COTTON, J. W., AND SHANAB, M. E. Number of dimensions, stimulus constancy, and reinforcement in a pseudo-concept  identification task. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1968, 76, 464-467.  DETAMBEL, M. H., AND STOLUROW, L. M. Stimulus sequence and concept learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1956, 51,  34-40.  ERICKSON, J. R., ZAJKOWSKI, M. M., AND EHMANN, E. D. All-or-none assumptions in concept identification: Analysis of latency  data. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1966, 72, 690-697. FALMAGNE, R. Construction of a hypothesis model for concept  identification. Preprint 241, University of Michigan, 1969. (a)  FALMAGNE, R. A direct investigation of hypothesis-making behavior in concept identification. Psychonomic Science, 1969, 13,  335-336. (b)  KURTZ, K., AND HOVLAND, C. I. Concept learning with different sequences of instances. Journal of Experimental Psychology,  1956, 51, 239-243.  LEVINE, M. Hypothesis behavior by humans during discrimination learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1966, 71, 331-338.  LUCE, R. D. Individual Choice Behavior. New York: Wiley, 1959.  PETERSON, M. J. Some effects of the percentage of relevant cues and presentation methods on concept identification. Journal of  Experimental Psychology, 1962, 64, 623-627.  RESTLE, F. The selection of strategies in cue learning. Psychological Review, 1962, 69, 329-343  96  FALMAGNE  RICHTER, M. Memory, choice and stimulus sequence in human discrimination learning. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Indiana  University, 1965.  SHAFFER, J. P., AND REMPLE, R. K. Stimulus similarity in a pseudo-concept identification task. Journal of Experimental  Psychology, 1966, 71, 593-599.  SUPPES, P., AND SCHLAG-REY, M. Observable changes of hypotheses under positive reinforcement. Science, 1965, 148, 661-662.  TRABASSO, T. R., AND BOWER, G. H. Presolution dimensional shifts in concept identification: A test of the sampling with  replacement axiom in all-or-none models. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1966, 3, 163-173.  TRABASSO, T. R., AND BOWER, G. H. Attention in Learning. New York: Wiley, 1968.