10.1016/0022-2496(70)90034-9
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 7, 444-465 (1970)  How Symmetry Restricts Symmetric Choice  ALAN NATAPOFFL2  Research Laboratory of Electronics  Massachusetts Insitute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139  and  Foundation for Research on the Nervous System  In a symmetric choice experiment, the share of response found on the ith alternative, or state, S; , is proportional to f  (Sj), a weight function that describes the results. The form of f is restricted by the symmetries of the experimental  situation through a functional equation. The response distribution must obey that equation and the extraction of a  satisfactory theoretical expression for it is analogous to the standard procedures used with differential equations to analyze  mechanical systems. It is shown that every symmetric choice function, f, is equivalent to a simpler, normal function, the  product of whose separate values is unity. This can simplify the discovery of simple formulas underlying otherwise obscure  numerical results. Applications are given to behavioral problems. Applicability to symmetric neural channels (such as paired  optic or auditory nerves) is noted.  A symmetric choice experiment is one that studies the way the distribution of "choices" among nearly-equivalent "alternatives"  depends on the differences in the alternatives. The "near-equivalence" of the alternatives defines the "symmetry" of the  problem; the differences, the way the symmetry is broken or restricted. A pigeon, for example, may face two alternative keys  that are identical in every way except that one delivers more pellets per peck than the other. Experiment might determine how  the pigeon's distribution of pecks on the keys depends on how often the keys deliver pellets.  The simplicity of such experiments can be effectively exploited with the help of group theory (Ledermann, 1961) which is the  formal apparatus of symmetry (Pitts and McCulloch, 1947).  The reason for bothering with such a formulation, when it applies, is that it focuses on one of the few exact properties of  the systems under study. Applying symmetry arguments first separates the effects of symmetry, which can be characterized  easily,  ' I gratefully acknowledge the many useful suggestions, discussions and criticisms of Drs. Richard Herrnstein, Shin-Ho Chung,  and Allen Neuringer. The errors remaining are entirely mine. This work was supported in part by a grant from Bell Telephone  Laboratories, Inc.  I Present address: Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Space Research Center, ManVehicle Laboratory, Room 37-221,  Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139.  444  SYMMETRY AND SYMMETRIC CHOICE 445  from those relating to model assumptions or other features of the experiment, which are necessarily more tentative or  approximate.  Theoretically acceptable equations must not only be numerically correct, they must behave (or transform) properly. In  particular, if an experiment has some basic property, the equation describing it must also have it. If certain manipulations  performed on the experimental alternatives leave the essence of the experiment unchanged, then the corresponding manipulations  of the quantities in the equation should preserve the corresponding formal property of the equation.  The equations = z x 9.80665 x t2, for example, gives correctly the approximate distance (meters) fallen in t seconds (at  standard latitude and altitude) by a body initially at rest. Despite its satisfactory numerical performance, the equation is  not yet acceptable as a description of the experimental results. Although s is roughly proportional to t2 at every latitude  and altitude, and in any units, the equation holds only for very particular choices. It does not faithfully reflect a central  invariance property of the experiment (i.e., its indifference to site and units) and, therefore, must be refined.  The only refinement needed is the substitution of the parameter g, for the numerical constant 9.80665. The equation then  becomes s = I t2, which is transformationally 29  as well as numerically acceptable-when given numerical values of s and t, and the value of g appropriate to the site and  dimensional units, the equation holds numerically in every case. That is, for each appropriate situation, there is a numerical  value for g that makes the latter equation correct. That value, however, is not always equal to 9.80665, as the former  equation suggests. [By contrast, the numerical constant "V' is the same in all cases, and is correct in both equations  (Bridgman, 1963).]  In symmetric choice experiments, it may happen that a changed geometric point-ofview, or a renaming or renumbering of  variables will make no essential difference. The equation describing the results, therefore, when transformed to conform to  that changed description, should retain precisely its original form. In the example above, the acceptable equation has the  same form everywhere-only the numerical value of g needs to be changed.  We try to indicate and illustrate how such considerations can simplify the description and analysis of symmetric choices.  ABSTRACTING SYMMETRIC CHOICE: THE GROUP REPRESENTS THE SYMMETRY  The usual analysis of a vibrating violin string is instructively analogous to what we are doing here. One writes the  differential equation expressing Newton's laws, imposes boundary conditions (the string is fixed at its two ends), and  extracts suitable combinations of the basic primitive solutions (called harmonics) that satisfy both. The result is an  equation for the response of the string (its displacement from its resting position) in terms of the independent variables  (time and position along the string).  446 NATAPOFF  In analyzing symmetric choice, we write, similarly, the equation expressing the governing consideration which, here, is the  symmetry obeyed by the system (rather than Newton's laws). The symmetry restricts the algebraic form rather than the numerical  character of the relation between the experimental variables and the pattern of choices observed. The basic equation, then, is  a functional equation (Bellman, 1965) not a differential equation as above. With some further assumptions, certain primitive  solutions emerge, and one approach is to try to describe the observed response (choice pattern) in terms of primitive  solutions as simple as possible.  In one set of operant experiments, for example, the empirical formula for the results, the Herrnstein matching formula  (Herrnstein, 1961) is precisely the simplest nontrivial primitive solution-what would be called the "fundamental" solution in  the vibrating string. We discuss what might correspond to "higher harmonics" in symmetric choice, and how those higher  primitive solutions may be introduced to refine, systematically, the analysis of a set of results.  In our abstract picture of symmetric choice, there is a fixed quantity that is to be distributed symmetrically among N similar  alternative "states" Sl , S2 , S3 ,..., S, . The fractional share, f (Si), apportioned to the ith state, Si , may depend in  any way whatever on all the numbers in the experiment, as seen from S; . The crucial requirement, however, is that f (Si)  depend only on the pattern of those numbers as seen from Si . In particular, if the pattern of all the relevant  symmetry-breaking variables is the same as seen from Si and S; , then the fractions assigned to those states must be the same,  f (Si) = f (S;). Identical patterns must yield equal fractions; otherwise, some presumed difference remains to "explain" why  the two states have unequal shares, contradicting the assumption either of symmetry or identical patterns.  For example, a pigeon may distribute pecks among keys that give different wage rates, but are otherwise (assumed to be)  identical. If, among these N keys, there are two from which the pattern of wage rates on all the keys appears the same, then  the pigeon's pecking will not distinguish those keys, either. More generally, interchanging patterns must interchange  responses.  We conclude that there is a fixed response to a given pattern that is the same no matter on which key that pattern appears. We  conclude, then, that there is a unique formula, f (Sj), for all the states; without the restriction of symmetry, each of the N  states might have a different one. We can write, then,  f(Sl) +f(S2) + - +f(SN) - 1, (1)  as a condition satisfied by any such universal formula f.  We can make Eq. 1 more tractable by a further use of symmetry. Since all the states are alike, there is no need to keep them  all in our description. Instead, we choose one, say Si , as a reference state and express states, wherever they occur in our  equations, in terms of it. Thereafter, our equations (such as Eq. 1) will refer explicitly to only one  SYMMETRY AND SYMMETRIC CHOICE 447  state, Sa , instead of all N. To express our N original states in terms of one reference state, we intorduce a set G = (gl ,  92 ,..., gv) of N transformations, one for each state. These transformations represent, abstractly, what must be done to the  reference state to change it, in turn, into each of the original set. The jth state, S; , for example, is produced by the  action of g; on Si . We write this as S; = g;Si . We would then rewrite Eq. 1 as  N  f(91Si) +f(g2si) +f(g3si) + ... +.f(9NSi) _ Y_ f(gjSi) = l. (2) ;_  By rewriting our equation in this way, we have transferred our attention to a reference state and a set G of transformations.  The similarity of the original states will now appear as a property of the transformations. The reference state, Si , now  plays the role of a coordinate system. We could have chosen any of the original states as reference, and we could, if we  chose, change our coordinate system (that is, our choice of reference state) at any time. The burden of the restriction of  symmetry is that such a change should make no difference in any important property of the system.  The set G contains, for every state S; , a single transformation g; that carries the reference state Si into S; . Further, G  will have some property that reflects the symmetry of the states S from which it was drawn. To discover what that property is,  we notice first that if G generates the states S from a reference state Si , it must also generate them from any other state  Sk . If that were not so, we could conclude either that the states Si and Sk were not similar (contrary to our symmetry  assumption) or that G did not faithfully represent their symmetry properties (contrary to our intention). The following sets  of states must, therefore, be the same:  Si , S2 >..., S,v g1Si , g2Si ,..., 9NSi 91Sk , g2Sk ,..., 9NSk .  The first is the original set; the second is the same set defined in terms of a reference state Si , and a set of  transformations G. The third is the set of states that G would generate when operating on reference state S, instead of Si .  If there is to be symmetry among the states S, and if the transformations G are to reflect it, then the third set must have  the same members as the first two, although they may appear in a different order. If G is a group that will be true.  Since there are N members in each set, we need only show that every member, g;Si , of the second set is the same as precisely  one member, g,, , of the third. If G is a group, then  giSi =9s(gklgk)'si = (k'jgkl)(gkS'i) _ (gjgx;l) Sk  The first equality is assured by the inverse-containing and identity-containing properties of a group. The second equality  follows from the associativity property (or indifference to changes in the grouping of elements). The last equality follows  from  448 NATAPOFF  our definition of the transformation gk . Finally, the closure property implies that g;gk I will be the same as some single  transformation, say g,,, . Every state in the second set, therefore, is precisely the same as one state in the third, if G is  a group. The symmetry of the states, then, is reflected in the fact that the transformations G form a group. This is not an  additional constraint, but only a restatement of the assumed symmetry with which we started.  We have demonstrated, in effect, the following lemma.  LEMMA. If the elements of a group G = (g, , ga ,..., g,,,) when applied to a state Si yield the states S = (SI , S2 ,...,  S,,,) in that order, then they will yield the same states S in some order when operating on any state, Sk , of S.  Remark. The change of reference state will have no effect on an expression of the form YN 1 f (g;Si) since the substitution Si  ~ g,Si will serve only to permute the order in which the states S will appear, and therefore, the terms of the sum. Similarly,  any other such symmetric expression as rjN I f (g;Si) will also remain invariant under the action of a transformation gk on  the reference state. Henceforth, our strategy will be to exploit this property by stating our crucial results in terms of  expressions having this invariant property. Notice, for example, that our fundamental Eq. 2 is already in invariant form.  We are, in summary, considering positive-valued solutions, f (gjSi), of Eqs. 1 and 2. These are given in terms of a group G  and a reference state Si , and transform as simple scalar functions under the action of any group element gk on the reference  state to become f (gig,Si). By studying what G leaves unchanged, we will derive the form of the solutions, remove their  arbitrariness, and show how they simplify the analysis of symmetric choice.  Theorems  Not surprisingly, the essential property of a function f (Si) with respect to symmetry is its behavior under the action of the  group G that embodies the symmetry. We distinguish four types of function by the changes induced on them by the  transformations in G, operating on the reference state, Si .  DEFINITION. A function f (Si) is invariant with respect to a group G = (gi 192 ,..., 91) if it has the same value on every  state generated by G acting on the reference state S; ; that is if, for every g; in G, f (g;Si) = f (Sj).  DEFINITION. A function f (Si) is (null, fractional) with respect to a group G if 1Nrf(gjSi) _ (fl, 1).  (Any function f satisfying Eq. 2, for example, is fractional.)  SYMMETRY AND SYMMETRIC CHOICE 449  DEFINITION. A function f (Si) is normal with respect to a group G if l lj l.f (gisi) = 1.  These types of behavior are related by the following results.  THEOREM 1. A function f (Si) is fractional if and only if, for some nonnull function WN (Si ),  N  f(Si) = W(Si)l I,, W(gjsi). =1  Proof. (Sufficiency) The remark following the lemma implies that the denominator sum in Eq. 3 is invariant. All terms of the  form f (g,Sj), therefore, will have the same denominator sum. Each numerator will be a different single term of that common  denominator sum, so that the sum of the terms for all the g,, will equal 1, and f is fractional.  (Necessity) If f (Si) is fractional it obeys Eq. 2. Dividing f (Si), in turn, by each side of Eq. 2 gives an equation of the  form of Eq. 3, with f itself playing the role of W. Q.E.D. This proof illustrates the directness with which group theory  yields the required results (here, the invariance of the denominator sum) to an appeal to symmetry. Given the importance of  symmetry in the problem of symmetric choice, its direct exploitation should be regarded as an attractive approach to the  problem, although some of the results could be derived in other ways.  Every solution to Eq. 2 is generated by an appropriate nonnull weight function W(S,) following Theorem 1. Further, every such  function W will generate a solution, although many will generate the same one. We now simplify our calculations by choosing,  for each solution f, a single, simplest representative of the equivalence class of functions W that generate it.  DEFINITION. Two nonnull weight functions W(Sj) and V(Sj) are equivalent if they generate the same fractional function, f (Sj);  that is, if, for every i,  f (Si) = V(Si) / I V(g1Si) = W(Si) J I W(gisi) (4)  j=1 j=1  THEOREM 2. Two weight functions W(Si) and V(Si) are equivalent over a group G  if and only if their ratio K(Si) = V(Sj)/W(S;) is invariant over G.  Proof. (Sufficiency) If K is invariant, substituting V = KW in Eq. 4, we find K in the numerator and in each term of the  denominator. Since K is invariant, its values are the same in all these cases, and will, therefore, cancel leaving the  rightmost member of Eq. 4.  450 NATAPOFF  (Necessity) The denominator sums in Eq. 4 are invariant. Their ratio, which must therefore be invariant, is equal, by Eq. 4,  to VFW = K, and K is invariant. Q.E.D. Since the product (or sum) of the values of any function taken over all the states  generated by G is invariant under G, the Nth root of that product (the geometric mean of the values) is also invariant. It  follows from Theorem 2 that  COROLLARY. For any positive function W(Sj), there is a positive normal function V(Si) = W(Si)I [HNI W(g;Si)]liN that is  equivalent to it.  If an invariant function K is a factor off, K will appear N times in the product of the values of f. If f is positive and  normal, therefore, its terms can have no common invariant factor, except l. Normal functions are, in this sense, simpler than  any of their equivalents, and Theorem 2 guarantees that every positive function has a normal equivalent.  This suggests a practical way to simplify the analysis of symmetric choice experiments. We should normalize the observed  shares in each experimental run (that is, divide each share by the geometric mean of all) before formulating the results. The  formula for the normalized shares will be equivalent to, but in the sense above, functionally simpler than that for any  equivalent. In particular, it will be simpler than the formula for the fractional shares, which is the one now in general use.  For example, the formula V(Si) = 1 is the normal description of completely identical keys that corresponds to, and is simpler  than the fractional formula, f (Si) = 1 /N. Similarly, V = xllx2 is equivalent to and functionally simpler than f = x12/(x12  -F- x22).  SYMMETRIC APPROXIMATION BY LEADING TERM (SALT)  Every normal function V(Si) can be expressed as the ratio of a positive weight function, Q(Si), to the geometric mean of all  its values. If there are N different states, this means that  V(Si) = Q(Si)l (QlSI) Q(S2) ... Q(SN))"'V  = Q(Si) / (H Q(g7Si))1/N - Q('Si)I <Q>,  (5)  =1  in which <Q> is the geometric mean of the values of the function Q(Si) taken over all the N states S1 , S2 ,..., SN .  Let us assume that the symmetry among the states is broken only by a single variable x = (X1 , X21 ..., XN) whose value on S;  is x; . We have seen that if there is a function prescribing the distribution among the states as a function of the values of  x, then there  SYMMETRY AND SYMMETRIC CHOICE 451  is a normal function that is equivalent to it. We discuss here the simplest case, where that normal function is a simple  product of powers of the x's-or equivalently, the approximation (called SALT) in which we consider only such forms for V.  More concretely, suppose there are two symmetric channels on which we have observed (f (Sl) = ) 900 and (f (Sz) = ) 100  counts, respectively. Further, the values of the single symmetry-breaking variable are x1 = 10 and x2 = 20. If we assume SALT,  we are assuming that the normalized values off can be expressed as a product of the values of x1 and x2 raised to some fixed  power. The normalized values of f are V(S,) = 900/(100 - 900)1'2 = 3 and V(S2) = 100/(100 . 900)1/2 = s. We see that the  product of V(S1) and V(S2) is 1, as planned and that those values must now be delivered in the form xi11x212 (for V(S1)) and  x121x222 (for V(S2)). In general,  1+i1 a12 .. 1 `x2  N  uiN ~ a.i  N = 11 xiz = =1  where ai; is the exponent of the jth component of x in the expression for the ith state's share of the function.  If the states are equivalent, then the exponents appearing in (6) must appear, in some order, for every state. For example, if  the exponents a3; , for Q1(S3) are (1, 3, 8, 4), then those for S2 must be (4, 1, 3, 8) or some other permutation of the same  numbers. If two states had different sets of exponents, they would be distinguishable, and we have assumed they are not.  We should mention, too, that the numbers (1, 3, 8, 4) could not actually be a set of exponents, because their sum is not 0.  The sum must be 0 because the sum of all exponents taken over all states is 0 for any normal function. Since by the argument  above, the sum is the same for each state, each state's exponents must sum to 0 separately.  Equation 6 is expressed for an arbitrary function Q1 rather than for the normalized function, V. This is to permit working  with whole exponents. In general, any function in monomial form is equivalent to one with whole coefficients, though the  latter may not be normal. We intend to distinguish, then, the normal functions (which are most convenient for searching out a  solution since they give, in a particular sense, the simplest functions) from monomials with whole powers (which one might  prefer to use after the solutions have been found). The latter suggests analogies with first order Taylor series  approximations which may be helpful in interpreting results once found.  In short, normal functions facilitate searching and analysis; whole exponent monomials make interpretation easier. Since the  aim is to simplify the phenomenology of choice experiments, both may play roles.  Another possibly suggestive analogy holds with the usual process for finding normal modes in dynamical problems (Goldstein,  1950). In both cases one seeks combinations of operating variables such that each (combination) contributes independently of  the  452 NATAPOFF  others to the response of the system, and the total response can be recovered as a total of independent, uncoupled  contributions.  In this spirit, Eq. 6 gives Ql as depending only on a single combination of the original variables, y; . Each state depends  only on a single such combination; whereas before, the response on any single state depended on all the variables.  This remark is the more helpful when we extend our attention to systems in which more than one independent variable is  operating. There, since the product, term-byterm, of two normal functions is also normal, one might approach the more  complicated system by seeking separate, normal functions of a single variable (say x, t) and multiplying. For example, a  pigeon experiment might involve both different reward rates (xi) and different delays of reward (t2), on the various keys. In  this approach, one might try to explain the results by multiplying together solutions of successively greater complexity  gathered from experiments on each factor alone. If that failed, one might look for underlying combination variables (functions  both of x and t) which reduced to x and t in the one variable cases, but yielded the separable behavior in the combined case.  One aspect of the normal mode problem that is particularly suggestive is the possibility of trivial (cyclical) variables.  These are combinations of the operating variables that play no role in the observed response. That is, the presence of such  combinations can be exploited because it permits us to focus on a smaller number of variable combinations that, because they  take up the slack left by the nonoperating combinations, concentrate the significant results in more tractable form. We  illustrate this below.  To illustrate some of these properties, assume that a pigeon pecks 3 of the time on key 1, and 3 on key 2 when the values of a  variable x are in the ratio 2:1 on those keys. The equations f (Sl) = s ; f (S,) = a are numerically correct descriptions  having different forms. Because there is no systematic renumbering of the variables in those equations, they must be regarded  as describing two  obeying two different basic laws. The following pair fundamentally similar keys that receive unequal shares values of x are  different on them:  fundamentally unlike keys, of equations describes two only because the numerical  .f (Si) = Xll(X1 + xa)>  (7) (8)  There is a single underlying formula obeyed at both keys and one can be obtained from the other by the systematic interchange  of subscripts I and 2 on the state S, and on the variable, x. The equation is symmetric. If the response of the system is not,  it is only because the boundary conditions are not (Wigner, 1967). The keys are not identical, then, full symmetry is broken  or restricted by the variable x.  Equation 7 gives shares equivalent to those of the normal function, V(Sl) _ (xl/x2)112. Those shares do not depend on the  absolute sizes of the x's, only  SYMMETRY AND SYMMETRIC CHOICE 453  their ratio. A law of this sort, then, could be discovered by examining only that ratio, a single independent combination of  variables, rather than the pair of original ones, x1 and x2. This illustrates the simplification mentioned above in analogy to  the situation of cyclic or trivial variables.  Having discovered such a law, it might be more convenient to work with the function O(S1) = x1 which is a monomial with whole  powers equivalent to f and I'', but simpler and perhaps more suggestive, intuitively.  N Keys, I Symmetry-Breaking Parameter  Assume that N otherwise identical keys are distinguished by a single parameter, x = (x1 , 12, ..., XN) (perhaps the keys  differ only in the wage rates they offer-x, on key 1, x2 on key 2 ...). If the SALT approximation holds, the normal weight  function, V(Si), describing the distribution of pecks among those keys will take the form prescribed by Eq. 6. The exponents,  aij , in that equation will obey:  I aij) = I ai = 0, i=1 (j=1 I i=1  where the sum YN1 aij , of the exponents attached to the various xj in the expression for V(Si), for the ith state, is called  ai . Notice that the ai must be equal. If they were not, say ai 7~: a, we could immediately distinguish the states Si and  S,,, , contrary to our assumption. The equality of all the ai implies, from Eq. 9, that each ai = 0. That is, in the  expression for V, the powers of the xi sum to zero, no matter which state we look at. For example, V(S1) = (x1/x2)1i2, a  formula that reappears below, expressing the Herrnstein matching formula, is a SALT approximation. The variable x1 is raised  to the 2 power, and x2 to the -2 power, and the sum of these powers is 0. For S2 , the roles of x1 and x2 are exchanged, but  the sum of the exponents remains 0.  Each situation may contain, not only absolute (or overall) equivalences, but relative equivalences as well. All keys, for  example are assumed to be basically equivalent; when standing on one of the keys, however, the others may take different  relative positions.  More specifically, suppose that five keys (N = 5) at the vertices of a regular pentagon are numbered clockwise. They are  basically similar, geometrically, but, as seen from key "1 ," "2," and "3" are not equivalent-"2" is, and "3" is not, adjacent  to "I" and a pigeon standing at key "I" can tell the difference, in principle. The actual symmetries obeyed by the response  must be determined by experiment.  Focusing on symmetry helps with, though it cannot resolve, the discriminationpreference ambiguity (Luce and Suppes, 1965).  Since each of them involves a symmetry-breaking process, the symmetries broken might be investigated separately, even if they  are inseparable in a particular experimental case (see pentagon examples to follow) (Weisman, Denny, and Zerbolio, 1967).  We introduce, here, the following abbreviations: Si = Sj means Si is (absolutely  454 NATAPOFF  or overall) equivalent to S; . Si = S;(S,f) means Si is equivalent to S; relative to S,, . Absolute equivalence of two states  implies that there is some symmetry operation of the system that carries one into the other. Equivalence relative to S, , that  there is such an operation that, in addition, leaves S, fixed. Relative symmetries, then, are measures of how powerful the  group of governing symmetry operations is. The better able that group is to reform the states, despite increasing constraints  that require one or another state to be kept fixed, the more powerful it is and the more relative, additional symmetry will  appear in the problem, beyond the initial overall symmetry of the states. Again, the problem is to discover the symmetry  governing the response, starting from the symmetry in the imposed conditions, and by actual observation.  The notation for relative symmetry is intentionally reminiscent of the usual congruence notation and there are corresponding  results (Birkhoff and MacLane, 1965). In that notation, two whole numbers, p and q, are congruent relative to (modulo) a  third, m, if their difference (p - q) is a whole multiple of m. Any pair of odd numbers, for example, is congruent modulo 2,  and one writes 7 = 293 (2) since 7 - 293 = -286 -= 2 x (-143).  The following results have counterparts for us. If two numbers are congruent to the same number, relative to the same modulus,  they are congruent (to each other), relative to that modulus. In a special case, this would mean that if two numbers differed  from a third by a whole multiple of two, their difference is also a whole multiple of two. In our notation, if p _- q(m) and p  _= r(m), then q = r(m). Our counterpart is the result that if two states are equivalent relative to a third state, to some  common state, they are themselves equivalent, relative to it. Symbolically, if Sl ` S2,(S4) and Sl = S,(S,), then S2 -- S3(S4).  We prove this result by using the properties of the group that is assumed to connect the states S. If S, --- S2(S4), it means  that there is some transformation, hl in the overall group, that carries Sl into S2 , but leaves S4 unchanged. That is, h1S1 =  S., and h1S4 = S4 . Similarly, the equivalence of Sl and S3 relative to S4 implies that there is an h2 such that h2,S1 = S3  and h2S4 - S4 . Since the h's are members of a group, the product h,hi 1 is also an element of the group, and, since that  product carries S2 into S3 , the group has an element connecting those states. Since hl and h2 separately leave S4 unchanged,  h,h;1 does also. Since there is a symmetry operation connecting S2 and S,, while leaving S4 fixed, we conclude that S. -  S3(S4). This proves the "transitivity" of relative equivalence; its "symmetry" and "reflexiveness" are even more direct  consequences of the group properties (Birkhoff and MacLane, 1965) and our equivalence obeys the requirements for a general  equivalence relation.  When we say that a state is equivalent to another relative to two or more other states, we mean that there is a transformation  connecting the two, leaving the others unchanged. For example, Sl - S,(S4S;) means that there is a transformation that carries  `1' into `2' while leaving both `4' and `5' fixed. This is clearly stronger than simple equivalence with respect to either `4'  or `5' alone, and would imply both of  SYMMETRY AND SYMMETRIC CHOICE 455  them. Similarly, in the numerical analogy, 47 _--_ 29 (6) implies that the same congruence holds separately relative to 2 and  3. Last, the converse is not generally true, in both cases. If 13 = 25 (4) and 13 --- 25 (6), we cannot conclude and it is not  true that 13 -= 25 (24). The general congruence mod 6 X 4 would hold only if 4 and 6 were relatively prime (which they are  not). Similarly, for us, if two states are equivalent, separately, with respect to two different states S, T, they need not be  equivalent with respect to both (there need not be an operation that will connect them and leave both S and T fixed at the  same time). There are here too, additional conditions before that converse will hold.  The apparent anomaly of having things absolutely equivalent though they are not relatively equivalent ("absolute" is usually  stronger than "relative") needs a comment since it is further illustration of the distinction between detailed and formal  equivalence.  Although in our pentagon example `2' T `3' ('1'), `2' _ `3' overall. The former relation derives from a detail of the  experiment, the symmetry of states happens not to include relative symmetry of `2' and `3' with respect to `1'. (We use `n'  and Sinterchangeably.) The latter, overall equivalence means that for every relation involving `2', there is a similar one  involving `3' that could be generated from the first by one of the operations of the symmetry group.  To illustrate this equivalence of relations in the experiment, we take the relation " `I' `3' (`2')" which involves `2'. Now  there is a similar relation, in which `3' plays the same role as `2' did in the first: " `2' -- `4' (`3')." More than that, we  could have "derived" the second relation from the first by a trivial renumbering of the keys, starting one key later. Since  there is no way to distinguish one starting point from another, (that would imply that the keys were distinguishable from the  first, contrary to assumption), two relations differing in such a trivial way, express the same information (apart from  symmetry) about the system. In general, two relations are called equivalent if, by transforming the variables in them in a way  (such as by renumbering) that is consistent with the allowed symmetry, we can change one into the other.  This is a good place to tie down, with an example, what lies under the phrases "governing symmetry," "allowed symmetry,"  "group of symmetries" and others alluded to. The illustration is taken from our pentagon example. Various assumptions about  that example are postulated, with which we give, for each case, the set of "allowed symmetries" implied thereby.  Suppose we consider the axis of symmetry passing through vertex 1 of the pentagon, and assume that the direction from the  bisected opposite side to that vertex is due North, along that axis. Suppose, too, that the pigeon can tell, no matter in  which direction he faces, just how many degrees from true North his line of sight lies. (We are not assuming in that  statement, that he can tell whether he is facing 10West of North, or 10East of North-only that he knows he is 10off true  North. The next assumption provides that additional information.) Last suppose that he can tell left from right. Under these  conditions, the pigeon could tell all the keys apart. There would be no  456 NATAPOFF  symmetry worth talking about, and the group of symmetries would consist entirely of the trivial, identity transformation.  Under that transformation, every state is carried into itself and, therefore, no state is carried into any other. Thus, no  states are equivalent to each other. To say this another way, the only thing we can do to the states that will carry them into  an equivalent configuration is leave them alone.  Suppose now, that the pigeon could, suddenly, no longer tell left from right. Then, if the keys previously to the left of the  North-South axis (`4' and `5') were exchanged with the corresponding keys to the right (`4' e'-> `3' and `5' -~ `2'), the  pigeon would not be able to tell that any exchange had been made. By contrast, if blindfolded and turned to face key `2', the  pigeon would detect that he was no longer facing North (as he was when facing key 1). Thus, keys '1' and `2' are  distinguishable, but keys `5' and `2' are not, with these assumptions.  There is a helpful heuristic description we might insert here. Suppose the pigeon does not know whether he is standing upright  or upside down. Then, when facing key `2' he cannot be sure whether it is key `2' or key `5'. He knows the key is adjacent to  the one that is most northerly (`1') but, even if he can tell left from right, he doesn't know whether he is looking at the  keys from above (in which case `2' is to the right of `1') or from below (where `5' appears to the right of `1').  Similarly, if he can tell up from down and left from right, he may still have difficulties with a transparent, vertical set of  keys on which `1' is uppermost, if he cannot tell which side of the partition he is standing on. If someone points to the key  next in clockwise order to `1', it could be `2' as seen from the left of the partition, or `5', from the right. Without  knowing whether one was on the left or right, therefore, it would be impossible to distinguish `2' from `5'.  In this general, second case, the group of transformations permitted contains two operations: first, the trivial operation  that leaves all the keys alone; second, the reflection operation in the symmetry axis drawn through ` 1' which exchanges `2'  and `5' as well as `3' and `4 '.  For our third case, we assume that left and right are distinguishable and, to use the language of the most recent  illustration, one can tell which side of the keys one is on, but no direction is preferred to any other, we get a group with  five different allowed symmetry operations. That is, a pigeon facing key `2' would have no way of knowing that it was not key  `1', but he does "know" that the key on its right is numbered one higher. He could not tell, if blindfolded, whether he had  been moved from his original direction to one of the other four vertex directions, or whether he had been left or returned to  his original orientation.  Last, suppose the keys are horizontal, there is no preferred direction and the pigeon cannot distinguish left from right. For  this case, there are 10 different operations that might be performed on the configuration without detection. They correspond  to the 10 renumberings of the keys in consecutive order (5 clockwise, 5 counterclockwise) that start from each key in turn.  SYMMETRY AND SYMMETRIC CHOICE 457  An Illustration of the SALT Approximation  Using the same pentagon example as above, we assume that the set of allowed symmeties includes the 10 reflections and  rotations, and that the SALT approximation holds (i.e., the normalized choice function, Q, can be expressed as a single  product of powers of the values of the symmetry-breaking parameters). This gives the following equation for key 1's share:  Q(S1) _ (xll('xl'x2'x3x4x5)lis)n(x2x51x12)a(x3x4Ix12)Y.  (10)  It satisfies, for every numerical value of the powers a, fl, y, the conditions we have imposed.  First, Eq. 10 has overall symmetry. If we permute the subscripts on the x's, and on S cyclically, we get another equation of  precisely the same form for each of the other S's. For example,  Q(S2) _ (x'2/(`x2'x3'x4'x5X1)"5)a(x3xllx22Y(x4x'5Ix22), (11)  is an equation for the normalized share of key 2 having the same form as (10). Second, the equation is a SALT approximation in  powers of the x's which, as we remarked, must (and does) have a sum of exponents equal to 0. Notice, too, that the expression  for Q contains three factors, each of which, separately, has an exponent sum of 0. Thus each term is dimensionless,  irrespective of the dimensions attached to the quantity x itself.  Next, the equation obeys the relative equivalences dictated by the symmetry group. In particular, `2' _~ `5' ('1'), and `3'  _-- `4' ('I'). These imply that in the equation for Q(S,), the powers attached to x2 and to x5 must be equal (i.e. a12 = a15).  Similarly, a13 = a, . Equation 10 has these properties and, therefore, remains numerically unchanged under the following  uniform exchanges of subscripts 2 <-> 5 and, simultaneously, 3 <-> 4, that is, (25)(34), in usual notation.  Roughly, Eq. 10 says that there are three strategic combinations of the variables x that determine the behavior, each a  dimensionless combination. The share of pecks bestowed on key 1, says Eq. 10, depends essentially on three rough quantities:  the value of x on key 1 itself, the values on the adjacent keys considered as a pair, and the values on the two remote keys  (3,4) considered as a pair. The SALT approximation loses one possible feature of the original system. In Eq. 10 we can  exchange the subscripts 2 and 5 and leave the equation numerically unchanged. In the geometrical situation that equation  intends to describe, the interchange (25) does not leave the system unchanged, unless accompanied by the simultaneous  interchange (34). That is, (25)(34) is a symmetric operation of the original system, but (25) and (34) are not. In the SALT  approximation, however, all three operations leave the equation fixed. Experiment will decide whether that approximation is  useful.  458 NATAFOFF  Suppose the pigeon's pattern did not distinguish the influence of remote keys from that of adjacent ones. The exponents  attached to each of these groups, then, would be equal, g = y, and the product of the two latter factors would be of precisely  the same form as the first one: (x11x1x2x3x4x5)iis)1. This form is the normalized value of xl , that is xl divided by the  geometric mean of all the x's. That function taken for all the different keys and multiplied together, will give 1. This would  mean that the normalized response is simply some power, a, of the normalized value of the independent variable, x. As we  mentioned, that very law is obeyed (with a = 1, N = 2) in certain experimental situations and called the Herrnstein matching  formula.  If, in addition, key 1 cannot be distinguished from the others, xl's exponent must be the same as the others', a = 0, O = 1  and we have complete identity of all the keysequal shares on all of them.  Suitable Variables  One of the major aims has been to simplify the phenomenology of choice experiments by using symmetry. We have a set of  dependent variables whose relation to a given set of independent variables is to be clarified, and we need to remember that  the application of symmetry is a relatively refined operation that depends, for its usefulness, on a satisfactory original  choice of variables.  For example, in a two-key situation, we could treat the equation as a function of xl and x2 separately, or perhaps, better, as  a function of the following variables: <x; _ (xlx2)1i2, the geometric mean of the two x values and second, xll<x;. We lose  nothing by this second choice since we could reconstruct the original x's from the new variables. We would gain if the  distribution happened not to depend on the absolute magnitudes of the x's, but only on their relative sizes. Then, the  equation would not be a function of <x> at all and only one independent variable would enter.  This facilitates phenomenological investigations considerably by permitting the results to be plotted against a single  independent variable, on a simple sheet of graph paper. More helpful, if the choices depend, not on the x values themselves,  but on some power of them, the actual exponents could be determined directly from the plot. In the pentagon example, the  exponents a, g, y would have to be determined in some such way.  By contrast, if we used xl , x2 , separately, we would need three dimensional plots (or at least contour diagrams). We could  not determine the exponents directly (say from the slope of the usual log-log plot), but only substantiate a correct guess as  to their magnitude.  One part of the simplification comes from the fact that fix; _ (xlx2)1; 2 is an invariant-it has the same value if we exchange  the subscripts 1 and 2. In the SALT approximation then, <x> cannot appear. If it appeared to any power # 0, it would do so in  the expression for each key. Since no invariant except 1 is common to all normalized weight functions, this cannot happen.  Thus, the SALT approximation is guaranteed to be independent of magnitude and to contain one less parameter.  SYMMETRY AND SYMMETRIC CHOICE 459  From the fact that the exponents in SALT approximations add to 0, we see that SALT always implies independence of scale. If  each component, xi , is multiplied by k (that is, the scale is uniformly reduced by a factor, k), each factor x'ij is  multiplied by kaii , and the whole expression, by k"ai,. That sum, however, is 0, so that the expression remains unchanged.  Notice, by contrast, that any term containing a net power of <x) will not have this property. If we multiply each component by  k, we would be multiplying <x> by k. The dimensionless combination xll<x>, on the other hand, remains unchanged since both  numerator and denominator are multiplied by the same factor. Thus, powers of the second variable do not cancel those of the  first and the equation will change under a change of scale.  The considerations above derive from symmetry, and start from the assumed variables xl and x. . If they are not the central  variables in the problem, of course, any further analysis is futile. More importantly, those variables ought to be roughly as  rapidly varying as the dependent variables they are asked to deliver. If the phenomenon depends on log x, x is not a suitable  variable, nor is y = ex, in which to express the dependence.  Two useful relations emerge, in this connection. First, if the function f (Si) is null, then the function g(Si) = efesi> is  normal. Second, conversely, if g(Si) is normal, f (Si) = log g(Sj) is null. For example, the function f (Si) = (xi - x)l<xj is  null (sums to 0 over all Si), so that its exponential, g(Si) = ef(si) = exp(xi - x)1,`x is normal. This function gives equal  shares to all keys in 0th order (i.e., if every xi = x), and approximates the Herrnstein function in first order, if the  values xi are close to x. [Numerically, if xl = 9, x2 = 1, then the normalized shares according to the Herrnstein function  would be (3, s); under this formula, (3.8, 1/3.8).]  This illustrates another useful feature of symmetric focus. While there are often hosts of possible formulas consistent with a  given set of data, there are few that give simple symmetric formulas. The procedure of constructing simple null functions and  taking their exponentials is one systematic approach. The example above gave a result similar to that given by SALT (the  Herrnstein result is a SALT). Yet SALT gives a power relationship, and this result is an exponential. Both, however, are  independent of absolute magnitude, in this case. If the <x; factor were omitted from the exponential, the approach through  null function would give a result that depended on the magnitude of the x's, and not merely their ratio(s). With SALT, that  can never happen.  We should mention the role of fractional (unit sum) functions in this connection, since they have been so often used in  practice. We have two choices: change the function to an equivalent null function, or to an equivalent normal function. We can  consider instead of the original function, the deviation of that function from its average value taken over all of the keys  (i.e., 1 /N). Instead of xll(xl + x.), for example, we would have the same with z subtracted from it which simplifies to (xl -  x)l2x which is null, where the original is fractional. Similarly, we could have made the original  480/7/3-6  460  NATAPOFF  normal, as illustrated earlier, by dividing by the geometric mean of the Vs, lx). Since that is an invariant, the normal and  original functions are equivalent, whereas the null function made from the original refers to an entirely different  function-the deviation of the first from its average value. With these remarks, the results apply to the usual analyses.  We notice in passing that when we shift a function by an invariant (in the case above, I IN) we get a new function; when we  multiply a function by an invariant (in the case above, by <x)) we get an equivalent function back.  We have assumed all along that the variables x give the proper independent quantities that will yield the simplest result.  Conceivably, linear (or other) combinations of the x's would be more suitable; other quantities, y, might also need to be  combined with the Vs, in general. The analysis suggested, again, depends on a shrewd choice, and cannot, generally, help in  making it.  When one plots a function on a log-log, or semilog plot, the considerations above determine whether the graph will appear as a  straight line. If SALT holds, and the plot is of a normalized choice function against a normalized variable (such as xll<x>)  it will be a straight line; if we chose to work with the fractional function, the corresponding plot would hold if, not only  SALT held, but also if (and only if) we chose the proper exponent in SALT.  A Further Illustration: The Isosceles Triangle. Inducing a Symmetric Description on an Initially Nonsymmetric System  Although all symmetric systems are alike in the applicability of group theory, each nonsymmetric system (to paraphrase  Tolstoy) is nonsymmetric in its own way. A special assumption about the details of the system is required in each particular  case to permit the application of group theory. The strategy underlying the choice of such an additional assumption aims at  embedding the original asymmetric system in a conceptually larger, symmetric one in which the old asymmetry appears, not as a  basic feature, but as a numerical consequence of some symmetry-breaking variable. Essentially, the symmetry assumed to govern  the system is enlarged, at the cost of introducing new symmetry-breaking variables.  We consider, as an illustrative example of this procedure, an isosceles triangle at whose vertices lie three keys-numbers 1  and 2 along the base; number 3, at its apex. Apart from the small geometric asymmetry, there is another, carried by the  variable x, whose values on the three keys are (xl , x2 , x3), respectively. We want an equation under which all three keys  (states), not merely the two base keys, are equivalent. To achieve this, we will need some suitable variable that will  effectively represent the geometrical asymmetry.  Before the symmetry has been enlarged, we expect only the base keys to be equivalent. That is, there is one function, say gl ,  that gives the share (gl(S,), gi(S2)) apportioned to either base key, and another, ga , for the share ga(S,) appearing at the  SYMMETRY AND SYMMETRIC CHOICE 46)1  apex key. Moreover, although (relative to the original symmetry) `1' = `2' (`3'), `2' _~4 `3' (`1') and `3' ~E `1' (`2'). That  is, although xl and x2 play precisely the same role in the expression for ga(Ss) (they should, the base keys are geometrically  indistinguishable as seen from the apex, `3'), the role of either in the expression for the share of a base key can be  distinguished from that of x3 , the corresponding property of the apex key.  Initially, then, the group of symmetries is assumed to contain two transformations: the identity (1)(2)(3) = I (leaving all  the keys alone), and the simple reflection in the axis of symmetry [exchanging keys 1 and 2, while leaving 3 fixed, i.e.,  (12)(3)].  We would like to have a larger group-one including, for example, all the rigid motions of the triangle (rotations and  reflections). The reason lies at the heart of all phenomenological exploitations of symmetry: when we have a fully symmetric  equation describing the observed behavior, we have a full description of the way in which the original asymmetric independent  variables (those having numerical values that are unequal on the various states) operate to induce unequal distributions of  choices. Stated differently, the equation having that property is theoretically acceptable in sharing or reflecting the basic  symmetry properties known to be possessed by the system it is describing.  In particular, when we have an equation for the normalized share, V(Si), assigned to the ith key-a single such equation that  holds for all three keys equally well-we will have a notion of the way the geometric asymmetry of the triangle is represented,  numerically, in the pattern of choices. That is, we will have reduced the previous basic asymmetry to a particular asymmetry  of basic detail that delivers the observed pattern of choices.  Here, we assume that the asymmetry can be delivered by the simplest kind of variable, call it t, having a single numerical  value for each key. To interchange the patterns of choice, we assume, it is necessary only to interchange the corresponding  values of t.  Even with this strong assumption (we touch in the next section on its alternatives) there are many choices of variables t that  satisfy our basic requirements and characterize the symmetry of the isosceles triangle. The entire geometry of any triangle  can be described by six numerical values giving the precise geographic location of each of the three vertices, assuming that  the triangle is in a horizontal plane, at sea level. If the triangle has two equal sides, only five different values are  needed.  Let us choose the following set: the latitude and longitude of the apex; the angle, B, made by the symmetry axis with true  North; the half-angle, A, at the apex of the triangle; and the length, L, of either of the legs.  We should emphasize the freedom exercised in this choice, a freedom that can be used with help from experimental data and  intuition, to reduce the complexity of the final equation. The first three variables above were deliberately suggested to take  advantage of the presumption that they play no role whatever in the choice distribution.  462 NATAPOFF  Similarly, in an earlier example, we suggested using <x>, the geometric mean of the various values of the symmetry-breaking  variable, x, as a basic variable, because of the possibility that it would play no effective role. Such lucky or judicious  choices reduce the number of variables operating at last, and can greatly facilitate the phenomenological analysis of the  results. The procedure is precisely analogous to that adopted systematically in classical mechanics where "cyclic" variables,  those playing a trivial role, are sought for the same reason (Goldstein, 1950). This may be thought of as a further structural  similarity between our present procedure, and the analysis of mechanical systems, such as the vibrating string, suggested  earlier.  If the same experimental result appears at different laboratories having different geographic locations, and if, at a single  laboratory, the same result is achieved when the whole apparatus is rotated, then none of the first three coordinates play any  role in the choices. This contrasts, for example, with earlier case in which the pigeon could distinguish true North. In that  case, 0 might appear in the final equation. Briefly, the experiment is assumed to depend only on the size and shape of the  triangle and not on its location or orientation.  This simplification from five to two variables presumes on, or appeals to, experimental results. If the pigeon were sensitive  to the geomagnetic field, or geographic location, these simplifications would not be available. This corresponds to the way  physical theories have translational or rotational invariance as a result of the experimental observation that linear and  angular momentum are conserved (Luce, 1959, p. 28), and not simply from the convenience that such invariances confer on the  equations.  There are, of course, many different possible characterizations of size and shape that are geometrically equivalent. Two  unequal sides, or a side and an adjacent angle will do here, geometrically. There is the interesting possibility, however,  that the pattern of choices will distinguish one choice from the others-will tell which choice best represents the role of the  geometry in the choice. This is conceivable because the different variables are not equivalent, in the sense of our earlier  definition, although they are equivalent geometrically. We should illustrate.  Suppose, for example, the governing consideration were length of side; the frequency with which a key receives pecks depends  on the length of the side opposite. If we normalize those lengths (divide each by the geometric mean of all), we find the  following values for the normalized lengths (2 sin A)"3, (2 sin A)-113, (2 sin X1)2-3. Possibly, the governing feature will  be, roughly, the accessibility of each key from the optimal position. The frequency may then depend on the distance to the  center-ofgravity (the intersection point of the medians). The normalized values of that distance (essentially the normalized  length of median) are (2 sin 1)-1/3, (2 sin /,)-113, (2 sin ~t)2-3. Again, A is the half-angle at the apex; ft is the angle  made by the median drawn to either leg with the base of the triangle. These two functions are not equivalent. Their ratio is  normal (the product or quotient of any pair of normal functions is normal) and,  SYMMETRY AND SYMMETRIC CHOICE 463  if it were invariant, each of its values would equal 1. In fact, that will only happen if ti = A, if the triangle is  equilateral. In general, then, the two variables give different results.  If the SALT approximation held for one of the variables, for example, it could not hold for the other since they are not  related by a power transformation. (In fact, tan A tan /-t = 3.) Observing a SALT result, then, would decide between the two  geometrically equivalent variables, and we might tell whether the pigeon looked at the length of side, or at the distance to  the center of gravity. More generally, if we could establish a basic relationship say for behavior in response to food amount  or frequency (e.g., the Herrnstein result), we might call that geometric variable distinguished that gave the same  relationship in the triangle case. We would distinguish the geometrical variable that bore the same functional relationship to  the pattern of choice as frequency did in, say, a Herrnstein situation.  The point is that such results are possible in principle and would illuminate the way geometric or other phenomena are  represented in choice, using an analogy with cases where we think we know the answer.  Possible Extensions  We have used concurrent choice experiments as illustrations, but these considerations apply more generally. The choices, if  symmetric, need not be concurrent. With certain assumptions, for example, the treatment might apply to recurrent or serial  choices. A single key might have different reward regimes when the light above it had turned different colors. This might  create five channels (if there were five different colors) susceptible to such analysis where the pecks bestowed when the  light is green would be counted for the green channel. The usefulness of such an approach, however, depends strongly on  certain assumptions relating to memory in the channel and dependence on sequence of presentation.  The analysis could apply to the response of paired nerves, say optic nerves, to asymmetric stimuli. Suppose a light were  focused on a point slightly off-axis. We might treat the distances xl , x2 to the respective eyes as a symmetry-breaking  variable, in an otherwise symmetric system. If one could find a numerical response function whose values are equal on the two  nerves for on-axis signals, the analysis of its dependence on xl and x2 (or other suitable variable) might be undertaken using  these methods, possibly with frogs.  In another sense, extensions could include cases in which responses are not simply numerical (a number of pecks, for example)  but rather, more complex algebraic quantities. Responses might be composed of patterns, rather than numbers. The extension in  this direction might lead to the analysis of symmetry properties of simple tensor functions, rather than simple numerical  functions.  The reconstruction of a three dimensional picture from two two-dimensional views (as seen by two adjacent eyes) provides an  illustration. Here the symmetry-breaking  464 NATAPOFF  variable x stands for distance along the line connecting the two eyes; one view is set a distance d farther down the line than  is the other. The views themselves, however, have complex differences-there is, for any fixed physical object, a whole  projection pattern that is different as seen at each eye. This pattern plays the role of response function as the distance  along the axis containing the eyes plays the role of independent variable. We might characterize the response as a pattern of  0's and 1's on some n X n grid, with the geometric properties of the object being observed providing invariance constraints  that might simplify the analysis.  Another, possibly simpler, biological application might be to the analysis of the responses of antagonistic pairs of muscles  or the nerves that innervate them. A successful description of such a system would characterize the way the body represents  the dissimilarities between the muscles in such a pair. This may suggest again that what is to be regarded as symmetry and  what as broken symmetry is largely a matter of choice-a choice controlled primarily by the difficulty in carrying out the  analysis that arises from it, rather than by any abstract theoretical consideration (Wigner, 1967).  SUMMARY  Symmetric choice experiments study the way properties are assigned to similar channels or states, and the way this  distribution depends on the numerical differences among them. Our position has been that the analysis of these exepriments can  be facilitated by exploiting the formal conclusions that group theory can derive from the particular symmetry that holds in  any case.  Where the response is simply numeric (say, a number of counts or an intensity of voltage), the phenomenological analysis is  simplified by considering the normalized values of the response (i.e., the values divided by the geometric mean of all of  them) rather than the response, or the fraction of responses on a given channel. The results are equivalent, in the end, but  the normal results are numerically simpler in a particular sense.  It was shown that any such experiment can be represented by a normal function and, therefore, by the exponential of a null  function (one whose sum, over all channels, is 0). One strategy then for exploring experimental results, is to seek to explain  them by choosing null functions of increasing complexity, then by taking the exponential of these to be compared with the  normalized values of the response.  Among the discussions of simple choice several have emphasized the role of probability and set-theoretic constraints. We have  emphasized symmetry and grouptheoretic results in the belief that symmetry is fundamental to simple choice and should be  exploited.  SYMMETRY AND SYMMETRIC CHOICE 465  REFERENCES  BELLMAN, R. Functional equations. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical psychology. New  York: Wiley, 1965.  BIRKHOFF, G., AND MAcLANE, S. A survey of modern algebra. 3rd ed. New York: Macmillan, 1965.  BRIDGMAN, P. W. Dimensional analysis. New Haven: Yale Univer. Press, 1963. GOLDSTEIN, H. Classical mechanics. Reading, Mass.:  Addison-Wesley, 1950. HERRNSTEIN, R. J. Relative and absolute strength of response as a function of frequency of  reinforcement. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 1961, 4, 267-272. LEDERMANN, W. Introduction to the theory of  finite groups. 4th rev. ed. New York: Interscience, 1961.  LucE, R. D. Individual choice behavior. New York: Wiley, 1959.  LuCE, R. D., AND SUPPES, P. Preference, utility and subjective probability. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.),  Handbook of mathematical psychology. New York: Wiley, 1965.  PITTS, W., AND MCCULLOCH, W. S. How we know universals: The perception of auditory and visual forms. Bulletin of Mathematical  Biophysics, 1947, 9, 127-147.  WEISMAN, R. G., DENNY, M. R., AND ZERBOLIo, D. J., JR. Discrimination based on a differential nonshock confinement in a  shuttle box. Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 1967, 63, 34-38.  WIGNER, E. P. Symmetries and reflections. Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana Univer. Press, 1967.  RECEIVED: June 5, 1968