10.1016/0022-2496(70)90061-1
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 7, 118-143 (1970)  The Metric of Multidimensional Psychological Spaces as a Function of the Differential Attention to Subjective Attributes  H. C. MICKOI AND W. FISCHERZ  Gdttingen University, Gdttingen, West Germany  Received July 20, 1967  Metrics of subjective spaces are derived from a common rule of combination: To every direction in R" is assigned a nonnegative  measure which reflects the importance othe corresponding attribute. Irrespective of the metric, an overall distance is  obtained by projecting the distance vector in R" on all directions of R", weighting the Euclidean lengths of these projections  by the corresponding importance scores, and averaging the weighted projection lengths. A particular metric is determined by a  particular distribution of importance scores over the directions of R". The city-block metric, e.g., assigns importance scores  ~f 0 to a set of mutually orthogonal directions only, the Euclidean metric assigns equal importance scores to all directions  in R". The average of Minkowski metrics is again a Minkowski metric.  1. INTRODUCTION, DEFINITIONS, ASSUMPTIONS  In this paper a theory of spatial models for multidimensional psychological scaling will be presented. The theory will be  described in psychological terms in Secs. 1-3 and elaborated in mathematical terms in Secs. 4-7. A discussion of possible  limitations of the method of multidimensional scaling, as suggested by Shepard (1964), and Torgerson (1965), is found in Sec.  8 and a general discussion in Sec. 9.  Multidimensional psychological scaling serves the purpose of mapping percepts or images, the subjective equivalents of stimuli  (objects, persons, concepts, etc.) as (stimulus-) points into a fictitious model-space, isomorphic to the real vector space Rn  with appropriate metrics. This space is usually called subjective or psychological space, its dimensionality n equals the  minimum number of attributes necessary for a complete but nonredundant description of the percepts studied. It is to be  constructed in such a manner, that subjective properties of stimuli are represented by projections of the respective  stimulus-points on axes of the space. By subjective properties we mean properties which are ascribed to stimuli by people or  which are inferred from verbal or other behavior of observers, not from inspection of the stimuli.  ' Now at Institute of Psychology, Philipps-University, Marburg, W. Germany. 2 Now at Dept. of Mathematics, Univ. of Bielefeld,  W. Germany.  ATTENTION TO SUBJECTIVE ATTRIBUTES 119  The axes of a subjective space are to represent subjective attributes which observers take into account when identifying,  distinguishing, or ordering stimuli. They are characterized by their direction only, in fact by a pair of mutually opposite  directions. We may use either the term "axis," Or the term "direction," depending on whether or, not we take into account the  orientation of the attribute represented by the axis.  Attributes will be considered the more subjectively correlated the more peoples' ordering or rating of stimuli with respect to  one attribute agrees with their ordering or rating with respect to the other. Attributes which yield mutually more or less  reverse orderings will be regarded as more or less negatively correlated. Subjectively uncorrelated attributes in this sense  will be called subjectively independent. They are to be represented in psychological space by mutually orthogonal axes, while  positively or negatively correlated attributes are to be represented by axes at angles <7r12 or :> 7T/2 with each other.  Most scaling models are devised so that the distance between every two stimuluspoints represents the subjective difference or  (dis)similarity between respective percepts. It will prove useful to distinguish between two kinds of difference and distances  (1) The ordinary subjective difference mentioned above shall be called overall subjective difference, or overall  (dis)similarity. Its representation in psychological space shall be called overall distance. (2) In addition we introduce the  the concept of specific subjective difference or specific (dis)similarity between stimuli with respect to some subjective  attribute. It is represented in psychological space by the specific distance between stimulus-points, i.e., by the distance  between their projections on the axis representing the attribute in question. The distance function or metric of a subjective  space gives the overall distance as a function of specific distances between the stimuluspoints. Let us assume:  1. That all subjective attributes to be considered in multidimensional scaling are linearly related;  2. That every direction in psychological space represents a subjective attribute;  3. That the sizes of overall distances and specific distances between stimulus-points are proportional to the sizes of the  overall subjective differences between the percepts represented by the stimulus-points;  4. That the overall subjective difference between two percepts results from a combination of specific subjective differences  with respect to some set of subjective attributes;  5. That it is precisely the distance function, the metric of the psychological space, which describes the "rule of  combination" (Shepard, 1964) that relates the overall subjective difference to the specific subjective differences.  For a discussion of these assumptions see Sec. 9.  120 MICKO AND FISCHER  2. A THEORY OF SPATIAL MODELS  So far, only a particular class of metrics, the "Minkowski power metrics," can be handled computationally in the construction  of psychological spaces. This class of metrics is given by  n  1  (la) dk(a, b) d k 1/k abi)  b=1  (1 b)  n k_1 d dabi  a-I dk(a' b) ) abi  with dk(a, b) denoting the overall distance between the points representing stimuli a and b, dabi denoting the distance  between the projections of these two points on the i-th of a set of mutually orthogonal axes in n-dimensional subjective space  and the exponent k (1 <_ k < oo) as a parameter which determines the particular metric.  Torgerson (1958, 1965) suggested that the degree of salience of the variables, along which the stimuli differ, determines the  Minkowski power metric which gives the best fit to a particular set of data. If the stimuli vary along perceptually distinct,  independent dimensions, the city-block model, k = 1, may give the most consistent results (Attneave, 1950; Micko, 1964;  Shepard, 1964). The Euclidean model, k = 2, might be the most suitable if the stimuli call for a sort of wholistic comparison.  This, we may assume, is the case in experiments with stimuli differing with respect to many (more or less correlated)  attributes, none of which are particularly distinguished or obvious to observers (Messick, 1956, Torgerson, 1958, Indow and  Kanazawa, 1960; Indow and Uchonozo, 1960; Micko,1964). Shepard (1964) speaks of highly analyzable stimuli in the first case  and of unitary, homogeneous stimuli in the second. Intermediate metrics (1 < k < 2) may be required by intermediate degrees of  salience, e.g., if to observers the stimuli seem to differ predominantly, but not exclusively, with respect to a set of  mutually independent attributes. From Assumption 5 and Eq. 1 a follows:  1. That the overall subjective difference between percepts is a function of specific subjective differences, with respect to a  particular set of n mutually independent subjective attributes;  2. That the city-block metric results if these n specific subjective differences are merely summed or averaged;  3. That the Euclidean metric results if the specific subjective differences are squared, summed and afterwards subjected to a  square-root transformation;  4. That other special Minkowski metrics result from similar but more complicated rules of combination.  ATTENTION TO SUBJECTIVE ATTRIBUTES 121  While the city-block metric has the support of set-theoretic (Restle, 1959, 1961) and biophysical (Householder and Landahl,  1945; Landahl, 1945) considerations, the most frequently obtained Euclidean metric suggests quite a complicated rule of  combination, so that Coombs (1964, p. 206) "... is not aware of any neurological or biophysical considerations which require  an Euclidean distance function for psychological processes."  Cross (1965) and Wender (1968) interpret the Minkowski power metrics according to (lb), an expression obtained by raising (la)  to the k-th power and dividing by dx(a, b)". The overall subjective difference now appears, for any k, as a weighted mean of  the specific subjective differences, every specific difference being weighted by its relative size raised to the (k - 1)-th  power. The expression (lb) shows, more clearly than (1 a), that, as the exponent k of the metric increases, more and more  weight is given to the largest specific differences. It must be mentioned, however, that (lb) cannot describe a common rule of  combination underlying the Minkowski power metrics, since dk(a, b) appears on both sides of the equation.  Economy is the only psychologically relevant argument, which occurred to the authors, to support the notion that overall  subjective differences result from the combination of specific differences on subjectively independent attributes. It is  tempting to abandon this view, at least when making assumptions about how observers determine the overall subjective  similarity of percepts which do not vary exclusively with respect to perceptually distinct and obviously independent  attributes.  An alternative theory (Fischer, 1966; Micko, 1967) will be presented in four postulates:  1) To every conceivable attribute, natural or artificial (see Sec. 9), and consequently to every direction P in psychological  space may be assigned a measure or weight, 0 <_ m(P), a sort of importance score or attention value. Equal importance scores  are assigned to attributes of mutually reverse orientation, or to opposite directions in subjective space.  An importance score is supposed to reflect the relevance of the attribute in question for the discrimination of the stimuli  investigated. It may be interpreted psychologically as the weight given to specific differences with respect to the subjective  attribute in question as observers determine overall subjective (dis)similarity from specific subjective (dis)similarities as  postulated. It may also be interpreted as the probability of the respective subjective attribute being considered. The latter  interpretation presupposes that not all conceivable subjective attributes are in fact considered, and it demands the attention  scores to be standardized so that their sum or integral taken over the set Sn-1 of all directions in Rn is unity (in  measure-theoretic formulation: f,.-, dm(P) = 1). If attention scores are distributed continuously over the directions of the  subjective space, they may also be viewed as a density, geometrically as the relative frequency or density of axes in a small  neighborhood (measured in angles) of  122 MICKO AND FISCHER  the axis P, psychologically as the number of discriminable qualitative nuances of the corresponding subjective attribute. All  these interpretations demand comparable and equal, e.g., subjective, measurement units for specific subjective differences  with respect to every possible subjective attribute. In terms of the geometric model, equal units for specific distances on  all axes of the subjective space are required.  Another meaning may be given to the importance scores if we renounce the assumption of equal measurement units. Let us assume  instead that all attributes are equally considered by observers and that they are assigned to equal weights in the process of  estimating overall subjective similarity. We may then conceive the attention score as a measure of the sensitivity of  observers for specific subjective differences with respect to the subjective attribute in question, This sensitivity is  reflected in psychological space by the unit of measurement for specific distances onthe corresponding axis, which is I /m(P).  2) The metric of a psychological space is a function of the specific distances on the set of all directions in the  psychological space. This approach leads to expressions which are more general than (1) and only for special metrics demand or  suggest that stimuli should be described by mutually independent attributes.  In psychological terms we assume that the set of subjective attributes, considered by observers, corresponds to the set of all  directions or axes in subjective space, or a random sample thereof, with the attention score m(P) indicating the relative  frequency of the respective subjective attribute being considered. The latter, probabilistic, formulation of the postulate is  weaker and, perhaps, more realistic.  3) The overall distance between two stimulus-points is the weighted mean of the specific distances between them, the specific  distances being weighted by the importance scores of the corresponding axes. Speaking in psychological terms, the overall  subjective difference between two percepts is the weighted mean of the specific subjective differences, the specific  differences being weighted by the attention score m(P) of the respective subjective attributes. Thus it is assumed that there  is only one rule of combination, i.e. averaging, which underlies all spatial models. In principle it is the rule of  combination traditionally assigned to the city-block model.  Since specific differences with respect to irrelevant or unconsidered attributes are weighted by m(P) = 0 they have no effect  on overall differences. Therefore, it is of no consequence if we present overall differences as functions of the specific  differences with respect to the relevant attributes only or with respect to relevant as well as irrelevant attributes. Since  zero attention scores are admitted it would even not have been necessary to confine our discussion to the relevant  n-dimensional psychological space. The discussion could just as well have been in terms of the Rm, n < m, the space in which  all conceivable attributes are represented, even completely irrelevant attributes, which are represented by axes in Rm but not  in the relevant subspace R". We shall follow, however, the common usage of the term subjective space which refers to the  relevant subspace of Rm of the smallest possible dimensionality.  ATTENTION TO SUBJECTIVE ATTRIBUTES 123  4) Different spatial models, different metrics of subjective space, are supposed to reflect different attention or importance  distributions, i.e., different distributions of importance scores over the subjective attributes, or over the directions of  the subjective space.  An alternative theory of spatial models is obtained if we replace Postulate 3 by the following proposition:  3a) The overall subjective difference between two percepts equals the greatest of the specific subjective differences, after  these have been weighted by the importance scores of the respective subjective attributes.  d(a, b) = SUP(dabP - M(P)), (PeSn-1)  A theory of spatial models based on Postulate 3a is mathematically more straightforward than a theory based on Postulate 3 and  avoids an essential difference between spaces of dimension n = 2 and n >, 3, inherent in the latter. It is, however,  psychologically less plausible, as long as we are dealing in multidimensional scaling, mainly  0.25  FIG. 1. Attention distributions over the directions of a two-dimensional subjective space. Because of symmetry the first  quadrant is given only. Every attention distribution corresponds to a special Minkowski metric with exponent k. A: base line  for measuring importance scores mk(P),B:k=1.1,C:k=1.5,D:k=1.9,E:k=2, F:k=2.5,G:k=3, H:k=4.  124 MICKO AND FISCHER  with Minkowski power spaces of exponents 1 < k <, 2. If Minkowski spaces of k > 2 are found more frequently in psychological  scaling experiments, (Kruskal, 1964; Wender, 1967), we may think of replacing Postulate 3 altogether by Postulate 3a, after  declaring Minkowski power metrics of k < 2 as artifacts, due to the heterogeneity of similarity-estimates (see Sec. 8). Or we  may consider Torgerson's (1965) distinction between perceptual-wholistic and conceptual-analytic cases and put to test the  assumption that Postulate 3a describes better what happens when people judge the similarity of unitary, unanalyzable stimuli,  while Postulate 3 applies to similarity judgments of more or less analyzable stimuli. In this paper, however, we shall confine  ourselves to the theory based on Postulate 3.  3. THE ELABORATION OF THE THEORY  In Secs. 4-7 the mathematical implications of the approach, presented in the four postlates of Sec. 2, will be discussed. For  the reader who does not want to enter into the details of the mathematical exposition the content and results of the  considerations will be summarized in the subsequent paragraphs.  In Sec. 4 three familiar conditions (identity, symmetry, triangle inequality) of a metric are recalled as well as two  additional homogeneity assumptions (translation invariance, homotheticity). The homogeneity assumptions express the fact that  the metrics considered respect an affine structure. The postulate that subjective spaces carry an affine structure rests on  the sometimes more and sometimes less realistic assumption that attributes can be presented in subjective space by axes, i.e.,  straight lines. Finally, the important concept of an "Eichkorper" (Minkowski, 1896) bounded by the isosimilarity contour  (Shepard, 1964) is introduced.  In Sec. 5 a general expression of distance functions is presented, which is the most concise formulation of the theory  advanced. It is shown that distance functions as defined by this equation meet the conditions of a metric. The relation  between distance functions and isosimilarity contours is pointed out.  For reasons of simplicity, let us confine ourselves for the moment to everywhere continuous distributions of attention values  over the set of directions in subjective space. Since every direction in the n-dimensional psychological space can be  identified with a surface-point of the n-dimensional unit-hypersphere, the attention distribution may be interpreted as a  density function on the surface Sn-1 of the n-dimensional unit-hypersphere. In this case the general distance function is  given by:  (2) d(a, b) = f d(a, b; P) - m(P) do(P) Sn-1  with d(a, b) denoting the overall distance between the stimulus-points a and b,  d(a, b; P) denoting the specific distance on the direction P, m(P) denoting the impor-  ATTENTION TO SUBJECTIVE ATTRIBUTES 125  tance score assigned to the direction P, and do(P) denoting the surface element of the n-dimensional unit-hypersphere  corresponding to the direction P. The integration is performed over all elements of the hypersphere-surface Sn-1, i.e., fl- is  a surface integral.  Taking into account the psychological meaning assigned to the quantities and operations constituting (2) we realize: The  specific subjective differences d(a, b; P) are weighted by the attention scores m(P) of the respective subjective attributes  (Postulate 1). The weighted specific differences are integrated, i.e., averaged, to yield the overall subjective difference  d(a, b) (Postulate 3). The integration is performed over the set, represented by Sr1-1, of all relevant and artificial  subjective attributes P (Postulate 2). The attention distribution m defines the particular metric (Postulate 4).  The distance function for the case of only a finite set of r isolated, not necessarily independent, attributes, possessing  importance scores m(P,), m(P2), m(P3)_., m(P,) > 0, is given by:  r  (2a) d(a, b) = (1/r) Y d(a, b; Pi) m(Pi). i=1  In Sec. 6 the interrelation between the set of importance distributions and the set of  metrics of subjective spaces is studied. The main results are as follows:  1) Every importance distribution defines a unique metric.  2) Every metric of a two-dimensional subjective space corresponds to an importance distribution. The equation relating the  attention distribution over Sl to the corresponding isosimilarity contour in R2 is given.  3) In psychological spaces of dimensionality n > 3 there are metrics which cannot be obtained in the postulated manner by any  conceivable importance distribution. The supremum metric is an example.  Every metric can be obtained, or can at least arbitrarily well be approximated, by the proposed type of distance function with  an importance distribution not everywhere nonnegative. It appears hardly possible, although tempting, to give a reasonable  psychological meaning to negative attention scares.  4) The Euclidean metric is the only one that permits arbitrary rotation of a set of mutually orthogonal reference axes without  changing the distances or the circular isosimilarity contour. Other metrics permit some rotations. In order for an  isosimilarity contour to remain invariant under some rotation of the Rn the importance distribution must also not be changed  by the rotation.  In Sec. 7 the following selected metrics and importance distributions of particular interest are discussed:  1) The city-block metric corresponds to an attention distribution which assigns importance scores m(P) = 0 to all but a set of  n mutually independent attributes  126 MICKO AND FISCHER  represented in psychological space by n pairwise orthogonal axes. The isosimilarity contour corresponding to the city-block  metric is an n-dimensional "hyperoctahedron."  2) If all but a finite set of m >, n isolated, not necessarily independent, attributes, which are represented by axes in Rn,  are assigned importance scores m(P) = 0, the isosimilarity contour is a polyhedron.  If a finite random sample of attributes is drawn on the basis of a continuous importance distribution, the "isosimilarity  polyhedron," defined by the attributes sampled, will approach the shape of the smooth isosimilarity contour corresponding to  the original importance distribution, if the sample is large enough.  3) The Euclidean metric corresponds to a constant importance distribution over the directions in Rn. That is to say, all  relevant attributes, or all directions in psychological space, respectively, are assigned equal importance. Consequently, the  choice of reference axes is arbitrary and rotation is a matter of convenience.  4) The Minkowski power metrics of two-dimensional subjective spaces, intermediate between the city-block metric and the  Euclidean metric (d(a, b) = (d,',',, -}- d b2)likwith l < k < 2), correspond to importance distributions which may be  described as follows: Maximum importance scores m(P) are assigned to a pair of mutually orthogonal axes, but axes, adjacent to  one of these, are also assigned importance scores m(P) > 0. As the angle between the "nearest" principal axis and the axis P  increases, the measure m(P) decreases. The decrease, which is abrupt for k = 1, the city-block metric, is steep for values of  k exceeding 1 by a small amount only. As k grows and approaches 2, the importance distribution becomes flatter and flatter  until for the Euclidean metric, k = 2, the distribution is constant (see Fig. 1).  Speaking in psychological terms, the metric of the subjective space will be a twodimensional Minkowski power metric,  intermediate between the city-block metric and the Euclidean metric, if a pair of independent subjective attributes is mainly  although not exclusively considered in the determination of overall subjective similarity. It looks as if a kind of error  causes the attention to spread over attributes or nuances which are more or less closely related to the primary ones. If the  primary attributes are distinct and the error is small, the metric will not differ much from the city-block type. If the error  is overwhelming, if a pair of mutually independent attributes only slightly dominates the other attributes, the metric will be  nearly Euclidean. The error is distributed centrally symmetrically but not normally.  This interpretation of Minkowski power metrics with 1 < k < 2 agrees very well with Torgerson's (1958) proposition that k is  related to the degree of salience of the relevant attributes. It agrees somewhat less with Torgerson's (1965) proposition that  k is related to a conceptual-perceptual continuum. Hyman and Well (1967, 1968) showed that the index k of the normally  Euclidean color space can be reduced by drawing attention of observers to particular attributes. Wender showed (1969) that  ATTENTION TO SUBJECTIVE ATTRIBUTES 127  the exponent k of the city-block space of geometric figures can be increased by shortening the exposure time.  The Minkowski power metrics 1 < k < 2 are discussed for the two-dimensional case only, but matters do not appear to be  different in principle for n > 3. Kruskal's (1964) version of Shepard's (1962) nonmetric multi-dimensional scaling procedure  permits a determination of the index k. It is to be hoped that similar, not too costly approaches will be developed, by means  of which metrics, other than the Minkowski power metrics, may be tried out as well. We could thus gain information about the  relative importance of the directions in subjective space and the corresponding attributes.  4. GENERAL PROPERTIES OF METRICS ON Rn  By Rn we understand the topological space of n-tuples of real numbers (= points), for the moment without any additional  structure. Let us first recall some well known facts: A metric on Rn (compatible with the topology) is a function d assigning  to every pair (a, b) of points a nonnegative real number d(a, b), the "distance" of a and b. It is subject to the following  axioms:  (3) (4) (5) (6)  d is a continuous function of a and b, d(a, b) = 0 if and only if a = b, d(a, b) = d(b, a),  d(a, c) <_ d(a, b) + d(b, c).  For any fixed point a and fixed positive number a, the set of points b such that d(a, b) = a will play the same role as the  "sphere of radius a and centre a" does in the Euclidean metric. In the psychological context, this point set is nothing else  than an "isosimilarity contour (or hypersurface)" around the stimulus represented by the point a.  These metrics may have unpleasant properties: There is no means to compare isosimilarity contours around different centers, or  even concentric isosimilarity contours with different "radii." Moreover, the regions bounded by the isosimilarity contours  need not be convex (this would mean that the metric respects somehow the affine structure, as the notion of convexity belongs  to affine geometry). As this class of metrics is far too general to permit a concrete and geometric theory, we have to  introduce some additional hypotheses.  We stipulate, in fact, that metrics to be considered are compatible with the natural affine structure of Rn. This means  intuitively that the metrics respect straight lines and parallelism. Mathematically, this is equivalent to the following  homogeneity conditions:  (7) d(a -}- c, b + c) = d(a, b),  (8) d(a, a + Pb) = fl I - d(a, a + b), for all a, b, c in Rn, fl in R.  128 MICKO AND FISCHER  Equation 7 expresses that isosimilarity hypersurfaces of equal radii around different points are translates of each other; (8)  expresses that concentric isosimilarity contours are homothetic to each other.  By (7) it is sufficient to study d on pairs of points of the form (0, a), which may be interpreted as vectors a starting from  the origin 0. Writing d(0, a) = 1(a) (= length of vector a), axioms (4)-(8) simplify to  (9) l(a) = 0 if and only if a = 0,  (10) 1(aa) _ I a I - 1(a),  (11) 1(a + b) < 1(a) + 1(b).  This class of metrics is known as (general) Minkowski metrics or norms on the afine space Rn. They were introduced by  Minkowski (1896) as a tool in the theory of convex bodies and in geometry of numbers.  It is easy to prove that isosimilarity hypersurfaces of Minkowski metrics are convex; any proof, however, rests heavily on (7)  and (8). When Shepard (1964) closely connects validity of the triangle inequality [i.e., (6) or (11)] and convexity, he  tacitly assumes homogeneity conditions for the metric.  It is, of course, only reasonable to suppose the metric of a subjective space Minkowskian when the subjective space carries a  fairly natural affine structure; e.g., the notions of "percepts lying on a straight line (not necessarily passing through the  origin)," of "parallel translations of a pair of percepts," etc., must be meaningful. Conditions for a general metric space to  be Rn with a Minkowski metric are given by Busemann (1933). It seems likely that subjective spaces are not always Minkowskian.  If Shepard (1964) finds a nonconvex isosimilarity contour, this does not contradict metrizability of the subjective space, but  excludes only the existence of a Minkowski metric. In the sequel, the term "metric" means always "(general) Minkowski metric."  By (10), a metric is completely determined by the set of vectors having length 1 with respect to it; by (10) and (11) the  endpoints of vectors (starting from the origin) of length 1 form a convex body B, symmetric to the origin, the boundary of  which is the "standard" isosimilarity hypersurface.  Conversely, any n-dimensional symmetric convex body in Rn determines uniquely a metric satisfying (9), (10), (11) in the  following manner: For any vector a # 0 there is exactly one positive number a such that as ends on the boundary of B. Then set  1(a) - a-.  A handy description of such a convex body B is by comparing it to the Euclidean unit sphere Sn-1 in Rn : For each point P in  Sn-1 denote by ep the vector joining the origin to P, and by p(P) the unique positive number such that p(P) - ep ends on the  boundary of B. The function p(P), defined on Sn-1, or, equivalently, on the set of all directions of Rn, describes the  boundary of B. It is a classical result that p is continuous and almost everywhere differentiable. It should be emphasized  that we use here the  ATTENTION TO SUBJECTIVE ATTRIBUTES 129  Euclidean structure of Rn as a purely technical device (for numbering directions by points of Sn-1), it need not have any  meaning in the subjective space itself.  S. GENERATION OF METRICS ON SUBJECTIVE SPACES  Our way of generating metrics may intuitively be described as follows: One projects the vector a on each direction of Rn and  defines 1(a) to be the weighted mean over the lengths of these one-dimensional projections. The weight in question is  precisely the distribution of the importance scores attributed to the different axes.  In precise terms: Let m(P) be a nonnegative measure on the sphere Sn-l, symmetric to the origin, and define for arbitrary  vectors a  (12) 1(a) = f I a - eP I dm(P), Sn_1  where a - e, denotes the usual inner product of vectors, such that I a - ep I is the Euclidean length othe projection of a  on the straight line through 0 and P. We have to postulate in addition that the support of m (i.e., intuitively the set where  m does not vanish) is not contained in any "equatorial" (n - 2)-sphere in Sn-1. This expresses the fact that n is the true  dimension(ality) of the subjective space considered.  This measure-theoretic formulation is chosen as including and unifying the discrete case: finitely many directions ei , with  weights mi , such that  1(a) = Y mi I a - ei 1;  and the "continuous" case: continuous density 8(P) on the sphere,  1(a) = f I a - eP I - 8(P) - do(P), sn_1  where do(P) denotes the ordinary surface element.  One verifies readily that the function defined by (12) satisfies (9), (10), and (11), i.e., is a metric on the n-dimensional  vector space. Equation 9 follows from the nonnegativity of m, and the assumption on the support of m, (10) is obvious, (11)  results from J(a+b)-epI < la -epI +Ib-erl.  For the function p on Sn-1 associated to the metric l, we have obviously  or  1 _-_ l(p(Q) - eQ) = p(Q) f n- I eQ - eP I dm(P), s 7  (13) (p(Q))-1 = f I eQ - eP I dm(P) = f I cos(QOP)l dm(P)  S n-1 S-1  480/7/1-9  130 MICKO AND FISCHER  In the theory of convex bodies, Blaschke (1916) studied this integral, for n = 3, as defining the support function of a convex  body. This body is related to ours by polar reciprocity (see Bonnesen-Fenchel, 1934).  6. RELATIONS BETWEEN METRICS AND ATTENTION SCORE DISTRIBUTIONS  It is natural to ask for the truth of the following assertions:  (a) Every metric on Rn may be obtained by an importance score distribution via (12);  (b) A metric which is representable by an importance score distribution via (12) determines this distribution in a unique  manner.  The mathematical investigation of these questions reveals a fundamental difference between the cases n = 2 and n > 3 (n = 1  being trivial). For n = 2, (a) and (b) are true and, thanks to the powerful technique of Fourier analysis, everything is, in  principle, accessible to computation. For n > 3, the uniqueness assertion (b) remains true, but (a) is false. If, however, we  drop the assumption that the measure m be positive, we can prove an "approximation" of (a), and even (a) is probably true in  this case. But unfortunately, no reasonable criteria are known for a convex body (or a metric) to be representable by (12)  with positive m, although this problem was posed 50 years ago (Blaschke 1916; W. J. Firey, personal communication). It should  be mentioned that the same problem has also occurred in a statistical context (H. G. Kellerer, personal communication).  Let us summarize the above considerations in three propositions:  PROPOSITION I a. For n = 2, every metric is obtainable by (12) from a positive measure. This measure is uniquely determined.  PROPOSITION 1 b. For n > 3, every metric with smooth isosimilarity surfaces is obtainable by (12), if we admit measures m  which are not positive. The occurring measures have continuous, but not necessarily positive, densities.  PROPOSITION lc. If, for arbitrary n, a metric is obtained from a (not necessarily positive) measure via (12), this measure is  determined uniquely.  The proof of proposition 1 a is given below. Proofs of propositions 1 b, c will not be given here, since they are too  technical. We refer the reader to Blaschke (1916, p. 154-155), where the proof for n = 3 and smooth surface is indicated.  Proposition lb is stronger than it seems, because every convex body may be arbitrarily well approximated by convex bodies with  smooth or even analytic surfaces (Bonnesen and Fenchel, 1934, p. 35). It should be remarked that proposition lb raises  ATTENTION TO SUBJECTIVE ATTRIBUTES 131  another mathematical problem which is also unsolved up to now; namely, to find necessary conditions for the measure m (no  longer assumed to be positive) to give rise to a metric by (12).  Proof of Proposition 1 a. p and m, being respectively a function and a measure on the circle S1, may be regarded as depending  on the angle (p between the vector ep and a fixed axis; or even as functions of a real variable, periodic with period 2rr, in  fact with period rr, as follows from the symmetry condition. Equation 13 now reads  (14) (P(9,))-1 = f 2~ I cos(g, - f dm(o), 0  so that p-1 is essentially the convolution product of the function I cos I and the measure m. Regarding p, m, and I cos I as  distributions in the sense of Schwartz (1957, p. 80), we may represent them by their Fourier series  dm(p) =  -00  c ei  cos 9' _ Y b,ei- with b, = 0 for odd v,  "_-Go b2u = (2/-)(-1)u+1 (4/~,z - 1)-1.  The symmetry conditions p(4' + rr) = p(9'), m(ip + 7r) = m(T) are equivalent to the vanishing of a, and c, with odd indices.  The convolution Eq. 14 is equivalent to the equations  (15) a, = 2rrbfor all even v.  When the metric 1 is given, i.e. when the av are known, (15) admits a unique resolution for the c, , so that the series Y%  c,ei- converges to a distribution A la Schwartz on S1. Making use of the values of the b, , we obtain a more explicit formula  for m:  implies  a2ue2uiro  If we differentiate this series twice term by term, we get the second derivative H" of h  in the sense of Schwartz's distributions:  x  H" (p + 2 _ Y  _ -1)-(-41.2) a,ue2uim. u=-00  u=-ao  h (, + _ atue-ie2uim = (- 1)u a2u e2uim. 2  u=-o0 u=-c0  132 MICKO AND FISCHER  Finally we get    4(hlp+ _  x  21+W(9,+ _ 4w2) a2ue2uim  2 )#     u=-ap   or  _ _ -   ~ (-l)u (1 41,2) b2uc2ue2uim   .'   u--pp  - x   Y- C2ue2uim = m(9,).  By the regularity conditions following from p = h-1 being the boundary function of a convex figure one may conclude that m is  in fact a measure, not only a distribution. Before we complete the proof, we extract and comment on Proposition 2.  PROPOSITION 2. Let p(4') be the boundary function of a plane convex symmetric figure, h(,p) _ (p(-p))-1. The corresponding  measure, uniquely determined by (14), is given by  m(9')-4~h(T+ 2)+H"(9,+ 2);,  where H" means the second derivative of h in the sense of Schwartz's distributions.  If h is twice continuously differentiable in an interval, H" coincides with the usual second derivative h" in this interval.  If the boundary of B (hence h(p), too) is piecewise twice continuously differentiable with finitely many corners, say at  angles T1 ,..., cp2k , the first derivative of h will have jumps of height say jK at TK , the usual second derivative is a  continuous function in general not defined at the op. , and  2k H"=W+Y7K~mK> K=1  where 8lp designates Dirac's 8-distribution at the point 9)K . In other words, m is a K  measure, sum of a measure ml having the continuous (not necessarily everywhere defined) density 1{h(q9 + a/2) + h"(T +7r/2)1  and of a discrete measure m2 assigning the masses 4j, to the angles q)K .  Now we continue the proof of proposition la and show the nonnegativity of m, assuming h(T) to be piecewise twice continuously  differentiable; the general case then follows by an approximation argument. In the special case, one verifies easily, using  the convexity of B, that the jumps jK are nonnegative; thus, the discrete component m2 is nonnegative. Now let 4> :F~z rpK ,  i.e., h twice differentiable at (p.  ATTENTION TO SUBJECTIVE ATTRIBUTES 133  Convexity of B at 9' is equivalent to  1 1 1 sin E  P(9') m(--p -+,E) ) sin 2E  for small E > 0 or to  h(9, -I- E) + h(q, - E) > h(w) sin 2E . sin E  But E-2(h(9' -F- E) + h(p -E) - 2h(g))) tends to h"(47) as E --* 0, SO E-2(h(9' + E) h(T - E) - (2 - E2) h(p)) tends to h(T)  -}- h"(9)) as E --> 0. By the convexity, the expression in parentheses is greater than  h(~) sin 2E sin E  -2+E2  which is positive for small E. Thus h"(p) -}- h((p), as a limit of positive terms, is nonnegative.  PROPCSITION 3. Let p and m be as usual, and let a be a rotation or reflection of the n-dimensional vector space such that  m(a(P)) = m(P) for all P in Sn-1. Then p(u(P))= p(P), i.e., invariance of m under a implies invariance of p, or B, under a. If  n = 2, invariance of p implies invariance of m.  Proof.  P(Q) = f I eQ - e,, I dm(P) = I i ea(r) ' ea(Q) I dm(P)  S"-~ S"-1  I ea(Q) - ea(r) I dm(-(P)) = f I eo(Q) - eR I dm(R) = p(-(Q))  The converse assertion for n = 2 follows from Proposition 2.  7. SOME SPECIAL METRICS  We shall first deal with the case of discrete measures, i.e.  2k  l(a)=~m; Ia-eil. i=1  134 MICKO AND FISCHER  If a varies in an angular sector not meeting any of the hyperplanes planes orthogonal to the ei , the products a - ei have  constant sign, and we may write  2k 2k  l(a) _ Y (+mi) - a - ei = a ' (Y (i) ei), i=1 i=1  and l(a) = 1 becomes the equation of a hyperplane. Thus B is a polyhedron the edges of which lie in the hyperplanes orthogonal  to the ei .  If n = 2, every convex symmetric polygon may be obtained in this way: If the 2k > 4 vertices of a given B have polar  coordinates (r, , (p,), where  ... 4,-1 : = 9'k-1 - a < TO < <P1 < ... < 4'k-1 < To + 7T = Pk < ...  the corresponding measure assigns to the points (1, (p, - 7r/2) of S1 the masses  sin(p. - T.-I) + r,-', sin(p.+1 - 9'K) + r,-' sin(TK+1 - TK-1) 4 sin(9~K+1 - pK) sin(9,K - 9'K-1)  If a given discrete symmetric measure has masses mK at (1, TK), 9)K as above, the corresponding polygon has vertices at (r,,  9)K +7r/2), with  2rK - mo sin(9,K - 9,0) + .. + mK-1 sin(g,K - 4,K-1)  + m,,+1 sin(,pKa-1 - pK) + ... + Mk-1 sin(Tk-1 - 9K)  Indication of proof. Let B be a polygon and apply remark after Proposition 2: The general equation of the faces of B is  h(4') = P(4,)-1 = a sin 92 + g cos T; 4)K-1 < 9' < 4'K .  Now obviously h(T) + h"((p) = 0, so that the continuous component vanishes, i.e., m is a discrete measure with masses at the  angles 9)K - 7r/2. It is easy to compute the explicit equations of the faces and then the jumps jK of h'. mK = 4j, gives the  above formula. The second assertion results from a simple computation.  If n > 3, we obtain only special polyhedra by this procedure; the set of (n - 2)dimensional faces of such a B must decompose  into cycles lying on (n -1)-hyperplanes through the origin. This condition is only necessary, not sufficient (cf. Blaschke,  1923).  An important special case is the convex polyhedron in Rn with vertices at (1, 0,..., 0), (-1, 0,..., 0),..., (0,..., -1) - a  square for n = 2, an octahedron for n = 3. It is the isosimilarity contour of the city-block metric  1(a) = Y l a, Y I I a - e, I + Y I I a - (-ev)I,  v=1 v=1 v=1  ATTENTION TO SUBJECTIVE ATTRIBUTES 135  where a = (a1 ,..., an) and ev has v-th component 1, 0 elsewhere. This means that the city-block metric is generated by the  discrete distribution of attention values which assigns to each of the directions e1 ,..., en , -el ,..., -ethe weight 1/2  or to each of the coordinate axes the weight 1.  Another important case is represented by the convex body in Rn with the 2n vertices (1,..., 1), (1,..., -1),..., (-1,..., -1)-  a square for n = 2, a cube for n = 3. The associated metric is the supremum metric 1(a) = sup I a, I. If n = 2, we may write  1(a) = 4 I a - (1, 1)I + 4 I a (I> -I)I + 4 I a + 4 I a  This gives a representation of the (n = 2)-supremum metric by a discrete attention value distribution, assigning weight 1/2 to  each of the bisectrices of the coordinate system. It must be noted, however, that in the case n > 2, no such representation is  possible, because the cube violates the above mentioned geometric condition.  Leaving the discrete case, we consider first the familiar Euclidean metric, the isosimilarity surface of which is precisely  the hypersphere surface in Rn. It is obviously obtained from a measure with constant density, the constant being half the  reciprocal volume of the (n - 1)-dimensional unit ball.  In discussing the Minkowski power metrics we have to confine ourselves to n = 2, as the higher dimensional case offers too  many technical difficulties.  The boundary function of the Minkowski power metric lx(a) _ (I a1 Ik -{- I a2 Ik)1i'k in R2 is easily seen to be  p(9') _ (I cos p I" + I sin 9' Ik)-Ilk.  We calculate the generating measure Mk by means of Proposition 2. It turns out that, for k > 1, the first derivative of h(,p)  = (p((p))-1 exists everywhere and is continuous. Therefore the discrete component of Mk vanishes, mk has the continuous density  4 1h l`p + 2 1 + h which is, however, not defined (or +co) at ry = 0, a/2, 7r, 37r/2, if 1 < k < 2. The computation yields  mk(9') = k 4 I (I COS (p IK + I sin (p Ik)11'k)-2 . COS 9J sin 99 Ik-2.  The investigation of this function of 9' and k is a little tedious, we only list the results. Taking account of the symmetry,  we may restrict our attention to the interval 0 < 9' < Tr/2. For I < k < 2, mk assumes its only minimum value at 7T/4, and  tends to -boo as (p tends to Tr/2 (or to 0). If k is close to 1, the minimum value is very small,  136 MICKO AND FISCHER  mk remains close to 0 on the largest part of 0 < T < rr/2, and tends rapidly to +oo at the extremities. As k runs from 1 to 2,  the functions Mk converge to the constant 1/4. If k > 2, Mk assumes its only maximum value at 7r/4, and has the minimum value  0 at the extremities 0, rr/2. If k is only slightly greater than 2, mx is small only in a very small neighborhood of 0 resp.  7r/2; as k increases to +oo, Mk becomes small throughout 0 < (p < Tr/2, with the exception of a neighborhood of Tr/4, where Mk  assumes very great values. More information can be taken from Fig. 1.  We may thus interpret Mk(T) for k > 1 near 1 as assigning very much importance to the distinguished axes 9) = 0, (p = 7T/2,  much importance to small neighborhoods of these, and very little importance to the intermediate regions. As k grows, the  emphasis on the distinguished axes decreases, the breadth of their emphasized neighborhoods increases, and the importance of  the intermediate regions increases slowly. As k approaches 2, the importance of all axes becomes approximately equal, with the  exception of small extra emphases on T = 0, T = rr/2. When k reaches 2, we reach equal status of all axes. When k surpasses 2,  there is a neglect of the distinguished axes and an extra emphasis on the middle region, centered around the bisectrices. As k  grows, an increasing neighborhood of the distinguished axes will be (almost) neglected, the essential part of the attention  will be concentrated around the directions of the bisectrices, until, for k = +oo, we arrive at the sup-metric, which takes  into account only the bisectrices. As this interpretation does not make sense psychologically, Minkowski power metrics with 2  < k G oo should rather be interpreted on the basis of Postulate 3a at the end of Sec. 2.  As the city-block metric results from projecting vectors on the two distinguished axes, and the sup-metric (for n = 2) from  projection on the bisectrices, we may interprete these results still more intuitively: The Minkowski power metrics lk for 1 <  k < 2 are city-block with respect to blurred axes, the amount of inaccuracy in the definition of the axes increasing with k,  until, for k = 2, the picture is completely and uniformly blurred. Analogously, when k decreases from +oo to 2, we may speak  of lk. as of a supremum metric with respect to blurred axes, the amount of blurring increasing as k approaches 2.  Although an explicit computation seems hardly possible for n > 2, it remains probable, that the qualitative picture of the  last paragraph holds true in this case, too. Starting with the concept of distinguished but blurred axes, we may of course  imagine other quantitative descriptions than those given by the mk associated to the Minkowski lk , and may calculate the  metric by (12) or the isosimilarity contour by (13). If we assume, for example, that m(T) is non-zero only in small  neighborhood of the coordinate axes, the corresponding isosimilarity contour will be a diamond with its vertices rounded off.  The values of m near the coordinate axes affect the size of the diamond and the type of arcs smoothing the vertices. By this  concept we may construct other meaningful transitions from city-block to Euclidean and supremum metrics than that offered by  the Minkowski power metrics.  ATTENTION TO SUBJECTIVE ATTRIBUTES 137  8. SHIFTS OF ATTENTION AND THE METRIC OF THE SUBJECTIVE SPACE  Until recently almost everyone concerned with multidimensional scaling felt rather certain that a representation of  (dis)similarities by distances in some metric space can always be achieved, at least in principle. Their confidence rested on  the correspondence of the conditions of a metric to the intuitive concept of subjective difference or (dis)similarity:  Dissimilarity is viewed with few exceptions (Bush and Mosteller, 1951; Coombs, 1964) as a symmetric relationship, the  closeness of which is to be measured by a nonnegative quantity which is zero in the case of identity only. The condition of  triangle inequality meets the notion that two percepts, which both are similar to a third percept, cannot be very dissimilar  to each other.  Pioneering experiments of Shepard (1964) and Torgerson (1965), however, pointed to serious, previously unnoticed restrictions  for the applicability of multidimensional scaling models. They concluded that the subjects, when producing similarity  estimates, must be required to stay all "in the same state of attention." Furthermore this state of attention must not change  in the course of the experiment. In terms of our theory, the importance, assigned to each of the subjective attributes in the  determination of similarity, must differ neither from subject to subject nor from item to item. Otherwise, the metric  properties of the psychological space cannot be guaranteed.  Multidimensional scaling will become much more complicated and costly if we are not allowed to pool similarity estimates of  subjects who regard the objects to be scaled from different points of view. The study of brand images or social stereotypes by  multidimensional scaling methods would then demand separate analyses at least for adherents of different brands or political  opinions. Of course, one may question from the outset the utility of informations drawn from a "common subjective space" of  adherents of different opinions. Striking examples have been put forward which show the necessity of analysing separately  similarity judgments given by groups of individuals who employ different ordering principles (Torgerson, 1965). Fortunately  scaling models are available which take into account such interindividual differences (Tucker and Messick, 1963). On the other  hand the particular object of an investigation, the need for conceptual simplicity and/or the funds available for the  execution of an investigation, may frequently necessitate or recommend the confinement to the determination of a "common  space." As long as the common subjective space is not a pure artifact, it may be an (over)simplification but nevertheless a  useful model for some purposes.  According to the theory presented above, a metric representation of (dis)similarity should be possible even though the  attention distributions of subjects differ, provided they remain invariant within each subject throughout the scaling  experiment. Averaging individual estimates of an overall distance has the same effect as estimating the overall distance on  the basis of a pooled attention distribution which assigns to every attribute the average of the individual attention scores.  138 MICKO AND FISCHER  This can be seen from  (16) 1 li(a) = 1 f a - ep I dmi(P) = J. a. ep I N dmi(P), N i=1 N i=1 S"-1 S"-1 i=I  with N denoting the number of experimental subjects and the remaining symbols defined as for (12). By (16) we are able to  average the attention distributions of any set of individuals. The average attention distribution determines the metric of the  common space. Speaking in mathematical terms: Any linear combination with positive coefficients of Minkowski metrics is again  a Minkowski metric.  Obviously, this result is in conflict with Shepard's (1964) finding that distances in a subjective space, common to subjects  of different viewpoints, violate the condition of triangle inequality or, equivalently, the condition of a convex  isosimilarity contour. Thus in order to retain the theory, we somehow must argue Shepard's results:  It is the bimodal distribution of "most similar" choices, apparent especially in Shepard's (1964, Figs. 2, 4, 5) tangential  series 3, 9, 15, and 21, which lead to Shepard's rejection of the so-far unquestioned assumption that a common subjective  space possesses metric properties. The bimodality is likely to be a result specific to the method, employed in Shepard's  critical Experiment 1, of asking only for the most similar stimulus pair out of a series. This "pick 1/n in QIVa"-method  (Coombs, 1964) yields comparativeiy little information. Let us regard the stimulus pairs of tangential series 3 (Shepard,  1964, Fig. 2) and let us consider only subjects who adopt either a consequent "match size" strategy or a consequent "match  angle" strategy, because the bimodality of the choice distribution is due, above all, to the pooling of these two extreme  groups (Shepard, 1964, Fig. 5C). We may now attempt to anticipate the average similarities which would have been obtained from  these subjects by a more powerful scaling method like ranking, rating, etc. We may ignore stimulus pairs A, B, C, M, N, O as  not contributing anything to our argument: Supposedly stimulus pair D would again be considered most similar by subjects  applying the "match size" strategy, stimulus pair L by subjects adopting the "match angle" strategy. For compensation,  however, stimulus pair D would be considered least similar by subjects applying the "match angle" strategy. The intermediate  stimulus pairs G, E, I, would be assigned medium ranks or medium scores on the similarity scale by both groups. If the ranks  or scale values were averaged over the combined sample of subjects, the resulting mean dissimilarities or distances between  all stimulus pairs would be about the same size. Thus, the concavity of the isosimilarity contour suggested by Shephard's data  would disappear and with it the objection against the possibility of a metric representation of average dissimilarities which  are obtained from heterogeneous subjects.  It must be mentioned, however, that our results concerning the pooling of data from heterogeneous subjects are valid only in  the case of distances or subjective differences being averaged. If we take the arithmetic mean of similarity estimates,  confusion data,  ATTENTION TO SUBJECTIVE ATTRIBUTES 139  etc., which are only monotonically related to subjective differences, then the distances obtained from averaged data may very  well violate the conditions of a metric even though distances obtained from individual data do not. Shepard (1958), Luce  (1963), Krantz (1967), and Tack (1968) discussed the similarity measure s(a, b) = exp(-k - d(a, b)), k > 0, which is related  to the confusion probabilities P(a, a), P(a, b), P(b, a) and P(b, b). Let us assume that we have obtained separate confusion  matrices from N heterogeneous subjects i = 1, 2,..., N. For simplicity let us consider the individual similarity measures  si(O, a). Pooling these measures by taking the geometric mean preserves the conditions of a metric for d, since from (16)  follows  N 1/N 1 N  (17) (H si(O, a)) = exp ki . li(a))  a=1 i=1  N  exp (-f S-1 ~ a - e, 1 ki - dmi(P)). N i=1  An effect, much more serious than the one discussed in the preceding paragraphs, is likely to be demonstrated in the near  future. Torgerson (1965) already showed that the estimated degree of overall subjective difference between two stimuli depends  on context, i.e., on the composition of the whole set of stimuli considered in a scaling experiment. On the basis of the  advanced theory, we can explain this effect by assuming that the attention distribution of a subject is a function of the set  of stimuli to be dealt with. From this statement it is only a short step to the supposition that subjects more or less  frequently shift their attention in the course of an experimental session. At least conditions may be envisaged that favor  changes of the attention distribution as well as conditions that impede changes. A systematic exploration of this important  point in multidimensional scaling seems to be lacking still. Most scaling models will be able to put up with random  fluctuations of attention distributions, but what is going to happen if the attention distribution changes systematically,  e.g., on the basis of some anchoring effect (Torgerson, 1965), or as a function of the kind of subjective difference  (direction) between the two stimuli just considered ?  Since the attention distribution defines the metric of the subjective space, any shift of attention, any change of the  distribution of attention values implies a change of the metric. It is only natural that distances which represent  dissimilarities based on different attention distribution, when forced into a subjective space of some uniform metric, may  violate the triangle inequality.  The situation suggests three lines of further research in the field of multidimensional scaling: Pessimists may attempt to  secure at least invariant topological properties for subjective spaces. Optimists may search for a more or less general  function describing and correcting for the distortion of attention distributions or metrics (distortions which can be  attributed to experimental variables still to be defined). Both optimists as well as  140 MICKO AND FISCHER  pessimists may try to create conditions that impede systematic shifts of attention during scaling experiments.  9. DISCUSSION  We could have discussed spatial models in behavioristic or pragmatic terms since we need not assume that points, axes and  distances in subjective space represent subjective entities or quantities in order to present and justify multidimensional  scaling as a useful research tool for psychologists. We chose psychological or mentalistic formulations because (1) an easier  and more elucidative presentation can be achieved, and (2) because from a mentalistic point of view we do not merely pursue  technical or methodological aims in studying the metrics of subjective spaces, but contribute to psychological theory as well.  Assumptions 4 and 5 at the end of Sec. 1 suggest explanations of the amazing fact that observers manage to give consistent  judgments concerning the overall similarity of stimuli, even if the stimuli are very similar with respect to some attributes  and very dissimilar with respect to others. Thus the psychological interpretation of formal properties of geometric models may  induce the design of experiments, which need not be multidimensional scaling experiments proper, for the purpose of testing  the interpretations of spatial models, if not the models themselves (Lachman, 1960; Drosler, 1965). A test of assumptions 4  and 5 is possible only if assumption 3 can be relied upon as being valid. This assumption, however, is the simplest that can  be conceived concerning the relation between subjective differences and distances in psychological space. Good reasons ought  to be brought forward before that assumption is replaced by another which will be most certainly much more complicated.  A few words must be said about assumptions 1 and 2 of Sec. 1. Without violating assumption 1 we may admit as subjective  attributes continuous variables as well as discrete variables including alternatives. It precludes, however, an attribute like  "extreme," which cannot be represented by a direction in subjective space, since the relation between extremity and other  attributes will be generally U-shaped. Similarly in subjective spaces constructed by the unfolding method (Coombs, 1950, 1964;  Bennett and Hays, 1960; Hays and Bennett, 1961) the preference variable cannot be represented by a direction, because in order  for the unfolding method to be applicable, stimulus-points representing stimuli highly preferable to some subjects must be  found more or less in all parts of the subjective space.  There are indications that stimuli, varying with respect to m mutually independent physical variables, will be mapped by some  scaling methods into Rn+1, the additional dimension reflecting extremity or social utility (Coombs and Kao, 1960; Messick,  1954; Micko, 1964; Ross and Cliff, 1964; Torgerson, 1965). Perhaps there are m-dimensional spaces of everywhere positive but  not necessarily constant curvature which fit such data.  ATTENTION TO SUBJECTIVE ATTRIBUTES 141  For the sake of simplicity, however, we limited our considerations to Rn, in the search of adequate spatial models for  psychological scaling. If we attach importance to the psychological interpretation of spatial models, we must assume that  subjective attributes like extremity, preference, etc. either remain unconsidered in the subject's estimation of  (dis)similarities, or that they define an extra dimension of the subjective space.  Torgerson (1958, 1965) distinguishes between two basically different cases in multidimensional scaling, which he regards as  endpoints of a continuum: Stimuli may vary either with respect to a multidimensional or complex attribute or with respect to  several unidimensional attributes. In the first "perceptual" case the subjective space ought to be Euclidean; in the second  "conceptual" case the space should be of the city-block type. In the present approach to multidimensional scaling, the concept  of a multidimensional attribute was not employed because of two reasons: (a) We prefer to derive different spatial models from  only one set of basic concepts if possible. (b) Even if the concept of a multidimensional attribute is employed, in the end  percepts will be described in terms of dimensions, not in terms of the multidimensional attribute. Therefore, we may just as  well raise the dimensions to the status of unidimensional attributes.  Assumption 2 of Sec. 1 demands that a subjective attribute corresponds to every axis or direction of the psychological space.  We need not require that subjects be able to specify all subjective attributes, let alone all qualitative nuances of  attributes, which they regard when distinguishing the stimuli under consideration. As a rule they will only be able to name,  roughly, the more prominent ones, and these will usually be subjectively correlated to a greater or lesser extent. Almost  everybody would name pitch and loudness as attributes of pure tones, but few would be able to name volume or density which  have been identified and represented by axes in the twodimensional space defined by pitch and loudness (Stevens, 1934). We do  not even demand that a word exists in our vocabulary for every attribute conceivable or, in fact, considered. We may also  introduce "artificial" attributes (m(P) = 0) into our considerations, i.e., attributes which can be defined as compositions of  relevant or natural attributes, which, however, people never take into account spontaneously. Shepard's (1964)  "two-dimensional" stimulus series define such artificial attributes, while the stimuli of the "one-dimensional" series No. 6,  12, 18, and 24 vary with respect to the obviously "natural" subjective attributes size and inclination.  It may be worthwhile exploring if under experimental conditions in the laboratory artificial attributes are able to serve as  classification principles, either immediately or after training. Presumably subjects can supply a missing link in a series of  stimuli varying with respect to some artificial continuum. Less likely they will be able to match parallel or orthogonal  series and to identify stimuli which show the same value on some artificial attribute while differing in several other  respects. We must note, however, that the logic of our argument does not depend on our ability to demonstrate an effect of  artificial attributes on behavior.  142  MICKO AND FISCHER  Admittedly, dealing with attributes that have no relation to behavior does not make much sense at first sight. At least a  subjective attribute, not considered by anybody, seems to be an absurd concept. It permits, however, a simpler presentation of  the theory to be advanced. Moreover, having introduced a measure of the importance of an attribute which may take the value  zero, and thus appraising all attributes for the degree of their being attended to, we may define in a natural way attributes  which are not attended to at all.  REFERENCES  BENNETT, J. F., AND HAYS, W. L. Multidimensional unfolding: Determining the dimensionality of ranked preference data.  Psychometrika, 1960, 25, 27-43.  BLASCHKE, W. Kreis and Kugel. Leipzig: Veit, 1916.  BLASCHKE, W. Vorlesungen fiber Differentialgeometrie II. Berlin: Springer, 1923.  BONNESEN, T., AND FENCHEL, W. Theorie der konvexen Kdrper. Erg. Math., Berlin: Springer,1934. BUSEMANN, H. Ober Raume mit  konvexen Kugeln and Parallelenaxiom. Nachr. Gottingen Akad. Wiss., Math. Phys. Kl., 1933, 116-140.  BUSH, R. R., AND MOSTELLER, F. A model for stimulus generalisation and discrimination. Psychological Review, 1951, 58, 413-423.  COOMBS, C. H. Psychological scaling without a unit of measurement. Psychological Review, 1950, 57, 145-158.  COOMBS, C. H. A theory of data. New York: Wiley, 1964.  COOMBS, C. H., AND KAO, R. C. On a connection between factor analysis and multidimensional unfolding. Psychometrika, 1960, 25,  219-231.  CROSS, D. V. Metric properties of multidimensional stimulus control. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of  Michigan, 1965.  DROSLER, J. Modell versus Schema in der Wahrnehmungspsychologie. Ber. 24. Kongr. deutsch. Ges. Psychol., Gottingen, Hogrefe,  1965, 65-68.  EKMAN, G. A direct method for multidimensional ratio scaling. Psychometrika, 1963, 28, 33-41. FISCHER, W. Zur Metrisierung  psychologischer Raume. Paper read at the Jahrestagung deutsch. Mathematikervereinigung, Dusseldorf, 1966.  HAYS, W. L., AND BENNETT, J. F. Multidimensional unfolding: determining configuration from complete rank order preference  data_ Psychometrika, 1961, 26, 221-238.  HOUSEHOLDER, A. S., AND LANDAHL, H. D. Mathematical biophysics of the central nervous system. Bloomington, Indiana: Principia  Press, 1945.  HYMAN, R., AND WELL, A. Judgement of similarity and spatial models. Perception and Psychophysics, 1967, 2, 233-248.  HYMAN, R., AND WELL, A. Perceptual separability and spatial models. Perception and Psychophysics, 1968, 3, 161-165.  INDOW, T., AND KANAZAWA, K. Multidimensional mapping of Munsell colors varying in hue, chroma, and value. Journal of  Experimenal Psychology, 1960, 59, 330-336.  INDow, T., AND UCHIZONO, T. Multidimensional mapping of Munsell colors varying in hue and chroma. Journal of Experimental  Psychology, 1960, 59, 321-329.  KRANTZ, D. H. Rational Distance Functions for Multidimensional Scaling. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1967, 4, 226-245.  KRUSKAL, J, B. Multidimensional scaling by optimizing goodness of fit to a nonmetric hypothesis. Psychometrika, 1964, 29, 1-27.  ATTENTION TO SUBJECTIVE ATTRIBUTES  143  LACHMAN, R. The model in theory construction. Psychological Review, 1960, 67, 113-129. LANDAHL, H. O. Neural mechanism for the  concepts of difference and similarity. Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics, 1945, 7, 83-88.  LucE, R. D. Detection and recognition. Handbook of mathematical psychology. New York: Wiley, 1963.  MESSICK, S. J. The perception of attitude relationships: a multidimensional scaling approach to the structuring of social  attitudes. Ph.D. thesis, Princeton Univ., 1954.  MESSICK, S. J. An empirical evaluation of multidimensional successive intervals. Psychometrika, 1956, 21, 367-376.  MICKC, H. C. Die Darstellung von Ahnlichkeitsurteilen als raumliche Entfernungen. Ber. 24. Kongr. deutsche Ges. Psychol.,  G6ttingen: Hogrefe, 1964.  MICKO, H. C. Raumliche Modelle fur die mehrdimensionale Skalierung. Ber. 25. Kongr. deutsch. Ges. Psychol. G6ttingen: Hogrefe,  1967.  MINKOWSKi, H. Geometrie der Zahlen. Leipzig: Teubner, 1896.  RESTLE, F. A metric and an ordering on sets. Psychometrika, 1959, 24, 207-220. RESTLE, F. Psychology of judgment and choice.  New York: Wiley, 1961.  Ross, J., AND CLIFF, N. A generalisation of the interpoint distance model. Psychometrika, 1964, 29, 167-176.  SCHWARTZ, L. Theorie des distributions. Tomes I et II. Paris: Herrmann, 1957.  SHEPARD, R. N. Stimulus and response generalization: deduction of the generalization gradient from a trace model.  Psychological Review, 1958, 65, 242-256.  SHEPARD, R. N. The analysis of proximities: multidimensional scaling with an unknown distance function. Psychometrika, 1962,  27, 125-140; 219-246.  SHEPARD, R. N. Attention and the metric structure of the stimulus space. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1964, 1, 54-87.  STEVENS, S. S. The attributes of tones. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 1934, 20, 457-459.  TACK, W. H., Zeitschrift fur Psychologie, 1968, 175, 64-91.  TORGERSON, W. S. Theory and methods of scaling. New York: Wiley, 1958.  TORGERSON, W. S. Multidimensional scaling of similarity. Psychometrika, 1965, 30, 379-393. TUCKER, L. R., AND MESSICK, S. J.  An individual difference model for multidimensional scaling. Psychometrika, 1963, 28, 333-367.  WENDER, I. Der Einflul3 der Intensitit von Geruchsreizen auf die Ahnlichkeitsskalierung. Paper read at the 9th Tagung  experimentell arbeitender Psychologen, Dusseldorf, 1967. WENDER, K. Interpretation of Minkowski metrics in ordinal  multidimensional scaling. Paper read at the 2nd meeting of the Gruppe mathematische Psychologie, Marburg, 1968. WENDER, K. Die  psychologische Interpretation nichteuklidischer Metriken in der multidimensionalen Skalierung. Doctoral dissertation,  Technical Univ. Darmstadt, W. Germany, 1969.