10.1016/0022-2496(70)90032-5
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 7, 379-409 (1970)  On the Empirical Status of Axioms in Theories of Fundamental Measurement'  ERNEST W. ADAMS  University of California, Berkeley, California 94720  ROBERT F. FAGOT  University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403  AND  RICHARD E. ROBINSON  University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia  If one regards the purpose of axiomatization in fundamental measurement theory as being that of exhibiting directly testable  sets of conditions (the axioms) that are necessary and/or sufficient to guarantee the existence of numerical representations  (numerical measurements) of certain kinds, then it should be clear that most of the axiom systems that have been given in  measurement theory do not realize this objective. This raises the question of precisely what the empirical content is of  axioms in theories of fundamental measurement. The basic concept in terms of which our formal results are stated is that of  data equivalence between two theories. Roughly, two theories are data equivalent if and only if they are consistent with  exactly the same finite sets of basic "observation" statements. The significance of data equivalence is that if two theories  are data equivalent and their primitive notions are given the same interpretation, then no experimental test can refute one  without refuting the other. We are able to show, for example, that certain axioms (Archimedean and continuity conditions) are  purely "technical" in the sense that the theory with the axiom in question is data equivalent to the theory without the axiom,  whereas certain other axioms, previously treated as technical, are indirectly testable; i.e., have testable consequences when  considered in combination with other directly testable axioms. The concept of data equivalence is used to analyze the  Luce-Tukey axioms for conjoint measurement, axiom systems for interval measurement, for additive and bisection measurement  (Pfanzagl), and for extensive measurement (Suppes).  ' This research was supported in part by National Science Foundation Grant GS-824, and in part by the Advanced Research  Projects Agency of the Department of Defense, and was monitored by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under Contract  No. F44620-67-C-0099. Preparation of the manuscript was facilitated by a Leave Fellowship awarded to Robinson by Canada  Council.  C~ 1970 by Academic Press, Inc.  379  48o/7/3-I  380 ADAMS, FAGOT, AND ROBINSON  In this paper, we discuss certain elementary considerations from model theory that bear on the "empirical status" of axioms in  various theories of fundamental measurement, and on the function of these axioms in empirical tests of the theories. In  particular, we are concerned with the vague but practically important intuition shared by many to the effect that only certain  axioms may contain the "empirical content" of the theory being axiomatized, while others are "technical" and may be ignored in  assessing the empirical adequacy of the theory as a whole.2 We shall attempt to give a precise, if limited, sense to the  notion of the empirical content of a theory of fundamental measurement. This will make it possible to ascertain clearly which  axioms in certain well-known theories of fundamental measurement contain a part of the empirical content of the theories, and  so can not be ignored in empirical tests, and those that do not, and so can (with certain qualifications) be ignored as  "technical."  To illustrate the methodological issues which concern us, consider the Luce and Tukey (1964) axioms for conjoint measurement.  These apply to ordered pairs (a, x) from a domain that is a cartesian product A x X, and an observationally determined binary  relation =< over this domain. The axioms are sufficient conditions for the existence of a pair of numerical conjoint measures  ml and m2 over the sets A and X, respectively, that satisfy the conjoint scale condition:  (CS) For all (a, x) and (b, y) in A x X, (a, x) =< (b, y) if and only if  ml(a) + m2(x) <_ mi(b) + m2(A  The assumption that there exists a pair of conjoint scales satisfying condition (CS) will be called the conjoint scaling  hypothesis, CSH. The Luce-Tukey axioms are trivially equivalent to the following four:  (WO) WEAK ORDERING. If (a, x) < (b, y) and (b, y) < (c, z) then (a, x) --<, (c, z); and either (a, x) --<, (b, y) or (b, y) <  (a, x).  (C) CANCELLATION. If (a, x) < (b, y) and (b, z) < (c, x) then (a, z) < (c, y).  (S) SOLUTIONS. For all a and b in A and x and y in X there exists c in A and z in X such that (a, x) - (c, y) and (a, x) - (b,  z) (where - is the indifference relation generated by <).  (A) An ARCHIMEDEAN condition (see Def. 7.3, Sec. III below).  Although the four axioms above are axioms for conjoint scaling theory, in the sense  z For instance, Luce and Galanter (1963, p. 259) say in discussing the empirical reasonableness of certain axioms in a theory  of measurement due to Pfanzagl (1959): "Axioms I and 3 are largely technical and need not be discussed."  EMPIRICAL STATUS OF MEASUREMENT AXIOMS 381  that they entail the validity of the underlying scaling hypothesis CSH, their exact relation to this theoretical assumption is  somewhat complicated. Of the four axioms, only the first two, WO and C, are actually necessary conditions for the validity of  CSH, but these two alone are not sufficient for CSH to hold, and so experimentally verifying just WO and C would not verify  CSH. The four axioms together are sufficient for CSH, but as the last two are not necessary, rejection of either of them would  not show that CSH had to be rejected. The Luce-Tukey axioms give assumptions justifying not just CSH but the use of a  particular scaling procedure (involving dual standard sequences). This scaling procedure can be used in determining numerical  scale values satisfying condition CS, but the applicability of this particular scaling procedure is not entailed by the  fundamental hypothesis CSH itself. The four axioms together are therefore necessary and sufficient conditions for the validity  of CSH together with the assumptions of the particular scaling procedure.  Although one cannot object to simultaneously axiomatizing both CSH and the special scaling procedure, it would clearly be  desirable to formulate axioms just for CSH alone, so that failure of the axioms would entail rejection of CSH. This is  particularly true in view of the fact that of the two theoretical hypotheses the Luce-Tukey theory axiomatizes, CSH is clearly  the more important, and there are many empirical realizations in which there are strong a priori reasons to think that the  Luce-Tukey special scaling procedure is unrealistic,3 even though CSH alone might be expected to hold. Unfortunately, recent  results of Titiev's (1969), based on results of Scott and Suppes (1958), show that it is impossible to give a finite list of  simple elementary conditions applicable to < that are necessary and sufficient for CSH to hold, even in finite domains. More  exactly, what has been shown is that no finite list of purely universal laws, of which WO and C are examples, are necessary  and sufficient for CSH to hold in any finite domain. And this trivially entails that no finite list of purely universal laws  plus universal existential laws, exemplified by S, are necessary and sufficient for CSH in finite domains. Since CSH alone  does not entail the existence of members of the domain A X X having any specific properties, it is hard to imagine what kinds  of elementary empirical laws other than purely universal ones could be entailed by it, and therefore Titiev's result at least  strongly suggests that the desirable objective of formulating elementary empirical laws that are necessary and sufficient for  the validity of CSH alone, even in finite domains, may be impossible to realize.4  Some of the force of the objection to the Luce-Tukey axiom set as a formulation of the "empirical content" of the underlying  theoretical hypothesis CSH could be met if it  ' We are referring to the consequence that the numerical scales are unbounded, which follows from Axioms S and A. However,  Luce (1966) has recognized that Axiom S is too strong, and has provided a more plausible alternative axiomatization which  weakens S.  ' Scott (1964) does give an infinite list of purely universal laws that are jointly necessary and sufficient for the validity  of CSH to hold in any finite domain, but as infinite sets of independent empirical laws are not empirically testable in any  obvious way, we shall not consider them here.  382 ADAMS, FAGOT, AND ROBINSON  could be shown that the nonnecessary Axioms, S and A, included in the set were "technical," hence, all the "empirical content"  of CSH was contained in just the two axioms WO and C, and S and A could therefore be ignored in experimental tests of the  theory. In that case testing WO and C alone would be an "adequate" test of CSH, since if either of these were found not to  hold, CSH would have to be rejected, and if both were found to hold, CSH could be regarded as empirically established simply  because all of its empirically significant consequences were verified. Unfortunately, it is easy to show that the Luce-Tukey  axioms are not "empirically adequate" as an axiomatization of CSH even in this weaker sense. It is easy to describe empirical  data that would be logically consistent with axioms WO and C, but would be inconsistent with CSH (and also to imagine  situations in which WO and C would be confirmed to hold for all members of an infinite domain, but in which CSH would be  inconsistent with simple empirical observations in the domain). A more limited objective would be to formulate axioms for CSH  in which all of the empirical content of the axioms was contained in some subset of the axioms that were actually necessary  conditions for the validity of CSH. However, it appears impossible to realize even this more limited objective, and this holds  for certain other systems of measurement, as well as the Luce-Tukey system.  Although the foregoing conclusion as to the possibility of getting "nice" systems of axioms for CSH and similar theoretical  hypotheses may be somewhat discouraging, nonetheless we feel that the intuition to the effect that among axioms of a theory,  certain ones are to be distinguished as having "empirical content," while others are lacking in it, is an important one  deserving of some analysis. One outcome of such an analysis would in fact be to make more precise the vague conclusion just  stated. Another would be to show that, even though certain of the nonnecessary axioms for theoretical hypotheses like CSH did  contribute to the "empirical content" of the theory, and so could not be ignored in empirical tests, others did not and  therefore could safely be ignored. As a matter of fact, one result of our investigation will be to show that in the admittedly  limited sense of "empirical content" we shall define, the LuceTukey axiom A (the Archimedean axiom) is technical; hence, of  the two nonnecessary axioms of their theory, only one-the Solutions axiom-needs to be given special attention in empirical  applications of the theory. Similar results will be found to hold in a number of related theories of fundamental measurement.  In clarifying our intuitions as to the "technical" or "substantive" status of axioms in theories of measurement, the key  concept in need of explication is that of the empirical content of such a theory. We shall not attempt a careful "analysis" of  this fuzzy but highly important notion, but shall make what is hopefully a plausible assumption concerning it, and then  investigate the consequences of that assumption. The assumption is that the empirical content of a fundamental hypothesis like  CSH is equivalent to the set of all purely universal laws that it entails. It seems hardly deniable that any purely universal  law entailed by CSH expresses part of the empirical content of CSH,  EMPIRICAL STATUS OF MEASUREMENT AXIOMS  383  since universal laws are empirically testable par excellence-not only as to whether they are logically consistent with  immediate observational data, but also for how well they are satisfied by data not perfectly consistent with them. They are  also inductively confirmable in a straightforward way. In the present case, however, it is at least plausible that the  universal laws entailed by CSH and similar theoretical hypotheses actually exhaust the empirical content of these hypotheses,  simply because (as previously noted) these hypotheses do not imply the existence of any particular objects in the domains to  which they apply, and so it is hard to imagine what kinds of directly testable empirical laws other than purely universal ones  might be entailed by CSH. Admittedly, this argument is inconclusive, and to that extent it suggests the desirability of  investigating alternative precizations of "empirical content" that would throw further light on the empirical status of  axioms. We shall not attempt any further justification for our basic assumption here, however, and shall turn instead to the  investigation of its consequences. Even if alternative approaches should lead to conclusions relative to the empirical status  of axioms that differ from those we arrive at, it seems likely that such results would not so much contradict as complement  our conclusions.  Given the assumption that the empirical content of a theory like CSH is equivalent to that of the purely universal laws it  entails, we shall be concerned with the question: Which axioms of a particular theory contain all the empirical content of the  basic theoretical hypothesis in the sense that they entail all of the purely universal laws that are entailed by the basic  hypothesis itself ? This question is trivially equivalent to the following, which is the form that we shall consider in what  follows: Which subsets ~1 of the axioms of a theory have the property that any finite set of observational data that are  logically consistent with axioms .4 must also be logically consistent with the underlying theoretical hypothesis ? In the next  section, this question is made more precise by our formulating a precise notion of an observational datum (relevant to a given  theory or set of axioms), and of what it is for such a datum or set of data to be consistent with a theory. We shall then be  able to give a precise answer to the question whether any finite set of data could possibly be consistent with certain axioms  of the theory, although inconsistent with the fundamental hypothesis being axiomatized. More exactly, we shall ask whether  data of particular kinds could be consistent with some subset of the axioms, but inconsistent with the fundamental hypothesis.  It will be shown that in some cases certain subsets of axioms in fundamental measurement theories are "empirically equivalent"  to basic measurement hypotheses relative to one kind of data (in that any finite set of data of that kind is consistent with  this subset if and only if consistent with the basic hypothesis) but not relative to other sorts of data. In particular, it  proves necessary in some cases to consider data of two kinds: one to the effect that certain observable entities stand in some  ordinal relation and one to the effect that certain of these entities are or are not identical. It is important to note that  the observable entities referred to in data expressions might be ordered pairs or  384 ADAMS, FAGOT, AND ROBINSON  concatenations of objects. Thus, in order to avoid misinterpreting "ordinal" in the narrow sense, we shall call data of the  first kind generalized ordinal data as such data would be relevant to theories of additive, extensive, conjoint, and interval  measurement, as well as to theories of ordinal measurement. It will be shown that axioms and theories differ in systematic  ways with respect to their implications for data of the different kinds.  The next section presents some fundamental definitions and states a main theorem, essentially due to Goldman (1956), that is  the basis of most of the proofs that follow. Section 11 then gives specific results concerning theories of ordered algebras,  including, in particular, theories of additive and bisection measurement due to Pfanzagl (1959, 1968) and extensive  measurement due to Suppes (1951). Section III gives results on systems of conjoint measurement, (Luce and Tukey, 1964), and  interval measurement due to Davidson and Suppes (1956) and Suppes and Winet (1955). Modifications of the above axiom systems  have appeared in the literature and investigations of the empirical status of the axioms that appear in such modifications  could be made. However, since the purpose of this paper is to introduce a basic methodological approach to questions regarding  empirical status of axioms, we shall restrict our treatment to those mentioned.  Certain of the results to be stated here were originally presented in Adams, Fagot and Robinson (1965), where the present  approach to assessing the empirical status of axioms was first proposed. The 1965 results are somewhat restricted versions of  those given here concerning ordered algebras, conjoint and interval measurement (the generalization in the present version  includes data involving identity). Pfanzagl (1968), following the approach of Adams et al. (1965), and using similar methods,  has proved theorems generalizing some of their 1965 results in a different direction. We give here a much shortened version of  the proof of the basic theorem concerning the existence of solutions to systems of linear inequalities which is fundamental to  all of the other theorems.  The presentation below is rather informal, and proofs are given only if they are not routine, and if the method of proof has  some interest of its own. Although the bulk of our discussion is technical, our concern is primarily with the methodological  issues these technicalities may throw light on-i.e., with the problem of assessing the empirical status of axioms-and only  incidentally with the technicalities themselves.  1. GENERAL CONCEPTS AND METHODS  In this section we formulate definitions of classes of ordered structures, theories of ordered structures, data (relevant to a  given kind of ordered structure) and what it is for a set of data to be consistent with a theory (of a kind of ordered  structure), and, finally, for different kinds of data equivalences that can hold between two or more  EMPIRICAL STATUS OF MEASUREMENT AXIOMS 385  theories of ordered structures of a given kind. We also describe some general features of the methods used to prove that  certain theories stand in particular data equivalence relations.  All of the theories considered are theories of ordered structures (OSs). An ordered structure is here defined to be a  set-theoretical system  such that: (1) A is a set called the domain of a; (2) ol,..., op are set-theoretical operations, called the basic operations  of 67; (3) Rl ,..., R4 are set-theoretical properties and relations defined over A, which, together with <, will be called the  basic relations of 67; and (4) =< is a weak ordering of A (see axiom WO in the introduction); which will be called the basic  ordering of dl. The domain A may be a set of individuals or the members of A may have some structure-e.g., they may be ordered  pairs. We allow the possibility that either or both of p and q may be 0, so that OSs with no basic operations and only one  basic relation are permitted. We do not require that the basic operations always be closed; i.e., that they be defined as  applied to all objects in A. When we wish to impose closure as a requirement, we shall do so explicitly.  The kinds of ordered structures that will be considered in detail are: (1) ordered algebras (OAs), which are OSs of the form  <A, c, =<j with just one basic operation, which is binary; (2) conjoint structures (CSs), which are OSs of the form <A, x A,,  <j; i.e., whose domain is a Cartesian product, and which have a single basic relation and no operations; (3) difference  structures (DSs), which are OSs of the form <A X A,  i.e., DSs are CSs whose domains are "squares."  Within each of the three categories of OSs, we shall be able to define appropriate concepts (1) of one such structure being a  substructure of another (or, equivalently, that the second is an extension of the first); (2) of a function mapping one  structure homomorphically onto another or of its homomorphically embedding one structure in another. The details of the  definitions of these notions vary with the kind of structure to which they are applied, but the following will hold in  general. First, a substructure of a given structure will be another structure of the same kind, which is obtained from the  first by restricting the domain of the first, and then restricting the basic operations and relations of the first to this  sudomain. Second, a homomorphism of one structure onto another is a function mapping the domain of the first structure onto  the domain of the second, preserving all the basic operations and relations of the first structure. Third, data that are  consistent with a given structure (in the sense that they could hold in or be true when suitably interpreted in the structure)  are also consistent with any extension of the structure; and data formulated just in terms of the basic relations of the  structure are consistent with the structure if and only if they are consistent with another structure to which it is  homomorphic. Finally, most of the basic measurement hypotheses to be considered, such as the CSH already discussed, can be  formulated  38E ADAMS, FAGOT, AND ROBINSON  as requirements to the effect that structures of particular kinds be homomorphically embeddable in a fixed numerical ordered  structure or a "canonical class" of such structures. [This way of formulating basic measurement hypotheses was first proposed  by Scott and Suppes (1958).]  For formal purposes we may identify a theory of ordered systems of a given kind with the class of all ordered structures that  satisfy its basic assumptions. However, we shall also speak occasionally of the various assumptions themselves as the  assumptions of the theory.  We must now define a datum relevant to a particular kind of theory; and then what it is for a set of such data to be  consistent with the theory. Data relevant to a theory of a given kind will, in general, be expressions that assert or deny  that certain observable objects stand in one of the basic relations of the theory, or else that these objects are identical.  We need not be perfectly formal and specify particular formal languages, but we indicate in a general way, for the given  theories, what sorts of expressions are terms and what sorts of expressions are data. For theories of OAs, CSs, and DSs the  basic ordering is the only basic relation of the theory, and therefore basic data for these theories can be taken to be  expressions of the form t, =< t2 and their denials (to be called generalized ordinal data as noted in the Introduction), or t,  = t2 and their denials (identity data) where t, and t2 are terms capable of denoting objects in the domains of the structures  to which the theory applies.  The kinds of terms that may enter into data expressions vary, depending on the kind of theory involved, and it is necessary to  say something about their structure. The terms entering into OA data (OA-terms) are variables (letters from "u" through "z,"  possibly with subscripts), together with all expressions formable from them by combining them through the use of the binary  operation symbol "o." It is convenient for us to use the notation "nt" as an abbreviation for "(( ... (t o t) ... c, t) ~~ t)"  0-times). This can be defined recursively, as follows: 1 t = t; (n + 1) t = (nt t). In the context of expressions such as "t,  o nt2" it is occasionally helpful to let n be any nonnegative integer. We can also define this recursively: t, o Ot2 = t, ; t,  o (n -{- 1) t2 = ((t, o nt2) o t2). (These notations are well-defined even when o is not associative, but they clearly are  useful only when it is.) Terms entering into CS data (CS-terms) are expressions of the form (a, fl), where a is a variable in  the sense already described, and g is a variable of the second kind, which is a lower case greek letter, possibly with  subscripts. DS-terms are simply expressions of the form (06, g) in which a and g are both variables.  Now, given a theory T of OSs of a particular kind and a set D of data of the same kind, we want to say in general what it is  for D to be consistent, first with a particular ordered structure Ol belonging to T, and second with T itself. To define these  notions we need the concept of a variable valuation in a structure. For OAs, a variable valuation in dC is simply a function v  mapping the set of variables into the domain of OL. For a CS 67 = <A, x A,, --<-,>, a variable valuation in 67 is a function  whose domain is  EMPIRICAL STATUS OF MEASUREMENT AXIOMS 387  the union of the set of variables and the set of variables of the second kind which maps variables into A1 and which maps  variables of the second kind into A2 . A variable valuation in a DS <A X A, <> is simply a function mapping the set of  variables into A.  Next, consider an OS Ol of one of the three kinds, a term t of that kind, and a variable valuation v of the appropriate kind  in 01. We want to define what it is for t to have a value under v in 67, and then, if t has a value under v in a, what the  value, v(t), is. These definitions vary, depending on what kind of structure is involved, though in all cases where a term t  has a value in an OS OC under a variable valuation v in 67, the value v(t) will be a member of the domain of 67. The simplest  cases are CSs and DSs, where terms are all of the form (a, P) such that a and g are variables or variables of the second kind.  In this case all terms (a, g) have values in 67 under v; namely, the ordered pair (v(a), v(g)), which is clearly a member of  the domain of a. For an OA-term t, a corresponding OS 67, and a variable valuation v in 67, the class of terms having values  in 67 under v is defined recursively together with their values. In these cases all variables a are terms, and all have values  in 67 under v; namely v(a). For compound terms o(t. ,..., t formed from terms tl ,..., tand operation symbol o, the  compound term has a value in a under v if and only if all of tl ,..., thave values v(tl),..., v(t in Ol under v, and the  operation o denoted by the operation symbol o is defined as applied to these values. In this case v(o(t. ,..., tn)) is defined  as o(v(tl),..., v(t.). In this special case we have taken care to distinguish between the operation symbol o, and the  set-theoretical operation o which it denotes; in what follows we shall not preserve this distinction, and so shall use symbols  like "o" ambiguously as names for operations and as names of names of operations.  Now, consider a datum of the form tl < t2 or tl = t2 , an OS a of the corresponding type, and a variable valuation v in a. We  shall say that the datum is defined in a under v if and only if the terms tl and t2 both have values in Ol under v and that tl  < t2 holds in OL under v if and only if the formula is defined, and the pair (v(tl), v(t2)) belongs to the basic ordering of  Cl, and tl = t2 holds if it is defined and v(t,) = v(t2). The denial of any basic datum holds in an OS Ol under variable  valuation v if and only if the datum is defined in Ol under v (i.e., both of its terms are defined), but it does not hold in  We are now in a position to define consistency of a set D of data of a given kind (e.g., OA-data, CS-data, etc.) with an OS 67  of that kind or a theory T of OSs of that kind. D is consistent with a if and only if there is some variable valuation v in Ol  under which all data in D hold in OL, and D is consistent with T if and only if D is consistent with some OS belonging to T.  Intuitively, a set of data of a kind appropriate to theory T is consistent with the theory if there is some structure to which  the theory applies and an interpretation of the terms occurring in the data as objects in the domain of the structure (which  is represented formally by the variable valuation involved) such that if the data asserts that two terms stand in a given  relation (ordering or identity), then the corresponding objects have that relation in the structure; and if the data deny  388 ADAMS, FAGOT, AND ROBINSON  that these terms have this relation, then the objects corresponding to the terms do not have that relation in the structure.  Data equivalence is now very simply definable. Two theories of the same kind are data equivalent if it is the case that any  finite set of data (of that kind) is consistent with one if and only if it is consistent with the other. The notion of data  equivalence is relativized to particular kinds of data by replacing the word "data" in the foregoing definition by the  appropriate kind of data. Thus, theories are generalized ordinal data equivalent in case any finite set of generalized ordinal  data is consistent with one if and only if it is consistent with the other. Identity data equivalence is defined similarly.  Before we describe in some detail the general methods we shall use in establishing data equivalence relations among theories  defined by various well-known axiom systems for fundamental measurement, we first note some trivial facts that will be used  repeatedly in these demonstrations. As already noted, any set of data that is consistent with an OS is also consistent with  any extension of that OS. It therefore follows trivially that if Tl and T2 are two theories such that any structure in Tl is a  substructure of a structure in T2 , then all data consistent with Tl must be consistent with T2 . For any two homomorphic  structures, generalized ordinal data are consistent with one if and only if they are consistent with the other. Hence, if any  structure belonging to a theory Tl is homomorphically embeddable in a structure belonging to theory T2 , then any generalized  ordinal data consistent with Tl must also be consistent with T2 .  In what follows we shall usually be concerned with the following kind of question: What is the relation between the "empirical  content" of a fundamental scaling hypothesis, FSH, and of a system of axioms 21, which are generally sufficient but not  necessary conditions for FSH to hold? We shall be interested in two things in particular: (1) Do certain subsets of s/ contain  all of the empirical content of FSH in the sense that any finite set of data consistent with the subset must also be  consistent with FSH, and (2) does the entire set have more empirical content than FSH alone in that there might be data  consistent with FSH but not consistent with v1 ? As it happens, it is useful to relativize the above questions to particular  kinds of data, because, as has already been mentioned, identity data play roles with respect to the theories we shall consider  that are very different from that played by generalized ordinal data. Hence, we shall usually begin by asking whether certain  subsets of .Q/ exhaust the empirical content of FSH relative to generalized ordinal data, and whether FSH is generalized  ordinal data equivalent to the entire set _V. The question, what role, if any, identity data may play, will then be considered  separately.  In determining generalized ordinal data ralations between axiom systems .zV and their subsets and fundamental scaling  hypotheses FSH, we shall follow essentially the same procedures in all cases, which are most easily described in their  application to theories of ordered algebras Ol = <A, o, --<-,>. In this case, all the FSHs and axioms to be considered will  share the following very general features: (1) Q/ entails FSH,  EMPIRICAL STATUS OF MEASUREMENT AXIOMS 389  (2) FSH can be expressed as the requirement that the OA G7 be homomorphically embeddnble in a fixed, "canonical" numerical  ordered algebra N = <R, o', <_>, where R is a subset of the real numbers, o' is some binary operation over this subset, and is  the ordinary "less-than-or-equal" relation restricted to R, and (3) N satisfies all the axioms of The mere fact that FSH is  expressible in the form of a requirement to the effect that an OA a must be homomorphically embeddable in a system N which  satisfies all of the axioms of V, is sufficient to entail that any generalized ordinal data consistent with FSH must also be  consistent with V-and in fact consistent with all laws that are satisfied by N. Hence the question whether the axioms have  more content than FSH, relative to purely generalized ordinal data will usually be trivially answerable in the negative.  Moreover, simply in virtue of the fact that the system N satisfies certain further conditions-for instance that it is  homomorphically embeddable in itself uniquely up to some group of transformations-it will follow that generalized ordinal data  consistent with the FSH is consistent with these further assumptions, and hence that adding these assumptions does not add  content to the basic theory relative to generalized ordinal data.  The most basic procedure we use in showing that some subset of mil, contains all the empirical content of an FSH as it applies  to generalized ordinal data involves essentially a syntactical argument which considers the syntactical form that finite  generalized ordinal data D inconsistent with the FSH must have, and then showing that any such data would have to be  inconsistent with -4. Since the FSH is equivalent to the assumption of homomorphic embeddability in the numerical OA, N = (R,  the assumption that generalized ordinal data D are inconsistent with FSH is equivalent to the assumption that D are  inconsistent with N; i, e,. that there does not exist anumerical valued variable valuation v in N, which is defined for all  terms t occurring in D, such that: (1) if a compound term tl o t2 occurs in D then its value in N is v(tl (, t~) = v(tl) ~,'  v(t2), (2) if datum tl < t2 occurs in D then v(tl) < v(t2), and (3) if tl } t2 (i.e., the denial of tl < t2) occurs in D, then  v(tl) > v(t2). Assuming that data D were inconsistent with FSH would therefore entail that there did not exist such a  valuation v. In the theories we consider, the operation o' is a linear function of its operands, and therefore the values v(t)  of compound terms t occurring in data D are linear functions of the values v(x) of the variables occurring in t-in fact in the  simplest case v(t) is simply the sum of these values. Therefore, to say that data D are inconsistent with an FSH is to say  that there do not exist variable valuations v(x) for the variables x occurring in D such that if the linear functions v(t) for  terms t in D are computed from them, the inequality v(tl) < v(t2,) holds if tl < t2 is in D, and the inequality v(tl) < v(t2)  holds if tl -< t2 is in D. And this in turn means simply that this set of linear inequalities in unknowns v(x) (for variables  x in D) has no solution in R.  To recapitulate: the fact that a set of data D is inconsistent with an FSH entails that there is no solution in R to the  unknown variable values v(x) for variables occurring in D to the linear inequalities v(tl) G v(tz) or v(tl) > v(tz)  corresponding to data  390 ADAMS, FAGOT, AND ROBINSON  ti ~< t2 or their denials occurring in D. But a theorem of Goldman (1956, Theorem 2) gives us very useful information  concerning finite sets of strong and weak linear inequalities that have no solution; according to that theorem, if these  linear inequalities have no solution, then certain relations must hold among the coefficients of the unknowns that occur.  Since the coefficient of an unknown variable value, v(x) in a compound term v(t) that contains x, is determined by the  syntactical structure of t; the fact that the inequalities have no solution and consequently certain relations must hold among  the coefficients of the unknowns entails, in turn, that the syntactic structures of the terms in the data must satisfy  corresponding conditions. The final step in the argument to show that data D, inconsistent with FSH, hence with N, must be  inconsistent with 9 also, consists in showing that any data whose terms exhibit the syntactic features entailed by the  unsolvability of the linear inequalities to which D corresponds, must be inconsistent with ,4.  We shall use the fundamental argument to show that certain subsets -4 of axioms for FSHs contain all of the "ordinal"  empirical content of the FSH in only two cases: namely in the theory of additive scales, due to Pfanzagl, and the theory of  extensive measurement, due to Suppes. Although it is possible in principle to use this direct method in other theories we  consider, it proves simpler in these cases to use one or another device to "reduce" such theories to additive or extensive  systems, or to systems that are in turn reducible to such systems. We do this first in the case of bisection measurement, due  to Pfanzagl, then with the Luce-Tukey version of conjoint mesaurement, and then with the Suppes-Winet theory of interval  measurement.  We conclude this section by stating Goldman's theorem in a form that will be most directly applicable to the sorts of problems  we are considering, together with some immediate corollaries. The version given here is essentially a translation of Goldman's  formulation into terms of linear inequalities, whereas Goldman's formulation was in terms of convex polyhedra and polyhedral  cones. Inasmuch as this formulation is no more than a translation, we shall simply give it without proof. Likewise, the  corollaries, some of which are not used in this paper but are used in related investigations to be reported elsewhere, are  almost immediate consequences of the main theorem, and their proofs also will be omitted.  Goldman's Theorem and Corollaries  Consider a set of inequalities  (IS) Y aijx7 > 0, i = 1,..., P  n  (IW) Y bi;x, > 0, i 1, ..., 4> =i  EMPIRICAL STATUS OF MEASUREMENT AXIOMS  391  where for i = 1,..., p, j = 1,..., n, ai; is a real number and for i = 1,..., q and j = 1,..., n, bi; is real (and the  possibility that p and/or q is 0 is allowed), and xI ,..., xn are real variables. Then:  (1) There exist real numbers xI ,..., xsatisfying (I) if and only if there do not exist nonnegative real numbers rI ,...,  r,, and sI ,..., sq such that at least one of rl ,..., rn is positive, and all of the sums  D 9  S; _ riai9 + Y sibij i=I i=I  are 0 for j = 1,..., n.  (2) There exist nonnegative real numbers xF ,..., xn satisfying (I) if and only if there do not exist nonnegative real numbers  rl ,..., rp , at least one of which is positive and nonnegative real numbers sI ,..., s,, such that the sums S; are  nonpositive for j = 1, ..., n.  (3) If p > 0 then there exist nonnegative xI ,..., xn which sum to 1 satisfying (I) if and only if there exist nonnegative xI  ,..., xn satisfying (I). If p = 0, then there exist nonnegative xI ,..., xn summing to 1 satisfying (I) if and only if there  do not exist nonnegative real numbers sI ,..., sa such that the sums S; are negative for j = 1,..., n.  (4) There exist positive real numbers xI ,..., xn satisfying (I) if and only if there do not exist nonnegative real numbers rI  ,..., rP , at least one of which is positive and nonnegative real numbers sl ,..., s, such that the sums S; are nonpositive  for j = 1,..., n, and there do not exist nonnegative real numbers rI ,..., rp and sI ,..., sQ such that all the sums S; are  nonpositive and at least one is negative.  (5) If the coefficients ai; and bi; are all rational then the term "real" qualifying ,..., rP and sI ,..., sq can be replaced  by "integer" in (1)-(4) above.  Clause (1) of the above theorem is a direct translation of Goldman's theorem into terms of solutions of linear inequalities,  and clauses (2)-(4), giving necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of special kinds of solutions, are immediate  corollaries of the basic result, which are derived from the fact that a solution of a special kind exists to (I) if and only  if there exists some solution to inequalities (1) together with a finite number of additional linear inequalities in xI ,...,  xn . The final clause, (5), is also a trivial modification of the basic results. It will be the clause that is most useful in  what follows.  II. SOME DATA EQUIVALENCES IN THEORIES OF ORDERED ALGEBRAS  The results stated in this section are concerned with systems of axioms for three kinds of fundamental scaling hypotheses that  may be satisfied by OAs: namely, they may be representable by additive measures, by extensive measures (which are a special  392 ADAMS, FAGOT, AND ROBINSON  kind of additive measure), or by bisection measures. Intuitively, these fundamental scaling hypotheses are that the operation  -_- acts like numerical addition over the domain of all numbers, like numerical addition over the domain of all positive  numbers, or like the operation of taking the arithmetical mean of ("bisecting") two numbers. We shall consider here axiom  systems due to Pfanzagl (additive and bisection representation) and Suppes (extensive representation). The problem is to  determine which subsets of the axioms of these systems contain all of the "empirical content" of the basic scaling hypothesis  in the sense that data consistent with the axioms of these subsets must be consistent with the scaling hypothesis itself.  Throughout most of this section we consider only generalized ordinal data, and our results demonstrate generalized ordinal  data equivalences. At the end of this section we state a model-theoretic result that helps to make clear the special roles of  data including identities, and of certain axioms involving identities in the theories of Pfanzagl. We begin by listing various  groups of conditions or assumptions that Suppes and Pfanzagl combine in different ways in their axiom systems. The exact form  of the assumptions given here differ in inessential ways from their original formulations.  DEFINITION 1. Let Ol = <A, o, -,') be an ordered algebra,  1.1. o is closed in A if and only if for all x and y in A there is a z in A such that C) (X, y) = z;  1.2. Ol is closed if and only if n is closed in A;  1.3. if x and y belong to A, then x o y is defined if and only if there is a z in A such that o(x, y) = z;  1.4. if x and y belong to A and x o y is defined, then x c: y = o(x, y).  Definition 1.3 is inelegant and creates some problems for the formal logician, but it provides a methods of expression that is  intuitively clear and it avoids other methods of expression that are lengthy and obscure to the nonlogician. Given Definition  1.3, if f = <A, o, ---<,> is an ordered algebra, then o is closed in A if and only if x n y is defined for all x and y in A.  It is important, however, that the closure condition can be stated in first order logic. Thus, if -3" is a 3-place predicate  (which is customarily interpreted by binary operations), and "x," "y," and "z" are individual variables in a given formal  language, then the closure condition can be written (with the quantifiers written out) as follows:  for all x, for all y, there is a z such that o(x, y, z). (The condition of being a binary operation can also be stated in  first order logic with identity by the statement  for all x, for all y, for all z, for all w,  if o(x, y, z) and -)(x, y, w), then z = w.)  EMPIRICAL STATUS OF MEASUREMENT AXIOMS 393  In the following definitions if the operation symbol is used, e.g., in "x o y," it is assumed that the definition is  hypothetical, the hypothesis being that x ; y is defined. Thus, the definition for commutativity, given below, would be, more  formally, "OC is commutative if and only if for all x and y in A such that x o y and y c> x are defined, x n y - y ~- x." We  shall also eliminate, in the customary mathematical manner, universal quantifiers. The definitions in Definition 2 are of  algebraic conditions that can be stated formally in first order logic with identity. The definitions are stated using the  identity symbol; corresponding definitions using the symbol for the indifference relation generated by the basic ordering  relation are for corresponding set-theoretic predicates preceded by the word "weakly."  DEFINITION 2. Let Ol = <A, cl, <j be an ordered algebra (OA) Ol is (i) commutative, (ii) associative, (iii) idempotent, (iv)  bisymmetric, (v) solvable, or (vi) positive solvable, as the following hold:  (1) x %-: Y - Y 0 x;  (ii) xc(Yoz)=(xoY)oz; (iii) x ,_ v - X.  (iv) (XCY)0'(zc,W)=(xoz)0(Yow); (v) there is a u in A such that x c u = y; (vi) if y } x, then there is a u in A such that x >  u = Y.  The next set of definitions is also formulable in first order logic, but do not involve identities (or indifferences) as did  those of Definition 2.  DEFINITION 3. Let OL = <A, u, ~<) be an OA. a is (i) left monotonic, (ii) right monotonic, (iii) left cancellable, (iv) right  cancellable, (v) Suppes monotonic, (vi) positive, or (vii) dense, as the following conditions hold:  (1) ifx<y,then xoz<ynz; (ii) ifx<y,then zox<zoy; (iii) if x o z < y o z, then x < y; (iv) if z o x < z o y, then x y; (v) x -  z z< z o y if and only if x < y; (vi) x ' Y 5 x;  (vii) if x > y, then there is a u in A such that x > u and u } y.  394 ADAMS, FAGOT, AND ROBINSON  The following set of definitions consists of conditions that can not be stated in first order logic.  DEFINITION 4. Let 67 = <A, o, <> be an OA. Ol is (1) additive Archimedean, (ii) bisection Archimedean, (iii) left continuous,  or (iv) right continuous, as the following conditions hold:  (i) if x o x > x and y o y > y, then there exists a positive integer n such that nx > y;  (ii) if x > y > z, then there exists a positive integer n such that y > x ~ ) nz;  (iii) both the following are topologically open sets: the set of all u in A such that u o y is defined and u o y > x; and the  set of all t in A such that t o y is defined and toy-<x;  (iv) both the following are topologically open sets: the set of all u in A such that y o u is defined and y c u > x; and the  set of all t in A such that y o t is defined and yot-<x.  The following set of definitions concern the various representations and FSH (fundamental scaling hypotheses).  DEFINITION 5. Let 67 = <A, o, <) be an ordered algebra.  5.1. An additive representation for OC is a real valued function m with domain A such that for all x and y in A,  (i) m(x) < m(y) if and only if x < y,  (ii) if x o y is defined, then m(x o y) = m(x) + m(y);  5.2. An extensive representation for Ol is an additive representation m for OL such that m(x) > 0, for all x in A;  5.3. A bisection representation for 67 is a real valued function m with domain A such that for all x and y in A,  (i) m(x) < m(y) if and only if x < y,  (ii) if x o y is defined, then m(x o y) = 2(m(x) + m(y));  5.4. 67 is additive representable if and only if there is an additive representation  for 67.  5.5. 67 is uniquely additive representable if and only if for any two additive representations ml and m2 for 67, there exists  a real number k > 0 such that ml(x) = km2(x), for all x in A.  5.6. Ol is extensive representable if and only if there is an extensive representation for 67.  EMPIRICAL STATUS OF MEASUREMENT AXIOMS 395  5.7. 67 is uniquely extensive representable if and only if for any two extensive representations m, and m2 for a, there exists  a real number k > 0 such that m,(x) = km2(x), for all x in A.  5.8. a is bisection representable if and only if there is a bisection representation for OK.  5.9. a is uniquely bisection representable if and only if for any two bisection representations m, and m2 for 67, there exist  real numbers k > 0 and g such that m,(x) = km2(x) + g, for all x in A.  In our considerations of data equivalences for ordered algebras we have dealt with only the original sets of axioms given by  Pfanzagl (1959), for additive representations and bisection representations, and by Suppes (1951) for extensive  representations.  DEFINITION 6. Let Ol = <A, o, =<) be an ordered algebra.  6.1. OC is an additive structure if and only if it is closed, weakly commutative, weakly associative, and left and right  cancellable;  6.2. 67 is an extensive structure if and only if it is closed, weakly associative, weakly positive solvable, positive, and  Suppes monotonic;  6.3. 01 is a bisection structure if and only if it is closed, weakly commutative, weakly idempotent, weakly bisymmetric, and  left and right cancellable.  Pfanzagl, extending the work of Aczel, and Suppes, extending the work of Helmholtz and Holder, provided sets of conditions  that were sufficient for the existence of additive (Pfanzagl), extensive (Suppes), and bisection (Pfanzagl) representations.  Pfanzagl has shown that additive structures that are left and right continuous are additive representable and uniquely  additive representable; Suppes has shown that extensive structures that are additive Archimedean are extensive representable  and uniquely extensive representable; and Pfanzagl has shown that bisection structures that are left and right continuous are  bisection representable and uniquely bisection representable. The only nonnecessary axioms contained in Pfanzagl's theories of  additive and bisection representations are those of closure and continuity. In Suppes's theory of extensive representation the  nonnecessary axioms are those of closure, positive solvability, and the additive Archimedean condition. Our task is to  determine which among these nonnecessary axioms is technical. First, however, some comment on the above definitions is  appropriate.  The definitions of various "algebraic conditions" in Definition 2 are considered in two forms, one using identity and the  other using the indifference relation generated by the basic ordering. Suppes uses the indifference versions and Pfanzagl, in  his earlier versions, did so as well. However, in his recent book Pfanzagl (1968) states most of the axioms for the  quotient-systems generated by the indifference relation  480/7/3-z  396 ADAMS, FAGOT, AND ROBINSON  (which is a congruence relation relative to the various OAs). At the end of this section we shall show that axiom systems  using identities and those using the indifference relation are empirically equivalent relative to generalized ordinal data,  but that when identity data are considered the identity versions are stronger than the indifference versions and some care  must be taken in determining the exact role played by identities.  The various monotonicity and cancellation conditions of Definition 3 are given because they are stated differently by  different authors. Suppes uses the version named for him (but essentially due to Holder) to combine monotonicity and  commutativity in a single axiom.  We distinguish the special class of "nonelementary axioms" stated in Definition 4 on the grounds that they are not formulable  in first order logic. The question how such nonelementary propositions might be tested empirically is, in general, a very  difficult one, but we shall be able to show that in the cases we consider such axioms do not add to the empirical content of  the theories of which they are parts. This will follow directly from our next comment.  The conditions that there exist additive, extensive, and bisection representations are equivalent to the conditions that there  exist homomorphic embeddings in the systems, respectively, Add = <Re, Ext = <Re+, +, -<->, and Bisect = `Re, Mean, ~j. An OA  OC = <A, c-, <~ is homomorphically embeddable in, for example, Add, if and only if there is a function f whose domain is A and  whose range is a subset of Re, the set of real numbers, such that  (1) if x o y is defined, then f (x) + f (y) is defined and f (x o y) = f (x) + f (y);  (ii) x < y if and only if f (x) <_ f (y).  This definition can be extended to other numerical OAS in an obvious way. Assume that a set of generalized ordinal data D  holds in an OA Ol under a variable valuation v and that a function f homomorphically embeds a in a'. It will follow, by  definitions, that D holds in Cl' under the variable valuation f (v), that is the composition off with v. It also follows that  if D is consistent with Ol and Ol is homomorphically embeddable in 67', then D is consistent with 67'. From this we  immediately infer that any purely generalized ordinal data consistent with the theory of additive (extensive, bisection)  representable OAS must be consistent with Add (Ext, Bisect). Furthermore, since the entire system of axioms of Pfanzagl and  Suppes entail the existence of such representations, it follows that the hypotheses to the effect that these representations  exist are generalized ordinal data equivalent to the entire axiom sets.  This last remark also throws light on the significance of uniqueness assumptions. It follows from our observations in the last  paragraph that hypotheses to the effect that representations are unique up to appropriate classes of transformations do not  add empirical content to bare hypotheses that the representations exist.  We now state and prove the main result of this section; namely, a theorem that  EMPIRICAL STATUS OF MEASUREMENT AXIOMS 397  certain subsystems of axioms are generalized ordinal data equivalent to basic scaling hypotheses for ordered algebras.  THEOREM 1. (a) The theory of additive representable OAs is generalized ordinal data equivalent to the theory of additive  structures (OAs that are closed, weakly commutative, weakly associative, and left and right cancellable); (b) the theory of  extensive representable OAs is generalized ordinal data equivalent to the theory of extensive structures (OAs that are closed,  weakly associative, weakly positive-solvable, Suppes monotone, and positive); (c) the theory of bisection representable OAs is  generalized ordinal data equivalent to the theory of bisection structures (OAs that are closed, weakly commutative, weakly  idempotent, weakly bisymmetric, and left and right cancellable).  Proof. Let D be a finite set of generalized ordinal data partitioned into two subsets DS and DW such that DS consists of  negations of sentences of the form  tai ~< ti z , i = 1,..., p.  For convenience, we shall regard DS as consisting of sentences of the form t1i _< tar p.  DW consists of sentences of the form  tic <_ tai , q.  All terms occurring in the sentences of D are OA-terms. We shall assume that n different variables, xl ,..., xn , occur in  these terms. We shall regard terms tlz and tli , occurring in DS and DW, respectively, as occurring on the left-hand side of  the inequality; similarly, we regard ta7 and t2'i as occurring on the right-hand side of their inequalities.  From our previous remarks it follows that if D is consistent with the theory of additive (extensive, bisection) representable  OAs, then D is consistent with the theory of additive (extensive, bisection) structures. It remains to show that if D is  inconsistent with the theory of additive (extensive, bisection) representable OAs, then it is also inconsistent with the  theory of additive (extensive, bisection) structures. We follow the general procedure outlined in Sec. I, considering the  additive and extensive cases first. Thus, the assumption that D is inconsistent with the theory of additive (extensive)  representable OAs is equivalent to D's being inconsistent with Add (Ext); that is, that there is no numerical valued variable  valuation v, defined in Add (Ext) for all terms t occurring in D such that: (i) if a term tl c ; to occurs in D, then v(tl o  ta) = v(tl) -}- v(ta); (ii) for all generalized ordinal data in DS, v(tli) G v(tai), i = 1,..., p; and (iii) for all  generalized ordinal data in DW v(tii) ~ v(t,t), i = 1,..., q.  398 ADAMS, FAGOT, AND ROBINSON  This entails that there do not exist real numbers (positive real numbers in the extensive case) v(x1),..., v(xn) assigned to  the variables x1 ,..., x7, such that  Y- Nj(tli) v(xj) < Y_ Nj(t2i) v(xi), i (IS) j=1 j=1  and  n Y Nj(tli) v(xj) Arj(t2i) 711xj), i = 1,..., 4, (IW) j=1 j=1  n  where Nj(t) is the number of occurrences of variable xj in term t.  From Clause (5) of Goldman's theorem it follows, given that there is no solution to the above system of linear inequalities,  that there exist nonnegative integers rl ,..., rP , sl ,..., sq , where at least one ri is positive such that all of the sums  Si = ri1Nj(t2i) - Nj(tli)] + Y_ Si[Nj(t2i) - Ni(ti-c)], n, i=1 i=1  are zero, and if there do not exist positive v(xl),..., v(xn) satisfying (IS) and (IW), then there exist integers rl ,..., rp  , sl ,..., s4 , with at least one of ri positive, such that all the sums Sj are nonpositive.  We have assumed that D is inconsistent with the theory of additive (extensive) representable OAS; let us now assume, contrary  to what we want to show, that D is consistent with the theory of additive (extensive) structures. This entails that the datum  rltll c, (... r,,tln ~3 (sit,, O ... c, sgtla) ...)  rjt21 '= (... rDt2D 0 (8141 '.. .. `~ S4t29) ...)  is also consistent with the theory of additive (extensive) structures. On the other hand, in the case in which D is  inconsistent with Add, all of the sums Sj are zero, and thus the number of occurrences of each variable xj in the right-hand  side of (S) is equal to the number of occurrences of that variable on the left-hand side of (S). Hence, (S) would be an  expression of the form t1 -< t2 , where, for each j, Nj(tl) = Nj(t2). However, it is easy to show that no such datum could be  consistent with the theory of additive structures. It follows, in the additive case, that D is not consistent with the theory  of additive structures.  In the case in which D is inconsistent with Ext, all of the sums S; are nonpositive. It would follow from this that all  variables xj occurred at least as many times on the left-hand side of (S) as on the right, and this is easily seen to be  inconsistent with the theory of extensive structures. It follows then that D is inconsistent with the class of extensive  structures if D is inconsistent with the class of extensive representable OAs.  EMPIRICAL STATUS OF MEASUREMENT AXIOMS 399  The proof of part (c) of the theorem is based on reducing the bisection case to the additive case by considering what we shall  call "uniform terms." It will be remembered that if tI and t2 are terms, then (tl o t2) is also a term; it is important to  note how parentheses are added in forming terms. An occurrence of a variable x in a term t is said to be order n if n  parentheses-pairs surround that occurrence of x in t, and the order of t itself is defined to be the highest order of  variable-occurrences in t. t will be said to be uniform of order n if all variable-occurrences in t are of order n, and to be  uniform if it is uniform of some order. For any variable x there is a uniquely constructable term n(x) that is uniform of  order n and in which only the variable x occurs. Any term t of order n can be reduced in a unique way to a uniform term of  order p > n by replacing an occurrence of a variable x of order m G p in t by the term (p - m)(x). Let us call this "reduced  term" Up(t). Finally, generalized ordinal data D can be reduced to uniform data of any order p, which is at least as great as  the order of any term in D, by replacing each term t in it by Ujt). Call the uniform data U,,(D).  We can establish the following (proofs are omitted, as they are straightforward): (1) D is consistent with the theory of  bisection representable OAs if and only if U,(D) is; (2) D is consistent with the theory of bisection structures if and only  if UD(D) is; and (3) U,(D) is consistent with the theory of bisection representable OAs if and only if it is consistent with  the theory of additive representable OAs. The first two of these show that we can consider without loss of generality that D  itself is uniform, hence that D = Up(D) for some p.  If D = Up(D) is inconsistent with the theory of bisection representable OAs, it is also inconsistent with the theory of  additive representable OAs, and, therefore, by our previous argument, there are integers rl ,..., r, sl ,..., sQ , with at  least one r; positive, such that all the sums S; are zero. Again, if data D were consistent with the theory of bisection  structures, then datum S constructed as before would also be. However, each variable occurring in (S) would occur the same  number of times on the left-hand side as on the right-hand side of the symbol for the strict ordering. It is possible that the  terms occurring in (S) are not uniform, but reducing them to uniform terms of the same order preserves the property that each  variable occurs the same number of times in the left- and right-hand terms in this case. But a uniform datum of form S in  which all the variables occur the same number of times in the left hand terms and the right hand terms is easily seen to be  inconsistent with the class of bisection structures. Hence, D itself is inconsistent with the class of bisection structures.  This concludes the proof of Theorem l.  From Theorem 1 we conclude that for both the additive and bisection cases the continuity axioms given by Pfanzagl can be  regarded as "technical" relative to generalized ordinal data. It is a trivial consequence of the Scott-Suppes-Titiev results  that the closure axiom is not technical, for if it were this would mean that the empirical content of these scaling hypotheses  could be axiomatized in a finite number  400 ADAMS, FAGOT, AND ROBINSON  of universal sentences. Of the Suppes axioms for extensive measurement it follows directly from Theorem I that the additive  Archimedean condition is technical relative to generalized ordinal data, but it appears that neither the closure nor the  positive solvability condition is.  We now wish to consider the special roles that identity data and axioms involving algebraic identities play in empirical  realizations in determining the validity of axiom systems containing algebraic identities (e.g., that the operation o is  commutative). As already noted, the fact, for instance, that o should be commutative is not logically entailed by any of the  basic scaling hypotheses considered here, and therefore it is at least a logical possibility that data consistent with the  existence of any of these scaling hypotheses might be inconsistent with the axiom systems given for them.  We now wish to consider subsets A of the set of axioms given in Def. 2-4. Let A be partitioned into AI (the algebraic  identities included in A, or the identity version of the solutions axioms contained in A) and AO (the "generalized ordinal  axioms" contained in A). Note that if Cl and 67, are two homomorphic OAs then axioms in AO hold in CI if and only if they hold  in a,. Also, let O(AI) be the "generalized ordinal versions" of the identity axioms in AI. It is trivial that any OA  satisfying AI also satisfies O(AI). Next, let D be a finite set of OA-data, which may be partitioned into three subsets DO  (generalized ordinal data contained in D), DI+ (data of the form ti = t2 in D) and DI- (data of the form ti 7~: t, in D). Let  O(DI+) be the set of data tl ti t2 for each identity tl = t2 in DI+. We now wish to prove the following:  THEOREM 2. D is consistent with A if and only if DO V DI+ is consistent with A and DI+ v DI- is consistent with AI. If AO V  O(AI) entails the monotonicity axioms, then DO u DI+ is consistent with A if and only if DO v O(DI+) is consistent with AO v  O(AI).  Proof. In proving the first part, clearly if D is consistent with A then DO v DI is consistent with A and DI+ v DI- is  consistent with A hence with AI, which is a subset of A. Conversely, suppose that DO V DI+ holds in an OA  a, = <KI, o,, <1>  that satisfies A, and DI+ V DI- holds in an OA  672 = <K21 02, <2>  that satisfies AI. Now construct the "quasi-product"  a1ICl2 = <Kl X K21 ;=1 X 02, <>,  where < is the binary relation over Kl X K2 such that for all (xl , x2) and (yl , y2) in Kl X K2 , (xl , x2) < (Yl , Y2) holds  if and only if xl <1 yi : i.e., the ordering < depends only on the ordering of the first members of the pairs in Kl X K2. The  EMPIRICAL STATUS OF MEASUREMENT AXIOMS 401  following are all easily shown: (1) the entire set D is consistent with 67,167, ; (2) CL,1G7L is homomorphic to CI , and  therefore satisfies all axioms in AO; and (3) because axioms in AI are satisfied in both CI and Ch , they are satisfied in the  quasi-product CC1/Clz . The foregoing three facts then entail directly that data D are consistent with the entire set A since  they are consistent with CCl1CC, which satisfies all axioms in A.  To prove the second part, suppose that AO u O(AI) entails the monotonicity conditions. Clearly if DO u DI+ is consistent with  A, DO v O(DO+) is also consistent with A, and therefore is also consistent with AO u O(AI). Conversely, suppose that DO u  O(DI+) is consistent with AO u O(AI): i.e., DO u O(DI+) holds in some OA C = (K, c, <> that satisfies the axioms of AO u  O(AI), and therefore satisfies the monotonicity axioms. Since the monotonicity conditions are satisfied we can construct the  quotient system Cl- _ <K- , ; , , <> in which K , is the set of equivalence classes of members of K under the equivalence  relation -, ~ is the quotient ordering on K_ , and for any two equivalence classes [x] and [y] in K_ generated from members x  and y of K, [x]  [y] is the class of all x' y' for all x' and y' in K such that x' ti x and y' - y. The following three  facts are easily demonstrable: (1) C is homomorphic to C, hence C_ satisfies axioms AO because Cl does; (2) G7 satisfies  axioms AI; and (3) DO u DID- is consistent with C_ . Thus, there is an OA, C,that satisfies all axioms of A and data DO u  DI+ is consistent with C,. This concludes the proof.  The point of the foregoing is this. When we are considering if "mixed data" D, including both generalized ordinal data and  identities, are consistent with any subset of the axioms listed in Def. 2-4, we can reduce this to the following question: Are  the identity data included in D consistent with the algebraic identities among the axioms and are the generalized ordinal data  included in D together with the "positive identities" consistent with these axioms ? This in turn reduces to the question of  determining whether the "generalized ordinal equivalents" of the identity data plus the original generalized ordinal data are  consistent with the "generalized ordinal equivalents" of the axioms in question, in the case of systems of axioms entailing  monotonicity.  III. DATA EQUIVALENCES IN THEORIES OF CONJOINT AND DIFFERENCE STRUCTURES  In this section results are obtained concerning axiom systems given by Luce and Tukey (1964) for conjoint measurement, by  Suppes and Winet (1955) and by Davidson and Suppes (1956) for difference measurement. Conjoint structures (CSs) were defined  in Sec. I as ordered structures with a single ordering relation, whose domain is a Cartesian product; i.e., structures of the  form <AI x Az , <;. Difference structures (DSs) were defined as conjoint structures whose domain is the Cartesian product of a  set with itself, i.e., structures of the form `A x A, <>.  402 ADAMS, FAGOT, AND ROBINSON  The techniques used in proving the results for these structures are essentially those described in Sec. I: (1) We begin by  assuming that fundamental scaling hypotheses (FSHs) can be formulated as requirements of homomorphic embeddability (suitably  defined for such structures) in certain "canonical systems." From this it follows that data consistent with the FSH must be  consistent with all laws satisfied by the corresponding canonical systems. (2) To establish that data consistent with certain  subsets of the axiom systems must be consistent with the relevant FSH we "reduce" the structures satisfying the axioms to  ordered algebras (OAs) satisfying axioms that are generalized ordinal data equivalent to an FSH for the existence of a  corresponding OA representation. We are then in a position to use the results of the last section to complete the proofs.  For conjoint and difference structures we do not need to consider identity data in establishing data equivalences because for  each subset of the axiom systems we consider the class of structures satisfying those axioms is data equivalent to the  corresponding FSH if and only if they are generalized ordinal data equivalent. This fact will not be proved, but it follows  easily from the fact that all the axioms to be considered are formulated solely in terms of the basic ordering relation and do  not involve any identities.  A pair of functions (f, g) is a CS homomorphic embedding of a CS structure <A X X, <> in a CS structure <A' x X', <'> if and  only if f is a function whose domain is A and whose range is a subset of A'; g is a function whose domain is X and whose range  is a subset of X'; and for all (a, x) and (b, y) in A x X, (a, x) < (b, y) if and only if (f (a), g(x)) < (f (b), g(y)). A  function f is a DS homomorphic embedding of a DS structure <K x K, <; in a DS structure <K' x K', <') if and only if f is a  function whose domain is K and whose range is a subset of K', and for all x, y, z and w in K, (x, y) < (z, w) if and only if  (f (x), f (y)) < (f (z), f (w)). It trivially follows, as before, that generalized ordinal data of the appropriate kind hold  in a structure Cl under a variable valuation if the data hold in a structure that is homomorphically embeddable in 67.  We begin by listing various definitions for CSs. We shall not separate the various kinds of definitions as was done in Sec. II.  DEFINITION 7. Let Cl = <A x X, <> be a conjoint structure (CS).  7.1. CL (i) is solvable, (ii) satisfies cancellation, (iii) is a Luce-Tukey structure, as the following conditions hold:  (i) for all a and b in A and all x and y in X there exist c in A and z in X such that (a, x) - (c, y) and (a, x) - (b, z);  (ii) if (a, x) < (b, y) and (b, z) < (c, x), then (a, z) < (c, y);  (iii) C is solvable and satisfies cancellation;  EMPIRICAL STATUS OF MEASUREMENT AXIOMS 403  7.2. A dual standard sequence for Ol is a pair of doubly infinite sequences ai, xi , i = 0, +1, +2,..., from A and X  respectively, such that if i + j = p + q, then (ai , x;) - (a,, , xq); the dual standard sequence is trivial if (ai , x,) (a,  , x.), for all i;  7.3. Cl is conjoint Archimedean if and only if for any nontrivial dual standard sequence ai , xi , i = 0, +1,..., and a in A  and x in X, there exist integers n and m such that (a,, , x,,) < (a, x) and (a, x) =< (a,, ) xm).  7.4. A pair of functions (ml , m2,) mapping A and X, respectively, into the set of real numbers is a conjoint representation  for Cl if and only if for all a, b in A and all x, y in X, (a, x) < (b, y) if and only if ml(a) + m2(x) <- ml(b) + mz(y);  7.5. 01 is (i) conjoint representable, (ii) uniquely conjoint representable, (iii) the structure CONJ, as the following  conditions hold:  (i) there exists a conjoint representation for 67;  (ii) if (mr , m2) and (ml', m2') are two conjoint representations for Cl, then there exists a positive real number k and real  numbers g and h such that for all a in A and x in X, ml'(a) = kml(a) + g and m2'(x) = km2(x) + h;  (iii) A = X = Re and < is the relation <+ such that for all real numbers x, y, z, and w, (x, y) <+ (z, w) if and only if x + y  < z + w (i.e.,  CONJ = <Re x Re, <+>).  From the definitions it follows that a CS structure a is conjoint representable if and only if it is homomorphically  embeddable in CONJ. It follows from this that generalized ordinal data are consistent with the theory of conjoint  representable structures if and only if consistent with CON J. Given any law satisfied by CON J, generalized ordinal data  consistent with the theory of conjoint representable structures are consistent with the theories consisting of models of that  law. We now state and prove our main result concerning conjoint measurement.  THEOREM 3. The theory of conjoint representable CSs is generalized ordinal data equivalent to the theory of Luce-Tukey  structures (CSs that are solvable and satisfy cancellation).  Proof. That generalized ordinal data consistent with the theory of conjoint representable CSs are consistent with the theory  of Luce-Tukey structures follows from the remarks made in the last paragraph. It remains to show that generalized ordinal data  consistent with the theory of Luce-Tukey structures are consistent with the theory of conjoint representable CSs. Let Cl = <A  X X, <> be a Luce-Tukey structure. For any pair (a,, xo) in A X X there is an OA system Ad(C7, a,, xo) associated with the  triple (CC, a,, xo) such that Ad(CC, a,, xo) _ <K, o, <'> where: (1) K is the set of all classes [a] and [x] defined as  follows, for all a in A and x in X:  404 ADAMS, FAGOT, AND ROBINSON  [a] = the set of all b in A and y in X such that (a, xo) (b, xo) and (a, xo) ti (a, , y); [x] = the set of all b in A and y in  Y such that (a. , x) (b, xo) and (a, , x) - (a,, y); (2) For all a and g in K, a c fl is the unique element [c] in K such that  for some a in A, x in X, a E a, x E /3, (a, x) - (c, xo);  (3) For all a and /3 in K, a <' R if and only if for some a and b in A, a E a, b E g, and (a, xo) ~< (b, xo).  The existence and uniqueness of the element [c] in K satisfying condition (2) above follows from the assumption that C is a  Luce-Tukey structure. This assumption also entails the following, the proofs of which we omit since they are straightforward:  (4) Ad(C, ao , xo) is an additive structure (it is closed, weakly commutative, weakly associative, and left and right  cancellable);  (5) For all (a, x) and (b, y) in A x X, (a, x) < (b, y) if and only if [a] , , [x] <' [b] o [y].  It is clearly the case that Ad(CON J, 0, 0) = ADD/ - which is isomorphic to ADD. CS data D can also be made to correspond to  generalized ordinal data ad(D) as follows. First, to each variable of the second kind, fl, occurring in D, let c(fl) be a  variable (of the first kind) not occurring in D (we assume that D is finite). Next, if Q - (a, 0) < (y, 8) is a CS datum, then  let ad(Q) be the OA datum a ~;,, c(p)  y o c(8) and let ad(-O) = -ad(Q). (If D is any set of DS data, then ad(D) is the set of OA data obtained in the above fashion  by ad.) It is trivial to show that if D is any set of CS data, then D is consistent with a Luce-Tukey structure C - lA X X, <`  if and only if ad(D) is consistent with Ad(C, a, x), for all a in A and x in X.  The proof of our theorem is simple given these preliminaries. Let D be a set of generalized ordinal CS data consistent with  the theory of Luce-Tukey structures. Hence D is consistent with some member 67 of that theory. By our remark in the last  paragraph, ad(D), then, is consistent with any associated OA, Ad(O7, a, x). Since such an OA Ad(CC, a, x) is an additive  structure, by Theorem 1, ad(D) must be consistent with ADD. But ad(D) is consistent with ADD if and only if D is consistent  with CONJ, since Ad(CONJ, 0, 0 ) = ADD/ = and ADD/ = is isomorphic to ADD. Hence we conclude that D must be consistent with  CONJ and must, then, be consistent with the theory of conjoint representable CSs if it is consistent with the theory of  Luce-Tukey structures. This concludes the proof.  Since the empirical content of the conjoint representable hypothesis is contained in in the axioms for solvability and  cancellation (and well-ordering), as shown by Theorem 3, it follows that the conjoint Archimedean condition is technical in  the sense we have employed that term. It also follows from Theorem 3 that solvability is the only nontechnical, nonnecessary  axiom in the axiom system given by Luce and Tukey.  Our next results concern interval measurement, including the Suppes-Winet theory of difference structures. In this case our  results are less neat as we have not  EMPIRICAL STATUS OF MEASUREMENT AXIOMS 405  isolated a single nonnecessary, nontechnical axiom. The results of Scott-SuppesTitiev show that it is impossible to formulate  interval measurement, just as it is impossible to formulate conjoint measurement, using only universal axioms. However, the  Suppes-Winet axiomatization uses no less than three axioms that are not universal. We begin by listing some definitions.  DEFINITION 8. Let a = <A x A, =<> be a difference structure (DS).  8.1. a is a basic interval structure if and only if  (i) (x, y) =< (z, w) if and only if (x, z) < (y, w) and  (ii) (x, y) < (z, w) if and only if (w, z) < (y, x);  8.2. A real-valued function m whose domain is A is an interval representation for Ol if and only if for all x, y, z, and w in  A: (x, y) < (z, w) if and only  if m(x) - m(y) < m(z) - m(w);  8.3. Ol is (i) interval representable, (ii) uniquely interval representable, (iii) the structure INT, as the following  conditions hold:  (i) there exists an interval representation for a;  (ii) if ml and m2 are two interval representations for 67, then there exists a real number k > 0 and a real number h such that  for all x in A: ml(x) = km2(x) + h;  (iii) A = Re and < is the relation <- such that for all real numbers x, y, z, and w, (x, y) <- (z, w) if and only if x - y < z  - w (i.e., INT = /Re X Re, <->).  DEFINITION 9. Let a = (A x A, <) be a basic interval structure.  9.1. The weak ordering of A associated with a is the unique weak ordering of A such that for all x and y in A, x < y if and  only if (x, y) < (y, y);  9.2. A finite sequence xl ,..., xof elements of A is equally spaced if and only if xi+l > xi , i = 1,..., n -- 1 and (xi+i ,  xi) ^' (xi , xi-i), i = 2,..., n - 1.  9.3. Ol is (1) bisectable, (ii) interval- bisymmetric, (iii) interval Archimedean, (iv) continuous, (v) a Suppes-Winet  infinite difference structure, (vi) a finite equally spaced difference structure, as the following conditions hold:  (1) for all x and y in A there exists a z in A such that (x, z) - (z, y);  (ii) if (x, a) ti (a, b) - (c, d);  (b, z), (y, c) - (c, w), and (z, d) - (d, w), then  (iii) if x > y and z } w, then there exists a positive integer n and an equally spaced sequence yl ,..., y, with yl = y and  yn = x, such that (y2 , yl) =< (z, w);  (iv) if x > y and (x, y) } (z, w), then there exists a u in A such that x } u > y and (z, w) < (x, u);  406 ADAMS, FAGOT, AND ROBINSON  (v) OC is bisectable, continuous, and interval Archimedean;  (vi) there exists an equally spaced sequence xl ,..., xn of elements of A such that for all x in A, x - xi , for some i =  1,..., n.  The interval-bisymmetry condition has not appeared before in the literature. What we show is that the empirical content of the  FSH of interval representability is contained in the set of conditions defining a basic interval structure together with the  conditions of bisectability and interval-bisymmetry. Three of the axioms given by Suppes and Winet-bisectability,the interval  Archimedean condition, and continuityare nonnecessary for interval representability. If it could be shown that bisectability  together with the conditions defining a basic interval structure entailed intervalbisymmetry, then our result would show that  continuity and the interval Archimedean condition are technical. We have not, however, taken up this question, and, therefore,  the status of the interval Archimedean condition and continuity remain in doubt.  Condition 9.3 (iv) is called "continuity," but it should be noticed that, unlike the usual continuity axioms, it is  expressable in first order logic. From the definitions it follows that a DS structure r7 is interval representable if and only  if it is homomorphically embeddable in INT. Hence, generalized ordinal data consistent with the theory of interval  representable structures are consistent with INT. It follows from this that generalized ordinal data consistent with interval  representability are consistent with all the laws satisfied by INT. INT satisfies the first five conditions of Definition 9.3,  but it does not satisfy the finite equal spacing condition. We shall consider the status of this law separately. We now state  and prove the main result concerning interval measurement.  THEOREM 4. The theory of interval representable DSs is generalized ordinal data equivalent to the theory of basic interval  structures that are bisectable and intervalbisymmetric.  Proof. That generalized ordinal data consistent with the theory of interval representable DSs are consistent with the theory  of basic interval structures that are bisectable and interval-bisymmetric follows from the remarks made in the last paragraph.  Let Ol = <A x A, ~; be a basic interval structure that is bisectable and interval-bisymmetric. We construct an associated OA,  Bi(OC) = <K, c, <> in which:  (1) K is the set of all classes [x], for all x in A, where [.x] = the set of all y in A such that y - x;  (2) For all and (3 in K, a c fl is the unique element y in K such that for some x, y, and z in A, x is in a, y is in /3, z  is in y, and (x, z) - (z, y);  (3) For all a and 9 in K, a <' /3 if and only if x =< y, for some x in a and some y in S.  EMPIRICAL STATUS OF MEASUREMENT AXIOMS 407  The existence and uniqueness of the element y in K satisfying (2) above follows from the assuption that CL is a basic interval  structure that is bisectable and intervalbisymmetric. This assumption also entails the following, the proofs of which are  omitted;  (4) Bi(C) is a bisection structure (it is closed, weakly commutative, weakly idempotent, weakly bisymmetric, and left and  right cancellable);  (5) For all x, y, z, and w in A, (x, y) < (z, w) if and only if [x] o [w] <' [y] o [z]. It should be clear that Bi(INT) =  INT/=, which is isomorphic to INT.  Similar to our procedure for conjoint measurement we associate to any generalized ordinal DS datum d a corresponding OA datum  bi(d). If d is of the form (a, /3) < (y, 8), then bi(d) is the OA datum a o 8 < g o y; we also let bi(_d) = _bi(d).If D is a  set of generalized ordinal DS data, then bi(D) is the set of OA data, each corresponding to a member of D by the above-defined  function bi. Given this correspondence it easily follows that a set of generalized ordinal DS data D is consistent with a  bisectable interval-bisymmetric, basic interval structure C if and only if bi(D) is consistent with the associated OA, Bi(C).  Let D be a set of generalized ordinal DS data consistent with a bisectable, intervalbisymmetric, basic interval structure C.  Then bi(D) is consistent with the associated OA, Bi(C). By Theorem 1, part (c), bi(D), then, is also consistent with BISECT.  But bi(D) is consistent with BISECT if and only if D is consistent with INT, since Bi(INT) = BISECT/= and BISECT/= is  isomorphic to BISECT. Hence, D is consistent with INT. From our remarks following Def. 9 it follows that D is consistent with  the theory of interval representable DSs. This concludes the proof.  Regarding the status of the finite equal spacing condition, it can easily be shown that any finite set of generalized ordinal  DS data is consistent with INT if and only if consistent with a subsystem INT, = Jn] X [n], <_j of INT, for some positive  integer n, where [n] is the set of the first n positive integers. This follows immediately from the fact that a finite system  of inequalities involving a finite set of unknowns, and having integral coefficients, has a solution if and only if it has a  solution in the integers. Now, all the systems INT,, satisfy the finite equal-spacing axiom, and therefore any finite set of  DS data consistent with INT is also consistent with the finite equalspacing axiom by itself. On the other hand, the finite  equal-spacing axiom is not satisfied by any but trivial DSs that are basic interval structures which are also bisectable and  interval-bisymmetric. This shows what is no doubt intuitively obvious; namely, that though the Suppes-Winet and the  Davidson-Suppes axiom systems are both equivalent so far as concerns their logical compatibility with finite quantities of  generalized ordinal data, each, in a sense, contradicts the other. It follows, then, that if these two competing theories are  to be compared in terms of their validity or consistency with data, this comparison will have to be made on grounds other then  logical consistency with finite amounts of generalized ordinal data.  408 ADAMS, FAGOT, AND ROBINSON  For both the Luce-Tukey and Suppes-Winet axiom systems we showed that in each case one nonnecessary axiom added empirical  content to the system (i.e., was not technical): the solutions axiom in the Luce-Tukey system and the bisectability axiom in  the Suppes-Winet system. These two axioms were the keys to the possibility of reducing, on the one hand, conjoint structures  to additive structures, and, on the other, interval structures to bisection structures. With certain qualifications, the  solutions axiom can be interpreted as saying that for any conjoint pairs, another pair can be found whose composite conjoint  measure is the sum of the measures of the two original pairs; similarly, the bisectability axiom can be interpreted as saying  that for any two members of the domain it is possible to find another member of the domain that "bisects" the interval between  them. In a sense, then, these two axioms say that we can always perform particular kinds of operations, in one case an  "empirical addition," in the other, a "bisection." Thus, these axioms play the role of the closure axiom for systems designed  for ordered algebras. We showed in Sec. II that in many cases the closure axiom was the one nonnecessary axiom, among the  empirical axioms for certain kinds of numerical representations, that added substantive content to the system.  The fact that conjoint and interval measurement can be axiomatized with their only nonnecessary axioms representing closures  of operations-of an additive operation in the conjoint case and of a bisection operation in the interval case-suggests that it  would be worthwhile to investigate axiom systems for these same basic representations that postulate that different kinds of  operations might always be carried out.5  Studies of the empirical status of axioms could obviously be extended to systems other than those reported here. In this paper  we have attempted to suggest a basic methodological approach and have used that approach for some of the standard theories of  measurement. In a follow-up study, one of the authors will report on further studies, using the methodological approach  introduced here, concerning subjective probability theories, cast in the form of ordered Boolean algebras, and certain  theories of utility measurement based on probability mixtures.  REFERENCES  ADAMS, E. W., FAGOT, R. F., AND ROBINSON, R. E. On the empirical status oaxioms in theories of fundamental measurement.  Technical Report No. 3, Measurement Theory and Mathematical Models Reports. University of Oregon, September 15, 1965.  DAVIDSON, D., AND SUPPES, P. A finitistic axiomatization of subjective probability and utility. Econometrica, 1956, 24,  264-275.  GOLDMAN, A. J. Resolution and separation theorems for polyhedral convex sets. In H. W. Kuhn and A. W. Tucker (Eds.), Linear  inequalities and related systems. Annals of Mathematics Studies No. 38, 1956. Pp. 41-51.  e For a treatment of conjoint measurement assuming a bisection operation and of interval measurement assuming an interval  reproduction operation, see Adams et al., 1965, pp. 61-73.  EMPIRICAL STATUS OF MEASUREMENT AXIOMS 409  LucE, R. D. Two extensions of conjoint measurement. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1966, 3, 348-370.  LuCE, R. D., AND GALANTER, E. Psychophysical scaling. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of  mathematical psychology. Vol. 1, Ch. 5. New York: Wiley, 1963. Luce, R. D., AND TUKEY, J. W. Simultaneous conjoint  measurement: A new type of fundamental measurement. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1964, 1, 1-27.  PFANZAGL, J. Die axiomatischen Grundlagen einer allgemeinen Theorie des Messens. Schriftenreihe des Statistischen Instituts  der Universitdt Wien Neue Folge Nr 1, Physica-Verlag. Wiirzburg, 1959. (a)  PFANZAGL, J. A general theory of measurement-applications to utility. Naval Research Logistics Quarterly, 1959, 6, 283-294. (b)  PFANZAGL, J. Theory of Measurement. In cooperation with V. Baumann and H. Huber. New York: Wiley, 1968.  SCOTT, D. Measurement structures and linear inequalities. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1964, 1, 233-247.  SCOTT, D., AND SUPPES, P. Foundational aspects of theories of measurement. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 1958, 23, 113-128.  SUPPES, P. A set of independent axioms for extensive quantities. Portugaliae Mathematica, 1951, 10, 163-172.  SUPPES, P., AND WINET, M. An axiomatization of utility based on the notion of utility differences. Management Science, 1955,  1, 259-270.  TITIEV, R. J. Some model-theoretic results in measurement theory. Technical Report No. 146, Psychology Series, Institute for  Mathematical Studies in the Social Sciences, Stanford University, May 22, 1969.  RECEIVED: August 1, 1966