10.1016/0022-2496(70)90053-2
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 7, 362-370 (1970)  Paired-Associate Recall Following a Distractor Task: Initial and Second Choice Performance'  DEWEY RUNDUS  Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305  Lists of nine stimulus-response pairs were presented, each followed by 0, 5, or 15 see of an interpolated mathematics task.  Following the interpolated task one of the pairs of the list was tested for recall. If an incorrect response was made, a  second response was required. Only one item was tested from each list. The interpolated mathematics task sharply depressed  recall of recently presented pairs but had no effect on items presented earlier in the list. The probability of a correct  second response following an initial error showed no effect of the interpolated task. These results are interpreted as  favorable to a short-term, long-term dichotomy of memory, and a model is fit to the data.  In a study of free recall Postman and Phillips (1965) noted a marked change in the shape of serial position curves if 30 sec  of an unrelated arithmetic task were interpolated between the study of a list and its test. They found an almost complete  elimination of the recency effect with only a slight depression of primacy. These results appear quite amenable to the  dual-storage interpretation of memory proposed by Atkinson and Shiffrin (1968) with the additional assumption that the effect  of the interpolated activity is to disrupt short-term memory storage. The experiment to be described was an attempt to  determine if an interpolated arithmetic task following the study of a list of paired associates would produce results similar  to those found in the Postman and Phillips free-recall task.  Subjects were given one presentation of a nine-item paired-associate list followed by 5 sec of an interpolated mathematics  task (IT), 15 sec IT, or no interpolated task (NIT). A test was then given on one of the paired-associate items. If the  subject gave an incorrect response he was asked to give a second response for that item. Although it was not known at the time  this experiment was conducted, Murdock (1967) performed a similar experiment using a short list of paired associates followed  by interpolated arithmetic. This experiment, then, will serve, in part, to replicate his work and extend its interpretation by  means of the second guess data.  i This research was supported by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Grant No. NGR-05-020-244, and by a  graduate fellowship to the author from the National Science Foundation.  362  INITIAL AND SECOND CHOICE PERFORMANCE 363  METHOD  Subjects. Thirteen Stanford University students served as paid subjects. Each subject served an average of nine consecutive  sessions each lasting about 40 min.  Materials. The stimuli employed were CVC's having association values between 40 and 85 (Archer, 1960). Responses were the  single letters "f", "g" or "h." No CVC's containing "f," "g" or "h" were used as stimuli.  Apparatus. A PDP-1 computer (Digital Equipment Corporation) operating under a timesharing system was used to control the  display of stimulus materials and to record responses and response latencies. The stimuli were presented visually on the  screen of a cathode-ray tube (CRT) and the subject typed his responses on an electric typewriter keyboard located below the  CRT.  Procedure. During each session a subject was presented with a series of 54 trials, each trial consisting of a study period, a  period of interpolated activity, and a test period. The subjects were instructed to type the letter "s" when they were  prepared for a trial to begin. The first portion of each trial was a study period during which a list of 9 CVC-letter pairs  were presented. One of the pairs appeared in the middle of the CRT and remained there for 2 sec. The screen was then cleared  and remained clear for 0.5 sec after which time a new CVC-letter pair appeared. The study period ended when each of the 9  pairs had appeared once. For motivational purposes a row of 9 zeros appeared at the top of the screen. One zero was removed as  each CVC-letter pair was presented, giving the subject an indication of the number of items remaining to be studied.  At the end of the study period the subject was given an interpolated mathematics task. In the zero second condition the screen  remained blank for 0.5 sec. In the other conditions, integers from -5 to -{-5 (excluding zero) were presented on the CRT at  the rate of one every second. The subject was required to add these integers, as they appeared, to an initial value of 100.  The words "your arithmetic answer is..." then appeared on the CRT and the subject was given 2 sec in which to respond to a  3-alternative multiple choice test. The alternatives were 3 consecutive integers, one of which was the correct result of the  additions. The additions plus the mathematics test took either 5 or 15 sec following which the screen was cleared and remained  blank for 0.5 sec.  Following the interpolated activity the subject was tested on one of the CVC-letter pairs studied during the trial. The phrase  "word test" appeared at the top of the CRT and one of the CVC's was shown in the center of the CRT. The subject was to respond  by typing the letter which had been paired with that CVC. The responding was self-paced, but the subjects were encouraged to  respond as rapidly as possible. If the response was correct, the word "correct" appeared on the CRT. If the response was  incorrect, the subject's initial response appeared on the screen to the right of the CVC and the phrase "wrong, try again" was  displayed below the stimulus-response pair. The subject had then to type in a second judgment of the correct response. This  second judgment was also self-paced. If this response was correct, the word "correct" appeared on the CRT; if incorrect, the  phrase "sorry, wrong again" appeared. Following the subject's responses on the paired-associate test, a message was displayed  on the CRT indicating whether or not his arithmetic response was correct. This ended the trial and a message appeared telling  the subject to "type s to start a new trial."  A within-subject design was employed so that during each session a subject was tested under all three conditions of  interpolated activity. Two tests were given for each of 9 serial positions under each condition of interpolated activity.  Thus, each day a subject received 3 x 9 x 2 =  364 RUNDUS  54 trials. The order of the trials was randomized at the beginning of each session for each subject. The subject was never  aware before a trial of the interpolated arithmetic condition or the position in the list which would be tested on that trial.  The subject was given a 5-min. break two-thirds of the way through the session. In addition to the 54 trials mentioned above,  4 trials presented at the start of each session and 2 trials immediately following the break were used as warmup with the data  from these trials not reported. Data from the first experimental session were also excluded from the results.  RESULTS  The probability of a correct first-choice response at each serial position for the three conditions is plotted in Fig. 1. The  interpolated activity greatly reduced the probability  I 2 3 4 5 6 7 B 9 List Position  Fic. 1. Observed and predicted probabilities of a correct first response as a function of list position for the no  interpolated task condition (NIT) and the 5-sec and 15-sec interpolated task conditions (IT).  of a correct response for the most recently presented items, but had little or no effect on the early items of the list. The  major effects of the interpolated task appear to have occurred after only 5 sec of mathematics with only slightly more  depression of the curve given 15 sec of arithmetic. No primacy effect is apparent for any of the three conditions. Murdock  (1967) presented 6-item lists of word pairs followed by 0, 5, or  INITIAL AND SECOND CHOICE PERFORMANCE 36)5  10 sec of an interpolated arithmetic task and a probe test on one of the pairs. He also found the main effect of the  interpolated task to be a reduction of the probability of a correct response for the last items presented with no effect on  those items presented early in the list. As in the experiment described here, no primacy effect was apparent. The lack of a  primacy effect in the present study and that of Murdock, both pairedassociate tasks, is in contrast with the presence of a  primacy effect in the free-recall tasks of Postman and Phillips, indicating that the primacy effect is related to the type of  task employed.  As a check to insure that the subjects were indeed attending to the arithmetic task, curves were plotted for the probability  of a correct response given that the answer on the arithmetic task was correct. These curves were of the same form as the  unconditional curves, but for all points of the curves for both conditions of interpolated activity the probability of a  correct response was higher given that a correct arithmetic answer was made. This indicates not only that the subjects were  attending to the interpolated task, but also that a wrong arithmetic answer interfered with the recall of the pairedassociate  items even though the subject was not given feedback on the arithmetic task before the paired-associate recall.  Figure 2 shows the probability of a correct second choice for those items that were answered incorrectly on the first test.  The curves for all three conditions appear indistinguishable. The chance level for the second choice responses was .5 and the  results for all three conditions were above this level. Due to the high probability of a correct first response on the ninth  item in the no interpolated task condition, reliable second response data was not available and no plot is shown for that item.  r o  a  a  7  3  - -o- - No interpolated task  -- 5 sec. interpolated task  - -d- - 15 sec. interpolated task  I 2 3 4 5 6 7 B 9 List Position  FIG. 2. Observed and predicted probabilities of a correct second response given an incorrect first response as a function of  list position for the no interpolated task condition (NIT) and the 5-sec and 15-sec interpolated task conditions (IT).  366 RUNDUS  DISCUSSION  As previously mentioned, this study was initiated for the purpose of exploring similarities between the Postman and Phillips  (1965) study which used an interpolated arithmetic task prior to free recall of a list of nouns, and the current study  employing a paired-associate procedure. The basic results were indeed quite similar-a striking reduction in the probability of  a correct recall of the most recently presented items, and little effect on the recall of items from early in the list. In  discussing their experiment, Postman and Phillips suggested that the interpolated arithmetic task acted as a source of  retroactive interference (RI). It was argued that since RI was at a high level for items from the first of the list and at a  low level for the last items presented, the additional RI provided by the arithmetic task would have a greater effect on the  most recently presented items. A similar explanation could be applied to the results of the present experiment. It should be  expected, however, that the descriptive term, retroactive interference, could be replaced by a specific and testable  hypothesis. In this regard, the second guess data should prove useful in a test of the proposed hypothesis.  Specifically, it is proposed that two memory storage systems operate in this task with the interpolated arithmetic task  serving to disrupt the short-term memory storage system (STS), but having little effect on the long-term memory storage (LTS).  Atkinson and Shiffrin (1968) propose a theoretical model of this type with the STS consisting of those items which the subject  is actively rehearsing, and with the LTS representing the more permanent memory store. A brief description of this model is  presented below. Further details and applications to other experimental contexts are discussed in Atkinson and Shiffrin (1968)  and Atkinson and Wickens (1971).  The model postulates that the subject may under certain conditions set up a rehearsal buffer in STS in which r items are  maintained in an active state. The value of the parameter r is dependent upon the complexity of the items being rehearsed and  the length of the study period. When an item is presented for study, the subject enters this item into the rehearsal buffer.  The entry of this item forces the elimination of one of the items currently in the buffer. It is assumed that the departing  item is chosen randomly from the current set of r buffer items. Define (3; as the probability that an item resides in the  buffer for exactly j study periods, given that more than j study periods elapse between the initial presentation of the item  and its test. Therefore,  j0, for j = 0  i (1 fir),, for j ;> 0.  For each study period in which a given item resides in the rehearsal buffer, information about that item is transferred to  LTS. It is assumed that the probability of correctly retrieving an item from LTS is a function of the amount of information  about that item in LTS at the time of test. This probability increases according to a linear  INITIAL AND SECOND CHOICE PERFORMANCE 367  process with parameter B such that the probability of correctly retrieving an item from LTS which has resided in the rehearsal  buffer for k study periods is  It is further assumed that as soon as an item leaves the rehearsal buffer, the probability of correctly retrieving that item  from LTS is decreased by a constant proportion T for each study period between the item's deletion from the buffer and the  time of the test of that item. Thus, if an item was knocked out of the buffer after residing there for j study periods, and a  total of i study periods had intervened between the original study and the test of that item, it would have a probability,  I - (I - B)'] T',  of being correctly retrieved from LTS. Including the probability g of guessing the correct response (the value of g for a  correct first choice is .33), the probability of a correct response from LTS is  Pzi=1-(I-g)[I-(1-BAT`-'  Now making the assumption that an item which is residing in the buffer at the time of its test will be correctly retrieved, we  may write the expression for the probability of a correct first response for item s(s = 1 to 9) given NIT as  P(C, I NIT) =  s-s s-.+  + 137:Ps-.,,A . 1 -A~-o~~ 0  When an interpolated mathematics task follows the study of the paired-associate list, it will be assumed that the rehearsal  buffer is disrupted so that only information in the LTS is available at the time of test. It was intended that the 5-sec  interpolated task should provide only a partial disruption of the rehearsal; however, the effects of both the 5- and 15-sec  interpolated tasks were nearly identical. Therefore, only one theoretical interpretation will be given for both interpolated  task (IT) conditions. This yields the equation,  10-s  P(C.s I IT) __ Y_ flkPiu-5,r., k=0  for the probability of a correct first response for item s following an interpolated mathematics task. When the test trial  immediately follows the list study, it is unnecessary to increment LTS information about items which are in the rehearsal  buffer during the last study period prior to test since their presence in the rehearsal buffer insures that they will be  correctly recalled on an immediate test. When an interpolated task precedes the test, this task is assumed to clear the  rehearsal buffer. An accurate measure of the probability of correct recall of items residing in the buffer just  480/7,/Z-12  368 RUNDUS  prior to the interpolated task must therefore include the information transferred to LTS about these items during the study  period proceeding the interpolated task. Thus, it should be noted that the summation now runs to 10 - s.  If items s is answered incorrectly on the first test (Es), the probability of a correct second response to that item (Cs*) may  be found using the equation,  P(C,* I Es) = PP E) s).  Now conditionalizing on (3k and applying Bayes' Rule yields  9-s Q P(Cs*Es) _ Y P(Cs*Esgk) + Y, P(Cs*Esflk) k=0 k=9-s  _ Y P(C,* I E,P,) P(E, 19k) P(9k) + E, P(Cs*EsNk)  k=0 k=9-s  An item answered incorrectly on the first test is assumed not to have been in the rehearsal buffer at the time of test and  therefore the last summation is equal to zero; hence,  where  9-s  P(Cs*Es) = Y_ Pk'(I - PA) Nk , k=0  Pk' = 1 __ (1 - 9'){I - (I - Bk)I T9-s-k+  and g' is the probability of guessing correctly on the second test which for this task is .5. As previously mentioned, for  items in the NIT condition it is not necessary to consider information transfer to LTS during the rehearsal following  presentation of the ninth item since their presence in the rehearsal buffer assures their correct recall. Transfer during this  last rehearsal must be considered for the IT condition, however, and the summation index for this condition runs to 10 - s.  It is also necessary to consider the possible disruptive effects to the information in the LTS which may result from the first  response to an item. For simplicity it will be assumed that the result of making an initial incorrect response will be to  reduce the probability of a correct retrieval from LTS by a constant proportion, 8. The resulting equation for the probability  of a correct second response to an item following an initial incorrect response is  1 9_s  P(Cs* I Es) - P(Es) Y_ 8Pk (1 - Pk) Nk  Six data curves, the probability of a correct first response and the probability of a correct second response given an  incorrect first response for each of the three inter-  INITIAL AND SECOND CHOICE PERFORMANCE 369  ference conditions, were fit simultaneously using a grid-search procedure. The parameters to be estimated were B, r, -r, and  S. Six theoretical curves were generated for each possible combination of values for these parameters in steps of .01 for B, T  and S, and steps of 1 for r, and a least-squares error was calculated between the theoretical and observed values. The  estimates of 9, r, -r, and S yielding the smallest least-squares value were .20, 2, .95 and .44, respectively, and the  theoretical curves generated by these parameter values are shown in Figs. 1 and 2. Substantially, the same disruptive effects  were observed following both the 5-sec and 15-sec interpolated tasks and therefore a single set of theoretical predictions was  generated for both IT conditions. A X2 goodness-of-fit test using the three curves for the probability of a correct first  response yielded a value of 27.6 with 22 degrees of freedom.  The probability that an item from the first half of the list will be in the rehearsal buffer following presentation of the  last item is quite low and thus disruption of the rehearsal caused by IT will have little effect on recall of these items. The  theory therefore predicts nearly equal recall for these items with or without IT, a prediction born out by the data. The  predicted recall for the last two items of the list in the IT condition is less than actually observed, suggesting that  disruption of the rehearsal by the IT may not be complete. The model assumes that an incorrect first response can only occur  for items no longer in the rehearsal, therefore a second response following an error must depend only upon LTS information.  The amount of this information available for each item is nearly the same (slightly less for the last items of the list as  they have less opportunity for rehearsal) regardless of the interpolated condition; hence the resulting predicted probability  of a correct second choice is approximately equal for all items and conditions. The data support this hypothesis with neither  primacy nor recency effects apparent for any condition.  Several variants of the basic model were also explored employing additional parameters to further specify the process.  Parameters were introduced to differentially decrement LTS information available following the 5- and 15-sec IT conditions;  variations of the transfer rate parameter, B, allowing different transfer rates for initial and subsequent rehearsals were  also considered. These expanded models provided only minor improvements in the description of the data. In summary, the  retroactive interference effects of the interpolated arithmetic task appear to be adequately explained by a dual-storage model  such as the one illustrated in this paper,  REFERENCES  ARCHER, E. J. Re-evaluation of the meaningfulness of all possible CVC trigrams. Psychological Monographs, 1960, 74, No. 497.  ATKINSON, R. C., AND SHIFFRIN, R. M. Human memory: A proposed system and its control processes. In K. W. SPENCE AND J. T.  SPENCE (Eds.), The psychology of learning and motivation: Advances in research and theory. Vol. 2. New York: Academic Press,  1968.  370 RUNDUS  ATKINSON, R. C., AND WICKENS, T. D. Human memory and the concept of reinforcement. In R. GLASER (Ed.), The nature of  reinforcement. Columbus, Ohio: Merrill, 1971, in press. MURDOCK, B. B. Distractor and probe techniques in short-term memory.  Canadian Journal of Psychology, 1967, 21, 25-36.  POSTMAN, L., AND PHILLIPS, L. W. Short-term temporal changes in free recall. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,  1965, 17, 132-138.  RECEIVED: January 15, 1969