10.1016/0022-2496(70)90033-7
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 7, 410-443 (1970)  Transformations That Render Curves Parallel'  MICHAEL V. LEVINE2  University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104  Five examples are given to indicate the desirability of having a general theory treating sets of curves that can be  transformed into parallel curves. With this theory it is shown that a set of curves can be rendered parallel if and only if  every pair of functions in the completion of a particular group associated with the curves is uncrossed. Under general  conditions any two transformations rendering a set of curves parallel are related by a linear transformation. Methods for  calculating transformations are proposed. Several structural properties of sets of curves which can be rendered parallel are  proven.  This paper contains a discussion of the transformations that render curves parallel. It begins in Sec. I with a formal  statement of what it means to render a set of curves parallel. Then some examples and problems in psychology to which the  theory may be applied are listed for motivation. In Sec. 1.3 the major results and organization of the theory are outlined. In  the final section of the introduction the theory is related to mathematical literature.  The theory itself begins in Sec. II. All facts and definitions given in the introduction and used later in the theory are  collected and repeated in Sec. II.  I. INTRODUCTION  I.1. Formal Statement  Two curves or subsets of the Cartesian plane are defined as parallel when a translation along the x-axis maps one onto the  other. In other words, two curves are parallel  1 This research was supported in part by Grant NSF GB 1462 from the National Science Foundation and Grant GM 1222 from the  National Institute of Health to the University of Pennsylvania. Most of the manuscript was prepared at the Educational Testing  Service, Princeton, New Jersey where the author was Visiting Psychologist.  I This research was undertaken as a consequence of some conversations with R. Duncan Luce in 1963 at the University of  Pennsylvania. It is a pleasure to acknowledge his advice and encouragement. I am also indebted to David Krantz, Frederic M.  Lord, M. Frank Norman, John Pfanzagl, and Burton S. Rosner for many pleasant and profitable conversations about this work. Dr.  Norman made detailed comments on an earlier version of this paper which were very helpful.  410  TRANSFORMATIONS AND PARALLEL CURVES 411  if for some k the mapping <x, y> , <x + k, y> carries one curve onto the other. A set of curves is called parallel if each  pair of curves in the set is parallel.  A real-valued function u of a real variable renders a set of two or more curves parallel if the mapping <x, y; -* <u(x), yj  carries the set of curves into a set of parallel curves. Real-valued functions of a real variable are parallel if their graphs  are parallel as curves. Parallel sets of functions and transformations rendering sets of functions parallel are defined in the  obvious way. Details are written out in Sec. 11.1.  1.2. Motivation for the Theory  Psychologists very frequently assume that the sets of functions which are crucial in their theories can be rendered parallel.  The examples given in this section were chosen to demonstrate this. The purpose of this paper is to provide one general,  accessible, more or less self-contained theory for each psychological theorist who wished to dissect his assumptions.  To achieve generality, very weak regularity conditions have been made and only the ordinal or topological properties of  numbers have been used in an essential way. Thus, the theory could be rephrased as a theory about correspondences between  luminances and sensations or correspondences between subjective probabilities and objective probabilities. To increase  accessibility very explicit and detailed proofs are given, geometric interpretations are emphasized and most of the  mathematical facts needed to understand the paper are discussed.  The research was undertaken simply to understand the meaning of "parallelizability" assumptions by finding necessary and  sufficient conditions for the existence of a transformation rendering a set of curves parallel. However, many surprising facts  were uncovered during the research. These facts are not needed to express the existence conditions; but they seemed likely to  have important consequences for the design of experiments, construction of theories, and reduction of data. Consequently, they  are also included in the theory.  As an instance of this sort of fact, consider the following. Some subsets of three curves selected from large sets of curves  which can be rendered parallel have the property that a transformation renders the small set of curves parallel if and only if  it renders the whole set parallel. The subsets which have this property are very numerous relative to the subsets which lack  this property. Consequently, with almost any three psychometric functions and the value of a fourth psychometric function at a  particular stimulus as data, the value of the fourth psychometric function at every stimulus can be computed. (See Examples 2  and 5 below for a discussion of psychometric functions and Sec. V.4 for a more precise statement of the mathematical facts  from which the assertion about psychometric functions follows.)  The examples given below may suggest applications for this work. However, the primary purpose of the examples is simply to  show that transformations which render curves parallel do occur often and in many different parts of psychological theory.  480/7/3-3  412  LEVINE  Detailed applications (to the measurement of visual brightness) will be reported in later papers.  Example 1. Stimulus generalization. Shepard (1965) observes that the shape of a generalization gradient is dependent upon the  scale used for the independent variable. He observes that a nonlinear transformation of the independent variable can change a  convex gradient to a concave or linear gradient. However, if several overlapping gradients are studied then there is generally  essentially no more than one transformation of the independent variable such that the plotted generalization gradients all  have the same shape.  Two generalization gradients have the same shape when they are parallel. Shepard has already given us effective techniques for  finding the transformations which render generalization gradients parallel. This work complements his by giving necessary and  sufficient conditions for the existence of such transformations, by discussing the uniqueness of the transformations and by  giving additional techniques for finding the transformations which render gradients parallel.  Shepard rescales each gradient so that the measure of generalization at the point of reinforcement is the same for each  gradient. The present theory may then be used to study the transformations which render the increasing limbs of the gradients  parallel to one another and the decreasing limbs parallel to one another. The application of this theory is more  straightforward when one regards the gradients as approximations to density functions and attempts to render their estimated  distribution functions parallel.  Example 2. Thurstonian psychophysics. Thurstone (1927a, 1927b) considers experiments in which pairs of stimuli are compared to  obtain psychometric functions Fy(x) giving the probability (as approximated by relative frequency) that stimulus x is judged  greater than stimulus y. Much of his reasoning seems compatible with current signal detection theory.  The essence of Thurstone's psychophysics seems to be this. Each stimulus x corresponds, not to a particular sensation, but to  a random variable Sx. When two stimuli x and y are being compared, x is judged greater than y whenever Sx is greater than S',  (or greater than Sy plus some threshold constant). More precisely, the probability that x is judged greater than y, F,(x), is  the probability that Sx - Sy is positive (or greater than some threshold constant).  For Thurstone, all the random variables Sx were normally distributed. Thus, for a fixed set of stimuli X, a complete account  of the functions F,,(x) is obtained when three other functions are specified. These functions are m(x)-the mean of S,. ;  s(x)the standard deviation of S,. ; and r(x, y)-the correlation coefficient between S,, and S,  Since the theory in this form has more unknown parameters (m, s, r) than data points (F) when X is finite, Thurstone made  simplifying assumptions. For example,  TRANSFORMATIONS AND PARALLEL CURVES 413  he assumed that Sx and S.. are independent and that the standard deviations, s(x) and s(y), are equal for all x and y.  One way to apply the results of this paper is to assume Sx and Sy are independent, that all the standard deviations s are  equal, but to relax Thurstone's normality assumption. If Ss, is normal, then Sx is equal to m(x) + sN where N is the normal  random variable with mean zero and variance one. In this generalization, we just assume that N is simply some unknown random  variable which, like the normal random variable, has a positive density. Then it follows that F,,(x) is the probability that  ni(x) - m(y) is greater than sD (or sD plus some threshold constant) where D is the random variable obtained as the difference  between two independent random variables that both have the same distribution as the unknown random variable N. If the set of  stimuli X is already physically measured so that it can be considered to be the set of real numbers and if the function m is  continuous, strictly increasing from .F onto the reals, then the unknown function m mapping stimuli to the modal or mean  sensation renders the set of psychometric functions {F,(-) I y is in h) parallel. Under these conditions, it is  straightforward to apply the theory given in this paper to obtain necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of a  function m and an unobserved random variable N satisfying the model. The function m can be calculated from the functions  fF,,(-)}. In fact, this theory shows that under very general conditions the function m can be calculated from just three of  the psychometric functions F,(-).  Example 3. Mental Test Theory. Mental test theory sometimes assumes that a single unidimensional ability underlies test  performance in the sense that there is a real valued function f from the set of individuals being tested such that the  probability that individual s knows the answer to item i can be written Pi(f (s)) for some cumulative distribution Pi . In  developing models with such assumptions, the distributions Pi have in the past been taken to be normal ogives (Lord and  Novick, 1968, particularly Ch. 16) or logistic distributions (Birnbaum, 1968).  These distributions have the advantage of having two parameters so that one can classify items according to their difficulty  or according to their discriminating power (i.e., the rate at which populations are separated or the steepness of the curve  Pi). This is achieved in the following way: In both cases there is some distribution P such that for each item i there are  constants a and b such that for all real x, Pi(x) = P(ax - b). P is the normal ogive in the normal case and P(x) is (1 +  e-')-1 in the logistic case. The discriminating power varies with a and the difficulty with b in both cases.  If all the items have the same discriminating power, then the functions Pi will be parallel. A generalization of these results  (Levine, 1970b) permits consideration of items with different discriminating powers. It is hoped that the theory presented  here will facilitate theoretical work by permitting researchers to analyze two parameter models without making normality or  logistic assumptions.  Example 4. JND scales. A Weber function is a function which gives the size of the jnd as a function of the comparison  stimulus. A Fechner function is a function u such that u(x) - u(x') equals u(y) - u(y') if and only if the number of jnd's  between x and x' is equal to the number of jnd's between y and y'. Alternatively, a Fechnerfunction may be defined as a  solution u to the functional equation  u(f (x)) - u(x) = constant,  where f (x) is x plus the Weber function evaluated at x.  Luce and Edwards (1958) show that it is illogical to integrate a Weber function to obtain a Fechner function. They obtain a  solution to the functional equation defining Fechner functions by studying the derivatives of the function f near zero.  Since a Fechner function can be shown to be simply a function which renders f and the identity function parallel, the theory  presented in this paper can be used to study all the strictly increasing, continuous Fechner functions. A graphical method for  "cumulating jnd's" (that is, finding Fechner functions) is sketched in Sec. 111.2. With the present results, it is easy to  state necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of continuous, strictly increasing solutions for the equation  defining Fechner functions. Finally, the results in Sec. 111.5 can be used to show that despite the fact that there are many  different Fechner functions satisfying the conditions imposed by a Weber function, meaningful statements about the shape of  Fechner functions can be made in some cases.  Example 5. Fechnerian psychophysics and utility theory. In extending Fechner's theoretical work in scaling, Luce and Edwards  (1958) (see also Luce, 1963, pp. 206 ff) express as a functional equation the psychological rule of thumb: equally often  noticed differences are equal unless always or never noticed. If P(x, y) denotes the probability that a stimulus x is judged  greater than a stimulus y, then an increasing one-to-one function mapping a set of stimuli onto the real numbers is a  sensation scale if for all stimuli x, y, x', y'  0 < P(X, y) = P(x', y') < 1 implies u(x) - u(y) = u(x') - u(_Y').  If P is never zero or one, then the fact that each such function u has an inverse u-1 can be used to express this condition as  follows:  for each real k, P{u-1(u(x) + k), x)  is a constant function of x. The results in this paper are easily adapted to give necessary and sufficient conditions for the  existence of solutions u.  This model also appears in utility theory. The Fechnerian utility model asserts that for objects x and y in a set A, the  probability P(x, y) that x is chosen over y can be  TRANSFORMATIONS AND PARALLEL CURVES 415  written P(x, y) = 0(u(x) - u(y)) for some cumulative probability distribution 0 and real valued function u. For details see  Luce and Suppes (1965, pp. 334).  More examples are found in Levine (1970).  1.3. Overview of the Theory  The theory focuses on the problem of finding all the functions rendering a given set of functions parallel. Only strictly  increasing functions mapping the reals onto the reals are considered. These functions will henceforth be called scales as in  measurement scales or psychological scales. The theory can be easily generalized to deal with bicontinuous mappings from any  space topologically equivalent to the reals to any other such topological space.  A scale which renders a set of scales parallel is called a solution for the set. A set which has a solution is called a  uniform system.  The theory is organized around three problems:  1. Find necessary and sufficient conditions for a set of scales to be a uniform system; 2. Discover the relationship between  two solutions;  3. Find methods for calculating solutions.  Simultaneously, an attempt is made to classify uniform systems, to provide techniques for their study, and simply to give the  psychological theorist a better feeling for what they are like.  The theory begins with a detailed study of two scales. A necessary and sufficient condition for a set {F, G} of two scales to  be a uniform system is that the two scales be uncrossed; that is, for all x, F(x) G G(x); for all x, F(x) = G(x); or for all  x, F(x) > G(x) This condition is progressively strengthened throughout the paper until a necessary and sufficient condition  for an arbitrarily large set of scales is obtained.  After a graphical method for computing solutions is discussed, the set of all solutions is surveyed. Interval measurement is  almost achieved in the sense that for some pairs of curves, any two solutions can be linearly transformed so as to almost  coincide.  Each set of scales is associated with a unique group of scales in Sec. IV. The first use of these associated groups is to find  the exact conditions under which the results on two scales can be applied. If a set of scales has solutions, then a pair of  scales which has exactly the same solutions can be found if and only if the associated group is monogenic (i.e., cyclic).  Necessary and sufficient conditions for the associated group to be monogenic and methods for finding equivalent sets of two  scales for sets of scales with monogenic associated groups are reviewed.  The first strengthening of "uncrossed" is introduced in Sec. IV. A set of scales is strongly uncrossed if every pair of scales  in its associated group is uncrossed. This is a necessary condition on a set of scales for the existence of a solution. There  is a natural order relation for uncrossed groups of scales: F ~> G if F(x) >, G(x) for all x. It is shown that each uncrossed  group of scales is isomorphic as an ordered group to a subgroup of the additive reals with the usual ordering. This  isomorphism is used to  416  LEVINE  present some elementary facts about uncrossed groups which were needed for later proofs or seemed important for applications.  In Sec. V a final strengthening of "uncrossed" is made to obtain a necessary and sufficient condition for parallel systems.  The completion of a set of scales is the collection of all scales which are (pointwise) limits of sequences of scales in the  set. A set of scales is completely uncrossed if every pair of functions in the completion of its associated group is uncrossed.  A set of scales is a uniform system if and only if it is completely uncrossed. This is the main mathematical result of the  paper.  For sets of scales with monogenic groups, little is learned by considering the completion since an uncrossed monogenic group  is its own completion. However, for sets with nonmonogenic groups several new necessary and sufficient conditions can be  obtained. Specifically, if F is a strongly uncrossed set of scales with nonmonogenic associated group G then F is completely  uncrossed if and only if (1) every function in the completion of G is continuous; (2) G has a sequence of scales decreasing to  the identity scale, f (x) = x; (3) the orbit for some x (i.e., the set { f (x) : f is in G}) is dense in the reals; (4) the  orbit of every x is dense; and, of course, (5) F has a solution.  Constructions and results relevant to calculating solutions are collected and informally discussed in Sec. V.4. The paper  concludes with a uniqueness theorem for sets with nonmonogenic groups. If u is a solution then v is a solution if and only if  for some positive a and real b, u(-) = av(-) + b.  1.4. Relation to Mathematical Literature  This section is written for mathematicians working on related problems who wish to place this paper with respect to the  mathematical literature. This section is not self-contained but can be skipped without loss of continuity.  In order to compare the mathematical content of this paper with related papers, the main mathematical question of this paper  is rephrased as a question about a familiar group. The elements of the group are the continuous mappings of the reals onto the  reals having continuous inverses; the product in the group is defined by composition of functions. The main mathematical  question is to characterize the subgroups which are conjugate to a subgroup of the group of translations, {x --* x +  constant}. The details of the rephrasing are given in Sec. IV.1.  If, instead of an arbitrary subgroup, a subgroup with some special properties is considered, then the literature on continuous  interaction, functional equations and nets contains some answers. In particular there are (1) results for groups generated by  one homeomorphism from the literature on Abel's equation and continuous iteration, (2) results for nondenumerable groups from  the literature on various functional equations, (3) results for groups transitively permuting the real numbers from the theory  of nets, and (4) results for finitely generated groups and groups isomorphic to  TRANSFORMATIONS AND PARALLEL CURVES 417  a quotient group of the additive group of real numbers from Michel's work on iteration groups.  This paper is unique in that it contains a characterization which is valid for an arbitrary subgroup. Thus, it gives results  for the cases not yet considered and brings together several lines of research.  (1) :4bel's equation and groups with one generator. If for some g other than the identity function on the reals, the subgroup  G can be written as G = { gn : n is an integer}, then it is easy to show that G is conjugate to a subgroup of the translations  iff for some homeomorphism u and nonzero real constant k, ug(-) = u(-) -}- k; i.e., iff there is a homeomorphism u satisfying  Abel's equation. Using a result of Ward and Fuller (1936) one easily obtains a necessary and sufficient condition frequently  appearing in the continuous iteration literature: g(x) - x has no roots. More details are in Sec. 111.3.  (2) Functional equations and nondenumerable subgroups. Let G be a subgroup and let F : Reals X G --> Reals be defined by F(x,  g) = g(x). Then F satisfies the transformation equation  F(F(x, f ), g) = F(x, G(f, g)),  where G(f, g) = fg.  Since only an Abelian group can be isomorphic to a subgroup of the translations there is no loss of generality in assuming G  is Abelian. Then F is permutable in the sense  F(F(x, f ), g) = F(F(x, g), f ).  The following considerations introduce the translation equation. Since only a group isomorphic to some subgroup of the  additive reals can be conjugate to a subgroup of the translations, there is no loss of generality in limiting consideration to  such groups. In fact, the isomorphism can almost be specified in advance. For the group of all real homeomorphisms is a  partially ordered group relative to ~ defined by f > g iff for all real x, f (x) > g(x). The group of translations is a  linearly ordered subgroup. Since inner automorphisms preserve inequalities, only the linearly ordered subgroups G need be  considered. By Theorem IV.2.A. each linearly ordered subgroup is archimedian and by H61der's theorem (Fuchs, 1963) there is a  strictly increasing isomorphism k into the additive reals. The isomorphism can be specified by a definite, well-known limiting  process up to a similarity transformation. In this sense, after consideration is limited to the linearly ordered subgroups,  each G can be regarded as provided with a definite isomorphism k into the reals. When F is redefined as a real valued function  on Reals X k(G) by F(x, k(g)) = g(x), it follows that F satisfies the translation equation  F[F(x, a), b] = F(x, a -{- b).  418  LEVINE  With these equations a number of sufficient conditions can be deduced from Aczel (1966b; particularly Secs. 6.1, 6.2, 7.1),  Aczel, Kalmar, and Mikusifski (1951), Aczel and Wallace (1967), Hosszu as treated in Aczel (1966b, page 270 ff) and Midura  (1968). In each case the obvious translation of the functional equations result implies that G has only one or uncountably  many elements. A complete bibliography on these equations is offered in Aczel (1968).  (3) Theory of nets and subgroups transitively permuting the reals. The terminology used here follows Aczel (1965). A more  detailed discussion of the connections between nets and the composition of functions can be found in Aczel (1966a).  If G is a subgroup then the graphs of the functions of G, the constant functions, and the subsets of the plane {(constant, y):  y is real} form a geometric net if and only if the functions of G transitively permute the reals and the graphs of different  elements of G are disjoint. It is easy to see that such a net is regular iff G is conjugate to a subgroup of the translations.  Since any subgroup with disjoint graphs is necessarily Abelian (Theorem IV.2B.), if G defines a net, then the net satisfies  the Thomsen condition. Consequently, Blashke's theorem (Blashke and Bol, 1938) asserting that a net satisfying the Thomsen  condition is regular can be used to prove that each group with exactly one curve through each point is conjugate to a subgroup  of the translations.  This special result also follows from a more general result (V.2E), proven below. For if G defines a net, then the (pointwise)  limit of every convergent sequence of functions selected from G lies in G.  Of course, groups transitively permuting the reals are uncountable. But a more fundamental property discouraged the use of  results from the theory of nets here. The fact that any two of the three families of curves in a net are isomorphic ordered  groups (Krantz, 1964) forces a symmetry which is extrinsic to the subject of this paper.  (4) Finitely generated groups, homomorphs of the additive reals and Michel's studies of iteration groups. For Michel (1962a,  1962b) an iteration group is a homomorphism of the additive reals into the group of homeomorphisms of the positive reals.  However, all his results translate easily into results about homomorphisms into the group considered here. Consequently we  will regard an iteration group as a one parameter subgroup of the group of all homeomorphism of the reals {f., : s is real}  with fixed parameterization satisfying f j, = fs+t for all real s and t.  An iteration group will be called monotone if for each real x, the mapping s ~f(x) is strictly increasing. An arbitrary  subgroup G of the group of all homeomorphisms is conjugate to a subgroup of the translations iff there is a monotone iteration  group containing each of the functions of G. More specifically, G is conjugate iff there is a set of generators for G and a  monotone iteration group {f,,) such that for each generator g there is some real s such that f equals g.  Let g(x) # x for all real x and let h be any other homeomorphism. Then from Michel's results (1962b) it follows that the group  G generated by g and h is conjugate  TRANSFORMATIONS AND PARALLEL CURVES 419  to a subgroup of the translations iff either G is cyclic or (1) G is Abelian; (ii) for each real x and y there is at most one  pair of integers p, q and that gphQ(x) = y; and (iii) the set {(x, g"h9(x)): x is real; p and q are integers} is dense in the  plane. Using Michel's results on the uniqueness of monotone iteration groups containing irrational iterates of g (1962b) or  results in this paper (V.4) one easily generalizes this result to obtain an algorithm which refers to no more than three of  the functions of a finitely generated group to decide whether or not a finitely generated group is conjugate to a subgroup of  the translations.  An iteration group {f,} is called monotonizable if there is a monotonic iteration group { gs} and a function 0 such that f =  g,,(,) . Clearly, the group of functions G of an iteration group is conjugate to a subgroup of the translations iff it is  monotonizable. Consequently Michel's characterization of monotonizable iteration groups (1962a) implies the following result:  If G is the group of homeomorphisms of an iteration group such that the graphs of different functions of G are distinct and  the union of all the graphs of functions of G is dense in the plane, then G is conjugate to a subgroup of the translations.  These conditions happen to be sufficient for any subgroup rather than for only subgroups obtained from iteration groups. The  more general result is first proven in this paper (V.2C). Since Michel is not directly concerned with whether or not an  arbitrary subgroup is conjugate to a subgroup of the translations, there is no suggestion of the more general result in his  paper. Furthermore, the arguments in Michel's paper do not prove the more general result. For all the subgroups obtained from  iteration groups are divisible and Michel's proof makes strong use of this divisibility.  Despite the fact that Michel and the present author were (independently) attacking different problems, similar methods were  used to prove similar premilinary results. Michel's work is cited where this seems to be the case.  11. PRELIMINARIES  This section contains some definitions, abbreviations and some elementary facts about the objects defined which are needed  throughout the theory.  A scale is defined to be a strictly increasing function of the reals onto the reals. Clearly scales are continuous and  one-to-one. The collections of all scales forms a group with composition of functions as the group operation. The identity of  this group is the identity function on the reals and will henceforth be denoted by e. The inverse of a scale F will be denoted  by F-1. The usual multiplicative notation for groups will be used so that FG will be the mapping G followed by the mapping F,  Fn will be the nth iterate of F, (F-I)n = F-n, and F= e.  420  LEVINE  If F is a scale, then a function G is said to be a linear transformation of F if for some positive a and real b such that for  all real x, G(x) = aF(x) + b. Clearly a linear transformation of a scale is a scale. If G is a linear transformation of F,  then it will be said that F and G are related by a linear transformation.  For each positive a and real b, there is a mapping of the set of all scales onto itself; namely, the mapping which sends each  scale F into the scale aF(-) + b. The collection of all such mappings is easily seen to be a group when the product of  mappings is defined by the composition of mappings. Thus, the product of mappings corresponding to the pairs al , b1 and a2 ,  bz is the mapping sending F into a,a,F(-) + (a,b2 + b1), the identity is the identity mapping on the set of all scales and the  inverse of the mapping corresponding to the pair a, b is the mapping corresponding to the pair I la, -b/a. From the fact that  these mappings form a group, it follows that "is a linear transformation of" is an equivalence relation on the set of all  scales.  IL3.  Two subsets of the plane are called parallel when for some k the mapping <x, y> <x + k, y> carries one onto the other.  The graph of a function F is the set {<x, F(x)> I x is real). Two functions are parallel when their graphs are parallel.  A function u is said to render a set of functions F parallel when the mapping <x, y> - <u(x), y> maps the graphs of any two  functions of F into parallel sets.  As a consequence of these definitions, it follows that a scale u renders a set of functions F parallel if and only if for each  F and G in F, Fu-1 and Gu-1 are parallel. For  {<u(x) + k, F(x) j I x is real} equals {<u(x), G(x)> I x is real}, if and only if  {<x + k, Fu 1(x)> I x is real} equals {<x, Gu-1(x)) I x is real}.  If F is a set of scales and u is a scale, then-u renders F parallel-is equivalent to each of the following conditions:  (1) For each F and G in F there is some k such that  Fu-1(x + k) = Gu-1(x), for all real x, (2) For each F and G in F there is some k such that  F_IG(x) = u-1(u(x) + k), for all real x,  TRANSFORMATIONS AND PARALLEL CURVES 421  (3) For each F and G in F there is some k such that  u(x) - uF-IG(x) -}- k, for all real x.  For {<x + k, Fu 1(x)> I x is real} equals {<x, Gu-1(x)> I x is real) is clearly equivalent to  Fu 1(x - k) - Gu-1(x), for all real x,  since the first set is equal to {(x, Fu 1(x - k)> I x is real). The other two conditions follow routinely from the fact that  F-1 is one-to-one and that u is one-to-one and onto. A set of scales is called a uniform system if and only if there is a  scale rendering it parallel. "Uniform" is used here as in Shepard's (1965) "uniform gradients of generalization."  If F is a set of scales and u is a scale which renders F parallel, then u is called a solution for F. When only one set of  scales is being studied, u will simply be called a solution. The three equations above give alternative characterizations of  solutions.  111. TWO SCALES  This section contains a study of the transformations which render a pair of scales parallel. A simple necessary and sufficient  condition is offered in 111.1. The necessity of the condition is proven. But the crucial part of the sufficiency proof is  established by citing a published result. To keep the paper more or less self-contained, an easily programmed procedure for  calculating a solution when one exists is outlined in Sec. 111.2.  In Sec. IIIA it is noted that when one solution exists then many different solutions exist. But in Sec. 111.5 it is shown that  this need not have serious consequences when solutions are used to summarize at least some sets of data. For there is a sense  in which any two solutions may be thought of as essentially related by a linear transformation.  111.1. Uncrossed Functions  The simple property introduced in this section gives a necessary and sufficient condition for a pair of scales to be a  parallel system. This property plays a limited role in several related theories. But because the property can be geometrically  obvious even with rough data and because the property can be translated into a statement with psychological content in some  parts of psychology, it has been placed at the center of this theory. It will be progressively strengthened in later sections  to give a necessary and sufficient condition for an arbitrarily large collection of scales.  Two functions F and G defined on the reals are said to cross if there are numbers x and y such that F(x) - G(x) but F(y) #  G(y). Otherwise, for all real x and y, F(x) - G(x) implies F(y) = G(y) and F and G are said to be uncrossed. A set of  functions is called uncrossed if each F and G in the set are uncrossed.  422  LEVINE  Since scales are continuous, the assertion that F and G are uncrossed scales means that exactly one of the following  1. F=G,  2. F(x) < G(x) for all real x, 3. F(x) > G(x) for all real x.  Pictorially, either the graphs of F and G coincide or one is higher than the other. With this picture in mind, we use the  symbol "FlIG" to abbreviate "F and G are uncrossed scales."  111.2. Graphical Method of Solution  The mathematical development is interrupted to heuristically develop a geometric interpretation of a method for calculating  solutions. This section may be skipped without loss of continuity. No proofs will be given in this section. No assertions made  in this section will be used in later proofs.  Let F and G be uncrossed scales. For definiteness assume that F(x) is greater than G(x) for all real x.  Now suppose u is a solution. Further, suppose we are given u(x) for each x in the closed interval [F-IG(0), 0]. Later we will  return to the problem of finding u(x) for each x in the interval; now it will be shown that u(x) can be found graphically for  each x outside the interval.  We will need to be able to calculate F-IG(x) for each x. In general it is difficult algebraically to find the inverse of F,  F-I, for a scale F. But graphically it is easy (because the graph of F-I is simply the reflection of the graph of F about the  graph the identity, e) and unnecessary. For as indicated in Fig. 1, if we are given any x on the x-axis we can find a y on the  x-axis, by following the arrows as indicated. Since F(y)  FIG. 1. Graphical method for finding a solution for two scales.  TRANSFORMATIONS AND PARALLEL CURVES 423  is clearly G(x), y equals F-IG(x). Thus graphically we can calculate F-IG(x) for any x. Since u is a solution, there is some k  such that u(-) = uF_1G(.) + k. The constant k can be considered known because k = uF-1G(x) - u(x) for any x. In particular, k  = uF-IG(0) - u(0) and we assume that the two numbers on the right hand side are known.  Now consider some .x slightly greater than zero. Later we will return to how large "slightly" is. Since x is greater than zero  and F-1G is a scale, F-IG(x) is greater than F-1G(0). But since F-1G is continuous and x only slightly greater than zero,  F-IG(x) is less than zero. Thus, F-IG(x) is in [F-1G(0), 0] and uF-1G(x) is one of those known values of u. Since k is also  known, u(x) = u[F-1G(x)] + k can be calculated by simply finding F-1G(x) graphically.  For this scheme to work, it was crucial that F_IG(x) be in the interval [F-1G(0), 0]. It is easy to see that this will happen  provided x is in the interval [0, G-1F(0)]. Thus we can graphically calculate u(x) for each x in [0, G-1F(0)]. This gives the  promised sharpening of "slightly greater than zero."  To summarize, we have calculated u(x) by computing graphically y = F_IG(x) to obtain some y such that u(y) is known and such  that u(x) = u(y) -{- k. In this way we can compute u(x) for x slightly greater than G-1F(0) and recursively for larger and  larger values of x. If F/1G, then it can be shown that u(x) can be calculated in this manner for arbitrarily large values of x.  By reversing the arrows in Fig. 1 we can graphically find G-1F(y) for any y. Clearly, for any y, G-1F(y) is always greater  than y. Thus u(y) can be calculated as u(y) = u(x) - k = u[G-1F(y)] - k for y slightly smaller than F-IG(0). In fact, it can  be shown that if F11G, then u(y) can be calculated recursively for arbitrarily small values of y. Thus, if u(x) is known only  for x in the interval [F-1G(0), 0], then u(x) can be calculated for any x.  Thus to find a solution, it remains only to find u(x) for each x in the interval [F-IG(0), 0]. It is shown in later sections  that if there is any solution for {F, Gj then there is a solution u such that u(x) equals x for each x in the interval. Thus,  the graphical procedure can be carried out by starting with u(x) = x on [F-1G(0), 0].  Zero has no special significance in this procedure. To find a solution graphically, one need only choose a number x,.  Graphically one finds F-1G(xu). On the interval [F-1G(x.), xo], u(x) is taken to be x. Then u(x) is defined elsewhere  graphically by the method just given.  111.3. Uncrossed Scales can be Rendered Parallel  III.3A. WARD AND FULLER'S LEMMA. If F and G are scales with F(x) < G(x) for all real x and u is a strictly increasing function  mapping the interval [0, F-1G(0)] onto the closed unit interval [0, 1], then there is exactly one extension of u to a solution  for {F, Gj.  424  LEVINE  Recall that if u is a function defined on a subset S of the reals then a scale v is an extension of u if v(x) equals u(x) for  each x in S.  Ward and Fuller (1936) prove a result close to this one by showing that if v is defined  by  v(x) = (F-1G)n u-1(x - n) where 0 <_ x - n < 1  then v-1 is a solution having each of the desired properties. Alternatively, routine methods can be used to verify that the  construction described in the preceeding section defines a solution. The uniqueness part of the lemma is obvious from the  construction.  Using this result it is easy to prove  111.3B. THEOREM. {F, G) is a uniform system if and only if F and G are uncrossed scales.  Proof. If F = G then the identity e renders {F, G) parallel. Otherwise F(x) < G(x) for all x (or G(x) < F(x) for all x) and  the lemma asserts that the mapping  x -- xIF-1G(0), (or x -~ x1 G-1F(0)),  of [0,F-1G(0)] (or [0, G-1F(0)]) onto [0, 1] has an extension to a solution. Conversely, if a scale u renders {F, G} parallel,  and if for some x, F(x) = G(x), then F = G. For if u is a solution, then for some k and all x, Fu-1(x + k) = Gu-1(x). If F(xo)  = G(xo) for some x0, then Fu-1(u(xo) + k) = Gu-lu(xo) = F(xo). Since F is one-to-one, u-1(u(xo) + k) equals xo and k equals  zero. Thus, Fu-1 = Gu 1. Since u-1 is onto the reals, F = G. This completes the proof.  111.4. The Set of All Solutions for Two Scales  As another easy consequence of Ward and Fuller's lemma, it is shown in this section that there are precisely as many linearly  unrelated solutions for two uncrossed scales as there are continuous, strictly increasing functions from a particular closed  interval into the reals. For a discussion of similar results in the context of iteration groups see Michel (1962b, pages 20  ff).  Recall (from Sec. 11.2) that two scales u and v were defined to be related by a linear transformation if for some positive a  and real b, v(-) = au(-) + b and that if u and v are related by a linear transformation, then v is a linear transformation of  u.  If u is a solution for a set of scales F then any linear transformation of u is also a solution. For v(-) = au(-) + b and u(x)  = uF-1G(x) + k implies that v(x) = vF-1G(x) + ak. Thus, the strongest uniqueness result that can be sought is the conclusion  that any two solutions are related by a linear transformation. Before showing when this result is approximately achieved, we  show that generally the  TRANSFORMATIONS AND PARALLEL CURVES 425  solutions for {F, G} are in one-to-one correspondence with the continuous strictly increasing mappings of a particular closed  interval into the reals.  If F and G are crossed scales, there are no solutions. If F11G and F = G, then every scale is a solution for {F, G}. Otherwise  F11G implies F(x) < G(x) for all x or G(x) < F(x) for all x. Since F and G play symmetrical roles we need only consider the  former possibility.  I11.4A. THEOREM. If F and G are scales and F(x) < G(x) for all x, then each continuous, strictly increasing function from  [0,F-1G(0)] into the reals has a unique extension to a solution for {F, G}.  Proof. If u : [0, F-1G(0)] -~ Reals is strictly increasing and continuous, then the image of u is a closed interval, say [x,  y] with x < y. Let a be 1/(y - x) (> 0) and b be xl(x - y). Then au(-) + b is a strictly increasing function mapping [0,  F-1G(0)] onto [0, 1]. By III.3A, there is a unique extension of au(-) -}- b to a solution v for {F, G}. Since a linear  transformation of a solution is a solution, the extension of u to a scale (lla) v(-) - (bla), is also a solution. There can be  no other extensions of u which are solutions, for if w is an extension of u to a solution, then aw(-) + b would also be a  solution and an extension of au(-) + b other than v, contradicting the uniqueness given in 111.3A. Thus, u has exactly one  extension to a solution.  Since the restriction of a scale to an interval is strictly increasing and continuous, the set of solutions for {F, G} with F  -,Z- G and F11G is in one-to-one correspondence with the set of strictly increasing continuous functions mapping a closed  interval into the reals.  111.5. The Relationship Between Any Two Solutions for a Pair of Scales  If F :~'_ G but the absolute value of F-1G(0) is small, then any two solutions can be linearly transformed so as to  practically coincide. In this sense, a solution for {F, G} may in some instances be thought of as unique except for a linear  transformation. In the next two theorems we make this idea more precise.  111.5A. Let u and v be solutions for scales {F, G} such that  u(0) = v(0) = 0,  uF-1G(0) = vF-1G(0) = F-IG(0) > 0.  Then for all x, I u(x) - v(x)l < F-IG(0).  Proof. Let u, v, F, G be scales satisfying the hypotheses of the theorem. Since u is a solution, for some k and all x, u(x) =  u(F-1G(x)) + k. Since  u(0) = 0 = uF-1G(0) -{- k = F-1G(0) -}- k,  426  LEVINE  k can only be -F-1G(0), and u(x) = u(F-1G(x)) - F-1G(0), for all x. Similarly,  v(x) = v(F-1G(x)) - F-1G(0), for all x.  Putting w(-) = I u(-) - v(-)I, we have w(x) = wF-1G(x) = w(F-1G)n(x), for all integers n and real x.  Since there are solutions forF and G, F11G. SinceF-1G(0) > 0, for all x, F(x) < G(x). From the equation F-1G(x) = u-1(u(x) -  k) and the fact that u-1 is a scale it follows that the set {(F-1G)n(0) : n is an integer} is neither bounded above nor below  and that (F-1G)n(0) increases as n increases. Consequently, the sets  -4n = {x I (F-1G)n(0) \ x < (F-1G)n+1(0)J' partition the reals. Since (F-1G)n(AU) = A.n we have  {w(x) I x is real} = U {w(x) I x E An}  n  _ {w(x) I x E Ao}.  For each xcA, ,  w(x) u(x) - V(x)~  = maximum{u(x), v(x)} - min{u(x), v(x)}  < max{u(F-1G(0)), v(F-1G(0))} - min{u(0), v(0)} = F-1G(0).  Thus, for all x, w(x) < F-1G(0) and the absolute value of the difference u and v is bounded by F-1G(0). This completes the  proof.  This result suggests that it is possible to take a sequence of scales {Fn} such that Fn/1G and Fn-1G(0) decreases to zero such  that {G, F1 , F2 , F3 ,...} will be a uniform system with essentially one solution. Michel (1962a, Theorem 3.4) gives an  interesting condition for this phenomenon. In Levine (1966, Section 4.7), III.5A is used to select a solution un for {G, Fn}  so that the sequence {u,t} converges to a solution for {G, F1 , Fz , Fs >...}.  This section is concluded with a result which only slightly extends the preceding results, but which brings the relationship  between solutions for two scales into sharper focus.  III.5B. THEOREM. Let F and G be two different, uncrossed scales. Let k = maximum {F-1G(0), G-1F(0)}. Then there is a solution  u such that u(0) = 0 and u(k) = k. If v is any other solution, then v is related to u in the following way:  TRANSFORMATIONS AND PARALLEL CURVES 427  There is a unique solution w such that w is a linear transformation of v, w(0) = 0 and w(k) = k.  This solution w is close to u in the sense that  1. w(x) = u(x) for infinitely many values of x;  2. 1 w(x) - u(x) ~ < k, for all x.  In other words, if F # G form a uniform system, then there is a solution u such that a linear transformation of any other  solution is uniformly close to u.  Proof. Let F and G be two different uncrossed scales and  k = maximum{F-1G(0), G-1F(0)}.  Clearly F-1G(0) # 0 because F # G and Fl1G. Thus, k is positive because F -1G(0) < 0 if and only if 0 < G-1F(0). For  definiteness, assume F-IG(0) > 0 and k = F-1G(0).  Since F1IG, there is a solution, say u'. Thus, putting  k a = u'(k) - u'(0) > 0  b = -au'(0)  we have u(-) = au'(-) + b is a solution with u(0) = 0 and u(k) = k.  Let v be any solution. If v(-) = aw(-) + b, w(0) = 0 and w(k) = k, then a can only be [v(k) - v(0)]/k > 0 and b can only be  v(0). Thus, if w is a solution, it is the only solution having these properties. Since w(-) = (lla) v(-) - (bla) and 1/a kl  [v(k) - v(0)] > 0, w is a solution.  Since u(0) = w(0) = 0 and uF-1G(0) = wF-1G(0) = F-1G(0) = k > 0,  I u(F-1G)n(0) - w(F_1G)n(0)i = I u(0) - w(0)I = 0,  as was shown under these hypotheses in the preceding theorem. Thus, u(x) = w(x) for each x of form (F-IG)n(0). Under these  same hypotheses it was shown I u(x) - w(x) I < F-1G(0) = k. This completes the proof.  IV. UNIFORM SYSTEMS WITH MONOGENIC ASSOCIATED GROUPS  IV. 1. Associated Groups  If u is a solution for F, then by 11.4 each pair of scales F, G in F satisfies an equation of form  F-IG(.) = u-'(u(.) + k).  48oh13-4  428  LEVINE  This fact naturally leads to useful necessary conditions and to the study of certain groups by an argument which will now be  given.  For fixed u, the set of scales of the form u-1(u(.) + k) is a subgroup of the group of all scales. For if f (-) = u-1(u(.) +  kl) and g(-) = u-1(u(.) + k2), then f -1(-) _---u-1(u(.) - kl) and fg(-) = u-'(u(.) + kl + kz). The group so obtained is  isomorphic to the group of additive real numbers. For the mapping u -'(u(-) + k) ~ k is additive, it is obviously onto, and  since u-'(u(.) + k) = e(-) implies k is zero, it is one-to-one.  This does not yet yield a useful necessary condition because the group is defined with respect to an unknown solution u rather  than with respect to the known scales of F. However, if we take the subgroup of the group of scales generated by the scales  F-IG, we do obtain a group defined in terms of the functions of F. As a necessary condition, we have that this group is  isomorphic to a subgroup of the additive reals. Thus, for example, we have the condition that (F-1G)(H-1 J) = (H-1 J)(F-IG)  for any F, G, H, J in F if F is a uniform system since the subgroups of the additive reals are Abelian.  This motivates the definition and study of associated groups.  The associated group of a set of scales F is the group generated by the scales F-1G for F, G in F.  In the remainder of this Sec. IV. 1 some elementary facts are proven about associated groups. This discussion will be used to  motivate a generalization of "uncrossed" which will give a new necessary condition.  The associated group of a set of scales F can be obtained by first choosing a scale F in F and then considering the set of all  scales of the form  (F-IGj)ml(F-1G,) 2 ... (F-1G.r)"~*,  where r > 1, and, for i = 1, 2,..., r, mi is an integer and Gi is in F. The relation (F-'H)-](F 1G) = H-1G shows that the set  so obtained is independent of the choice of F and that this set contains each of the generators of the associated group. Since  this set is obviously a group of scales, it is the associated group.  From this characterization of associated groups it follows at once that a group of scales is its own associated group. For if  F is a group of scales, then e is in F and the associated group of F is generated by the elements e-1F = F of F.  One of the most useful facts about associated groups is the following:  IV. IA. If two sets of scales have the same associated group, then they have the same solutions.  Proof. Let Fl and F2 be sets of scales with associated group G. Let u be a solution for Fl . If F and G are in F2 , then F-1G  is in G. Since G is also the associated group for Fl , there are scales Fl , Gl , G2 ,..., Gr all in Fl and integers ml , m2  ,-- Mr such that  TRANSFORMATIONS AND PARALLEL CURVES 429  F-IG = (Fi 1G1)"1l(Fi 1G2)""2 ... (Fi IGr)"''. Since u is a solution for F2 , for some constants ki , Fi 1G&) = u-1(u(-) + ki)  for i = 1, 2,..., r. Since the set of scales {u-'(u(.) + k) I k is real} is a subgroup of the set of all scales, there is some  k such that F-'G(.) = u -'(u(-) + k). Thus, u renders F, G in F2 parallel and u is a solution for F2 . Similarly, if u is a  solution for F2 it is a solution for Fl. This completes the proof.  As a consequence of this fact, a set of scales and its associated group have the same solutions. For a set of scales and its  associated group have the same associated group.  It follows at once that the associated group of a uniform system is a uniform system. Hence, the associated group of a uniform  system is uncrossed, for any pair of scales in a uniform system constitute a uniform system and are thus uncrossed.  We now have two apparently distinct necessary conditions for uniform systems:  1. the associated group is uncrossed,  2. the associated group is isomorphic to a subgroup of the additive reals.  The second condition does not imply the first. For the group of all increasing linear functions {ae(-) ~ a is positive} is  isomorphic to the reals under the mapping ae(-) , log a, but every pair of scales in it cross. The first condition will be  shown to imply the second.  In the remainder of Sec. IV, sets of scales with uncrossed associated groups are studied. The conditions under which the  results of the previous section can be used to generate all the solutions for a set of scales will be given and some general  results needed for later sections will be proven.  IV.2. Strongly Uncrossed Scales and Uncrossed Groups  A set of scales is strongly uncrossed if its associated group is uncrossed.  Uniform systems are strongly uncrossed, as was just shown. The converse is "almost" true; strongly uncrossed sets of scales  admit a representation which is a multidimensional generalization of the representation characterizing parallel systems.  Details will be given in a later paper.  Strongly uncrossed is a strictly stronger condition than uncrossed since if F and G are crossed scales in F, then e, F-1G are  crossed scales in the associated group of F. However, if F(x) = x + 2 and if G(x) = x + 3 if x is negative and 2x + 3  otherwise, then {e, F, G} is uncrossed. But since (e 1F)2(x) = F2(x) = x + 4 = e 1G(x) = G(x) iff x = 1, {e, F, G) is not  strongly crossed.  The associated group of every strongly uncrossed set of scales is isomorphic to a subgroup of the additive reals. To prove  this we define an order relation on uncrossed groups and then use Holder's qualitative characterization of the subgroups of  the additive ordered group of real numbers.  430  LEVINE  IV.2A. Let G be an uncrossed group of scales. Let < be the binary relation on the elements of G given by  hl < h2 if and only if for all real x h1(x) < h2(x).  Then (G, <-) is a linearly ordered, Archimedean group.  Proof. Since < on the reals is reflexive, antisymmetric, and transitive, < is a partial ordering of G. Since any two elements  hl and h2 of G are uncrossed, and h1(0) < h2(0) or h2(0) < h1(0), we have for all hl , h2 , in G, hl < h2 or h2 < hl . Thus, <  is a linear ordering of G.  To show (G, <-) is an ordered group we consider any hl < h2 and h in G. Since h is strictly increasing h1(x) < hz(x) iff  hhl(x) < hh2(x). Thus, hh1 < hh2 . Furthermore, since h,h and h2h are in G they are uncrossed and h,h(x) < h,h(x) is  equivalent to h1(x) = hlh(h-1(x)) < h2h(h-1(x)) = h2(x). Thus, h,h < h2h also and (G, <) is an ordered group.  To show that G is Archimedean we consider hl and h2 positive in the sense e < hi and e # h2 for i = 1, 2. We show that for  some n, h2 < h,n. Since e and hl are both in G, they are uncrossed and {e, hl} is a uniform system. Thus, there is a scale u  and a constant k such that  e 1h1(x) = h1(x) = u-I(u(x) -} k), for all real x.  We must have k greater than zero because k = uh1(0) - u(0), h1(0) < 0, and u is increasing. Iterating, we obtain  h,n(x) = u-I(u(x) + nk), for n < 1 and real x.  Since u-1 is a scale and nk increases without bound as n increases, h,11(x) increases without bound as n increases. Thus, for  any fixed x, there is some n such that h2(x) < h,n(x). Since h1 and h2 are uncrossed, this equivalent to h, < h,11 and (G, <)  is Archimedean. This completes the proof.  Holder's theorem asserts that every linearly order, Archimedean group is isomorphic as an ordered group to a subgroup of the  additive group of real numbers. In other words, if (G, <) is such a group, then there is a mapping 0 from G into the reals  such that for each f and g in G, 0(fg) = 0(f ) + g) and f < g if and only if 0(f) < 0(g). For a proof of Holder's theorem,  see Fuchs (1963, pp. 45 and 46).  From Holder's theorem and the preceding result we have,  IV.2B THEOREM. The associated group of a strongly uncrossed set of scales is isomorphic as an ordered group to a subgroup of  the additive reals.  Henceforth, we will use the symbol < to denote any one of three partial orderings:  TRANSFORMATIONS AND PARALLEL CURVES 431  the usual ordering of the reals, the Archimedean ordering on a group of uncrossed scales and the ordering on functions of the  reals into the reals given by  hl G h2 iff hl(x) < h2(x) for all real x.  The symbols >, < will be given their usual meaning in each case.  As a final comment on the meaning strongly uncrossed, Professor John Pfanzagl has conjectured that if F is a finite set of  scales such that the set {F-1G I F, G in F} is uncrossed and such that the associated group is commutative then F is strongly  uncrossed. If this were true it would give a very useful and simple formulation of the condition.  IV.3. Monogenic Associated Groups and the Generality of the Results for Two Scales  With the results of Sec. III we can find all the solutions for any set of two scales. Sometimes it is possible to solve a set  of more than two scales by finding a set of two scales with the same solutions. Associated groups seem to be exactly the right  tool for finding pairs of scales equivalent to a set of scales.  A group of scales is monogenic if it consists of the powers of one scale. Thus, a monogenic group has one generator.  Monogenic associated groups are important for this theory because they show exactly how general the results of Sec. III are.  For it will be shown that if F is a uniform system, then there exists a pair of scales with exactly the same solution if and  only if F has a monogenic associated group. Half of this result is easy to prove. If the associated group of F is {fn I n is  an integer} for some scale f, then F and {e, f } have the same solutions since they have the same associated group. The proof  of the converse is given later in this section.  Whether F is a uniform system or not, if F has a monogenic associated group, {f n I n is an integer), then F has the same  solutions as {e, f } by the argument just given. Thus, for sets of scales with monogenic associated groups, one simply has to  find a generator to find all the solutions. Thus, there is some interest in characterizing monogenic associated groups and  finding their generators. Since only strongly uncrossed sets of scales have solutions, we now offer a way for deciding whether  an uncrossed associated group is monogenic and for finding a generator.  If G is an uncrossed group of scales, then by IV.2B there is an order-preserving isomorphism into the reals; that is, there is  a real-valued function 0 such that 0(fg) = 0(f ) -{- 0(g) and f <_ g iff 0(f ) G 0(g) for all f, g in G.  Clearly, G is monogenic if O(G) is. It is well known and easily proven by routine arithmetic arguments that G) has one  generator if and only if it is the trivial group {0} or it has a least positive element. Furthermore, if O(G) has a least  positive element, say x, then x generates G) and no other element except -x generates O(G). Since the mapping 0 : G -> ~(G)  is an order-preserving isomorphism, we have,  432  LEVINE  IV.3A. (Order criterion for monogenicity). If G is an uncrossed group of scales, then G is monogenic if and only if G is {e)  or G has a least positive element. If h is a least positive element in uncrossed G, then h generates G; the only other  generator for G is h-1.  Thus, an uncrossed group G # {e} of scales is monogenic if and only if the set of numbers {f (0) 1 f > e and f is in G} has a  minimum. If f is a generator, then f (0) (or f -1(0)) is the minimum.  Now it is easy to establish the limits of applicability of the results of Sec. III.  IV.3B. If F is a uniform system, then there are two scales F and G with the same solutions if and only if the associated group  of F is monogenic.  Proof. Half of this assertion has already been proven. We prove the remaining half. Let F be a uniform system with associated  group G. Suppose there are two scales F and G with exactly the same solutions as F. We show G is monogenic.  Suppose on the contrary G # {e) and G does not have a least positive scale. Without loss of generality, then, we may assume F  -1G > e. Since G does not have a least positive element, we can find h in G such that  0 < h(0) < h2(0) < F-1G(0).  If u is a solution for {F, G}, then by hypothesis, u is a solution for F, its associated group G and {e, h}. Thus, for some k,  u(-) = uh(-) + k. This implies that u(0) = uh(0) + k = uh2(0) + 2k and u(0) - uh(0) = uh2(0) - uh(0). Thus, there are  continuous strictly increasing functions on [0, F-1G(0)] which cannot be extended to solutions for {F, G}. Since this  contradicts the uniqueness Theorem 111.4A for {F, G), the associated group of F must be monogenic.  IVA Finite Sets Strongly Uncrossed Scales3  The problem of exploiting the results of Sec. III by finding a pair of scales with the same solutions as a given set of scales  is reconsidered. The criterion given in the preceding section ignored the algebraic structure of the associated group and  considered only the ordering on the group. Now the algebraic structure is studied to find generators and criteria for  monogenicity. Particular attention will be paid to uniform systems of three scales because of the special role they play in  this theory.  Let G be an uncrossed group of scales other than the trivial group {e}. We use only the order relation on G to compute one of  the order-preserving isomorphism that exist by IV.2B. Let g > e be a fixed positive scale in G. Since G is a linearly-ordered  Archimedean group for each f in G and for each positive integer there is exactly one integer p such that g" <_ f "1 < g1+".  Thus, for each f there corresponds a unique  a For related results on iteration groups see Michel (1962b, Secs. 3 and 4).  TRANSFORMATIONS AND PARALLEL CURVES 433  sequence of integers {p.. This sequence is obtained by using only ordinal information on G.  Now let ~ be any one of the order-preserving isomorphisms mapping G into the reals. Since g is positive, 0(g) is also. For  each n > 1 and f in G the following statements are equivalent  gP < f n < gi+P  p(g) <_ no(.f ) < (1 + p) 0(g), p ~ n(O(f)/0(g)) < 1 -+ p,  p is the integer part of n(~(f)l~(g)).  It follows that that sequence {pn} associated with f is such that {p,ln} converges to ~(f )l~(g). By repeating this procedure  for fixed g and variable f in G we obtain a functional t on G where t(f) equals lim(pn/n). Since 0(g) is positive, it follows  that t is an order-preserving isomorphism for G. It can be shown that the subgroup generated by f and g is monogenic if and  only if t is rational. We bring these facts together in the following proposition leading to a scheme for finding generators  and for gradually reducing finite sets of scales to equivalent sets of two or three scales.  Henceforth the integer part of a number x will be written [x].  IVAA. Let G be an uncrossed group of scales with g > e in G. For each f in G define t = t(f ) by t(f ) = limn (pnln) where pn  satisfies gv<_ f n < gl+r'-. Then  1. t is well defined as a mapping from G to the Teals.  2. t is an order preserving isomorphism of G.  3. The subgroup of G generated by f, g is monogenic if and only if t is rational.  4. If there are integers f and o not both zero such that f = g(, then t is rational.  5. If t is a ratio of integers, say flo, then f = g(.  6. If t = f/o and f and o are relatively prime integers, then there are integers n and m such that no +- fm = 1 and f ngm also  generates the subgroup generated by f g.  Proof. (1) and (2) have already been proven.  To prove (4), let f = g( for o and f not both zero. If o = 0, then e = f = gr and f = 0 too. Therefore, o # 0. For each m  >. 1, if p = ml, then gP <_ f mo < g--1 and pmo = mf. Therefore, pnln = (mf)l(mo) = I/o, infinitely often. Since pn  converges to t., t equals flo.  To prove (5), suppose t = f/o. Then  ~(gc) f 0(g) f  434 LEVINE  Thus  O(g) = 0(f .  Since 0 is one-to-one, gr =f  To prove (6), suppose t = ~lo for integers f, o relatively prime. Then it is well known that there are integers n and m such  that no + Im = I. Put h = f-g"d, and G' = the subgroup generated by f, g. Clearly, h is in G'. Furthermore, hl = f mpg" _ fmC  fno = fm,Ctno =fl. Similarly, h= g. Thus, the iterates of h include f and g, and h generates G'.  To prove (3), first suppose t = Clo is rational. Then we may take C and o relatively prime. By (5), f = g~. By (6), there is  a function of form f "gm which generates G', the subgroup generated by f, g. Therefore, G' is monogenic. Conversely, if G' is  monogenic, for some h, G' _ {hn I n is an integer}. Therefore, there are integers n and m such that f = hn, g = h-. Since g >  e, m # 0. Since f m = hnm = gn we apply (4), to show t is rational. This completes the proof.  Since the associated group of three strongly uncrossed scales {Fl , F2 , F3} is generated by the scales Fi IF2 , Fl 'F, (and  generated by Fj1F2, , F3 IFI = (F1 IF3)-I in case Fi IF3 fails to be positive) we can now take any strongly uncrossed set of  three scales, and calculate an equivalent pair of two scales, if there is one, by finding a generator for the associated  group. These results are now extended to any finite set of scales.  If the associated group of a finite set of scales is monogenic, then clearly the associated group of any subset of three  scales will be monogenic. Conversely, if every subset of three scales of strongly uncrossed finite set of scales has a  monogenic4 associated group, then the associated group of the finite set is monogenic and a generator can be obtained by  considering no more than three scales at once. This is now stated more exactly and proven.  IVAB. For r > 4, let F = {FI , F2 ,..., F,.} be a strongly uncrossed set of r different scales with associated group G. If for  1 < i < j <_ r, {FI , Fi , F;} has a monogenic associated group, then G is monogenic.  Proof. Denote the function F1 IFa by f and the subgroups of G generated by f,..., h in G by G(f,..., h). Under the hypothesis  that G(fi , f;) is monogenic, for 1 < i < j <_ r, we prove that G = G(fl , fz ,..., f,-) is monogenic by constructing a chain  of monogenic subgroups  G4 C G5 C ... CG, = G.  Gi+i will be generated by fi+I and the elements of Gi.  Clearly, fI = e and fi :7'- f; unless i = j because F is a system of r different scales. Since G(f2 , fs) is monogenic, for  some h3 in G, G(h3) = G(f2 , fa). Similarly for some  n Michel (1962b; Theorem 3.2) derives an equation for a generator.  TRANSFORMATIONS AND PARALLEL CURVES 435  h4, G(h4) = G(f2 ,f4). Since f2 # f4 and G(h) = G(h-1) we may take h4 > e. Since both h3 and h4 are in G, they are uncrossed.  Since fs is in both G(h3) and G(h4), there are integers n and m such that f2 = h'n = h4m. Clearly, m # 0 because f2 # e. Thus  we may use the preceding result to conclude G(h3 , h4) is monogenic and to find a generator ha4 such that  G(h.) = G(ha, h4).  Since the iterates of hs4 include fl = e, f2 , f , f4 , we have G(hs4) = G(fl , fs , fa , f4). If r = 4, G is monogenic.  Otherwise we take h5 > e such that G(h5) = G(f2 , f5). Sincefs is in both G(ha4) and G(h5) we have G(h, , h5) is monogenic for  the same reason as before and hs45 can be chosen such that  G(h345) = G(hs4 , h5) = G(fl , f2 ,..., f5)'  We continue in this manner until we use up the generators. Thus, G is monogenic.  I V.5. Idempotents  An idempotent function is a function h such that hh = h. Constant functions and e are idempotent. A fact that will prove  important in the sequel about idempotent functions and uncrossed groups is now given.  Every nonmonogenic uncrossed group of scales has a sequence of positive scales decreasing to an idempotent function.  Proof. If a sequence of scales {h,} in an uncrossed group has the property  e < hn+1 <- hn for each n,  then it converges to an idempotent. First this is proven and then it is proven that every uncrossed nonmonogenic group  contains such a sequence.  If the sequence {h,n} in an uncrossed group has the property, then e(x) < hn+1(x) < hn+1 (x) <- hx) for each x. Thus, the  sequence of numbers {hn(x)) is monotonic and bounded and therefore convergent. Thus, {hn) converges pointwise to a function h.  Since x < h,(x) for all n, x < h(x). Since h is the limit of increasing functions, it is nondecreasing and h(x) <- hh(x) for  all x.  To conclude h is idempotent we show hh(x) < h(x). Since the hn are continuous  hh(x) = inf{hnh(x) I n, m > 1),  h(x) = inf{he(x) I ~ > 1}.  If n = m = C + I for any i' > 1, then by the hypothesis that {hn} has the property, hnhm(x) = h'+1(x) <. hr(x). Hence hh(x) -  h(x) and h is idempotent.  436 LEVINE  The theorem is proven when it is shown that each nonmonogenic uncrossed group has a sequence {h,) such that e < hn+1 < h. It  is clearly sufficient to show that if G is a nonmonogenic uncrossed group and h is positive in G then there is some positive g  in G such that g2 < h. (Recall that {e} is defined to be monogenic so nonmonogenic, uncrossed groups have positive elements.)  Let h be any positive element of nonmonogenic uncrossed G. Since G has no least positive element there is some g in G such  that e < g < h. Either g2 < h or h < g2. If h < g2, then h2g 2 < h. Since uncrossed groups are Abelian, h2g2 = (hg-1)2 and at  least one of the positive scales hg-1 or g is such that its square is no greater than h. This concludes the proof.  Since a monogenic uncrossed group has no nontrivial convergent sequences, this result gives a third characterization of the  monogenic groups.  V. UNIFORM SYSTEMS WITH NONMONOGENIC ASSOCIATED GROUPS  V.1. Completions and Completely Uncrossed Sets of Scales  The following proposition is offered to introduce the final strengthening of "uncrossed."  VAA. If f is the limit of a sequence of scales in the associated group of a uniform system with solution u, then for some k, f  (-) = u-1(u(-) -}- k).  Proof. For each sequence {fn} of scales in the associated group of a uniform system with solution u, there is a corresponding  sequence of real constants {k,,} such that fn(-) = u-'(u(-) + kn). Since u-1 and u are continuous and since k,, equals  uf-1(0), {fn} converges (pointwise) if and only if {k does. Furthermore, if {fj converges its limit must be f (-) =  u-1(u(-) + lim k.  Since for each scale u, the set of functions of form u-1(u(-) + k) is a uniform system we have at once a new necessary  condition on uniform systems.  V.1 B. Limits of sequences of scales in the associated group of a uniform system are uncrossed scales.  This motivates some definitions.  The completion of a set of scales is the set of all functions which are (pointwise) limits of sequences of scales in the set.  A set of scales is completely uncrossed if the completion of its associated group is uncrossed.5  The relation between strongly uncrossed and completely uncrossed is somewhat  a Generally, the completion of a set of scales will contain functions which are not scales. In particular, it will be seen  that every function in the completion of an uncrossed group of scales is a scale if and only if the group is a uniform system.  TRANSFORMATIONS AND PARALLEL CURVES 437  delicate. Completely uncrossed implies strongly uncrossed because the completion of a group clearly contains the group. Thus a  set of scales with a nonmonogenic group is completely uncrossed if and only if it is strongly uncrossed. If a set of scales is  uncountable, then it is completely uncrossed if and only if it is strongly uncrossed. However, there are finite and countable  sets of scales which are strongly uncrossed but are not completely uncrossed. These sets are studied in a multidimensional  generalization of this theory developed elsewhere (Levine, 1970a).  The meaning of completely uncrossed should be much clearer after the following section. Here we show that a set of scales is  completely uncrossed if and only if it is a uniform system. During the proof a number of other necessary and sufficient  conditions are obtained. The remainder of Sec. V contains uniqueness results for nonmonogenic uniform systems and informal  remarks on the calculation of solutions.  V.2. Necessary and Sufficient Conditions for the Existence of Solutions  Some interrelated necessary conditions are derived and then these conditions are shown to be sufficient.  Since the completion of the associated group of a uniform system is a set of uncrossed scales, it follows that each function  in the completion is continuous. Using this fact we obtain a new necessary condition.  V.2A. If F is a strongly uncrossed set of scales such that each function in the completion of the associated group is  continuous, then either the associated group of F is monogenic or it has a sequence of positive scales decreasing to e.  Since uniform systems satisfy the hypothesis we have another necessary condition.  Proof. As shown in Sec. IV.5 either the associated group is monogenic or there is a sequence of positive scales {hn}  decreasing to an idempotent function h. We use the hypothesis that h is continuous to establish h = e.  Since each his strictly increasing, h is nondecreasing and for all real x, x < h(x). Let xo be freely chosen. We show h(xo)  = xo to complete proof. Put xl = h(xo). Since h is idempotent, h(x,) = hh(xo) = h(x,) = xl .  The set A  A = {x I h(x) _>_ x1},  is bounded below by hi 1(x1) since hi 1(x1) > x implies xl > hl(x) > h2(x) > h(x). Let x2 be the infimum of A. Clearly x2 < xo  <_ x1 . Thus h(x2) <_ xl . Since h is continuous and nondecreasing, h(x2) = inf{h(x) I x e A} >__ xl and h(x,) = xl . If h(x)  > x2 , then h(h(x)) = h(x) h(x,) = xl which implies x is in A. Thus x G x2 implies h(x) 1< x2 . This gives xl = h(x2) =  sup{h(x) I x G x21 < x., . Thus x2 ~xo  xl <_ x2 ; i.e., h(x,) = xl = xo . Since xo is arbitrary, h = e, and the proof is complete. We extend this chain of necessary  conditions by one final link in the next theorem.  438  LEVINE  V.2B. Let G be a group of uncrossed scales containing a sequence of scales decreasing to e. Then for each x, the set A (x)  A(x) = {h(x) I h E G},  is dense in R.  Proof. Let x and y be real. Let E be positive. We show that there is some z in A(x) such that I y - z I <_ E.  Let {hn} be a sequence decreasing in G to e. Since {hn} converges monotonically to continuous e, the sequence converges  uniformly on the closed interval B,  B={zI I x-zI S Ix-yI+ E}.  Thus, for some n, if z is in B then hn(z) < e(z) + E = z +E. The subscript n remains fixed throughout this proof so h instead  of hn will be written.  Since h is in a sequence of scales decreasing to e we have e < h. Thus, for all z in B, z < h(z) < z + E. Since h > e, {h, e}  is a uniform system. Thus, there is a scale u such that h(-) = u-'(u(-) + k). k is positive since e > h. Since hr(x) =  u-'(u(-) + rk), the numbers hr(x) are strictly increasing and diverge to plus or minus infinity as r tends to plus or minus  infinity, respectively. Thus, for exactly one integer r, hr(x) < y < hl+r(x). Since hr is in G, hr(x) is in A(x). We will show  I hr(x) - y < E to complete the proof.  If r is nonnegative, then hr(x) is clearly in B so that hr(x) <- y < hr(x) + E, i.e., hr(x) - y < E. If r is negative, then y  < hx) = x so that the lower end point of B is y - E = x - x + y - E. Thus if hr(x) is in B, we again have I hr(x) - y I <E.  The proof is completed by showing hr(x) is in B.  If hr(x) is not in B then r is negative and  hr(x) < y - E < y < hr+I(x).  But we also have  hr+I(x) = h(hr(x)) < h(y - E) < e(y - E) + E - y < hr+I(x).  From this contradiction, we conclude hr(x) is in B and conclude the proof.  After one lemma, it will be shown that these necessary conditions are in fact sufficient conditions.  V.2C. If G is a nonmonogenic uncrossed group of scales such that for some xo the set A  A = { g(xu) I g is in G}  is dense in the reals, then G is a uniform system.  TRANSFORMATIONS AND PARALLEL CURVES 439  Proof. Since G is uncrossed, there is some order-preserving isomorphism 0 of G onto an additive group of reals. The mapping v  : A , O(G) given by v(g(xo)) = 0(g) is well defined (since G is uncrossed) and it is clearly strictly increasing. The image of  G is dense in the reals for otherwise v(A) = O(G) would be monogenic as would isomorphic G. Thus v is a strictly increasing  function mapping a dense subset of the reals onto a dense subset of the reals. Thus v has a unique extension to a scale u.  We now show that u is a solution for G. Let f be in G. For x in A, u(f (x)) = v(f (x)) = v(x) -}- 0(f ) = u(x) + 0(f ).  Whether x is in A or not,  u(f (x)) = inf{v(y) { f (x) < y E A}  = inf{v(f (y)) I f (x) < f (y) E A), since y e A iff f (y) E A.  = inf{v(f (y)) I x < y and f (y) E A} since f is a scale  = inf{v(y) -}- ~(f ) I x < y and y E A} since y e A iff f (y) E A = inf{v(y) I x < y and y E A) -f- 0(f )  = u(x) + 0(.f ).  Thus f (x) = u-'(u(x) + Off )) for any real x and u is a solution for G. This concludes the proof.  Using this lemma, we easily obtain the following theorem which brings together some previously proven results and gives  necessary and sufficient conditions for a set of scales to be a uniform system.  V.2D. THEOREM. Let F be a strongly uncrossed set of scales with associated group G. If G is monogenic, then F is a uniform  system. If G is not monogenic then the following conditions are equivalent:  (1) F is a uniform system.  (2) Every function in the completion of G is continuous. (3) G has a sequence of functions decreasing to e.  (4) For some x, the set {h(x) I h is in G) is dense in the reals. (5) For all x, the set {h(x) I h is in G) is dense in the  reals. (6) F is completely uncrossed.  Proof. If G is monogenic with generator, say h, then F has the same solutions as {e, h}. Since both e and h are in uncrossed  G, e//h and F is a uniform system.  If G is not monogenic, then we have already proven (1) implies (2), (2) implies (3), (3) implies (5). Condition (5) obviously  implies (4) and by the lemma, (4) implies (1). Thus the first five conditions are equivalent.  It remains only to show conditions (6) and (1) are equivalent. The implication, if (1) then (6), is equivalent to proposition  V.1 B. Conversely, suppose (6) is true and G is not  440 LEVINE  monogenic. Then there is a decreasing sequence {hn} in G converging to an idempotent function h. The identity function of G is  the limit of the trivial sequence  e, e, e,... .  Thus, h and e are uncrossed. Since h is idempotent, h(h(0)) = h(0) = eh(0). Therefore for all y, h(y) = e(y) and G has a  sequence of functions decreasing to e. Since this condition (3) is equivalent to (1), F is a uniform system and the proof is  complete.  V.2E. COROLLARY. A set of scales is a uniform system if and only if it is completely uncrossed.  Proof. If a set of scales is completely uncrossed, then it is strongly uncrossed since the completion of a group contains the  group. Thus a completely uncrossed set of scales is a uniform system whether it is monogenic or not. Conversely, V.1 B asserts  that each uniform system is completely uncrossed.  V.3. Computing Solutions for Uniform Systems  This section contains informal remarks on computing solutions for uniform systems. No new results are proven. Research is  still being done on computing solutions for sets of scales known only approximately. It will be reported in a later paper.  Throughout this section, let F be a uniform system with associated group G.  If G is monogenic then the results of IV can be used to find a generator h. Since the solutions for F will be exactly the  solutions for {e, h}, the construction used in the proofs of Sec. III or the graphical method sketched in 111.2 can be used to  find the solutions for F.  For nonmonogenic G Sec. V.2 expressed a solution in terms of an order-preserving isomorphism of G onto a subgroup of the  reals. If ~ is any such isomorphism, then the condition u(f (0)) = ~(f ) for each f in G completely determines a scale u  rendering F parallel.  It is easy to obtain such an isomorphism. Let g be any fixed scale greater than e in G. We define a functional t on G as in  IV.4 by associating each f in G with a sequence of integers {pn} such that gP,, < f n G gl+P,,. As shown in IV.4 {pnIn}  converges and if t(f) = lim{ pn/n} then t is an order-preserving isomorphism.  Notice that if the scales of G are known only approximately, then for many values of x, gP(x) and f n(x) can be compared in  order to decide if gP < fn. Unfortunately, however, the sequence {pnln} converges slowly.  One special case is particularly easy to work with computationally and is sufficiently general to be useful in applications.  If G has two generators say f and g > e and if G is nonmonogenic, then the set {h(x) I h is in G) will be dense. To compute a  solution, one need only find t(f ) for f instead of for the whole group. Then for each real x the value of u(x) is  approximated by choosing n and m such that f ngm(0) is close to x.  TRANSFORMATIONS AND PARALLEL CURVES 441  (This is easy because fg equals gf) Then, u(x) may be taken as approximately nt(f) + m. This method has proven to be  particularly easy to program. For reasons yet unknown, it works when f and g are known only approximately.  If F is finite, then the monogenic methods or the special case can always be used. For let F = {F1 ,..., F; , F; ,..., F,.}.  If F is monogenic, the associated group of {F1 , F;, , F;} is monogenic for each i, j and the algorithm sketched in the proof  of 1 V.4B can be used to calculate a generator for G. Otherwise for some i, j, {F1 , Fi , F;) will have a nonmonogenic  associated group and the special case just considered can be applied. It will follow from the uniqueness results for  nonmonogenic groups proven in the next section that F and {F1 , F; , F;} will have exactly the same solutions.  Finally, if F is not finite, then it still might be monogenic or there might be a subset of F' with three scales, a  nonmonogenic associated group and exactly the same solutions as F. One possibility remains: G can be nonmonogenic but every  finitely generated subgroup monogenic. (Consider, for example, F,(-) = e(-) + q and F = {FQ I q is rational}.) In this case, a  sequence of monogenic subgroups of G1 C G;;C ... G,,C ... G may be selected and a solution ucomputed for each Gin such a  way that the sequence {u will converge uniformly to a solution for F. For details and proof, see Levine (1966, C. 4, pp.  23-32).  V.4. Uniqueness of Solutions for Uniform Systems with Nonmonogenic Associated Groups  In this section it is shown that any two solutions for a uniform system with a nonmonogenic associated group are related by a  linear transformation, i.e., if u and v are solutions, then for some positive a and real b, u(-) = av(-) + b. Thus, if this  theory is applied as a measurement theory, one may obtain interval measurement.  VAA. If F is a uniform system with a nonmonogenic associated group and a solution u, then v is a solution for F if and only if  v is a linear transformation of u.  Proof. Since a linear transformation of a solution is a solution, it remains only to prove that any two solutions are related  by a linear transformation.  Let u and v be any two solutions for F having nonmonogenic associated group G. Since G is nonmonogenic, { fu-1(0) I f is in G}  is dense. Thus two scales which coincide on this set are equal. The proof is completed by showing that for some positive a and  real b, av(x) + b is equal to u(x) for each x in this set.  We will use the fact that for any f in G, any integer n, and any solution w, f "(-) _ w -'(w(-) + nwfw-1(0)) several times. It  is derived by noting f (x) = w-1(w(x) -+ k) for some k and all x, putting x equal to w-1(0), solving for k and iterating.  Let g > e be a fixed scale of G. Then g(-) equals u-1(u(.) -+ ugu-1(0)) and ugu-1(0) is positive. Since g is positive and v is  a scale, vgu-1(0) is greater than vu-1(0). Thus a = ugu-1(0))l(vgu-1(0) - vu-1(0)) is positive and w(-) = au(-) - avu 1(0) is  a solution. A routine calculation verifies w-1(0) = u-1(0) and wgu-1(0) = ugu-1(0). The proof is concluded by showing that for  each f in G, w(fu-1(0)) = u(fu1(0)).  442 LEVINE  For any f in G and n > 1, there is one p such that gp < fn < gl+p. Since w -'(w(-) + k) < w -'(w(-) + k') is equivalent to k <  k', the inequalities in G imply  pwgw 1(0) < nwfw l(0) < (1 + p) wgw'(0).  Similarly,  pugu 1(0) < nufu-'(0) < (1 + p) ugu'(0).  Since n is positive, w-1(0) = u-'(0) and wgu-1(0) ---- ugu'(0), these inequalities imply  lzufu-'(0) - ufu-'(0)1 < n (ugu'(0)).  Since this is true for each n, w(fu'(0)) equals u(fu'(0)) and w and u are equal on dense f fu-'(O) I f is in G). This  concludes the proof.  As a consequence of this theorem, the problem of finding all the solutions for a finite set of scales can be reduced to the  problem of finding solutions for a set of no more than three scales. For let F - IF, , F2 ,..., Fr} be a strongly uncrossed  set of r > 4 different scales with associated group G. Then we have exactly two cases:  (1) For each 1 < i < j < r the subset IF, , FZ , F;} has a monogenic associated group.  (2) For some 1 < i < j < r the subset IF, , Fi , F;} has a nonmonogenic associated group.  If (1) holds, then as shown in IVAB, G is monogenic and has exactly the same solutions as the set of two scales {e, h} where h  generates G. It was shown that a generator for G could be obtained by finding generators for the associated group of several  sets of three scales in IVAB.  If (2) holds and say F' = IF, , FZ , F;} has a nonmonogenic associated group, then F cannot be a uniform system unless F' is.  For a subset of a uniform system is a uniform system. Using the construction given in V.2C we can find a solution u for F'. F  will be a uniform system if and only if u renders F parallel, for any solution for F must also be a solution for F'. By the  uniqueness theorem, the only solutions for F are the linear transformations of u.  In this sense the problem of finding solutions for a finite set of scales can be reduced to the problem of finding solutions  for one set of no more than three scales.  REFERENCES  ACZEL, J. Quasigroups, nets, and nomograms. Advances in Mathematics, 1965, 1, 383-450. ACZEL, J. Funktionskomposition,  Iterationsgruppen and Gewebe. Archiv der Mathematik, 1966, 17, 469-475. (a)  TRANSFORMATIONS AND PARALLEL CURVES  443  ACZ~L, J. Lectures on functional equations and their applications. New York: Academic Press, 1966. (b)  ACZEL, J. Works on functional equations. Aequationes Mathematicae, 1968, 1, 152-191.  ACZEL, J., KALMAR, L., AND MIKUSItvSKL J. Sur 1'equation de translation. Stadia Mathematica, 1951, 12, 112-116.  ACZEL, J., AND WALLACE, A. D. A note on generalizations of transitive systems of transformations. Colloquium Mathematicuin,  1967, 17, 29-34.  BIRNBAUM, A. Some latent trait models and their use in inferring an examinee's ability. In F. M. Lord and M. R. Novick (Eds.),  Statistical theories of mental test scores. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1968.  BLASCHKE, W., AND BOL, G. Geometric der Gewebe. Berlin: 1938.  FUCHS, L. Partially ordered algebraic systems. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1963. KRANTZ, D. H. Conjoint measurement: The  Luce-Tuckey axiomatization and some extensions. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1964, 1, 248-277.  LEVINE, M. V. Transformations which render curves parallel. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania, Psychology Dept., 1966.  (mimeographed report)  LEVINE, M. V. Representations of uncrossed groups of functions, unpublished, 1970. (a) LEVINE, M. V. Transformations that  render curves similar, unpublished, 1970. (b)  LORD, F. M., AND NOVICK, M. R. Statistical theories of mental test scores. Reading: Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1968.  LUCE, R. D. Discrimination. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical psychology. Vol. 1.  New York: Wiley, 1963.  LUCE, R. D., AND EDWARDS, W. The derivation of subjective scales from just noticeable differences. Psychological Review, 1958,  65, 222-237.  LUCE, R. D., AND SUPPES, P. Preference, utility, and subjective probability. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter  (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical psychology. Vol. 3. New York: Wiley, 1965.  MICHEL, H. Uber Monotonisierbarkeit von Iterationsgruppen reeller Funktionen. Publicationes Mathematicae (Debrecen), 1962, 9,  298-306. (a)  MICHEL, H. Untersuchungen fiber stetige, monotone Iterationsgruppen reeller Funktionen ohne  Differenzierbarkeitsvoraussetzungen. Publicationes Mathematicae (Debrecen), 1962, 9, 13-46.(b) MIDURA, S. Sur les solutions de  1'equation de translation. Aequationes Mathematicae, 1968, 1, 77-84.  SHEPARD, R. N. Approximation to uniform gradients of generalization by monotone transformations of scale. In D. Mostofsky  (Ed.), Stimulus generalization. Stanford: Stanford Univer. Press, 1965. Pp. 94-110.  THURSTONE, L. L. A law comparative judgment. Psychological Review, 1927, 34, 273-286. (a) THURSTONE, L. L. Psychophysical  analysis. American Journal of Psychology, 1927, 48, 368-389.(b) WARD, M., AND FULLER, F. B. The continous iteration of real  functions. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 1936, 42, 393-396.  RECEIVED: February 6, 1968  48o/7i3-5