10.1016/0022-2496(70)90047-7
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 7, 243-258 (1970)  On Nontransitive Indifference'  FRED S. ROBERTS2  The Rand Corporation, Santa Monica, California 90406  Observed indifference is typically not a transitive relation. Various measurement models for preference and indifference data,  taking account of this observation, are summarized. The relations among the models are discussed; most of the models are  equivalent. Necessary and sufficient conditions are given for the various models, and algorithms for obtaining from the data  the desired (numerical and other) assignments are presented.  1. INTRODUCTION  We shall use the terms "preference" and "indifference" in a very broad sense, much as Coombs (1964) uses the terms "order  relation" and "proximity relation." We are interested in data arising from an individual's judgments "I prefer object  (stimulus) x to object (stimulus) y" or "I am indifferent between x and y." As does Coombs, we want to be quite general and  allow such diverse alternatives for indifference as "x and y are similar," "x and y are the same," "I cannot tell x and y  apart," "x and y match," etc. The reader should refer to Galanter (1956), Goodman (1951), Harary (1964), and Restle (1959) for  examples of the uses of these various terms. A similar range of alternatives should be kept in mind for preference.  It has been variously pointed out (Armstrong, 1939, 1948, 1950, 1951; Luce, 1956; Harary, 1964) that observed indifference is  often not transitive. The aim of this paper is to describe several mathematical models which have been proposed to take  account of this observation, and to summarize some recent results of the present author appearing in the mathematical  literature, presenting necessary and sufficient conditions for these models, and showing that most of them are equivalent.  All of the models to be discussed can be classed as deterministic measurement models. As Luce (1956) has remarked, possibly  the biggest weakness with such models  ' Most of the results appearing in this paper are contained in the author's doctoral dissertation in mathematics at Stanford  University. The research was supported in part by grants from the National Science Foundation.  2 The author thanks Professors Dana Scott, Halsey Royden, Patrick Suppes and Garrett Birkhoff for their helpful comments.  243  244  ROBERTS  is that a person's preferences (and indifferences) change over time, and in particular may not remain invariant during any  experiment which purports to study preference and indifference. This observation, along with the observation that real data  often are distorted by "noise," has led to the development of probabilistic models, some closely related to the measurement  models discussed in this paper. Luce and Suppes (1965) offer a survey article on such models and Roberts (1969a) applies some  of the results described in the present paper to a probabilistic setting.  Throughout our discussion, we shall assume given a set A of objects (stimuli) and a binary relation of preference P on A, or  alternatively a binary relation of indifference I on A, or possibly both P and I. (Given P, we can always obtain I, but not  conversely.) Our discussion will concentrate on the case where we are given only the indifference data-the case Coombs calls  Qlllb-although we shall describe analogous results for the situation where both P and I are known or where I can be defined  from P.  We find it convenient, as does Harary (1964), to use the framework of graph theory for our discussion. We begin in the next  section by introducing a few graph-theoretical terms which will be used in the sequel.  2. GRAPH-THEORETICAL TERMINOLOGY  We shall impose below only a minimal requirement on the observed indifference relation I, namely that it be symmetric and  reflexive. We shall always refer to the pair G = (A, I) as an (unoriented) graph if this is the case.3 Unless otherwise  stated, we shall in the discussion assume that G is finite, i.e., that A is a finite set. However, for the sake of the casual  reader (and the theoretician), we shall include the word finite in the statement of each theorem if it is needed. The set A  will be called the set of points of the graph and I the relation of adjacency. We shall draw diagrams of graphs by  representing the elements of A by points and indicating xly by drawing a line joining the points x and y. We shall always omit  the loops joining a point to itself.  We need only a few definitions from graph theory. A graph (B, J) is a subgraph of (A, I) if B is a subset of A and J is the  restriction of I to B. This is called the subgraph generated by B. The graph (A, I) is connected if for every x, y E A, there  is a sequence of points al , a2 ,..., an in A so that xIal , atla2 ,..., an-,Ian , ay. A component of the graph is a maximal  connected subgraph. The graph in Fig. 1 has three components, namely the subgraphs generated by the subsets {a, b, c}, {d, e,  f, g}, and {h, i, j}.  a We refer the reader to Harary (1964) and Harary, Norman and Cartwright (1965) for any graph-theoretical terminology which is  not explained. Harary (1964) calls these reflexive, symmetric relations r-graphs rather than graphs.  NONTRANSITIVE INDIFFERENCE 245  e  FIG. 1. A graph with three components.  3. THE JND MODELS  We now assume, until Sec. 11, that we are given only the indifference data. Some of the standard examples of nontransitive  indifference data have the following property in common: We can find three objects x, y, and z in A so that x and y and also y  and z are "close," and so we are indifferent between them, while x and z are far enough apart so we are not indifferent  between them. The idea that indifference corresponds to closeness suggests trying to account for the intransitivities by using  the notion of "threshold" or "just noticeable difference" (jnd). This suggests the first model: Try to assign numbers to the  objects so that we are indifferent between two objects if and only if the corresponding numbers are close, say within some  fixed positive distance 8 which measures the threshold. Formally, let us say that a graph (A, I) satisfies the constant jnd  model if one can assign to each x in A a real number f (x) so that for all x, y E A,  XIY H I f (x) -f (A <- 8, (1) where 8 is some fixed positive number. We do not require f (x) and f (y) to be different if x :/~  - y, though it can be shown that an f-assignment can always be modified to accomplish this (provided A is finite). Also, it is  easy to show that if there is an assignment satisfying (1) with some 8, then there is an assignment satisfying (1) with 8 = 1.  The constant jnd model has been studied by, among others, Roberts (1968a, b; 1969b, c) and, in the case where the preference  relation P is known, by Scott and Suppes (1958) and Suppes and Zinnes (1963). To give an example, the numbers in parentheses  give a constant jnd assignment f (with 8 = 1) for the graph of Fig. 2.  b(2) d(2)  e (2)  Interval assignment  J (a)  J (e)  Ftc. 2. Jnd and interval assignments are shown and a compatible simple order is given by a, b, c, d, e. The points a and e are  extreme points.  J (b)  J (d)  246 ROBERTS  Since it seems likely that our threshold may vary from place to place, it is natural to study simultaneously a variable jnd  model. Here the idea is that we assign to each point x in A both a value f (x) (a real number) and a jnd interval J(x) (real  interval about f (x)) so that x is indifferent to y if and only if x is within y's jnd; formally, for all x, Y E A,  xIy H f (x) E AY) .4  Such a model has been introduced (for the case when P and I are known) in Luce (1956)-he speaks of upper and lower jnds rather  than jnd intervals, but the ideas are the same. To give an example here, we may define a jnd assignment for the graph in Fig.  2 by taking f (x) to be the number in parentheses and J(a) 1], J (b) = (- s , 2), J(e) _ [0, 2], J(d) _ [z , 24) and J(e) = Q  Clearly, if (A, I) satisfies the constant jnd model, then it also satisfies the variable jnd model. For, we take J(x) _ [f (x)  - 8, f (x) + 8]. It turns out that iA is finite, then the converse is also true; thus any data that we can account for by  variable jnds we can also account for by constant jnds, simply by changing the numerical assignment. This, as Suppes and  Zinnes (1963) point out, is somewhat surprising and has significant philosophical content.  4. THE INTERVAL MODELS  Closely related to the variable jnd model is the following idea: why not reflect indifference by assigning just jnd intervals,  forgetting assignments of values ? Then the intention is that indifference between objects should correspond to overlapping of  the corresponding intervals. (An interval might stand for a range of possible values.) Formally, let us say that (A, I)  satisfies the interval model, or (A, I) is an interval graph, if there is an assignment to each x in A of an interval J(x) on  the real line such that for all x, y E A,  xIy e--> J(x) r) J(Y) 0 0 .s (3)  We do not require that the J(x) be distinct. An interval assignment for the graph  of Fig. 2 is shown in that figure.  ' Note that by the symmetry of I, f(x) e J(y) implies f(y) e J(x). This implication does not hold for arbitrarily chosen  intervals on the real line with distinguished points inside. Conditions on the functions f and J necessary and sufficient for  this implication to hold are given in Appendix D of Roberts (1968b). For the formalists, we are allowing the interval J(x) to  be "closed," "open," or even "half-open." With some work, it is possible to show that the intervals may always be modified so  as to arrange that all be open or all closed (cf. Roberts, 1968b).  ' Again, we do not specify whether the intervals are open, closed, or half-open. Also, as before, the intervals may all be  taken open or all closed. In the infinite case, it turns out to be more natural to speak of intervals in a simple (linear)  order and define an interval graph in terms of intersections of such intervals (cf. Gilmore and Hoffman (1964)).  NONTRANSITIVE INDIFFERENCE  247  Interval graphs have been studied extensively in the recent mathematical literature, and have been characterized by Fulkerson  and Gross (1965), Gilmore and Hoffman (1964), and Lekkerkerker and Boland (1962). Harary (1964) discusses these graphs in some  detail and describes the Gilmore-Hoffman characterization. Gallai (1967) also discusses some of the characterizations of  interval graphs. We shall not repeat any of these discussions here.  There are two variants of the interval model which turn out to be closely related to the constant jnd model. We shall say that  (A, I) satisfies the unit interval model, or (A, I) is a unit interval graph, if it has an interval assignment satisfying (3)  where all the J(x) are closeds intervals of unit length. And, finally, (A, I) satisfies the proper interval model, or (A, I)  is a proper interval graph, if it has an interval assignment satisfying (3) where no interval is properly contained in  another, i.e., where J(x) C J(y) implies J(x) = J(y). Clearly, unit interval graphs are proper interval graphs and proper  interval graphs are interval graphs. The first two notions, surprisingly, turn out to be equivalent. On the other hand, it is  simple to give an example of an interval graph which is not a unit interval graph. The graph shown in Fig. 3 is such an  example. An interval assignment is shown, and it is not hard to see that no unit interval assignment exists. This graph is  frequently denoted K1,3 in the graph-theoretical literature, and it is important in our discussion because it is in essence  the only interval graph which is not a unit interval graph, in a sense to be made precise later.  KI,3  d Interval assignment Unit cube assignment J (b)  J (a) J (d) J (c)  FIG. 3. K1,3 is an interval graph which is not a unit interval graph. An interval assignment  and a 2-dimensional unit cube assignment are shown.  5. THE GOODMAN-GALANTER COMPATIBILITY MODEL  Closely related to the constant jnd model is a model first studied by Goodman (1951) and then by Galanter (1956). The  motivation is that, rather than assign values to objects in A, we simply try to order objects in a manner "compatible" with  the data. The idea is again that indifference corresponds to closeness in the ordering. Specifically, if R is a simple  (linear) order or a weak order' on the elements in the set A, we shall require that for all x, y, u, v in A,  xRuRvRy & xly ~ uIv. (4)  s Here, closedness is important. Unit interval graphs have been studied and characterized by Wegner (1967).  (A, R) is a weak order if R is reflexive, transitive and complete (for all x, y in A, xRy or yRx). If in addition R is  antisymmetric (xRy and yRx implies x = y), then (A, R) is simple.  248 ROBERTS  In words, two things between which we are not indifferent can never be included between two things between which we are  indifferent. To give an example, if A is the set of real numbers, I means "within distance S" and R means <-, then (4) is  satisfied. Goodman calls (4) the Weak Mapping Rule. In general, if R is a simple or a weak order on the points of a graph (A.,  I), we shall use the term compatibility between R and I to describe the fact that Fq. 4 holds. The simple order a, b, c, d, e  is compatible with the graph of Fig. 2.  6. RELATIONS AMONG THE MODELS  Before going on to give necessary and sufficient conditions for any of the models we have described, we note here the  surprising result that most of these models are equivalent. The various parts of the following are proved in Roberts (1968a,  1969b).  THEOREM 1. Let (A, I) be a finite graph. Then the following are equivalent:  (1) (A, I) satisfies the constant jnd model.  (ii) (A, I) satisfies the variable jnd model.  (iii) (A, I) satisfies the unit interval model.  (iv) (A, I) satisfies the proper interval model.  (v) (A, I) satisfies the interval model and does not contain K1,3 as a subgraph.  (vi) (A, I) is compatible with some simple order.  (vii) (A, I) is compatible with some weak order.  (It follows, as we remarked before, that K1,3 is essentially the only interval graph which is not a unit interval graph, for  an interval graph (A, I) is a unit interval graph if and only if it does not contain K1,3 as a subgraph.)  7. INDIFFERENCE GRAPHS  In order to give necessary and sufficient conditions for the various models we have defined, we shall have to introduce a few  graph-theoretical notions. In studying these models, it is convenient to introduce an equivalence relation E on the points of  a graph G = (A, I). We shall, following Scott and Suppes (1958) and Suppes and 7innes (1963), say that two points x and y are  equivalent, written xEy, if x and y are adjacent to (indifferent to) exactly the same points. Formally,  xEy H (Vz)(xIz F > yIz)s.  It is convenient to define a new graph G* _ (A*, I*) whose points A* are the a Note that since I is reflexive, equivalent  points are adjacent.  NONTRANSITIVE INDIFFERENCE 249  equivalence classes and so that two equivalence classes are adjacent (i.e., in the relation I*) if and only if their  representatives are. For example, let G be the graph of Fig. 1. Then aEb, bF,c, aEc, eEf. G* is shown in Fig. 4, where [x]  denotes the equivalence class containing x. If G is isomorphic to G*, i.e., if there are no equivalent points, then we shall  say G is reduced.  FIG. 4. The reduction G* of the graph G of Fig. 1.  The significance of the relation E is that for each of the models we have defined, G satisfies the model if and only if G*  does. (In the case of the constant jnd model for example, simply map equivalent points onto the same real number.) Thus it is  sufficient to study reduced graphs. Similarly, it is sufficient to study connected graphs, for a graph satisfies one of our  models if and only if each component does.  To characterize the various models, it is by Theorem 1 sufficient to characterize graphs compatible with some simple order.  The main idea involved here is that a (finite) simple order on a set of more than one point has two end points. Thus a graph  with a compatible simple order also should have two end points, or extreme points. Analysis of the notion of endness in a  compatible simple order suggests the following definition (Roberts, 1969b). If e is a point in a graph (A, I), we say e is an  extreme point if whenever x and y are points of A which are adjacent to e, but not equivalent to e, then x is adjacent to y  and, moreover, there is another point in (A, I) adjacent to x and y but not to e. It is not difficult to identify extreme  points. To give some examples, the point i in the graph of Fig. 1 is not an extreme point because it is adjacent but not  equivalent to h and j which are not adjacent to each other. The point e of Fig. 5 is not extremal because it is adjacent but  not equivalent to points b and c but there is no point adjacent to both b and c and not e. Finally, the points a, b, c are  extreme points in each of the graphs 11, 111, IV of Fig. 6, while a and e are extreme points in the graph of Fig. 2.  e  FIG. 5. e is not an extreme point.  250  ROBERTS  An n-gon for  7 n ?4 7  7  c c  c 40  K 1,3 M 8  a b a b a b  Fia. 6. The points a, b, c are extreme points in each of the graphs II, III, IV, while the graphs in I have no extreme points.  A graph is an indifference graph if and only if it does not contain any of the graphs I-IV as a subgraph.  Since a simple order has exactly two extremes, a graph (at least a reduced, connected one) with a compatible simple order  should also have exactly two. This suggests the next definition (Roberts, 1969b). A graph (A, I) is an indifference graph if  it has the following property: whenever H is a connected subgraph, then either H* has just one point or H* has precisely two  extreme points. Since testing for extreme points and reducing ("starring") a graph are easy procedures to carry out, it is not  hard to test whether a given graph is an indifference graph. None of the graphs I-IV of Fig. 6 are indifference graphs. For,  all the graphs are reduced and connected, yet the graphs of type I have no extreme points while those of types II-IV each have  the three extreme points a, b, and c. On the other hand, the graphs in Figs. 1 and 2 are indifference graphs.  The next result, proved in Roberts (1968a), gives together with Theorem 1 a criterion for almost any of the models we have  discussed.  THEOREM 2. Suppose (A, I) is a graph. Then the following are equivalent': (1) (A, I) is an indifference graph.  (ii) (A, I) is compatible with some simple order.  We mention for completeness, and without much discussion, several alternative criteria which turn out to be equivalent to the  notion of indifference graph. Note first that since the graphs I-IV are not indifference graphs, it follows that an  indifference graph cannot have any of these graphs as subgraphs. The converse is also true (cf. Roberts, 1969b) and this gives  a convenient alternative test for the notion of indifference graph.  s This result holds also in the case where A is infinite if the definition of indifference graph is modified so that the  stated requirements hold only for finite H.  NONTRANSITIVE INDIFFERENCE 251  THEOREM 3. A graph is an indifference graph if and only if it does not contain any of the graphs I-IV of Fig. 6 as a subgraph.  Finally, we note that indifference graphs may be defined in terms of besideness rather than extremality, in much the same  spirit as above. We shall adopt the definition of besideness in a graph which is due originally to Goodman (1951) and is  repeated in Coombs (1964), Galanter (1956), and Harary (1964). To define besideness, let us first say that if x, y E A, then x  d y is the collection of all points in A different from x and y and adjacent to one of x and y but not both. Let us say that y  is betwixt x and z if x, y, and z are pairwise adjacent and Jx d z ~ > x d y J and x d z J > y d z J, where I - I indicates  cardinality. Finally distinct points x and y in G are beside one another if they are adjacent and there is no point betwixt  them. The basic result (cf. Roberts, 1968a), essentially based on the ideas of Goodman and Galanter, is the following:  THEOREM 4. A graph (A, I) is an indifference graph if and only if for every finite, connected subgraph H, either H* has just  one point; or every point of H* is beside at least one and at most two others and there are precisely two points of H* beside  just one other.  8. ALGORITHMS  The earlier results are all "constructive" in the sense that there are easily describable algorithms for obtaining compatible  simple orders and for obtaining a constant jnd assignment (and hence a variable jnd assignment, unit, and proper interval  assignments) for an indifference graph.  To describe these, suppose G is an indifference graph which is reduced and connected. Then G satisfies the conditions of  Theorem 4. Let al be a point beside just one other, a. a point beside al , a3 a point beside a2 and different from al , etc.  The simple order al , a2 ,..., an is compatible with G. If G is not reduced, find a simple order compatible with G* and then  order points of equivalence classes arbitrarily. For example, if G is the graph of Fig. 1 then G* is the graph of Fig. 4. The  order [a], [d], [e], [g], [h], [i], [j] is compatible with G*. From this we find that the order a, b, c, d, e, f g, h, i, j is  compatible with G. And so is a, c, b, d, f e, g, h, i, j. Finally, if G is not connected, apply the above procedure to each of  the components of G, and then order the components arbitrarily. For example, the orders a, b, c; d, e, f g; and h, i, j are  compatible with the components of the graph G of Fig. l. And the orders a, b, c, d, e, f g, h, i, j; d, e, f, g, a, b, c, h,  i, j, etc. are compatible with G.  There is an alternative algorithm which simultaneously tests whether a given connected graph G is an indifference graph and  gives a compatible simple order in the case that G is. The procedure is as follows.  252 ROBERTS  (i) Find an extreme point a, of G.  (ii) Find an extreme point a2 of G, , the subgraph of G generated by points different from a, , which is adjacent to a, .  (iii) Having generated the sequence a, , a2 ,..., am , let p be the smallest i _ m so that as is adjacent to some point of G  different from a, , a2 ,..., a,,, . Let G,,, be the subgraph of G generated by points different from a, , a2 ,..., a . Let  a+, be an extreme point of G,n which is adjacent to aD.  It is proved in Roberts (1968b) that G is an indifference graph if and only if the above procedure can be carried out.  Moreover, if the above procedure can be carried out, the resulting order al , a2 ,..., an is a simple order compatible with G.  The algorithm applied to the graph of Fig. 2 gives the order a, b, c, d, e.  To obtain a constant jnd representation for an indifference graph, first generate a compatible simple order a, , a2 ,..., an .  Then, in the case 8 = 1, define the assignment f on the points of G recursively as follows:  (1) f (a,) = 0,  (II) f (ai) = a i 1 if aiIa, , (6)  (iii) f (ai) = f (a,) - I. [f (a,) -f (ai-,)] + 1  if aiIa; & - aiIa;_, .  One can prove easily, combining the results of Roberts (1969b) and of Scott and Suppes (1958), that f provides the desired  assignment. Finally a constant jnd assignment gives immediately variable jnd, unit, and proper interval assignments.  9. UNIQUENESS  Those who study measurement models of the kind we have been discussing often are interested in the uniqueness of the  assignment if it exists. The main result here is that it is the compatible simple (weak) order which is essentially unique.  This answers several questions of Galanter (1956). It follows from this uniqueness result that, for example, in a constant jnd  assignment, the order of the values f (x) is essentially unique; and in a unit interval assignment, the order of the left-hand  end points is essentially unique.  To make all this precise, we note first that there is some freedom in compatible weak orders: They may be reversed, the order  of two equivalent points may be interchanged, the order of two connected components may be interchanged. The following  theorem, proved in Roberts (1968a), says that these are the only possible changes.  NONTRANSITIVE INDIFFERENCE 253  THEOREM 5. Suppose (A, I) is a connected graph. Let a and b be two inequivalent points of A and let R and S be two weak orders  on A compatible with I such that aRb and aSb. Then for all x, y E A such that -xEy, we have xRy +-r xSy.  COROLLARY. Suppose a graph (A, I) with more than one point is reduced and connected and is compatible with some simple order.  Then (A, I) is compatible with exactly two simple orders, one the converse (reverse) of the other.  10. HIGHER DIMENSIONS  All of the models discussed so far are unidimensional in nature, and it is natural to try to formulate higher-dimensional  analogues. Both Coombs (1964) and Galanter (1956) stress this as an essential generalization. The motivation for these models  is to try to describe our preference or indifference between objects by looking at different components or facets or  dimensions of the objects. One such model is the n-dimensional constant jnd model, where the intention is to assign to each  point x in a graph (A, I) an element f (x) in _In, Euclidean n-space, so that for all x, y E A,  Wy <-> d(.f (x),f(.y)) ~ 8, (7)  where d is some appropriate metric on _qn and 8 some positive number (which may be taken equal to 1). There are various  metrics d which have been studied in connection with such measurement or scaling problems (cf. Torgerson, 1958). The one which  seems most appropriate to the author is also the one which has been most neglected in the measurement literature, namely the  "max metric":  2 ,..., xn,', \J1 ,.y2 ,., yn%) -" n1aX I xi -yi ~.  This metric has the property that d(<xl , x2 ,..., xn), (yl , y2 ,..., yn ) 8 if and only if for every i, ; 'x'i - yi I _ 8.  Thus, if (7) is satisfied, we are indifferent between two elements if and only if we are indifferent between them on each of  their components or dimensions.  The interval model and the unit interval model also have n-dimensional versions. Namely, one asks for an assignment to each  point x in a graph (A, I) of a "box" (generalized rectangle with sides parallel to the coordinate axes) or a closed unit cube  (closed box with side-length one) J(x) in :Tn so that for all x, y E A, Eq. 3 is satisfied. We might speak of the  n-dimensional box model and the n-dimensional unit cube model. The results of Sec. 6 generalize, and it is easy to show for  example the following:  THEOREM 6. Let (A, I) be a finite graph. Then (A, I) satisfies the n-dimensional constant jnd model with the max metrix if and  only if it satisfies the n-dimensional unit cube model.  254 ROBERTS  It is natural to define for each type of model a notion of dimension of a graph (dimensionality of the given indifference  data) as the smallest n so that the graph satisfies the n-dimensional version of the model. The dimension gives the smallest  number of "attributes," "components," etc. we need to account (in a given way) for given indifference data. In Roberts  (1969c), we define the cubicity and the boxicity of a graph to be these dimension notions corresponding to the unit cube  models and the box models. In particular, by Theorem 6, the cubicity also corresponds to the dimension notion for the constant  jnd model with the max metric. The graph KI,3 for example has boxicity equal to 1, since it is an interval graph, but K1,3 is  not a unit interval graph and so its cubicity is greater than 1. In fact, K1,3 has cubicity equal to 2, since by the picture  in Fig. 3 it is easy to see that K1,3 satisfies the 2-dimensional unit cube model. The results of Roberts (1969c) provide  explicit formulas for the dimensionality (cubicity, boxicity) of certain graphs and give various properties of dimension.  11. MODELS OF PREFERENCE WITH NONTRANSITIVE INDIFFERENCE  Frequently one is interested in collecting more data, and deciding for two elements between which a subject is not  indifferent, which of the two he prefers. (The reader will recall that we are using the term "preference" in a very broad  sense, to include more general alternatives such as "thinks x is heavier than y," "thinks x is smarter than y," etc.) The  relation P of preference is in general asymmetric. We shall call the pair (A, P) an oriented graph if P is asymmetric. We draw  oriented graphs in the standard way by representing the elements of A by points and drawing an arrow from x to y if xPy.  Formally, the relation between indifference I and preference P is given by the following:  XIy H -xPy & -YPX. (8)  Whenever an asymmetric relation P and a reflexive, symmetric relation I are related by Eq. 8, we shall say that I is the  symmetric complement of P. Given P, we can always obtain I by means of Eq. 8, but we cannot obtain P from I.  The models we have studied in Secs. 3-5 and the theorems we have given all have analogues in the preference case. For  completeness we shall compile the definitions and results, without too much discussion. The reader should have no trouble  understanding the motivation behind each if he thinks of "preferred to" as meaning "not indifferent and bigger than."  Throughout (A, P) will be an oriented graph and (A, I) its symmetric complement. (A, I) can be either given initially or  defined from (A, P).  (A, P) satisfies the constant jnd model if there is an assignment to each x in A of a real number f (x) so that for all x, y E  A, xPy E--> f (x) > f (y) + 8, where 8 is some  NONTRANSITIVE INDIFFERENCE 255  fixed positive number (which may be taken equal to 1). (A, P) satisfies the variable jnd model if there is an assignment to  each x in A of a real number f (x) and a real interval J(x) containing f (x) so that the pair (f, J) satisfies Eq. 2 and also,  for all x, y E A, xPy -f (x) > J(y), -here f (x) > J(y) means f (x) > a for all a C J(y). (A, P) satisfies the interval model  if there is an assignment to each x in A of an interval J(x) on the real line so that for all x, y E A, xPy " J(x) > J(y),  where J(x) > J(y) means a > b for all a E J(x), b E J(y). It satisfies the unit (proper) interval model if all the J(x) are  closed unit intervals (if no J(x) is properly contained in a J(y)). (A, P) is compatible with a simple (weak) order (A, R) if  (A, I) is compatible with (A, R) and, moreover, for all x, y E A, xPy -> xRy.  The oriented graph H of Fig. 7 has as symmetric complement the graph G of Fig. 2. The constant jnd assignment, variable jnd  assignment and interval assignment for G, as described in Secs. 3 and 4, have been chosen so as to give the corresponding  assignments for H with the given labeling of points. (It is not necessarily true that a constant jnd assignment for the  symmetric complement (A, I) automatically is one for (A, P); indeed (A, I) may have such an assignment while (A, P) has none.  The same is true for variable jnd and interval assignments.) The order a, b, c, d, e is a simple order compatible with H.  The following theorem is easy to derive from the results of Roberts (1968a, 1969b).  THEOREM 7. Suppose (A, P) is a finite oriented graph and (A, I) is its symmetric complement. Then the following are equivalent:  (i) (A, P) satisfies the constant jnd model.  (ii) (A, P) satisfies the variable jnd model.  (iii) (A, P) satisfies the unit interval model.  (iv) (A, P) satisfies the proper interval model.  (v) (A, P) satisfies the interval model and (A, I) does not have K1,3 as a subgraph.  (vi) (A, P) is compatible with some simple order.  (vii) (A, P) is compatible with some weak order.  A criterion for the constant jnd model (and hence for the other models in Theorem 7) has been provided by Scott and Suppes  (1958). This is the notion of semiorder, which was first introduced by Luce (1956). We include the Scott-Suppes definition for  reference: the oriented graph (A, P) is called a semiorder if for all x, y, z, w E A,  (i) xPy & ZPw -* XPw v ZPy.  (ii) xPy &YPz ~ XPw v WPz.  The oriented graph of Fig. 7 is an example of a semiorder. To state the next theorem, it is convenient to speak of the graph  K,., , the square, which is the first graph in I  48017!2-5  256 ROBERTS  c  FIG. 7. A semiorder H. A compatible simple ordering is given by a, b, c, d, e. The symmetric complement is the graph G of Fig.  2. The constant jnd, variable jnd, and interval assignments for G give corresponding assignments for H.  of Fig. 6. The following result is proved in Roberts (1968a, 1969b). [Holland, 1966b, proves the implication (i) -> (iv).]  THEOREM 8. Suppose (A, P) is an oriented graph and (A, I) is its symmetric complement. Then the following are equivalent)  (i) (A, P) is a semiorder.  (ii) (A, P) is transitive and (A, I) is an indifference graph.  (iii) (A, P) is transitive and (A, I) does not contain K1,3 or K,,2 as a subgraph.  (iv) (A, P) is compatible with some simple order.  This theorem gives a criterion for almost all the models defined above. Fishburn (1970) has recently characterized interval  models. He defines an interval order (A, P) as an oriented graph satisfying condition (i) in the definition of semiorder. His  result can be summarized as follows:  THEOREM 9 (Fishburn). Suppose (A, P) is an oriented graph and (A, I) is its symmetric complement. Then the following are  equivalent:  (i) (A, P) is an interval order.  (ii) (A, P) is transitive and (A, I) does not contain K., as a subgraph.  (iii) (A, P) is transitive and (A, I) is an interval graph.  (iv) (A, P) satisfies the interval model.  The implications (iv) --> (iii) ~ (ii) --* (i) are straightforward and the implication (i) -> (iv) is proved in Fishburn  (1970).11  1This theorem holds even for the case where A is infinite, if the definition of indifference graph is modified in the manner  described in footnotes  11 The Fishburn proof assumes A is countable. If the more general notion of interval model, i.e., using intervals in a simple  order, is adopted, the result holds without this restriction.  NONTRANSITIVE INDIFFERENCE 257  Algorithms for obtaining compatible simple orders and the various assignments are, if anything, easier to state for oriented  graphs than for unoriented graphs. Suppose (A, P) is a semiorder and (A, I) is reduced. Then, following Scott and Suppes  (1958), we may define a simple order R on A by  xRy H (dz)(yPz -> xPz & zPx ~ zPy).  It turns out (Roberts, 1968a) that R is compatible with P. If (A, I) is not reduced, then R is a weak order compatible with P  and we can obtain a simple order by ordering equivalent points arbitrarily just as in Sec. 8. Finally, if al , a2 ,..., a,, is  a simple order on A compatible with P, we may obtain a constant ind assignment with 8 following Scott and Suppes (1958) again,  by means of the function f defined in Eqs. 6. The uniqueness results of Sec. 9 also have analogues. To state these, we use the  equivalence relation E defined as in Sec. 7 from (A, I).  THEOREM 10. Suppose (A, P) is an oriented graph and (A, I) is its symmetric complement. Let R and S be two weak orders on A  compatible with P. Then if -xEy, we have xRy H xSy.  COROLLARY. Suppose (A, P) is an oriented graph and its symmetric complement (A, I) is reduced. If (A, P) is compatible with  some simple order, then it is compatible with exactly one.  Finally, in the oriented case it is not entirely clear what the higher-dimensional analogues are for the various  unidimensional problems. This is, it seems, an important area for further research.  REFERENCES  ARMSTRONG, W. E. The determinateness of the utility function. Economics Journal, 1939, 49, 453-467.  ARMSTRONG, W. E. Uncertainty and the utility function. Economics Journal, 1948, 58, 1-10. ARMSTRONG, W. E. A note on the  theory of consumer's behavior. Oxford Economic Papers, 1950, 2, 119-122.  ARMSTRONG, W. E. Utility and the theory of welfare. Oxford Economic Papers, 1951, 3, 259-271. COOMBS, C. H. A theory of data.  New York: Wiley, 1964.  FISHBURN, P. C. Intransitive indifference with unequal indifference intervals. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1970, 7,  144-149.  FULKERSON, D. R., AND GROSS, O. A. Incidence matrices and interval graphs. Pacific Journal of Mathematics, 1965, 15, 835-855.  GALANTER, E. H. An axiomatic and experimental study of sensory order and measure. Psychological Review, 1956, 63, 16-28.  GALLAi, T. Transitiv orientierbare graphen. Acta Mathematica Academic, Scientiarum Hungaricce, 1967, 18, 25-26. Reviewed in  Mathematics Reviews 36, No. 5026.  258 ROBERTS  GILMORE, P. C., AND HOFFMAN, A. J. A characterization of comparability graphs and of interval graphs. Canadian Journal of  Mathematics, 1964, 16, 539-548.  GOODMAN, N. Structure of appearance. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1951. HARARY, F. A graph theoretic approach  to similarity relations. Psychometrika, 1964, 29, 143-151. HARARY, F., NORMAN, R. Z., AND CARTWRIGHT, D. Structural models: An  introduction to the theory of directed graphs. New York: Wiley, 1964.  HOLLAND, P. W. Semiorder theory I: Characterization of semiorders. Memorandum NS 44, Department of Statistics, Harvard  University, 1966. (a)  HOLLAND, P. W. Semiorder theory 11: Linear semiorders. Memorandum NS 45, Department of Statistics, Harvard University, 1966.  (b)  LER%ERE:ERRER, C. G., AND BOLAND, J. C. Representation of a finite graph by a set of intervals on the real line. Fundamenta  Mathematicce, 1962, 51, 45-64.  LUCE, R. D. Semiorders and a theory of utility discrimination. Econometrica, 1956, 24, 178-191. LUCE, R. D., AND SUPPES, P.  Preference, utility and subjective probability. In R. D. LUCE, R. R. BUSH, AND E. GALANTER (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical  psychology, III. New York: Wiley, 1965. Pp. 249-410.  RESTLE, F. A metric and an ordering on sets. Psychometrika, 1959, 24, 207-220.  ROBERTS, F. S. On the compatibility between a graph and a simple order. The Rand Corporation, Memorandum RM-5778-PR, 1968.  Abridged version to appear in the Journal of Combinatorial Theory. (a)  ROBERTS, F. S. Representations of indifference relations. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Stanford University, Stanford,  California, 1968. (b)  ROBERTS, F. S. Homogeneous families of semiorders and the theory of probabilistic consistency. Memorandum RM-5993-PR, 1969. To  appear in the Journal of Mathematical Psychology. (a) ROBERTS, F. S. Indifference graphs. In F. HARARY (Ed.), Proof techniques  in graph theory: Proceedings of the Second Ann Arbor Graph Theory Conference. New York: Academic Press, 1969. Pp. 139-146. (b)  ROBERTS, F. S. On the boxicity and the cubicity of a graph. In W. T. TuTTE (Ed.), Recent progress in combinatorics:  Proceedings of the Third Waterloo Conference. New York: Academic Press, 1969. Pp. 301-310. (c)  SCOTT, D., AND SUPPES, P. Foundational aspects of theories of measurement. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 1958, 23, 113-128.  SUPPES, P., AND ZINNES, J. L. Basic measurement theory. In R. D. LUCE, R. R. BUSH, AND E. GALANTER (Eds.), Handbook of  mathematical psychology, I. New York: Wiley, 1963, Pp. 1-76.  TORGERSON, W_ S. Theory and methods of scaling. New York: Wiley, 1958.  WEGNER, G. Eigenschaften der Nerven Homologisch-einfacher Familien in 7l". Unpublished doctoral dissertation, G6ttingen, 1967.  RECEIVED: November 12, 1969