10.1016/0022-2496(70)90046-5
OURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY: 7, 236-242 (1970)  Further Extensions of a Theorem of Dimensional Analysis  D. K. OSBORNE'  University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois 61803  This paper extends the Luce extension of the dimensional analysis theorem to cover ordinal and log interval scales. It shows  (1) that no complex of dimensionally distinct interval or log interval scales maps into an ordinal scale; (2) that a complex  of dimensionally distinct ratio scales maps into a log interval scale only by the power function f (xl , x2 ,...) = K II%1  x, where K > 0 and a.i :~, 0 are arbitrary, and the function A exp f(xl , x2 ,...), where A > 0 is arbitrary; and (3) a  complex of ratio scales maps into an ordinal scale by any increasing monotonic function of f(x, , x2 ,...), and by no other  function. Adjoined to the Luce results, these complete the analysis of all combinations of "independent" and "dependent"  scales of the ratio, interval, log interval, and ordinal type.  Let X = (x,, x2 ,..., x, Y = (yt , Y!,_ y.),..., Z = (Z,, z2 ,..., z be complexes of measurements on a fixed set of n  dimensionally distinct variables. X, Y,..., Z are regarded as points in a real n-space S, defined by axes on which the n  variables are measured, and whose nonnegative orthant is S+. Let a transformation T : S - TS change the system of measurement  of the n variables, i.e., if the n variables are ratio-measurable, T is a linear transformation with positive definite  diagonal matrix; such a transformation is denoted by L. If the n variables are interval-measurable, T is an affine  transformation, 2 changing both origin and units of measurement. Whatever its form, T takes X, Y,..., Z into TX, TY,..., TZ.  Let R be the real line, and R+ its nonnegative half. Let a function f : S --* R attach to any complex X E S a real number f  (X); of course, f takes TX into f (TX).  It is convenient to speak of a ratio complex when all the n variables are ratiomeasurable, and of a ratio scalar when the  values of f are ratio-measurable. We note  ' The paper was written while the author was visiting the University of Birmingham.  2 There is some confusion over these transformations in social science literature. It seems best to follow mathematical usage  here. A transformation T is linear if and only if T(aX - b Y) _ aT(X) + bT(Y). See, e.g., Birkhoff and Maclane (1963, Ch. 8).  It may be noted that none of the scale transformations of interest in scale theory form groups, since they are in all cases  monotonically increasing. The group nomenclature remains useful, however, in distinguishing scale types. The standard  reference here is Stevens (1966).  236  FURTHER EXTENSIONS OF A THEOREM OF DIMENSIONAL ANALYSIS 237  that, for any permissible measurement transformation T on a complex, the defining characteristic of a ratio scalar is that f  (X)lf (Y) = f (TX)lf (TY) for all X, Y E S. The theorem in question may then be stated as  DIMENSIONAL-ANALYTIC THEOREM OF LUCE. If S is of at least two independent dimensions, the only continuous, nonconstant  function f : S+ -~ R+ satisfying the condition f (X)lf (Y) = f (L X)lf (L Y) is of the form  n  f (X) = P(X) = K xa', a=1  where K > 0 and the a's -A 0 are arbitrary real nondimensional constants.  That is, the only mapping of a ratio complex into a ratio scalar is the power function P(X). Luce (1964) was not the first to  prove the uniqueness of the power function in this regard, but he was the first to prove it without requiring f to be  differentiable. (See Bridgeman, 1922, for the earliest proof, and e.g., Ellis, 1966, for an alternative which still requires  differentiability.)  In his 1964 paper, Luce extended the scope of this type of analysis by considering other scale types as well. In particular,  he showed that:  (1) A ratio complex maps into an interval scalar only by the two functional forms log P(X) and P(X) + B, where B is an  arbitrary real constant.  (ii) No complex of two or more dimensionally distinct interval scales (i.e., no interval complex) maps into an interval scalar  (nor, a fortiori, into a ratio scalar).  In an earlier study (1959) Luce had analyzed situations where S is of a single dimension.  The present note completes the analysis of mappings from and to the common scale types-the ratio, interval, log interval, and  ordinal. The results, which are of interest in certain branches of preference theory and psychophysics, are:  (1) A ratio complex maps into a log interval scalar only by P(X) and C exp P(X), where C > 0 is an arbitrary real constant.  (2) A ratio complex maps into an ordinal scalar only by any monotonic increasing function of P(X).  (3) An interval complex does not map into an ordinal (nor, a fortiori, into any common) scalar. This implies Luce's result  (ii).  (4) A log interval complex does not map into any common scalar.  In other words, only ratio complexes can be mapped into real numbers which are not wholly sensitive to systems of measurement.  It may be observed that both S and its nonnegative orthant S+ are metric spaces, by virtue of the trivial metric  238 OSBORNE  d(X, Y) = (1 if X :/= Y, 0 if X = Y). These results, therefore, suggest that nontrivial metrics on spaces of two or more  distinct dimensions require the admissibility of only linear transformations on the spaces; certainly a fixed point is  required .3 This seems to have been given no attention in topology. It does, however, make plausible the "ubiquitous power  function" in psychophysics (Stevens, 1966).  I first prove the result numbered (3).  A scale change on interval measures takes the form of an affine transformationa linear transformation of the type L followed  by a translation. Let A be an affine transformation, and let X and Y be interval complexes in S. Let f : S -> R be a function  from S to an ordinal scalar. If such a function exists, the order of its values is invariant under A. That is,  CONDITION I. For any X, Y, in S, and any afne transformation A with positive definite diagonal matrix, f (X) > f (Y) if and  only if f (AX) > f (A Y).  THEOREM I. If S is of at least two distinct dimensions, no continuous, nonconstant function f : S R obeys Condition I.  Proof. Assume, contrarily, that f exists. Since it is continuous, it is a many-one mapping-at least two distinct points in S  are mapped into the same real number. Let these points be (xl , x2) and (yl , y2), with xi 4: yi . Furthermore, by the  properties of interval scales, xl can be put equal to zero. By assumption, then, f (0, x2) = f (yl , y2), and the preservation  of this equality is necessary for the observance of Condition I. But changing the scale of the first coordinate by a positive  multiplier a requires f (0, xs) = f (ay, , y2) for all real positive a. Therefore, f must be constant in its first argument.  By repetition, it must be constant in any intervalmeasurable argument. Q.E.D.  It should be noted that only the first argument underwent a scale change. Therefore, the presence of at least one  interval-measurable argument simultaneously with at least one other argument of any type, so long as its dimensions are  distinct from the first's, suffices for the theorem. I may add, in conjunction with this, that the least well-determined  element of a complex of measurements determines the nature  a The Euclidean metric is preserved under affine transformations, but only those which operate on all axes equally. We are  interested in more general transformations-that is, in more general spaces. The space S under discussion here lacks the  Euclidean metric; that is why the complexes are not referred to as vectors.  FURTHER EXTENSIONS OF A THEOREM OF DIMENSIONAL ANALYSIS 239  of the complex; i.e., a complex of one ratio-measurable variable and n - 1 dimensionless variables is a ratio complex, a  complex of one interval-measurable variable and n - 1 ratio-measurable variables is an interval complex, and so on. Because of  this it is not necessary to consider intermixtures of scale types in complexes.  Turning to the result numbered (4), we consider log interval complexes whose elements are unique up to a positive power and a  positive multiplier (the operations occurring in that order) and whose logarithms are therefore interval scales. Mappings from  such complexes to an ordinal scalar must satisfy  CONDITION II. For any X, Y, in S+, and any transformation T such that TX = (alxil,..., anxn-) with positive a's and b's, f  (TX) > f (TY) if and only if AX) > f (Y).  THEOREM II. If S is of at least two distinct dimensions and if at least one b ~/- I in the transformation T, no continuous,  nonconstant function f : S+ ---> R satisfies Condition II.  Proof. The preservation of equality between f (X) and f (Y) is necessary for the observance of Condition II. Assume, then, by  the continuity off, that f (X) = f (Y), with X ~ Y. Put xl = 1. Then it must be true that f (1, x2) = f (yl , ys) if and only  if f (a, x2) = f (ayi y2) for a, b > 0. This obviously requires either yl = 1 where xl = 1, contrary to the assumption of  continuity, or constancy of the function in its first argument. Q.E.D.4  Clearly, a complex that does not map into an ordinal scalar will not map into an interval, log interval, or ratio scalar, for  the latter are only special types of ordinal scalars: the preservation of order is necessary for the preservation of intervals  or ratios. The same reasoning shows that the failure of an interval complex to map into a given type of scalar implies the  same failure by an ordinal complex. Hence the statement that only ratio complexes map into scalars not wholly dependent on  measurement systems.  The remaining results are those numbered (1) and (2). We take them in order. The invariance condition for mappings from ratio  complexes into log interval scalars is  4 The multiplier a plays no role in this proof. If, therefore, one should consider a "log ratio" scale-that is, a scale  determined up to a positive power-it is seen that complexes of such scales do not map into ordinal scalars.  480/7/2-4  240 OSBORNE  CONDITION III. For all X, Y, W in S+ and any linear transformation L with positive definite diagonal matrix,  log f (X) - log f (Y) _ log f (LX) - log f (LY) log f (W) - log f (Y) log f (LW) - log f'(LY) '  It is clear that, if Condition III holds for S+ of two or more dimensions, it also holds for S+ of one dimension; therefore in  order for the former to be true it is necessary for the latter to be true. That is, no function which violates Condition III  in the case of one-dimensional S+ can satisfy it in a multidimensional case. Luce (1959) has already shown that the only  functions satisfying Condition III in the onedimensional case are the power function P(X) and its exponentiation, C exp P(X),  where C is an arbitrary real positive constant. Furthermore, both these functions are seen to satisfy Condition III in the  multidimensional case also. This proves  THEOREM III. The only continuous, nonconstant functions f : S+ , R satisfying Condition III are  (1) f (X) = K H xz i, K>0, ai -t 0, and i=1  (ii) g(V) = C exp f (X), C > 0.  Turning to the final result, we may write the invariance condition for mappings on ratio complexes to ordinal scalars as  CONDITION IV. For any X, Y in S+, and any linear transformation L with positive definite diagonal matrix,  f (X) > f (Y) if and only if f (LX) > f (LY).  THEOREM IV. Let P be the power function, let f : S+ ~ R be any continuous, nonconstant function, and let g : R+ , R be any  strictly increasing monotonic function; then f satisfies Condition IV if and only if f (X) = g[P(X)].  Proof. The "if" part is trivial. Concerning the "only if" part:  (i) f must obviously be monotonic increasing because of the distinct dimensions of the n variables (the elements on the main  diagonal of L are independent).  (ii) If f(X) is not a function of a product of powers of the variables, it must be a function of at least two additive terms,  say hl(X) and h2(X), which are not dimensionally homogeneous-that is, hl(X) > h2(X), say, is not preserved by all permissible  scale transformations. Define  xi ~ hi(V)  'x2 - h2(X)'  FURTHER EXTENSIONS OF A THEOREM OF DIMENSIONAL ANALYSIS 241  Then Condition IV requires  f (xi -}- x2) > f(yi + Y2) if and only if f (Lxl + Lx,) >f(41 + 42),  where L2i denotes hi(LZ). The preceding must hold for continuous monotonic f, linear L, and all X, Y E S+; it therefore implies  xl - Yl > 'x2 if and only if L(xl - yl) > L(y2 - x2).  But the two sides of the latter inequality are dimensionally incompatible-they obey the stated order only in certain units.  Hence L may be chosen to reverse the inequality. Hence, if f(X) is not a function of a product of powers of the n variables,  it violates Condition IV. Q.E.D.  IV  This completes the analysis. The results are summarized in Table 1 (compare Luce, 1959).  Comment  These results bear most strongly on questions of definition. They show, for example, that no "group preference" function can  be defined on interpersonally incomparable interval preferences (say of the von Neumann-Morgenstern type) of the group's  members (unless they are unanimous). But they lend negligible aid to the search for empirical laws. Thus n -+ 1 independently  dimensioned variables distributed in the multivariate normal are related by a linear regression equation  x,+i = a + bixi  TABLE I Possible Mappings from Complexes of Two or More Dimensionally Distinct Variables to Scalars  Complex Scalar Functional forms of continuous mappings  Ratio Ratio P(X) = K Ijn-1 x, K > 0, a, -A 0  Interval log P(X), P(X) + B  Log interval P(X), C exp P(X) (C > 0)  Ordinal g[P(X)], g any monotonic increasing function  Interval, Ratio, interval, None  log interval, or log interval, or  ordinal ordinal  242  OSBORNE  As all variables might well be interval-measurable, the regression equation certainly maps an interval "complex" into an  interval scalar. But in fact the arguments of the "complex" are not the x's but the bx's, and these all have the same  dimensions. The dimensional constants of the regression equation are determined by the moments of the distribution, and so are  inherent in the situation.' And that is the rub: there seems no reliable way of knowing a priori when dimensional constants  will be inherent in a scientific problem. This is a most important unsolved problem in the philosophy of science.  REFERENCES  BIRKHOFF, G. AND MACLANE, S. A Survey of modern algebra. New York: Macmillan Co., 1963. BRIDGEMAN, P. W., Dimensional  Analysis. New Haven, Conn.: Yale Univ. Press, 1922.  ELLIS, B., Basic Concepts of Measurement. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1966.  LUCE, R. D., On the possible psychophysical laws. Psychological Review, 1959, 66, 81-95. LUCE, R. D., A generalization of a  theorem of dimensional analysis. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1964, 1, 278-284.  STEVENS, S. S. A metric for the social consensus. Science, 1966, 151, 530-541.  RECEIVED: June 24, 1968  Hence the results' bearing on psychophysics depends on there being no dimensional constants inherent in psychophysical  problems, and I think that is the case. The reader may not regard this as conclusive.