10.1016/0022-2496(71)90018-6
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 8, 285-301 (1971)  The Analysis of Economic Teaching Strategies for a Simple Learning Model'  RICHARD D. SMALLWOODZ  Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305  This paper formulates in economic terms the decision problem for teaching a list of paired associate items. The analysis  assumes that learning behavior for each item is described by the one-element model with parameters that can depend on both the  student and the item. A dynamic programming formulation for the decision problem is developed that accounts for the cost of  instruction as well as the cost of terminating the instruction in the unconditioned state. This formulation considers three  alternatives at each decision: simply present the item with no elicited response, present the item and observe the students'  response, and terminate instruction for the item. The paper proves that the optimum policy for a multi-item list can be  calculated by considering each item individually and then aggregating the individual results into a total policy. Secondly, an  algorithm for calculating the optimum policy for each item is derived. The algorithm is simple enough so that the optimum  policy can be calculated by hand. Two examples illustrate the application of the algorithm.  I. INTRODUCTION  In planning the day-to-day operations of an educational system, we should like to allocate the system's limited resources so  as to maximize the effectiveness of the instruction. To examine the trade-offs that inevitably occur between commitment of  educational resources and instructional effect, it is imperative that we have available rational tools for attacking the  problem. This paper is an attempt to contribute to the development of just such a set of tools. A classical instructional  situation is defined and an economic formulation of the instructional decision process is presented. A method for solving the  economic optimization of the instructional strategy is developed and applied to several examples.  The situation considered is one in which a specified number of paired associate items is to be learned by the student. These  items might be simple nonsense syllables in  1 The work reported in this paper was partially supported by the joint Services Electronic Program (U.S. Army, U.S. Navy, U.S.  Air Force) under Contract Nonr-225(83), NR 373 360. 2 I am very grateful to Dr. James E. Eckles of the RAND Corporation for  his aid and suggestions in formulating the early versions of this problem. In particular, the proof of Section III is  completely his contribution.  285  286 SMALLWOOD  a psychological experiment or, in a more practical context, they might correspond to foreign language vocabulary, spelling  drills, arithmetic tables, or even simple mathematical concepts. In any case, we assume that the purpose of the teaching  system is to present the items to the student in such a way that he will learn to identify a desired response for each of the  stimulus items in the list.  The quantitative formulation of the decision process requires a mathematical model of the learning process within the student.  For this simple paired associate learning situation we shall use the simple model of Fig. I to describe: (a) the effect of the  instruction upon the student's state of knowledge, and (b) the effect of the student's state of knowledge upon his responses  to our queries. Since there will be many items in the list to be learned, we shall assume that a learning model of the form in  Fig. 1 is applicable to each of the items in the list.  k=1 (correct)  __"0 k=0 (incorrect)  FIG. 1. The all or nothing model.  In using the model in Fig. 1 to describe the paired associate learning behavior of a student, we assume that the student's  state of knowledge about each item can be described by two states; these two states are represented by the two nodes in the  figure. The "zero" state is associated with the unconditioned or unlearned state of the student; while the "one" state  represents the conditioned or learned state of the student for the particular item under consideration.  If a response is elicited from the student, then the dotted lines in Fig. I represent the dependence of the student's response  (correct or incorrect) upon his state. The symbols associated with these lines are the probabilities of the response  conditioned upon that particular state for the student. Thus we assume that, if the student is in the "one" state, he will  always give the correct answer; but, if he is in the "zero" state, he will "guess" the correct answer with probability r. The  solid lines in Fig. I represent  ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC TEACHING STRATEGIES 287  the possible transitions in the student's state of knowledge that may occur after he has given his response; and the symbols  associated with these lines represent the probability associated with that transition. Thus, if a student is in the "zero" or  unconditioned state, there is a probability t that he will make the transition to the "one" or conditioned state, and with  probability 1 - t he will remain in the "zero" or unconditioned state. Similarly, if he is in the conditioned state, then with  probability l he remains in that state for that item. This model has been discussed extensively in the literature (Atkinson,  Bower, and Crothers, 1965; Groen and Atkinson, 1966; Karush and Dear, 1966; Matheson, 1964; Suppes, 1964a, 1964b) and because  of the above interpretation for the two states it has been termed the "all or nothing" model for human learning.  Several researchers have studied the optimization problem associated with this model (Karush and Dear, 1966; Matheson, 1964).  The work of Karush and Dear (1966) is particularly relevant to the present discussion. They have derived the optimum teaching  strategy for this simple situation under the following assumptions and restrictions:  (a) The decision process consists only in selecting the next item from among the possible items to be presented. That is, once  a particular item from the list has been selected for presentation to the student, there is only a single method of  presentation, and this consists of presenting the item to the student and then soliciting his response. (b) The state  transition probabilities and response probilities are the same for all items.  (c) The total number of item presentations is fixed.  (d) The terminal value of the instruction is a monotonically increasing function of the number of items for which the student  is in state "1."  Within these assumptions they show that the optimum strategy is to select for each presentation that item for which the  probability of being in state "1" is minimum. In this paper we shall present an economic formulation of this problem and show  how solutions for the optimum teaching strategy may be calculated for any practical situation. The corresponding assumptions  and restrictions for this discussion are as follows:  (a) If a particular item has been selected for presentation to the student, we shall consider two alternative methods of  presentation. In the first alternative, termed the "present" alternative, the student is simply presented the stimulus and  correct response for the item, but no overt response by the student is required. We shall use the notation pi to represent the  state transition probability when this method of presentation is used for the ith item. The response probability r obviously  has no meaning for the "present" alternative. The second alternative method for presenting an item, termed the "test"  alternative, involves presenting the stimulus material to the student and then eliciting an overt response by the student.  This is the form of  288 SMALLWOOD  presentation discussed by most authors and the notations ti and ri will be used for the state transition probability and  response probability when this "test" alternative is used for the ith item.  (b) The constraint mentioned above on the total number of presentations is not usually a realistic restriction. In a practical  situation one is usually willing to present "one more item" if the expected payoff justifies the necessary expenditure of  resources. Thus, in a more realistic formulation of the constraints on the number of presentations, we might consider the  marginal costs of presentation for each strategy and then let the economics of the situation dictate the number of  presentations for each item. This is the approach followed in the succeeding discussion. The cost parameters cpi and cti will  denote the cost of presenting the ith item by means of the "present" and "test" alternatives, respectively.  (c) As implied by the notation in paragraphs (a) and (b) above, all of the model and cost parameters in this formulation of  the problem may depend upon the item involved.  (d) The terminal cost structure for the instructional process will be described by a set of parameters [yl , 72 ,...] where yi  is the cost incurred if the instruction is terminated with the ith item in the "0" or "unlearned" state.  II. A DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING FORMULATION  Before proceeding with the formulation of the optimization problem for this situation, we must agree upon a parameterization  of the student's past history. That is, what representation of our total information about the student shall be used in  deciding upon the next presentation to the student ? If it were possible to detect the true state of the student in Fig. 1,  then this information could be used to characterize the student's past history. Since this information is not available, the  student's past history for each item will be summarized by the current probability that the student is in the "one" state;  this probability that the student has "learned" the ith item will be denoted by 7ri .  In order to simplify the following development we shall consider first the very simple situation in which there is only a  single item on the list to be taught the student. (In this case we can drop the "i" subscript from the various parameters of  the decision problem.) After formulating the decision problem for this single item situation we shall show in Sec. III that  the solution of the single item case for each item on the list defines the optimum strategy for a multi-item list.  In the succeeding formulation of the decision problem we shall first calculate the total expected cost of future instruction  for each of the three available alternative strategies: use the "present" instructional alternative, use the "test"  instructional alternative, or terminate the instruction for this item. The total expected cost of future instruction for the  optimum decision policy is then just the minimum of these three quantities.  ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC TEACHING STRATEGIES 289  The calculation of these three cost functions requires the explicit description of the process for updating the student's past  history as new data is obtained from particular presentations of the item. For example, if the student's current past history  for an item is 77 and the "present" teaching strategy is used, then the updated past history 7T' for the student is3  W'=7T+(1-7T)P. (1)  Equation 1 describes a transformation from iT to 7r' of our state of information about the student's internal state of  knowledge; we shall designate this transformation by Tp(7T) and write  Tp(-) = - + (1 - -)P  This transformation notation will prove useful in the succeeding development.  If the "test" teaching strategy is used for the presentation of the item, then there will be two possible responses by the  student: correct and incorrect. If the probability that the student is in the "one" state prior to the presentation is 7r,  then the probabilities for the two responses are  Pr(k = 1) = a + (1 - 7r)r, (correct)  Pr(k = 0) = (1 -7r)(1 - r). (incorrect) (3)  After the student's response to the "test" presentation of the item has been recorded, we must update the student's past  history. If the student's response was correct, then the updated probability for the "one" state is given by the following  transformation;  a + (1 - 7r) rt 7r + (1 - 7r)r  Similarly if the student's response is incorrect, then the corresponding probability transformation is just  Tt(7r, 0) = t.  The results in (2)-(5) now allow the derivation of the total expected instruction cost for each of the three available  instructional alternatives. The simplest alternative is to terminate the instruction for the item. In this case, if the  current probability that the student occupies the "one" state is 7r, then the total accrued cost of further instruction is  simply  C'o('r) = y(1 - -)  a Equations 1-5 are easily derived by considering the two possible prior states of the student. A complete derivation of these  equations is contained in Smallwood (1967).  290 SMALLWOOD  Notice that we shall write the instruction costs as functions of the student's past history rr.  If the "present" teaching strategy is selected, then we accrue a presentation cost cp as well as the costs of all succeeding  trials for the item. AVe can write this cost as  CP(-) = cn + C[- -:- (I - -)P]  where C(7r) is the minimum expected total cost of instruction for all the succeeding trials; that is, we assume in calculating  Cp(a) that all future decisions concerning the instruction of this item are optimum.  For the "test" teaching strategy, there will be an immediate presentation cost ct after which we must consider the cost  associated with each of the two possible responses by the student. The minimum expected cost of future instruction for each  possible student response must be weighted by the probability of observing that response. Thus, the expected instruction cost,  if the "test" strategy is used for the next trial and all future decisions are optimal, is  Ct('T) = ct + [7T + (1 - 7r)r] C ['r + (1 - rr) rt ] + (I - rr)(I - r) C[t] (8) 7r+(1 -7r)r  where we have used the results in (3)-(5) for the student response probabilities and updated value of past history.  The minimum expected cost of instruction for the item is simply the minimum of the costs associated with the three alternative  actions, that is,  C(v) = Min  [COM, CP(rr), Ct(-)]  Y(1 - 'a)  = Min cp + C'[rr + (1 - 7r)P]  ct + [rr + (1 - rr)r] C a + (1 - a) rt j + (1 - -)(I - r) C(t). (9) rr + (1 - 7r)r  Equation 9 is the dynamic programming equation that defines the minimum expected instruction costs C(rr) for a single item.  III. THE EXTENSION TO MULTI-ITEM LISTS  Although the optimum teaching strategy calculated from (9) is for a single item, this equation can also be used to find the  optimum solution for a multi-item list.  ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC TEACHING STRATEGIES 291  This section will develop this result and then, in Sec. IV, we shall develop a simple procedure for solving (9).  For the situation in which a two-item list is to be taught to the student, the past history of the student can be summarized  by the two quantities 7rl and 722 where 7ri is the probability that the student is in the "one" state for the ith item. In a  manner similar to the one-item case we define C(7T1 , 722) to be the total expected optimum policy cost of the remaining  instruction for a student whose current state probabilities for the two items are 721 and 722 . At each decision point there  will be five teaching alternatives available: (1) "present" Item 1; (2) "present" Item 2; (3) "test" Item l; (4) "test" Item  2, and (5) terminate the instruction. The optimum decision is to select the alternative that minimizes the expected total cost  of instruction for the two items. Therefore we can write a recursive equation for C(7r1 , 722) in a manner analogous to the  development of (9).  C(77,, 722) = Min  (1): Cpl + C[721 + (I -TTl)pl >7r2l  I (2): CP2 + CL-1 r -2 + (I - -2) t'21  (3): Ctl + (I - -1)(I - rl) C[tl , -2l  + [-1 + (I - T21) r1] C I 7T11 -f-((1 - 7r)) rll + (I - -2)(I - r2) C[-l , t2l  (4): Ct2  + [-2 + (1 - -2) r2l C 2 +((I 7r2) r212  72 2 2) r2  (10)  (5). yl(I - -1) + Y2(I - 72)  Since we have assumed that the state transitions for each item are independent of the state transitions for the other items on  the list, it is not surprising that we can decompose this two-item problem into a consideration of the optimum teaching  strategy for each item separately. We shall now show that the optimum decision policy specified by (10) can be reduced to the  following three steps:  1. Select an item from the list according to any desired rule.  2. Use the policy prescribed by the application of (9) to this particular item; that is, discard, present, or test the item  depending upon whether the first, second, or third line of (9) is minimum. This decision will depend, of course, upon the  current value of the state probability for the item under consideration.  3. If the decision in Step 2 is to terminate the instruction of that item, then remove the item from the list and proceed as  before.  We shall now prove that this procedure is optimum for a two-item list; the proof for  292 SMALLWOOD  an arbitrary number of items proceeds in an exactly analogous fashion. We first define Ci(7ri) as the cost function of (9)  evaluated for the ith item.  CPi - Ci[7ri + (1 - -i) 1'il Cti + (1 - 7ri)(1 _ ri) CZ[til  Ci('ri) = Min + [7rz + (1 - -i) rij Ci [ ~, ~((1 - 1i))rYti (1 l)  This quantity is just the expected total cost of instruction if only the ith item is to be taught. Now if we can show that  C(7r1 , 7r2) = Cl(7r1) + C2(7r2), this will prove the optimality of the three-step procedure described above.  To prove that this relation is true we make the following general observation:  if    = Min[xl , x2 , xJ (12)  and    y = Min[yl , y2 > Yal, (13)  then    x + y + Min[xl + y, x + .Yl > 'x2 + y, x + y2 I xs + ys]' (14)  But a careful inspection of (14) shows that x + y must in fact be equal to one of the five expressions on the right side of  (14). Therefore, x + y must be equal to the right side of (14), and we can write  x+y=Min[xl+y,x+yl, X2+y,x+y2,xs+.Y3]'  (15)  This result can now be used directly with (11) to write an expression for  Cl(-1) + C2(-2).  'CP1 CP2 Ctl  Cl(7r1) + C2(7r2) = Min X [Cl 7r1 +((1 - -1) rll + C2(7r2)J (16) Ct2 + (1 - 7x2)(1 - r2)[Cl(7r1) + C2(tA +[-2+(1 --2)r2l  X [C1(7r1) + C2 ( 7T 7T2+((1 -72  72 ) r2 )~  Yl(1 - -2) + Y2(1 - -2)'  + Cl[7r1 + (1 - -1) P1j + C2(-2) + C'(-l) + CZ[-2 + (1 - -2) P21 + (1 - 7x1)(1 - rl)[C1(tl) + C2(7r2)j + [TT1 + (1 - 7r1) rJ  ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC TEACHING STRATEGIES 293  A comparison of (16) with (10) shows that (10) is satisfied by  C(-,,, -2) = C1(-I) + C'(-0  (17)  The optimum teaching strategy in this case can thus be implemented by optimizing the instruction of each of the items  separately in accordance with the three-step procedure outlined above. As stated earlier, this proof can easily be extended to  the situation in which we are teaching more than two items.  IV. AN ALGORITHM FOR CALCULATING C(1r)  Although the formulation in (9) is in terms of the minimum expected instruction cost, the primary goal in this development is  to calculate the optimum teaching strategy for each value of the state probability vr. That is, we are interested in an  algorithm for computing d(7r) where this optimum policy function is defined by  do if Co(-) = min[Co(-), Cp(-), Ct(-)]  d(v) = dp if Cp(-) = min[Cufr), Cp(-), Ct(v)] (18)  ~ dt if Ct(ir) = min[C,(vr), Cp(7r), Ct('r)].  The algorithm that we shall develop for the calculation of d(or) is critically dependent upon the fact that C(r) is a  piecewise-linear function of -rr. In fact, we shall prove that the optimum cost function C(7T) is not only piecewise-linear in  -'r but is also concave. The proof of this property for C(7r) proceeds directly from the following theorem.  THEOREM 1. If C(x) is of the following form,  C(x) = min[-ix + g2(1 - x)] for a < x < b, (19)  then  (i) Cp(7T) is piecewise linear and concave in 7T for TPI(a) < Tr < T,-'(b);  (ii) Ct(7r) is piecewise linear and concave in Tr for Tt 1(a, 1) <_ 7T <_ Tt I(b,l).  In the statement of Theorem 1, the two functions TPI(.) and Tt I(., 1) are just the inverse probability transformations  corresponding to Tp(-) and Tt(-, 1) in (2) and (4), respectively; that is,  To x) _ x_ -p 1 - p  Tt 1(x, 1) - r(x - t)  (1 - x) -{- r(x - t)  (20)  48o/812-Io  294 SMALLWOOD  The proof of Theorem 1 proceeds by the direct substitution of the equation for C(7r) in (19) into the expressions for Cp(7r)  and Ct(7r) in (7) and (8). This operation yields the following expressions for Cp(7r) and Ct(7r):  Cp(7r) = min[(cp + ai)7r + (cp -, (xip + Ri(1 -P))(1 __ 7r)] = min[ai'7r + fli'(1 - 7T)]  for a ~ Tp(7r) =; b  (21)  Ct(7r) = min[(ct + ai)7r + (ct + (1 - r) C(t) + girt + gir(1 7r)]  = min[a"7r + g'(1 - 7r)].  for a ~ Tt(7r, 1) ~< b (22)  In writing the range of validity for (21) and (22), we have used the convenient transformation notation introduced in (2) and  (4). Since these transformations are monotonic in 7r, the inverse transformation operation upon the inequalities in (21) and  (22) yields the range of validity in terms of the past history parameter 7r. This then completes the proof of Theorem 1.  This theorem now provides the means for proving the piecewise-linear concave nature of the optimum expected instruction cost  C(7r) over its entire range.  THEOREM 2. C(7r) is piecewise-linear and concave in 7r for 0 < 7r G 1.  The first step in the proof of this theorem is to notice that C(7r) will be equal to Ca(7r) = y(1 - 7r) for all 7r > 7ro ,  where 7ro is some positive number less than one. This statement can be easily verified by noting that:  (a) C(7r) is the minimum of [Co(7r), Cp(7r), Ct(7r)], and  (b) from (7) and (8), Cp(7T) > cp and Ct(7r) > ct .  Since Cp(7r) and Ct(7r) are always greater than these positive values, there will be some value of 7rp such that for 7r > 7ro  the "terminate" teaching alternative is optimal. The physical interpretation of this statement is that there is a critical  number 7ro such that, if the probability of a student being in the "one" state is greater than this number, the optimum  teaching strategy is to terminate the instruction of the item.  The second step in the proof of Theorem 2 is to show that  Tn i(7r) - 7r  (23)  Tt 1(7r I) - 7T - (I - 7T)[7r(1 - r -{- rt  1 - [7r(1 - r) + rt]  For both cases in (23) the equality holds only for 7r = 1.  ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC TEACHING STRATEGIES 295  Since we know that C(7r) = y(1 - vr) for 7Tu < Tr < 1, we can now apply Theorem 1 to this region of ?T and show that Cp(7r)  will be piecewise-linear and concave in a region defined by Tp'(7ro) < 7r < 1 where T,'(-iro) is less than pro . Similarly the  application of Theorem 1 to this situation also shows that Ct(w) will be piecewise-linear and concave in the region defined by  Ts '(z,, 1) < 7T < 1 where Tt i(7ro, 1) is less than 7To . And now, since C(7r) is just the minimum of [Co(7T), C&r), Ct(7T)]  and since each of these three functions has been shown to be piecewise-linear and concave over a larger interval of 7r, we  have thus shown that the optimum expected instruction cost C(1r) will be piecewise-linear and concave over some larger  interval of 7T. This argument can be extended by induction until the piecewise-linear concave nature of C(7r) has been shown  to apply over the complete range of 7r.  The expressions for Cp(7r) and Ct(") in (21) and (22) provide the necessary tools for the development of an algorithm to  compute the optimum policy d(ir) and the optimum expected instruction cost C(ir). There is one problem, however. In using (22)  to compute Ct(v), it is necessary to know the value of C(t) before Ct(7T) can be calculated. Unfortunately C(t) is dependent  upon the very function that is being calculated. One possible method for overcoming this obstacle is to assume a value for  C(t), say oi, and then to carry out the calculation of C(7r) in (9) as though w were the true value of C(t). The newly  calculated function, C(7r I w) could then be used to compute a new estimate of C(t), say, w' = Qt I w). With this estimate of  C(t) the process could be repeated to obtain a new estimate of C(t), and so on. In this way we can hope to obtain a set of  successive approximations to C(t) that will eventually converge to the true value. In the latter part of this section we shall  describe a more precise method for calculating C(t) that converges to the exact value of C(t) in a finite number of iterations.  In any case it is necessary first to describe a general algorithm for calculating C(7r I w) for some value, w, for the unknown  quantity C(t). This algorithm is outlined in Fig. 2. The first step in the algorithm is the recording of the seven parameters  of the model including w. The next step is to calculate that value of the state probability a, beyond which the optimum policy  is to terminate the instruction for the item. This critical value of ar is calculated by using ai = 0 and Ni = y in (21) and  (22) to compute those values of rr for which Cp(7T) and Ct(7r) are equal to CO(7T) = y(1 - 7r). The maximum of these two  values of 7T is the required critical value for the state probability Tr. If this maximum value is negative, then the  computations are complete and the "terminate" teaching alternative is optimum over the complete range of a.  This will usually not be the case, however, and so (21) and (22) are repeatedly applied to calculate Cp(-) and Ct('r) for ever  greater regions of the state probability Tr. The minimum of these two functions is the desired optimum expected instruction  cost C(7r I w), and this in turn determines the optimum policy. This step is applied repeatedly until the optimum policy has  been calculated for the complete range of the state probability 7r.  SMALLWOOD  lrmin=np ; d=dp  d(tr)=C4 and C(n)=Y0-fl) for min<1rSr  lrmin =7rt ; d=dt  Yes  7rmin 50~  No  Stop  For the reyc'on containing 7,(T.mn-.c) find the Coefficients cep and #p such that C(tr)=arpIr*A*(1-rr) ,n the region; and find  fhe lower 6ounolary of the region, rr'. For Me region containing r<n~~i,-E,~) f the corresponding oct, pt, and rrt.  oC p= Cp t ~!p a< t= Ct t act  ~'% Cp t atpp +'Sp (/-P)  lg t = ct f- at r t +at r(1-t) + (dh-r)  cross qp is ttat-o(P i If rrcross>fi6rn ,Set  7r,,,,, = -oo  ~rnax = ~+oin ; rrrnir, = MEtX ~~ross, T ~ln'I. T'rrt /), d=dt?  I{ rrm;. -Ir~o.s, set d. a,?  d0r)-dr and  C(rr) _ a t rr+p t(i-n') /or  Ir.in 15 fi< f r..,  If firm.-frre.s, set d=dt d0r) -d,, and C(1r)oCPrrs`~?'all-1r) for Jr.;,, S fit rrJOAx  Fic. 2. The basic algorithm.  ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC TEACHING STRATEGIES 297  The algorithm in Fig. 2 is only useful for calculating C(7r I w) for some specified value of w. The problem in computing the  true value of w can then be simply stated as the solution of the following equation for w:  w = C(t I w). (24)  That is, we seek the value of co for which the resulting function C(7T I w) is equal to watar=t.  To solve this equation let us look at the process by which the algorithm of Fig. 2 calculates C(t I w) for a particular value  of w. As shown in Fig. 2, by the time we have calculated the a and P for the region containing 7T = t, we will have applied  (21) and (22) several times. Furthermore, a simple inspection of (21) and (22) shows that regardless of how many times they  are applied and regardless of the order in which they are applied, C,(a) and C&r) will never be more than linearly dependent  upon w. That is, the repeated substitution of a2', flz', a", and /3Z back into (21) and (22) will never produce more than a  simple linear relationship between the costs, Cp(7r) and Ct(7r), and co.  Now since C(t I w) is just the minimum of [Qt), Cp(t), Ct(t)], it is also true that C(t I co) will be linearly dependent upon  lo. In fact, the dependence of C(t I w) upon w will actually be piecewise linear because the number of applications of (21)  and (22) will generally vary with the value of w. Furthermore, we can calculate the value of 8C(t I w)/8w by tracing the  possible transformations of the state probability Tr from 7T = t until a lies within the region for which the "terminate"  teaching strategy is optimum. In particular, let us consider the very common situation shown in Fig. 3 in which the optimum  teaching strategy for a student with yr = t is to use the "present" teaching strategy np times followed by the application of  the "test" teaching strategy.  FiG. 3. A special case.  The "test" teaching strategy is applied successively until nt correct responses have been elicited from the student, at which  time the instruction for that item is terminated. In this case we can calculate 8C(t I cu)law by successively applying (22) nt  times and then applying (21) np times. The result is  8C(t p)np(1 - t)(1 - r)[l - r"t(1 - t)'`] G 1  8w 1 - r(1 - t)  (25)  298  sn7ALLWOOD  Since the value of aC(t j w)1aw can be computed so easily, we can use Newton's method to calculate the next estimate of co for  the algorithm. For example, if a certain value of w has produced particular values for C(t w) and aC(t I w)/Ow, then the next  estimate for w should be:  C(t w) - w ac(t w)  aw (26)  aw  The piecewise linear dependence of C(t I w) upon w plus the fact that OC(t I cu)/au) < 1 ensures the convergence of this  procedure in a finite number of iterations. In this way the algorithm in Fig. 2 can be used with successively better estimates  for w until (24) is satisfied and the complete optimum teaching strategy has been calculated.  As an illustration of the relative ease with which these computations can be carried out, Figs. 4 and 5 present the  application of the algorithm to two numerical examples.  C(r)  p=0.3 t=0.3 r=0.1 c. =0.5 ct=0.7 y=8  Fic. 4. C(7r) for example no. 1.  In each of these cases the regions were calculated by hand. Both examples used an initial value of to equal to y(I - t), and  both required four iterations before the calculations converged. It is possible, of course, for there to be several values of  a and P that are applicable to each major teaching alternative region; thus the boundaries of the regions for the three  alternatives are denoted by dotted lines in the two figures.  For the case in which a student is known to begin the instruction with a particular value of the state probability 7r, the  optimum teaching strategy can be described by a very simple sequence diagram. Figure 6 illustrates such an instructional  sequence diagram for the two examples in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 for the special case in which the prior  ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC TEACHING STRATEGIES  299  1.0 p=0.1 t=0.1 r=0.25 cp=0.5 ct=1.0 y=20 FIG. 5. C(a) for example no. 2.  Stop  (a) Example No. I  Stop  (b) Example No.2  FIG. 6. Optimum teaching policies for v = 0 initially.  300 SMALLWOOD  state probability is zero. Thus, for the first example, we use the "present" alternative twice and then select the "test"  teaching alternative. If a student responds with the correct answer, then the instruction for that item is terminated; but, if  he responds with an incorrect answer, then we use the "present" teaching alternative once and then return to the presentation  of the "test" teaching alternative. These instructional sequence diagrams provide a very convenient representation of the  optimum teaching strategy for any particular situation.  V. CONCLUSIONS  The results of this paper raise some interesting possibilities for alleviating the computational problem in those  computer-directed teaching systems that incorporate a sophisticated decision-making capability. We might, for example, program  the computer to calculate the optimum policy regions as a function of the student's past history for each of the alternative  teaching strategies. Once this calculation has been completed, there will be no need for any lengthy computations for each  individual student as the complete optimum teaching policy will have been calculated for all possible student past histories.  In this way each teaching system would be capable of handling a much larger number of students. Of course this procedure will  necessitate a complete recalculation of the optimum policy regions periodically as more data become available from past  students' responses. This involved calculation could very likely be carried out during the off-duty hours when the teaching  demands of the computer system are very low. This may result in a much more economical system overall, since the system would  now be used more efficiently by trading off relatively inexpensive off-duty computation time for an increased student-handling  capability. A further discussion of these possibilities is presented in Smallwood (1968).  REFERENCES  ATKINSON, R. C., BOWER, G. H., AND CROTHERS, E. J. An introduction to mathematical learning theory. New York: Wiley, 1965.  GROEN, G. J., AND ATKINSON, R. C. Models for optimizing the learning process. Psychological Bulletin, 1966, 66, 309-320.  KARUSH, W., AND DEAR, E. E. Optimal stimulus presentation strategy for a stimulus sampling model of learning. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 1966, 3, 15-47.  MATHESON, J. Optimum teaching procedures derived from mathematical learning models. EES Technical Report No. CCS-2,1964,  Engineering-Economic Systems, Stanford University. SMALLWOOD, R. D. A decision structure for teaching machines. Cambridge,  Massachusetts: M.I.T. Press, 1962.  SMALLWOOD, R. D. Optimum policy regions for computer-directed teaching systems. Presented at the Conference on Computer-Aided  Instruction, Testing and Guidance, Austin, Texas, October 1968; also to be published as a chapter in a forthcoming book by the  same name.  ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC TEACHING STRATEGIES  301  SMALLWOOD, R. D., WEINSTEIN, I., AND ECKLES, J. Quantitative methods in computer-directed teaching systems. Final Report  Nonr-225(84), March 15, 1967, Department of EngineeringEconomic Systems, Stanford University.  SUPPFs, P. The development of mathematical concepts in children. Technical Report No. 63, February 25, 1964, Institute for  Mathematical Studies in the Social Sciences, Stanford University. (a)  SUPPES, P. Mathematical concept formation in children. Technical Report No. 64, April 10, 1964, Institute for Mathematical  Studies in the Social Sciences, Stanford University. (b)  RECEIVED: February 24, 1970  Printed in Belgium