10.1016/0022-2496(71)90015-0
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 8, 240-247 (1971)  Concept Identification: Effect of the Intertrial Interval on the Efficacy and Consistency of Information Processing  RACHEL FALMAGNE'  Laboratoire de Psychologie, University of Brussels, Brussels, Belgium  Two experiments following identical procedure except for the feedback duration (respectively, 2 sec and 1.5 sec) and the  intertrial interval (respectively, I sec and 3 sec) are compared with respect to three sequential statistics whose theoretical  interpretation is related to the degree of optimality of information processing. The results indicate that the values of the  theoretical parameters representing the efficiency of information processing, the consistency of trial-by-trial decisions, and  the efficacy of reinforcement are greater in the 3-sec interval condition. This is interpreted as a tentative explanation of  the well-known effect of intertrial interval on the difficulty of the task with respect to the mean number of trials to  criterion.  It has been abundantly reported (Bourne and Bunderson, 1963; Bourne, Guy, Dodd, and Justesen, 1965; Bourne, Dodd, Guy, and  Justesen, 1968) that increasing the intertrial interval (ITI) facilitates learning in concept identification tasks, in terms  of the mean number of trials to criterion. Various interpretations of this effect have been offered. All of them, however,  refer to results in which the dependent variable was a global index of performance. The aim of this paper is to gain a more  direct insight into the nature of that effect by studying how the ITI affects some indices of the efficacy, consistency, and  completeness of the trial-by-trial information processing. The indices to be used are some parameters of a learning model  (Falmagne, 1970), whose psychological interpretation is related in an obvious way to the aspects mentioned above.  The model assumes that the subject handles the learning task by entertaining and testing hypotheses about the concept and that  two processes proceed simultaneously: (i) a long-term memory process in which the strength of the various hypotheses is  increased or decreased as a function of confirmations and disconfirmations and (ii) a selection or decision process that  controls which hypothesis is active on a given  1 This paper was prepared while the author was at the Mental Health Research Institute of the University of Michigan as a  Visiting Research Psychologist. The two experimental studies reported were carried out with the support of, respectively, the  Fonds National de la Recherche Scientifique (Belgium), and Grant MH-14695 from NIMH to Professor R. C. Calfee (University of  Wisconsin).  240  EFFECT OF THE INTERTRIAL INTERVAL 241  trial, i.e., is used as a basis for the response. When the active hypothesis leads to a correct response, it remains active on  next trial with a probability 1 - a, and with a probability a resampling occurs. If the hypothesis leads to an error,  resampling occurs with a probability b. The subject does not always use hypotheses: on some trials he can be in a passive  state in which he gives his response at random. When the subject is in the passive state on a given trial, resampling always  occurs before the next trial. When resampling occurs, if the subject does not enter the passive state, the probability of each  hypothesis depends upon its current strength.  Several parameters of the model are related to the degree of optimality of the trialby-trial information processing.  The probability a of resampling when the active hypothesis led to a correct response can be regarded as an index of  inconsistency. Resampling in that case can occur either if the subject forgot which hypothesis he was using or if he did not  fully process the information from the preceding trial, in particular with respect to the correctness of his response. It can  be expected that the more favorable the conditions are to a full treatment of the information, the more logical, or  consistent, the subject will be. Therefore, a is likely to decrease in particular when the ITI increases.  A second index of inconsistency is (1 - b), the probability of not resampling after an error. Optimally, (1 - b) should be  equal to zero, since one error is logically enough to disprove a hypothesis.  A third parameter, the probability of the passive state, is correlative of the occurrence of "gaps" during which the subject  does not use the information stored in memory and responds at random. A reasonable way to interpret the passive state is to  assume that it corresponds to cases where the previous information has not been completely processed yet at the time the  stimulus appears, so that no hypothesis is being made. Under this interpretation, the probability of the passive state would  be expected to decrease when the ITI, during which information is processed, increases.  A fourth group of parameters represents the extent to which the strength of a hypothesis is modified when it is confirmed or  disconfirmed. Low efficacy of reinforcements could result either from incomplete information processing or from a lack of  consolidation of the memory traces of past reinforcements.  If the model is an adequate description of the learning process, the values of some (or all) of the parameters just discussed  are expected to vary with conditions that control the difficulty of the task; since these parameters refer to different  aspects of the cognitive process, their variations can yield a relatively specific picture of the effect of a particular  condition.  This paper deals with a comparison of the results of two experiments, reported in detail in Falmagne (1969, 1970)2. The method  used in both experiments was the same, except for the duration of the feedback and the ITI. After verifying that the condition  a Only the results of Group R from Falmagne (1969) will be discussed here.  4801812-7  242 FALMAUNE  with the shorter ITI is effectively more "difficult" in terms of the usual global indices of performance, the analysis  concentrates on a comparison of the values of the parameters discussed above, in order to account in cognitive terms for the  difference in difficulty between both conditions.  METHOD  Experiments I and II involved 150 and 49 subjects, respectively, all undergraduates. On each trial the subject was presented a  different stimulus from a six-dimensional stimulus set. Stimuli were lines inside a rectangle and varied according to  direction (horizontal or vertical), size (large or small), number (single line or double line), shape (straight line or  curve), position (at the top of the rectangle or at the bottom), appearance (solid or dotted). Each stimulus was named either  H or W in Experiment 1, and either E or K in Experiment II. The names had been attributed according to a unidimensional  concept.  Stimuli were projected from behind onto a screen situated on a table facing the subject. When the stimulus appeared, the  subject guessed what its name was by depressing one of two keys at the bottom of the screen, labeled respectively H and W in  Experiment 1, E and K in Experiment II. As soon as the subject started his response the correct letter (feedback) appeared on  the screen below the stimulus for a duration of 2 sec in Experiment I, and of 1.5 sec in Experiment II. The stimulus and the  feedback then disappeared, and the next stimulus was presented after a 1-sec delay in Experiment I, and a 3-sec delay in  Experiment II.  The stimulus sequence was random, and different for each subject. Twelve subgroups of subjects, of approximately equal size,  learned respectively one of the 12 possible unidimensional concepts. The learning criterion was a sequence of 20 consecutive  correct responses, weakened by allowing one error to occur between the 11th and the 20th trial of the sequence. The detailed  description of the stimulus set (with several examples) and of the 12 possible unidimensional concepts was specified in the  instructions. The subject was asked to reach the criterion in the minimum number of trials and the minimum time.  RESULTS  It is expected from previous results that the mean number of trials to criterion and the mean number of errors be larger in  the condition with a 1-sec ITI (SI, for "short interval") than in the conditionwith a 3-sec ITI (LI, for "long interval").  Table 1 shows that this is verified, in spite of the fact that the feedback duration is 0.5 sec shorter in the LI condition.  Moreover, the proportion of nonsolvers and the mean number of trials to criterion for solvers are larger in Condition SI. This  condition can thus be regarded as more "difficult." Equivalently, learning can be said to be less efficient in Condition SI.  The rest of the paper is aimed towards a more detailed characterization of that difference of efficiency, in terms of the  indices discussed above.  EFFECT OF THE INTERTRIAL INTERVAL 243  TABLE 1 Mean Number of Trials to Criterion and Mean Number of Errors for the SI and LI Conditions  Mean number of trials to criterion 25.4 13  Mean number of errors 12.2 6.2  Proportion of nonsolvers 0.20 0.04  Mean number of trials to criterion for solvers 15.8 10.8  Let V,n.,_1 be a variable representing the similarity between the stimulus of trial n and the stimulus of trial n - 1, in  terms of the number of dimensions on which they coincide. If the two stimuli are totally dissimilar, Va_1 = 0; if they are  identical (which never happened in the present experiments), V,,,,-, = 6.  One major prediction of the model for precriterion data is that, when the response on trial n - 1 is correct, the probability  c,,,, of giving the same response on trial n increases with VR_1 , i.e., with the similarity between both stimuli. This can  be understood intuitively by considering the various cases that can occur.  (i) If a hypothesis has been used on trial n - 1, then, since the response is correct, the same hypothesis is kept for trial n  with a (supposedly high) probability a.  In that case, if both stimuli are similar with respect to the dimension involved in that hypothesis, the response will be the  same to both. When Vn_1 increases, there is an increasing probability that the hypothesis made on trial n - 1 be based upon  a dimension on which both stimuli are similar; hence, when the same hypothesis is used on both trials, the probability of  giving the same response to both stimuli increases with Vn.n-1 .  (ii) If resampling happened between trials n - 1 and n (whether a hypothesis was made on trial n - 1 or whether the subject  was in the passive state), and if a hypothesis is made on trial n, then two cases can occur. Consider any hypothesis which has  been confirmed on trial n - 1 (beside the active hypothesis). By definition, it was associated with the same response as the  active hypothesis on trial n - 1. Hence, the same reasoning as (i) can be applied here, namely: if this hypothesis is sampled  on trial n, the probability that it leads to the same response is an increasing function of Vn,n_1 . Symmetrically, for the  hypotheses disconfirmed on trial n, that probability is a decreasing function of V,_l . Since the strength (and hence the  probability) of just disconfirmed hypotheses is, on the average, larger than the strength of just confirmed hypotheses, then,  if resampling occurs between n - 1 and n, the slope of cv.n will be positive, although very likely weak.  (iii) If the subject is in the passive state on trial n, his responses are independent of the similarity between both stimuli.  244 FALNIAGNE  Since the probability of giving the same responses to both stimuli increases with Vn.n_t in cases (i) and (ii) and remains  constant in case (iii), the overall c,.,increases. The model furthermore predicts that this increment is linear. Verifying  this last assumption empirically will give an idea of the reliability of the model before it is used to compare both  experiments.  The relevant aspect for measuring the optimality of information processing is the slope of c,...n . Obviously, the perfect  information processor should never be in a passive state and should never reject a hypothesis which has just been successful.  In other words, he should always be in case (i). It can easily be seen that in that case c,,,, would range from 0, when V,,,-,  = 0, to 1, when = 6; its slope would thus be maximum. When the probability of the passive state increases or when the subject  more often resamples after a success, cases (ii) and (iii) are more frequent and the slope of clan becomes weaker.  L00  SI Condition L I Condition  00  FIG. 1. Conditions Sl and Ll: Proportion of responses repeating the preceding response when it was correct, as a function of  the similarity between both stimuli.  Figure 1 shows the observed proportion corresponding to cv,n as a function of Vn.n_1 in both Sl and LI conditions. The  prediction about the linearity of the function is clearly supported by the data in both conditions. The slope of the curve in  the LI condition is steeper than in the SI condition. Since the functions are theoretically linear, the regression  coefficients of the observed curves can be meaningfully compared. The regression coefficients for the SI and LI conditions are  respectively 0.102 and 0.147. The t-test for regression coefficients yields a value of 1.72 (p < 0.10, one-tailed). The slope  of the curve for LI is thus significantly larger than for SI, which implies that the probability of the passive state and/or  the probability of resampling after a success  EFFECT OF THE INTERTRIAL INTERVAL 245  are higher in the SI condition. Under the interpretations given before (and in fact under any psychologically plausible  interpretation of these parameters), this means that when the ITI is shorter, the efficiency of the processing of information  and the consistency of the trial-by-trial decisions are reduced.  Another prediction of the model is that, when the response on trial n - 1 was an error, the probability c,,,, of giving the  other response on trial n is a linear function of Vn,n_1 . The function is not necessarily increasing. The sign and value of  its slope depend upon the balance between two parameters: the amplitude of the modifications of the strength of hypotheses  under positive and negative reinforcement, and the probability (1 - b) of not resampling after an error. Consider the possible  cases.  (1) If the subject does not resample between both trials, the probability of giving the other response decreases, as shown  above.  (ii) Suppose resampling occurred between trials n - 1 and n. The just disconfirmed hypotheses, which led to the same response  as the hypothesis that was active on trial n - 1, behave as in (i). For the just confirmed hypotheses, the probability of  generating the other response on trial n than the one which was given on trial n - 1, increases with Vn,n_1 . Since their  strength is higher on the average than the strength of just disconfirmed hypotheses, the curve increases in this case, with a  slope which is related to the efficacy of reinforcement.  (iii) If the subject is in the passive state on trial n, the responses do not depend upon Vn.n_1 .  Points (i) and (ii) indicate that if the subject often resamples after an error and if the reinforcement is very effective,  the curve showing c'y,n as a function of Vn.n_1 increases. If the efficacy of reinforcement is small and the subject often  fails to resample after an error, the curve can decrease. The value of the positive slope of the curve is thus indicative of  both the efficacy of reinforcement and the consistency of decisions.  Figure 2 shows the two curves for, respectively, Conditions SI and LI. Again, the linearity prediction is satisfied in both  curves. The slope of the curve for the LI condition is positive and greater than for the SI condition. The respective  regression coefficients are 0.059 and 0.008 (t = 1.79, p G 0.10, one-tailed). The consistency of decisions and/or the efficacy  of reinforcement are thus poorer in Condition SI.  Both statistics that were examined were joint estimates of at least two parameters. A third prediction of the model is only  related to a, the probability of resampling after a success generated by a hypothesis.  Let V,',.-, be the number of irrelevant dimensions on which the stimuli of trials n and n - 1 coincide (V,,,,-, ranges from 0  to 5). Let Vn,n_1 be the number (either 0 or 1) of relevant dimensions on which they coincide.  If a = 0, i.e., if resampling never happens after a success generated by a hypothesis, then the correct hypothesis can never  have been sampled before the last error, since  246 FALMAGNE  1,00  SI Condition L I Condition  00  Vn, n _ I  5  FIG. 2. Conditions SI and LI: Proportion of responses different from the preceding response when it was an error, as a  function of the similarity between both stimuli.  once it is sampled it is bound to be used on every subsequent trial. Therefore, it can be shown that if a = 0, the value of  c,, , (see Fig. 1) is only a function of the similarity according to irrelevant dimensions. Whether both stimuli are similar  with respect to the relevant dimension should not matter. Referring back to the intuitive argument about Fig. 1, this can  easily be seen by realizing that the similarity of both stimuli on a given dimension intervenes in the increasing shape of  Fig. I only when a hypothesis based upon that dimension is used on both trials. Hence, if c,n is the probability of giving  the same response on trial n than on trial n - 1 (when it was correct) as a function of the irrelevant similarity V,,,n_1 ,  then c,,,n should be the same whether the relevant similarity is 0 or 1. If a is nonzero, i.e., if the correct hypothesis can  possibly have been used, the value of cv,,n should be higher when Vn,n_1 = 1 than when V,,,n_1 = 0.  According to the model, the difference between both curves is constant over Vv,.n_1 and its value increases with a.  Since the difference between both curves is theoretically constant, the value of cv,,n, can be pooled over (for V,,n_1 =  0,..., 4), respectively for the case when Vn.n_1 = 0 and when Vn,n_1 = 1. Table 2 shows the estimated mean value of c,(for  V,,,n_1 = 0,..., 4), when 0 and when V,,., -1 = 1, in both conditions. The difference between ev,,l and cv,,o is larger in  Condition SI, which indicates that the value of a is larger in this condition. This result is thus consistent with the  conclusions from Fig. 1, but more specific in showing that the value of a increases when the ITI decreases.  EFFECT OF THE INTERTRIAL INTERVAL  247  TABLE 2 Conditions SI and LI: Projection of Repetitions of the Preceding Response When it Was Correct, Averaged over V,,1 =  0,..., 4 (i) When V,,1 = 0 (cv,.o); (ii) When V,,i = I (ev,,,i)  SI LI  (i) Mean value of ev,,o 0.405 0.449  Number of observations 911 138  (ii) Mean value of ev,.n.i 0.515 0.538  Number of observations 942 143  Difference between cv,,n,l and ev,,n,o 0.110 0.089  CONCLUSIONS  All the statistics examined to estimate the degree of optimality of the trial-by-trial information processing were consistent  in indicating the expected difference between Conditions SI and LI. The probability of temporarily rejecting a hypothesis  while it was confirmed was found to increase when the ITI decreases. The results furthermore indicate that, when the ITI  decreases, guessing responses are more frequent, the reinforcement is less effective in modifying the stregnth of hypotheses,  and the probability of maintaining a hypothesis which led to an error increases.  These results have a twofold meaning. They propose a picture of the ITI effect in cognitive terms. They also constitute a  validation of the model in terms of the meaningfulness of its parameters and of its intersituational predictive power.  REFERENCES  BOURNE, L. E., AND BUNDERSON, C. V. Effects of delay of informative feedback and length of post-feedback interval on concept  identification. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1963, 65, 1-5.  BOURNE, L. E., Guy, D. E., DODD, D. H., AND JUSTESEN, D. R. Concept identification: The effects of varying length and  informational components of the intertrial interval. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1965, 69, 624-629.  BOURNE, L. E., DODD, D. H., Guy, D. E., AND JUSTESEN, D. R. Response-contingent intertrial interval in concept identification.  Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1968, 76, 601-608. FALMAGNE, R. Memory and decision processes in concept identification.  Communication #250, Mental Health Research Institute, University of Michigan, 1969.  FALMAGNE, R. Construction of a hypothesis model for concept identification. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1970, 7, 60-96.  RECEIVED: December 22, 1969