10.1016/0022-2496(71)90001-0
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 8, 453-480 (1971)  Attribute Elimination Strategies for Concept Identification with Practiced Subjects*  THOMAS D. WICKENS  University of California, Los Angeles, California 90024  AND  RICHARD B. MILLWARD  Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island 02912  The experiment reported in this paper investigated the strategies employed by well-practiced subjects in solving simple  concept-identification (CI) problems. Fortyseven high school subjects were run for 10 hours on repeated 12-dimensional CI  problems. Performance improved for the first 20 problems and remained stable thereafter. The presolution response probability  was constant, indicating an all-or-none solution process. A model based on the elimination of attributes, or dimensions, is  developed to describe the asymptotic CI behavior. This model postulates that the subject tests samples of s attributes  simultaneously, and eliminates from consideration those attributes that are inconsistent with the observed classification  pattern. This elimination occurs regardless of the correctness of the overt response. Attributes thus eliminated are not  immediately resampled for test, but remain excluded from consideration for an average of the next I samples. The selection of  a sample containing the relevant attribute leads to solution of the problem. The range of individual subject solution rates  was sufficiently large that no single choice of s and l could fit all subjects. The large number of problems available for a  single subject, however, allows parameter pairs to roughly be assigned to subjects. The model is also related to some general  theories of human information processing and memory.  * This paper is a modified version of a dissertation submitted by T. D. W. in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the  degree of PhD under the direction of R. B. M. This research was supported in part by a fellowship from the National Science  Foundation to T. D. W., by National Institute of Mental Health Grant MH-11255 to R. B. M., and by grants for computer time  from Brown University and National Science Foundation Grant GP-4825. The authors acknowledge the advice and assistance of John  Aikin, Kathryn Troyer, Glenn Rice, and Sheila Wickens.  1971 by Academic Press, Inc.  453  4801814-r  454 WICKENS AND MILLWARD  1. INTRODUCTION  Much of human behavior is characterized by responses that treat objects as members of categories with fixed properties rather  than as unique entities. The denotative meaning of words provides a particularly clear example of such categorization: a word  rarely has only a single referent, but instead denotes a class of objects with some common properties and some different  properties. The concept-identification (CI) paradigm has provided a bridge between this rather general view of behavior and  the more tractable ones represented by recent quantitative models of psychological processes. In the CI task the subject is  presented with a series of stimuli and is asked to classify each of them into one of a number of categories. Feedback about  the correct classification is provided after the response is made, and it is this information that allows the subject to learn  the classification. The CI task is distinguished from ordinary paired-associate learning by the fact that the classification  of the stimuli depends on a definite rule, so that once this rule has been learned, novel stimuli can be correctly classified  immediately.  In recent years a series of increasingly complex mathematical models has been proposed which appear to give a fairly  satisfactory representation of CI. These are the hypothesis testing models originally presented by Restle (1962). The basic  assumptions of these theories, in their simplest formulation, were described by Bower and Trabasso (1964) and elaborated more  fully by Trabasso and Bower (1964; 1966; 1968). In the simple formulation, the subject starts the experiment with a set of  hypotheses that he believes to be potential classification rules. He begins by selecting one of these hypotheses to see if it  is consistent with the classification of the next few stimuli. If the hypothesis that is selected is the correct one, the  subject will have solved the problem and will make no further errors; if the hypothesis is not correct an error will  eventually be made. In the latter case, the theory postulates that the subject abandons the erroneous hypothesis and tests a  new hypothesis chosen at random from the pool of hypotheses. The process of sampling and testing continues until the correct  hypothesis is chosen.  In this form the theory makes little demand on the subject's memory. The subject, according to the theory, is not required to  remember hypotheses tested on past trials, nor more than one hypothesis at any time during a trial. In later versions of the  theory two modifications were introduced that allowed a consideration of more efficient learning strategies. The first  modification assumed that after an error a new hypothesis is not selected at random, but rather those hypotheses that had been  ruled out by the past few tests are excluded temporarily from the pool of hypotheses, presumably because they were remembered  to be incorrect (Trabasso and Bower, 1966). The second modification allowed the subject to examine more than a single  hypothesis at one time (Trabasso and Bower, 1968). In this modification it was still assumed that the occurrence of an error  caused the subject to abandon all the hypotheses currently  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 455  under test and to draw a new set at random. As will be seen later the assumption that the subject discards all sampled  hypotheses on an error trial means that the average rate of learning for this model is no faster than for the simple  single-hypothesis model outlined above.  These models of CI have proved relatively satisfactory in describing the results of many experiments. The slow rate at which  subjects learn problems seems to be predicted successfully by the single-hypothesis theory, and the experimental results that  motivated the two memory modifications discussed above have involved special experimental manipulations such as successive  shifts in the relevant attribute of the stimulus or the introduction of redundant attributes. The observed slow rate of  learning, however, may be attributed to the way in which the typical experiments were performed. Subjects have generally been  run on only a single CI problem and it is unlikely that the subjects' behavior was homogeneous throughout this problem.  Subjects probably spent the first few trials becoming familiar with the stimuli, then developed a strategy for solution, and  only later actually began testing hypotheses. Hence, it is not surprising that the learning rates that have been observed are  no more rapid than those predicted by the single-hypothesis model. The use of one problem for each subject also leaves  unassessed any differences between the strategies employed by different subjects. Accordingly, one purpose of the experiment  reported below was to collect a large body of data on each subject so that a determination of his strategy can be made after  he has become completely familiar with the task.  When subjects are run on a number of problems it is to be expected that their rate of solution will increase markedly, and  that memoryless models of the single-hypothesis type will no longer provide a satisfactory representation (Millward, 1968).  The two modifications mentioned above can increase the predicted rate of learning if the assumption that all sampled  hypotheses are eliminated on error trials is removed. A second goal of this paper, therefore, is to incorporate these memory  modifications into a theory which does not make this assumption. The theory developed below assumes that the subject samples  attributes of the stimuli and tests them for their consistency with the classification rule, rejecting on an error trial only  those attributes that are actually inconsistent with the trial outcome. Furthermore, it assumes that attributes which are  rejected remain rejected for some number of trials. Thus, both memory factors are incorporated into the model.  The experiment discussed is an affirmative concept-identification task. The experimental procedure is typical: The stimuli are  binary-valued and the problem is solved by picking the correct attribute and classifying the stimuli on the basis of its two  values. The experiment is atypical in that each subject was run for 10 hr and solved at least 50 CI problems. The use of  stimuli with 12 independent attributes is also unusual. Section II describes the results of this experiment. Section III  describes the attributeelimination model which was developed to account for subject's behavior after solving a great many CI  problems. In Sec. IV, the adequacy of this theory is discussed.  456  WICKENS AND RIILLWARD  11. A CONCEPT-IDENTIFICATION EXPERIMENT WITH EXTENDED PRACTICE  Method  Subjects. The subjects were 47 male and female high school students between the ages of 17 and 18. They were recruited by  newspaper advertisement and were paid $15.00 for 10 hr of participation in the experiment. No subject had previously served in  any CI experiments.  Apparatus. The experiment was run on a computer-controlled apparatus in the Human Learning Laboratory at Brown University.  Each of four subjects sat in an enclosed booth in front of a full-character-set keyboard. On the paper holder above the  keyboard there were 10 white lights denoted from left to right as LO to L9. Directly under LO there was a green light and  under L9 a red light. In front of the subject was rear-projection screen. The stimuli were projected on this screen by  superimposing two beams from two Kodak Carousel RA-950 random access projectors, modified to allow control of their internal  shutters. Subjects 1 and 2 received identical stimuli, as did subjects 3 and 4. [See Aikin, Millward, Munck, Troyer, and  Wickens (1972) for a more detailed description of this system.] Lights, keyboards, projectors, shutters, etc., were controlled  by a PDP-8/S computer. The computer was programmed to select and present the stimuli and to record subject's responses.  Although latencies were recorded, they will not be discussed in this paper.  Stimuli. The stimuli were pictures containing 12 binary-valued attributes. There were two sets of pictures used. One set  consisted of pictures of houses in which the binary attributes were represented by 12 relatively nameable distinctions, for  example, the number of windows in the house or the type of car sitting beside it. The second set of stimuli were abstract  geometric forms in which the attributes were represented by such values as the slant of a line or the shape of a particular  object. It is important to note here that all 2'2 - 4096 possible stimuli were randomly accessible (Aikin et al., 1972).  Procedure. The house and geometric stimuli were used for 24 and 23 subjects, respectively. Subjects served in groups of four  for five 2-hr sessions on successive days. On the first day, subjects were given a detailed description of the procedure, the  nature and construction of the stimuli, and the type of rules to be used.  The experiment consisted of a series of single-dimensional, affirmative CI problems run without interruption. Upon solution of  one problem the subject was immediately started on another. The choice of the relevant attribute for each new problem was made  randomly with the restriction that two consecutive problems were never based on the same attribute. Subjects were run for  about 50 min, then, upon solution of the current problem, a 10-min break was given. After the break subjects returned for the  remainder of the 2-hr session. On the fifth day of the experiment subjects were run for 80 min without a break and then were  asked to fill out a questionnaire.  A problem began when a randomly chosen stimulus was projected on the screen in front of the subject. The subject then pressed  the 0 or the 1 key on the keyboard to indicate his classification of this stimulus. The 0-key (1-key) press was confirmed by  turning on the L2 (L7) light above the keyboard. If a key other than 0 or 1 was pressed, the green light came on and the  subject responded again. The red light lit automatically after a delay of more than 7.4 sec, prompting the subject to respond  immediately. After the subject responded, the correct classification was indicated by another light: light L3 indicated a 0  classification and light L6 a 1 classification. Feedback was withheld until both subjects 1 and 2 (or 3 and 4) had responded,  since the stimuli were the same for each pair. The correct attribute and sequence of classifications  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION  457  could differ between subjects, however. The delay produced by waiting for the other subject of a pair rarely exceeded 1 sec.  The stimulus, the response light, and the feedback light were present simultaneously for 4.6 sec, then all three were  extinguished. After a 4.6 sec intertrial interval, a new stimulus was presented, starting another trial.  Trials were repeated until the subject had reached a criterion of 12 consecutive correct responses. On the 12th correct trial  all 12 lights were turned on indicating that the problem was solved and a new one, based on a different dimension, was to  begin. A few subjects experienced difficulty in solving problems on the first day but except for two cases these difficulties  were overcome by additional instructions.  Results  The experimental results consist of 2609 complete unassisted problems from 45 of the 47 subjects run. Each of these subjects  solved from 55 to 115 problems with a median of 87 for the house stimuli and 74 for the geometric stimuli.  Type of Stimulus. The subjects who solved problems based on the geometric stimuli solved, on the average, fewer problems than  did the subjects who solved problems based on the house stimuli (t(43) = 2.40, p = 0.02). The difference between the two  stimulus types was not significant when compared on the trial of last error (TLE) or on the total number of errors (TNE)  (t(43) = 1.23, 0.96; p > 0.20). Although there appears to be more variability in the TLE and THE statistics for subjects who  used the geometric stimuli than those who used the house stimuli, the variances were not significantly different (t(43) =  1.27; p > 0.20). Although the subject reports gave the impression that the attributes of the geometric stimuli were more  difficult to remember, the similarity of the results from both sets of stimuli is striking. Every analysis that was run on the  two sets of data gave almost identical results. Accordingly, no attempt is made in the remainder of the paper to separate  results from the two stimulus sets.  Learning to Learn. The TLE provides a good measure of the rate at which the learning of individual problems takes place. The  TLE decreased with practice from near 50 on the first problem to about 12 by problem 20, and remained roughly constant  thereafter (Fig. 1). An analysis of variance on problems 25 through 52 (all that was available for every subject) for each set  of stimuli did not indicate the presence of any problems effect (house stimuli, F(27,594) = 0.71; geometric stimuli, F(27,567)  = 1.28). There was also a significant subjects effect (house stimuli, F(22,594) = 3.39, p < .001; geometric stimuli, F(21,567)  = 1.85, p < .02). On the basis of these results, subjects were assumed to have developed relatively stable methods of solution  by the 25th problem, and data from problems beyond the 24th have been lumped together for analysis. Subsequent analyses will  be concerned only with this asymptotic data.  Presolution Responses. In an all-or-none model of learning, the correct or error responses before the TLE should form a series  of independent, chance Bernoulli events. This implies that the following three properties must hold: (1) the probability  458 WICKENS AND MILLWARD  60  40  w F a J J O J  a 60 F  2 Q  0  40  20  0  10 20 30 40 50 PROBLEM  FiG. 1. Mean trial of last error by problems. Each point is the mean from 23 subjects for the house stimuli and of 22 subjects  for the geometric stimuli.  of an error response on each trial before the TLE must be constant (stationarity); (2) the error response probability must be  at chance; (3) the probability of an error on any trial must be independent of the responses on all other previous trials. The  following paragraphs examine these properties briefly using data from the asymptotic problems for both stimulus types. It  should be noted that a more detailed analysis by Wickens (1969) gives exactly the same results and that the rationale behind  the analyses is more fully described in Atkinson, Bower, and Crothers (1965, Ch. 2).  Stationarity. The presolution responses of each subject were tested for stationarity in two ways. In the first of these tests  the response strings through the TLE were split in two halves and the proportion of errors in these two halves compared. A t  test using these proportions indicated that the frequency of errors declined significantly in the second half for 11 of the 45  subjects. For the second test, the proportion of errors on each trial of the presolution data was determined. A chi-square  test was then used to test for a change in these proportions over trials. For 7 of the subjects the chi-square deviated  significantly from chance. The nature of the failure of stationarity is well indicated by the shape of the stationarity curve  for all asymptotic problems (Fig. 2). This shows chance performance on the first two or three trials, followed by a drop to a  constant, but below chance level. The deviations from the constant prediction of an all-or-none model occur only in this  initial drop.  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 459  Chance probability of an error. As indicated above, the probability of an error fell below the chance value of 2 after the  first two trials. Over the 20,881 presolution responses by all subjects, the proportion of errors was 0.478, which is  significantly below chance (Binomial test, z = 6.3, p < 10-').  6  .5  0  w .4 0  0 .3 0  0 .2 a  0  1234567891011121314 TRIAL  Fic. 2. Stationarity curve for both stimulus types combined (45 subjects). Curve plots proportion of errors on trial t given  TLE > t.  Independence. The independence of successive responses for each subject was tested using all possible pairs of consecutive  presolution responses. There were 10 subjects for which this test showed significant departures from independence. A similar  test extending over three trial blocks showed an even larger number of dependencies. In both cases the failure of independence  takes the form of an excessive number of runs of consecutive similar responses, particularly of runs of correct responses.  Although all of the above analyses showed significant deviation from stationarity, the size of these deviations was not very  great. The statistical analyses that show these deviations are based on a very large number of observations, so they are very  powerful and may detect effects of relatively small magnitude. For example, the independence test for all data pooled is based  on 26,121 observations and is highly significant (X2(1) = 70.8,p < 10-16), yet knowledge of the results on one trial reduces  the uncertainty about the next trial by less than 0.2% (Hays, 1963, Ch. 17). Similarly, the significant nonstationarity  illustrated in Fig. 2 is not large. The associations represented by these significant effects are not of sufficient magnitude  to reject an all-or-none interpretation. Instead they represent any of a number of factors that disturb the results but are  not central to the learning strategy that the subject uses. For example, if a subject discovers the correct attribute, then  forgets or falsely rejects it before the criterion is reached, a spuriously high proportion of correct responses would  460 WICKENS AND MILLWARD  result. Because the deviations from the all-or-none properties are small and do not hold for every subject, and because they  can be attributed to special biasing factors, the construction of a general model for CI behavior of practiced subjects will  assume that the presolution responses may be represented by independent, chance Bernoulli trials.  Rate of Learning. If the all-or-none notions discussed above are accepted, a sequence of responses can provide no information  about the process which generated it except through the length of the string and the proportion of errors in it. Accordingly,  the analyses of learning to be made can depend primarily on the error probability and the TLE.  For the asymptotic data of most subjects the TLE showed a clearly unimodal distribution, skewed somewhat toward positive  values. A few subjects showed deviations from this general form and tended to display a more uniform distribution. However,  there was considerable variability in the parameters of these distributions. The mean TLE for individual subjects ranged from  7.00 to 21.96 for the house stimuli and from 7.92 to 23.59 for the geometric stimuli (the distribution of the mean TLE is  presented in Fig. 6 and is discussed more fully below). As mentioned above, these means varied significantly across subjects.  Similarly, a wide range of variances was present. This indicates that the subjects must have differed in the strategies that  they employed. It is apparent that any model of learning applied to these data must be able to accomodate a wide range of  learning rates.  III. THE ATTRIBUTE-ELIMINATION MODEL  The presolution results considered above indicate that the data are consistent with the class of hypothesis testing models  mentioned in the introduction. However, the simple formulation of these models cannot provide a satisfactory description of  the TLE data presented above. Accordingly, the attribute-elimination model was constructed. In this section the  attribute-elimination model is developed in detail and its predictions for TLE and THE statistics are derived. These  predictions can be compared with the observed rate of learning for each subject to yield a plausible strategy to account for  that subject's behavior.  Basic Assumptions and Axioms  The attribute-elimination model assumes that subjects sample a set of stimulus attributes which are then tested against  outcomes of the next few trials for their consistency with these outcomes. The subject's response on each trial is determined  by the attributes remaining in the sample on that trial. Selecting an attribute means to consider a hypothesis about that  attribute. The hypothesis is a simple association  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 461  of one of the values of the attribute with one of the outcome classes. Thus, in a CI experiment with classification 0 and 1,  and color as one of the attributes, a subject might sample the color attribute by forming the hypothesis "red is a 1." This  association is made at a time when the subject can still see (or remember) the value and classification of the previous  stimulus. In the above example, the stimulus would actually have been red and classified 1, so the alternative "red is 0"  could not have been true. With the binary stimuli considered here a hypothesis about one stimulus value ("red is a I")  directly implies a hypothesis about the other value ("blue is a 0"). Thus, the four possible hypotheses for each attribute  ("red is a 0", "red is a I", "blue is a 0", and "blue is a l ") are reduced to a single hypothesis, and one can speak of  sampling attributes as readily as sampling hypotheses. With the practiced subjects considered here this seems to be a  reasonable assumption.  The stimuli will be assumed to be composed of a set, H, of independent, binary dimensions, or attributes. The size of this set  will be represented by h. Since data from practiced subjects is under consideration, only these attributes are assumed to be  of importance in the subject's testing procedure. At the start of any trial the set H can be partitioned into four subsets: a  set, S, of attributes under active test (the sample); a set, S, of attributes that have just been tested and rejected; a set,  U, of attributes that have been tested and rejected from earlier sample sets; and a set, A, of attributes that are still  considered potential solutions to the problem but are not under active test. In the course of solving a CI problem, attributes  from A are sampled to form S, are rejected from S to S, then pass to U, and then, perhaps, are forgotten and return to A. The  rules that govern this shifting of attributes will be given in the axioms below.  It is necessary to distinguish between two types of sample, S, that the subject may have selected. The sample may contain only  attributes that are irrelevant to the solution of the problem. In testing such a sample, the subject will eventually eliminate  all of its members from consideration, and be forced to draw a new sample. Accordingly such a sample will be referred to as  nonterminal. In the other case S contains the correct attribute. When such a sample is tested the irrelevant attributes will  be eliminated, leaving only the correct solution attribute. Since this represents the solution of the problem, such samples  will be described as terminal. Of course, the subject does not know which type of sample he is currently examining.  The general sequence of events implied by the above definitions can be formalized and made explicit by the following set of  axioms. In several places alternative forms of the axioms are given, indicated by lower case letters. These alternatives will  be considered in the following section.  SAMPLING Axioms. After the first trial, and at several later stages, the subject must select a subset of attributes, S, from  the set of available attributes, A. It is this set, S, that will be actively examined on the following trials.  462 WICKENS AND MILLWARD  S1. On trials when sampling occurs, it is assumed to take place after the subject has been informed othe correct  classification.  S2. Whenever the attribute sample, S, is empty, a new sample of size s is taken from the set of available attributes, A. If A  contains fewer than s attributes, all those available are sampled. After the first trial of a problem, when presumably no  attribute sample exists, a sample is always taken from A after the feedback.  S3a. Each attribute, h; E H, is associated with a weight, w2 . The probability of sampling a particular hi e A is a joint  function of w; and the weights of the remaining attributes in A.  S3b. Each attribute in A has an equal probability of being selected as part of S. This probability is given by a simple ratio  of set sizes:  P(ht sampled I hi E A) = sla,  where a is the size of A.  RESPONSE Axioms. On all trials except the first, the subject is considering the attribute sample S. This sample is used to  determine his response.  R 1 a. Single-attribute rule. When a sample is drawn, one of the attributes is selected at random and used to determine the  response on subsequent trials. If this attribute is eliminated from S, another attribute remaining in S is chosen.  Rlb. Proportional rule. If x attributes in S predict response 0 and y predict the response 1, then the subject responds 0 with  probability xl(x + y).  Rlc. Majority rule. If x attributes in S predict response 0 and y predict response 1, and if x > y, then the subject will make  the 0 response. If y > x he will make the 1 response and if x = y he will choose randomly between the responses.  ELIMINATION Axioms. On each trial, after the subject makes his response classifying the stimulus, the correct classification  is presented to him. This feedback allows him to eliminate certain attributes from S.  El. Each sampled attribute will either be consistent with its prior classifications or inconsistent with them. Attributes in S  that are inconsistent move from S to S, consistent attributes remain in S.  E2. Whenever the size of S becomes zero, attributes in S are entered into U and a new sample is drawn in accordance with  axioms S1, S2, and S3.  MEMORY Axioms. The extent to which eliminated attributes remain in U is a function of the subject's memory. This may be less  than perfect.  M 1. The size of the set of unavailable attributes, U, is limited to sl attributes, I = 0, 1, 2,... .  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 463  M2. The shift of attributes from U to A takes place before any sampling that occurs on any trial.  These assumptions mean that the size of A drops from h on the first trial to h - sl and remains constant thereafter. Note that  if l = 0, sampling is with replacement, while if l , hls - 1 it is without replacement.  Discussion of the Model  The above axioms describe a family of attribute-elimination models. Each model is defined by two parameters, the sample size,  s, and the number of samples remaining unavailable for sampling, l. The psychological correspondence of these two parameters  seems fairly obvious. The sample size corresponds to the limits of the subject's short-term memory. The attribute sample set,  S, represents the set of attributes that are being actively tested and remembered from trial to trial. The parameter l  represents some measure of the subject's long-term memory for material to which he is not immediately attending.  An important feature of this theory, and a new one from the point of view of earlier theories, is the assumption that the  sample, S, is not automatically rejected when an error is made. The model presented above assumes that testing goes on,  regardless of the overt response, until all attributes in S have been eliminated. The degree to which the varied rates of  learning shown in the experiment above can be accounted for by the proposed theory provides one justification for this  assumption, but an independent verification is also possible. Essentially this demonstration depends on the fact that the  individual attribute rates of learning are too rapid to be accounted for if the sample is rejected on every error. The  difficulty is not apparent when only a single attribute is considered, but becomes evident when the learning rates for all 12  attributes are examined simultaneously. If the subject abandons his sample after an error, then the probability that any  sample that he draws is the last one is equal to the probability of the joint event that the sample contains the relevant  attribute and that this attribute is chosen as a basis for his responses. Suppose that for the ith attribute this event has  probability ci . Because of the requirement that the relevant attribute be selected for the response, this probability will be  approximately independent of the size of the sample. An estimate of ci can be obtained from the number of errors that are made  in solving problems based on that attribute. If mi is the mean number of errors made in solving problems based on the ith  attribute, then the maximum likelihood estimate of the solution probability is given by  where Pi is the probability that the initial response, made without information, is  correct. The Bower and Trabasso (1964) formula differs from this one in that they  464 WICKENS AND MILLWARD  assumed that the subject started the experiment with an incorrect hypothesis rather than with a random selection of  attributes, possibly including the correct one. Because one and only one attribute can be the basis for responding at any  time, the c, should form a probability distribution over the set of hypotheses that the subject may hold about the solution  and so can sum to no more than unity. Because of the relatively large number of problems available from a single subject in  this experiment, it is possible to make estimates of c2 for each of the 12 attributes. For one typical subject the sum of  these 12 estimates was 1.95. The theoretical variance of each of the i'z can be determined (Bower and Trabasso, 1964), and  under the assumption that the estimates are independent of each other, the variance of the sum may be estimated. The resulting  standard error is 0.24, which indicates that the observed deviation from 1.0 is unlikely to be due to sampling error alone. It  might be supposed that resampling on errors could be retained while predicting somewhat faster learning by assuming that the  sampling of attributes is made at least partially without replacement. However, such a procedure actually can retard solution,  since the correct attribute may be eliminated through an error made to another attribute in the sample. The notion of  resampling on an error must be abandoned in favor of the exhaustive test strategy assumed above.  The use of a sample size greater than one has been suggested previously by Trabasso and Bower (1968). Their evidence supports  this assumption as do the results from the current experiment.  The assumption that the eliminated samples are not available for resampling for some number of trials has been suggested by  other investigators of CI (Gregg and Simon, 1967; Levine, 1963; Trabasso and Bower, 1966). The idea that subjects remember the  attributes that they have eliminated seems so reasonable that its omission in the earlier theories is rather surprising. The  particular rules that determine the way in which attributes are returned from i',' to A can take many forms. In particular a  measure of the strength of the long-term memory trace may be associated with every attribute in U, and the probability that an  attribute passes back to A may be a function of this strength and the amount of interfering activity. The assumption of a  fixed memory size (Axiom M 1) is made here in part for mathematical convenience. It allows the size of A to be known exactly,  and hence reduces the number of cases that must be considered. A particularly natural way to view this axiom is to assume that  the s attributes that reenter A constitute the oldest complete sample in U. The notion that the attribute samples are treated  together during the elimination process gives plausibility to the idea that they are grouped and that these groups act as  units in the longer-term processing. Perceptual arguments can also be made for keeping certain sets of attributes together.  Thus, although not necessary, the memory axioms are not without psychological support.  Two versions of sampling axiom S3 were given. In the remainder of the discussion the simpler of the two, S3b, will be assumed.  This amounts to assuming that the  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 465  sampling weights mentioned in S3a are equal for every attribute. For the data under consideration this seems a reasonable  assumption, since the subjects were highly practiced and were receiving randomly chosen problems. Although residual  preferences for particular attributes undoubtedly existed, an attempt to incorporate them into the general model would place  an impossible burden of parameter estimation on the data.  The selection of one of the three response axioms is of less consequence. All three are plausible and there is little evidence  to help decide between them. For nonterminal samples the three axioms lead to the same predictions for the number of trials  and the number of errors to eliminate a sample. For terminal samples slight differences appear-for example, subjects' behaving  according to Axiom Rlc (the majority rule) would solve in slightly fewer trials and with slightly fewer errors than subjects  using the other two rules. The magnitude of this difference is well below sampling variation in the data, and Axiom Rla (the  single attribute rule) has been assumed in the sequel.  It is important to think about this theory not as fixed as programmatic. Thus, if experimental conditions are changed, the  theory would of necessity be modified appropriately. The particular version presented here seems best for the well-practiced  subjects of interest in the reported experiment but cannot be taken as necessarily accurate for other CI procedures.  The Derivation of TLE and THE  In this section the distributions of the two most important statistics for CI, the TLE and the TNE, are derived. In the model  presented above, CI problems are solved through the testing and elimination of a series of attribute samples. The sequence of  responses made in testing a particular sample is independent of the number of trials that were required to eliminate any  previous sample or the number of errors that were made during these eliminations. Because of this independence, the TLE or THE  can be written simply as the sum of the number of trials or number of errors that were required to locate the relevant  attribute. Thus, let the random variable t,, represent the number of trials required to eliminate a nonterminal sample, and  let tt represent the number of trials before the last error made in eliminating the irrelevant attributes from a terminal  sample. If a total of k samples is required to solve the problem, the TLE for that problem can be written  k-1 terms  The THE is amenable to a similar analysis, this time with the random variables denoted by N and n:  Nk=n.+nn+ ..+nn+nt  The number of terms in the above sums, k, is itself a random variable.  466 WICKENS AND MILLWARD  The derivation of the TLE and the THE will proceed as follows: The first step will be to derive the distribution of k. This  will depend both on the size of the samples, s, and the number of samples that the subject can remember, l. In the second step  the distribution of the four variables n, and n, will be derived. A separate derivation will be necessary for each value of  s. Finally the results from these two steps will be combined, mixing the Th or N,, distributions according to the  probabilities that k samples were required.  The Number of Attribute Samples  The distribution of k, the number of samples required to draw a terminal sample, depends critically upon the memory parameter  l. Each value of I yields a different distribution so the probability that k samples are required is denoted P,(k). When a  subject is assumed to sample with replacement, i.e., without memory (l = 0), the derivation of this distribution is simple.  Let ro denote the probability that a sample from the full set of attributes contains the relevant attribute. Since sampling is  without replacement this value remains the same regardless of the past sampling history. The probability that k samples are  required in order to obtain a terminal sample is given by a geometric distribution,  PO(k) = ro(1 - ro)1-1.  When the sampling of attributes is allowed to take place without complete replacement, i.e., Z > 0, the distribution is  slightly more complicated. The probability that the first sample contains the relevant attribute is still specified by a  single number, r, but if this sample is nonterminal it is not returned to A for resampling and the probability that the next  sample is terminal changes. The size of A has been reduced by the attributes in the first sample. By Axiom S3a the probability  of selecting the correct attribute in the next sample is  s  rl=h-S>  and in general, when j samples are contained in U,  For each value of l, the probability that the jth sample, if drawn, contains the relevant attribute increases from ro until j  = l, then remains constant at r, . The distribution of the number of samples then can be written as  ro k = 1  (1 - ro) rl k = 2  PL(k) -  (1 - ro)(I - r,) r,, k = 3  (1 - ro)(1 - rl) ... (I - ri-1) r, k = I + I  (1 - ro) ... (I - r,-1)(I - r,)'-l-Ir, . k > l + 1  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 467  Since when (3) holds, (1 - r,)(1 - rl) ... (1 - r;_1) r; = ro for every j, this may be simplified to  r  pt(k) = ro(1 - rt)h-1-1.  This formula is reasonable only as long as the memory is not sufficient to completely exhaust the sampling pool. When all  attributes are eliminated before any one is returned, only a limited number of samples will ever be required, and the  probability of choosing the relevant attribute will be identical on all but possibly the last sample:  P(k) _ h  ~ h - Ns  h  k<-N  where N is the greatest integer equal to or less than h/s.  Elimination of Attributes from S  In this section the distributions of the last error and the terminal and nonterminal attribute samples will be derived, i.e.,  to , tt , nn , and nt . These four distributions depend principally upon the number of attributes in the sample, s, and  require separate derivations for each s. When s = 1 or s = 2 this is relatively simple, but when s > 2, the derivations depend  on a series of sums and mixtures of random variables. The determination of the distribution of these sums and mixtures is most  easily handled through the use of generating functions (GFs), since sums of random variables are represented by products of  the corresponding GFs and mixtures by linear combinations of GFs (see, e.g., Feller, 1957, Ch. 11.). To illustrate the form of  these derivations, GFs will be used in the s = 2 case. The GFs will also prove essential in the final section, where the  results are combined to determine the distribution of the TLE and the TNE.  number of errors for  Single Attribute Samples: s = 1. Here the derivations are almost trivial. Three of the four distributions are degenerate:  nt = 0, tt = 0, n,, =1.  For a nonterminal sample, the number of trials until the last (and only) error is simply one more than the number of correct  responses that precede the error as the only attribute is rejected. This is distributed according to a geometric distribution,  p(tn = j) = p7-1q  468 WICKENS AND MILLWARD  where p and q = 1 - p are the probabilities of a correct response and an error, respectively.  Nonterminal Samples: s = 2. In this case S initially contains two attributes, but on later trials is reduced to one and zero  attributes. The subject's state in the elimination of S can be represented by the number of attributes that remain  uneliminated. When i attributes remain in S, this state will be denoted by S; . The states and the transition probabilities  between them are shown in Fig. 3. The transition probabili  Fic. 3. State diagram for elimination of attributes from a nonterminal sample with s = 2.  ties are determined as follows. In state S2 the subject may pass into So in one trial only if both attributes in the sample  are inconsistent with the outcome. Since the values taken by the attributes are independent of each other, the probability of  this transition is the product of the probabilities that each attribute is found inconsistent, or q - . The use of q as the  probability of an inconsistency when the attribute is the basis of responding and 1 otherwise is a compromise. On the one  hand, the probability of an inconsistency should, a priori, be z, but, on the other hand, q was observed. The convention  adopted here-using p and q only to refer to overt responsescompromises between setting all probabilities to and using p and q  throughout. The same principles apply to the determination of the other transition probabilities in Fig. 3.  To derive the actual distributions, first consider t. This is the number of trials required to pass from S2 to S. There  are two paths by which this can be done, one direct, the other via S, . The distribution t. will be a mixture of the  distributions of the number of trials associated with the first path and the distribution associated with the second path. The  individual distributions will be the sum of the number of trials required to pass between the various states of the path. Here  GFs become useful. Let O;(~) be the GF for the number of trials in state Si . At least one trial is required to pass out of  either state Sl or S2 , and additional trials are needed if all attributes are consistent. The probability that the subject  leaves S2 in one trial is 1 - p/2, that it takes  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION  469  two trials is (1 - p/2)(p/2), that it takes 3 trials is (1 - p/2)(p/2)2, etc. The resulting series has a simple GF  02G)=(1-2)~+(1-922+(1-2)433  p  _ _ 2) 1 - (x/2)  An analogous argument allows the number of trials that the subject remains in Sl  to be expressed by the GF  The number of trials to reach So via Sl is the sum of the number of trials in S2 and the number of trials in Sl . The GF of  this sum is given by the product of the GFs of its terms, 02(x) The number of trials to reach So directly is simply  As determined by the probabilities of exiting from S2 , these paths have probabilities 1/(1 + q) and q/(1 + q), respectively.  The two terms of the two paths can be combined as a mixture to give the GF of t,,,  0-G) - 1 + q 02(x) M0 + 1 + q MO  q(1 + q~)~ 2[l - (p~/2)](1 -p~)  indicates a nonterminal sample. Although only the GFs are used below, the explicit distribution of t,, can be obtained by  decomposing 0n(~) by partial fractions into  where the subscript n on  4(p - 2)~ q~ ~n(~) - 2p[l - (p~/2)l + p(1 -p~) '  then noting that each term is the GF of a geometric distribution.  This gives  P(tn -1) - q(p - 2) (p)'-I + q p;_,. 2p 2 p  Now consider n.. The GF for the nn can be obtained from the same diagram, with the additional requirement that the two paths  from S2 to S, must be considered separately and that errors are associated witht the transitions between states rather than  with the states themselves. Let Ozj(~) be the GF for a transition between states Si and Si . The GF associated with passage  between any two states is equal to the probability  48x/8/4-z  470 WICKENS AND MILLWARD  that the passage is made without an error, plus ~ times the probability that the passage is made with one error. Thus,  0216) p + q~, 0206) - ~, CIA) - ~~  and, again forming a sum, then a mixture,  O-G) - 1 + q 021(x) 0106) -' 1 ' 0200)  This converts directly to the distribution function 1  P(nn = j) =  j-2  Terminal samples: s = 2. Here the choice of response rule becomes important. A terminal sample contains one relevant and one  irrelevant attribute, and, by Axiom RIa, one of these is chosen to determine the response. If the relevant attribute is  chosen, the subject will never make an error and the irrelevant attribute will be unobservably eliminated the first time that  an inconsistency appears. If, on the other hand, the irrelevant attribute is chosen as a basis for responding, the subject  will make a single error before switching to the correct attribute. In order to formalize these possibilities a new  probability, c, must be defined to indicate the likelihood that the relevant attribute is chosen to determine the response.  With probability c, no error is made, while with probability 1 - c an attribute must be explicitly eliminated, following the  same general procedure as for a single attribute nonterminal sample. Either the distributions or their GFs can be written more  or less directly from this description, giving  P(tt = A -  j=0  - c) p'-1q j > 0  and  _ c P(nt -J) = 1 - c,  j=0 j=1  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 471  or  and  MO =c+(1 -CX.  Larger samples: s > 2. The calculations above were sufficiently simple that the use of state diagrams and GFs may seem  unnecessarily powerful. These techniques, however, make calculation of the four distributions possible when s is greater than  2. The state diagrams for s = 3 and s = 4 are given in Figs. 4 and 5 and the resulting  FIG. 4. State diagram for elimination of samples with s = 3 attributes: (A) nonterminal samples; (B) terminal samples.  TABLE 1 Generating Functions for the Distributions of the Number of Trials and the Number of Errors to Eliminate Terminal and  Nonterminal Samples  N  Sample size No. of trials No. of errors  Nonterminal sample 1  2  3  4 8 + (12 + 26g)~ + (1 + 5q + llg2)~2 + g3S3 (21 -14q + q2)~ - (45q -_7q_Z)_~-_~- 17g2~3, q3~4  4~ (8 - Pt)(4 - P~)(2 - P~)(1 - P~) - - (7 = q)(3 :- q)(1 + q) e  Terminal sample N r 1 1 1  a z  C+(1 -C)q~ C+(1 -C)~  2 3  1 -P$  q~  1 - P~  1 + q~ _  44  (2 - P~)(1 - PC) 1 + q  44 2 + (1 + 4q)C + qz~2 (3 __ q)~ + 5q~z + gIC3 rxn  (4 - PC)(2 - PC)(1 - PC) (3 + q)(1 -+_ q) z  C + (1 - C) q~[l + qC + c'(1 - ~)] (2 - PC)(1 - P~)  C + ( _ P~~ 1 + C' + 2C" + 2011-Pc') 4  ~(1-qC') r +C+ qC)l  + 2 -P~ L1 1 _P~ Jf  C  C) (1 + qc')~ + q(1 -_C')~1 4- q  [3 - q2 + qC"(3 + q) + qc'(1 q)]~  + [4q + qa - 3qc" - qC, - qVc_~_  q2(1 - C')(1 - Crr)~3 (3 _ q)(1 -- q)  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 473  FIG. 5. State diagram for elimination of samples with s = 4 attributes; (A) nonterminal samples; (B) terminal samples.  GFs in Table 1. The diagrams for the terminal samples differ slightly from the ones discussed in Fig. 3. These diagrams  contain nodes labeled Si' which allow for the possibility that when starting with i attributes, the subject may choose the  relevant attribute as a basis for responding and thereby make no further errors. The symbols c, c', and c" represent the  probability of choosing this attribute from a set of s, s - 1, and s - 2 attributes, respectively. No responses take place at  these nodes, so they serve only to increase the number of paths and not to add GFs to any of the equations.  474 WICKENS AND MILLWARD  The TLE and THE  In the two previous sections the distributions of the number of samples, k, and of the random variables to , t, , n, and n,  were determined. Now these two sets of distributions must be combined to give the distributions of the TLE and TNE.  Suppose that k samples are required to obtain a terminal sample. As (1) indicates, the TLE is the sum of k - 1 random  variables, to , plus the random variable, t, . These random variables are independent of each other so that the GF of the sum,  0(r)(~), is the product of the component GFs:  0(4) G) - r"r, -1(S) Y't(b).  This equation is incomplete since it does not include the first trial of the experiment, on which the subject must guess since  a sample has not yet been drawn. The solution to the problem of the first trial response is either to ignore the first trial  altogether, both in theory and in the data, or, as will be done here, to correct for it after the GFs of TLE and THE are  The value of k in (6) is not fixed but is a random variable with a distribution given by (4) or (5). Thus, the distribution of  TLE is a mixture of the Tk distributions, weighted according to the appropriate distribution of k. When l = 0 these weights,  PO(k), are given by (2) and the GF of the TLE distribution is  0,0(S) - PO(k) 0n-1(S) Y't(S)  F'=0  _ root(S)  l - (1 - ro) 0n(~)  The subscripts of 0 refer to the parameters s and 1 of the model. Similarly, from (4) with Z = 1,  0s,1(~) = root(S) 1_ r1Y'n(b)  The GFs for TNE, are identical to those of TLE if ~n(~) and 0t(~) are replaced by 0n(~) and Ot(~).  The correction for the first trial can now be made. In all cases except where no other errors are made, the effect of  including the first trial is simply to increase the TLE by l. When no errors are made in actually solving the problem, the TLE  will depend on whether the first guess was correct or not. The TLE will be either 0 or 1 with probability 1. Since the 0,J0)  gives the first term of the probability function, the corrected GF for TLE with the first trial included is  0..1,1(0) (1 + 0 + 2  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 475  Of course, this correction could be made to the probability distribution itself after it has been obtained from the GF. A  similar argument shows the correct GF for the THE to be  2(1 + 0 IF",A).  Substitution of the appropriate GFs into any of these equations provides, in principle, the distribution of the TLE and THE  for any s and l. In practice considerable work must still be done to convert the GFs into distributions. The GFs used here  will always take the form of the ratio of two polynomials, and a partial fraction decomposition can be applied to them. Thus,  the GF can always be written as a polynomial of finite degree plus a number of terms of the form a/(1 - ~/a)v. The  distributions associated with such GFs are well known and the distribution of the TLE and THE may be written as the sum of the  probability terms of these known distributions.  Much of the information that will be needed to compare these predictions to a subject's behavior can be obtained without  converting the GFs to distributions. The mean TLE or TNE, for example, can be obtained more directly. Suppose that the mean of  the random variable t. was m,, , and that of tt was mt . These means can be obtained from the sample GFs by first  differentiating, then setting ~ to 1 (Feller, 1957). The mean TLE for a problem requiring k samples is kmn + m,, so when the  mixture probabilities are obtained from (4) the mean TLE for the whole problem is  Y [(k - 1) mm + mt] pt(k) A=1  = mt + mo[(l - 1) rt(lri + 2) -I- 2] , 2rt2  This mean may be corrected for the first trial, this time by adding 1 - roc12. With the appropriate changes to this correction  factor, the identical analysis can be applied to the THE and, because of the independence of samples, to the variances of the  TLE and TNE.  In order to obtain numerical predictions for the TLE and TNE, values must be assigned to r; and the c's. For the experiment  discussed in Sec. II an attribute set of size h = 12 is assumed and the constant r; determined by (3):  rj =  s  The c's are reciprocals of successively smaller set sizes,  1 1 11 1  c=-, c = c =  s s-1 s-2'  476 WICKENS AND MILLWARD  The response probabilities, p and q, are estimated from the overall frequency of presolution errors asp = 0.522 and q~ .478.  All predictions discussed below make use of these values.  IV. EVALUATION OF THE ATTRIBUTE-ELIMINATION MODEL  Predictions and Limitations of the Model  As mentioned earlier, the attribute-elimination model is actually a family of models depending on the two parameters, s and l.  If the model is adequate, it must be possible to explain the observed individual differences in learning rate in terms of  these parameters. The predictions for the TLE are presented on the four horizontal axes in the upper part of Fig. 6. Each of  the axes corresponds to a particular value of s and the points marked on it to values of l. A correction for the first trial  has been made.  15  N  y- 5 = 1  U i  $ = 2 ITT~  m 5 3 2  7 10 5= 3 r-r-,-~  N 3 2 I 0  W m  o I~~- rn rn n n 0 5 10 15 20 25 MEAN TRIAL OF LAST ERROR FOR INDIVIDUAL SUBJECT  FIG. 6. Distribution of mean trial of last error for individual subjects over asymptotic problems. Upper axes show predictions  of model.  These predictions represent ideals of performance for subjects attempting to use a particular s, 1 pair, and real data would  be expected to show slightly larger TLEs due to occasional mistakes and the few times a subject might forget an attribute. The  predictions should be treated more as lower bounds on learning rate than as the exact behavior expected.  In the lower part of Fig. 6 is plotted a histogram of the mean TLE observed for individual subjects. As indicated in Sec. II,  the range of this distribution is too large to be accounted for by sampling error alone, but must be a result of the use of  different strategies by different subjects. It is reasonable to use Fig. 6 to roughly assign possible s, Z pairs to each  subject. The use of the mean alone does not allow an exact determination of the subject's strategy since several different s,  l pairs often predict roughly the same TLE. Finer discrimination is possible if more than the mean is used. For example, in  Fig. 7 the predicted distributions of the TLE for s = 1, l = 11 and s- 3, 1 = 0, are given, both of which have mean of  approximately 12. The systematic but  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 477  Fic. 7. Theoretical distribution of the trial of last error for two parameter sets, illustrating effect of s and 1. Mean TLEs,  indicated by arrows, are 12.46 for s = 1, 1 = 11; and 12.33 for s=3,1=0.  slow search entailed in the s = 1, l = 11 model produces a more nearly uniform distribution than does the more random s = 3, l  = 0 strategy. By making use of the appropriate estimation procedures it would certainly be possible to identify subjects with  s, Z pairs more closely than with Fig. 6 alone. However, such an analysis would be of limited value in this study since an  exact identification of strategy would provide little further psychological insight. The ideal nature of the predictions also  limits the usefulness of this identification.  The range of predicted solution rates, illustrated in Fig. 6, demonstrates that the model is adequate to explain the  performance of any subject. It also provides more conclusive evidence that the modifications made to earlier forms of  attribute testing models were necessary. Almost half the subjects showed rates of solution that were too rapid to be accounted  for by theories based on a sample of size 1. The same fact again discredits the assumption of resampling on errors. The  question of memory size may not be considered so directly. Because s may be as large as 12, it is possible to obtain learning  rates even more rapid than those observed here without the use of any long-term memory (i.e., l = 0). In order to make such  predictions a sample size of at least seven is required, and this is much larger than was reported by any of the subjects in  their responses to the questionnaires. It seems safe to conclude that most subjects sampled at least partially without  replacement.  The responses to questionnaires give further, nonquantitative support to the attribute-elimination model. Of the 45 subjects,  38 gave information in their answers about the size of the samples that they used. Of these, only 4 indicated that they used a  single-attribute sample; 24 indicate that they may have used an exhaustive sampling strategy (l > h/s).  478 w'ICKENS AND nIILLw'ARD  The attribute-elimination models appear so far to have given a satisfactory account of the practiced subject data. There are  two respects in which they sometimes fail to fully describe the subject's behavior, however. The most efficient use of the  subject's memory can be made only when he is testing the maximum number of attributes. When attributes begin to be eliminated  from the sample, this capacity will not he used unless the subject introduces a new attribute into the sample for each one  that has been eliminated. This continuous sampling feature has not been incorporated into the model that was proposed above,  although it is certainly consistent with the general attribute sampling philosophy. Twelve subjects indicated in describing  their solution strategy that they made at least partial use of a continuous sampling strategy. Only 4 subjects unambiguously  indicated that they never used such a procedure. Somewhat more light is shed on this division in an experiment reported by  Troyer (1969) and Millward and Troyer (1969) in which the sampling of attributes was made observable. Troyer found that of 24  subjects, 7 used a continuous sampling scheme with s = 2; 3 used s = 1 (for which there is only one sampling procedure) and  the remaining 14 used the simpler elimination scheme discussed here with s ~ 2. Twelve of these subjects had an attribute  sample greater than 3. It seems clear that a complete account of practiced CI behavior must take both sampling procedures into  account.  The second deviation from the model becomes apparent when the individua subject predictions are compared with the results from  the questionnaire. The strategies reported by the subjects are in good agreement with the model in general. However, the  values of the sample size given in the questionnaire were invariably larger than those estimated from the data. This  discrepancy can be attributed to the ideal nature of the model, since even practiced subjects make occasional processing  errors. These accidental errors, in fact, probably represent the major deviation from the predictions of the model. However,  it does not seem reasonable to try to incorporate these errors into a general stochastic model of CI behavior. If this were  attempted, the number of free parameters would be greatly increased and could not be estimated with any degree of accuracy. A  more practical approach to this problem, it appears, would be to follow Levine (1970) or Berger (1970) and give a series of  trials without feedback between regular trials in order to permit the specific hypothesis under investigation to be  determined. From such protocols a more exact analysis of processing errors can be made.  General discussion  The results obtained here cannot be specifically related to any previously published model of CI. Highly practiced subjects  were employed in this experiment so the learning was undoubtedly more rapid than that observed by other workers. Thus,  Trabasso and Bower (1966) found that a model similar to the s = 1 model reported here would fit the data from their  dimensional shift CI experiment when 1 was about  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION 479  3 or 4. In the present experiment both s = 1, 1 = 3 and s = 1, l = 4 are clearly insufficient for all but a few subjects.  Similarly, in a model in which sample size was allowed to vary, a size of s = 2 was obtained (Trabasso and Bower, 1968, p.  80). This model is not comparable to the one discussed here, due, in part, to the assumption of complete resampling on errors,  but again the learning rates that would be predicted are too small. The restricted information processing capacities implied  by these parameter estimates probably reflects the fact that the data considered in these experiments came from subjects  solving their first CI problem.  On the other hand, a parallel can be drawn between the attribute-elimination model and the multiprocess models of memory such  as the one proposed by Atkinson and Shiffrin (1968). Greatly simplified, their theory identifies two memory stores involved in  the subject's processing of information. Active processing takes place in a short-term memory store, and from this store,  information is passed to the permanent, or longterm store. The subject may make use of the processing capacity of his  short-term store in a number of ways, for example, by establishing a buffer in which material can be rehearsed in a rote  manner. The attribute sample can be viewed as comparable to this rehearsal buffer. The subject uses his short-term memory  rehearsal to temporarily retain the status of the s attributes in his sample, without attempting to permanently store them in  long-term memory. In the event that the sample is exhausted without obtaining the relevant attribute, a new sample must be  drawn. Since the information that is available from the short-term store concerns the most recently tested set of attributes,  in order to sample more efficiently, information about which attributes have already been tested must be retrieved from the  long-term store. The extent to which this retrieval is or is not successful determines the value of l. It is interesting to  note that the sample sizes required for the data reported in this paper are in close agreement with the range of buffer sizes  reported by Atkinson and Shiffrin (1968) for a number of short-term memory experiments using practiced subjects. This  correspondence further supports the identification of the attribute testing with the short-term processing in Atkinson and  Shiffrin's model. Although the details of this parallel are not fully worked out, it is encouraging to be able to fit the  hypothesis testing models of CI into the context of a more general model of information processing. A more detailed discussion  of the application of the Atkinson and Shiffrin model to CI is given in Atkinson and Wickens (1971).  REFERENCES  AIKIN, J. O., MILLWARD, R. B., MUNCK, R., TROYER, K., AND WICKENS, T. The production and display of many-dimensional stimuli.  In preparation.  ATKINSON, R. C., BOWER, G. H., AND CROTHERS, E. J. An introduction to mathematical learning theory. New York: Wiley, 1965.  480  WICKENS AND MILLWARD  ATKINSON, R. C., AND SHIFFRIN, R. M. Human memory: a proposed system and its control processes. In K. W. Spence and J. T.  Spence (Eds.), The psychology of learning and motivation: advances in research and theory. Vol. 2. New York: Academic Press,  1968. Pp. 89-195. ATKINSON, R. C., AND WICKENS, T. D. Human memory and the concept of reinforcement. In R. Glaser (Ed.), The  nature of reinforcement. Columbus, Ohio: Merrill, 1971. Pp. 66-120. BERGER, D. E. Direct measures of information processing in  concept identification. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of California, Los Angeles, 1970.  BOWER, G. H., AND TRABASSO, T. Concept identification. In R. C. Atkinson (Ed.), Studies in mathematical psychology. Stanford:  Stanford Univ. Press, 1964. Pp. 32-94.  FELLER, W. An introduction to probability theory and its applications. Vol. 1. (2nd ed.). New York: Wiley, 1957.  GREGG, L. W., AND SIMON, H. A. Process models and stochastic theories of simple concept formation. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 1967, 4, 246-276.  HAYS, W. L. Statistics for psychologists. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1963.  LEVINE, M. The assumption concerning "wrongs" in Restle's model of strategies in cue learning. Psychological Review, 1963, 70,  559-561.  LEVINE, M. Neo-noncontinuity theory. In G. H. Bower and J. T. Spence (Eds.), The psychology of learning and motivation:  advances in research and theory. Vol. 3. New York: Academic Press, 1970. Pp. 101-134.  MILLWARD, R. B. Probabilistic reinforcement of reversal and dimensional shifts. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1968, 5,  196-223.  MILLWARD, R. B., AND TROYER, K. Direct measures of strategies for concept identification. Paper presented at meeting of  Psychonomic Society, St. Louis, November 7, 1969.  RESTLE, F. The selection of strategies in cue learning. Psychological Review, 1962, 69, 329-343. TRABASSO, T., AND BOWER, G.  H. Component learning in the four-category concept problem. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1964, 1, 143-169.  TRABASSO, T., AND BOWER, G. H. Presolution dimensional shifts in concept identification: a test of the sampling with  replacement axiom in all-or-none models. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1966, 3, 163-173.  TRABASSO, T., AND BOWER, G. H. Attention in learning: theory and research. New York: Wiley, 1968.  TROYER, K. Hypothesis sampling strategies in concept identification: a theoretical and empirical analysis. Unpublished honors  thesis, Brown University, 1969.  WICKENS, T. D. Attribute elimination strategies for concept identification with practiced subjects. Technical report number 3,  Human Learning Laboratory, Brown University, 1969.  RECEIVED: June 5, 1970