10.1016/0022-2496(71)90024-1
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 8, 82-108 (1971)  A Theoretical and Empirical Comparison of the All-Or-None Multilevel Theory and the Mixed Model'  WILLIAM H. BATCHELDER2  University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois 61803  Two theories for stimulus generalization in paired-associate learning (P.A.L.) are compared-the mixed model and the  all-or-none multilevel theory. Both theories postulate basic all-or-none learning processes but differ in their mechanism for  generalization. The mixed model postulates that generalization occurs only during responding; whereas, the multilevel theory  postulates that generalization takes place during learning itself.  The theories are compared on P.A.L. experiments involving lists composed of several duos of related items with similar Gibson  form stimuli and identical responses. Interactions among related items are studied by considering the joint error-success  process to both related items during learning. Both theories give fairly adequate accounts of this joint data; however, the  multilevel theory seems the more adequate. In addition to the empirical comparison of the two theories, several theoretical  relationships are also presented.  INTRODUCTION  Generalization of response tendencies or rules from one item to another in pairedassociate learning has received much recent  attention (Batchelder, 1966, 1970; Friedman and Gelfand, 1964; Friedman, Trabasso, and Mosberg, 1967; Greeno and Scandura,  1966; Hintzman, 1968; Polson, 1967; Polson, Restle, and Polson, 1965; Restle, 1964). Generalization processes in P.A.L. have  traditionally been studied in the two ways suggested by Gibson (1940). In the first, a list of unrelated items is brought to  some learning criterion and transfer to related items in another list is studied. In the second, only a single list of related  items is studied during acquisition. Probably out of tradition as well as theoretical simplicity, the first method has been  1 This work was supported by funds supplied by the Illinois Research Board. Portions of this work were presented at the  Stanford Mathematical Psychology Meetings, August 28, 1968. 1 wish to thank Robert A. Johnson and Bruno Breitmeyer for  assisting with the experiment running and data analysis. I also wish to thank Alan Ruskin and Theodore Steiner for their  helpful comments at various stages in the project.  z Present address: School of Social Science, University of California at Irvine, Irvine, California.  82  THEORETICAL AND EMPIRICAL COMPARISON 83  the more widely considered by mathematical modelers. This paper is concerned with the question of how related items interact  during original learning.  The simplest system likely to involve generalization during learning consists of two items with similar or conceptually  related stimuli and identical responses. Denote such a system by S1-R, S, R. Empirical evidence on how the items in such a  system interact can be obtained by embedding the system into a list of unrelated items and studying the performance on S, -R  and S, -R jointly during list acquisition. In this paper data from several P.A.L. experiments involving duos of items with  similar Gibson form stimuli (1941) and identical, pretrained, English word responses are reported.  These data are used to compare two theoretical approaches to generalization in P.A.L.-the mixed model (Atkinson and Estes,  1963; Friedman, 1966) and the all-ornone multilevel theory (Batchelder, 1966, 1970). These two theories fall, respectively,  into two classes of generalization theories delineated by Greeno and Scandura (1966). The first class assumes that items are  learned independently as patterns and that generalizations occurs only during performance as a function of selecting shared  components. The mixed model postulates the simple case of all-or-none pattern learning. The second class of theories is  referred to as the selection of strategies class and is due to Restle (1962, 1964). The theories in this class assume that  subjects learn items by associating components or properties of the stimulus with a response. If another stimulus shares a  learned property, learning may transfer to it. The multilevel theory considers the simple case where properties fall into two  sets, unique or common, and it assumes that acquisition of properties is an all-or-none process.  The organization of the remainder of the paper is as follows. First, the experiments are described. Second, the two theories  are axiomatized, and derivations from the theories are accomplished for the experiments. And finally, parameter estimation and  data fits are presented.  GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE EXPERIMENTS  The five experiments reported in this paper all shared the same essential structure. Each subject learned one paired-associate  list consisting of Gibson form stimuli (Gibson, 1941) and pretrained, English word responses. Each list had several pairs of  items with similar stimuli and the same response and several unrelated control items. All experiments involved presentation  schedules which alternated presentations of the two items in a pair. If S, -R and S, -R denote a pair of items with similar  stimuli and the same response, the entire list was presented in cycles in such a way that the trial sequence on these items  was Si R, S2 R, S, -R, S2 R, etc. The first four experiments presented the list in anticipation cycles according to the  preceding restriction, and the fifth experiment employed the study test methodology with the same order  84 BATCHELDER  of presenting items in a duo on both study and test trials. Table 1 presents a summary of the main variables in each  experiment.  TABLE 1 Conditions of the Experiments  Experi- Schedule List No. of No. of No. of  ment  length pairs responses protocols  I Anticipation 18 6 3 156  11 Anticipation 18 3 6 162  III Anticipation 18 6 6 150  IV Anticipation 24 8 4 224  V Study-test 24 8 4 176  'The method of presenting list cycles is indicated in the second column. The total list length including unique control items  and, in the case of Experiment 2, duos of related items paired with different responses is given in the third column. The  fourth and fifth columns give the number of generalization duos and the number of available response alternatives,  respectively. From 25 to 54 subjects were run in each experiment. The last column of Table 1 gives the number of separate  subject duo response sequences obtained from each experiment. A complete method section for the experiments is included in an  appendix.  There were several rationales for employing the alternation rule for presentations of a pair of related items. The main  motivation was to study the generalization among related items at various stages during learning. The alternation procedure  permits one to separate transfer within a cycle (from S1 -R to S2 R) and transfer between cycles (S,, -R to S, -R). Another  motivation was to eliminate the role of short-term memory four particular items in performance during acquisition. The  alternation rule permits the scheduling of from 9 to 17 other items between successive presentations of each item. Finally,  the assumption that items are alternated in acquisition facilitates the derivation of models since the same sequence of  learning events always occurs between successive presentations of a given item.  CRITICAL DATA FOR ANALYSIS  Each list was run to a criterion of two consecutive perfect cycles. The data of interest for theory evaluation concern the  trial ordered performance sequence on a pair of related items. Each cycle through the list produces an ordered pair of  results, where each coordinate is an error (1) or a success (0). A sample protocol might be  Result: (1,1) (1,1) (1, 0) (0,1) (0, 0) (0, 0) . Cycle: 1 2 3 4 5 6 .  THEORETICAL AND EMPIRICAL COMPARISON 85  where the first coordinate is the result on item Sl and the second for S, . Thus, from the sample protocol, the subject was  incorrect to both items on cycles 1 and 2, missed only SI on cycle 3, missed only S, on cycle 4, and was correct on both items  for all remaining cycles. The collection of all obtained sequences of two-valued result protocols comprises the basic data  appropriate for theory analysis.  The two theories will be represented as stochastic processes with a sample space consisting of infinite strings of two-valued  result pairs terminating in all doublezeros. This sample space for the learning of two related items is the direct analogue of  the usual space of all strings of ones and zeros (terminating in all zeros) assumed by most Markov learning models. In  applications, only this ordered-pair space and naturally defined subspaces will be considered. These analyses will ignore  interactions between a given pair of related items and other items in the list. Such interactions are certainly possible;  however, the hope is that the order of magnitude of these interactions will be considerably less than those captured by the  above data space.  After representing both the mixed model and the multilevel theory for two items in a general framework, specific models for  the experiments will be derived. Each derivation takes the form of specifying the boundary conditions of the presentation  schedule and level of data analysis and then deducing an appropriate model from the theory. It is analytically possible  (though cumbersome) to derive models for the fourvalued data sequences illustrated in Eq. 1. In addition to the unwieldiness  of expressions, the difficulties in developing parameter estimation and goodness of fit criteria for a four-valued process  would obscure the main points of this paper. Consequently, three two-valued subprocesses were selected to compare the adequacy  of the theories. The processes selected were the two individual item error-success processes and the double-error process  defined as follows:  ~ 1 if error to S2 on cycle n  xz~0 if success to St on cycle n  for i = 1, 2, and  -  Z 1 if xln = x2n = 1 n 10 otherwise.  To illustrate how these processes are obtained from the original data space, consider the sample protocol in Eq. 1. The three  subprotocols are as follows:  xln: I I 1 0 0 0  x2n: I 1 0 1 0 0  Zn: I 1 0 0 0 0  cycle: 1 2 3 4 5 6  86 BATCHELDER  Another reason for the choice of these three two-valued processes comes from considering the data on cycle n. It can be  arrayed in the 2 x 2 contingency table presented in Eq. 4.  x2n  Pr(Z, = 1)  Pr(xln = 1)  0  Pr(x2n = 1)  The probabilities in this 2 X 2 table are completely determined by specifying the two marginal probabilities, Pr(xln = 1) and  Pr(x,n = 1), and the one joint probability Pr(Z= 1). Thus the three subprocesses capture much of the information in the  original data space. The only information lost by using the three subspaces are sequential probabilities in the original space  not obtainable from the sequential probabilities in the subspaces.  The strategy used in this paper will be to obtain three pools of 1-0 sequences from each experiment corresponding to the xln ,  x,n , and Zn processes, then derive three appropriate models from each theory, then estimate one set of parameters for each  theory, and finally compare the theories on their ability to account for summary statistics of the three protocol pools. This  strategy is employed separately for each of the five experiments.  MATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS OF THE THEORIES  This section is divided into four subsections. First, the two theories are stated on a general level. Second, they are  embedded into a mathematical framework designed to facilitate analysis of theories that postulate item interactions  (Batchelder, 1966, Chap. 4). Third, the derivations of particular models relevant to the experiments reported in this paper  are accomplished. And finally, some interesting relationships between the theories are presented.  1. Assumptions of the theories  The mixed model makes the assumption that each item is learned independently by an all-or-none model. Thus, transitions among  learning states for an item occur only when that item is presented for study. The theory postulates a generalization or  transfer process between related items during response as follows. If a presented item is in the  THEORETICAL AND EMPIRICAL COMPARISON 87  unlearned state and a related item is in the learned state, the subject has a certain probability, t, that the response to the  learned item will transfer to the unlearned item. In the case of similar stimuli paired with the same response, this transfer  is facilitative. Whether or not transfer occurs on a particular trial in no way affects the learning state of an item or the  probability of transfer occurring on later trials. Thus, the mixed model postulates independent learning on study trials with  transfer possible only on test trials.  More specifically, the assumptions for the mixed model (in the case where related items are paired with the same response) are  as follows:  1. Items are learned independently by the all-or-none model with learning rate c and guessing probability g (see Atkinson,  Bower, and Crothers, 1965, Chap. 3, for a further description of this model).  2. If a presented item is in state U (the unlearned state) and all other related items are in U, the probability of correct is  g. However, if the presented item is in U and another related item is in state L (the learned state) the probability of  correct, s, is given by  s = t -}- (1 - t)g,  where t is the probability that the subject selects a component of the presented stimulus pattern to respond to which is in  common with the related learned item. For a more complete discussion of the mixed model see Atkinson and Estes (1963).  The multilevel theory takes a different position on the mechanism of transfer. Response probability to a presented item  depends only on the state of that item. If the item is unlearned, the probability of correct is at the guessing level, g. If  the item is learned, on whatever basis, the probability of correct is unity. When an unlearned item is presented for study,  the subject attempts to select a property (mnemonic, strategy, etc.) for that item. Sometimes a selected property is in common  with the related item which results in its learning (called rule learning) and sometimes the property is unique to that item.  The assumptions for the multilevel theory are as follows:  1. Items are in one of three states: unlearned, U; learned on a unique basis, P; or learned on a common basis, R.  2. When an unlearned item is presented, it alone is learned with probability p, or the entire collection of related items is  learned with probability r, or nothing is learned with probability 1 - r - p.  3. When an item in state P is presented, the entire collection is learned with probability a, and nothing further is learned  with probability 1 - a.  4. If a presented item is in U, the probability of correct is g; otherwise it is 1.  For a more complete statement of the theory, see Batchelder (1970).  88 BATCHELDER  Another way to conceptualize the transfer properties of both theories is to consider the performance probabilities to S, -R  and S, -R as an ordered pair. Then, for the mixed model, the two item system can occupy any of the performance states (g, g),  (s, 1), (1, s), and (1, 1), where the first entry is the probability of correct to S1 if it were presented for a test trial  and the second entry the probability of correct to S2 if it were presented. The possible performance states for the multilevel  theory are (g, g), (g, 1), (l, g), and (1, 1). Transitions among these performance states are possible when an item is  presented for study. The transition probabilities depend only on which item is presented and the current performance state of  the pair. These probabilities are obtained directly from the assumptions and are exhibited in Fig. 1.  Mixed Model  ~c c/ (I's) (s,l) O's) (s,l) c~ ~c  if SI presented if S2 presented  Multi-Level Theory  a (r+p) (r+p) o (I,g) r (g,l) (I, g ) r (g,l) P~ /P If SI presented If 32 presented  FIG. 1. Directed graphs of possible transitions among performance states for the mixed model and the multilevel theory. Each  state can of course communicate with itself.  To illustrate Fig. 1, suppose S, -R is presented for study for the multilevel theory and the pair is in the performance state  (g, 1). A transition will occur to state (1, 1) if the subject picks up either a unique property or a property in common with  S2 R. The composite probability of this event is (r + p) and is written along the appropriate directed line segment in Fig. 1.  Each graph on the right is the mirror image of the one on the left. This is due to the order of listing items in the  performance state. A presentation of item SIR has the same effect on a performance state as a presentation of S,--R has on the  reverse of that performance state. For purposes of model derivations, it is useful to represent the theories in a slightly  different fashion.  THEORETICAL. AND EMPIRICAL. COMPARISON 89  2. Embedding the Theories into the Multilevel Framework  Both theories postulate that the pair of similar items is tied together during acquisition. Unlike the approach in Fig. 1,  this is reflected in the framework by defining the learning states rather than the performance states as ordered pairs of  states, where the first coordinate is the state of item S1 -R and the second coordinate is the state of S2 R. Transitions  among states of the pair occur when either item is presented. These transitions are reflected in the framework by defining for  each item a Markov transition matrix over the various states of the pair. Thus when S, -R is presented, one transition matrix  governs transitions of the pair, and when S, -R is presented, another matrix is active. Response probability to an item  depends jointly on the current state of the pair and the presented item. This is represented in the framework by a pair of  performance functions, one for each item. A general discussion of this framework for multilevel learning theories is presented  in Batchelder (1966, Chaps. 4 and 5).  The Mixed Model for Two Items  The theory postulates that each item is learned independently by the all-or-none model; consequently the state space, W, for  an individual item is given by  W = { U, Lj,  where U is the unlearned state and L is the learned state. The state space for the pair of items, listing the state of S, -R  first and S, -R second, is given by  Y1,_ - W x W = {( U, U), (U, L), (L, U), (L, L)} (6)  Thus on any trial, N, the state of the pair of items is one of the four states in y6''. The theory postulates that when an  item is presented, transitions among the states in YV are possible. Further the transition probabilities depend only on the  presented item and current state of the pair. The transition probabilities are represented by a  stochastic matrix ' The matrix for item Sl is given by  over for each item.     (L, L) (L, U) (U, L) (U, U)  (L, L) 1 0 0 0  U) 0 1 0 0  Nil 1 c 0 (1 - c) 0  (U, L)      (U, U) 0 c 0 (1 - c)  and the matrix for S2 is      (L, L) (L, U) (U, L) ( U, U)  M2  (L, L) - 0 0 0  1     (L, U) c (1 - c) 0 0  _ 0 0 1 0  (U, L)      (U, U) 0 0 c (1 - c)  90 BATCHELDER  where the jkth entry in Mi is the probability that the state of the pair changes from w; to wk on a trial when item Si is  presented, for w; , wk E 0'.  Let rN be the row vector of probabilities of being in the various states going into the Nth trial on the duo. Then the  assumption that both items start in state U requires that  rl = <0, 0, 0, 1;;.  Further, if Si is presented on trial N,  rN+, = rN ' mi.  (10)  The final aspect of the framework concerns performance. The probability of correct on any trial depends on the presented item  and state of the pair. This is represented by a performance vector, hl and h2 , for each item, where the jth entry in hi is  h(') = Pr(Correct I Si,N and w;,N).  Listing the states in the order (L, L), (L, U), (U, L), and (U, U), the assumptions of the mixed model require that these  vectors be  and  hl = <1, 1, s, g> (11)  h2 = <1, s, 119)1 (12)  where s is the probability of correct to an unlearned item when the other related item is in state L. Equation 5 gives s in  terms of t, the transfer probability.  This completes the embedding of the mixed model into the multilevel framework. The theory can be formally represented by the  four-tuple  'ff = <#, {Mi I Ma11 {hl, hs}, rl>.  (13)  Once a multilevel theory is axiomatized in the framework, many properties and specific models can be deduced from it. Before  deriving the models from /ff relevant to the experiments considered in this paper, the embedding of the all-or-none multilevel  theory is stated. Since these results are already presented in Batchelder (1970), they will be briefly restated here for  completeness.  The Multilevel Theory for Two Items  Let U be the unlearned state, P be the paired-associate state, and R be the rule (common basis)state. Then the item state  space, T, for the multilevel theory is given by  T= {U, P, R}.  THEORETICAL AND EMPIRICAL COMPARISON 91  The state space for the pair, J-, is given by  = {(U, U), (C;, P), (P, (7), (P, P), (R, R),', (14)  where the states  {(U, R), (P, R), (R, U), (R, P)}  have been dropped from T X T since they are excluded by the assumptions. The transition matrices over ,% are given by  (R, R) (P, P) (P, U) (U, P) (U, U)  (R, R) 1 0 0 0 0  (P, P) a (1 - a) 0 0 0  A1 = (P, U) a 0 (1 - a) 0 0  (U, P) r p 0 (1-r-p) 0  (U, U) r 0 p 0 (1 - r -p)  and  (15)  (R, R) (P, P) (P, U) (U, P) (U, U)  (R, R) 1 0 0 0 0  (P, P) a (1 - a) 0 0 0  A2 = (P, U) r p (1 - r - p) 0 0  (U, P) a 0 0 (1 - a) 0  (U, U) r 0 0 p (1 -r-p)  Let pr, be the row vector of probabilities of being in the various states on the Nth trial on the pair. Then the start vector  is given by  pl = <0, 0, 0, 0, 1). (17)  Finally the performance vectors for item Sl and S2 are given by   gi =<],,, l,g,g> (18)  and   92 = <1, 119, 119>1 (19)  respectively. Consequently, the all-or-none multilevel theory can be represented by the four-tuple  = <9-, {Ai , Az}, {91 1 ga}, Pl>'  (20)  92, BATCHELDER  3. Models for the Experiments  In all experiments S, -R is alternated with S, -R using either an anticipation or study-test methodology on the entire list.  In data analysis, the two single item errorsuccess processes, xln and x,n , were selected along with the double-error process,  Z,, (Eqs. 2 and 3). Consequently the two schedules and three levels of data analysis require that six separate models be  derived from each theory. In this section, these models are briefly developed.  Models for the Anticipation Schedule  For this schedule each presentation is an anticipation trial (subject responds followed by immediate feedback), and cycles of  the entire list of items are arranged so that item Sl alternates with item S2 with Sl occurring on trial one. First, models  for the individual item error-success processes will be derived for the mixed model and then the model for the double-error  process will be presented. Finally, the corresponding models for the multilevel theory will be presented.  The mixed model. Consider the error-success process on item Sl . Between any two successive responses on Sl , reinforcements  of Sl and S2 occur in that order. Thus the transition matrix, T, which is active between trials on Sl is given by  T=M1 .M2  (L, L) (L, U) (U, L) (U, U)   (L, L) 1 0 0 0   (L, U) c (1 - c) 0 0 (21)  (U, L) c 0 (1 -c) 0   (U, U) C2 C(I -    - C) C(I - C) (I C)2   A. simplification of Eq. 21 is possible by noting that (L, L) and (L, U) form an absorbing class of perfect performance states  for Sl . Combining these states, changing notation to Ul = {( U, U)}, U2 = {(U, L)}, and L = {(L, U), (L, L)), and obtaining  the probability of correct from Eqs. 11 and 12 yields the following three state Markov model for the xl process:  Ln+1 U2,n+i Ui.n+i Pr(Correct I State)   Ln 1 0 0 I   U2,. [ c (1 - c) 0 I [ s ] , (22)  U1, c c(I - C) (I - C)2 g   and start vector  P, = <0, 0, I>,  where n indexes trials on item Sl (or equivalently cycles on the pair).  THEORETICAL AND EMPIRICAL CORIPARISON 93  The error-success process for S., is similar to that for S, . Between successive responses on S,= , reinforcements of S., and  SI occur in that order. The matrices MI and M2 commute, i.e., 1VI1 - Rah === M2 - M,, therefore the transition matrix in Eq.  21 results. Further, by defining states as (%1 -- ;(L%, U)), U, _ {(L, L')), and L = {(U, L), (L, L)}, the same model is  obtained for the S2 process as that in Eq. 22 except for the start vector. Since the first trial on S2 has been preceded by a  trial on Sl , the start vector for the S2 process is given by  The model for the double error process is obtained by noting that in order to make an error to both Sl and S2 on a cycle, the  pair must start the cycle in state (U, U). If the pair does start the cycle in (U, U), the probability of a double error is  given by  Pr(Z = 1 I ( U, U)) = (1 - g) [C(1 - s) + (1 - C)(1 - g)]  Substituting for s in terms of g and t (Eq. 5) yields  Pr(Z = 1 I (U, U)) - (1 - g)2(l - Ct). (24)  If a pair starts a cycle in (U, U), the probability of starting the next cycle in (U, U) is (1 - C)2. Consequently, the double  error process can be represented by the following two state model  V.+1  Un+i Pr(Z= 0 1 State)  V, 1 0 lI 1  Un [I - (1 - C)2 (1 - C)2J [1 - (1 - g)2 (1 - Ct)]'  (25)  with start vector  Pl = <0, I>, U = {(U, U)} and V = {(U, L), (L, U), (L, L)}.  Unfortunately, performance and transitions are not independent for the model in Eq. 25. For example, if the subject fails to  make a double error over a cycle, it is more likely that he learned Sl and consequently has made a transition to state V. It  is straightforward but cumbersome to expand Eq. 25 into a presolution success (Z = 0) and error (Z = 1) state. The result is  presented in Eq. 26.  Vn+1  Us.n+1 Ue.n+1 Pr(Z,, = 0 1 State)  Vn 1 0 0 1  U,.,~ A g(2 - g)(I - C)2 B 1 , (26)  U,. C D (1 -g)2(l - C)2 0  94 BATCHELDER with start vector  where  pl = <0, 1 - (1 -g)2(1 - ct), (1 -g)2(1 - ct)>,  A = gc(2 - c - t)(2 - g) + ct 1 - (1 - g)2(1 - ct) '  B -_ g(2 - g)(1 - g)2(l - c)2(1 - ct) 1 - (1 - g)2(1 - ct) '  C=c(2-c-t) (1 - ct) '  and  D = (1 - c)2[l - (1 -g)2(1 - ct)] (1 - ct)  The multilevel theory. The derivations for the two single item processes and the double error process were presented in  Batchelder (1970, Eqs. 10 and 11). Their derivations follow the format for those for the mixed model, and they will be stated  here for completeness. By an argument based on the fact that A, and A2 commute, the error-success process on item S, is  governed by the following three state model:   Ln+i U2,-+l Ul.n+i  L 1 0 0  U 1 - - -   - (1 - r - p)(1 - a) (1 r p)(1 a) 0  U.[,,, 1 -(1 -r -p)(1 -r) p(1 -r-p) (1 -r -1 ')2  Pr(Correct I State) 1  g , (27) Ig  with start vector  P, = <0, 0, 1>.  The states L, U2 , and Ul of Eq. 27 are defined as follows:  L = {(P, U), (P, P), (R, R){, U2 = { U, P){, and U1= {(U, U)).  The model for the error-success process on item S2 is also governed by Eq. 27 except for the start vector which is  p, = <r, p, (1 - r - P)>, (28)  and, of course, the obvious changes in the definitions of L and U2 .  The derivation for the double error process follows closely the reasoning of that for the mixed model (Eq. 26). Since double  errors are possibly only in state U = {(U, U)), the following two state model with states U and  V = {(U, P), (P, U), (P, P), (R, R)}  THEORETICAL AND EMPIRICAL COMPARISON 95  is obtained:  1'_h I i t"', i Pr(Z -- 0 I State)  1~'n 1 0 l  Un [(r + p)(2 - r - p) ( ( - r - p)- [ 1  I - (I - g)' (1 ._ r) J >  (29)  with start vector  P, = <0, I /,  Since performance and transitions are not independent for the model in Eq. 29, it is necessary to expand U into presolution  success (Z = 0) and error (Z = 1) states. The result is presented in Eq. 30:  Vn+1. Us,n+1 Ue.n+i Pr(Z,, = 0 I State)  V,t 1 0 0 1  Us,n A (I - r - p)2g(2 -g) B [1], (30) [  U"" C D (I - r - p)2(I - g)2 0  with start vector  where  p, = <0, i - (I -g)2(I (I -g)2(1  and  A -_ r + g(2 - g)[P + (I - r - p)(r + p)] I - (1 - g)2(I - r) ,  B -_ g(2 -g)(I -g)2(I -r -p)2(I -r) 1 - (1 -g)2(1 - r) , C=p+(I -r-p)(r+p)  D r -p)2[I - (I -g)2(I - r)l  - (I - r) .  Models for the Study-Test Schedule  First, it should be made clear that the study-test derivations are contingent on the assumption that test trials have no  effect on the learning states of the pair. Experiments IV and V of Table 1 involve the same materials and list length under  the two schedules. A comparison of parameter values (Table 3) for the multilevel theory (anticipation: r = 0.17, p = 0.05,  study-test: r = 0.30, p = 0.11) suggests that this assumption may be false. Nevertheless, the multilevel theory, and to a  lesser extent, the mixed model give an adequate account of the data in this procedure; so the models will be deduced under the  neutral test trials assumption.  96 BATCHELDER  Second, the derivations of the single item processes are straightforward extensions of their counterparts for the anticipation  schedule. This is true because between successive tests on Si , one study trial on each item intervenes. Since the item  transition matrices commute for both theories, the same model governs both the S1 and S2 processes for the study-test  schedule. These models are presented in Eq. 22 for the mixed model and Eq. 27 for the mutltilevel theory. The only difference  for the studytest procedure is the start vector for these models. Since a study trial precedes the first test trial, the start  vector for both individual item processes for the mixed model is  Pi = <C, c(1 - 0, (1 - C)2>' (31)  and for the multilevel theory  Pi = <1 - (1 - r - p)(1 - r), p(1 - r -p), (1 - r -p)2>_ (32)  All that remains is to give the models for the double error process. For both theories, double errors are possible only in  state U = {(U, U)}. Further, since study and test trials are separated, performance and transitions are independent.  Consequently for the mixed model, the double error process is governed by the following two state model:  Vn+I  U,,+i Pr(Z,, = 0 1 State)  Vnr 1 0 l r 1  Un L c(2 - c) (1 - c)2J Lg(2 - g)]'  (33)  with start vector  Pi = <c(2 - c), (1 - c)2>,  where  V = {(U, L), (L, U), (L, L)).  For the multilevel theory, the model is  Vn+1 Un+1 Pr(Z,, = 0 1 State)  Vnr 1 0 1  Un L(r "f p)(2 - r - p) (1 - r - p)21 Ig(2 - gj' with start vector  (34)  Pi = <(r + p)(2 - r - p), (1 - r - p)2>,  where  V = {(U, P), (P, U), (P, P), (R, R)}.  THEORETICAL AND EMPIRICAL COMPARISON 97  These models conclude the derivations of models from the theories for the experiments reported in this paper. For additional  derivations from the multilevel theory see Batchelder (1970). Additional models for the mixed model would proceed as in that  paper.  4. Additional Theoretical Comparisons  There are several interesting theoretical properties of the two theories which are developed in this subsection.  Relationship of Theories to the All-Or-None Model  Both theories represent natural directions that the all-or-none paired-associate model can be extended to handle facilitative  stimulus similarity. Their tie to the original all-or-none model is that both theories reduce either to the all-or-none  paired-associate model or the all-or-none concept model (with equal likelihood of learning following a presolution error or  success) with appropriate parameter restrictions. The appropriate parameter restrictions for each theory are presented in  Table 2. In cases where the theories do not satisfy the restrictions in Table 2, the relative amounts of pairedassociate and  rule (concept) level learning is reflected in the parameter values.  TABLE 2 Parameter Restrictions Reducing the Theories to the All-Or-None Model  Theories  Multilevel Mixed  All-or-none paired-associate r = a = 0 t = 0  All-or-none concept p = 0 t = 1  The Assumption of a Constant Rule Learning Probability for the Multilevel Theory  In the multilevel theory, the probability of rule learning on any trial (r or a) depends on the state of the presented item.  If r = a is assumed, the single item processes for both schedules are governed by the all-or-none paired-associate model with  learning rate  b = 1 - (1 - r - p)(1 - r). (35)  This result follows directly by inserting the restriction that r = a into Eq. 27 and noting that U2 and UI then lump. Estes  (1961, p. 83) remarked that for the Suppes and Ginsberg (1962) study, which involved children learning a paired-associate list  with triples of related items, a model postulating how generalization occurs among  48o/8/I-7  98 BATCHELDER  related items must reduce to something like the all-or-none model. This result shows how the multilevel theory might meet this  empirical requirement. The mixed model, which also postulates a generalization process, will reduce to the all-or-none theory  only if the restrictions of Table 2 are met. These restrictions also eliminate its generalization process.  Equivalence of the Double Error Models  The two theories generate equivalent double-error models in the sense of Greeno and Steiner (1964) for the schedules used in  this paper. The parameter equations that generate these equivalences are presented in Eqs. 36 and 37. For a fixed triple of  parameter values for the mixed model, (c, t, g), the equivalent multilevel model is given for  r = ct,  (36)  0 < a G 1, and identical guessing rates. For fixed values of the multilevel theory, (r, P, a, g), the parameter equivalences  are  r  t =  (r +P)'  (37)  and identical guessing rates. The proof of these assertions is obtained by inserting the restrictions in Eqs. 36 and 37 into  the appropriate double error models in Eqs. 26, 30, 33, and 34, and then noting that the corresponding mixed and multilevel  models are identical. However, if parameter estimates for the two theories do not proceed with the restrictions in Eqs. 36 and  37, as is the case in this paper, equivalent double error models do not result.  Nonequivalence of the Theories  The two theories are not equivalent, and, in particular, they generate nonequivalent single-item models. There are several  ways to show this, and perhaps the simplest is to note that for the multilevel theory the probability of an error prior to the  last error is constant at (1 - g); whereas, for the mixed model it is a decreasing function of the last error trial for t > 0.  Clearly, if the two theories generate nonequivalent measures on the same events, they generate nonequivalent measures on the  original sample space illustrated in Eq. 1.  Despite the nonequivalence of the individual item models, the parameter equivalences in Eqs. 36 and 37, along with the  restriction that a = 0 (rule learning impossible when the presented item is in state P), generate some close correspondences.  THEORETICAL AND EMPIRICAL. COMPARISON 99  Under these restrictions the theories produce identical single item learning curves, Pr(x;n -= 1). For example, for item Sl  under the anticipation schedule,  Pr(xlg)(l - r - p)"-1 [p(l - a)"-1 + (r - )(I - r (38) (r+p-a)  and for the mixed model,  Pr(xln = 1) = (I - g)(l - c)"-'[(l - C)"-1 + (I - t)(l - (I - C)n-1)]. (39)  Putting the restrictions, r = ct, p = c(I - t), and a = 0 into Eq. 38 yields Eq. 39. Similar results follow for item SZ in the  anticipation schedule and for both items in the study test schedule.  PARAMETER ESTIMATION FOR THEORIES  The general strategy for parameter estimation was to consider the three pools of binary data strings corresponding to the xln  , x?n , and Zn processes separately for each experiment. The guessing parameter, g, was set equal for both theories and  estimated from the initial guessing cycle for the four anticipation experiments and set equal to 1/4 for the fifth study-test  experiment (see Table 1). This leaves the parameters c and t for the mixed model and r, p, a for the multilevel theory. Once  estimates of these parameters are obtained, prediction and goodness of fit statistics are obtainable from all three pools of  protocols simultaneously.  To obtain maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters, if possible, would seem to require going back to the original data  space (see Eq. 1). Although it would be possible to select one of the three protocol pools and obtain maximum likelihood  estimates from it, it was decided to use information from more of the data in obtaining the estimates. First, theoretical  derivations of conventional summary statistics such as the learning curve, total error distribution, trial number of last  error distribution, probability of an error on trial n + 1 given error on trial n, etc., were developed from both theories for  the xi, , x, , and Z,, processes. Then a computer search of the parameter space (nonexhaustive) for each theory was  undertaken. The results of the search revealed: (1) both theories could fit the data from all three pools pretty well, and (2)  the fit of the multilevel theory with r = a could not be substantially improved upon by letting a vary. For this reason, the  restriction that rule learning is equally likely if the presented item is in state U or P was made.  Relevant to the r = a restriction is the fact that several theorists have assumed that if a subject has a basis, strategy,  discrimination net, etc., capable of producing the correct response on a trial, no further learning takes place on that trial  (e.g.,  100  BATCHELDER  Feigenbaum, 1963; Greeno and Scandura, 1966; Hintzman, 1968; Restle, 1964). This assumption would correspond to a = 0, rather  than a = r, for the multilevel theory, i.e., if the presented item is in state P, the subject is correct to that item and  therefore would learn nothing further on that trial. The restriction that a = 0 definitely produced poorer fits to the data  than the restriction a = r. Assuming the validity of the multilevel theory, the apparent result that a = 0 yields relatively  poor fits could be due to the nature of the lists. Since there was a lot of facilitative transfer possible, subjects may have  used each study trial as an occasion to search for common features (cf., Polson, 1967).  With the restriction that r = a, the multilevel theory has the pleasant property of predicting that the individual item  processes are governed by an all-or-none model with start vector predicted by the theory. In addition, this restriction  implies that both theories have two free parameters, r and p, for the multilevel theory and c and t for the mixed model, each  to account for the three separate protocol pools from a given experiment.  Rather than arbitrarily select one of the computer choices, it was decided to use a method of moments procedure utilizing the  mean total errors from each of the single item processes. Consequently, the equations for the two theories for the mean total  errors, Tl and T,, on each item were obtained. For the mixed model the equations are  TI = (1 -g)[1 + (1 - c)(1 - t)1 c(2 - c)  (40)  and  T2 = 0 -g)(1 - 011 + 0 - 00 - t)]+ 0 -g)(1 - 0c(2 - e)  (41)  Equations 40 and 41 yield the estimation equations  (1 -g) + (T2 - TI)  T2  (42)  and  IT2 - (1 - e) T11. (43) (1 - g)  For the multilevel theory, the equations are  T - g) (44)  l - (1 1-(1-r-p)(1-r)  THEORETICAL AND EMPIRICAL COMPARISON 101  and  (45)  Equations 44 and 45 yield the estimation equations Tl - T2  r =  T1  (46)  and  T2 - [TI + g - 1 ] (47) 7,1 T2  The estimates from each of the five experiments for both theories are presented in Table 3.  TABLE 3 Moments Estimates of Parameters  Experiment Mixed K f(=d) Multilevel  e    p  I 0.46 0.66 0.42 0.25 0.22  II 0.35 0.63 0.30 0.18 0.16  III 0.40 0.81 0.30 0.30 0.10  IV, 0.22 0.78 0.28 0.17 0.05  Vb 0.41 0.77 0.25 0.30 0.11  The moments method yielded an impossible p estimate for Experiment IV so a computer search fitting Tl and T2 was substituted.  b Since theoretically Tl = T2 for the study-test procedure, the total number of double errors was used for the other parameter  estimation equation.  Before discussing the fit of the theories to the data, a few comments on the parameter estimates are in order. The empirical  estimates of g tended to run higher than the reciprocal of the number of response alternatives in experiments I to 4, which  are 0.33, 0.17, 0.17, 0.25, respectively. It seems that subjects employ a strategy of avoiding as guesses recently reinforced  responses (cf. Peterson, Brewer, and Bertucco, 1963) which results in a slight improvement on "chance." In the fifth  experiment, the studytest procedure does not permit such an enlightened guessing strategy so g was set equal to 1/4, the  reciprocal of the number of response alternatives.  Since all experiments involved identical stimulus material, it might be expected that parameter estimates would be more nearly  the same over the various experiments.  102  BATCHELDER  There were, however, important differences in the experiments (see Table 1). Experiment III involved a different subject pool  than the other four experiments. Experiment 11 involved a list where, in addition to the pairs of items considered here, there  were several pairs of similar stimuli with different responses. It was encouraging to note that the paired-associate  parameter, p, was relatively larger for this experiment since the existence of discrimination pairs may have tended to  motivate the subject to search for unique bases for coding an item. Experiment IV involved a 24 item list rather than the 18  item lists of the first three experiments; consequently smaller values of the parameters were expected. What was surprising to  the writer was the failure of Experiments IV and V to turn up identical parameter estimates. Both experiments involved the  same list and subject pool and differed only in the presentation schedule. Actually the learning rates for the study-test  experiment were about twice as great as for the anticipation, which is much more than the usually found slight benefit to a  study-test schedule (e.g., Battig and Brackett, 1961). It is encouraging, however, to note that the relative sizes of r and p  are compatible for both schedules. Perhaps some sort of learning on test trials due to item similarity produced the different  learning rates.  DATA FIT  Considering both theories for all combinations of the five experiments and three processes, there were 30 separate  error-success analyses of the standard type (see Atkinson, Bower, and Crothers, 1965, Chap. 3). The relatively low error rate  in the experiments (see Table 4) does not warrant a detailed presentation of statistics from all thirty analyses. However, a  comparison of theory and data on the learning curve, total error (T) distribution, trial of the last error (L) distribution,  and probability of an error following an error on successive trials were considered.  The pattern that emerged from these analyses was quite clear. Both theories gave fairly accurate accounts of the first three  statistics. They each predict that the total error distribution and the last error trial distribution should be unimodal at  either 0 or 1. Such results were obtained in 28 of the 30 distributions with the only exceptions being the xl process in  Experiment IV. In addition, the fits to individual probabilities were quite close with the maximum departure of predicted and  observed overall points in the first three statistics between 0.04 and 0.10 from distribution to distribution. To convey some  of these results, the means and variances of the total error and last error trial distributions are presented in Tables 4 and  5.  Table 4 presents the mean and variance of the total error distributions for all protocol pools. A glance at the data values  shows that E(T) is consistently less for x2 than for xl . This decrease is consistent with the positive transfer between  similar items predicted by both theories since each x2 item benefits from a prior presentation  THEORETICAL AND EMPIRICAL COMPARISON  103  TABLE 4 Predicted and Observed Values of the Mean and Variance of the Total Error Distributions  Experiment E(T) V(T) E(T) V(T) E(T) F(T)  I Mixed - 0.74 - 0.79 0.33 0.31  Multi - 0.77 - 0.75 0.35 0.32  Data 0.97 0.77 0.72 0.75 0.38 0.33  II Mixed - 1.47 - 1.66 0.66 0.70  Multi - 1.72 - 1.75 0.71 0.74  Data 1.51 1.79 1.24 1.96 0.73 0.90  III Mixed - 0.91 - 0.98 0.53 0.54  Multi - 0.97 - 1.09 0.54 0.54  Data 1.22 1.09 0.86 0.98 0.58 0.70  IV Mixed - 3.41 - 3.26 1.08 1.65  Multi - 2.27 - 3.30 1.08 1.65  Data 2.09 2.34 1.63 1.96 1.05 1.17  V Mixed - 0.77 0.52 0.77 - 0.40  Multi - 0.81 0.52 0.81 - 0.40  Data 0.52 0.66 0.52 0.70 0.30 0.38  TABLE 5  Predicted and Observed Values of the Mean and Variance of the Last Error Trial Distribution  Experiment E(L) V(L) E(L) V(L) E(L) V(L)  I Mixed 1.26 1.88 1.03 1.98 0.41 0.58  Multi 1.16 1.34 0.87 1.26 0.43 0.58  Data 1.15 1.29 0.87 1.25 0.44 0.53  II Mixed 2.02 4.12 1.81 4.40 0.84 1.37  Multi 1.82 2.80 1.49 2.79 0.92 1.49  Data 1.80 3.16 1.56 3.59 0.85 1.30  III Mixed 1.52 2.20 1.18 2.39 0.63 0.94  Multi 1.41 1.47 0.97 1.43 0.66 0.96  Data 1.41 1.79 1.00 1.55 0.67 1.05  IV Mixed 3.35 5.68 3.08 7.52 1.55 3.97  Multi 2.51 5.43 2.08 5.39 1.55 3.97  Data 2.57 5.80 2.04 3.11 1.50 1.86  V Mixed 0.75 1.86 0.75 1.86 0.35 0.61  Multi 0.58 1.07 0.58 1.07 0.35 0.61  Data 0.63 1.20 0.63 1.04 0.35 0.44  104 BATCHELDER  of a similar xl item. This decrease in error rate to the second presented items represents real positive transfer, as  unrelated control items in both sublists did not differ significantly in their total errors, and in fact, the unrelated items  in the second sublist had a slightly higher error rate than those in the first sublist on the first few cycles of the  experiment. Additional evidence for positive transfer comes from the fact that the E(T) values for the unrelated items-1.60,  2.96, 2.00, 2.25, .82, respectively, for Experiments I to V-are substantially above those for the corresponding similar items  in Table 4.  The predicted E(T) values for the single-item processes are not presented for either theory since their data counterparts were  used in parameter estimation. Both theories give adequate fits of Var(T) except perhaps in Experiment IV, which was the single  case where the total error distribution failed to have a mode at 0 or 1. Both theories predict that E(T) is identical for xl  and x2 in the study-test procedure (Experiment V). Despite the small number of errors, this prediction was supported. Finally  it is encouraging that both theories accounted for the double error process accurately. Since the parameter values for the  first four experiments were obtained from the single item data alone, the close fit to the Z-process indicates that the  theories can account for item interactions as well as the marginal process on individual items.  A sharper differentiation between the theories is possible by considering the last error trial distribution presented in Table  5. In all ten individual item cases, the mixed model overpredicted the E(L) statistic, whereas the multilevel theory generated  very close fits. In other words, if both theories are constrained to fit the E(T) statistic for individual items, the mixed  model overpredicts E(L). Assuming that the mixed model is not correct for these experiments, it is possible to indicate why  E(L) is a diagnostic statistic. An all-or-none model (with learning rate c and guessing probability g) predicts that E(L) is  given by the equation  and E(T) by  E(L) 1 (48)  (1 g + gc)c   E(T) (I g)   = (49)  c ,   Equation 48, unlike Eq. 49, is fairly insensitive to changes in the guessing value, g. The mixed model is similar to the  all-or-none model for individual items except that midway in learning, the guessing parameter may shift from g to s (see Eq.  23). Therefore, if the data are really consistent with the all-or-none model with a larger learning rate, as predicted by the  multilevel theory, the mixed model, with its smaller learning rate but intermediate higher guessing probability, will over  predict E(L) if its parameters are chosen to fit E(T). In addition, the mixed model seems to overpredict  THEORETICAL AND EMPIRICAL COMPARISON 105  Var(L) for the individual item processes. Such a result is consistent with the preceding argument.  Both theories seem to give adequate and similar fits to the 7.-processes in Tables 4 and 5. The fact that these fits are good  is encouraging for theories that postulate and test item interactions. The near identity of the predictions of both theories  is consistent with the fact that they generate equivalent Z models (see Eqs. 36 and 37). Since parameter estimates were  obtained from the single item processes rather than from the equivalence restrictions, slight differences in predictions occur.  With the assumption that r = a, the multilevel theory predicts a constant error given error probability, whereas the mixed  model predicts a decreasing function. To get a stable estimate of this quantity, the Pr(x;,+I = 1 ~ x;= 1) statistic from  all individual item processes was combined into one curve. The first four points on this error given error combined curve were  0.38, 0.36, 0.31, and 0.34. Thus the error given error statistic seems pretty constant and close to its theoretical value of  0.33 for the multilevel theory.  In conclusion, both theories account pretty well for the data obtained. Particularly impressive are the close fits to the  Z-process since parameters for the theories were estimated from the individual item processes. Although the mixed model shows  a a consistent failure on the E(L) statistic, the low error rate in these experiments suggests that more data involving  stimulus similarity is needed to decide between these two generalization theories. In any event, this discussion should  suggest the feasibility as well as the value of posing and testing learning models for item interactions on multiple levels.  APPENDIX  METHOD SECTION  Data from five experiments are reported. The method section is facilitated by first describing the common properties of all  five experiments and then indicating the differences (see Table 1 for a summary of these differences).  Subjects  The subjects for all experiments except Experiment III were 129 undergraduates from the University of Illinois whose service  in the experiment met a course requirement in introductory psychology. The subjects in Experiment III were 25 undergraduate  volunteers who were paid $1.50 for their services. Each experiment involved roughly an equal number of males and females.  Stimuli  The stimuli were Gibson forms (Gibson, 1941). Six forms were drawn from her Category IV and served as stimuli for a warm-up  task. Six pairs of similar forms were drawn from her  106  BATCHELDER  Categories 1, 11, III. Pairs were equated for similarity by jointly considering Gibson's scale values and the results of a  pilot study patterned after her scaling procedures. An additional six forms were selected as stimuli for control items. To  complete the design an additional two pairs of forms and two control forms were constructed and scaled to equate intrapair  similarity.  Responses  The responses were the common four letter English words used by Polson, Restle, and Polson (1965). In all experiments subjects  were told the available responses and also given a card with the responses on it in case they forgot.  Lists  'The warm-up list consisted of six geometric forms and two response alternatives. The forms in this list were unrelated to  each other as well as the forms in the main list. The main list was constructed by taking x pairs of similar forms and y  unique control forms and assigning responses to forms in such a way that similar forms went with the same response. An  exception to this last rule was Experiment III where three pairs were assigned the same response and three pairs to different  responses. In the analysis of Experiment III only data from the three pairs with the same response were considered.  Apparatus  'The stimuli were drawn on 3 x 5 cards using India Ink. The subject sat facing the experimenter behind a black shield. Cards  were placed on a small black card rack situated to the right of the shield. Responses and outcomes were given verbally. The  pacing of trials was accomplished by a set routine that the experimenter would go through in randomizing items, presenting  items, giving outcomes, and recording responses.  Procedure  For purposes of presentation, the main list was divided into two sublists. The first sublist consisted of one member of each  pair of similar forms and half the unique control forms and the other sublist comprised the rest of the forms. The subject was  not instructed about the sublist structure or the number of items.  'The first four experiments employed an anticipation methodology which will now be described. The subjects learned the list to  a criterion of two perfect cycles by a restricted anticipation procedure. The restriction consisted of alternating the two  sublists back and forth in randomized anticipation cycles. Thus in Experiment I, the first nine trials consisted of a  randomized anticipation cycle on the first sublist, the next nine trials the second sublist, the next nine the first sublist,  etc., until the subject correctly anticipated the entire list twice in a row. The interitem interval was approximately one  second and the response interval was subject-paced. There was no additional time between sublists; thus, from the subject's  viewpoint, the experiment consisted of an uninterrupted progression of anticipation trials. No subject indicated his awareness  of the sublist structure in a postexperimental question session.  'The fifth experiment employed a study-test methodology with the same sublist division rule. The subject would first study  sublist 1, then study sublist 2, then be tested on sublist 1, and then tested on sublist 2. Thus the fifth experiment employed  a study test methodology with a randomization restriction analogous to that used in the first four experiments. The interitem  interval was again approximately one second, responding was subject paced, and there was no additional time between study and  test cycles or between sublists.  In all experiments assignments of forms to responses and items to sublists was randomized every five subjects with the  restrictions on sublist composition mentioned earlier.  THEORETICAL AND EMPIRICAL COMPARISON 107  Prior to learning the main list, subjects were read brief paired-associate instructions (with no mention of stimulus  similarity) appropriate to their procedure and then run in the six form, two response warm-up list. Following the warm-up  list, the subject was asked if he had any questions and then run in the main task.  REFERENCES  ATKINSON, R. C., BOWER, G. H., AND CROTHERS, L. J. Introduction to mathematical learning theory. New York: Wiley, 1965.  ATKINSON, R. C., AND ESTES, W. K. Stimulus sampling theory. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of  mathematical psychology. Vol. II. New York: Whey, 1963. BATCHELDER, W. H. A mathematical analysis of multi-level verbal  learning. Technical Report No. 104, 1966, Institute for Mathematical Studies in the Social Sciences, Stanford University  (unpublished Ph.D. dissertation).  BATCHELDER, W. H. An all-or-none theory for learning on both the paired-associate and concept levels. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 1970, 7, 97-117.  BATTIG, W. F., AND BRACKETT, H. R. Comparison of anticipation and recall methods in pairedassociate learning. Psychology  Reports, 1961, 9, 59-65.  ESTES, W. K. New developments in statistical behavior theory: Differential tests of axioms for associative learning.  Psychometrika, 1961, 26, 73-84.  FEIGENBAUM, E. A. The simulation of verbal learning behavior. In E. A. Feigenbaum, and J. Feldman (Eds.), Computers and  thought. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1963. Pp. 297-309. FRIEDMAN, M. P. Transfer effects and response strategies in  pattern-versus-component discrimination learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1966, 71, 420-428.  FRIEDMAN, M. P., AND GELFAND, H. Transfer effects in discrimination learning. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1964, 1,  204-214.  FRIEDMAN, M. P., TRABAsso, T., AND MOSBERG, L. Tests of a mixed model for paired-associates learning with overlapping stimuli.  Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1967, 4, 316-334. GIBSON, E. J. A systematic application of the concepts of generalization  and differentiation to verbal learning. Psychological Review, 1940, 47, 196-229.  GIBSON, E. J. Retroactive inhibition as a function of degree of generalization between tasks. Journal of Experimental  Psychology, 1941, 82, 93-115.  GREENO, J. G., AND SCANDURA, J. M. All-or-none transfer based on verbally mediated concepts. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 1966, 3, 388-411.  GREENO, J. G., AND STEINER, T. E. Markovian processes with identifiable states: General considerations and application to  all-or-none learning. Psychometrika, 1964, 29, 309-333. HINTZMAN, D. L. Explorations with a discrimination net model for  paired associate learning. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1968, 5, 123-162.  PETERSON, L. R., BREWER, C. L., AND BERTUCCO, R. A guessing strategy with the anticipation technique. Journal of Experimental  Psychology, 1963, 65, 258-264.  POLSON, P. G. A quantitative study of the concept identification process in the Hull paradigm. Unpublished doctoral  dissertation, Indiana University, 1967.  POLSON, M. C., RESTLE, F., AND POLSON, P. G. Association and discrimination in paired-associate learning. Journal of  Experimental Psychology, 1965, 69, 47-55.  RESTLE, F. The selection of strategies in cue learning. Psychological Review, 1962, 69, 329-343. RESTLE, F. Sources of  difficulty in learning paired associates. In R. C. Atkinson (Ed.), Studies in mathematical psychology. Stanford: Stanford  University Press, 1964. Pp. 116-172.  108 BATCHELDER  SUPPES, P., AND GINSBERG, R. Application of a stimulus sampling model to children's concept formation with and without an  overt correction response. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1962, 63, 330-336.  UNDERWOOD, B. J., AND RICHARDSON, J. Some verbal materials for the study of concept forma  tion. Psychological Bulletin, 1956, 53, 84-95.  RECEIVED: August 1, 1969