10.1016/0022-2496(72)90021-1
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 9, 306-319 (1972)  Internal State Models for Magnitude Estimation and Related Experiments,  A. A. J. MARLEY  Department of Psychology, McGill University, Montreal 101, Canada  Most theory and experiment in magnitude estimation, cross-modality matching, and related areas, has concerned the relation  between average responses to various stimuli and the physical measures of these stimuli. In this paper, a class of internal  state models is presented that predicts the detailed form of the response distribution to individual stimuli. These models  generalize an earlier model that dealt with response distributions in magnitude estimation experiments, and they are also  compatible with most of the results that are usually stated as being correct for the various relations between average  responses and the relevant physical measures of the stimuli.  INTRODUCTION  Most research on magnitude estimation, cross-modality matching, and related paradigms, has focused attention on the average  response to various stimuli, and the relation of the average response to some physical measure of these stimuli. Krantz (1972)  states five generalizations regarding such average responses that he feels are approximately correct, and that therefore must  be predicted by any satisfactory theory; he also presents two theories, mapping theory and relation theory, that can handle  such generalizations. A major exception to this concern with average responses is a model of Luce and Galanter (1963b) that  was tested by Luce and Mo (1965); this model was motivated by the choice model (Luce and Galanter, 1963a). It predicts the  form of the response distribution to individual stimuli in a magnitude estimation experiment. However, by default, it is not  compatible with Krantz's (1972) five generalizations, for it is not immediately applicable to pair estimation (Krantz, 1972).  Not enough data has yet been collected to test the model's predictions for the response distributions to individual stimuli,  but certain average distributions are fit quite well by the model (Luce and Mo, 1965). Now, as indicated above, this  1 This work was supported in part by National Research Council of Canada Grant A-8124. I would like to thank David H. Krantz,  Eric W. Holman and R. Lambert for their comments on an earlier draft of this paper. Requests for reprints should be sent to A.  A. J. Marley, Department of Psychology, McGill University, P.O. Box 6070, Montreal 101, Quebec, Canada.  Copyright Q 1972 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  306  INTERNAL STATE MODELS FOR MAGNITUDE ESTIMATION 307  model was motivated by the choice model. The other major class of models that has been studied in psychophysics is the interal  state model (Luce, 1964). So we are led rather naturally to ask whether there is a class of internal state models that can  deal effectively with Luce and Mo's (1965) magnitude estimation data. We answer this question affirmatively by constructing a  class of internal state models that includes, as a special case, the model considered by Luce and Mo (1965). We also apply  these models to other situations, such as cross-modality matching, and show that they are compatible with the (five)  generalizations that Krantz (1972) requires any satisfactory model to handle. Each model is motivated by mapping theory as  opposed to relation theory and in the discussion we consider the reasons for this approach.  THE INTERNAL STATE MODEL  The available internal state models, as applied to psychophysical data, suppose that each possible stimulus presentation  activates, in a probabilistic fashion, an internal state, which in turn leads via some decision mechanism to a response. Many  such models for detection, paired comparison, similarity, etc. (summarized in Holman and Marley, 1972; Luce and Green, 1972b;  Zinnes, 1969) assume that the distributions of internal states for the various stimuli all belong to the same scale family;  i.e., the set of possible internal states is (isomorphic to) a real interval, and if, for each element x of the set of  available stimuli X, we let u(x) denote the random variable associated with the corresponding distribution of internal states,  then there exists a cumulative distribution function G, and a function q on X, such that for real t, and x E X,  Pr(u(x) <_ t) = G(tlr7(x)).  However, such internal state models have not been applied to magnitude estimation experiments. We now suggest certain  "obvious," and hopefully intuitively reasonable, models for such experiments, leaving detailed discussion of their motivations  until later.  Consider a magnitude estimation experiment, in which a series of stimuli from some set X is presented one at a time, and the  subject has to report a (nonnegative) real number that represents the magnitude of the presented stimulus, relative to the  magnitude of a standard stimulus xo that is assigned the finite (response) value ro > 0 by the experimenter. We first consider  a class of models that assumes that the subject refers his judgments to the memory of the previous stimulus and response, and  then indicate a natural change in the interpretation that gives a model in which he always refers his judgments to the memory  of the standard stimulus-response pair. Let P(r I xsy) denote the probability that the subject responds with a number  308 MARLEY  less than or equal to r when x is presented on the present trial, and y was presented on the previous trial and responded to  with s. We suppose that there is a positive valued random variable u(x) which represents the effect of a presentation of x,  and a positive valued random variable v(y) which represents the memory for the previous stimulus y. When x is presented, the  subject evaluates the ratio u(x)/v(y), and emits a response based on this ratio. In fact, if dP(u(a)lv(y) < u) denotes the  probability density of the ratio u(x)/v(y), and if P3(r I u) denotes the probability that the subject responds with a number  less than or equal to r when the ratio equals u and the response on the previous trial was s, then we suppose that  P(r I xsy) = J ~- P3(r I u) dP ( (y) < u).  u-0 V  In particular, if there exist functions 77, G, H, and K, and a constant y > 0, such that  Pr(u(x) < t) = G(tl-q(x)),   Pr(v(y) < t) = H(tl,1(y)), (2)  and    P# I u) = K (w),   then    P(r I xsy) r/s (3)  = 0 ( x [,()Ry)lV )'   where    ~(w) = J K (w) 8 (f .=O  G(av) dH(a)) dv.  v_0 vv Sv a=o  The properties that we now discuss only depend on the fact that functions 77 and 0, and constant y, exist satisfying Eq. 3.  The reader might therefore suggest that the derivation in terms of the distributions of Eqs. 1, 2 is unwarranted. However,  remember that we assume that the distributions of Eq. 2 also apply in other psychophysical experiments.  If r(x/y) denotes the response random variable associated with the ratio rls in the quantity P(r I xsy), and if M is a  real-valued function such that for each x, y E X, and real constant c,  M(cr(xly)) = cM(r(xly)),  then for each x, y, z E X,  M(r(xly)) M(r(ylz)) = M(r(yolyo)) M(r(xlz))  INTERNAL STATE MODELS FOR MAGNITUDE ESTIMATION 309  for arbitrary yo E X. Examples of suitable M are the n-th root of the n-th raw or central moment (including the arithmetic  mean and the standard deviation), the geometric mean, and the percentiles (including the median)2; in the remainder of the  paper, we loosely refer to such functions 111 as a measure of the average response. Also  Pr r(xly) - < t = 0(ht) (5) I m(r(xly))  for suitable constant k (in fact, k = f w=o w dP(w)). In words, for each stimulus pair (x, y), the distribution of the  response r(xly), normalized by the average response M(r(xly)), is independent of the stimulus. Observe that if the (directly  observable) properties oEqs. 4, 5 are valid, then r(xly) is distributed in the way given by Eq. 3 for an appropriate  function _ 7)Y. To the author's knowledge, neither Eq. 4 nor 5 has been tested.  In constructing the model of Eq. 1, we assumed that on each trial the subject refers his judgments back to the stimulus and  response on the previous trial. A more traditional assumption is that the subject refers his judgments back to the standard  stimulus-response pair xo - ro . If we let P(r I x) indicate the probability that the subject responds with a number less than  or equal to r when x is presented, then following through the arguments leading to Eq. 1, but using the present memory  assumptions, we obtain that P(r I x) has the forma given for P(r I xroxo) in the previous model, i.e.,  P(r x) _ (-0(X)/0(X0) ~ >  where 0 = qy.  If we now let r(x) denote the response random variable4 associated with x E _Y, then it follows from Eq. 6 that for each x, y  E X, r(x) and [0(x)h0(y)] r(y) have the same distribution, and if 167 is a measure of average response, then for each x E X,  M(r(x)) = [M(r(xo))l0(xo)] - O(x).  Thus, if we call 0 the psychophysical function, then M(r(x)) is proportional to the psychophysical function. In particular,  when 0 is a power function, the average  The author originally stated the result only for the raw moments and the geometric mean; Eric Holman suggested the more  general result.  a We refer several times to distributions being of the same form in different experiments. In most such cases, this can be  interpreted as meaning that Eqs. 2 hold, with the functions G, H, K possibly different, but with the function 77 and the  constant y the same, in the different experiments.  4 We should include reference to the standard stimulus-response pair x,, - ro in the notation, but no confusion should arise  from our incompleteness.  310 MARLEY  response is also a power function; this result is frequently said to be approximately true in magnitude estimation (Krantz,  1972; Stevens, Mack, and Stevens, 1960). Secondly, the mean response to a particular stimulus x must be linearly related to  the standard deviation of the responses to that stimulus, since both are linearly related to O(x); Luce and Mo (1965) give  evidence, both favourable and unfavourable, on this point. Also, if M(r(x)) (respectively, M(r'(x))) denotes the average  response to x when a standard stimulus xo (respectively, xo') is assigned the response value ro (respectively, ro'), then  M(r(x)) is proportional to M(r'(x)), the constant of proportionality being [M(r(xo))1M(r'(xo'))] - [O(xu')1O(xu)]; Krantz  (1972) calls this magnitude consistency. Finally,  r(x)lro l _  Pr [ M(r(x))IM(r(xo)) < tJ ~(t),  i.e., for each stimulus x, the distribution of the response r(x), normalized by the average response M(r(x)), is independent  of the stimulus. This property is not commonly tested on magnitude estimation data, although Luce and Mo (1965) give some  evidence in its favor.  Luce and Galanter's (1963b) model' is of the above form with  and  0  a+b  b  to  t<0  if 0<t<1 ,  where a, b, a, fl > 0. Luce and Mo's (1965) test is of the above predictions regarding the average response (with the  exception of magnitude consistency) using the arithmetic and geometric means as their measure. We later demonstrate that this  model can be generated by the distributional assumptions behind Eq. 1.  Luce and Green (1972a) present a general "neural" pulse modulation model that when specialized to magnitude estimation is of  the form' given in Eq. 6 with  y x_ -lev 0(t) - ~Y=kit (k - 1)! dy,  for t > 0, and k, c constant.  s This statement is strictly true only if ro = O(xu). This is because the model does not explicitly mention the value of the  standard stimulus-response pair x,, - ro.  INTERNAL STATE MODELS FOR MAGNITUDE ESTIMATION 311  Sometimes magnitude estimation experiments are carried out by presenting a standard y c X on every trial, followed by another  stimulus x E X, and the subject has to judge x as a proportion of y; the value of y changes over trials; Krantz (1972) calls  this pair estimation. If we let P(r ; x, y) denote the probability that the subject emits a number less than or equal to r  when y occurs as a standard, followed by x as a comparison stimulus, then it is reasonable to assume that this probability is  of the form given above for P(r I xsy), with the constraint that s = 1. If we let r(x, y) denote the response random variable  associated with the quantity r in P(r I x, _v), and if M is again a measure of average response, then for each x, y, z c- X,  M(r(x, y)) M(r(y, z)) = M(r(yo, yo)) M(r(x, z))  for arbitrary yo E X. Krantz (1972) calls this pair consistency, and cites Fagot and Stewart (1969) and Hanes (1949) as  validation studies. As in the previous two applications,  pr [ (((' y) )) <_ t] 0(kt) M r x,  for suitable constant k; the interpretation and use of this pair consistency, parallels that given for Eqs. 4, 5.  If we now suppose that in magnitude estimation, the subject refers his judgments back to the standard stimulus-response pair,  and that stimulus and response distributions of the same form' are involved in magnitude estimation  then for each x, y E X,  result, in conjunction with  and pair estimation,  M(r(x, .y)) = M(r(yo , .yo)) M~ (.1'))  for arbitrary yo E X, i.e., the average pair estimation response is proportional to the ratio of the corresponding average  magnitude estimation responses. Krantz (1972) calls this result magnitude-pair consistency; the main evidence for this, as  cited by Krantz (1972), is that magnitude and pair estimation lead to about the same exponents for the power functions  corresponding to the function q''.  In one form of cross modality matching, we have available two sets of elements X, and Q, and on any given trial an element x E  X is presented, followed with probability 'T,(q) by the element q E Q, and the subject has to say whether or not q "matches"  x.''  In a more common form of cross modality matching, the subject is presented with x E X, and is allowed to "search" along the  dimension Q for a matching element. Thus, for each x E X, there will be a distribution of matching values obtained on  different trials, and it is the random walk component of this experiment that we are avoiding by looking at the form described  312 MARLEY  (The development below is easily generalized to the case where a standard "matching" pair xo E X, qo E Q is available.) For  each x E X, q e Q, let P(gMx) denote the probability that the subject agrees that q matches x. In line with the earlier  models, we suppose that associated with each x E X (respectively, q e Q) is a nonnegative random variable u(x) (respectively,  w(q)) and constants cl <_ 1 <- c2 such that  P(gMx) = Pr (cl < u(x) <C2 ).  Now suppose that there exist functions F, G, q, and B, such that Pr(u(x) <- t) = G(t1,7(x)),  and  Pr(w(g) <- t) = F(tlB(g))  Then  P(gMx) = dG(a) F ace --q(x) F (ac, - "1(x)  a-o B(g) B(g) ~~  Let  T(cl , c2 , u) = f dG(a)[F(ac,u) -F(aclu)]. a-0  If T is unimodal in u, then for fixed x E X, P(gMx) considered as a function of q is unimodal. If we now let t(cl , cs) be  such that T(cl , c2 , t(cl , c2)) >- 7'(cl , c2 , u) for all u, and E,(x) be such that P(E,(x) Mx) ->- P(sMx) for all s E Q,  then  r!(x) = t(el , c2). (g) B(EQ(x))  If there exist constants a, g such that for each x E X, q E Q, ,0) = xa,  and  B(g) = gs,  (where we are implicitly assuming that x E X, q E Q are identified by their measure on some standard ratio scale), then we  obtain  E1.1(x) = t(ci 1 c2)-'IP x 10.  INTERNAL STATE MODELS FOR MAGNITUDE ESTIMATION 313  Although the precise experimental design given above is not the usual one in cross modality matching,s the final result given  above is of the kind found in such experiments (Luce and Galanter, 1963b).  Returning to the derivation of Eq. 8, it is clear that if we include the natural reference to a standard "matching" pair xo E  X, qo E Q, then  ,7(x)/,7(xo) = t(cl , ca). B(EJx))1 e(qo)  Now consider a magnitude estimation experiment using elements of X (respectively, of Q) with standard stimulus xo  (respectively, qo). Assuming that distributions of the same form as those introduced above are operative in the magnitude  estimation experiments, and that the subject refers his judgments back to the standard stimulusresponse pair, then the above  results, plus those obtained earlier, imply the following: The ratio of the average magnitude estimate of x to the average  magnitude estimate of xo is proportional to the ratio of the average magnitude estimate of E,(x) to the average magnitude  estimate of qo . This is essentially what Krantz (1972) calls consistency of magnitude estimation with cross-modality  matching; he cites Stevens, Mack, and Stevens (1960), and Stevens (1966) for supporting evidence.  SPECIFIC EXAMPLES  We now consider a couple of specific examples for the distributions of the model of Eq. 1; we assume that decisions are  referred back to the standard stimulus-response pair xo - ro, so we write P(r I x) = P(r I xroxo). Suppose that  and  P.,o(r I u) = 1 if and only if r1ro = u,  0  t<0  Pr(u(x) < t) = t a(x) if ( 0 < t < O(x)  O(x) )    l  O(x) < t  0  t<0  Pr(v(xo) < t) = t o (a0) if 0 < t < O(xo)  O(xo)    O(xo) < t  314 MARLEY Then it is easily demonstrated that  P(r ~ x) =  ' ) r/ro p(x)  a(xo) + P(x) O(x)/O(xo)  _ P(x) r1ro -o(xo) 1 a(xo) + P(x) O(x)/O(xo) I  if  ro O(xo) tb(x) r O(xo) ro  which reduces to Luce and Galanter's (1963b) models when for all x E X, p(x) = a, o(xo) = b. Luce and Mo's (1965) data give b  > a, which in the present context suggests that the "memory" random variable v is more peaked than the input random variable  u. Since Luce and Galanter's model satisfies Eq. 7, the distribution of r(x)IM(r(x)) is independent of x, and in particular  its variance does not depend on x. With M the arithmetic mean, the authors found that in some cases the variance decreased  with increasing x, a result that is compatible with the above more general model provided that p is an increasing function of  x. Although the above model does reduce to Luce and Mo's (1965) in a special case, the assumed form for the random variables  u, v seems implausible.  A second interesting example arises if we consider Eq. 1, and the additional constraints given by assuming that G, H, and K of  Eq. 2 are of the form  G(a) = H(a) = 1 - exp (- ah) for 0 < a G oo, h a positive constant,  and  0 a<_0  K(a) = 8 + E as for 0 a < 1  1- 8+E a-E 1 <a  Substituting these values in Eqs. 1, 2, then 0 as defined in Eqs. 3, 6 becomes, for w > 0,  O(w) = 1 - cx(w) + E WVa(w) 1 + Y8 , 1 - YSl E+S h hl  where  a(w) = 1  1 -}- whey '  INTERNAL STATE MODELS FOR MAGNITUDE ESTIMATION 315  and  x  I.(p, 4) v-1(1 - v)1 dv. - ~^ v=0  For h large relative to 8, y, e, response variability is the dominant feature in magnitude estimation and in this case the  model approximates that of Luce and Mo (1965).  If we now consider an absolute judgment experiment using x, y E X, with response 1 correct when x is presented, response 2  correct when y is presented, and suppose that for each set of data, there is a real number t such that  p(1 x) = Pr(u(x) < t) = G(tln(x)) = 1 - exp - (th(x))1, p(1 Y) = Pr(u(y) < t) = G(tl-q(Y)) = 1 - exp - (th(Y))1,  then we obtain a plausible internal state model for such data. Similar models have been proposed by Egan, Greenberg, and  Schulman (1961), (discussed by Green and Swets, 1966, p. 81), and by Luce and Green (1972a). Also, if we define  AX, y) = Pr(u(x) > c - U(Y)I,  then  p(x, Y) = ~(x)'1 f-q(x), +'t(Y), Chi  which is the form suggested by the biased choice model for such binary choices (Luce and Galanter, 1963a).  DISCUSSION  The body of the paper has shown that a broad class of internal state models has many of the properties usually cited as  correct for the data concerning average responses in magnitude estimation, pair estimation, etc. A major assumption has been  that associated with each element x of the set of stimuli X is a positive valued random variable u(x) with the property that  there exists a cumulative distribution function G, and a function q on X such that for real t,  Pr(u(x) < t) - G tf qt(x).  Various functions (ratios, differences, etc.) of the relevant "sensation" values u(x), x E X, then form the basis of the  subject's responses in different experiments. In Krantz's (1972) terminology, these ideas illustrate mapping theory, as  opposed to relation theory. The latter theory assumes that it is relations between stimuli that  4801913-S  316 MARLEY  form the basis for later decisions: for instance, in pair estimation, a "sensation ratio" forms the sensory basis for the  response. It is not explicitly assumed that such a "sensation ratio" is a numerical quantity, nor in particular is it  necessarily the ratio of numerical quantities. We briefly illustrate why we chose not to formulate the present paper in terms  of relation theory, and in the process suggest that our (probabilistic) mapping theory be considered a special case o relation theory.  We present the discussion in terms of a magnitude estimation experiment for which the subject is assumed to use the  stimulus-response pair on the previous trial as his reference point. So we have quantities P(r I xsy), which correspond to the  probability that the subject responds with a number less than or equal to r when x is presented on the present trial, and y  was presented on the previous trial and responded to with s. If we let r(xly) denote the response random variable associated  with the ratio rls in P(r I xsy), then we observed in the body of the paper that if this quantity satisfies two conditions,  given by Eqs. 4, 5, then there exist functions 0, 0 such that for positive t,  Pr[r(xly) < t] = 0 x t 0()/0(y) ).  Now we do not have data supporting Eqs. 4, 5, but these conditions are sufficiently similar to available results (given in Eq.  7 and in data on pair consistency) that they are not entirely unlikely to be supported. So our task is to find rationales for  the above representation of the random variables r(xly), x, y E X. We have presented one such rationale using mapping theory.  How do we use relation theory?  The sensory basis for the subject's decision on a particular trial is the "sensation ratio" of the presented stimulus x to the  (memory of the) stimulus y presented on the previous trial. Because there is response variability, we assume that the  "sensation ratio" of x to y is a randomly distributed quantity p(xly). Now relation theory does not explicitly assume that  p(xly) is a real-valued random variable, nor in particular that it is the distribution of the ratio of real-valued random  variables. Nonetheless, in whatever space the quantity p(xly) takes its values, I cannot think of distributions for it, other  than those that depend on a quantity rl(x)l q(y) for some suitable function q, that are compatible with the results for mean  responses, etc. (Eqs. 4, 5). Since mapping theory gives a fairly natural argument as to why the distributions should depend on  such ratios, I prefer this theory until I have stronger reasons for turning to relation theory.  One argument that is given against mapping theory is that it requires the subject to "calculate" ratios of real numbers, these  numbers corresponding to the individual "sensations." The assumption that the individual sensations are (isomorphic to)  real-numbers is made for simplicity, and can be given up whenever the data show that it is too simplistic. Also, the  "calculation" of the ratios need not be "conscious" or involve arithmetic ability; we simply use the term calculate to  indicate that the  INTERNAL STATE MODELS FOR MAGNITUDE ESTIMATION 317  sensory basis for the decision has two separate components, one associated with x, the other with y, and that by some process,  (possibly "sensory," possibly "cognitive"), the ratio of these quantities is available to the subject.  A second aspect of mapping theory that seems to involve considerable arithmetic manipulation is the means by which the subject  "decides" on what numerical response to give to a particular value of the ratio of the sensations. Thus, if this ratio equals  u on a particular trial, and the response on the previous trial was s, then we suppose that there is a probability P3(r I u)  that the subject responds with a number less than or equal to r. However, again this probability only represents the end  product of a process, and says nothing about how the process works. An advantage of relation theory as Krantz (1972)  formulates it is that the process is more explicit; however, as we now illustrate, it is not sufficiently explicit to be  useful in the present instance.  For suppose that the subject was presented with stimulus y on the previous trial, he responded with s, and is now observing x.  According to relation theory, the quantity available to him is the "sensation ratio" p(xly). To generate a response (Krantz,  1972), the subject imagines a pair of lines w, v such that the "sensation ratio" of w to v is identical to the "sensation  ratio" of x to y; note, thus, that "sensation ratios" are comparable across dimensions. Because length of lines is a  "primitive" dimension, the subject can judge how many times v fits into w-denote the result by t. The subject then emits is as  his response. Is there any variability in this procedure ? If not, then mapping theory seems just as adequate; for in that  theory, the ratio of sensations would correspond to the "sensation ratio," and on this particular trial would have value t.  The desired response is ts; this is given by the following distribution for the response process:  Ps(r I u) = 1 if and only if r = us.  I do not feel that the relation theory description in terms of line length is any more satisfactory than the above assumption.  If there is variability in the response process of the relation theory, then either a particular "sensation ratio" is not  always matched by the same "sensation ratio" of line lengths, or the final multiplication (t times s above) is not  deterministic. In either case, relation theory has to specify the details of these processes. The assumption of a distribution  PS(r I u) in mapping theory is a first attempt at suggesting an appropriate form for the resulting distribution, without  studying the actual underlying process; presumably relation theory can be similarly developed.  Krantz (1972) avoids the above problems with relation theory by talking about a "sensation ratio," but ultimately concluding  that an appropriate ratio of real numbers contains all the available information about this quantity. He deals only with mean  responses, so requires no distributional assumptions. In such a case it is relatively easy to distinguish between mapping and  relation theory. However, once we look  318 MARLEY  at response distributions, the distinction is less clear, and our interpretation of a particular model as a relation or  mapping theory seems to depend more on our viewpoint than on the actual structure of the model.  A basic assumption of this paper has been that mean magnitude estimates, mean pair estimates, etc., are the measures of  interest, and that there are certain empirically supported relations between such estimates; the supporting data are tenuous.  Krantz's (1972) relation theory has the advantage that the investigation of such relations is pursued in the context of  fundamental measurement (Krantz, Luce, Suppes, and Tversky, 1971). For instance, in pair estimation, he assumes that we have a  qualitative relation > between pairs of pairs, with (x, y) > (u, v) being interpreted as "the sensation ratio of x to y is  greater than or equal to the sensation ratio of u to v." This relation can be obtained in various ways, including using mean  pair estimation respcnses to generate the order, or by requiring direct ordinal comparison of pairs. If the order > satisfies  suitable qualitative conditions, and assuming that all the elements belong to a common set X, then there exists a real-valued  function f on X with  (x, y) > (u, v) if and only if f (x) > f (u) ,  f (y) f (v)  and if f' also has this property, then f' = afs for suitable constants a, P. Assuming that we can construct the function f,  and that the order > was not generated by mean pair estimation data, then we have a further check on the usefulness of the  mean pair estimate measure-for we can discover whether the mean pair estimates are monotonically related to the appropriate f  ratios. This use of fundamental measurement is akin to its use in the measurement of mass: physicists have long teated mass as  an additive numerical quantity, but only recently has a system of qualitative relations between objects been formulated that  guarantees the appropriateness of such measurement (Krantz et al., 1971).  REFERENCES  EGAN, J. P., SCHULMAN, A. I., AND GREENBERG, G. Z. Operating characteristics, signal detectability, and the method of free  response. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 1961, 33, 993-1007.  FAGOT, R. F., AND STEWART, M. Tests of product and additive scaling axioms. Perception and Psychophysics, 1969, 5, 117-123.  GREEN, D. M., AND SWETS, J. A. Signal detection theory and psychophysics. New York: Wiley, 1966.  HANEs, R. M. The construction of subjective brightness scales from fractionation data: A validation. Journal of Experimental  Psychology, 1949, 39, 714-728.  HOLMAN, E. W., AND MARLEY, A. A. J. Stimulus and response measurement. In E. C. Carterette, and M. P. Friedman (Eds.),  Handbook of perception, Vol. 2. New York: Academic Press, 1972.  INTERNAL STATE MODELS FOR MAGNITUDE ESTIMATION 319  KRANTZ, D. H. A theory of magnitude estimation and cross-modality matching. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1972, 9,  168-199.  KRANTZ, D. H., LUCE, R. D., SUPPES, P., AND TVERSKY, A. Foundations of measurement. New York: Academic Press, 1971.  LUCE, R. D. Asymptotic learning in psychophysical theories. British Journal of Statistical Psychology, 1964, 17, 1-14.  LUCE, R. D., AND GALANTER, E. Discrimination. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical  psychology, Vol. 1. New York: Wiley, 1963a.  LUCE, R. D., AND GALANTER, E. Psychophysical scaling. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of  mathematical psychology, Vol. 1. New York: Wiley, 1963b. LUCE, R. D., AND GREEN, D. M. A theory of psychophysics and response  times based on interarrival times of "neural" pulses. Psychological Review, 1972a, 79, 14-57.  LUCE, R. D., AND GREEN, D. M. Detection, discrimination, and recognition. In E. C. Carterette, and M. P. Friedman (Eds.),  Handbook of perception, Vol. 2. New York: Academic Press, 1972b.  LUCE, R. D., AND MO, S. S. Magnitude estimation of heaviness and loudness by individual subjects: A test of a probabilistic  response theory. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 1965, 18, 159-174.  STEVENS, J. C., MACK, J. D., AND STEVENS, S. S. Growth of sensation on seven continua as measured by force of handgrip.  Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1960, 59, 60-67. STEVENS, S. S. Matching functions between loudness and ten other  continua. Perception and Psychophysics, 1966, 1, 5-8.  ZINNES, J. L. Scaling. Annual Review of Psychology, 1969, 20, 447-478.  RECEIVED: May 27, 1971