10.1016/0022-2496(72)90004-1
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 9, 36-54 (1972)  More about Metrics of Subjective Spaces and Attention Distributions  W. FISCHER AND H. C. MICKO  Universitdt Bielefeld, Bielefeld, W. Germany, Universitdt Marburg, Marburg, W. Germany  A new representation of metrics is presented, competing theories of similarity and their geometric representations are  compared, and metrics resulting from averaging individual distances are discussed.  1. INTRODUCTION  Three expressions for metrics on the n-dimensional space Rn have been advanced  in the theory of multidimensional scaling: d(a, b) n  d(a, b; Pi) Ilk k)  a-I  d(a, b; Pi)k-I . d(a, b; Pi), d(a, b)k-I  i--1  d(a, b) = J d(a, b; P) dm(P), s"-1  d(a, b) = sup{d(a, b; P) , f (P) : P E Sn-I}.  (2) (3)  Here d(a, b) denotes the distance between points a and b in subjective space and d(a, b; P) the distance between the  projections of a and b on a direction (= line through the origin) P of Rn. The parameter k in (1) determines the particular  Minkowski power metric, m(P) in (2) is a nonnegative measure on the set Sn-I of all directions P in Rn, and f (P) in (3) is a  function on Sn-I. It is mathematically more reasonable to label the directions in n-space by the points of projective (n -  1)-space. We stick to labeling by the points of the (n - 1)-sphere Sn--I = S, because we think it more intuitive.  Formulas (1) and (1 a) have been advanced and discussed extensively by Cross (1965) and Wender (1969), expression (2) by Micko  and Fischer (1970). In Section 2 expression (3) will be elaborated. It will be shown in mathematical terms that  (a) The function d(a, b) of (3) is a metric,  (b) The function f (P), to be interpreted as attention distribution over the  1972 by Academic Press, Inc.  36  METRICS OF SUBJECTIVE SPACES AND ATTENTION DISTRIBUTIONS 37  variables represented by the directions P, can, without loss of generality, be assumed nonnegative and having equal values for  a direction P and its opposite -P,  (c) The relationship between the attention distribution f (P) and the isosimilarity contours of the corresponding metric may  be described in a rather simple geometric manner,  (d) The degree of attention given to a variable must exceed some threshold value in order to have an effect on the metric,  i.e., on the overall (dis)similarity of percepts. This threshold value depends on the degree of attention given to the  neighbouring variables,  (e) The attention distribution fk(P) associated with the Minkowski power metric dk of exponent k equals the function  describing the "unit sphere" of the power metric dkl(k_i) of exponent kl(k - 1). This relationship establishes a one-to-one  correspondence between the power metrics of exponent 1 < k < 2 and those of exponent 2 < k < co.  In Section 3, an analysis of formulas (1)-(3) is given by decomposing the computational pattern of these expressions in a very  general manner into three steps: selector, transformer or weighter, and combiner. This yields a mathematical formulation of  the term "rule of combination" compatible with psychological interpretations. We discuss the rules in terms of the reported  findings about the dependency of the metric of subjective space on the perceptual distinctness of the stimuli scaled. We  discuss in particular merits and demerits of power metrics.  In Section 4 expressions (1)-(3) will be compared from the point of view of simplicity. Moreover, criteria and empirical tests  will be suggested, on the basis of which the theories behind these rules of combination may be falsified or verified.  In Section 5 we investigate the effects of averaging individual distance estimates, i.e., the relation between metrics of  individual subjective space and the metric of their "average space." It will be shown that when considering only average  metrics, one may be led to erroneous conclusions about individual "attention distributions" and "rules of combination."  2. THE GENERATION OF METRICS BY EXPRESSION (3)  (a) We want to study metrics on the n-dimensional real number space Rn which respect the affine structure of Rn. We assume n  >, 2, the case n = I being trivial. It suffices to study norms on the n-dimensional real vector space Rn, i.e., functions l:  Rn --),. [0, oo) with the properties  l(a) = 0 if and only if a = 0, (4)  1(aa) _ I oa l(a), (5)  l(a + b) < l(a) + l(b), (6)  38 FISCHER AND MICKO  for vectors a, b E Rn and numbers a E R. [See textbooks on vector spaces or Micko and Fischer (1970).]  We start with a trivial observation on the Euclidean metric le : The Euclidean length of a vector a equals the supremum of the  Euclidean lengths of the projections of a on all directions (this supremum is assumed when a is projected on its own  direction). Formally,  le(a) = sup I a - e l,  the supremum being taken over all unit vectors e in Rn, i.e., vectors with e - e = 1. For convenience of notation we write eP  for the unit vector joining the origin with the point P on the unit hypersphere S = Sn-1 in Rn. Then (7) becomes  le(a) = sup I aep 1. Pes  This description of the Euclidean metric suggests the following procedure of generating norms: We introduce a bounded  real-valued "weight" function f defined on S, and define  lf(a) = sup{ I a - eP I - f (P) : P E S). (8)  This is a kind of weighted supremum of the Euclidean lengths of the projections of a.  (b) We remark first that if does not change if we replace f (P) by f1(P) = max{ f (P), f (-P)}. Therefore we may assume  without loss of generality that f is an even function, i.e., f (-P) = f (P).  Secondly, I a - eP I - f (P) = 0 for eP orthogonal to a. Therefore l f(a) > 0, and directions eP with f (P) G 0 do not  contribute to the supremum. In other words, l f does not change if we replace f by f + = max{f, 0}, and we may assume without  loss of generality that f is nonnegative.  One verifies easily that conditions (5) and (6) are satisfied by l = if , i.e. If is a pseudonorm.  Now, If(a) = 0 for a =A 0 if and only if f (P) > 0 implies that eP is orthogonal to a. So l f(a) > 0 for all a 0 0 if and only  if the set {P : f (P) > 0} is not contained in any hyperplane through the origin. In other words, l f is a norm if and only if  there exist n linearly independent vectors epl ,..., epn such that f (P1) > 0, ... If (P.) > 0.  Now let us assume that this condition is satisfied. We consider the "unit ball" with respect to the metric if , that is the  closed convex set symmetric with respect to the origin  B f = {a E RI, : If(a) < 1).  METRICS OF SUBJECTIVE SPACES AND ATTENTION DISTRIBUTIONS 39  Formula (8) implies that Bf is the intersection of the sets  Bf.P = {a e Rn : I a - ep I -f(P) <, 1},  Bf = n Bf.P (9) PCs  If f (P) > 0, Bf.p is a strip in R" orthogonal to ep , symmetric with respect to the  origin, and of the breadth 2/f (P). If f (P) = 0, then Bf.p = Rn.  (c) The question arises whether every norm 1 on Rn may be written as 1 = if with a suitable function f. The answer is  affirmative. The function f is in general not uniquely determined by the norm l, but among the possible f's there is a  well-defined maximal and well-defined minimal one.  Let a norm l be given, let Bl = {a E Rn : 1(a) <_ 1) be the associated "unit ball." Then Bt is a compact convex set, symmetric  to the origin, which contains the origin as an interior point. A "supporting strip" of Bl is a strip of the form HP - {a E Rn  : I a - ep I < h(P)) such that Bt C HP , and HP has nonvoid intersection with the boundary of Bl ; i.e., the set 8Bl = {a c Rn  : 1(a) = 1}. For every pair  E S there is exactly one supporting strip HP of Bl , and 0 < h(P) < oo. The function h is known  as the supporting function of B,. It is a well-known fact (cf. Bonnesen-Fenchel, 1934; Eggleston, 1966) that Bl is the  intersection of its supporting strips:  Bt = n HP . (10) PCs  Thus defining f *(P) = (h(P))-1, we have Hp = Bf'.P , and, by comparing (9) and (10), Bt = Bf~ or, equivalently, 1 = 1f . .  This f * is maximal: If a function g has a strictly bigger value than f * at, say, P E S, then B9 is contained in the strip  B,,, , which is strictly smaller than Bf,,P = HP . So By cannot equal Bl . Interpreting f * as an attention distribution  (importance function, sensitivity measure, etc.; see Micko and Fischer, 1970) we observe that the metric of a subjective space  changes, if for some variable, represented by a direction P in subjective space, the importance value f *(P) is replaced by  some value g(P) > f *(P). This interpretation makes the metric of subjective spaces depend on the attention distribution over  the set of stimulus variables represented by S.  On the other hand, it may be possible to replace some values of f * by 0. This is due to the fact that in the representation  (10) we may possibly omit some strips without changing Bt . For example, if Bl is a polyhedron, we need only the strips whose  boundaries contain the (n - 1)-dimensional faces of B,. In general, we apply the notion of "extremal supporting strip"  (Bonnesen-Fenchel, 1934; Eggleston, 1966): A supporting strip HP is nonextremal, if there are supporting strips HP, and HP,  and positive numbers al and a2 such that ep = alepl + a2ep2 and h(P) = a1h(P,) + a2h(Pz).  40 FISCHER AND MICKO  Then Hp. n Hp2 C Hp , and we may omit Hp in forming the intersection (10). It is a known fact that Bi is the intersection of  its extremal supporting strips and that none of these extremal strips may be omitted in forming the intersection.  Thus, defining f*(P) = (h(P))-' for such P that Hp is an extremal supporting strip, and f*(P) = 0 elsewhere, we have Bf*,p =  Hp in the "extremal" case, Bf*,p = Rn otherwise, and Bl = Bf. or, equivalently, l = 1f.. This f* is the minimal generating  function for l.  In psychological terms the importance value of a variable represented by P in subjective space is irrelevant as long as it  does not exceed a certain threshold value f *(P), which guarantees that the corresponding supporting strip Hp is extremal. The  size of this threshold value depends on the threshold values of other variables, particularly on those of closely related  variables which are represented by directions in a neighborhood of P.  It should be mentioned that the maximal generating function f * varies "continuously" with B,, while the minimal generating  function f* does not (cf., for example, the generating functions of the power norms; see below). So f * is the more meaningful  object.  (d) We have seen that the geometry of the relation between norms and generating functions in the sense of (8) is rather  simple, and that the main work in determining a generating function for a given norm is to calculate the supporting function  of the "unit ball" associated to the norm. If the "unit ball" is a polyhedron, there is no trouble: If ep is not orthogonal to  an (n - 1)-dimensional face, let f*(P) = 0; if ep is orthogonal to a face of distance a from the origin, let f*(P) = 01-1.  More specially, let 1 be the supremum norm 1(a) = sup{I al ~,..., I a1), if a = (a,,..., an). Then Bi is the n-dimensional  unit cube, and f*(P) = 1 if P = (~1, 0,..., 0),..., (0,..., 0, ), and f*(P) = 0 elsewhere gives the minimal generating  function. The maximal generating function is f *(P) _ (FE 1 pi I)-1, if P = (pl ,..., pn). Any "spread of attention," blurring  the attention distribution f* , leads to the sup-norm as long as it does not exceed f *.  If l is the city-block norm l(a) = Y_a 1 ~ ai 1, BL is a polyhedron with 2n (n - 1)dimensional faces, whose 2n vertices are  (, 0,..., 0),..., (0,..., 0, ). The function f* is different from 0 only for P = (1/A/n)(, ~1,..., ~1), and then has the  value V1%tz.  As has been said above, the Euclidean norm is obtained if f is the constant 1, and only from this function, because all  supporting strips of the Euclidean unit ball are extremal. Other constant functions yield the Euclidean norm multiplied by a  constant. Another example is given by the Minkowski power norm  n  lx(a) _ (i I ai 11 ) I/k ; 1 < k < oc. (11) Z_1  METRICS OF SUBJECTIVE SPACES AND ATTENTION DISTRIBUTIONS 41  The cases k = 1, k = 2, k = oc have been treated above. The general case may be treated in a manner which applies to all norms  whose "unit spheres" are smooth. If the boundary aBl of Bl is (locally) described by g(x1 ,..., xn) = 0, g a smooth function,  then the unit normal vector n(xo) to aBi at xo = (xol ,..., xo,) E OBl is  a 2 -1 /2 a a  n(x - ( agi (x~ ) ' ag1 (xa),..., ax" (xo))>  (12)  and the value h(n) of the support function h at the unit vector n is  To determine h(ep) for given ep , solve the equation n(xo) = ep for xo by means of (12) and then apply (13).  In the case of the power norm (11), we have  gk(x) = I x1 I k + I x2 Ik + ... + l X" Ik - 1,  and, using (13), we obtain  n  hk(ep) _ (Y I xi Ilk-2 2=1  -1/2  (14)  where the xi are connected with ep = (yl ) ..., yn) by  (I y1 ~,..., I yn 1) = a - (I 'xl j x,~ Ik-1)  and a = (Y 1 1 yz IK)1/K = 1K(ep) with K = k/(k - 1). Inserting this in (14), we obtain  fk(ep) = (h(ep))-1 = (1/a) ~Y yi2 = 1~a - 111K(ep). a=1  (15)  This formula is also valid for those points of aBt the coordinates of which are not all different from zero. It remains valid  for k = 1 and k = oo.  Formula (15) shows that the importance function ,fk , associated to the power norm 1, of exponent k via (3) is nothing else  than the function describing the unit sphere of the power norm 1, with rc = kl(k - 1). This exhibits a sort of duality of 1k  and 1k/(k_1) .  Figure 1 shows the importance functions fk for the power norms of exponents 1; 1,5; 2; 2,5; 4; oo in 2-space. By the above  remark, their graphs are the isosimilarity contours for the power norms of exponents oo; 3; 2; 1,67; 1,33; 1. Because of  symmetry, it suffices to draw the first quadrant only.  42 FISCHER AND MICKO  FIG. 1. Importance functions fk for power norms: A: k = ~c, B: k = 4, C: k = 2.5, D: k = 2, E: k = 1.5, F: k = 1, A':  nonmaximal importance function for k = co. Isosimilarity contours for power norms: A: k = 1, B: k = 1.33, C: k = 1.67, D: k =  2, E: k = 3, F: k = r.  3. METRICS AND "RULES OF COMBINATION"  Let us take formulas (1)-(3) seriously in order to draw psychologically relevant information from empirically obtained metrics  of subjective spaces. Our purpose is to explain the amazing fact that apparently people are able to respond to the  (dis)similarity of percepts (objects, concepts, etc.) even when the percepts are highly similar with respect to one variable  and highly dissimilar with respect to another one.  Let us assume that d(a, b) is proportional to the overall dissimilarity between percepts mapped on a and b, and that d(a, b;  P) is proportional to their specific dissimilarity with respect to the particular unidimensional variable mapped on P. In  addition, let us assume that the overall dissimilarity between two percepts results from a combination of their specific  dissimilarities with respect to various variables considered by observers. Expressions (1)-(3) are mathematical equivalents of  three different hypotheses about the assumed psychological "rule of combination" (Shepard, 1964).  It seems reasonable to give a more formal analysis of the meaning of "rule of combination," which permits a comparison of  formulas (1)-(3).  The general procedure underlying these formulas may be decomposed into three steps. The first step is to select a certain set  of directions which are considered "essential" (directions which really enter into the definitive formula). Then one forms  METRICS OF SUBJECTIVE SPACES AND ATTENTION DISTRIBUTIONS 43  for every pair of points (a, b) E Rn X Rn the indexed set of projection lengths (d(a, b; P))p , P running through the  essential directions. As a next step, one applies a "transformer" or "weighter" T, which is a set of functions Tp : R+ , R  (depending on P, but not on a, b), mapping the number d(a, b; P) to a number T,(d(a, b; P)), and the set of numbers (d(a, b;  P))p to the indexed set T((d(a, b; P)) = (T,(d(a, b; P)))p. The last step is the application of a "combiner," i.e., an  operator C which assigns a nonnegative real number d(a, b) to every (possible) set (Tp(d(a, b; P)))p of real numbers indexed  by the essential directions.  As an example let us consider the power metrics as given by formula (1). The "selection" clearly leaves us with a set of n  mutually orthogonal directions, or, psychologically speaking, with n mutually independent stimulus variables. The  "transformer" means "raising (the specific dissimilarities) to the k-th power," and the "combiner" is "summing up (the  transformed specific dissimilarities) and extracting the k-th root."  In formula (2) or (3), one has a trivial selector, i.e., all directions or, in psychological terms, all stimulus variables are  considered essential. The transformer is "Tp means multiplication (of the specific dissimilarities) by a weight m(P) or f  (P)," i.e., by the importance score of the variable considered. The combiner in (2) is "summing" or "averaging," while the  combiner in (3) is "taking the supremum," i.e., equating the overall dissimilarity to the size of the most prominent weighted  specific dissimilarity.  In more abstract mathematical terms, the decomposition of a "rule of combination" may be described as follows: Denote by  Map(A, B) the set of functions (mappings) with domain A and range B, and by R+ the set of nonnegative real numbers. We have a  canonical map 17: Rn X Rn ---> Map(S, R+), which sends each pair of points (a, b) to the indexed set (d(a, b; fl), of the  Euclidean lengths of the projections; this indexed set may be considered as the function P ~ d(a, b; P) from S to R_,. .  The simplest description of the "selector" is of course a function Z'* : S -> {0, 1 }, assigning 1 to the essential  directions, 0 to the negligible directions. It is, however, more convenient to define the selector as a map E' : Map(S, R1_)  -> Map(S, R+), which transforms a function f: S -> R+ into the function Z(f ): S -> R_ defined by -'(f )(P) = f (P) if P is  essential, E(f )(P) = 0 if P is negligible.  The transformer or weighter is a set of functions Tp : R+--* R, indexed by S, i.e., an element of Map(S, Map(R+ , R)). It may  be considered in a natural way' as a map from Map(S, R+) to Map(S, R), transforming a function f: S -* R_, into T(f ): S -* R  defined by T(f )(P) = T,(f(P)).  The combiner is a map C from Map(S, R) to R+ , the domain of which contains the range of T, and which transforms the function  P --* T,(d(a, b; P)) into the number d(a, b).  1 There is a natural but not surjective embedding Map(S, Map(R+ , R)) - Map(Map(S, R+), Map(S, R)). We consider the  transformer as an element of the latter object, but require it to be in the image of the embedding.  44 FISCHER AND MICKO  So we have the following decomposition of the map d : Rn X Rn --> R+ : d = C-T.E-17with  Rn X Rn ---> Map(S, R+) ---> Map(S, R+) --, Map(S, R) -* R,. rr E r C  Any (afplne) distance function d on Rn admits such a decomposition; this is, e.g., a consequence of the fact shown in Section  2 that any affine metric is representable by a formula of type (3).  The postulate that the distance of different points be different from zero implies the existence of n linearly independent  directions which are not mapped to zero by TZ The other postulates for d being a metric (e.g., the triangle inequality) are  not reflected in a simple manner by conditions on E, T, C. In many cases one may expect the range of T to be contained in  map(S, R+). When using the sphere for labeling directions, one should stipulate that P is essential if and only if -P is  essential, and that Tp = T_p .  The decomposition of TE into the factors T and E involves an obvious arbitrariness. It amounts to the same whether a direction  P is not selected by E, or whether it is selected and Tp is identically zero. However, there is a well-defined minimal  selector.  On the whole, the description of a given metric by means of selector, weighter, and combiner is far from unique. This  decomposition describes not so much the metric but the "formula" by which it is produced; that is precisely the "rule of  combination."  The metric of subjective space apparently depends on the distinctness of the variables according to which the scaled percepts  vary (Torgerson, 1958, p. 292 ff.). So far, only formula (1) has been considered. Usually, exponents k .., 1 were found for  "highly analysable" percepts, which vary along perceptually distinct continua, and k .. 2 for "unitary, homogeneous" percepts  which do not (Shepard, 1964). Moreover, for a particular percept domain, the metric of subjective space has been manipulated  successfully by changing the perceptual distinctness of the stimulusvariables. Hyman and Well (1967, 1968) showed by an  indirect argument that the exponent k of the color space decreases if the subjects' attention is drawn towards particular  color variables. Wender (1969) made k increase by shortening exposure time of highly analysable geometric figures.  Let us provisionally assume for the sake of simplicity that subjective spaces have power metrics.  If formula (1) is supposed to describe the manner by which the overall dissimilarity of percepts is obtained, weighter as well  as combiner change as the perceptual ambiguity of stimulus variables increases. The specific dissimilarities are raised to  higher powers k and the reverse is true for the sum. Consequently, the larger ones of the n specific dissimilarities gain in  weight, whereas the contribution of the smaller ones is reduced, as can be seen from formula (la).  When assuming formula (2) to reflect the psychological rule of combination, we  METRICS OF SUBJECTIVE SPACES AND ATTENTION DISTRIBUTIONS 45  can explain the above results more simply. Selector and combiner are not affected by stimulus ambiguity, only the weighter  changes as a consequence of blurring the attention distribution (making it more uniform); see Fig. t of Micko and Fischer  (1970). For power metrics of exponent 1, i.e., in the case of perfectly analysable stimuli, the attention distribution has  values =,,1=0 only for n mutually independent variables. As the stimulus-variables become perceptually less distinct, the  attention distribution spreads more and more to cover variables neighboring the predominant ones, and consequently k  approaches the value 2.  Applying rule of combination (3), again only the weighter changes. However, assuming the supremum-combiner, increasing  variability of attention has the effect of a decrease of the exponent k from oo to 2, as can be seen from Fig. 1. There seems  to be no satisfactory explanation of exponents between 1 and 2 by rule (3). These metrics result from (3), when maximum  attention is given to the mixed or combined variables represented by diagonal directions in subjective space (see Fig. 1).  Even in the two-dimensional case, one cannot eliminate this difficulty by rotating the space by 45and reinterpreting the  variables, as was shown by Wender (1969).  Our provisional assumption that metrics of subjective spaces are always power metrics is, of course, too restrictive.  Admitting only power metrics means admitting only very special attention distributions with regard to rules (2) or (3). Also,  if we admit the idea that increasing perceptual ambiguity implies increasing variability of attention, there is no reason to  assume that the spread of attention yields the particular distribution of Fig. 1 above or Fig. 1 in Micko and Fischer (1970).  One should, therefore, regard power metrics only as crude but handy approximations of the "real" metrics of subjective spaces.  They are handy because they demand only one parameter k to be determined instead of a function f (P) or a measure m(P).  Computing such a function requires rather big sets of data and much time. One need not worry too much about the crudeness of  approximation by power metrics as long as the available methods of determining overall dissimilarities d(a, b) and relative  dissimilarities d(a, b; P) are crude as well (Kruskal, 1964). From a theoretical point of view, however, restriction to power  metrics is not satisfactory.  4. COMPARISON OF THE PROPOSED RULES OF COMBINATION  First, let us study the "simplicity" of formulas (1)-(3) on the background of the decomposition d = C o T o f o IT. The power  metrics as described by formula (1) have a simple and "economical" selector. The transformer or weighter may be called at best  fairly simple, and the combiner is rather complicated. A somewhat problematic psychological interpretation of (1) can be given.  Metrics described by formula (2) have again a very simple selector. The weighter is of a simple and natural type, too, and so  is the combiner. Formula (2) admits of  46 FISC14ER AND MICKO  a psychological interpretation (Micko and Fischer, 1970). The disadvantage is that for n > 3 not every metric can be produced  by this type of formula. It looks as if this disadvantage can be bypassed by admitting negative weights, but it will then be  hard to find a plausible psychological interpretation.  Metrics described by formula (3) have the same type of selector and weighter as those described by (2), and the combiner is  simple. This way of producing metrics admits of a psychological interpretation, and has, moreover, the advantage that any  metric may be thus produced without introducing artefacts like negative weights.  Crucial experiments for deciding which of the present formulas is valid under which circumstances are, of course, desirable.  But it does not seem easy to invent such experiments without introducing further hypotheses. We derive some differentiating  predictions from (1)-(3), which are, however, not too stringent.  Scaling experiments presupposing power metrics support (2), if they yield k ~< 2; they favour (3), if they yield k > 2, since  otherwise we should have to assume rather improbable attention distributions. Consider e.g., a scaling experiment with  ellipsoids presented to observers in a fixed position. If rule (3) is applied and the subjective space obtained carries a  power metric with k > 2, we can conclude that observers give most attention to three mutually unrelated stimulus variables  (e.g., high vs. low, broad vs. narrow, deep vs. flat). If a power metric with k < 2 results, rule (3) leads to the conclusion  that maximum attention is given to four variables which are not independent of each other (e.g., high+broad+deep vs. low-}-  narrow+flat, high+ broad+flat vs. low+narrow+deep, high+narrow+deep vs. low+broad+flat, low+broad+deep vs. high+narrow+flat),  whereas the "simple" variables height, breadth, depth are attended to to a lesser extent.  Similarly, if we apply rule (2), power metrics with exponent k < 2 result from attention distributions with maxima for n  unrelated variables, whereas power metrics with k > 2 result from attention distributions with maxima for the 2n-1 "diagonal"  combined variables (cf. Micko and Fischer, 1970).  So far, we do not know of any experimental support for the somewhat unnatural assumption that observes consider mainly  combined variables like those mentioned above. Such an attention distribution seems to be uneconomical. For the time being, we  rather rely therefore on the simple hypothesis that observes give maximum attention to a minimal number of mutually  independent variables. If this hypothesis is correct, the rule of combination expressed by formula (3) is supported at the  cost of rule (2), if k > 2 is found in scaling experiments with individuals (cf. Section 5), rule (2) is supported, if k < 2  is found. The bulk of the available evidence is in favour of (2). Exponents k > 2, however, have been reported by Kruskal  (1964), Wender (1967), Liier and Fillbrandt (1970), so that a closer examination of rule (3) is indicated. Moreover, in  Section 5 we show that power metrics with k < 2 obtained by averaging the data of subjects applying different strategies may  result as artefacts from individual metrics with k > 2.  METRICS OF SUBJECTIVE SPACES AND ATTENTION DISTRIBUTIONS 47  Rule (1) is clearly falsified when a carefully evaluated experiment yields a metric which cannot be approximated  satisfactorily by a power metric. As long as the numerical methods employed presuppose or aim at a power metric, criteria for  or against (1) are less easily determined. We derive three differential predictions opposing (1) to (2) and (3). They are,  however, only partly conclusive or tend to escape satisfactory experimental manipulation.  (a) We may ask people for variables which they believe to differentiate between unitary homogeneous stimuli of some stimulus  domain corresponding to a (nearly) Euclidean metric. This may be accomplished by more or less simple questioning or by more  refined methods like Kelly's (1955) REP-test, etc. (Micko, 1962). Let us assume that the variables named upon questioning are,  at least roughly, the same as the variables influencing the similarity of percepts by way of specific (dis)similarities. If  this assumption is correct, we can derive from rule (1) the expectation that people will name mainly mutually unrelated  variables, possibly using various denotations for one variable. On the other hand, if rules (2) or (3) apply, people would be  expected to name many mixtures or combinations of these variables as well. There is an obvious objection against this test:  The structure and vocabulary of the language used will exert a hardly controllable influence; the difference in difficulty of  linguistic and perceptual analysis may falsify the results.  (b) As the perceptual distinctness of the stimulus variables is decreased, k should increase from 1 to 2 but not further if  rule (2) is appropriate. If rule (3) is appropriate, k should decrease from oo to 2 but not further. If rule (1) is correct,  the value k --- 2 is not distinguished and the probability that just 2 is approached is minimal. Therefore, we should rather  expect that k either does not reach or that k surpasses the value 2 as stimulus salience is decreased.  (c) The theory behind formula (la) is meant to explain the changes in k, due to the changes in attribute distinctness, by  assumed changes in the relative weighting of large vs. small specific dissimilarities with respect to the n mutually  independent variables considered (Cross, 1965; Wender, 1969). This explanation, however, fails if all n nonzero specific  dissimilarities between two percepts are equal in size. In this case the weights (d(a, b; P;)ld(a, b))k-1; i = 1, 2,..., n,  are equal for any k.  Consider, e.g., a stimulus configuration like that of Fig. 2, which can be constructed easily, e.g., from Shepard's (1964)  material. We may study the ratios d(a, c)ld(a, b), d(a, d)ld(a, b), and d(a, e)fd(a, b) as functions of stimulus salience. The  city block metric is supposed to apply in the case of perfect salience. Then the ratios should take the values 2, 3, 4. What  happens if we determine these ratios under various conditions of perceptual ambiguity, which may be brought about, e.g., by  adding increasing amount of visual noise to the stimuli ?  The first ratio d(a, c)/d(a, b) should remain unaffected, since d(a, c) as well as d(a, b) is composed of one specific  dissimilarity only and consequently no weighting  48 FISCHER AND MICKO (angle)  a  b  c  (size)  FIG. 2. Hypothetical stimulus configuration [e.g., Shepard's (1964) rim-spoke figures] in subjective space. All distances  between adjacent points are equal.  occurs. An increase of k has no effect on d(a, b), if the sum in (1) or (la) has only one nonzero member.  The second ratio d(a, d)ld(a, b) should decrease, since the d(a, d; size)-component of d(a, d), i.e., the specific  dissimilarity with respect to circle size, is supposed to become progressively ignored. An increase of k in (1) of (la) from 1  over 2 towards 00 would make the ratio decrease from 3 over HIS towards 2.  No prediction can be made on psychological grounds about the third ratio (d(a, e)ld(a, b), since none of the components d(a,  e; size) and d(a, e; angle) is more likely to be ignored than the other in the case of stimulus ambiguity. Apparently the best  guess is a "no change"-hypothesis. Formula (1) or (la), however, demands a decrease of the ratio from 4 over 8/$ towards 2 as  k increases from I over 2 towards 00. This reveals an inconsistency in the theory behind formula (1 a).  S. METRICS FOR INDIVIDUAL AND GROUPED DATA  Frequently, distances obtained in scaling experiments represent combined or averaged (dis)similarity measures of several  subjects. There are various ways of pooling, depending on the scaling method employed (Horan, 1969; Micko and Fischer, 1970).  Even if we make the necessary but daring assumption that each subject has an invariant attention distribution (during one  experiment), we must take into account the possibility that different subjects have different attention distributions and  different individual metrics.  Here we consider the simplest and most natural case of taking the arithmetic mean of individual metrics di, i = 1, 2,..., N,  as average metric d. It is easily verified that  METRICS OF SUBJECTIVE SPACES AND ATTENTION DISTRIBUTIONS 49  d = (11N) yN1 di , or, more generally, d = YN1 Fktdi with positive real 11'i , is a metric if the di are.  When employing formula (2), it makes no difference whether metrics or attention distributions are averaged. With formula (3),  however, it does, because an arithmetic mean of attention distributions does not necessarily yield the analogous mean of the  corresponding metrics.  If the di , i = 1, 2,..., N are affine metrics, then so is d = yNl widi . In this case we can also speak of norms: l = YN 1  wili . For convenience and without loss of generality we will assume Y N11Ai = 1. We may visualise the effect of averaging by  comparing the "unit spheres" 8B, = {a : l(a) = 1} and BB,, = {a : li(a) = 1}. If a is any vector, there are unique positive  numbers a, ai such that 1(aa) = 1 and li(aia) = 1, i.e., as e 8B1 and aia E M,, . One immediately obtains  1 N - _ Y Pti - , a i=1 ai  FIG. 3-7. Relationship between norms of two hypothetical individual subjective spaces and the norm of their average space.  Hatched/dotted line: Isosimilarity contour 11(a)/12(a) of the norm corresponding to a person (or homogeneous group) which  assigns more weight to variables represented by (more or less) horizontal/vertical axes.  Full line: Isosimilarity contour of the norm l(a) obeyed to by the mean of the two persons' corresponding distance estimates.  FIG. 3. 11(a) = 12a1 I + I a21112(a) = I ar I + 12a2 1,1 (a) = z(11(a) + 12(a)).  480/9/1-4  FIG. 4. 11(a) = 1/(2a1)Q + a22, 12(a) _ Va12 -}- (2a2)2, l(a) = 2(11(a) -{- 12(a). Approximate exponent of 1: k = 1.75. (See  caption for Figs. 3-7.)  FIG. 5. 11(a) = V(6a1)2 + a22, 12(a) = /a12 -}- (6a2)2, l(a) = I (11(a) -h lz(a)). Approximate exponent of 1: k = 1.15. (See  caption for Figs. 3-7.)  FIG. 6. l,(a) = sup(I tai I -I- I a2 I), l2(a) = sup(I a, I + 12a2 I), l(a) _ 4  ,(l,(a) + 1,(a)).  Approximate exponent of l: k = 2.8. (See caption for Figs. 3-7.)  FIG. 7. l,(a) = sup(I 6a, I -F I as I), l2(a) = sup(I a, I + 16a2 I), l(a) = -lff(l,(a) -I- l2(a)). Approximate exponent of l:  k = 1.2. (See caption for Figs. 3-7.)  52 FISCHER AND MICKO  that is, a is a weighted harmonic mean of the ai . In particular, min ai G a < max Cai , i.e., Bt contains the intersection  and is contained in the union of the BI. .  If we restrict ourselves to the special but typical case N = 2, /i = 1'2 = 1/2, which exhibits all essential features of the  general case, a is the usual harmonic mean of al and a2 , in particular, in any direction, OBI is much closer to the inner one  of the OBI, than to the outer one (see Figs. 3-7).  In connection with averaging metrics, one must take care of measurement units. Multidimensional scaling usually demands equal  units on all coordinate axes (Micko and Fischer, 1970). Individual subjective units meet this requirement for the individual  metrics di , but they forbid averaging. So, in this case, we have to demand comparable units in all dimensions for the  resulting space, and to admit different units for individuals.  Consider, for instance, a situation comprising two independent stimulus variables of strong salience [like angle and size in  Shepard's (1964) experiment]. Observers following a match-angle-strategy will arrive at an isosimilarity contour resembling  the broken line of Fig. 3. Observers following a match-size-strategy will produce roughly the dotted line as isosimilarity  contour. These contours have to be described by modifications of the city block norm, namely,  h(a) = rll aI ( + rI2 az (broken line),  l2(a) = r2l al + r22 a2 (dotted line),  with 0 < r.2 < r1l and 0 < r2i < r22 . The factor ri; may be viewed as expressing different importance attributed to the  different dimensions, or as reconciling different units of measurement (= sensitivity measures) employed by the different  groups of observers. So, even assuming for practical reasons that individuals employ (roughly) power norms, we are led to  consider average metrics of the form  l(a) _ Y fuili(a) with li(a) ri,a, Ik.\i/k> (13) v_I  where the riv are positive constants. One can prove that the mean l is a power norm only in some trivial special cases.  Nevertheless, one can try to find a "best approximation" of l by a power metric (in the strict sense) lk or by some power  metric with factors ri inserted. The term "best approximation" admits of several well-known distinct mathematical  formulations, but we will not discuss this matter in detail here.  The relationship between the exponent k of the "best approximation" to the average metric 1 of (13) to the constants 1i , ki ,  riv is not easily accessible to computation. Some essential features, however, may be displayed using the simplest nontrivial  case, which we discuss now.  Let 1I(a) = (I ral 11 + I a2 Ik)l1k and l2(a) = (I ai lk + I rat Ik)lfk be power-metrics in two-dimensional space, with equal  scaling factors r > 1 inserted, and with the  METRICS OF SUBJECTIVE SPACES AND ATTENTION DISTRIBUTIONS 53  same k. Let 1(a) = 1/2(11(a) -}- 12(a)) be the arithmetic mean. This corresponds roughly to the two-strategies-situation  described above, with the additional assumptions that just one half of the subjects follows each strategy, and that there is  no quantitative difference between the strategies except interchanging the axes (same r, same k).  The averaged metric 1 has enough symmetry to be reasonably approximated by a power metric lk.(a) = r*(J al Ik* +- I a2,  ~k*)l1k The factor r* is not very important; it is convenient to set r* = 1/2(r + 1), such that 1 and lk* coincide in the  directions of the coordinate axes. The new exponent k* depends on k and r. Useful information on this dependence may be drawn  from figures like Figs. 4-7. Generally, one can conclude that, for fixed k, k* equals k for r = 1 (trivial), and decreases  monotonically to 1 as r runs from 1 to +oo. For sufficiently large r, k* will be smaller than 2, even if k exceeds 2.  These considerations show that it makes sense to work with averaged metrics and even with averaged attention distributions as  long as it is reasonable to work with affilne metrics, but that from an averaged metric little can be inferred about  individual metrics, attention distributions, mental mechanisms.  In particular, the theory behind our "rule of combination" (3) is not necessarily falsified by empirically obtained exponents  k between 1 and 2. Those exponents, as far as they are reported for averaged data, might be due to the process of averaging.  Individual metrics have still to be determined. It is likely that attention distributions differ between subjects-not only  randomly. It remains to investigate whether one can assume a common rule of combination or "combiner."  REFERENCES  BONNESEN, T. AND FENCHEL, W. Theorie der konvexen Korper. Erg. Math. Berlin: Springer, 1934. CROss, D. V. Metric properties of  multidimensional stimulus control. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Michigan, 1965.  EGGLESTON, H. G. Convexity. Cambridge University Press, London/New York, 1966.  HORAN, C. B. Multidimensional scaling: Combining observations when individuals have different perceptual structures.  Psychometrika, 1969, 34, 139-165.  HYMAN, R. AND WELL, A. Judgement of similarity and spatial models. Perception and Psychophysics, 1967, 2, 233-248.  HYNiAN, R. AND WELL, A. Perceptual separability and spatial models. Perception and Psychophysics, 1968, 3, 161-165.  KELLY, G. A. The psychology of personal constructs. New York: Norton, 1955.  KRUSKAL, J. B. Multidimensional scaling by optimizing goodness of fit to a nonmetric hypothesis. Psychometrika, 1964, 29, 1-27.  LUER, G. AND FILLBRANDT, H. Interindividuelle Unterschiede bei der Beurteilung von Reizahnlichkeiten. Z. Exp. Angew. Psychol.,  1970, 17, 123-138.  MICKO, H. C. Die Bestimmung subjektiver Ahnlichkeiten mit dem Semantischen Differential. Z. Exp. Angew. Psychol., 1962, 9,  242-279.  FISCHER AND MICKO  Micro, H. C. AND FISCHER, W. The metric of multidimensional psychological spaces as a function of the differential attention  to subjective attributes. J. Math. Psychol., 1970, 7, 118-143.  SHEPARD, R. N. Attention and the metric structure of the stimulus space. J. Math. Psychol., 1964, 1, 54-87.  TORGERSON, W. S. Theory and methods of scaling. New York: Wiley, 1958.  WENDER, I. Der Einflu13 der Intensitat von Geruchsreizen auf die ALhnlichkeitsskalierung. Paper read at the 9th Tagung  experimentell arbeitender Psychologen, Dtisseldorf, 1967. WENDER, K. Die psychologische Interpretation nichteuklidischer  Metriken in der multidimensionalen Skalierung. Doctoral dissertation, Technical Univ. Darmstadt, 1969.  RECEIVED: July 14, 1970