10.1016/0022-2496(72)90029-6
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 9, 237-242 (1972)  Recognition and Recall in Short-Term Memory*  HARLEY A. BERNBACH AND PATRICIA G. KUPCHAK  Cornell University  A signal detection analysis of confidence judgments in short-term memory was used to investigate the difference in the amount  of information required in memory for recognition and recall. In yoked recognition and recall experiments, subjects learned  lists of five paired-associates and were probe-tested for one of them either by a recall or yes-no recognition procedure. This  method permitted examination of the effect of serial position on the obtained differences in information in memory.  Psychologists interested in human learning have long made a distinction between recognition and recall procedures for  measuring retention. A graph showing recognition performance to be better than recall, from a monograph by Luh (1922) that  compared several retention measures, can be found in virtually every introductory psychology textbook. These results have been  replicated, using more modern methodology, by Postman and Rau (1957). The conclusion commonly drawn is that recognition is in  some fundamental sense "easier" than recall, and this conclusion fits nicely with our common intuition that a true-false or  multiple-choice question is easier than one which is open-ended.  For several years, a number of investigators have tried to determine whether this performance difference really signifies a  fundamental difference in memory or is instead to be explained by variables related to the retrieval task. Results from much  of this work have made it fairly clear that task variables do contribute significantly to creating the difference between  recall and recognition performance. However, the really fundamental issue, to the memory theorist at least, is whether  something more is required of the memory system for recall than for recognition, and, if so, what the nature of this  "something more" is. At present, at least for all "typical" conditions, all that is known is that retrievability is generally  more difficult under conditions of recall than recognition. Virtually nothing is known about memory under these conditions.  To get at answers to our questions it is necessary to assess the amount of information (in the nontechnical sense) in memory  independently of retrieval task variables,  * This study was supported by Public Health Service Grant HD 04951 from the National Institute of Child Health and Human  Development.  1972 by Academic Press, Inc.  237  238 BERNBACH AND KUPCHAK  rather than to attempt to interpret the effect of these retrieval variables. Fortunately, recent theoretical developments  involving the application of decision or detection theory to memory make this possible, and there is ample empirical evidence  favoring this theoretical approach (cf. Banks, 1970). In this paper, a detection theory approach was used in an attempt to  answer directly the questions regarding memory differences in recognition and recall. Considerable use was made of the  theoretical model proposed by Bernbach (1967), which is a finite-state decision model for confidence judgments in both  recognition memory and recall. The essential points of this theoretical approach are outlined below.  It has proved useful in recognition memory to categorize simple verbal items such as paired-associates as being in one of two  states when tested for retention: state R (remembered) or state N (not remembered). It was shown possible (Bernbach, 1967) to  generate likelihood distributions for each of these states on a unidimensional scale labeled "apparent oldness." From this  point, it is a fairly straightforward procedure to convert confidence rating data from an "old-new" recognition memory task to  memory operating characteristics and to obtain values of the memory/sensitivity parameter d'. It was also shown that the  parameter d' could be characterized theoretically by the following product:  d' = rd*,  where d* is a measure of discriminability within the set of materials, and r is the probability that the item is remembered,  i.e., in state R. Thus, the value of r is a measure of the probability that there is enough information in memory for the item  to be considered remembered for purposes of recognition, and it is independent of variables that affect the value of d*, and  of response criteria (or response biases).  The value of r cannot be calculated directly in recognition memory unless the value of d* is known, as only the product d' can  be estimated from the data. It is because of this that recognition memory and recall have not previously been contrasted with  comparable measures. A value of d* can, however, be estimated from the value of the Type 11 d' (here called d") estimated from  confidence rating data in recall. Thus, we performed yoked recall and recognition memory experiments, so that parameter values  would be interchangeable. This made it possible to find a relatively pure measure of the probability that an item is  remembered sufficiently for recognition.  The above presentation has been deliberately sketchy, since the theoretical arguments are lengthy and are available in  published form (Bernbach, 1967). The following argument, relating recall and recognition memory parameters, was developed for  this project. It is assumed that the probability of a correct response in recall p may be characterized by the equation,  RECOGNITION AND RECALL IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 239  where r is the previous recognition memory probability. The parameter a is a multiplier with a value between zero and one  which may depress the value of p if "something more" is required in memory for recall than recognition. In a sense, it is this  parameter a that the study was about. We asked: (1) Does it have a value less than one, and (2) If so, how does it behave as a  function of serial position in short-term memory? The answers to these questions should provide answers to our questions about  any memory difference between recall and recognition in this study.  Values of the critical parameters r, a, and d* are not readily available, but they can be derived once values of d' (from the  recognition task), and d" and p (from the recall task) have been estimated in the standard ways, e.g., as in Bernbach (1967),  or Murdock (1966). With the details of the derivations in the Appendix, the formulas for the critical parameters are  and  r =d'l[(1 -p)dd (3)  a _-_ plr, (4)  d* = d"[a(1 - p)l (a - p)] (5)  Equations 3-5 were used to estimate these parameters for each of several serial positions (SPs) in a single yoked  recall-recognition experiment. It should be noted that this provides a built-in test of the theory and the procedures, since  the value of d*, which is independent of whether or not a particular item is remembered, should be unaffected by memory  factors such as SP.  PROCEDURE  Subjects were 69 female volunteers from an introductory psychology course. Twenty-one of these subjects were in the  recognition phase and 48 were in the recall phase.  Subjects were shown a series of 60 5-item paired associate lists. The first ten lists for each subject were treated as  practice lists, and only the data from the remaining fifty lists are included in the analysis. Stimuli were the digits 1  through 5 and the responses were consonant trigrams of 29% association value (Witmer, 1935). The pairs were shown by slide  projector one at a time at a 2-second rate. Two seconds after the presentation of the last item in each list, one of the items  was tested for retention. Twenty seconds was allowed for the subject to respond before the next list was presented. Each  serial position was probed an equal number of times in both the practice and regular series. The same lists were shown in the  recognition and recall phases, and for any particular list the serial position tested was the same in the recognition and  recall phases.  240 BERNBACH AND KUPCHAK  In the recall phase, the test slides contained a digit alone and the subject was required to write the trigram he thought was  paired with that digit along with a rating of his confidence that it was correct. The scale used for this rating was: - (think  your answer is wrong), + (think your answer is correct), ++ (pretty sure your answer is correct), and +++ (positive your  answer is correct).  In the recognition phase the test slides consisted of a digit-trigram pair and the subject was required to rate his confidence  that the pair was a member of the immediately preceding list. The scale used for this rating was: -- (positive the item was  not in the list), - (do not think the item was in the list), + (think the item was in the list), ++ (positive the item was in  the list). Subjects were informed that the test item was equally likely to have been or not have been in the preceding list.  The recognition phase was yoked to the recall phase by the choice of trigrams for "incorrect" test items. The recall phase was  run first, and the incorrect recognition items were chosen from those errors made most frequently and given highest confidence  ratings by the recall phase subjects. One feature of this yoking was that many incorrect recognition items were intralist  intrusions, so that recognition memory had to be for pairs, not merely for the trigrams.  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  given  The results from both the recognition and recall phases of the experiment are in the left-hand section of Table 1. The values  of d' and d" were estimated  TABLE 1  Results as a Function of Serial Position  SP d' d" p d * r a  1 0.89 1.78 0.28 2.17 0.41 0.68  2 0.87 2.17 0.20 2.61 0.33 0.60  3 0.72 1.98 0.20 2.29 0.31 0.65  4 1.14 1.71 0.38 2.21 0.52 0.73  5 1.93 1.92 0.71 2.49 0.77 0.92  from the confidence judgment data from the recognition and recall groups, respectively. These estimations were accomplished  with a computer program that essentially uses a chi square minimization technique.' The procedure is the same as that described  1 Listings of the computer program developed by Dr. Keith Smith and H. Bernbach for this estimation are available on request  from H. Bernbach.  RECOGNITION AND RECALL IN SHORT-TERM MEMORY 241  by Bock and Jones (1968, Chap. 8). The values of p are simply the proportions of completely correct responses at each SP for  the recall group. Both d', the common measure of recognition memory performance, and p show a typical SP and memory  relationship, with both primacy and recency effects.  The right-hand side of Table 1 gives the values of the parameters derived from Eqs. 3-5. The first thing to note is that the  prediction that the value of d* would be invariant appears to be borne out in these data: d* is correlated neither with SP (r  = .20) nor the recall rate, p (r = .15). As noted earlier, this provides a crucial self-test of the theoretical assumptions  underlying the derivations of r and a, as well as d*. It should be noted that this invariance of d* is not a revelation (cf.  Bernbach, 1971); rather, in this instance, it is a validation of our procedure.  The values of r are the probabilities for each serial position that the item is remembered in terms of recognition. Since  these values are all greater than the equivalent proportions of correct recall responses, or equivalently since the values of  a are all less than unity, these data appear to indicate that more information is required in memory to support recall than  recognition. Of particular interest, at least in formulating some hypotheses about the meaning of the parameter a, is the  effect of SP on a. This effect is precisely the same as the effect of SP on r: in fact, the correlation between r and a is  .97, which is particularly striking in view of the many sources of error variance inherent in these complex estimation  procedures. Since the values of a are all between zero and one, a is perhaps best thought of as a probability, in this case  the probability that needed recall information (such as retrieval cues or the like) is available in memory. The probability of  correct recall (p) is then the probability that both the basic defining information and the recall information are present.  Further, the correlation between r and a would seem to indicate that this response information is processed and subject to  forgetting in much the same fashion as that information referred to by the probability r.  Obviously, considerably more empirical work is needed before we can make very definitive statements about the implications of  obtained values of the parameters a and r. There are at least two things that we have established, however. The first, and  most important, is the viability of the theoretical approach; the values of d* were invariant as predicted, and reasonable  values of r and a were obtained. Second, we have demonstrated that, in this experimental situation at least, something more is  required in memory for recall than for recognition.  APPENDIX  In this Appendix, derivations of Eqs. 3-5 are provided. From probability theory, we have the relationship,  p(.y I e) = P(.y I R) p(R I e) + P(.Y I N) p(N I e),  48019/2-7  242 BERNBACH AND KUPCHAK  where e is the occurrence of an error, since States N and R form mutually exclusive categories. If we take derivatives and  means, as was done by Bernbach (1967, Eq. 6), and the value related to p(y I R) is set equal to 0, then the corresponding  values for p(y I e) and p(y I N) are -d" and -d*, respectively. This yields the relationship  d" = d*p(N I e).  We first solve for p(R I e), using p(R) = pla from Eq. 2 and Bayes theorem, as follows:  p(R I e) = fp(e I R) p(R)l/ [p(e)] , = (1 - a)pla(1 -p).  Now, taking the complement, we have,  p(N I e) = (a - p)I La(1 - p)],  and  d"" = d*(a - p)I [a(1 - p)].  Simple rearrangement of the above yields Eq. 5. Equation 4 is simply a rearrangement of Eq. 2. From this equation, we  substitute p/r for a in Eq. 5, yielding  d* = [(1 - p)1(1 - r)] d  But d* = d'Ir, from Eq. 6 of Bernbach (1967). Substituting and solving for r, we have Eq. 3,  r = d'l [(1 - p) d+ d,].  REFERENCES  BANKS, W. P. Signal detection theory and human memory. Psychological Bulletin, 1970, 72, 81-99.  BERNBACH, H. A. Decision processes in memory. Psychological Review, 1967, 74, 462-480. BERNBACH, H. A. The invariance of d* in  memory: Response to Banks. Psychological Bulletin, 1971,76,149-150.  BOCK, D. R., AND JONES, L. V. The measurement and prediction of judgment and choice. HoldenDay: San Francisco, 1968.  LUH, C. W. The conditions of retention. Psychological Monographs, 1922, 31 (Whole No. 142). POSTMAN, L., AND RAu, L. Retention  as a function of the method of measurement. University of California Publication in Psychology, Berkeley, 1957, 8, 217-270.  WITMER, L. R. The association value of three-place consonant syllables. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 1935, 4, 337-360.  RECEIVED: May 6, 1971