10.1016/0022-2496(72)90024-7
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 9, 141-1617 (1972)  A Quantitative Theory of the Concept Identification Processes in the Hull Paradigm'  PETER G. POLSON2  Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana 47401  A model of concept identification and paired-associate learning processes as they occur in a concept acquisition paradigm  developed by Hull was derived from a cue selection theory of learning. The model predicts that paired-associate learning  occurs in an all-or-none manner and that concept identification leads to all-or-none transfer. Both predictions were confirmed.  In the Hull paradigm, concept identification leads to increasing amounts of positive transfer as a function of successive  lists. A two-stage theory of the concept identification process was developed to account for the transfer data. A subject may  be in one of two states, a or ft. A subject in state a has learned none of the concepts and does not know the class of  relationships that defines the concepts. Transition from a to S occurs when the subject discovers the general properties of  the concepts. A subject in state g has a correct higher order hypothesis concerning the relationships that hold between  successive lists. The probability of initially being in state a is assumed to be a function of instructional variables.  During the last few years, several investigators have proposed that the same process underlies paired-associate learning and  concept identification (Restle, 1965; Greeno, 1964, 1967; Shepard, 1963, 1966; Trabasso and Bower, 1968). The common process  is assumed to be some type of selective attention process, e.g., a hypothesis or cue selection mechanism. An elegant and  powerful test of the common process assumption would be to show that a quantitative theory of performance in an experimental  1 This article is based in part upon the writer's dissertation submitted to the Graduate School of Indiana University in  partial fulfillment of the requirements of the Ph.D. degree. The author would like to thank the members of his committee, Dr.  Alexander Buchwald and Dr. Lloyd Peterson, and his co-chairmen, Dr. Frank Restle and Dr. James Greeno.  The author was supported by USPHS Predoctoral Research Fellowship, 1-F1-MH-31-289-01 during the execution of this research.  Preparation of this paper was supported in part by grant HD-02212-01 to Dr. John Theios.  The author is indebted to William K. Estes, Douglas Hintzman and an anonymous referee for their many valuable criticisms and  suggestions.  2 Requests for reprints should be sent to Peter G. Polson, Department of Psychology, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado  80302.  1972 by Academic Press, Inc.  48o/9I2-I  142 POLSON  paradigm in which both paired-associate learning and concept identification operate concurrently can be derived from a  selective attention theory of learning. Hull (1920) used such a paradigm in his well-known series of studies on concept  identification. In current notation, the Hull paradigm is a transfer paradigm of the form A - B, A' - B,..., A(N> - B where  the set of stimuli associated with the same response in successive lists are examples of a concept. The objective of the  research presented in this paper is to develop and test a quantitative theory of the concept acquisition process.  Paired-associate learning. The theory proposed in this paper assumes that pairedassociate learning is a cue selection process  proposed by Greeno (1967). Each item in a paired-associate list defines a set of cues. When the item is presented for the  first time and on later trials when it is not in memory, the subject guesses correctly with probability g and then samples  randomly from the set of cues. If the subject selects an adequate cue, he will respond correctly to all further presentations  of that item. The subject will sample an adequate cue with probability d. If the cue is not adequate, it will support memory  of the item for some short, random interval of time. An inadequate cue will support retention of an item from one trial to the  next with probability h. Eventually, the item will be lost from short term memory and the subject must again sample from the  set of cues. These assumptions define a four-state Markov-chain whose initial vector and transition matrix are  P(L1, H1, El, G1) = (t, 0, (1 - t)(1 - g), (1 - t)g),  and  L,,+l Hn+1 En+1 G,,+l  L1 0 0 0  H,, 0 h (1 - h)(1 -g) (1 - h)g (1)  d (1 - d)h (1 - d)(1 - h)(1 - g) (1 - d)(1 - h)g  Gn d (1 - d)h (1 - d)(1 - h)(1 - g) (1 - d)(1 - h)g.  The item is in State L if it has been encoded for memory using an adequate cue. H is the state of an item in short term  memory; F. is the error state; and G is the state of an item that has been guessed correctly.  Concept acquisition. The theory proposed here assumes that concept acquisition in the Hull paradigm is a transfer process  mediated by cues shared by items that are instances of a given concept. Two models of concept acquisition are developed in  this paper. The first, the single-stage theory, is an extension of a transfer model developed by Greeno and Scandura (1966).  The second, the two-stage theory, is a more complex model that assumes that instructions and preexisting habits have  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION PROCESSES IN THE HULL PARADIGM 143  significant effects on the concept identification process, and it was developed to account for the results of the experiment  discussed later. Instructional variables were not manipulated in this experiment, but the assumption that instructions are an  important determiner of performance is consistent with findings of other investigators using similar materials (Reed, 1946;  Underwood and Richardson, 1956b). The two models differ in their assumptions about the utilization of common cues to mediate  transfer.  Stimulus representation assumption. Let Ci , i-- 1, 2,..., M be items in successive lists whose stimulus terms are instances  of a concept and are all paired with the same response. When an item in the i-th list Ci is memorized by the process described  by Eq. l , there is a constant probability r that Ci will be encoded for memory using a cue that will also support retention  of Ci+i . If Ci is learned using a cue common to the sets of cues defined by the i-th and i -}- l st examples of the concept,  the singlestage theory assumes that the subject will utilize the common cue to respond to all presentations of Ci+i , and we  say that the subject has learned the concept. If C, is learned using a cue unique to that item, training on Cwill not  facilitate the acquisition of Ci,, . It is assumed that training on previous instances of a concept does not increase the  probabilities of sampling common cues. Thus transfer is assumed to be all-or-none. Any changes in learning (d) and performance  (h and g) parameters of the paired-associate learning process as a function of successive lists are assumed to be due to  nonspecific transfer, and thus changes in the values of d, h, and g as a function of successive lists should be the same for a  group learning conceptually related lists and a group learning a series of unrelated lists equated for difficulty of  paired-associate learning.  Given that a subject learns Ci using a cue common to Ci and Ci_~l , and that he transfers, the materials used in this study do  not permit us to assume that this cue will be common to all later instances of the concept, C.i+_ ,..., Cm. Thus, it is  necessary to incorporate a recognition process into the cue selection model. It is assumed that if c is a cue common to the  sets of cues defined by Ci and Ci+1 , then c is a member of the set of adequate cues for Ci-2, with probability q If a subject  fails to recognize a given item as an instance of a concept that he learned on some previous list, the item is learned in a  manner described by the paired-associate learning theory (1). The concept may be relearned by the process described in the  preceding paragraphs.  The single-stage theory. The above assumptions define a theory of the concept acquisition process that can be incorporated  into the process defined by Eq. 1. The parameter t, the probability of being in state L on trial 1, is the probability that an  item is responded to on the basis of a transferred cue. Alternatively, ti is the probability that a concept was learned during  the acquisition of some previous list  144 POLSON  and the i-th instance was recognized as an instance of the concept. Expressions for the ti can be derived from the above  assumptions.  Initially, the subject knows none of the concepts, and he must memorize all items in list 1 using the process described by the  assumptions underlying Eq. 1. Thus, tl equals 0. Proportion r of the items in list 1 will be learned using a cue that is  common to the next example of the concept in list 2, and thus t2 equals r. t;, equals the proportion of items that were  learned using a common cue plus the proportion of items that transferred times the probability of recognizing the next  instance of the concept. Thus,  t3 - r(1 - t2) + qt2  and this recursion holds for all i. Solving the above difference equation, we get  ti = r (1 - (q - r)i-1) for i = 3,..., M. (2) (1 +r-q)  METHOD  Four groups of 24 subjects each learned a series of five eight-item lists. There were two Concept Acquisition (CA) groups and  two Learning-to-Learn (LL) control groups. The stimuli for all groups were common nouns and the responses were the digits 1-8.  Materials. The structure of the lists learned by the two CA groups was identical to that of the Hull paradigm. The stimuli for  each list were instances of eight verbal concepts. The instances of a given concept appearing in successive lists were paired  with the same digit. One of the CA groups learned eight superordinate category concepts: furniture, parts of the body,  insects, fruit, articles of clothing, geographical features, means of transportation, and animals. The concepts and their  examples were drawn from materials standardized by Cohen, Bousfield, and Whitmarch (1957). The other group learned eight sense  impression concepts. The examples of the sense impression concepts are nouns that evoked a given descriptive adjective from a  large percentage of the subjects in a controlled association task (Underwood and Richardson, 1956a). The concepts used in this  group were soft, red, round, dark, white, small, smelly, and green. The examples of each sense impression concept elicted a  given adjective as a response from at least 52 % of the subjects in the Underwood and Richardson (1956a) study.  Subjects in the LL groups learned series of lists in which the stimulus terms for each group were matched with the stimulus  terms of one of the two CA groups on variables known to affect the rate of paired-associate learning. Five control items were  selected for each set of concept examples. Four nouns, each matched to a given concept instance on initial letter(s),  approximate length, and frequency of usage were selected from Thorndike and Lorge (1944). The fifth control item in a set was  an instance of the concept.  Apparatus. The S-R pairs and programming information were punched on IBM cards, two-pairs per card, by a program that  generated the experimental protocols, and the pairs were then printed on the cards by an IBM 554 alphabetic interpreter. The  materials were presented to the subject by a modified IBM 024 keypunch controlled by programming equipment located  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION PROCESSES IN THE HULL PARADIGM 145  in an adjacent room. The subject indicated his response by pressing the appropriate key on a special keyboard mounted on the  keypunch. A more detailed description of the apparatus has been presented elsewhere (Polson, 1967).  Procedure. All subjects received detailed instructions on how to use the apparatus, the order of events on each trial, and  were told that they would have to learn a series of lists of wordnumber pairs. In addition, subjects in the two CA groups were  told that successive lists were related and that on later lists, they should be able to use these relationships to respond  correctly to some of the items on the first presentation of the list. The nature of the relationship was not specified.  All lists were learned by the anticipation method. Subjects were required to respond on all trials including the first. The  stimulus term of each pair was presented for two seconds or until the subject responded, whichever interval was longer. At the  end of the anticipation interval, the apparatus recorded the response, and then displayed the stimulus paired with the correct  response for two seconds. Successive presentations of the list were randomized with the restriction that the last item on the  n-th presentation could not be the first item on the n -I- 1-st presentation of the list.  Subjects were run to a criterion of 3 consecutive perfect recitations of the list, or 30 presentations of list 1 or 20 of  lists 2-5. Before the presentation of lists 2-5, instructions were read to every subject stressing that he was expected to  improve his performance by "utilizing his past experience." The interval between successive lists varied from one to two  minutes.  Subjects. The subjects were students in introductory psychology courses. Participation in the experiment was in partial  fulfillment of a course requirement. A total of 101 subjects was run. Three were dropped because of apparatus failures or  because they did not learn the five lists in the alloted time, The data from two subjects were discarded because they failed  to reach criterion on one of the lists.  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  The cue selection theory of paired-associate learning and concept identification (Eqs. 1 and 2) makes three sets of  predictions about the results of the experiment. First, the theory assumes that paired-associate learning occurs in a manner  described by (1). This assumption was tested by evaluating the correspondence between the data and predictions derived from  Eq. 3. Second, given that the predictions derived from (3) adequately describe that data, the theory predicts that certain  relationships hold between the parameters of comparable concept acquisition and control groups, the all-or-none transfer  hypothesis. Finally, the predictions of the concept acquisition process, (2), will be evaluated.  Statistical preliminaries. The evaluation of the adequacy of the cue selection theory of the acquisition processes in the Hull  paradigm (Eqs. 1 and 2) will make use of results discussed in detail elsewhere (Greeno, 1967; Polson, 1970). Greeno has shown  that the following observable states theory implies (1).  P(Al , Rl , Sl) = (-, (1 - 7x)0, (1 - 7r)(1 - 0)),  146 POLSON  and  An+l Rn+1 Sn+1 An 1 0 0 Ru (1 - u)v (1 - u)(1 - v)  S0 v (1 - v)  where A is an absorbing state, entered on the trial following the last error or is the initial state of a sequence with no  errors; R is the occurrence of a recurrent event, an error; and S is a correct response before the last error. The concepts of  observability and implication relationships between theories have been developed by Greeno and Steiner (1964, 1968). A theory  is observable if the occurrence of each state can be identified in the response sequences obtained in an experiment.  Informally, a theory T1 implies some other theory T2 if it is possible to find values of the parameters of Tl for any  admissible combination of the parameter values of T2 such that the two theories make identical predictions for all aspects of  the data.  If Eq. 3 adequately describes the data from the various conditions, then (3) can be used as a statistical model to evaluate  the effects of the different independent variables like concept type and successive lists on performance, to test the  prediction that d, h, and g will only be a function of successive lists, and to evaluate Eq. 2. In other words, hypotheses  concerning the effects of independent variables and the predictions of the cue selection model of concept acquisition in the  Hull paradigm can be expressed in terms of the parameters of (3). Polson (1970) has developed the necessary techniques to  employ (3) as a statistical model.  Let , _ (arm,) 0M, u,,,, , v m) be a vector whose elements are the parameters of (3) for the m-th cell of some partition of  the data. Polson (1970) derived an expression for the test statistic, -2 log A, for the likelihood ratio test of the  hypothesis  = 02 = ... _ 0. The statistic is asymptotically distributed as X2 with 4(n - 1) degrees of freedom.  Furthermore, it was shown that the total X2 for the overall difference between groups can be partitioned into four independent  components, each due to a single parameter. Thus, we can test hypotheses defined by a single restriction, e.g., 7r1 = Trs =  ... = 7r, . The components due to each parameter are asymptotically distributed as X2 with n - 1 degrees of freedom.  Goodness-of-fit, The data from each subject were transformed into success-error protocols for each item. The learning  criterion for an item was five correct responses in a row. The subject-item sequences were partitioned into 20 groups of 192  sequences each. The partition was defined by the following dimensions: training paradigm, concept identification or  Learning-to-Learn (CA, LL); type of concept, superordinate category or sense impression (NOUN, SENSE); and ordinal number of  the list (1, 2, 3, 4, 5).  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION PROCESSES IN THE HULL PARADIGM 147  Parameter estimates and observed and predicted values of the following distributions and their means and standard deviations  were computed for each of the 20 groups: total errors, trial of the last error, and runs of errors of length k given an error.  The observed and predicted values of the presolution performance function (the probability of an error on trial n given an  error on trial n or later) and the backward learning curve were computed also. The derivations of these statistics are  presented elsewhere (Polson, 1970; Greeno and Scandura, 1966). The Kolmogorov-Smirnov one-sample test (Siegel, 1956, pp.  47-52) was used to evaluate goodness-of-fit for all the probability distributions. A modification of the Chi Square test  presented by Atkinson, Bower, and Crothers (1965, pp. 42-43) was used to evaluate the goodness-of-fit for the presolution  performance function and the backwards learning curve (Polson, 1967, p. 75).  The observable states theory, Eq. 3, adequately describes the data from the 20 conditions. The correspondences between the  observed and predicted distributions were quite good. Significant deviations were observed in only two out of the 20  conditions for the distributions of total errors (TE) and trial of the last error (TLE). These deviations occurred in the LL,  SENSE group on lists 2 and 4 for both distributions, (LL, SENSE, 2: TE, Dmax = .133, p < .01; TLE, Dma,, = .135, p < .01; LL,  SENSE, 4: TE, Dmax = .104, .05 > p > .01; TLE, Dmax = .106, .05 > p > .01). This is approximately the expected number of  deviations if the null hypothesis were true. None of the observed values of the goodness-of-fit statistics for the conditional  distributions of success runs were significant, and only one out of the 20 conditional distributions of error runs deviated  significantly from the distribution predicted by the model. However, the goodness-of-fit results for the presolution  performance functions and the backward learning curves were not consistent with the assumption that v is a constant,  independent of trial number. Significant deviations were observed in two out of the four groups on list 1 for the presolution  performance functions and in all conditions on list I for the backward learning curves. Comparisons between the observed and  predicted presolution performance functions and the backward learning curves for lists 2-5 showed that significant deviations  occurred in one or two conditions for both on lists 2-4.  In summary, the major differences between the model and data were confined to the presolution performance functions and the  backward learning curves for list 1. Other investigators have found that theories equivalent to special cases of (3) give  excellent descriptions of the data except for the presolution performance functions (Suppes and Ginsberg, 1963; Polson,  Restle, and Polson, 1965; and Greeno and Scandura, 1966). It was concluded that (3) provided an adequate account of the data  from all conditions.  Effects of successive list and concept type. The observed values of the maximum likelihood estimates of -0m were computed for  each of the 20 conditions defined by  148 POLSON  training condition (CA, LL), concept type (NOUN, SENSE), and ordinal number of the list presented to the subject. The observed  values of 7r and u plotted as a function of successive lists for each of the four groups are presented in Fig. 1, and the  observed values of B and v are presented in Fig. 2. Evaluation of the effects of training condition, concept type, successive  list, and the all-or-none transfer hypothesis was done using (3) as the statistical model.  The effects of successive lists were evaluated in the following manner. The values of the test statistic, -21og A, were  computed for the hypothesis that Oi,1 = Oi.2 = ... = k5 where kk is a vector whose elements are the parameters of group i on  list k for each of the four groups (CA, NOUN; LL, NOUN; CA, SENSE; and LL, SENSE). The observed values of the test statistics  were highly significant for all groups; the smallest value was equal to 231.1 with 20 degrees of freedom. These results  indicate that nonspecific transfer, concept identification, or a combination of both processes in the CA conditions, produced  highly significant improvements in performance as a function of successive lists.  The effects of training condition (CA, LL) and concept type (NOUN, SENSE) were evaluated in the following manner. For every  pair of CA and LL groups for a given concept type, the values of the test statistics were computed for the hypothesis that  Y'i.k = W1.k and the components due to each of the parameters where i and j are CA and LL groups for a given concept type on  list k, k = 2, 3, 4, and 5. Similar comparisons were made between the two CA groups and the two LL groups for each list. The  values of the test statistics and their degrees of freedom are presented in Table 1.  Examination of Table 1 shows that the test statistics for the hypotheses OCA.k = OLL.k for lists 2-5 for the superordinate  category concepts (NOUN) and for lists 3-5 for the sense impression concepts (SENSE) were highly significant. It was concluded  that significant levels of concept attainment occurred in both CA conditions.  The test statistics for the overall comparison between the two CA groups for lists 2-5 were highly significant. Richardson  (1960), using a very different paradigm, has shown that superordinate category concepts are much easier to learn than sense  impression concepts. These results confirm his findings. There were no significant differences in the comparisons between the  two LL groups on lists 2-5. This result is not unreasonable. Both sets of materials are almost identical with respect to  variables that are known to affect the rate of paired-associate learning, e.g., meaningfulness, part of speech, response  terms, etc.  All-or-none transfer. The all-or-none transfer hypothesis, expressed in terms of the parameters of (3), predicts that 7ri,k >  Tr;.k , ei.k = Oi,k , ui.k = uj,k , and vi.k = vi,k were i and j are CA and LL conditions, respectively, on list k.  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION PROCESSES IN THE HULL PARADIGM 149  TABLE 1  The Observed Values of the Test Statistics for the Hypotheses that Oi= 0i, ,i=~i,Bi=Bj,ui=u,,andvi=vi  Training Condition (CA vs. LL)  List X2(0i = Oj) XZ(_i = _j) X2(Bi = Bj) X2(ui = u;) X2(vi = z'i)  df = 4 df = 1 df = 1 df = 1 df ---- 1  CA, NOUN(i) vs. LL, NOUN(j)  2 59.77* 50.97 * 5.92* 0.14 2.73  3 231.12* 199.72* 21.59* 2.45 7.36*  4 249.72* 234.32* 6.18* 0.01 9.21  5 283.86* 280.12* 2.74 0.24 0.67   CA, SENSE(i) vs. LL, SENSE(j)    2 6.76 - - - -  3 40.18* 33.71* 0.10 0.02 6.35*  4 55.02* 47.94* 0.15 4.15* 2.79  5 80.07* 77.16* 0.00 2.00 0.90   Concept Type     CA, NOUN(i) vs. CA, SENSE(j)    2 42.70* 36.48* 5.31* 1.90 0.01  3 78.93* 67.60* 9.20* 2.60 0.07  4 91.36* 78.94* 11.1 1 * 0.88 0.43  5 68.52* 63.47* 3.18 0.02 1.85   LL, NOUN(i) vs. LL, SENSE(j)    2 2.30     3 7.20     4 6.56     5 1.29     * p < 0.05.  Components due to the four parameters not computed if X'($a = 0;) is not significant.  The cue selection theory predicts that ir, the probability of zero errors, will primarily be determined by the level of  concept attainment in the two CA groups. The rate of increase of a as a function of successive lists (k) should be a function  of variables that determine the rate of concept acquisition, e.g., concept type.  150 POLSON  Examination of the observed values of yr plotted as a function of successive lists presented in Fig. 1 shows that 7T varied in  the manner predicted by the cue selection theory. The components due to Tr of the between condition comparisons shown in Table  1 were highly significant in all the significant overall comparisons between CA and LL conditions and between CA conditions  learning different types of concepts. Qualitatively, variations of 7T as a function of successive lists and concept type in  the CA groups are in accord with the predictions of the cue selection theory.  The remaining parameters of (3), 0, u, and v, are expected to be functions only of the paired-associate learning processes,  e.g., nonspecific transfer. If it is assumed that nonspecific transfer affects the composition of the set of cues defined by  each item, increasing the proportion of cues adequate to support retention, then d and thus u will increase as a function of  successive lists. Furthermore, since the different LL materials were shown to have no effect on performance and the  nonspecific transfer processes are assumed to be identical in CA and LL groups, u should vary only as a function of successive  lists. Exactly this pattern is shown in Fig. 1. In the seven significant overall comparisons between CA and LL conditions  shown in Table 1, only one of the components due to u was significant. None of the components due to u in the comparisons  between pairs of CA conditions and LL conditions shown in Table 1 were significant. It was concluded that u varied only a  function of successive lists.  The remaining two parameters, B and v, reflect the level of performance before the last error. The cue selection theory  suggests that these parameters will be about the same for CA and LL conditions and will remain constant across successive  lists. The changes in the observed values of these parameters as a function of successive lists, as shown in Fig. 2, are small  in comparison to the changes in 7T and u. However, the graphs of the observed values of B and v for the CA, NOUN group suggest  that the superordinate category concepts produced significant improvements in presolution performance across lists.  Examination of Table 1 supports this impression. In a majority of the comparisons between the CA, NOUN group and the other  conditions, the components of the total X2 due to B and v are significant.  Polson (1967, pp. 99-105) discussed alternative explanations of the transfer data, in particular, the pattern-components model  (Atkinson and Estes, 1963). The patterncomponents model is of special interest because it also predicts that (3) will fit the  data from all conditions, but it predicts different interrelationships among the observed values of the parameters of (3) from  CA and LL conditions. Although, the patterncomponents model predicts that concept acquisition will increase the probability of  a correct response on trials before the last error and thus lower values of B and v in the CA conditions, it could not account  for any of the results shown in Fig. 1.  There are several possible explanations in the context of the cue selection theory, (1), for the significant facilitation of  presolution performance observed in the CA, NOUN conditions. One would be to generalize the stimulus representation assumption  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION PROCESSES IN THE HULL PARADIGM 151  w J a  w w f Q a a a  .9  .8  .7  .O  LIST  FiG. 1. The observed values of 7r and u plotted as a function of successive lists for each group.  by hypothesizing that some of the set of cues common to the i-th and i + lst instances of a concept are not adequate to  support retention of the i -{- lst item. Thus, some proportion of the items in a CA list would initially be in the short term  memory state H on the first presentation of the list. Such a modification of the stimulus representation assumption could  account for the observed values of B from the CA, NOUN group. The only problem with the above explanation is that it would  also predict similar but smaller differences between the observed values of 8 from the CA and LL groups that learned the sense  impression materials. However, examination of the upper panel of Fig. 2 shows that the data from the sense impression groups  are not consistent with such predictions.  The differences in the observed values of v from CA and LL groups can be dealt  152 POLSON  .9  .7  .6 1 T  4  7  I 2 3 4 5 LIST  FIG. 2. The observed values of B and v plotted as a function of successive lists for each group.  with by the cue selection theory, (1), by assuming that h, the probability of an item remaining in short-term memory for one  trial, is in part determined by interference from other unlearned items (e.g., Calfee and Atkinson, 1965). Such an assumption  leads to the prediction that h would be an increasing function of the number of items initially in the learned state L of (1).  Thus, v would decrease as a function of the level of concept attainment.  The facilitation of presolution performance found in the CA, NOUN group was the only result inconsistent with the cue  selection theory. Although differences in B and v were in the direction predicted by the pattern-components theory, it could  not account for any of the other results, in particular, the observed relationships between ;r and u. The variations in rr and  u account for a major portion of the total variance, and all the predictions made by the cue selection theory for these two  parameters were confirmed. Furthermore, it was shown that the cue selection theory could be modified to account for the  facilitation of presolution performance found in the CA, NOUN group.  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION PROCESSES IN THE HULL PARADIGM 153  On the basis of these results, it was concluded that concept attainment leads to all-or-none transfer increasing the values of  7r across successive lists. The changes across lists in u and the remaining parameters are assumed to be due to nonspecific  transfer. Thus, all information about the concept acquisition processes in the Hull paradigm is contained in the changes in  the number of items with no errors as a function of successive lists.  Although the results of this experiment confirmed a majority of the predictions of the cue selection theory of concept  identification and paired-associate learning, the concept acquisition model, (2), could not give an adequate quantitative  description of the changes in the observed values of 7r across successive lists nor any other aspect of the concept  identification data. A complete discussion of the analysis of the singlestage concept acquisition theory is presented  elsewhere (Polson, 1967, pp. 114-121).  Two aspects of the transfer data were strikingly inconsistent with the predictions from the single-stage theory of concept  acquisition, (2). First, the single-stage theory predicts that or will be a negatively accelerated function of successive  lists, but this prediction is clearly contradicted by the observed values of 7r from the CA groups presented in Fig. 1.  Second, examination of the transfer data from individual subjects suggested that mastery of a given concept was highly  correlated with the acquisition of other concepts being learned by a subject. For example, several subjects in the CA, NOUN  condition showed no evidence of concept attainment on lists 2 and 3 and a very high level of concept attainment on lists 4 and  5. More formally, the observed distributions of the number of items per subject with no errors on list i were not consistent  with the predictions from the single-stage theory.  A two-stage theory of the concept acquisition process was developed to account for these results. The remainder of this paper  deals with the development and evaluation of a model derived from the two-stage theory. The two-stage theory, like the  single-stage theory, assumes that paired-associate learning is a cue selection process described by the assumptions leading to  (1). Both assume identical stimulus representation assumptions, and therefore both predict all-or-none transfer. Thus, the  goodness-of-fit and all-or-none transfer results presented in the preceding section are also consistent with the two-stage  theory.  A Two-STAGE THEORY OF THE CONCEPT ACQUISITION PROCESS  The two-stage theory assumes that a subject is in one of two possible states. When a list containing new instances of the  concepts is presented for the first time, the state of the subject determines the nature of the concept identification  (transfer) process. If the subject is in state a: it is assumed that he holds an incorrect hypothesis about the relationships  that hold between successive lists. As a result, he can encode an item for memory using a common cue and then fail to utilize  the shared cue to  154 POLSON  respond to the next instance of the concept. If the subject is in state P, the single-stage theory, (2), describes the concept  identification process. Finally, it is assumed that a subject initially in state can discover a correct higher order  hypothesis and go to state P. If a subject initially in state a learns a concept, i.e., utilizes a common cue, he immediately  goes to state P.  The two-stage theory can informally be described in terms of the possible states of a single concept. A concept can be in one  of three possible states: the two unlearned states, V. or G&s , where the subscript denotes the state of the subject, and the  learned state, Y. A diagram representing the states of the process and the admissible transitions is shown in Fig. 3. At the  start of acquisition of list 1, all concepts are in an unlearned state, and the subject is either in state a or P. Let s be  the probability that the subject is initially in state #. The theory assumes that we can manipulate the initial state of the  subject with various sorts of pretraining procedures or instructions. Thus s should be a function of instructional variables.  Instructional variables were not manipulated in this experiment, but other investigators have found that instructions affect  the rate of concept acquisition using similar materials (Reed, 1946; Underwood and Richardson, 1956b).  Concept acquisition can occur from either of the two unlearned states. Similar mechanisms underlie the concept acquisition  process in both states; the only difference is that a subject in state a may fail to utilize a common cue. The concept  acquisition parameter for subjects in state a, r*, is the probability of a joint event: the subject rote learns an item using  a common cue and then utilizes the cue to respond to the new instance of the concept. r and q are the concept acquisition and  recognition parameters for subjects in state P. Finally, it is assumed that if a subject in either state a or P does not  transfer, then the instance will be learned in a manner described  STATE qlc SUBJECT oC CONCEPT IN 9.l  r '  STATE `1Ap  SUBJECT CONCEPT IN 9A  STAT E c7_0 SUBJECT /3 CONCEPT IN X  FIG. 3. A diagram of the admissible transitions among states 4l. , 9lp, and Y for a single concept.  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION PROCESSES IN THE HULL PARADIGM 155  by the cue selection theory of paired-associate learning, (1). The following section presents formal statements of the  assumptions of the two-stage theory.  Let {q1, , Glla , Y} be the state space for a single concept. The concept is in state .V. if it is unlearned and the subject  is in state a and in state WQ if it is unlearned and the subject is in state P. Y is the learned state; the subject will  always be in state g after learning at least one concept. Let CI; , Cz; ,..., Ci; ,..., C,y; be the sequence of examples of  the j-th concept. It is assumed that a subject learns a series of M lists each containing one example of the N concepts. The  model to be developed describes the concept acquisition process for a single subject. The following conventions concerning  indices will be used in the remainder of this paper: i is the list index with range i == 1, 2,..., M, and j is the concept  index with range j = 1, 2,..., N. Unless explicitly qualified, any statement is assumed to hold for all iJ, and all subjects.  Assumption I. The Initial States of the Process  At the beginning of acquisition of list 1, all concepts are in an unlearned state, and the subject is in either state or  state P. The probability that a subject is initially in state a and all concepts are in l, equals (1 - s). A subject is  initially in state and all concepts are in 1?la with probability s.  Assumption II. The Concept Acquisition and Recognition Processes  Let D(Ci.;) be the set of cues that are adequate to support retention of the item whose stimulus term is Ci,;. Let c be an  element of D(Ci,;) n D(Ci+1,;). Let r equal m[D(Ci,r) n D(Ci+i.s)]Im[D(Cjj)].  (a) The concept acquisition process given that the subject is in state a on list i. The j-th concept goes from state Wa to Y  when the item whose stimulus term is Ci.i is memorized using a cue common to D(Ci,;) and D(Ci+l,;), c, and the subject  utilizes c to respond to Ci+l,; the first time it is presented. The probability that the j-th concept goes from ill. to Y  equals r*. The occurrence of a transition from l~ to Y is assumed to be independent of the states and changes of state of  the other N - 1 concepts in a list.  (b) The concept acquisition process given that the subject is in state P on list i. The j-th concept goes from *s to Y if the  item whose stimulus term is Ci,i was encoded for memory using an element of [D(Ci,;) n D(Ci+,,;)]. The probability of a  transition from We to Y equals r.  (c) The recognition process. The subject will recognize Ci+,; , n = 2, 3,..., M - i as instances of the j-th concept if: (1) c  is an element of D(Ci,;) n D(Ci,,;), (2) c was used to encode for memory the item whose stimulus term is Ci,; , (3) c is used  to  156 POLSON  respond to CE,,,; the first time it is presented, and (4) c is an element of D(Ci+;), n = 2, 3,..., M - i. It is assumed that  P(c E [D(Ci+.+$,j) n D(Ci+n+i,j)j I c E [D(Ci+.+i.j) n D(Ci+n.i)l) = q  for n=0,1,...,M-i-2.  The probability of transition from Y on list i to Y on list i -F- 1 equals q. If the concept is in state Y on list i and c is  not an element of D(Ci+l,;), the concept goes to state Glh on list i -{- 1.  Transitions of the j-th concept between states fills and Y are independent of the state and changes of state of all other N -  1 concepts in a list.  Assumption III. The Stage I Acquisition Process, Transition of the Subject, from State a to State 9  (a) Given that the subject is in state a at the beginning of acquisition of list 1 or after the initial presentation of all  items in list i - 1, the subject immediately goes to state P when a concept goes from 'la to Y during the initial presentation  of the i-th list.  (b) Given that the subject is in state /3 on list i, he never returns to state a.  Assumption IV. The Probability of Zero Errors on an Item given the State of the Concept  (a) Let yi be the probability that a subject makes no errors on an item whose stimulus term is Ci.; given that the j-th  concept is in state G&~ or fills on list i.  (b) The probability of zero errors on an item whose stimulus terms is Ci,; is 1.0 given that the j-th concept is in state Y.  THE MODEL  In the discussion preceding the presentation of the formal assumptions of the two-stage theory, it was pointed out that the  two-stage theory deals with both the acquisition of individual concepts and the changes in the state of a subject learning  several concepts. The transition of a given concept from W. to W,, is assumed to depend on a change of state of another  concept being learned by the subject. Thus, the model must describe both the state and changes of state of a given concept and  the states of the other N - 1 concepts in a list. It will be shown that a model that describes the state of the i-th list can  be represented as a N -+- 2 state Markov-chain with stationary transition probabilities where the states are defined in terms  of the number of concepts in G&a , V,, and Y.  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION PROCESSES IN THE HULL PARADIGM 157  The events that determine the state of the j-th concept are assumed by the twostage theory to occur during the acquisition of  the i - 1 st list and the first presentation of the i-th list. For subjects in state g, the parameter homogeneity and item  independence assumptions permit one to ignore when these events occur for a given concept and the order in which they occur  for different concepts. The parameter homogeneity and independence assumptions for the W. to Y transition can be exploited in  a similar manner. Thus, the model describes the state of the i-th list at the beginning of its second presentation to the  subject. The i-th "trial" is defined as all presentations after the first of the i-th list and the initial presentation of the  The state space. Let Y, !1(0), A(1),..., A(N) be the states of a Markov-chain with stationary transition probabilities. The  process is in state Y if the subject is in state a and all concepts are in state W. . The process is in state A(n) if the  subject is in state /3 and n concepts are in state Y and the remaining N - n are in state ?la . The response rule for each  state maps states of the theory to the data. For the present model, the response rule specifies the distribution of the number  of items with zero errors on list i given the number of concepts in l, or ?/s and Y. In order to simplify the notation in  the following expressions, !1(n) will be written as n. Thus the N -j- 2 states of the process are Y, 0, 1,..., N.  In the following section, expressions for the elements of the initial vector and transition matrix, the response rule, and  predictions are presented without proofs. Proofs are presented in the Appendix, and the interested reader is referred to it  for such details.  THEOREM 1. The initial vector and transition matrix. The initial vector, Pl equals  P(Yi , X1(0)1, x(1)1,..., A(N)1) = ((I - S), s, 0,..., 0),  and the transition matrix, T, equals  b(0; N, r*) for m, n = Y,  0 for m=Y,n=O, N-n+1  (tmn) - I (1 - r*)e-lr*b(n - 1; N - t, r) for m = Y, n = l , 2,..., N, e=1  0 for m = 0, I_.,  and  min(m,N-n)  b(n - m + C; N - m, r)b(e; m, 1 - q) for m, n = 0, 1,..., N  e=max(0,,n-n)  where b(k; N, p) = (k) pk(1 - p)N-k.  480/9/2-2  158 POLSON  THEOREM 2. The response rules.  Zi is a matrix whose rows are the probability distributions of the number of items with zero errors given the state of the  process.  b(k; N, yi) for n = Y, 0, and k = 0, 1,..., N,  Zi = (z,,,,) = 0 for n = 1, 2,..., N, and k = 0, 1,..., n - 1, and  b(k - n; N - n, yi) for n = 1,..., N, and k = n,..., N  where n is the state of the process and k is the number of items with zero errors.  THEOREM 3. Xi , the predicted probability distribution of the number of items with zero errors.  Xi = P,Ti_'Zj .  In addition it is shown in the Appendix that T is a transition matrix.  THE Two-STAGE THEORY: RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  Since the all-or-none transfer hypothesis and the predictions for the item statistics derived from Eq. 3 follow from both the  one- and two-stage concept acquisition models, the goodness-of-fit results and the confirmation of the all-or-none transfer  hypothesis discussed earlier support the two-stage theory also. The two-stage model, like the one-stage theory, is a theory of  the parameter Tr in Eq. 3.  The goodness-of-fit of the two-stage theory was evaluated by comparing the observed and predicted distributions of the number  of concept acquisition items per list with zero errors, Xi , i = 2,..., 5, and the values of 7Ti . The number of items with  zero errors was computed for each subject on each list in the two Concept Acquisition groups. This gives 24 observations per  list for each group.  Graphs for the cumulative distributions of the observed and predicted Xi , i = 2,..., 5, for both CA groups are presented in  Figs. 4 and 5. The predicted distributions were computed for the general case of the model with no restrictions on the values  of s, r*, r, and q. The observed values of the parameters are presented in Table 2. None of the observed values of the  Kolomogorov-Smirnov goodness-of-fit statistics were significant. The predicted values of 7ri are the means of the Xi divided  by N, the number of concepts in a list. The predicted mean proportions of items with zero errors were computed for the  distributions shown in Figs. 4 and 5. The observed and predicted values of 7ri are shown in Fig. 6. It was concluded that the  model could provide an adequate account for the data from both CA groups.  The goodness-of-fit results are not a very powerful test of this complex model. Predictions for only one aspect of the data  were tested, and the power of the goodnessof-fit tests is limited due to the relatively small number of observations. However,  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION PROCESSES IN THE HULL PARADIGM 159 io  FiG. 4. The graphs of the observed and predicted cumulative distributions of the number of items with zero errors (no) on list  i, Xi , i = 2, 3, 4, and 5, for the CA, NOUN group.  the two-stage model assumes r* will be less than r, and identifies some of the independent variables which determine the  values of the parameters. In this section, the various special cases of the model will be evaluated, and hypotheses about the  determinates of the observed values of the parameters and the interrelationships among the parameters for a given group will  be discussed and evaluated.  Parameter estimates for s, r*, r, and q were computed for both CA groups. The yz's, probabilities of zero errors for items in  states Gh. and G&a , for each CA group were estimated from the respective Learning-to-Learn control groups. The maximum  likelihood estimates of the parameters were computed using a search algorithm to find the point in the parameter space defined  by the admissible values of the parameters which minimized -2 log L where L is the likelihood function (See Polson, 1967, pp.  149-151). The computations were carried out using a search algorithm developed  FIG. 5. The graphs of the observed and predicted cumulative distributionsiof the number of items with zero errors (no) on list  i, X; , i = 2, 3, 4, and 5, for the CA, SENSE group.  - OBSERVED ----PREDICTED  .SUPERORDINANTS  SENSE  n IMPRESSIONS  6  W N  4 O  Y H J Q  m O K a  0  3 LIST  FIG. 6. The observed and predicted yr values for the concept acquisition conditions.  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION PROCESSES IN THE HULL PARADIGM 161  by Chandler (1965). Parameter estimates were also computed for various special cases of the model: q = 1.0, the subject  recognizes all instances of a concept learned previously; s = 1.0, all subjects are in state at the beginning of acquisition  of list 1, and for the case where s = 1.0 and q = 1.0. The assumptions defining the concept acquisition and recognition  processes for subjects in state g and the singlestage theory are identical. Thus for cases in which s = 1.0, the two-stage  model reduces to a list model where N concepts are learned in a manner described by the assumptions leading to Eq. 2, the  single-stage concept acquisition theory.  The observed values of the maximum likelihood estimates for the general case and the three special cases are presented in  Table 2 for both CA groups. Since the various special cases of the two-stage model are defined in terms of restrictions on the  parameters of the theory, they were evaluated using likelihood ratio tests. The observed values of the test statistics for the  three special cases are presented in Table 3.  All the test statistics for hypotheses including the restriction s = 1.0 were highly significant. This result confirms the  observation made earlier that the single-stage theory cannot account for the data. Further, the hypothesis that q == 1.0 was  rejected in both CA conditions.  The two-stage theory assumes that s, the probability that a subject is initially in state g, is a function of instructions,  pretraining, and preexisting habits. Instructions were not manipulated in this experiment. Subjects in both CA groups were  only told that the lists were related in some unspecified way. The observed values of .s were equal to zero in both CA  conditions. One possible interpretation of this result is that the correct higher order hypothesis is very specific and is  determined by both the concept type and the structure of the particular experimental paradigm.  The theory predicts that r* will be less than r. Recall that r* is the probability of the joint event that an item whose  stimulus term is Ci.; is encoded for memory using a cue common to D(Ci,;) r) D(Ci+l,;) and that the common cue is utilized to  respond to C,+1,; . Thus, r* must be less than or equal to r. Furthermore, this constraint was not built into the estimation  algorithm. The observed values of r* were less than their respective values of r in both CA conditions. In addition, it was  assumed that r*, r, and q are functions of concept type and that differences in performance between the two CA conditions  should be reflected in these parameters. Likelihood ratio tests of hypotheses that the values of these parameters for the two  CA groups were equal were all highly significant. Thus, the relative values of the observed parameters from the two CA  conditions confirmed all predictions from the two-stage theory. Furthermore, these results give us some insight into the very  large instruction effects that have been found by other investigators.  If it is assumed that instructions have no effects on r*, r, and q and that s can be driven to 1.0 by suitable instructions or  pretraining procedures, the results of this experiment suggest that the two-stage theory can account for the large instruction  162 POLSON  TABLE 2  The Observed Values of the Maximum Likelihood Estimates of the Parameters of the Two-Stage Theory for the General Case and  Three Special Cases  Group s r* r q  CA, NOUN 0 0.121 0.740 0.950  0 0.134 0.586 1.000 1.000, " 0.441 0.970  1.000- 0.403 1.000,  CA, SENSE 0 0.050 0.417 0.751  0 0.052 0.269 1.000,  1.000, - 0.133 1.000  1.000, - 0.133 1.000,  Parameter set equal to specified value and likelihood function was maximized with respect to the remaining free parameters.  r* undefined for the case s = 1.0.  TABLE 3  The Observed Values of the Test Statistics for the Likelihood Ratio Tests of the Hypotheses Defined by the Three Special Cases  Group  Hypothesis CA, NOUN CA, SENSE  q = 1.0. 41.52 9.56 df = 1  s = 1.0. 85.08 47.79 df = 1  s = 1.0, q = 1.0. 104.76 47.79 df=2  effects that have been found by other investigators using similar materials. Examination of Table 2 shows that r* was much  less than r in both CA conditions, and thus any experimental manipulation that significantly increases the value of s will  produce large improvements in overall performance.  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION PROCESSES IN THE HULL PARADIGM 163  APPENDIX  This Appendix contains the proofs of Theorems 1-3 and the assertion that T is a transition matrix.  Theorem 1  Proof. The initial vector.  P(Y1 , A(0)1, A(l)l ,..., A(N)l) = ((1 - S), s, 0,..., 0)  by Assumption I and the definitions of the states of the process.  Proof. The transition matrix. The probability that a single concept goes from 1W, to Y equals r*. The probability that the  j-th concept makes this transition is only a function of the state of the process, (Ila). Therefore, the probability that none  of the N concepts go from 011, to Y on the initial presentation of a list equals  tyy = (1 - r*)N = b(0; N, r*),  tyo = 0 by (IIIa).  Assume that on the initial presentation of list i, the item whose stimulus term is Ci,; is the f-th item to be presented, the  subject is in state a, and the j-th concept goes from qd. to Y. The probability of the preceding complex event is (I -  Y*)'-Ir*, (Ila). The subject immediately goes to state fl, (IIla). The probability that he learns n - 1 out of the remaining N  - f concepts equals (n 1) rn-1(1 - r)N-i-n+'. Thus  )f-lr* (N - rn-1(1 - r)N-f-n+l \n - 1)  by Assumption Ilb.  tn,y = 0 by Assumption IIIb.  Additional complications are introduced in the derivations of the remaining tn because there are many possible combinations  of transitions of concepts from IWO to Y and Y to 011,3 that result in the process going from !1(m) to !1(n). Let k be the  number of concepts going from 011,3 to Y and f be the number making the Y to 011,3 transition given the process is in state  !1(m).  P(k concepts, 011,3 to Y I m concepts in Y) = b(k; N - m, r),  and  P(( concepts, Y to 011,3 1 m concepts in Y) = b((; m, 1 - q).  164 POLSON  The above expressions follow from Assumptions IIb and Ilc and the assumption that the occurrence of transitions between W,,  and Y of an individual concept are independent of the state and changes of state of all other concepts in the list.  Furthermore, it follows from the independence assumption that  tmn = I b(k; N - m, r)b(~; m, 1 - q)  where summation is over all h and ~ such that there are m concepts in state Y on list i and n in Y on i -{-- 1. Observe that  for given m and n, k - 1' equals m - n for all admissible combinations of k and e. Therefore  and the admissible values of k can be computed by letting 4 take on the values max(0, m - n) < e < min(m, N - n). Therefore  mtn(m,N-n)  tmn = Y, b(n - m + t; N - m, r)b(C; m, 1 - q) for m, n = 0, 1,..., N. C=max(0, m-n )  Theorem 2. The Response Rules  Proof. Given the process is in state Y or 11(0), the probability of no errors on any given item equals Vi , and the occurrence  of zero errors on any single item is independent of the sequence of responses made to any other item in the list, (IV) and  (1). Therefore, the probability that k out of N items are mastered without making any errors equals b(k; N, yi).  Given the process is in state A(n), n = 1, 2,..., N, the probability of k items with no errors, k = 0, 1,..., n - 1 equals 0  by Assumption IVb. The probability that k ---- n,..., N given the process is in A(n) follows from an argument identical to the  one presented in the preceding paragraph, and it equals b(k - n; N - n, yi).  Theorem 3. Xi , the Predicted Distribution of the Number of Items with no Errors on List i  Proof. Let xi = I be the event that e items were mastered with no errors during the acquisition of list i. If k is the state  of the process and k ranges over Y, 0, 1,..., N, then  P(xi = e) = E P(k on list i) P(xi = 1' 1 k on list i)  _ E P(k on list i)zk,t, k  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION PROCESSES IN THE HULL PARADIGM 165  but P(xi = /) is the tth element of Xi . Therefore,  Xi = Pizi,  A proof of the fact that Xi is in fact a probability distribution is presented by Polson (1967, pp. 143-144).  Theorem 4. T Is the Transition Matrix of a Finite Markov-Chain with Stationary Transition Probabilities  Proof. (a) T is finite. Obvious.  (b) The tmn are independent of i (stationary).  Observe that the tmn are functions only of states m and n and parameters r*, r, and q (Theorem 1). By assumption, the  parameters are independent of trial number.  (c) tn + 0. Observe that the t.n = 0 by assumption, or are equal to the sums of products of terms which are >, 0.  (d) Y_n , tmn = 1 for all m. For m = 0 and N, the tn either equal 0 or the terms of a binomial distribution (Theorem 1).  Therefore tmn = 1. For m = Y,  N N-n+1  tmn = (1 - r*)N + ~, (1 tt=1 ~=1  r*b(n- 1;N-t,r)  N N-e+1  (1 - r*)N + Y (1 - r*)e_Ir* Y b(n - 1; N - ~, r)  e=1 n=1  (1 - (1 - r*)N)  r*  For the remaining rows of T, observe that the elements of each row equal 0 or are the elements of a probability distribution  which is the convolution of the probability distributions of the following two integer-valued random variables:  P(k concepts, ill, to Y I n concepts in Y) = b(k; N - - n, r),  and  P(P remain in Y I n concepts in Y) = b(t'; n, q).  166 POLSON  Observe that by suitable changes in the limits of summation, tm% can be rewritten in terms of the above distributions as  n  Y b(n - P; N - m, r)b(e'; m, q), c-=o  but the above sum is just the f'-th term of the convolution.  REFERENCES  ATKINSON, R. C., BOWER, G. H., AND CROTHERS, E. J. Introduction to mathematical learning theory. New York: Wiley, 1965.  ATKINSON, R. C., AND ESTES, W. K. Stimulus sampling theory. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of  mathematical psychology, Vol. 11. New York: Wiley, 1963, pp. 121-268.  CALFEE, R. C., AND ATKINSON, R. C. Paired-associate models and the effects of list length. Journal of Mathematical Psychology,  1965, 2, 254-265.  CHANDLER, J. P. (1965). Subroutine Stepit: An algorithm that finds the values of the parameters which minimize a given  continuous function. A copyrighted program: J. P. Chandler, Copyright 1965. The program and write-up may be obtained from the  Quantum Chemistry Program Exchange, Indiana University; request program QCPE 66.  COHEN, B. H., BOUSFIELD, W. A., AND WHITMARSH, G. A. Cultural norms for verbal items in 43 categories. Technical Report No.  22. Office of Naval Research Contract Number Nonr-631(00), University of Connecticut, 1957.  GREENO, J. G. Paired-associate learning with massed and distributed repetitions of items. Journal of Experimental Psychology,  1964, 67, 286-295.  GREENO, J. G. Paired-associates learning with short-term retention: Mathematical analysis and data regarding identification.  Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1967, 4, 430-472. GREENO, J. G., AND SCANDURA, J. M. All-or-none transfer based on  verbally mediated concepts. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1966, 3, 388-411.  GREENO, J. G., AND STEINER, T. E. Comments on `Markovian processes with identifiable states: General considerations and  applications to all-or-none learning.' Psychometrika, 1968, 33, 169-172.  GREENO, J. G., AND STEINER, T. E. Markovian processes with identifiable states: General considerations and application to  all-or-none learning. Psychometrika, 1964, 29, 309-333. HULL, C. L. Quantitative aspects of the evolution of concepts.  Psychological Monographs, 1920, Whole No. 123.  POLSON, M. C., RESTLE, F., AND POLSON, P. G. Association and discrimination in pairedassociates learning. Journal of  Experimental Psychology, 1965, 69, 47-55.  POLSON, P. G. A quantitative study of the concept identification and paired associates learning processes in the Hull  paradigm. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Indiana University, 1967. POLSON, P. G. Statistical methods for a general theory  of all-or-none learning. Psychometrika, 1970, 35, 51-72.  REED, H. B. Factors influencing the learning and retention of concepts. 1. The influence of set. Journal of Experimental  Psychology, 1946, 35, 71-87.  CONCEPT IDENTIFICATION PROCESSES IN THE HULL PARADIGM 167  RESTLE, F. The significance of all-or-none learning. Psychological Bulletin, 1965, 64, 313-325. RICHARDSON, J. Association  among stimuli and the learning of verbal concept lists. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1960, 60, 290-298.  SHEPARD, R. N. Comments on Professor Underwood's paper. In C. N. Cofer and B. S. Musgrave (Eds.), Verbal Behavior and  Learning. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1963, pp. 48-69.  SHEPARRD, R. N. Learning and recall as organization and search. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1966, 5,  201-204.  SIEGEL, S. Nonparametric statistics for the behavioral sciences. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1956. SUPPES, P., AND GINSBERG, R. A  fundamental property of all-or-none models binomial distribution of responses prior to conditioning, with application to  concept formation in children. Psychological Review, 1963, 70, 139-162.  THORNDIKE, E. L., AND LORGE, 1. The teacher's work book of 30,000 words. New York: Bureau of Publications, Teachers College,  Columbia University, 1944.  TRABASSO, T., AND BOWER, G. Attention in learning: Theory and research. New York: Wiley, 1968.  UNDERWOOD, B. J., AND RICHARDSON, J. Some materials for the study of concept formation. Psychological Bulletin, 1956, 53,  84-95. (a)  UNDERWOOD, B. J., AND RICHARDSON, J. Verbal concept learning as a function of instructions and dominance level. Journal of  Experimental Psychology, 1956, 51, 229-238. (b)  RECEIVED: September 17, 1970