10.1016/0022-2496(72)90025-9
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 9, 168-199 (1972)  A Theory of Magnitude Estimation and Cross-Modality Matching,  DAVID H. KRANTZ  The University of Mtchigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48104  The generalizations that have emerged from "ratio scaling" of sensory continua include: consistency among various methods,  consistency with changes in modulus, and the power law. These generalizations pose difficulties for the commonly held view  (called here mapping theory) that "ratio scaling" judgments are mediated by mappings of stimuli into sensations. The main  difficulty is that the ratio-like consistency properties of cross-modality matching cannot be accounted for by essentially  nonnumerical sensations, and hence must be treated by a process theory which assumes that crossmodality matching is mediated  by magnitude estimation. An alternative process theory (relation theory) assumes that "ratio scaling" judgments are not  mediated by a property of single stimuli (sensation) but rather by a property of pairs of stimuli. The perceived relations of  pairs (called sensation "ratios") are assumed to share a qualitative property of numerical ratios. This axiom leads to a  measurement representation by ratios of psychophysical functions (sensation functions). These psychophysical functions can be  obtained directly by magnitude estimation provided that mental estimation of length ratios and perceived sensation "ratios" of  length pairs are ordered alike (in fact, both correspond roughly to physical length ratios). The assumed ordering of stimulus  pairs by sensation "ratios" leads to a simple account of the various empirical consistency generalizations. Such an ordering  may also be related to other pair orderings, such as those based on discriminability measures and on perceived sensation  "differences."  The purpose of this paper is to present and contrast two different kinds of theory concerning "ratio scaling" in  psychophysics. Mapping theory is based on the classical idea that subjects' judgments in "ratio scaling" are mediated by  sensation. Relation theory refers to a proposal of R. N. Shepard, to the effect that subjects' judgments are mediated by  perceived relations (sensation "ratios") pertaining to pairs of stimuli.  The first two sections present notation and terminology, and some empirical generalizations. The latter are only rough  approximations, but even as such, they need to be explained in a theory of "ratio scaling." Section 3 contains an informal  exposition of several alternative theories. Section 4 presents mapping theory axiomatically. In Section 5, I discuss briefly  some special criticisms of physical-correlate theory. Section 6 is devoted to relation theory. The final section assumes (as  does my title) that relation  1 This research was supported by NSF grants GB 4947 and GB 8181 to the University of Michigan.  1972 by Academic Press, Inc.  168  A THEORY OF MAGNITUDE ESTIMATION 169  theory is essentially correct, and discusses, in light of that theory, the concept of sensation.  1. NOTATION AND TERMINOLOGY  By a sensory continuum I simply mean a set of stimuli that is ordered with respect to some attribute such as brightness,  loudness, perceived length, etc. If X is a sensory continuum, typical members of X are denoted by the letters u, v,..., z. If  several sensory continua are dealt with at once, they are denoted Xl , XZ ,..., and corresponding subscripts are put on the  letters u, v,..., z to identify the continuum. Thus, xi always denotes an element of Xz , etc. (It may happen that the same  physical stimulus occurs in several continua, corresponding to different attributes, but this possibility is not recognized in  the notation; it receives different names in different continua, and the sets X; are therefore considered to be disjoint.)  Various physical measures may be used to identify an element x of X, but these are considered purely as nominal scales, i.e.,  names for elements of X.  For reasons that will be clear below, the notation Xi will be reserved for the perceived-length continuum; ul , vl ,..., zl  will always refer to line segments.  I use the term "ratio scaling" to refer to a family of interrelated psychophysical methods, discussed and classified by  Stevens (1957). The quotation marks are used to emphasize the distinction between the term "ratio scaling" and the term ratio  scale, the latter having its usual technical meaning in measurement theory (Suppes and Zinnes, 1963). "Ratio scaling" need not  lead to ratio scales; but we shall see that mapping theory and relation theory both lead to ratio scales, though for very  different reasons.  The word ratio has its usual meaning in arithmetic, i.e., the quotient of two numbers. The term "ratio" will be used to denote  whatever relation a subject judges when he is told to judge the "ratio" of two sensations. "Ratio scaling" derives its name  from the fact that in some of its methods, the subject is instructed to judge sensation "ratios." Relation theory permits the  construction of a ratio scale such that the ordering of numerical ratios of scale values preserves the ordering of sensation  "ratios."  I shall be concerned specifically with three methods of "ratio scaling." In pair estimation, the subject is presented two  stimuli, either simultaneously or in close temporal succession, and is asked to judge the sensation "ratio" (with respect to  the defining attribute of a sensory continuum, e.g., he is asked to judge the brightness "ratio" or loudness "ratio" or the  "ratio" of perceived lengths). (Stevens uses the term ratio estimation, but I cannot bring myself to use the sequence  r-a-t-i-o in yet a fifth meaning.)  The second method is magnitude estimation, where stimuli are presented one at a time and the subject assigns numbers "in  proportion to the sensations evoked."  170 KRANTZ  Finally, in cross-modality matching, stimuli are presented one at a time, and the subject chooses a stimulus in another  continuum that matches the given stimulus, e.g., he may be asked to choose a noise x3 in X3 , the loudness of which matches  the brightness of a light x2 in X2 .  Pair estimation and magnitude estimation yield responses in the set R+ of positive real numbers. The letters p, q, r, s, t are  used to denote typical elements of R+. Strictly speaking, the responses are not numbers, but names of numbers; however, in  data analysis, the names are invariably associated with the corresponding numbers.  Magnitude-estimation functions are sometimes manipulated by assigning a modulus, i.e., a fixed pair (xi , p). This may be  attempted by presenting stimulus xi and informing the subject that the number to be assigned to xi is p. When the averaged  magnitudeestimation function is plotted, it is then found that the average' response to xi is a number q which is reasonably  close to p. Further analysis usually assumes that the error, if any, is unimportant and that the true modulus is (xi, q). At  any rate, any pair (xi , p) can be considered to be a modulus. The magnitude-estimation function for modulus (xi , p) is  denoted Ni( I xi , p), i.e., Ni(yi I xi , p) is the (average) magnitude estimate for stimulus yi when the modulus is (xi , p).  By definition, Ni(xi I xi , p) = p.  Similarly, cross-modality matching of X; to Xi depends on a modulus (x;, xi). We denote by C;i(y? I x; , xi) the (average) Xi  match to stimulus y; , when the modulus is (x; , xi); by definition, C;i(x; I x; , xi) = xi . As in magnitude estimation, the  experimenter may propose a modulus (x; , xi'). This produces an observed modulus (x; , xi) with xi not too far from xi'.  Finally, the pair-estimation function for Xi is denoted Pi; thus, Pi(xi , yi) is the number in R+ assigned to (xi, yi).  2. SOME EMPIRICAL GENERALIZATIONS  In this section I shall list five empirical generalizations concerning the results of the three methods of "ratio scaling"  described above. The first four are consistency properties, the fifth is the well-known power law. None of these  generalizations is strictly true; but they are all good enough approximations that I think any theory must take account of  them.  (i) Magnitude consistency. Magnitude estimation functions with different moduli differ only by similarity transformations.  That is,  Ni (xi I xi , p)lNi(yi I xi , q) = ki(p, q),  s Throughout I use the term average loosely to refer to some appropriate measure of central tendency.  A THEORY OF MAGNITUDE ESTIMATION 171  where ki(p, q) is a constant. Putting xi = yi in that equation, the left side reduces to p1 q, so we have  Ni(yi I xi , p)I Ni(yi I xi , q) = p1 q.  This property seems to be part of the lore of "ratio scaling"; it is based on the observation that the modulus is not a very  critical variable affecting the exponents of power functions [see generalization (v) below].  (ii) Pair consistency. Pair estimates behave like ratios, i.e.,  Pi(xi, yi) - Pi(yi, zi) = Pi(xi, 2i).  Note that if there is a scale ni on Xi such that  Pi(xi , yi) = na(xi)I ni(yi), (3)  then Eq. (2) follows. Conversely, if Eq. (2) holds, then for any fixed zi in Xi , the function  ni(xi) = Pi(xi , zi)  satisfies Eq. (3).  See Hanes (1949) and Fagot and Stewart (1969) for validation studies of pair estimation.  (iii) Magnitude pair consistency. The pair estimate is equal to the ratio of magnitude estimates for the members of the pair,  i.e., ni(xi) = Ni(xi I zi , p) satisfies Eq. (3). Obviously, generalization (iii) implies (ii), since Eq. (3) implies Eq. (2).  The evidence for this is mainly that magnitude and pair estimation lead to about the same exponents for power functions.  (iv) Consistency of magnitude estimation with cross-modality matching. If y; is matched with yi , in the cross-modality  matching function with modulus (x; , xi), then the ratio of magnitude estimates of y; to x; equals the ratio of magnitude  estimates of y; to xi . That is [for any moduli (zi , p), (z; , q)],  Ni[Cji(y> I xj , xi) I zi , p] __ Nj(yi zj, q)  Ni(xi I Zi, P) Ni(xi zi, q)  See J. C. Stevens, J. D. Mack, and S. S. Stevens (1960) and S. S. Stevens (1966) for evidence (in terms of power-law  exponents) concerning this point. Again, the fact that the modulus is not critical in determining the exponent in  cross-modality matching seems to be part of the lore of "ratio scaling."  172 KRANTZ  (v) Power law. Magnitude estimates are approximately power functions of stimulus energy, i.e.,  N,(yi I xi , p) = p . (yilxi)B,, (5)  where Bi is a positive constant. Here, of course, the elements of Xi are taken to be energy values, rather than mere  designations of stimuli. It is well known that Eq. (5) is a very poor approximation for low energies, or in some  circumstances, even for moderate ones, and that it can be improved by various corrections that do not alter its shape for high  energies.  3. PROCESS THEORIES OF "RATIO SCALING" PERFORMANCE  The theory of "ratio scaling" performance that seems most reasonable to me is named relation theory. This section gives a  brief sketch of relation theory and of three alternative views, and indicates the general reasons that cause me to favor  relation theory.  According to relation theory, the fundamental object judged by an observer is not a single stimulus, but a pair of stimuli.  Given a pair of stimuli, there are various judgments that can be made: their dissimilarity; how well they go together (e.g.,  the colors of a shirt and a necktie); or, in the present case, their sensation "ratio." The first two examples, dissimilarity  and harmoniousness, are obviously properties of the pair as such; they may or may not be predictable from some simple property  of the individual stimuli in the pair. What relation theory asserts is that the same holds for the third property, the  sensation "ratio" of the pair. It is a property of the pair; it may or may not be predictable in a simple way from a property  of the individual stimuli. That is why "ratio" appears in quotes; a sensation "ratio" is not necessarily a ratio of  sensations. In fact, the notion of ratio of sensations does not have any meaning until a numerical function, identified as  sensation, has been constructed. The term sensation "ratio" merely reminds us that the property of the pair which is judged is  identified to the observer by telling him to assign numbers proportional to sensation, or the like.  The formal development of relation theory is concerned in part with the empirical laws that must be satisfied, by the  judgments of a property of pairs, in order to permit the construction of a numerical "sensation" function on individual  stimuli, such that ratios of function values predict the judgments. For example, the loudness "ratio" of a pair of tones must  increase as the first tone gets louder, holding the second one fixed. This is not sufficient; the key empirical law is a  stronger monotonicity property, which asserts that the sensation "ratio" shares a qualitative property of numerical ratios  (Axiom 3, Section 6). A further concern of relation theory is the detailed account  A THEORY OF MAGNITUDE ESTIMATION 173  of performance, including generalizations (i)-(v) above, in terms of judgments of stimulus pairs.  Concerning the history of relation theory, note first that it is similar to the very old idea that any stimulus is judged in a  context of previous and concurrently present stimuli. This idea owes its greatest development to Helson (1964). A position  akin to relation theory was mentioned by Stevens (1957, p. 176) and seems to underlie formal developments by Kristof (1965,  1967). The main source of my ideas on relation theory was a manuscript by R. N. Shepard, entitled "What does the  psychophysicist measure ?" (The term relation theory is my own usage.)3  The most obvious alternative to relation theory is that the observer judges some property of single stimuli. I call this view  mapping theory because it assumes that each stimulus continuum is mapped onto a common continuum, which may be called  sensation. One obvious difference between relation and mapping theories is that relation theory gives a simple account of pair  estimation, since judgment of pairs is considered to be the basic process, and a slightly more complicated account of  performance in other "ratio scaling" methods, whereas mapping theory gives a more complicated account of pair estimation, and,  one would think, a simpler account of the single-stimulus methods. (In fact, we shall see that the apparent simplicity is  abandoned when one tries to account for generalizations (i)-(iv) in the framework of mapping theory.)  A sort of hybrid possibility, suggested by one of the referees, is that relation theory applies to some continuum (say, X1)  and that the other continua are mapped into X1 via the mediation of the sensation continuum. Thus, the observer is assumed to  judge a relational property of a pair of Xl stimuli whose sensations are equivalent, individually, to the sensations of two Xi  stimuli. I shall call this the relative judgment theory, because it assumes that the sensation level of a single stimulus is  judged, but it provides a mechanism whereby the judgment is relativized, via relational judgement in Xl .  The third alternative to relation theory is the physical-correlate theory [see Warren (1969)]. This theory assumes that the  continua Xi are mapped into Xl (which in turn governs the use of numbers) not via the mediation of sensation, but on the basis  of learned contingencies. For example, the luminance continuum is mapped onto the  a Professor Shepard introduced the idea that magnitude estimation and cross-modality matching are based on a function of  stimulus pairs, and he formulated the qualitative axiom leading to the power law [Eq. (18) below] and emphasized the  evolutionary value of this qualitative property. In a later draft, he independently obtained and used the basic qualitative  law of relation theory [Eq. (12) below]. His forthcoming revision, tentatively titled "On the status of `direct' psychological  measurement," contains much detailed discussion of psychological issues relating to the various theories presented here. I am  responsible, however, for the formulations and interpretations of all the main theorems in this paper and for the emphasis on  generalizations (i)-(iv) of Section 2.  48o/912-3  174 KRANTZ  distance continuum because the luminous flux from a relatively small light source decreases as the distance of the source  increases.  All these theories share the common feature that the use of numbers is based on some special sensory continuum associated with  numbers. This continuum may be numerousness, length, distance, or possibly some other. There may, in fact, be important  individual differences in which continuum or continua are directly associated with numbers. This paper assumes that there is  one continuum, X,, associated with numbers (though the details of the association vary slightly across theories), and for  concreteness, Xl is assumed to be the length continuum. This last assumption makes hardly any difference in the formal  developments to follow, but it accords with my own introspections and with the fact that magnitude estimation of length gives  rise to a linear function (Teghtsoonian, 1965).  The principal reason for favoring relation theory over the others is that it gives a satisfactory account of generalization  (iv): that magnitude estimates predict crossmodality matches, independent of the choice of the moduli in the cross-modality  matching. If cross-modality matching worked only for one set of moduli, then one would hypothesize that y; is matched to yi  just if y; and yi are mapped into the same sensation (mapping theory). The modulus would be any pair (x; , xi) that is  identical in sensation. However, once we allow the modulus (x; , xi) to be chosen arbitrarily, mapping theory is in trouble.  One has nonmatching sensations corresponding to x; , xi , and other, presumably nonmatching, sensations corresponding to y; ,  yi; in what sense does yi correspond to y; ? Stevens might answer that the sensation ratio of y; to x; is the same as that of  yi to xi , but this is meaningless. Sensations are not numbers, in mapping theory; they are internal mediators. Their ratio is  not defined. On the other hand, if one answers that the reason the observer chooses yi as the match to y; is because the  magnitude estimate for y; bears the same ratio to that for x; as the yi estimate bears to the xi one, then one assumes  cross-modality matching is mediated by (a) magnitude estimation and (b) explicit calculations with four numerical magnitude  estimates, two of them remembered from presentation of previous stimuli (x; , xi). This is both implausible and contrary to my  introspection of what I do when I make cross-modality matches. A similar problem exists for physical-correlate theory.  Relative-judgment theory escapes the assumption of explicit numerical calculations, but still requires everything to be  mediated by mapping via sensation into Xl , with two remembered values of Xl stimuli (corresponding to x; , xi) involved in  the relative judgments. Relation theory, however, gives by far the simplest account: yi is chosen as the match to y; because  the relation of yi to the remembered xi (in the same modality) matches the relation of y; to the remembered x; . In other  words, in relation theory one substitutes for Stevens' ratio of sensations a perceived relational property of the pair, which  is called a sensation "ratio." This property may or may not satisfy laws (such as the ones presented in Section 6) that permit  the construction of a numerical sensation function.  A THEORY OF MAGNITUDE ESTIMATION 175  4. AxIOMATIZATION OF MAPPING THEORY  The structure of this section is as follows: I first give an informal description of the primitive concepts and the axioms of  mapping theory. Secondly, I give a formal statement, followed by a representation and uniqueness theorem. The latter is hardly  more than a restatement of the axioms, but I put it in the form of a theorem to facilitate comparison with other measurement  theorems, especially, those of relation theory. Thirdly, I give some brief explanatory remarks concerning the formal system  and the theorem. Finally, I indicate how the development would be modified in the case of relative-judgment theory.  The first three primitives are: sensory continua Xi , i = 1,..., m; a set S of sensations; and mappings Oi of Xi into S. The  value Oi(xi) is an element of S-representing the central tendency of the sensations evoked by xi . Of these primitives, only  Xi is observable; Oi and S are hypothetical constructs.  The next three primitives are the observable functions introduced in Section 1: real-valued magnitude-estimation functions  Ni(yi I xi , p), real-valued pair-estimation functions, Pi(xi , yi), and cross-modality matching functions C;i(y; I x; , xi),  taking values in Xi . These three observables, of course, must be primitive concepts in any formal theory that encompasses the  ground covered in Sections 1 and 2.  The seventh and last primitive concept is introduced to provide a link between sensations and numbers. What we require is a  function that maps S into the set R'- of positive numbers, and is modulus dependent. Suppose we had such a function, denoted  ~'(s I x; , p). Then we would postulate that magnitude estimation is mediated by S and by ~', i.e., Ni is the function  composition ~' - 0i , or  Ni(yi I xi , p) = o'[oi(yi) I xi , A  However, I do not see how sensations could be paired directly with numbers at all, much less in the sliding fashion required  by varying moduli. It is not as though the subject can literally read a dial in his head. A neurophysiologist could measure,  say, spikes per second, or, to adjust to varying moduli, could transform to spikes per half second or per ten seconds, etc.  The subject cannot do so. He does not have any unit sensation, nor any means of taking a unit sensation and mentally  reduplicating it until it builds up to match a given sensation. At least, I am unwilling to postulate such an ability, unless  forced to by very clearcut evidence.  A more reasonable assumption, I think, is that the mapping oS into R+ is mediated by some sensory continuum for which the  subject is highly familiar with the physical scale. The continuum Xl (length) will be assumed to play this role; though, as  mentioned earlier, this is not the only possibility, and individual differences may play a role here. Thus, the final  primitive is not 0', but a numerical-association function 0 from Xl into R+; O(xi) is the number the observer has learned to  use to describe  length stimulus xl . The mapping from S to R+ goes via X1; in function-composition notation, it is efii 1, where 011 is the  inverse of the mapping Y'1 from Xl to S. (The axioms therefore include a provision that the inverse of 01 exists.)  However, 0X11 is not modulus dependent. Therefore we cannot replace Eq. (6) by the postulate Ni = 0 ~i 1 Oi, or  Ni(yi I xi , p) - Y'1Y'l 1[Y'i(yi)]}, (7)  because the left side depends on xi , p and the right side does not.  Within the confines of mapping theory, I do not see how to provide for the right kinds of changes in modulus, except by  assuming that the subject carries out the needed transformation directly, by multiplying. That is, he transforms 0 11 by  multiplying it by the factor  p/O{o110i (xi)] }  in order to obtain modulus (xi , p). In other words, there is a natural modulus, (xi , q), where q is given by applying Eq.  (7) to xi [i.e., q is the denominator of the fraction (8)]. If the subject is asked to produce modulus (xi , p), he simply  calculates (as best as he can) the ratio plq and then multiplies each natural numerical response [Eq. (7)] by that ratio.  Equivalently, the subject may decide what unit of length will generate the right number p, associated with xi , and then  report all the lengths 011[Y'i(yi)] in terms of those units. Conversion from a familiar unit (say, feet) to an unfamiliar one  (meters, or 8-millimeter units) still requires the kind of multiplication and division postulated above.  The first numbered axiom simply asserts that the function Ni is given by 0 -l 0 4'i multiplied by the factor (8) determined by  the modulus. The interpretation is that the subject carries out this multiplication explicitly (as best as he can, i.e.,  intuitively, not with pencil and paper). The magnitude-consistency property (Eq. (1)] is an immediate consequence of this  first axiom.  The second numbered axiom postulates that pair estimation is mediated by magnitude estimation; more precisely, the observer  obtains Pi(xi , yi) by (intuitively) dividing the magnitude estimates for xi and yi , given by 0 i 1 0 Y'i . Magnitude-pair  consistency [generalization (iii)] follows immediately from this conception of the pair-estimation process; and generalization  (ii), pair consistency, is a logical consequence of magnitude-pair consistency, as noted in Section 2.  This postulate of arithmetical operation on magnitude estimates does not appeal to me; yet it is hard to see how else the  subject can get a number, Pi(xi , yi), out of two nonnumerical objects, the sensations, Y'i(xi) and Y'i(yi). A good way to  cast further doubt on this postulate would be to show that the ordering of pairs (xi, yi) obtained  A THEORY OF MAGNITUDE ESTIMATION 177  from Pi values can also be obtained by other operations, e.g., direct rating of pairs, or reaction time to decide which  stimulus is more intense.  The third, and last numbered axiom specifies the process by which cross-modality matches are performed. The difficulty that  mapping theory faces here was described in Section 3. There is no way to account for the maintenance of consistency as the  modulus changes by the device used for magnitude estimation, because there is no way of multiplying a nonnumerical object like  a light by a factor such as (8), and no way to obtain that factor directly either, since we no longer have the number p  available. The only reasonable account I have thought of assumes that cross-modality matching is mediated by magnitude  estimation. The subject generates numbers o f 1 o Y'i(xi,) and 0 - 011 - O;(x;) and calculates (intuitively) their ratio. Let  the ratio be r. Then, given y; , he attempts to find yi so that the corresponding y ratio is also equal to r. Equation (4)  obviously follows from this postulate.  Finally, we turn to generalization (v), the power law. Mapping theory really has very little to say about this; it simply  happens to be the approximate form of the mapping Vi 1 o wi from Xi to XI . If the length sensation of segment xl matches the  brightness of light xi , the length sensation of segment yl matches the brightness of light yi , and segment yl is  approximately double xl in length, then the luminance of yi will be approximately 8 times that of xi (cube root law for  brightness).  In my opinion, the accounts given above of magnitude estimation, pair estimation, and cross-modality matching are implausible.  I do not believe that subjects explicitly or implicitly multiply on every trial in order to maintain a given modulus; nor that  they make covert magnitude estimates of each stimulus, and divide, in pair estimation; nor, finally, that they make covert  magnitude estimates in two different modalities, divide, and compare the result with a modulus-ratio, in cross-modality  matching.  Furthermore, the account given of cross-modality matching undercuts the very idea of mappings of Xi into S; if subjects do not  match sensations directly, in cross-modality matching, then when do they? To put this another way, the sensation matches aye  now entirely unobservable-there is no way of telling, from any of the "ratio scaling" methods here discussed, whether Oi(xi) =  O;(x;) or not.  Neither my beliefs, nor the arguments in the previous paragraph suffice to reject mapping theory, There probably is no single  critical experiment or argument that would suffice. Below, we shall see that relation theory, and to some extent  relativejudgment theory also, avoid some of the various multiplications and mediations that I find artificial, and make  predictions which there would be no reason at all to make on the basis of mapping theory.  Primitives o f Mapping Theory  Xl ,..., X are nonempty sets. S is a nonempty set.  178 KRANTZ  For i = 1,..., m, y'i is a one-to-one mapping of Xi into S; ~1 is onto, so i 'exists.  For each xi E Xi and p E R+, Ni( I xi , p) is a function from Xi into R+.  For each i, Pi is a function from Xi x Xi into R+.  For each xi E Xi and x; E X; , Cii( I x; , xi) is a function whose domain is a subset of X; , including x; , and whose range  is a subset of Xi , including xi .  0 is a one-to-one mapping of X1 onto an interval in R+; it is convenient to assume that the interval includes 1.  Axioms of Mapping Theory  1. Ni(yi I xi , p) = i P P(xi) - 0 01 1 oi(yi)  2.  Pi(xi , Yi) _ Y'11 Y'i(xi) 011 Oi(Yi)  3.  0-01, 04cii(Yi I xi, xi)J __ 0-00 P(xi)  0.00 Y'i(Yf) 0.00 oi(x1)  These three axioms are simply reformulations of the mechanisms proposed to account for magnitude consistency, magnitude-pair  consistency, and consistency of magnitude estimation with cross-modality matching. Thus, Axiom 1 asserts that the "natural"  assignment of a number to yi , given by the mapping 0 0' Y'i (yi into S into X1 into R+), is multiplied by a factor  depending on the modulus (xi , p); Axiom 2 asserts that the pair estimate is obtained by dividing magnitude estimates; and  Axiom 3 states that if yi is the cross-modality match to yi , then the magnitude estimates for yi and yi match a criterion  ratio determined by the modulus, (xi , xi).  Representation and Uniqueness Theorem  THEOREM 1. Let X1 ,..., X , S, 01 ,..., 0m , Pi , Ni , C1i , and 0 satisfy Axioms 1-3 of mapping theory. Then there exist  functions fi from Xi to R+, i = 1,..., m, and a strictly increasing function f from R+ to R+, such that  (I) Ni(yi I xi , p) = q if and only if  fi(Yi)1fi(xi) =f(q)lf(p),  (II) Pi(xi, yi) = r if and only if fi(xi)1fi(yi) =f(r);  (III) if Cii(yi I xi, xi) = Yi, then  fi(Yi)Ifi(Y?) =fi(xi)Ifi(xi)-  A THEORY OF MAGNITUDE ESTIMATION 179  Moreover, gi , g are other such functions satisfying I, II, and III, if and only if there exist positive numbers ai , 1 < i <  m, and g, such that  gi(xi) = -if i(xi)s> i = 1,..., m,  g(p) =f(p)s.  Proof. Let fi = 0 o Oil - 9'i , i = 1,..., m and let f be the identity function on R-~. Axioms 1, 2, and 3 are respectively  equivalent to properties I, II, and III.  If al ,..., a , and g are positive numbers, then obviously gi = aifs, g = fa satisfy 1, II, and III also.  Conversely, suppose that gl ,..., g,, , g are any functions satisfying the conclusions of the theorem. For any p, q in the  range of 0, take xl , yl in Xl with.fi(x,) = O(x,) = p, fi(yi) = 0(yi) = q. By I, II of the theorem, N,(yl I xi , p) = q and  P,(yl , xI) = of p. But since gl , g also satisfy I, we have  gi(yi)I gi(xi) = g(q)l g(p)  Also, since II holds for g, gl ,  gi(yi)lgi(x1) = g(glp).  Thus, we have g(q)l g(p) = g(ql p). Since g is assumed to be increasing on R+, it follows from well-known results on  functional equations that g(p) = ps, P > 0. Now, whenever gi(yi)lgi(xi) = g(q)(g(p), we have also fi(y)lfi(xi) = q1 p, hence,  gi(yi)lgi(xi) = (fi(yi)lfi(xi))S'  Rearranging,  gi(yi)lfbi)s = gi(xi)lfi(xi)s.  This separation of variables yields gi(yi)lfi(yi)s = a constant, denoted ai . Q.E.D.  A few remarks about this result are in order. First note, that although the axioms were arrived at by process arguments, they  essentially do no more than postulate the existence of the desired representation. Axioms 1-3 are essentially identical with  properties I, II, and III of the representation theorem; this made the existence part of the proof completely trivial.  Second, note that the functions Ni( I xi , p) constitute a representation (since they are proportional to the fi defined in  the proof, by Axiom 1). Hence, magnitude estimation does yield ratio-scale measurement, in the context of the present  development of mapping theory.  Third, note that the uniqueness theorem, although seemingly satisfactory, is very unsatisfying in one sense. The uniqueness  stems from the fact that the subjects are  180 KRANTZ  assumed to use the ordinary number scale, carrying out multiplications and divisions with it. The transformations p --* ps  leave such numerical operations invariant. If a subject chose to exponentiate all his numbers, and then used them just as  subjects are assumed to do here, then the same representation would be valid, but the functions fi would be exponentials of  the ones that would otherwise be produced. In other words, we do not really have ratio-scale measurement of sensation, we have  ratio-scale measurement of sensation-cum-use of natural numbers. A more satisfactory uniqueness theorem is obtained in  relation theory.  If mapping theory were axiomatized omitting variation in moduli and omitting pair estimation, then there would be no basis for  ratio-scale uniqueness. The relation Ni(xi) = p would be represented by fi(xi) = f (p), and the relation C;i(x;) = xi would be  represented by f;(x;) = fi(xi). This would lead only to ordinal measurement.  Fourth, although it is true that the uniqueness theorem fi --* ai fill is ordinarily thought of as logarithmic-interval,  rather than ratio-scale uniqueness, the situation here is somewhat more like ratio-scale measurement. This is because the  various scales are subject only to a common power transformation. The situation is analogous to additive conjoint measurement  (Luce and Tukey, 1964), where the interval scales have a common unit. Here, there is a very natural convention for fixing the  exponent: use the identity function for the real numbers, i.e., let the scale for length, Xl , be the natural physical scale,  which is what is obtained directly by magnitude estimation (function Nl) in any case. (The reason that a power transformation  of the real numbers is permissible is that only multiplication and division are employed in the representation.)  Relative-Judgment Theory  The simplest way to modify the preceding axiom system, to capture the essence of the relative judgment assumptions, is to  replace the numerical-association function 0, from Xl to R+, by a function expressing relative judgments of Xl stimuli. The  pairestimation function, Pl , can be used for that purpose. Axioms 1-3 would be replaced by  1'. Ni(yi I xi , p) = p - P1[01' Y'i(yi), Y'l, Y'ilxiA.  2'. Pi(xi, yi) = Pl[oll Oi(xi), Y'll Ti(yi)J.  3'. P1lY'l1 Y'i C,i(yi I x; , xi), Y'l 1 Y'ilxiA = P1[l 1 OAya), Y'l 1 Oa(xA  Thus, according to Axiom 1', the magnitude estimate for yi is obtained by mapping yi and xi , via S, onto lengths yl =X11  Oi(yi), xl = 011 Oi(xi), and then making a relative judgment P,(yl , xl) of these two lengths. This is multiplied by p to  adjust the modulus. Likewise, pair estimation is simply relative judgment of matching Xl  A THEORY OF MAGNITUDE ESTIMATION 181  stimuli; and cross-modality matching proceeds by choosing yi = C;i(y; I x; , x;) such that the length match of yi , relative  to that of xi , is the same as the length match of y; relative to that of x; . Besides Axioms 1'-3' we need an assumption  about the relative-judgment process represented by Pi . We assume pair consistency,  4. Pi(xi , y1) - Pi(yi , zi) = Pi(xi , ZI).  It was remarked in Section 1 that this is equivalent to the existence of a function f1 such that  Pi(xi , .y1) = f1(x1)1f1(y1)  Substituting f1 ratios for P1 in 1'-3' restores Axioms 1-3, with f1 = ~. It is also easy to show that  Ni,(yi I xi , p) = N1(011 Pi(yi) 101 1 Oi(xi), p);  the theory was suggested, in this latter form, by one of the referees.  In essence, we have dropped 0 from the primitives and reintroduced it by definition, using Axiom 4. The latter is not too  appealing as an axiom, but it will be seen below, in the discussion of relation theory, that it can be justified fairly well.  What the relative-judgment theory does is to apply relation theory only to X1 and then mapping theory to connect the Xi with  X1 . It still suffers from the implausibility of the processes in Axiom 3': cross-modality matching requires remembering the  X1-stimuli associated with both xi and x; , via S, and the finding of Xl-stimuli associated with yi and y; , followed by two  relative judgments whose results are then compared.  S. PHYSICAL-CORRELATE THEORY  Mapping theory incorporates a physical-correlate assumption to account for subjects' use of numbers: the mapping from S to R+  goes via X,, for which it is assumed that there is a familiar physical measure. Warren (1969) omits S altogether, going  directly from Xi to X1, thence to R+. The association between Xi and X1 is assumed to be learned via environmental  contingencies. For example, the intensity of light from a point source decreases as the square of distance; this suggests that  light intensities may be associated with distances, for which the physical scale is familiar.  Physical-correlate theory does not avoid the disadvantages of mapping theory cited above. In order to account for the  consistency generalizations, (i)-(iv), it must make mediation assumptions like those of mapping theory. Its apparent  advantages over mapping theory are: first, elimination of the hypothetical construct S and the  mappings Y'i into S; and second, the derivation of certain power laws, e.g., a squareroot law corresponding to inverse-square  distance relations. These advantages are outweighed, I think, by the following points.  First, the fact that judged brightness of a light is correlated with judged distance is cited as evidence; but one can just as  well interpret this as showing that distance judgements are mediated by perceived brightness, under the conditions of the  experiments in question.  Second, the fact that a square-root law is shown to hold, under suitable viewing and judging conditions, is not at all  conclusive. J. C. Stevens and S. S. Stevens (1963) have shown that many factors systematically affect the brightness exponent.  To be convincing, physical-correlate theory would have to give a systematic account of at least some of these factors in terms  of the correlate idea. This has not been done. Moreover, it seems quite possible that two rather different, though closely  related, intensive attributes of light can be judged: brightness and whiteness. The latter seems to follow the square-root law  much better than the former (Krantz, 1971).  Third, physical-correlate theory does not deal with the large variety of continua that have been scaled, and the remarkable  consistencies of cross-modality matching. For example, what is the physical correlate of the amount of green in a  green-pluswhite additive color mixture, which can account for the consistency with which this is scaled and matched to other  qualities (redness, yellowness) at various luminance levels (Indow and Stevens, 1966) ? Again, how can one account for the  fact that the magnitudeestimation function for brightness of monochromatic lights is independent of wavelength, after  correcting the energy scale for threshold luminous efficiency? [See Ekman, Eisler, and Kunnapas (1960); Jameson (1970); Krantz  (1972); Wilson (1964).] Most of the intense, pure lights used in such an experiment have never been seen before by the subject  at any distance, much less over a range of distances. If he can use his experience with broad-band lights, it is because there  is a sensory qualitybrightness-in common between the monochromatic and the broad-band lights. Once this is conceded, there is  no advantage to physical-correlate theory, since a mediating set S needs to be assumed in any case.  Fourth, I think that the basic mechanism of physical-correlate theory is quite incredible, a priori. After all, people have  experiences with various lights at various distances. The subject must have learned, for each pair of intensities, what  distance ratio would cause that change in intensity. This requires a twofold series of associations-comparable to memorizing a  series of paired associates of form (p, q)-r, where p, q, r are all two-digit numbers and where there is no rule for  calculating r from p and q. Of course, a physicist can calculate the distance ratio from the light intensities, but this does  not help the subject, since the intensity measure is unknown to him; he must remember the intensities themselves, not their  numerical values, and associate a distance ratio with each pair of them. (The more modest physical-correlate view in mapping  theory assumes only that the subject associates a number with each length  A THEORY OF MAGNITUDE ESTIMATION 183  sensation.) The difficulty is in no way avoided by combining relative-judgment theory with physical-correlate theory.  6. AxIOMATIZATION OF RELATION THEORY  In this section I start by introducing and exemplifying an abstract relation, denoted >, which corresponds to the informal  notion of ordering of stimulus pairs according to their sensation "ratios." The connection of > with C;i leads to detailed  consideration of the process of cross-modality matching, and thence to the formulation of a key qualitative property of >,  called the monotonicity axiom. This property is the key axiom of a measurement theory based purely on X The theory is  summarized by Axioms 1-5 of relation theory, leading to Theorem 2. The proof has been given elsewhere, but the process of  constructing measurement scales, based solely on >, is discussed. I then consider the connections of > with C;i , Pi , and Ni  . These links are summarized by Axioms 6-9 of relation theory, and incorporate the idea about association of Xl pairs with  numbers that was mentioned earlier in connection with relative-judgment theory. This idea is discussed here in detail. Axioms  1-9 _yield Theorem 3, the relation-theory analog of Theorem 1.  Pair Ordering and Cross-Modality Matching  In Section 4, the idea that each stimulus evoked a sensation was formalized by introducing the set S and mappings Y'i into S.  The idea of relation theory, that subjects judge a property of stimulus pairs, called the sensation "ratio," is formalized by  means of an ordering, 1, of pairs. For convenience, the pair (xi , yF) of stimuli from Xi is abbreviated xi yi . The expression  xiyi ~: u;v;  means that the pair xi yi is greater than or equivalent to the pair u;v; with respect to sensation "ratio."  For example, let u; and v; be pure tones of the same frequency, with u; somewhat louder than v; , and let yi be an achromatic  light. If we raise the luminance very much, obtaining xi , then xi yi > u;v; , i.e., the brightness "ratio" of xi and yi  exceeds the loudness "ratio" of u; and v; . On the other hand, surely u;v; } yi yi . At some intermediate luminance level,  with xi somewhat brighter than yi, we have xiyi - u;v;: the two sensation "ratios" are judged to be identical. (The existence  of required intermediate levels is postulated in Axiom 4 below.)  As explained in Section 3, the introduction of the relational property, formalized by the ordering >, is suggested by the data  of cross-modality matching. The principle employed is embodied in the following assumption:  If Csi(ys I x; , xi) = yi , then y;x; - yixi .  184 KRANTZ  That is, if x; is matched by xi and y; by yi , then the sensation "ratios" y;x; and yixa are equivalent. (This is Axiom 7 of  relation theory, in the subsequent development.) When the subject matches yi toy;, the matching pair x; , xi is not present  physically. Hence, if the subject makes the match by comparing y;x; and yixi , these pairs involve temporal separation. The  pair y;x; is judged based on physically present y; , or recent memory, and an older memory trace for xi. In principle, this  poses no difficulty. The distinction between simultaneous and successive presentation cannot be sharp. Even if two stimuli are  presented simultaneously for a pair judgment, the subject may attend to them successively. Any comparison probably involves  memory to some extent.  What this leads us to is the idea of an ordering, >, of pairs that can be tapped by various empirical operations. A pair can  be rated on some discrete scale; or a pairestimation function Pi can be obtained; or two pairs can be compared directly by the  subject; or various indirect indices, including discriminability or reaction time or parameters from learning models can be  employed. If the temporal separation and the intervening or surrounding stimulus context are varied, then the data on pairs  will also vary. What one may hope is that the inferred ordering, >, of pairs will remain more or less invariant; or that  factors which perturb the ordering are second-order influences or are removable by randomization and averaging procedures.  Among the procedures that are assumed to tap the ordering > are pair estimation and cross-modality matching. The latter is  governed by Eq. (9). Pair estimation leads to the very natural assumption  Pi(xi,Yi) >,PAui , vj) zf xiyi > u,v, - (10)  (This is Axiom 6 of relation theory.)  The cross-modality matching paradigm leads, however, to a further question. If the subject chooses yi as a match to y; , which  pair x; , xi does he use as "reference levels" to form yixi and y;x; ? The first matching pair presented? The immediately  preceding matching pair ? This question loses importance provided that the same match is attained, regardless of what  reference match is used. This suggests the following axiom:  If xiyi ti u;v; and yizi _ v;w; , then xizi _ u;w; . (11)  Suppose, for example, that the subject first matches x; by xi and then y; by yi . Suppose he is presented z; . If he uses y;  and yi as references, then he finds a match zi such that z; y; - zi yi (9). But yi was constructed to satisfy y;x; - yixi (9);  and from these two equivalences and (11) we obtain z;x; - zixi . Hence, the same zi would be matched to zi, with x; and xi  used as reference levels, as was obtained using y; and yi as references. The argument obviously generalizes to arbitrary  choice of reference levels from any preceding matches. Principle (11) is, of course, testable by any data  A THEORY OF MAGNITUDE ESTIMATION 185  that can be used to tap the ordering >. A slight strengthening of this principle is the key axiom (Axiom 3) in a measurement  theory based purely on the ordering >.  Axioms of Pair Ordering  The first two axioms formalize the idea that > is an ordering and the idea that xi yd and yaxi are is some sense "opposite"  pairs. Thus, > is assumed to be transitive and connected (Axiom 1) and reversing pairs is assumed to reverse the ordering  (Axiom 2). For example, if xi is much brighter than yi , and u; slightly louder than v; , so that xiyi } u;v;, then we also  have v;u; } yixi (yi much dimmer than xi but v; only slightly softer than u;).  zi  y  Vi wi  FIG. 1. Illustration of the key axiom in relation theory. The (xi, yi) "interval," in X; , exceeds the (u; , v;) "interval,"  in X; , while the adjacent (yi , zi) "interval" exceeds the correspondingly adjacent (v; , w) "interval"; the conclusion is  that (xi , zi) exceeds (u; , w;).  The third axiom extends principle (11) to strict orderings, as well as equivalences. It is called the monotonicity axiom  (Krantz, Luce, Suppes, and Tversky, 1971).  If xiyi > u;v; and yizi > v;w; , then xizi > u;w; .  (12)  This axiom is depicted in Fig. 1. Clearly, it says that the pairs behave qualitatively like ratios or differences with respect  to the ordering >. (With positive real numbers, xil yi > u;lv; and yilzi > v;lw; implies that xil zi > u;lw;; for arbitrary  real numbers, xi - yi > ui - vi and yi - zi > v; - w; implies xi - zi > ui - wi .)  Axiom 4 postulates that any pair xiyi is equivalent to some Xl x Xl pair, and that intermediate levels can be chosen  continuously within Xi . (This does not necessitate continuity in Xi.) Axiom 5 is an Archimedean axiom, of a type often  encountered in measurement theory; it says that, however small the (positive) sensation "ratio" .xiyi , if one finds a  sequence of stimuli x?", xi",... such that each pair xan+IIXznl is equivalent to xiyi , then eventually, the overall interval  xiW xal~ becomes indefinitely large. The importance of this axiom in scale construction will be clear below.  Axioms 1 and 2 can be regarded as adequacy requirements that are imposed on any method of obtaining the ordering >. One must  be able to obtain the order of any pairs in a consistent fashion (Axiom 1); and Axiom 2 can be imposed, for example, by using  the average of Pi(xi , yi) and 1l Pi(yi , xi) to order the pair xiyi and the inverse of this  186 KRANTZ  same value to order yixi . Axioms 4 and 5 are almost surely true in the psychophysical context; they would not be interesting  to test directly. Thus, the main empirical test is of Axiom 3.  The precise statement of the primitives and axioms follows.  Xl,..., Xm are nonempty sets.  > is a binary relation on Um 1 Xi X Xi.  1. > is a weak order (transitive and connected).  2. If xfyi > u;v; , then v;u; > yixi .  3. If xiys > u;v; and yixi > v;w; , then xizi > u;w; .  4. (i) For any xi , yj , there exist xl , yj in Xl such that x, y, - xiyi .  (ii) If wlzl > xlyl > wlwl, then there exist xl', yl' in Xl such that wlyl' ^'  xl y1 ^' xl'zl .  5. Suppose that x11), x(i 2),..., xln).... is a sequence of equally spaced elements of Xl , that is, xln+1)xln) ,x(2)x(1) }  X1(I)X1(1), all n. If the x1(n) are strictly bounded (i.e., if there exist ul , vl with ulvl } xln)xll), all n), then the  sequence is finite.  These axioms lead to a theorem in which the ordering > is represented by the numerical ordering of ratios of scale values  fi(xi).  THEOREM 2. Let Xl . X , satisfy Axioms 1-5 of relation theory. Then there exist functions fi , from Xi to R+, i = 1,...,  m, such that  =Yi > u,v; if and only iffi(xi)lfi(yi) > f,(u,)lfj(vj). (13)  Moreover, gl ,..., gm are other functions with the same properties if and only if there exist positive numbers al ,..., oz,,,  , and S such that gi = Cai fie, i = 1,..., m.  This theorem was proved by Krantz et al. (1971, Theorem 4.4). Related measurement results may be found in H61der (1901),  Debreu (1958), Block and Marschak (1960), Suppes and Zinnes (1963), Kristof (1967), and Pfanzagl (1968). All these are based  either on Axiom 3 (monotonicity; Block and Marshak call it the weak 6-tuple condition) or on some closely-related condition  (quadruple condition or strong 6-tuple condition; see Blockand Marschak). Here, I shall merely outline the method by which the  functions fi can be constructed.  First, suppose that fl has been constructed on Xl such that x, y, > ulvl , if and only if fl(xl)/fl(yl) > fl(ul)Ifl(vl). The  construction of the other fi is then simple. Choose arbitrary "moduli" x2*,..., xm*, with xi* in Xi . For any yi in Xi ,  choose xl , yj in Xl such that  Y1xl ^' Yixi" A THEORY OF MAGNITUDE ESTIMATION 187  Let  fi(yi) =f1(y1)1f1(x1)  The  fact that the functions fi , constructed in this way, satisfy the representation property (13) is easily proved, using Axioms  1-4. For example, suppose that zixi* > yixi* > xi*xi*. Then we can construct 21 , y1 , x1 with zix.i* - ZIx1 , yixi * ^' y1x1  , and zi yi ti z1 y1 . We then have  f (zi) fi(z1)l fi(x1) - A(z1)  fi(yi) f1(y1)If(x1) f(y1) ,  as required. The units are determined by the value assigned to xi*. In this case, f (xi *) = 1. If a different modulus is  chosen, so that fi(xi *) = ai , then the entire function fi is simply multiplied by ai .  The main problem, for the scale constructor who starts with only the relation >, is to construct f1 on X1 . This is done by  setting up standard sequences of the kind described in Axiom 5. For example, suppose we decide arbitrarily to let My,) - ( ,  f1(z1) = 2 (this specifies the two arbitrary constants, al and P). Suppose now we want to measure f1(v1)lf1(u1). We take a  sufficiently small sensation "ratio" xI(2)X(1), and construct two sequences,  yi1), yi2),...,  (1) (2) u1 , u1 ~ ..,  y(i) (n+1) (n) -X (2) (1) and likewise u(1) - u and u(n+1)u(n) ti x(2)x(1).  with y1 = y1 and y1 y1 1 1 , , 1 - 1 u,  with 1 1  The sequences can be continued, as long as z1y1 } yin) (n)  Y, or viu1 >- uln~ul , respectively. Eventually, this will no longer be true. Thus, p adjacent equal sensation "ratios" will  approximate v1u1 , and q such "ratios" will approximate z,y1 . Thus we have approximately  f1h)1fi(u1) = (f(xi2))lfi(xi1)))", fi(Z1)lf(y1) _ (fi(xi2))IA(xi1)))9,  or  f1(v1)1f#1) = 1f1(z1)1f1(y1)l1`1  = 2".  This measurement process is essentially the counting-of-equal units process that  188 KRANTZ  goes into an interval scale of position on a line. There, the origin and unit are arbitrary. Here, we use equal multiples  instead of equal differences; and the "unit" yl and the "ratio" z, y, can be assigned arbitrarily.  Stevens (1957) rejected this method of scale construction because it leads only to logarithmic interval scales (permissible  transformations g = of o). His claim is correct, for any one continuum Xi; but he failed to consider the combination of this  method with cross-modality matching. Once the exponent for f, is fixed, the other fi are ratio scales. Thus, there is only one  power transform, applying to all scales; and no better result can be obtained in Stevens' methods, since one can always apply  a power transformation to the number system, without changing any of the observed relations in "ratio scaling."  In practice, one might sometimes short-circuit the above process by using the physical-length scale as fi . This depends on  the empirical truth of the fact that equal physical-length ratios yield equal sensation "ratios" (power law for estimated  In mapping theory, we hadfi(yi)I fi(xi) =f;(y;)l f (x;) whenever C;i(yi I x; , xi) = yi. Here, the same equation in fi and f;  ratios corresponds to yixi - y;x; . Another similarity lies in the fact that logarithmic interval scales were obtained in both  theorems. The great difference lies in the source of the representation and uniqueness results. In mapping theory, it is the  subject's supposed use of numbers for arithmetic calculations that produces the scale and its uniqueness, and the axioms were  all interpreted in terms of number usage. From a purely sensory standpoint, there is only an equivalence relation (or at most,  an ordering) on the set Um 1 Xi . Here, however, I postulate an ordering > of Um, Xi x Xi that has a sensory basis; and this  gives rise to the scales fi that can be constructed purely from qualitative (ordinal) observations of this relation, without  necessitating any assumption about subjects' usage of numbers.  Numerical Judgments  To treat the numerical-judgment primitives, Pi and Ni , in terms of >, we require a theory of the way in which numbers are  used. Instead of the mapping 0, of Xl into R+, assumed in mapping theory, the assumption of relation theory is that stimulus  pairs, in Xl X Xl , are associated with numbers. The association function is simply the pair-estimation function for Xl ,  namely, Pl .  That is, instead of assuming that the subject associates, with each xl in Xl , a familiar number (say, its length in feet),  assume that he can estimate, for each pair of segments (xl , yi), the ratio of their lengths. The standard algorithm for  estimating this physical ratio-by laying off the shorter against the longer as many times as possible, then repeating the  algorithm to estimate the ratio of the remainder segment to the shorter segment, etc.-has a mental counterpart. For example,  imagine your living room; imagine (or look at) your desk; now estimate the ratio of their longest dimensions. One does this (I  do, at any rate) by picturing the number of desks that would fit along the wall of my living room.  A THEORY OF MAGNITUDE ESTIMATION 189  (A bit of data: as I wrote the last passage, I carried out the above task obtaining an estimate of 5.5. Then I measured,  discovering that the living room is 19 feet long, the desk 4 feet, for a ratio of 4.75. My original estimate was not mediated  by estimates of the lengths of the two elements of the pair. Of course, the accuracy of the figure is hardly the point-many  factors may distort the perceived sizes of rooms and desks. In particular, my mental picture of the living room omitted an  alcove worth two feet; so a truer physical comparison with my mental ratio of 5.5 is given by 17/4 - 4.25. Also, I tried my  wife on the same task. Despite painstaking instructions, her estimate was 14! Interrogation revealed she was estimating area  ratios! All this is not intended to prove anything experimentally; merely to illustrate the idea of a mental ratio of lengths,  as compared on the one hand with physical ratios, and on the other, with other ways of generating numbers, e.g., by means of  mental area ratios.)  The preceding discussion is not incorporated in any way into the formal assumptions of relation theory; it is merely intended  to explain the psychological interpretation of the primitive Pl , which is different from that of all the other numerical  functions, P21 ..., P and Nl ,..., N.. The axiom that is proposed in this connection is simply pair consistency for Pl (the  same axiom as in relative-judgement theory above),  Pi(xl , yi) - Pi(yi , zi) - Pi(xl , zl).  (14)  This is Axiom 8 of relation theory. It states that mental estimation of length ratios is very likely physical measurement: if  xl contains r mental replicas of yi , and yi contains s mental replicas of zl , then xl contains rs mental replicas of zl .  Empirically, the justification of this axiom is that mental estimation of length ratios is veridical; the psychophysical  function for length is the identity function. Note that Eq. (14) is more general than that; it does not even entail that P,(xl  , yl) is a power function of the physical ratio x,/y, . But it is hard to see how a property as strong as (14) would hold if  it were not for the veridicality of this mental process.  The axiom linking pair estimation with > and Pl (Axiom 6 of relation theory) was given above as Eq. (10): Pi(xi , yi) > P;(u;  , v;) iff xiyi ~ u;v; . This assumption has two special cases with distinct psychological interpretations. For the first, take  i = j = 1. In this case, we assert that the ordering of length pairs by sensation "ratio" is the same as the ordering by  mental estimation of length ratio. This is the key psychological postulate by which I succeed in interpreting numerical  judgments as measures of sensation, in relation theory. It is somewhat puzzling to me why a perceptual property of pairs of  lines-represented by the ordering ~-and a cognitive process whereby numbers are assigned to pairs of lines-represented by P,  -should give the same ordinal results. Perhaps it is adaptive to have a sensory system where the perceived relation of two  lines corresponds to their physical ratio, and a cognizing system where the estimated numerical ratio also corresponds to the  physical ratio. Note that when this assumption is false, psychophysical functions may still be  480/912-4  190 KRANTZ  constructible as in Theorem 2, but they will not be obtained "directly" from numerical judgments.  The preceding discussion applies also to the mechanism for generating numerical judgments in relative-judgment theory. In that  theory, the relation between Pr and Pi is given by mapping theory. Here, it is given by relation theory, as follows. The  second special case of Axiom 6 is i :5-1 1, j = 1. The interpretation here is that the pair estimate, Pi(xi , yi), is obtained  by imagining a pair ulvr in Xr X Xr that is equivalent to xi yi and then carrying out the Pl process for ul , vl .  This proposed mechanism corresponds to certain introspections about how pair estimates are produced. When I claim that yi is  more than twice as loud as xi , for example, I do so because I feel that the loudness of xi would "fit into" the loudness of  yi more than two times. This process of estimating how many times one loudness would "fit into" another one may correspond to  matching the loudness pair with a pair of lengths, then mentally estimating the ratio of the lengths.  Note that, according to this view, pair estimation is not mediated by individual numerical estimates for the members of the  pair, and that no numerical calculations by the subject are assumed.  Finally, consider magnitude estimation. If the subject has assigned the number p to stimulus xi , and if his pair estimate for  (yi , xi) is r, then I assume he will assign to yi the number q = pr, i.e., the number whose numerical ratio to p is equal to  r. This is the one place in the theory that requires the subject to know arithmetic. Even here, the arithmetic seems a little  more natural than that required by mapping theory. For in mapping theory, the subject must remember a fixed ratio r,  determined by the modulus, and must mechanically multiply every natural scale value p by r, before emitting it; whereas in  relation theory, he need only remember some previous response, p-perhaps the one from the preceding trial-and must then find  the number q such that ql p yields a suitable ratio r. The ratio r requires knowledge of length, in the sense of mental  estimates of length ratios, but it does not require any actual arithmetic.  This is incorporated as the ninth and last axiom of relation theory: Ni(yi I xi , p) pPi(Y, , xl), provided yixi - yixr .  These assumptions lead easily to proofs of generalizations (i)-(iv) of Section 2, as will now be shown.  To understand magnitude consistency, note first that it does not matter which previous stimulus, with its associated response,  is remembered. For suppose that xi yields the response p, and that yi yields the response q, by means of the pair (yi , xi).  By the mechanism suggested above, we have  Yixi ^' Yrxr ,  PI(Yl, x1) = q1 p.  Now suppose that zi yields the response r, by means of the pair (zi , yi), i.e., that (yi , q) is remembered in order to  generate (zi , r).  A THEORY OF MAGNITUDE ESTIMATION 191  Then we can assume  ziyi ^' zly1,  Pj(zl , yl) = r1 q.  [Note the assumption that an X1 x Xl pair can be found, matching zi,yi , with one endpoint, y1 , specified; this is Axiom 4(i)  above.] By (11), zixi ti zlx, . Therefore, if (xi , p) had been used instead of (yi , q) to generate the response to zi , that  response would be pP,(z, , xl). But by Eq. (14),  PP1(z1 , XI) = PPl(z1 , yi) - PAY, , x1) = p - (rlq) - (ql p)  as required. Thus, the nondependence on a particular remembered standard, which follows from (11) alone for cross-modality  matching, depends on (11) and on (14) for magnitude estimation.  It is now easy to establish magnitude consistency. If the modulus is (xi , p), we may as well assume that the response toys is  made via (xi , p), i.e.,  ysxa ^' y1X1 ,  Nj(yj I xi , p) = pP1(yl , xi).  Equation (1) follows immediately, since PI(y1 , xl) cancels out when Nj(yj I xi , p) is divided by Nj(yj I xi , q).  The argument for nondependence on choice of remembered stimulus also establishes magnitude-pair consistency, since, going back  to that argument, we had  Nj(yj xi , p) = q;  Nj(zi xi , p) = r;  Pi(yi , yi) = P1(zl , yl)  = r1 q  = Nj(zi I xi , p)lNi(yi I  as required in Eq. (3).  The consistency of cross-modality matching with magnitude estimation also follows easily. If C;i(y; I x; , xi) = yi , then by  (9), yixi ti y;x; . Choose xl , y1 in Xl such that  yi'xi ^' y1x1 ^' yixi  By (10), we have  Pi(yi, x) = PI(y1, XI) = Pj(yj, xj).  192 KRANTZ  Now substituting the magnitude-pair consistency equation, for P(xi , xi), using modulus zi , p, and for P;(y; , x;), using  modulus z; , q, we obtain Eq. (4). This completes the proof of the consistency properties.  Note that Eq. (4) shows that the functions Ni( I zi , p) satisfy (13), i.e., the magnitude estimation scales are  representations , fi . Thus, given the measurement theory based on (12), Eqs. (10) and (14) allow us to infer that magnitude  estimation is a legitimate method of scale construction.  The above considerations are summarized in the following list of additional axioms and in Theorem 3. (The primitives Pi , Ni ,  C;i are the same as for mapping theory).  6. Pi(xi , yi) i P7(ui v,) Z.ff xiyi } u,v, .  7. If Cii(yi I x; , xi) = yi , then y,x; ti yixi  8. Pj(xl , yl) - Pj(yl , zl) = Pl(xl , zl).  9. If yixi ^' ylxl , then Ni(yi I xi , p) = pPj(yl , xl).  THEOREM 3. Let Xl ,..., Xm , Pi , Ni , C;i satisfy Axioms 1-9 of relation theory. Let fl ,..., fm satisfy the conclusions of  Theorem 2. Then there exists a function f from R+ to R+ (of form pv) such that fl ,..., fm , f satisfy the conclusions of  Theorem 1 (I-III). Moreover, 91 ,..., gm , g are other functions satisfying I-III of Theorem 1, if and only if they are  related to the f's by gi = fis, g = f a.  This theorem is relatively trivial; yet, it should be noted that, unlike Theorem 1, conclusions I-III do not appear as axioms.  Proof. Conclusion III is immediate from Axiom 7 and Theorem 2. From Axiom 6 and Theorem 2, we have  Pi(xi , yi) = h[fi(xi)I fi(yi)],  (15)  where h is a strictly increasing function, independent of i. By Axiom 8, we have [specializing (15) for i = 1]  h[fi(xl)Lf&l)] = h[fi(xl)Lfi(yl)] - h[fi(yl)Ifi(zl)],  or  h(rs) = h(r)h(s) (16)  for all r, s of form fl(xl)Lfi(yl), fi(y&fl(zl), xl , yl , zl in Xl . It can be shown that, under Axioms 1-6, _the range off,  is such that Eq. (16) has its usual solution, h(r) = r' IV. We now let f = h-1, i.e.,  .f (p) = pv.  (17)  Conclusion II is immediate from (15) and (17).  A THEORY OF MAGNITUDE ESTIMATION 193  Finally, note that Axioms 4(ii), 6, and 9 imply that Nj(yi I xi , p) = q if and only if  yA ^' yixr ,  Pj(yi , xi) = Pi(yi , xi) = qI p,  i.e., by (15) if and only if fi(ya)Ifi(xi) = (ql p)''. Therefore, Conclusion I holds. Uniqueness is obvious, since if gl ,...,  gm , g satisfied 1, II, and III, then by II and Axiom 6, gi ,..., gm, give a representation for Xl ,..., Xm , in the sense of  Theorem 2. Q.E.D.  The Power Law  I have yet to discuss the power law. For this purpose, the elements of Xi must be taken to be energy values; so Xi has the  structure of R+, and elements in Xi can be multiplied and divided. The power law corresponds to the following axiom.  For all p in R-r, xiys "  (pxi)(pyi). (18)  Equations (18) and (13) lead to  Putting yi == 1 gives  fi(Xi)Ifi(yi) -fi(Y'xa)Ifi(Pyi)fi(pxi) =fi(Xi)fi(p)Ifi(1),  which implies fi(xi) = aixBi, where a; =fi(1).  The assumption (18) is very close to the power law, so that the above proof is not terribly enlightening. However, Shepard has  pointed out that (18) has an interesting interpretation. In the present terminology, we can say that the perceived relation,  or sensation "ratio" of two stimuli is independent of the overall energy level, depending only on the energy ratio. It might  be adaptive, for example, to have the perceived brightness relation between two lights or surfaces be independent of  illumination level and distance, or the perceived loudness relation between two sounds be independent of distance from the  sources. The same sort of argument was used above in connection with the assumption that Pl and > order Xl X Xl in the same  way; this, together with veridicality of Pl , entails thatfi is a power law.  Extrapolated to stimuli xi , yi that are very nearly indistinguishable, principle (18) is essentially Weber's law. One may  speculate that discrimination and supraliminal sensation depend on the same kind of perceived relation between stimuli, one  which is essentially independent of absolute energy level.  Naturally, the power law and Weber's law are only approximations; (18) must also be considered as an approximation. In  particular, modifications to take account of the deviations from the power law and Weber's law at low energy values could also  be formulated as axioms similar to (18).  194 KRANTZ  7. DISCUSSION: "RATIO SCALING" AND THE CONCEPT OF SENSATION  Sensation, according to relation theory, is a theoretical construct. Subjects can make ordinal judgments, >, of relations or  sensation "ratios." From these ordinal judgments, the psychophysicist can construct functions fi that can be labelled  sensation. The sensation functions give a simple description of the > data.  The magnitude-estimation functions, Ni , do yield a satisfactory set of representing functions. In this sense, "ratio  scaling"-especially, magnitude estimation-can be said to measure sensation directly. But the reason why this works, according  to relation theory, is rather subtle: it has to do with the fact that the process of estimating numerical length ratios-P,  values-is compatible with the judged sensory relations of lengths. The assumption that xlyl > ulvl if and only if Pl(xl , yl)  > PI(ul , vl) is really the core of the matter.  The construction of fi , i 1, outlined in the proof of Theorem 2, is precisely the same as the construction which the subject  is assumed to carry out in magnitude estimation. Given a stimulus yi and some standard stimulus xi *, the data analyzer finds  lengths xl and yl such that yixi* ti y,xl . He then assigns to yi the scale value fi(yi) =fi(y1)lfi(x1); or he multiplies that  ratio by fi(xi*), if xi* is not to be assigned unit value. Similarly, the subject in magnitude estimation finds ylxl that  matches yixi in sensation "ratio" and assigns to yi the value of P,(yl , xl), multiplied by the previous response to xl .  The justification for calling the fi functions sensation depends, of course, on the nature of the ordering > and its  connections with sensory processes. One would hope that measurements, based on >, would enter into simple laws describing many  other sorts of sensory phenomena.  One major class of phenomena, which one might hope to describe in terms of sensation, is sensory discrimination. The classical  view of the relation between sensation and discrimination is Thurstone's (1927): a stimulus evokes a variable sensation, with  some known distribution; errors in discrimination are due to the variability. This view leads to the idea of measuring  (central tendency of) sensation by evaluating discriminability.  The relationship between discriminability and sensation will be treated in detail in a subsequent paper by J. C. Falmagne and  this author. However, I shall make three remarks on this problem here.  First, one usually speaks of discriminability scaling as indirect and of "ratio scaling" as direct. This is somewhat  misleading, under the assumptions of relation theory. For example, the reformulation of Fechner's problem, by Luce (1959) and  Falmagne (1971) can be stated as follows: given an index of discriminability r(x, y) (for example, the probability that x is  chosen over y) find a scale f such that  r(x, y) > r (x', y') if and only if f (x) - f (y) > f (x') - f (y').  A THEORY OF MAGNITUDE ESTIMATION 195  Obviously, there is no formal difference between this and the representation of crossmodality ordering  xy > x'y' if and only if f (#f (y) > f (x')I f (y').  The empirical difference lies in the use of discriminability, r, rather than, say, pair estimation, P. In both cases, the  function f is a theoretical construct. To speak of one method as direct is somewhat to prejudge the nature of the relation >.  Second, the Thurstonian theory of discrimination can be quite complicated, when one considers the possibilities of unequal  variances and nonconstant correlations between the sensations evoked by different pairs of stimuli. Thus, one cannot simply  compare the scales derived from "ratio scaling" with those from discriminability scaling, without giving some thought into the  way that discriminability scale values depend on the details of the Thurstonian model.  Thirdly, the Thurstone view is not the only basis for a theory of discrimination. An alternative, more consistent with  relation theory, is that discrimination is based on perceived relations between stimuli, rather than on sensations evoked by  the stimuli. For example, consider the difference between increment-theshold and two-intensity recognition experiments. In the  former, the subject must detect an increment, dx, superimposed on a background, x. In the latter, he must recognize whether x  or x -}- dx was presented to begin with. The measured difference limen tends to be smaller in the increment-threshold test,  because the subject can detect the transient (neural "on" response) when dx is introduced, even though the steady-state  difference in sensations evoked by x, x + dx may be small, compared with variability. Perhaps one needs two theories of  discrimination: one for transients, and one (Thurstonian) for discrimination of steady-state sensations. But it might be more  parsimonious to assume that all discrimination is based on relations between stimuli. Thus, the equation  r (x, y) > r(x', y')  might be taken as analogous to  xy ~ x'y'  in more than a formal sense. The simplest case would be that in which discriminability measures yield an ordering of pairs  that is continuous with the ordering based on judgments of the supraliminal relations of perfectly discriminable pairs. Some  evidence that this might work may be found in the study of small (imperfectly discriminable) and large (perfectly  discriminable) color differences (Krantz, 1967).  With these comments, I leave the topic of interrelations between "ratio scaling" and discrimination. There are a great many  other areas in which one might hope to use sensory scales based on "ratio scaling" for other purposes. Some good examples are  196 KRANTZ  the use of perceived-size and perceived-distance scales in the study of size constancy [see Gilinsky (1951); Sternberg (1966)]  and the use of perceived-brightness scales in the theory of brightness contrast (Jameson and Hurvich, 1964). It would be going  too far afield, however, to pursue these possibilities in detail here.  One last interrelation, which must be touched on, is that between "ratio scaling" and other methods of so called direct  estimation, for example, methods of bisection or category estimation. One of the long-standing puzzles is why the scales  obtained from category rating differ from those of magnitude estimation. The commonest position is that category ratings are  based on discrimination either partly (Stevens, 1957) or wholly (Eisler, 1962). This may be true, for the methods and data  examined by those authors, but it seems hard to escape the fact that subjects sometimes do produce very meaningful and  interesting results when they are instructed to judge sensation "differences" rather than sensation "ratios." For example, all  the extensive psychophysics on which the original and revised Munsell color systems are based, involves judgments of  "differences" (Newhall, 1939).  Perhaps some insight into the nature of the relation > on Um, Xi x Xi can be gained by consideration of the ways in which the  relation can be altered by instructions. Suppose that one relation, >i , is obtained by having subjects rate or compare  sensation "differences," a second relation, >2 , by using sensation "ratios." How might >1 , }2 be related ? Torgerson (1961)  suggests that they coincide: the subject responds to only one type of perceived relation between stimuli. A second possibility  is that >,, >2 are distinct, that each satisfies the Axioms 1-5 of relation theory, and that we can construct our  representations fi such that the same scales account for "ratio" and for "difference judgments." That is,  xiyi ?i u;v; if and only if fi(xi) - fi(yi) > f(u;) - f#;); (19)  xiYi >2 u;v, if and only if fi(xi)Ifi(yi) >,fj(uj)lf#j).  It can be shown (Krantz et al., 1971, Theorem 4.3) that the key condition that must be satisfied for this to hold is the  following interlocking of >1 , >2:  If xiui ^'2 Yivi `"2 z'iwi , then xiyi >i Yizi if and only if uivi >i viwi . (20)  Apart from this, it should be noted that (19) determines the fi up to ratio-scale transformations. The ratio representation  yields uniqueness up to gi = ai fill, but at most one value of P can yield the difference representation. Thus, the  relationship between "ratio" and "difference" judgments can be explored in two ways: by seeing whether Axioms 1-5 hold for  each, and (20) holds linking them; or by seeing whether scales  A THEORY OF MAGNITUDE ESTIMATION 197  constructed by the two methods are linearly related after a suitable power transformation of the scales obtained by "ratio"  methods.  If it can be shown that a single set of scales, f , can account for two different kinds of data, >l , ;~:z , in a natural way,  the confidence with which these scales are labelled sensation will be increased.  A final topic for discussion is the connection between relation theory and the much bruited controversies over the nature and  the validity of direct-estimation methods of sensory scaling. Up till now, I have discussed mapping and relation theories as  though the empirical relations Pi , Ni , C;i , were given in a highly stable fashion, free of systematic or random error.  Of course, random error is no more of a problem here than in any theory which is nonstatistical in nature. The theory must be  reinterpreted as referring to appropriate central tendencies of variable data. This may not be trivial at all. Questions arise  as to what central tendencies are appropriate, and these relate to theories dealing with variability as well as central  tendency. [Such theories have been proposed, albeit in the context of mapping theory, by Luce and Galanter (1963); Luce and Mo  (1965); Levine (1968); and Marley (1972).] The measurement analysis leading to Theorem 2 offers an alternative approach,  however. Here, we do not try to deal with variability within the theory; rather, we reduce the variability problem to a form  that occurs commonly in fundamental measurement based on ordinal data. Our basic statements take the form xy ~ uv. If (x, y)  and (u, v) are compared, then we have the conventional statistical question of whether the probability that the (x, y) pair is  judged as larger exceeds one-half. This can be dealt with by binomial methods. If (x, y), (u, v) are rated on some scale, then  other appropriate techniques-especially, the Mann-Whitney statistic-can be used to infer that xy ~ uv. In other words,  relation theory deals with the problem of random error by reducing it to a form which has no particular connection with  sensory scaling, but occurs in many other contexts.  More serious is the question of systematic error. For example, the relation theory of magnitude estimation is very much an  idealized theory, assuming that the response to a stimulus, yi , is determined only by the previous response p to xi and the  length pair y1xl equivalent to yixi . In fact, many other factors can be shown to influence the response to yi; among them,  the total range of stimuli presented in N; , and the choice of the initial stimulus and the second stimulus actually  presented. See Poulton (1968) for a review of such results.  The very designation, systematic error is a prejudgment of the main issue in controversies concerning direct estimation. It  implies that there is some true sensory result, plus sources of systematic error. Some authors take the view that the  judgments are determined entirely by these "error" factors; hence, the term error is meaningless, since there is no true score  to be extracted.  It is my view that the term systematic error is justified. The generalizations listed in Section 2 are too close to the mark  to be disregarded, and have never been accounted  198 KRANTZ  for on the basis of nonsensory factors4 alone. What relation theory provides is a theory of "true score" behavior; it is  therefore a baseline, against which sources of systematic error can be evaluated and neutralized. Stevens has used the power  law for this purpose: methods of stimulus presentation, instruction, averaging, etc., that yield power laws with reproducible  exponents, are the "correct" methods, while other methods produce "biases." This approach has not always been accepted, in  part, perhaps, because it is based on the idea of a "correct" answer, rather than on a theory. Perhaps a formulation like  relation theory (or a more adequate successor to it) can serve as an additional basis for refinement of psychophysical methods.  REFERENCES  BLOCK, H. D., AND MARSCHAK, J. Random orderings and stochastic theories of responses. In I. Olkin, S. Ghurye, W. Hoeffding, W.  Madow, and H. Mann (Eds.), Contributions to probability and statistics. Stanford: Stanford Univ. Press, 1960.  DEBREU, G. Stochastic choice and cardinal utility. Econometrica, 1958, 26, 440-444.  EISLER, H. On the problem of category scales in psychophysics. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 1962, 3, 81-87.  EKMAN, G., EISLER, H., AND KUNNAPAS, T. Brightness scales for monochromatic light. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 1960,  1, 41-48.  FAGOT, R. F., AND STEWART, M. Tests of product and additive scaling axioms. Perception & Psychophysics, 1969, 5, 117-123.  FALMAGNE, J.-C. The generalized Fechner problem and discrimination. Journal of Mathematical Psychology 1971, 7, 22-43.  GILINSKY, ALBERTA S. Perceived size and distance in visual space. Psychological Review, 1951, 58, 460-482.  HANES, R. M. The construction of subjective brightness scales from fractionation data: A validation. Journal of Experimental  Psychology, 1949, 39, 714-728.  HELSON, H. Adaptation-level theory. New York: Harper & Row, 1964.  HOLDER, O. Die Axiome der Quantitat and die Lehre vom Mass. Berichte iiber die Verhandlungen der Koniglichen Sdchsischen  Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften (Leipzig), Mathematische-Physische Classe, 1901, 53, 1-64.  INDOW, T., AND STEVENS, S. S. Scaling of saturation and hue. Perception & Psychophysics, 1966, 1, 253-271.  JAMESON, DOROTHEA. Brightness scales and their interpretation. In International colour meeting Stockholm 1969. Gottingen:  Musterschmidt, 1970. Pp. 377-385.  JAMESON, DOROTHEA, AND HURVICH, L. M. Theory of brightness and color contrast in human vision. Vision Research, 1964, 4,  135-154.  KRANTZ, D. H. Small-step and large-step color differences for monochromatic stimuli of constant brightness. Journal of the  Optical Society of America, 1967, 57, 1304-1316.  KRANTZ, D. H. Visual scaling. In L. M. Hurvich and D. Jameson (Eds.), Visual psychophysics. Vol. VII/4 in Handbook of sensory  physiology. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1972.  ' What is needed, of course, is a theory encompassing both sensory and nonsensory factors. A start toward this is found in the  very interesting work of R. Teghtsoonian (1972) on range effects and sensation "ratios."  A THEORY OF MAGNITUDE ESTIMATION  199  KRANTZ, D. H., LUCE, R. D., SUPPES, P., AND TVERSKY, A. Foundations of measurement. Vol. I. Additive and polynomial  representations. New York: Academic Press, 1971.  KRISTOF, W. On the theory of unidimensional sensory scaling. Educational Testing Service Research Bulletin RB 65-14.  Princeton, 1965.  KRISTOF, W. A foundation of interval scale measurement. Educational Testing Service Research Bulletin RB 67-22. Princeton,  1967.  LEVINE, M. An analogue of Holder's theorem for measuring brightness contrast and mental test scores. Mathematical Psychology  Meetings, Stanford, 1968.  LucE, R. D. Individual choice behavior. New York: Wiley, 1959.  LucE, R. D., AND GALANTER, E. Psychophysical scaling. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of  mathematical psychology. Vol. 1. New York: Wiley, 1963.  LUCE, R. D., AND MO, S. S. Magnitude estimation of heaviness and loudness by individual subjects: A test of a probabilistic  response theory. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 1965, 18, 159-174.  LUCE, R. D., AND TUKEY, J. W. Simultaneous conjoint measurement: A new type of fundamental measurement. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 1964, 1, 1-27.  MARLEY, A. A. J. Internal state models for magnitude estimation and related experiments. Journal of Mathematical Psychology,  1972, 9, in press.  NEWHALL, S. M. The ratio method in the review of the Munsell colors. American Journal of Psychology, 1939, 52, 394-405.  PFANZAGL, J. Theory of measurement. New York: Wiley, 1968.  POULTON, E. C. The new psychophysics: six models for magnitude estimation. Psychological Bulletin, 1968, 69, 1-19.  STERNBERG, S. Four theories of the effect of distance on apparent size. Paper read at Psychonomic Society meeting, 1966.  STEVENS, J. C., MACK, J. D., AND STEVENS, S. S. Growth of sensation on seven continua as measured by force of handgrip.  Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1960, 59, 60-67. STEVENS, J. C., AND STEVENS, S. S. Brightness function: Effects of  adaptation. Journal of the Optical Society of America, 1963, 53, 375-385.  STEVENS, S. S. On the psychophysical law. Psychological Review, 1957, 64, 153-181. STEVENS, S. S. Matching functions between  loudness and ten other continua. Perception Psychophysics, 1966, 1, 5-8.  SUPPES, P., AND ZINNES, J. Basic measurement theory. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of  mathematical psychology. Vol. 1. New York: Wiley, 1963. TEGHTSOONIAN, MARTHA. The judgement of size. American Journal of  Psychology, 1965, 78, 392-402.  TEGHTSOONIAN, R. Range effects in psychophysical scaling and a revision of Stevens' law. American Journal of Psychology, 1972,  85 (in press).  THURSTONE, L. L. A law of comparative judgment. Psychological Review, 1927, 34, 273-286. TORGERSON, W. S. Distances and ratios  in psychological scaling. Acta Psychologica, 1961, 19, 201-205.  WARREN, R. M. Visual intensity judgements: An empirical rule and a theory. Psychological Review, 1969, 76, 16-30.  WILSON, BARBARA C. An experimental examination of the spectral luminosity construct. Ph.D. thesis, New York University. Ann  Arbor: University Microfilms, 1964.  RECEIVED: July 1, 1970; REVISED: August 2, 1971