10.1016/0022-2496(73)90020-5
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 10, 296-325 (1973)  Identifiability of a Class of Theories With States Not Directly Observed Over Trials*  IRWIN D. NAHINSKY  Psychology Department, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky 40208  The problem of identifying probabilities for sequences involving K underlying states is investigated for experiments in which  there are K observed states, with the conditional distribution for these states specified for each underlying state.  Conditions for finding unique estimates of the underlying probabilities are outlined for situations in which underlying  transitions depend upon the last observed state as well as for situations in which no such dependency is assumed. No  restrictions upon the nature of underlying transitions are assumed for a large number of trials. Applications to some known  experimental situations are suggested.  The behavioral sciences are replete with theories which involve the dependence of a set of observable behaviors upon certain  underlying organismic states. Typically, it is assumed that the distribution of responses into a number of behavioral  categories changes over time with the transitions among hypothesized states of the organism. Some theories specify the  relationship between observable state probabilities and the nonobserved organismic states. Various stochastic learning  theories are in this category. The stimulus sampling theory of Estes (1959) exemplifies such an approach. Other formulations  merely postulate some observed state-hypothetical state link which might be made explicit. Mediational theories of transfer  (e.g., Osgood, 1953, Chap. 12 and Chap. 16) fall into this category.  Most theories specify the transition rules that govern the changes among underlying states, the most common rules following  the restrictions of a Markov chain. However, it may be desirable in many cases to regard the underlying distribution of  transitions over trials as unknown with no restrictions and to search for the underlying structure most compatible with the  data. Consider an experimental situation in which there are a number of observed states linked theoretically to a set of  underlying states in such a way that the conditional distribution of observable behaviors is specified for each underlying  state. Very often it is possible to specify such a conditional distribution in a reasonable fashion, either from a priori  considerations or from prior empirical evidence. For example, in a four choice situation in which alternatives may be con  * Preparation of this manuscript was supported in part by Grant MH 20322 from the U. S. Public Health Service. I would like to  acknowledge one referee for pointing out a substantive difficulty in my initial approach to the outcome-contingent model.  296  Copyright 1973 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  IDENTIFIABILITY 297  sidered equally preferred with no knowledge of differential consequences, it would be reasonable to assume that the  conditional probability of a correct choice assumes the values 1/4, 1/3, 1/2, and 1 given underlying states corresponding  respectively to 0, 1, 2, and 3 incorrect alternatives eliminated. If equal preference cannot reasonably be assumed, it may be  possible to estimate such probabilities in situations in which underlying states can be specified in advance. In either case,  if behavioral sequences are observed over trials, it is then possible, under certain circumstances, to estimate relative  frequencies of underlying transitions and test hypotheses emanating from a related theory.  It is the purpose of this paper to investigate conditions under which the underlying distribution can be estimated. The  article deals specifically with theories which do not place an a priori restriction upon the underlying state distributions as  is the case for many stochastic models of behavior. Hence, it should be noted that the term theory will be used to refer to  systems in which an underlying structure must be identified.  The topic to be discussed represents a facet of the identifiability problem which has been dealt with by a number of authors  (e.g., Koopmans and Reiersol, 1950; Hurwicz, 1950). In psychology, the problem has been considered in relation to multiple  factor analysis (Reiersel, 1950) and to Markovian learning models (Greeno and Steiner, 1964) to cite two prominent examples.  Because the identifiability problem is central to a consideration of the topic of this article, some basic definitions in the  formulation of the identifiability concept will preface the treatment of the specific problem. The concept of identifiability  used involves the association of a unique underlying structure with a given distribution of observed states. It is well to  remember that a number of useful theories do not meet such a strict criterion. However, unique identifiability is a distinct  advantage for a theory in terms of unambiguous interpretation and as a guide for future experimentation.  The author next considers a somewhat simplified model for an experimental situation in which the number of observed states  equals the number of underlying states, and in which the underlying transition probabilities are independent of the observed  outcomes on any trial. Further, it is assumed that the conditional probability of any observed state on trial N given the  prior sequence of underlying and observed states equals the probability of that observed state given the underlying state on  that trial. Intuitively, this restriction means that the last underlying state embodies all information about a related  outcome and that the dependence of an outcome upon prior states is only through their relationship to the last underlying  state in an N-trial sequence, an assumption not unreasonable for many theories. For example, in the prior illustration the  probability of a correct response on trial N given a sequence eventuating in elimination of one incorrect alternative should  be 1/3 regardless of the path leading to that underlying state on trial N.  Although the restrictions imposed by the preceding model make it inapplicable to many situations, the development of this  model serves as a convenient preliminary to  298 NAHINSKY  derivation of a broader model, one which allows for the influence of observable outcomes upon subsequent transitions among  underlying states. Provision is made for the possible dependence of the underlying states on trial N upon the sequence of all  prior underlying states and the observed state on trial N - 1. It is then shown that this outcome-contingent model can be  analyzed using essentially the same approaches as those developed for the simpler model, although some identifying restriction  upon the initial state dependencies is needed.  The models referred to are limited to the class of experiments in which the number of observed and underlying states are  equal. Nevertheless, it is shown that such experimental models are possible to derive by combining either underlying or  observed states to bring about such a correspondence. The conditions under which such combinations can take place are  specified. Further, it is shown that experimental tests of theories often can be devised in which there is a correspondence  between underlying states and observed states in number.  The approach which is discussed goes beyond problems involved in the testing of specific models. Tests of certain classes of  theory or certain characteristics of a theory are made possible. For example, one might consider a test of the hypothesis that  transitions between underlying states on some trial N obey the conditions of a Markov process of specified order. Examples are  given that illustrate ways in which the approach can be used to aid in making formalization a heuristic tool in successively  approxiating a more refined theory.  1. IDENTIFICATION CF STRUCTURAL CHARACTERISTICS  Much has been written about the problem of identifying underlying structural characteristics through the use of observed  distributions. The model and terminology presented by Koopmans and Reieresl (1950) seem appropriate for the developments which  follow and will be used in the succeeding discussion. These authors considered the problem in which structural relationships  are specified between observed and nonobserved variables. In their terminology, the underlying variables are referred to as  latent variables, denoted by a vector u, as contrasted with observed variables, denoted by a vector y, which represent  observations recorded by an experimenter. A key concept is that of a structure, defined as follows.  1.1. DEFINITION. By a structure S = (F, 0) we understand a particular probability distribution function, F(u), of the latent  variables, combined with a particular structural relationship (or set of simultaneously valid relationships), 0(y, u) = 0,  between observed and latent variables. The corresponding probability distribution, H(y I S), of the observed variables is  therefore uniquely determined by the structure S, and is said to be generated by S.  The term model is used to signify a set of structures. Thus, the specification problem  IDENTIFIABILITY 299  is concerned with specifying a model, E, which by hypothesis contains the structure S generating the distribution H of  observed variables. In general, a model refers to some class of distributions, e.g., normal, over a parameter space.  A major question to be asked is the following: Can the distribution H, of observed variables generated by a given structure S  which is contained in a model Z, be generated by only one structure in the model ? Specification of the conditions under which  an affirmative answer is possible is equivalent to specification of conditions under which a given theory can be tested  explicitly. The following definition of identifiability thus explicates the major problem to be discussed:  1.2. DEFINITION. If the distribution, H, is generated by only one structure, we say that the model Z identifies the given  structure, S, or that the structure S is identifiable by the model.  The problem of identification can be extended to deal with certain characteristics of a model. A structural characteristic of  a model X(S), is understood to be some feature of a structure S, for example, the functional form of a relationship  represented by a component of the vector ~. Identifiability is linked to statistical inference by noting that each structural  characteristic X, partitions a model into two mutually exclusive subsets of structures,  (of which one may be empty), such that X(S) is uniquely identifiable in a structure So by the model if So belongs to EX and  not identifiable if So belongs to Zz . If T coincides with 2;X , X(S) is said to be uniformly identifiable.  In general if X(S) is uniformly identifiable by E, one can in principle test hypotheses about the nature of this structural  characteristic. If all structural characteristics of a model are identifiable by E, a test of all characteristics of the model  is possible. Sections 2 and 3 deal with a specific class of structural relationships between latent and observed variables and  with the problem of identifying classes of models.  2. OUTCOME-NONCONTINGENT MODELS  Consider an observable set of states, Y (e.g., behavioral categories) which contains K distinct elements for any observational  interval. That is, observations may assume any one of K distinct values on any one of N trials or observational intervals,  Thus, y, E Ym denotes some observational state i, in Y on trial m, i = l, 2,..., K. Define a set of K underlying states U, in  a similar manner, where u;m E U denotes the underlying state j in U on trial m, j = 1, 2,..., K. Consider the product spaces,  rm-i Y. and UN =Z , Um . Each space may be considered an N-cylinder of Y, _ Flm-i Ym and Ux = rlm-l Um respectively. In terms  of Section 1, the N-tuples of the product space, Y,v , represent the observable variables, and the  300 NAHINSKY  N-tuples of the product space U1,, , represent the latent variables. Note that each N-tuple in YN represents some ordered  N-trial sequence of observed states, Y,,,,, = (Y'1 , y=2 ,..., y'N). Similarly, each N-tuple in UN represents some ordered  sequence of latent variables, UJ,N = (u;1 , u;2 ,..., u;N). For increasing N, YI,N C YI,N-1 when the components of YI,N_1 are  identical to the first N - 1 components of YI,N . Otherwise, Y1,N r1 YI,N-1 = 0. Thus, Y,,1 , Y1,2 ,..., represent a  decreasing sequence of Yx . Similarly, U,,1 , U, ,2 ,..., represents a decreasing sequence in U, .  A definition of the conditional distribution of the YI,N given UJ.N and a natural relationship which follows from it, will  define the structural relationship to be investigated. Let p(yim I U,,,n , be the probability of observable state i on trial m  given the sequence of latent states through trial m, U,, , and the sequence Yl,m_1 of the m - 1 observable states preceding  trial m. Let u; be the latent state on trial m in the sequence U,,m . Then, we assume that  Y(yi~ I UJ,m , Yl,m-1) = p(yi~ I u,m).  That is, the observable state on trial m depends directly only upon the latent state on trial m. Further, assume that  p(ujm I UJ.m-1 , Yl.m-1) = p(ujm I UJ.m-1)' (3)  This equality means that the latent state on trial m depends only upon the sequence of prior latent states. From (2) and (3),  it follows that  N '~ N  p(UJ,N, YI,N) = [ 1'(Jim I u7m), H Y(u.7~ I  m=1 m=2 p(Yim I uin,)] p(UJ,N)  -1)] p(UI1),  The equality in (4) leads to the following definition.  2.1. DEFINITION. The conditional distribution of Y,, N given U,, N , p(YI I U,)N = l lire=1.Y(y?~ I ujm); I = 1, 2,..., KN, J  = 1, 2,..., KN.  Suppose that p(yim I u;.) = p(yi I u;) for all m. That is, the conditional probability is stationary over trials for all state  pairs, i, j. Then, we say that the conditional distribution set defined by the p(yi I u;) generates the conditional  distribution p(Y, I UJ)N . Although the following developments concern stationary conditional probabilities, it will be shown  that generalizations to the nonstationary case are straightforward.  Consider probability spaces, (UN , Su,N , PUN), (YN , SY,N , PYN), and (YN, SY,N, r(YN'UJ.N))' J = 1, 2,..., KN for all N,  where SU,N, and SY,N are the a-algebras of UN and YN, respectively. It can be shown that in general such spaces can be  defined, and thus a probability can be defined for any countable union of sets in UN(YN) and for any complement in UN(YN).  Further, for each J we define a conditional probability  IDENTIFIABILITY 301  for countable unions and complements in YN given UJ.N. Every defined probability will be between zero and one with probability  of the given space equal to unity, and the usual rules for probability will hold.  We next consider conditions under which one space can be mapped uniquely into the other. First, it is necessary to define the  structural relationships between the observed and latent variables.  2.2. DEFINITION. The structural relationship, S[F(UN), O(YN , UN)] is defined by the following linear mapping of the KN  possible latent sequences, L~,N into the KN possible observed sequences, Y1,N:  KN  Y, P(YI I UJ)NP(UJ.N) = P(I'I,N), I = 1, 2,..., K,v; J=1  where 0(YI,N , L!J,N) is the relationship defined by the above set of simultaneous equations, and F(UN) is the vector of  probabilities of order KN, where  KN  Y, P(UJ,N) - 1 J=1  and  0 G P(UJ.N) G l  for all J.  The set of equations which define O(YN , UN) can be written as a matrix equation,  PN -F(UN) = F(YN), (5)  for any N, where PN is the KN X KN matrix with p(Y, I UJ),, the element in row I and column J, and  P(y1 U0 P(Y1 I u2) ... P(yl UK)  Pi - P(.Y2.I ul) P(Y2.I u2) ... P(.Y2 UK) of order K X K. (6)  P(YK I ul) P(YK I u2) ... P(vK.I UK))  Next, consider a means for characterizing PN in more convenient form.  2.3. THEOREM. PN can be written in terms of PN-1 as the following partitioned matrix:  PN  _P(1'1 I ul) PN-1 i P(Y1 I u2) PN-1 ... p(Y1 I UK) PN-1I  _ _________ -__I____-_____  P( lr2 I ul) PN-1 XY2 I u2) PN-i ~~11 ... XY2 I UK) PN-1  - - --------  - -_--__ _ _________ __,-___-___ P(y'K I ul) PN-1 1 P(YK I u2) PN-1 I . . !II P(YK I UK) PN-1 I  N - 2,3....  where the p(yi I u;) are scalars which multiply PN-1 to produce each submatrix in the partition, and Pl is defined as in (6).  302 NAHINSKY  Proof. The demonstration that PN can be written as the partition shown follows along inductive lines. The rows of P,_1 contain  all KN-lp(Y, I UJ)N_i for fixed I, and multiplication by p(yi I u;) for all j with i fixed, as the partition dictates, for  each row results in all KNp(Y, I UJ)N for fixed I. Since the scalars p(yi I u;) are taken over all i, we get all KN possible  Y,,N represented in the KN rows.  Next, for the equations PN_1 - F(UN_1) = F(Y,,_1), all elements in any column J, of PN_1 will be coefficients Of P(UJ,N_1) in  the given equations. In the partition for PN , the multiplier p(yi I u;) is constant for u; for any column, and thus for a  given column, elements of PN are coefficients of p(U,.N_lu;) = p(UJ,N) for some sequence, UJ.N . Since the multiplier p(yi I  u;) is varied over all j for each row, p(Y, I Ur)N for all UJ are represented by each row I, and hence PN. F(UN) = F(YN) is a  set of equations in all unknowns, p(UJ,N).  The theorems in the appendix demonstrate that for each structure of the type defined by 2.2, there exists some mapping such  that we may define probability functions on both the U,,N and the Y,,,. We may then, in general, define the corresponding  probability spaces. However, suppose we estimate the probabilities p(Y,.N), from observed frequencies of occurrence for the  Y,,N . It is conceivable that solution of the equations using such estimates will not produce "sensible values." That is, some  solutions for p(Uj,N) may be less than zero or greater than one, although the restrictions require that the solutions sum to  unity. Such outcomes may be attributable to sampling error but do not bode well for the existence of a structure of the type  defined. It would be well to consider the conditions under which sample estimates of the p(U,, N) converge to the true values  for large n.  Consider the conditions under which the defined relationship uniquely maps F(UN) into F(YN). The conditions under which a  unique mapping is possible are obviously those under which the KN simultaneous equations provide unique solutions. The  following lemma and theorem establish these conditions for all N-trial sequences and suggest an algorithm for solution of the  equations.  2.4. LEMMA. I PN I = I P1 INKN-1, N = 1, 2,... .  Proof. The matrix PN may be expressed by the following product of partitioned matrices:  PN =  p(Y1 I ul) IKN-1 ... p(Yi I UK) IKN-1--N PN_1 0 ... 0  p(Yz I U0 IKN_1 ... p(Y2 I UK) IK^'-1 I 0 PN_1 ... 0  IP(YK I ul) IKN-1 ... i p(YK I UK) IKN-1  L 0 ii 0 ii ... ii PN_lj  IDENTIFIABILITY 303  where the postmultiplier contains K rows of submatrices of order K"-1. Denote the premultiplier by Q. Perform a set of column  interchanges on Q to produce  rP(Ytlut)P(Yilu2) ... P(YIIUK)~ 0 0 ... 0 I ... I 0 0 ... 0  0 ... 0 I P(Ytlut) P(Y1lu2) ... P(YIIUK)I ... ; 0 0 ... 0  I I  I I I  0 0 ... 0 0 0 ... 0 ... xyllui) P(Yilu2) ... P(Y~IuK)  _________________I___________________ __  P(Y21ui)P(Y2lu2) ... P(Y2IUK)I 0 0 ... 0 ... 0 0 ... 0 0 0 ... 0 P(Y21 ul) P(Y21 u2) ... P(Y21 UK)~ ... 0 0 ... 0 I  0 0 ... 0 I 0 0 ... 0 I ... I P(Y21ui) P(Y21 u2) ... P(Y2I11K)  I _________________1__________________________________ I I  I I I __________________________________________________  P(YKlut)P(YKIu2) ... P(YKIUK)~ 0 0 ... 0 ... 0 0 ... 0  0 0 ... 0 I P(YKlut) P(YK1112) ... P(YKIUK)I ... 0 0 ... 0 I  L 0 0 ... 0 11 0 0 ... 0 ... 11 P(YKlut) P(YKIu2) ... P(YKIuK)  with each of the square submatrices of order K. Next, a series of row interchanges produces  pl i 0 i ... I,I 0 -----------0 Pl 11 ... 0  a partition of KN-1 rows and columns of square submatrices of order K. Let I be the minimal number of column interchanges  needed to transform Q to Q', and let J be the minimal number of row interchanges needed to transform Q' to Q". Then I QI =  (-1)1+-' I Q I, The symmetry of the partition in Q dictates that I = J, and hence I Q I = I O" I = I Pl IK"-L. The  postmultiplier clearly has determinant I P"_1 lix, Hence,  I P" I - I Pl IK"-' I P,-1 IK.  To show that I P" I = I Pl INK"-1, first note that for N = l, I P" I = I Pl IlKI Pl (, which establishes the equality for N  = 1. If  I P"-1 I = I PI II"-11K("),  48o/loJ3-5  304 NAHINSKY  then,  I PN I = I PI IKN-1 I PN-I IK - I PI IKN-1(I PI I m(N-1)K(N-2) ) K  = I PI IKN-1+(N-I)K(N-1) . I PI I NKN-1  an equality which establishes an inductive proof of the lemma. The lemma leads immediately to the following theorem.  2.5. THEOREM. For any N, PN is nonsingular if and only if PI is nonsingular, and a structure, S[F(UN), O(YN , UN)], is  uniquely identifiable for any N if and only if the structure for N = 1 which defines it is uniquely identifiable. Further, all  structural characteristics, X(U1,N), = p(UI,N), are uniformly identifiable only when the related structure is uniquely  identifiable.  The theorem shows that the necessary and sufficient condition for identifying a theoretical structure to deal with states  underlying sequential observations is dependent for all trials upon the structure defined for the first trial. If the  conditional distributions of observed states given latent states are not stationary over trials, it can easily be shown, by a  proof analogous to 2.5, that I P,v I = nNI Pi IK'-1, where Pi is the matrix for trial i of conditional probabilities given  U,,i , J = 1, 2,..., Ki, and PN is defined essentially as before. Thus, each Pi would have to be nonsingular to establish  unique identifiability of the theory.  In addition to establishing conditions for unique identification of an underlying structure, 2.4 and 2.5 suggest an algorithm  for solution given F(YN), since the computational formula for I PN I is specified and computation of other determinants  necessary for solution merely entails substitution of the column vector, F(YN), for the appropriate column of PN.  If the structural relationship does not uniquely identify a distribution for a set of latent variables, an unequivocal test of  such a theory for the observed variable set would not be possible, and convergence of estimated values to nonexistent true  values would have no meaning.  With the conditions of solvability met, there is a one-to-one mapping of the KN space of observed probabilities onto the KN  space of underlying probabilities. If the solvability conditions are not met, identifiability of a theory of the type  described is not possible. However, it should be noted that many existing models not fulfilling such conditions for observed  state conditional probabilities are still identifiable by virtue of the fact that certain relationships between underlying  state probabilities are specified by the model. In general, all underlying transition probabilities are certain functions of a  parameter set and, hence, are linked in a certain way. Thus, the number of unknowns for solution is effectively reduced. For  example, assume a two-state theory with one absorbing state, and consider some trial N in which preceding trials have not led  to the absorbing state. Let the probability for transition to the absorbing state be 0  IDENTIFIABILITY 305  for this trial. Next, let p(UN_1 , ua) be the probability of some sequence of N - 1 latent states with transition to an  absorbing state on trial N, and let p(UN_1 , ut) be the probability of the same sequence of N - 1 latent states not leading to  a transition to the absorbing state on trial N. Then, p(UN-1 , ua) = p(UN_1)B, and p(UN_1 , ua) == p(UN_1)(1 - B). This  relationship, given B, effectively reduces the number of unknown sequence probabilities to be estimated. Application of the  criteria outlined in this paper can aid in specifying restrictions on underlying probabilities in models necessary for  identifiability. However, analysis of existing models or of those with such a priori restraints is beyond the scope of this  paper.  Lest the reader convince himself that the requirement of equality of number of underlying and observed states is unduly  restrictive, he should bear in mind that the essential problem involves analysis of a model for an experiment to investigate  the nature of the operation of certain hypothetical variables. In this spirit, the approach may be considered a guide to  devising appropriate experiments involving a proper set of observational categories to test a theory. A number of examples  will be considered which show how tests of theories can be guided by such considerations. Further, we will also consider the  situation in which the underlying and observed states are unequal in number. There will be a discussion of conditions under  which states may be combined in the analysis to arrive at identifiability. In all cases, the problem boils down to one in  which the experimenter must find the conditions necessary to reduce a one-to-many mapping to one which is unique, regardless  of how artificial the restrictions appear to him. The present approach merely confines the search to situations in which the  investigator does not wish to prematurely place restrictions upon the latent distributions.  The response noncontingent model is limited in application. Models which involve physiological recording of certain states  over time may fall into this category. A situation in which reward probability is independent of the particular response made  would provide another example. Burke (1959) describes an experimental routine that can fulfill the requirements of such a  situation. The subject is required to predict which of two responses, A1 or A2 , another subject will make on any trial. The  experimenter then administers one of two reinforcing events, El or E,, depending upon the correctness of the prediction. If  the experimenter arranges the reinforcement probabilities such that the events El and E2 are independent of the subject's  response, a noncontingent conditioning routine is established. One might extend the paradigm to include multiperson  interactions with some corresponding increase in number of reinforcing states. If underlying states are assumed which  correspond to a subject's hypotheses about the reward structure, it is then possible to postulate a conditional probability  distribution for a subject's behavior for each of the hypothetical states. The noncontingent routine makes the assumption of  lack of dependence of underlying transitions upon prior outcomes reasonable. One could then investigate the course of strategy  shifts represented in underlying state changes by the response noncontingent  306 NAIIINSKY  model. However, it is necessary to provide for some dependence of latent states on the prior outcome in order to extend the  use of the approach to many situations of interest. The following sections will deal with the response-contingent problem and  will present examples of the application.  3. OUTCOME-CONTINGENT MODELS  It is reasonable to expect that transitions to some latent state are contingent upon the preceding outcome as well as upon the  preceding latent states. Consider the probability of u; given the sequence of prior latent states and observed states, denoted  m  UJ,m-1 1 Y1,m-2 , yi_1 . The following assumption is made:  C(ui- I UJ,m-1 r Y1,m-2 r yi_) = p(uim I UJ,m-1 I yi_),  m = 2, 3,...,  for each and all Y1,1,1-2. Translating the equality into the implied contingencies, it is seen that the only outcome which has  direct impact upon the transition to the next latent state is the immediately preceding outcome. All other outcomes exert  influence only through their role in determining the latent sequence leading to trial m. Thus, in a typical learning model, if  the subject is in a given conditioning state, it is assumed that the last reinforcement and, perhaps, prior latent states,  directly influence latent state changes, with all prior latent states changes determined to some degree by prior  reinforcements. Assuming that (2) also holds,  N N  p(UJ,N, Y7.N) - [ fl p(yim I ui-)] [ f] p(ui~ I yi-, UJ,m-1), p(uil), m=1 m=2  UJ,m C UJ,m-1 (8)  for the outcome contingent case.  To solve for p(ujN 1 y'N_1, UJ,N-1), first assume, we can solve forp(uim I yim_.1 , UJ,_1) for m = 1, 2,..., N - 1. Then we  have as coefficients for the equations for fixed  N N-1  [ H p(yi. I ui,a)] [ H p(uim I yi-, U'..-o] p(uil), UJ,m C UJ,m-1 m=1 m=2  where the right-hand side of the equations is comprised of an observed outcome vector for N-trial sequences containing fixed  yiN-1 . (Unless yiN-1 is fixed, there is no way for only one unknown to correspond to each column of a matrix of coefficients.  That is, fixing yiN-1 avoids a confounding of observable conditions with the latent distribution in the equations.) There are  KN-1 equations in KN unknowns. However, if uil is constant for a given set of equations, KN-1 equations in KN-1 unknowns  result. It is  IDENTIFIABILITY 307  possible to solve for the p(u;1) by P1F(U1) = F(Y1) as before. Certain strategies for identifying a structure are possible,  each with identifying restrictions upon the initial states.  One kind of restriction follows naturally from the constraint imposed on the initial state in many situations. For example,  many learning models would proceed from an assumption that the subject starts in an unlearned state regardless of the manner  in which he might progress subsequently. An experimenter might also manipulate information given to the subject at the  beginning of the experiment, thereby entailing the assumption of another starting state. Thus, for many learning models, we  may assume that for the KN-1 equations for fixed u; , values on the right become  - ( P( Y".), for u;l = u; ,  (10)  where u; represents a specified starting state. Therefore, solutions would involve only one starting state for a given  experimental situation. Although the assumption of a fixed starting state is reasonable for many situations, this approach may  not be feasible in other situations and certain a priori restrictions may be used, as it will be illustrated later.  Next, we must characterize the KN-1 X KN-1 matrix of coefficients, P,,(, ,1), "N-1,  N > I , for some fixed u;l and yiN-1 which contains elements in row I, N and column J, N:  N N-1  p(yiN 1 I uiN_) H p(yi- I uJ [ F1 p(nim. I yi~ _1 , UJ,m-i)] J'(u71),  m=1 m=2 (m,,N-1)  UJ"n C UJ.m-1 . (11)  Let F(U,,,),,N-1,u,1 be the column vector of unknown p(u;N I yiN-1 , UJ,N-1) for fixed y'N-1 and u;1 , and let F(YN),. , u;1  be the column vector of the p(Y,,, , u;1) for fixed N-1  yiN-1 and u;1 . In the context of the preceding conditions, the following theorem states the conditions under which unique  solutions giving permissible probability values for the p(u; !  (Y yiN-1 , UJ,N-1) in PN(v; N-1'uj1 ) . F(UN)y;N-1'uJ1 = F(YN).; N-1'U'i are possible for large N.  3.1. THEOREM. Assuming that all solutions for p(u;N-1 I yiN-2 , UJ,N-2) are in the closed interval [0, 1], unique solutions  exist for the KN-1p(u;N 1 yiN-1 , UJ.N-1) associated with some fixed yiN-1 and u;1 in the equations  PN(,JiN-1.%11) F(UN)v;N-1.4611- F(YN)v;N  for N > 3  and only if the following conditions are met.  308  NAHINSKY  1. Unique solutions exist for all p(u;m I yi.-1 , N- 1.  2. The p(yi I u;) are greater than zero for all yi and all u; (assuming the theory restricts values to the interval [0, 1]).  -1) for fixed uj, for m = 1, 2,...,  3. P1 is nonsingular.  4. For each of the Kyin_2 = yi , all KN-3p(u;N-1 = u; I Yi,,_2 = yi, Ur,N-2) for fixed u; must be nonzero for some u; such  that each yjN-2 = yi has one set of nonzero solutions for a different u; N-2 = u; .  5. p(u;) is nonzero.  Proof PN(v .u. ) for N > 1 is a KN-1 x KN-1 matrix with elements 'N-1 ~1  p(YiN I ujN)[nm $p(yim I u~~)][11mN=ip(uj. I yi_l, Ur.m_1)]p(u,l),where U,,mCU,,,n-1. For N > 2 let P,,-1 be a KN-2 x KN-2  matrix with elements p(yiN-1 I u;N-1) [l 1m=1 p(.Yim no.)][l 1m=2 p(ui._1 I yim_y , UJ.m-1)] p(ujl) with U,,,n, C Ui,m_1 ,  where  each of the Kp(yiN-1 I u;N-1) is a constant multiplier of KN-3 columns of P*-1 , since yiN_1 is fixed. Then, PN(v;N-1 ,u,i ) =  QR,  p(y1 I n1) IKN - 2 1 ... i I p(Y1 I UK) IKN - 2 _-____-_____________--_  where Q =  i  ------------ ------------p(y. I u1) IKN - 2 ... i p(YK I UK) IKN - 2 .  a KN-1 x KN-1 matrix, and  P*- 0 0 pN-1 ... 0  R  0 i 0 i PN1 J  a KN-1 x KN-1 matrix with K rows and columns of KN-2 x KN-2 submatrices, with diagonal submatrices PN,-1 and all others null.  As in 2.4, Q is nonsingular if and only if P1 is nonsingular. R is nonsingular if and only if Pr,-1 is nonsingular. For N > 3  consider the following partition of PN-1 .  IDENTIFIABILITY  309  PN-1 -  PN(12) ... pN-2)  jj pN(22) j ... pN-2)  p*(KI) ... p*(KK) N-2 N-2  where PN(i2) is a KN-3 x KN-3 matrix with elements  Y(yiN _2 - yi I ujN-2 )p(yiN-1 I UjN--1 - uj) p(UIN-1 - uj I yiN. 2 = yi ' UJ,N-2)  N-3 N-2  [ H p(yim I uj~)] [ H p(uj,n I yi.m-1, UJ,m-1)] p(ujl), UJ,.m C UJ,nt-1 mt=1 m=2  Let PN-2 be a KN-3 x KN-3 matrix with elements  N-3 N-2  [ p(yim uj,2)] [ p(ujm I yi-" tTJ,m-1)] p(ujl). rn=1 m=2  Since each p(yiN-2 = yi ujN-2) p(y'N-1 I ujN-1 - uj) is a constant multiplier of some KN-4 columns in PN-2' ~ and each p(ujN-1  = u; yiN_2 = yi , UJ,N-2) is a constant multiplier of some column of PNIi2),  K  i PN(a2) _ _I - I PN-2 I LP(yiN-1 I ujN-1 - uj KN-a [fI p(y'N-2 - yi I ujN-2 - uk KN 4 k=1  KN-a  x [ H p(ujN-1 - uj I yiN_2 - yi , UJ,N-2)] p(ujl)' J=1  Thus, by the Laplace expansion  PN-1 I - I PN-2 I K x I 0 ~ 1p(y'N-1 I ujN 1 - uj)]KN-a ui,j  ~N-1  K  [ p(yiN-2 = yi I ujN-2 = k=1  KN_q  310 NAHINSKY  where the product 11i,; refers to a product of K terms of the type in braces, each involving different values for both yiN_,  and u;N_, , and where the summation, y-u .N_1 , refers to a summation involving all K! orderings of the u; N-, with the  ordering of the yiN_2 fixed. Thus, for PN_1 to be nonsingular, the following conditions must be met;  For each yiN-2 , the solutions p(u;N_1 I yiN-2, U,,N_2) must all be nonzero for at least one u;,-, such that each yiN-2 is  associated with one set of nonzero solutions for a different value of u;N_l; the p(yi I u;) must be nonzero for all i, j; and  PNv_2 must be nonsingular. In the partition for PN_1(,, analogous to that for P,,(N. ,ujN_2 ~i N_i ~i  PN_2 assumes the status held by PN_1 in the latter partition. Hence, unique solutions for p(u;N-2 I yiN-1 , UJ,N-2) for N > 3  exist if and only if Pl is nonsingular and PNv_2 is nonsingular. Since a nonzero p(u;,) is necessary for all matrices and  submatrices in the proof to be nonnull, since I R I _ I PN_1 I K, and since P*_1 is uniquely determined if and only if there  are unique p(u;m I yi,u_, , Ur.._1) for m = 1, 2,..., N - 1, the stated conditions are necessary and sufficient for  PN(,,,N_l,uil) to be nonsingular, and hence for the given equations to have unique solutions.  The theorem suggests an iterative process to find solutions for the conditional probabilities p(u;m I yi-, , Uj,m_1)  starting at trial 1 and proceeding to trial N. Thus, 3.1 establishes that under certain conditions, one can find solutions for  trial N, for N sufficiently large, when solutions for preceding trials are sensible, i.e., they are in the interval [0, 1].  This restriction removes an additional complication in proving the theorem, and its removal would still allow for solutions in  many cases. It is possible, for example, that certain values of p(u;m I yi, , U,, m-1) are negative for certain m G N, but  solutions for trial N values can sometimes be found under the conditions of the theorem. However, the solutions in the [0, 1]  interval would seem to be the only ones of real interest. Certainly, a priori a unique underlying structure may be specified  wherever Pl is nonsingular with all nonzero values.  Solutions for trials 1, 2, and 3 represent special cases which can be dealt with easily. For N = 1, solutions for p(u;,) are  of course possible for Pl nonsingular. For N = 2, u;, and yi, fixed, the K values of p(u;2 I yi, , u;) are found by solving  equations that involve the K x K matrix with elements p(yi2 = yi u;2 = u;) X p(yi, I u;) p(u;l) in row i and column j. This  matrix is actually Pl multiplied by the constant p(yi, I u;,) p(u;,), and hence solutions exist for I Pl I, p(yi, I u;,)  p(u;,) ~A 0. For N = 3, solutions for p(u;3 I yi2 , u;2 , u;,) for the fixed yi2 and u;, involve the K2 X K2 matrix with  elements p(yi, I u;,,) p(u;2 I yi, , u;) X p(y?2 I u;2) p(yi, 1 u;) p(u;). It can be readily shown by a partition similar to  that used initially in 3.1, that the existence of unique solutions depends upon existence of nonzero determinants for the  matrix Pl and the K X K matrix with elements p(u;2 = u; I yi, = yi , u;,) in row i and column j as well as upon nonzero p(yi,  I u;) p(u;). Extension of the procedure to nonstationary conditional distributions is possible in this case as in the  outcome-noncontingent case, with the requirement that the Pi all be nonsingular in this instance also.  IDENTIFIABILITY 311  The requirement of a matrix P, with nonzero entries appears to restrict severely the models which can be analyzed. However, it  is often possible to circumvent the restriction with no great damage to the integrity of the theory by noting that systems  usually can be assumed to possess a certain amount of "noise." For example, a subject may on occasion respond in a manner not  consistent with an existing hypothetical state. Probabilities for such deviations may be estimated by prior observations,  independent of the main experimental situation, and these estimates would allow the investigator to substitute very small  nonzero entries for zero entries specified by the original model. The remaining entries can then reflect conditional  distributions of the original model, with probability of nondeviation multiplying the values. The example which follows  illustrates how the general approach might be applied to outcome-contingent models.  Consider a stochastic model for concept learning presented by Trabasso and Bower (1964), who focused their attention upon the  four-category concept learning task. In this task, subjects are presented with a series of stimuli varied with respect to  number of dimensions, e.g., color, shape of figures, size of figures, etc., with each dimension assuming two values. The  subject is required to learn to classify each stimulus into one of four categories on the basis of two relevant dimensions.  For example, the subject might be required to learn that shape and color of figures are the two relevant dimensions. The  correct classification rule might be as follows: "red triangles" in category one, "red squares" in category two, "blue  triangles" in category three, and "blue squares" in category four. The learner is presented with a random sequence of stimuli  which he is asked to classify by category, and he is then told whether or not his response is correct. Trabasso and Bower  hypothesized that a subject learns the problem as two independent part-problems, each involving one of the relevant  dimensions. For example, the subject might learn the color dimension but not the shape dimension. In this case, he would  always classify red figures in category one or two and blue figures in category three or four. However, he would respond at a  chance level with respect to shape until he learns the shape dimension, e.g., he would place red triangles in category two as  often as in category one. Trabasso and Bower considered a model which postulated that subjects learn the two problems  independently on an all-or-none basis, with no forgetting once learning takes place. The resulting process is a threestage  Markov chain. The reader is referred to the authors for a more detailed account of the model. However, its precise  characteristics are not central to the present discussion. It is important to specify the three stages of the process: stage  one (ul), both part-problems unsolved; stage two (u,), one part-problem solved and the other unsolved; and stage three (u,),  both part-problems solved. The subject could solve both part-problems simultaneously, which is equivalent to a jump from ul to  u3. Consider three behavioral categories which can be assessed upon any trial: (y,), an incorrect response for each  part-problem; (y,), a correct response for one part-problem and an incorrect response for the other; and (y,), a correct  response for each partproblem. Assuming chance responding for unlearned problems, the following matrix  312 NAHINSKY  of conditional probabilities, Pl , holds for the structural relationship:  .\ uI u2 u3   p(yl u;) 1/4 0 0   p(y2 u;) 1/2 1/2 0 (12)  p(y3 u;) 1/4 1/2 1   Although the matrix is nonsingular, it has zero entries, and the reasonable assumption that transition to the N-th trial  latent state depends upon the observed outcome on trial N - 1 requires nonzero entries. The data presented by Trabasso and  Bower provide some justification for modifying the conditional distributions to meet this requirement. Subjects in certain  conditions were given the solution to one half of the problem and were required to solve the other half. For example, they  were told that circles belonged in categories one or three and that triangles belonged in categories two or four. However,  each subject was to learn that the final subclassification depended upon color in a certain way. In this situation, subjects  sometimes made classifications inconsistent with the information given, i.e., they misclassified stimuli on the basis of  shape. Such deviations suggest that individuals on occasion suffer temporary lapses in the processing system. The data  revealed inconsistent responding on about five trials in 1000. This outcome would be in accord with the assumption that  subjects depart from the postulated system with probability q = .01 with response at a chance level in this case. The  conditional distributions can be modified to account for such chance responding. For example, p(y3 I u3) becomes (1 - q) +  q/4, p(y3 I u2) becomes 1/2(1 - q) + q/4, and p(yl I u2) becomes q/4. The following matrix results:  ui u2 u3 p(Y1 u;) .2500 .0025 .0025  p(y2 I u;) .5000 .5000 .0050 (13)  p(y3 u;) .2500 .4975 .9925.  The matrix is nonsingular and may provide solutions for subsets of sequences Ur,N, y=N-1 . It is, of course, true that  solution of probabilities for all sequences may not be possible. However, the probability for the subset of sequences without  solutions is determined by existing solutions. Hence, a structure may be identified in which, perhaps, some subset of latent  state sequences is considered a single event.  If minor variations in the small values chosen can produce major changes in solutions for latent states, a serious problem is  posed. However, it should be noted that if PN represents a structure determined by one set of values and PN' a structure  determined by another choice, then  PN 1(PN - PN) F(UN) = JF(U,).  IDEN rIFIABILITY 313  where JF(UN) = F'(UN) - F(UN). Thus, the difference in the two solutions sets is directly related to the magnitude of 4PN = PN  - PN'.  In the example considered, suppose q had been estimated as .02 rather than as .01 determining a different structure, specified  by PN'. In comparing this structure with the prior one, it was found that  -.0050  Pi-1 AP,F(Ul) < -.005, ( .0100)  the vector on the right representing a maximum array arrived at by finding the largest elements in absolute value in each of  the rows of JPl . The values of JF(U,) would more likely be about one third the size in absolute value. Thus, the p(u;l)  produced by the two choices would differ slightly. In view of the fact that the p(u?Q I yjI , u;,) are found by multiplying  elements of Pl by values of p(yi2 I u;) Y(yil I u;,) p(u;l) the effect on F(U2) should be even smaller. Solutions for  successive trials should show a decreasing effect in absolute value. At any rate, it is possible to estimate the sensitivity  of the structure to small changes in the choice of values for near-zero entries.  The solutions may be based on the assumption shown in (10), with fixed starting ul . It is also possible to make certain a  priori assumptions about these conditional probabilities. For example, if u3 is considered to be an absorbing state, with  probabilities of the two types of inconsistent responses equal to those shown in column three of (13), one would assume a  trinomial distribution of responses in the three categories over the first N trials given u;l = u,. If an N-sequence contains  r occurrences of yl and s occurrences of y2 , the  p(I"I,N, ujl = us) = p(YI.N I u31 = us)p(uil = ua) = Nllrlsl(N- r - s)1  X Lq/4 + (1 - q)l `N-r-"'(q/4)r(gl2)sp(ujl = us).  Later solutions would, of course, have to be consistent with the absorbing state assumption, with contradictory results  requiring different assumptions.  The stochastic model proposed by Trabasso and Bower is well known to provide for an empirical test. Consequently, the issue  was not in doubt. However, consider a broader approach to examining the latent distribution for the process under study. It is  possible to estimate probabilities for underlying sequences regardless of a priori assumptions about their nature. Thus the  investigator is free to explore a number of possibilities. For example, he could examine the probabilities for which u3 is  reached on some trial and then left upon a subsequent trial. If one compares the estimated latent distribution with a  theoretical distribution in which the probability for sequences of the type described is zero, a significant difference would  not support the hypothesis that u3 is an absorbing state. Other possibilities could be examined. One might  314 NAHINSKY  consider the probabilities for sequences in which u3 is reached a given number of times and then left to be returned to  subsequently on a permanent basis. To consider one possibility, it might be found that u3 is maintained in short term memory,  with decreasing probability on each subsequent return until final learning takes place. Tests for degree of dependency upon  prior trials, as shown in Section 7, could also be performed. In short, the approach would allow more flexibility in interplay  between theory and data.  4. UNEQUAL NUMBERS OF OBSERVED AND LATENT STATES  There may be instances in which observed and latent states are unequal in number. A system of simultaneous equations in such a  situation would produce either an infinite number of solutions or no solutions for the latent structure, unless certain  restrictions are placed upon the relationships as suggested in Section 2. Consequently, the identification of a unique  structure without a priori restrictions requires some combining of states when there is an inequality in number of observed  When the number of observed states exceeds the number of latent states, it is necessary to combine observed states in some  manner. Suppose there are K latent states and L observed states with L > K. The matrix of the transformation is then L X K,  and it is necessary to reduce the number of rows by L - K. This reduction can be achieved by combining subsets of observed  states to form a new set consisting of K observed states. A subset, S, of observed states may constitute one observed state in  the new set. The equality p(yics I u;) = Lies p(yi I u;) for j = 1, 2,..., K defines the conditional probabilities for such a  new state. For each such set, it is necessary to assume that for each u; and U,,N_1 , the p(u; I yiN-1 , U,,N_1) are equal for  each yiN-1 E S for N = 1, 2,... . Thus, choice of combinations of observed states to form a nonsingular Pl is dictated in part  by certain constraints in assumptions. Since combining observed states entails adding conditional probabilities within sets  for each u; , the operations constitute elementary row transformations of the L X K matrix. Thus, transformation to some  nonsingular Pl is possible only if the rank of the original matrix is K, i.e., there are K independent linear equations. (An  alternative to the collapsing procedure might involve a best fitting solution for a distribution on the theoretical sequence.)  If there are L latent states and K observed states with L > K, the problem is one of combining latent states. This state of  affairs poses a more serious question than the preceding one, in that the underlying structure must be reconceptualized to  obtain identifiability. Define some subset of underlying states T and consider p(yi I WT u;). Since the u; are disjoint, it is  easy to show that if for each i the p(yi I u;) are equal for all j E Tp(yi I UiCT u;) equals the common p(yi I u;). Otherwise,  p(yi I Uj.T u;) is some function of the p(u;). Thus if there are only K unique condi-  IDENTIFIABILITY 315  tional distributions corresponding to K values of u; , and the matrix corresponding to K latent states is nonsingular,  combining the latent states produces a resulting, Pl which is nonsingular. The fact that subsets of latent states give rise to  the same observed state conditional distributions would indicate that distinctions between these observed states would have no  operational meaning within the context of the experimental model, and perhaps a more parsimonious model is called for unless a  relevant experimental test is proposed. Identification of the new structure would, of course, not enable one to infer anything  concerning values of p(u; I y;N- , UJ,N_1) which involve ungrouped latent states.  Combinations of observed and latent state groupings may be used to arrive at an identifiable model. However, requirements  presented for both types of groupings would have to be considered at each stage of the process.  An example of combining states to arrive at an identifiable latent structure is provided by a model for conjunctive concept  identification presented by Nahinsky (1970). Rather than examining the hypothesis selection assumptions for the underlying  process, suppose we consider the responses that a subject might be expected to make contingent upon the set of hypotheses he  holds to be possible solutions on a given trial. The problem would then involve making inferences about the underlying process  from observed response sequences. The model involves a subject's hypothesis testing procedure as he is presented a series of  stimuli over a number of trials. On each trial an individual is presented with a stimulus and is asked to classify it as an  example or as a nonexample of a concept based upon two dimensions of the stimuli. As an example, for stimuli varied with  respect to shape of figures, color, size, etc., the concept might be "black squares." Then the subject would be correct  whenever he classifies any stimulus with black squares as an example, or whenever he classifies as a nonexample any stimulus  not containing squares that are also black. After a feedback trial, the subject is informed about the correctness of his  classification. Suppose the first feedback trial is a "focus" which involves an example of the concept and the subject samples  hypotheses based upon dimension values of this stimulus. Assume that on subsequent trials a subject classifies a stimulus as  an example if and only if the stimulus contains a pair of dimension values which corresponds to at least one of the hypotheses  about solution held by the subject. Next, suppose blocks of trials which involve no feedback are interspersed within a random  feedback series after every K feedback trials. If all stimuli are varied in k dimensions, there are (z) possible hypotheses  compatible with the focus. Let the no-feedback series be composed of (2) stimuli with each stimulus overlapping the focus by  exactly two dimension values with probability p, and overlapping by fewer than two values with probability (1 - P). Further,  let the possible overlap pair be different for each no-feedback stimulus. If we assume that a subject's hypothesis set remains  constant during these no-feedback trials, we can use the number of positive classifications of these stimuli as the observed  variable, y; , to identify latent state probabilities. [Nahinsky and Slaymaker (1969)  48o/l0/3-6  316  NAHINSKY  present evidence to justify the constancy assumption.] To illustrate, imagine that there are three dimensions along which  stimuli vary. Then the subject may hold 0, 1, 2, or 3 hypotheses after viewing the focus. Let C = 1 if the correct hypothesis  is in this set, and let C = 0 if it is not. Denote the number of hypotheses in the set by r. Then there are six latent states,  u; = (C = i, r = h), and four observed states yi . Trial N is represented by the yi on the N-th no-feedback series, and the  observational interval is K feedback trials, where K can assume any integral value. The following matrix results:  ui = u2 = u3 = ua - us = us =  (C=1, r=1) (C=1, r=2) (C=1, r=3) (C=O, r=1) (C=O, r=2) (C=O, r=0)  P(yi=01ui) (1 - P) (1 - P)2 (1 - P)3 (1 - P) (1 - P)2 1  P(yr=1lu) P 2(1 - P)P 3(1 - P)2P P 2(1 - P)P 0       (14)  P(yi=21 ui) 0 P2 3(1 - P)P2 0 P2 0  P(y== 31 u) 0 0 P3 0 0 0  The lack of correspondence between observed and latent states in number can be resolved if we note that %. and u4 correspond  in the conditional distribution of the yi as do u2 and u5 . Combining the states as indicated results in a set of latent  states not classified with respect to the value of C. In addition, let q = ~3-1 q2 , where qi represents the probability of  response favoring i hypotheses inconsistent with the underlying state. An approach similar to that used for estimating q in  the Trabasso and Bower research might apply here. [Nahinsky (1970) has estimated similar deviation probabilities.] The  following revised matrix results:  P(yi = 0 l ui) \ul =(r= 1) u2 =(r =2) u3 =(r =3) u4 =(r=0)    (l - q)(l - p) (l - q)(1 - p)2 (l - p)3 (l - q)   P(yi = l ui) (l - q)p 2(l - q)(1 -p)p 3(1 -p)2p ql (l5)  p(yi =2~u?) q2 (l - q) p2 3(1 -p)p2 q2   p(yi = 3 I ui) q3 q3 P3 q3   Identification of the latent structure defined by (15) allows an investigation of the possible underlying processes involved  in arriving at solutions. If the stimulus population can be arranged so the probability p, applies to overlap relations  between concept examples other than the focus and the no-feedback sets, the approach applies to the possible resampling of  hypotheses on concept examples following the focus. As the latent structure suggests types of processes, a more detailed  analysis is made possible by finer differentiation of response patterns to include all observed states as shown in (14).  IDENTIFIABILITY 317  5. DISCRIMINABILITY OF Two MODELS  If two models for the same set of observed sequences identify the same latent structure, they in effect constitute identical  theories for the underlying process. It is of some interest to determine if two mappings PNF(UN) =F(YN) and PN'F'(UN) =F(YN),  identify the same latent structure for N-trial sequences. Consider two models for N-trial sequences, each of which provides  unique solutions for the KN latent probabilities. In this context, the mappings are intended to denote equations for  outcome-contingent as well as outcome-noncontingent models. The theorem which follows specifies the necessary and sufficient  conditions for the two structures to be distinct.  5.1. THEOREM. Let two models, PNF(UN) =F(YN) and PN'F'(UN) =F(YN), for N-trial sequences of the same observed states  respectively define unique structures F(UN) and F(UN). Then the necessary and sufficient condition that F(UN) :F-~ F(UN) is  that PN'PN' - I (or PN 1PN - I) is nonsingular.  Proof. The relationships of the models imply that PNF(UN) = PN'F'(UN) and, hence, INF(UN) = PN'PN F'(UN). By subtracting  INF'(UN) from both sides, we get (PN1PN' - IN) F'(UN) = F(UN) -F'(UN). To prove sufficiency, assume Pj~'PN' - IN is  nonsingular. If we then assume F(UN) = F'(UN), the equations are homogeneous. In this case, the only solution for F'(UN) is a  null vector, which contradicts the existence of the latent structure. Thus, F(UN) must be different from F(UN) if I PIVIPN' -  I I -- 0.  To prove the necessity, assume F(UN) *- F'(UN). Consider the mapping (PNIPN' - IN) F(UN) = F(UN) - F(UN) = [PN" - PN 1] F(YN),  a relationship which defines the unique solutions, F(UN) and F(UN). If we assume PN'PN' - IN is singular, it follows that many  values for Y(UN) satisfy the relationship. This condition contradicts the condition that the mapping is unique. Thus, PIVIPN'  - IN must be nonsingular, in which case a unique structure exists. (If PN'PN' - IN is nonsingular, multiplication by PN 1PN  shows that IN - PN 1PN , and hence P,V 1P,,- - IN , is nonsingular.)  An example of a situation in which two models might be discriminated involves studies of the effect of patterns of social  perceptions upon decision-making strategies for individuals in groups. Foa (1958) has presented a very detailed analysis of  perceived reward structures in dyadic relationships. The analysis is based upon a general balance theoretical approach  (Heider, 1946; Newcomb, 1953). In brief, a dyad is considered balanced if both members perceive that rewards from the  relationship are equally distributed between the members, and each member feels that the other member perceives reward  equality. Nahinsky (1969) has developed a stochastic model for changes in dyadic structure contingent upon mutual behavioral  changes made to bring about a balanced state, which is postulated to be an absorbing state. If one  318 NAHINSKY  considers groups of, say, three individuals, three dyadic structures may be analyzed at any one time. Consider possible  changes in dyadic structure which may occur during some negotiable game, a bargaining game of the type investigated by a  number of authors (e.g., Nash, 1950, Raiffa, 1951). The outcome of a given trial's play might be expected to influence  perceived reward structure, which in turn would influence a subject's decision strategy upon the next trial in a manner  determined by the rules of the game, perceived reward structure, and a player's bargaining strategy. Player A might seek to  cooperate with player B only, with player C only, with players B and C, or with neither players B nor C, depending upon A's  predictions of the other players' "moves." These predictions should in turn be dependent upon A's perceptions of the dyadic  relationship. The conditional probabilities for each perceived state would then depend upon an analysis of the game at a  characteristic function level, i.e., an analysis of the mappings of coalition patterns upon expected payoffs. Perceived reward  structure for A could be classified into four categories: balanced relationships with both B and C, with B alone, with C  alone, or with neither B nor C. Without postulating anything about the nature of transitions between states, one could then  derive strategy distributions for each dyadic state. One might consider two strategies for determining the conditional  distributions. For example, consider a maximum expected value strategy as compared with a minimax strategy. If the two  resulting models meet the differentiability criterion of 5.1, they would identify distinct structures, and the models could be  compared in different situations.  6. ASYMPTOTIC BEHAVIOR OF OBSERVED AND LATENT DISTRIBUTIONS  A natural question concerns the relationship between the behaviors of observed and latent distributions as N increases. Let  P(UN) be the vector of latent state probabilities, p(u;N), on trial N, and let P(YN) be the vector of observed state  probabilities, p(yiN)' on trial N. One might suppose that convergence of the latent state probabilities to some stable  distribution would imply the convergence of observed state probabilities to some stable distribution, and visa versa. The  theorem which follows shortly establishes that such convergence of one distribution is equivalent to convergence of the other  for identifiable structures. As a preliminary, note that  Y- P(YiN = .Yi I u.4N = u.1) p(u7N = u7) - p(.Y'N = .Y'),  i = 1, 2,..., K. (16)  From this it follows that  PI - P(UN) = P(YN).  (17)  We can then prove the theorem which follows.  IDENTIFIABILITY 319  6.1. THEOREM. The unique distribution of the N-th trial latent state probabilities, p(U,,), converges in probability to some  stable distribution, P(U), as N increases, if and only if the distribution of observed state N-th trial probabilities P(YN),  converges to some stable distribution P(Y), as N increases.  Proof. To prove sufficiency, we need show that if P(YN) converges to P(Y), there is some N such that for each E > 0, 1 p(u;N)  - p(u;N2)' < E/2 for all u;N, and u;,., for all N,, N, > N. If P(YN) converges in probability to a stable distribution, it  follows that there exists some N such that for each 8 > 0, 1 p(yjN) - p(yi,2)I < 8/2 for N, , N2 > N and for every yjNj and  yjN2 . Noting that PjP(UN) = P(YN) for all N, we see that P,[P(UN,) - P(UN2)] = P(YN,) - P(YN2), and hence I P(UN) - P(UN2) ~  - P11[P(I'Nl) - P(YN2)] l , where differences in absolute values are denoted. The equality for each J1Nl and JfN2 .h(u ) -  ~h/uJN~) _ Fi =1 i =1 qi1[ p(.yiNl ) )]  ~ I Y JNl t'1 I - I l - p(yiNZ I follows, where qi; is element i, j in Pi 1. Let a be the largest absolute value of any qi; .  Then, each 1 P(u;N,) - p(u;N2)~ _i 1 qi; I p(.Y'NI) -Y(.Y'N2)I < Ka 812. Since the inequality is true for all 8 > 0, let 8 =  ElKa, for E > 0. Then each I p(u;N)-p(u;N )'I < E/2 for every E > 0.  To prove necessity, note the equality, 1 Pl[P(UNI) - P(UN2)]' _ P(1"N) - P(1,N2)I and apply an inequality to the left side  similar to that used in the preceding demonstration.  The theorem enables one to use the behavior of the distribution of observed states over trials to make inferences about what  is happening to the latent distributions. If the relative frequencies for observed state occupancies stabilize over many  trials, the latent structure should approach a corresponding stability. If, for example, u; is the absorbing state of a latent  structure, the p(y,N = yi) converge to the corresponding p(yi I u;). For a given limiting P(Y), there is corresponding  limiting P(U).  TESTS OF HYPOTHESES ABOUT THE STRUCTURE  If n observations are drawn randomly and independently in an experiment with each observation representing an occurrence of  some sequence Y,,N , the results provide a series of observations classified with respect to the KN possible observed  sequences. For n > KN, let M, be the number of observations for sequence I. Then,  M = (Ml , M21 ..., MKN)  (18)  is the multinomial associated with the KN possible behavioral sequences. Next note that for the outcome-noncontingent case  F(UN) = PN 1F(YN) for PN nonsingular. Thus, each p(U1,N) is some linear combination of multinomial probabilities, P(YI,N).  320 NAHINSKY  Let p(Y,,,v) be the observed proportion of observations for sequence Y,,,,, and let F(YN) be the column vector of the  p(Y,,,,). Then the vector nf(Y,,)' = M, the multinomial associated with the Y,,N, and, for large n, the vector approaches the  multivariate normal distribution. For large n, let  nP(UN) = PN1nP(YN). (19)  Here, ft(UN) is an estimate of the relative frequency of observations in each of the KN hypothesized categories. For nP(YN)  multivariate normal and Efi(Y,,N) = P(Y,,N), the solutions, nP(UN), are actually solutions to normal equations which provide  the best unbiased linear estimators of the np(UJ,N). This conclusion follows from a theorem due to Markov (see Rao, 1952, p.  76). It is known that P(YN) converges in probability to F(YN). Thus, P(UN) converges in probability to F(UN), the "true"  latent distribution, assuming the existence of a true structural relationship of the type described. For the  outcome-contingent case, solutions for the P(u?N I YiN-1 , UJ,N-1) can be used to arrive at estimates of P(UJ,N) (in some  cases, the probabilities for unions of certain U1,N) with a resulting linear mapping of the p(UJ,N) or the P(Y,.N). Thus,  np(UN) is some linear function of nF(YN) in the outcome-contingent case also, and the resulting estimators will be seen to  have desirable properties for statistical tests in this case too.  Test of hypotheses about latent distributions can be made in both the contingent and noncontingent cases using the observed  distribution for the behavioral categories. The hypotheses of most interest are generally composite hypotheses about specific  characteristics of the latent distribution. For each N, define a parameter space, 0, such that B E O represents a vector of  order KN of the parameters, p(UJ,N) = 0, . Thus is some subset of Euclidean KN-space, which contains as elements certain  KN-tuples of parameter values meeting specified requirements. Assuming some underlying structure,  E P(Y1 I UJ)NB = 91(0) = p(Y1,N), I = 1, 2,..., KN (20) J-1  for some parameter set 9. A hypothesis may place certain restrictions upon the g,(B). Denote such restrictions by g; (B), and  consider the composite hypothesis  and the statistic  P(YI,N) = 91'(0), I = 1, 2,..., KN, (21)  - (22)  2 [Mr ngi (")]2   i=1 ngl(0)   IDENTIFIABILITY 321  where the g,'(0) represent the functional values for 0 which minimize 7rn2 under the hypothesis. It can be seen that solutions  in the contingent as well as the noncontingent case are minimizing solutions. It is well known that under certain conditions,  the statistic in (22) approaches the X2 distribution with degrees of freedom dependent upon the restrictions of the  hypothesis. Birch (1964) has shown that ,r~2 approaches the X2 distribution as n gets large under a set of general conditions  for a parameter space 0, defined under some composite hypothesis. The conditions for the case considered here are as follows.  1. For each 0 E 0, g,'(0) is positive or zero for each I, and Y-i g,'(0) = 1. This condition is certainly implied by the  existence of a structural relationship of the type defined in 2.2, along with a set of restrictions which require the  functions to behave as probabilities should.  2. The space 0 is some subspace of Euclidean KN-space, and each 0 is an interior point of 0.  3. Given any E > 0, there exists S > 0 such that I g,'(0) -g,'(00)j > S whenever 10 - 00 I > E, i.e., gr1 is continuous at 00  . This condition implies that each parameter set, 0, defines a unique structure which is identifiable, a condition assured by  the identifiability conditions previously established. The condition assures the consistency of maximum likelihood estimators.  It is known that minimum 7r.2 estimators in (22) approach the maximum likelihood estimators for large n. Thus, with unique  identifiability, our estimators converge in probability to the true values and are efficient.  4. For each 00 E 0, the partial derivatives, bg,'(0)ls(Br), exist for each I and J in some neighborhood of 00 and are  continuous at 00.  An important example of a composite hypothesis about the latent distribution involves the dependency of trial N transitions  upon prior trials. Consider the hypothesis that the transitions from u;- on trial N - I to u; on trial N depend only upon the  latent state on trial N - 1, i.e., that the transition probabilities obey the rules of a first order Markov process. Note that  p(UJ.N) =p(ua I Ur.N-1)P(Ur,N-1),  (23)  where U1,N C U1,N_l, u; is the latent state of the sequence U1,N on trial N, and P(Uj I UJ,N-1) is the probability of state u;  on trial N given the sequence UJ,N-1 on the first N - 1 trials. Under the hypothesis,  P(Uj I Ur,N-1) = P(Uj I uj'), p(UJ,N) = P(Uj I uj') p(UJ,N-1),  (24)  where u;represents the latent state on trial N - 1, and p(u; I u; is the probability  322 NAHINSKY  of uj on trial N given uj, on trial N - 1. Thus the null hypothesis can be stated as follows:  K K KN-a  p(YI,N) - E Y_ p(YI I UJ.N-1 , uj)NP(uj I uj')p(UJ,N-2 > uj') j =1 j=1 J=1  for I = 1, 2,..., KN; (25)  where p(YI I UJ,N-1 , uj)N is the conditional probability of the N-trial sequence ending with state uj , p(UJ,N-2 , uj.) is  the probability of (N - 1) trial sequences ending with uj, , and the inner sum is over the sequences in which uj, occurs on  trial N - 1 and uj on trial N. [In the outcome-contingent case, one might modify the hypothesis to specify that the p(uj I y2  , uj, , UJ,N-2) equal a common p(uj I yz , uj-).] Let the term on the right be denoted by g,'(0), where 0 is now the vector of  the KN-1 values of p(UJ,N-1) and K2 transition probabilities, p(uj I uj). If (22) is minimized with respect to the resulting  KN-1 + K2 homogeneous linear restrictions of the hypothesis, it will be distributed approximately as X2 with KN - KN-1 - K2  degrees of freedom.  Consider dependencies of higher order in which transitions on trial N depend upon the states on the preceding M < N trials.  Then, under the hypothesis  K K K KN-M-1  p(YI,N) = , Z Y ... Y, Y  jN-M=1 jN-M+1=1 j=1 J=1  p(YI I UJ.N-M+1, uj, ujN-1 I..., U&-M)N 'p(uj I u&_3 ,., ujk_M p(UJ.N-M-1, uj~,_3 ,..., ujk-M  (26)  for I = 1, 2,..., KN; and the test statistic is minimized with respect to KN-M + KM+1 linear restrictions and hence is  distributed as X2 with KN - KN-"' - KM+1 degrees of freedom.  Many other hypotheses are possible. For example, one might test the hypothesis that some subset of p(UJ,N) = 0, and minimize  (22) under this assumption. Some hypotheses would not be subject to test. If the subset of the 0 specified by the hypothesis  is everywhere dense in O, then the hypothesis is not subject to test. For example, the hypothesis that certain ratios of the  p(UJ,N) are rational numbers would not allow a statistical test in the usual sense.  Tests of simple hypotheses are, of course, straightforward, with the g,'(0) specified by the hypothesized distribution of the  p(UJ,N). The X2 statistic will have KN - 1 degrees of freedom.  For long sequences, the number of categories, KN, obviously becomes quite large, and frequencies within categories become  small. Hence, it is sometimes necessary to regroup categories using different partitions of the set of sequences. The reader is  IDENTIFIABILITY 323  referred to Holland (1967), who has dealt extensively with the problem and the rationale for this multipartition case.  APPENDIX: DEMONSTRATION OF THE EXISTENCE OF  PROBABILITY FUNCTIONS FOR THE MAPPINGS OF 2.2  If a probability space (Y1 , SY,1 , p(Yi I u;)) is assumed for each u; , it follows that x ~h U j) 1 for all and 0 < u  yi=1Y(yi ;) j, p(yi ;) G 1 for all i, j. We next show that if the above conditions hold, then EI p(Y, I U,)N = l  , and a probability space (YN, SY,N, P(YN,a,)), can usually be defined for all N and each U,.  A.1. THEOREM. If we define a probability space, (Y1 , SY,1 , p(Yl I ",)) for each u; , j = 1, 2,..., K, then for any N, for  each conditional distribution associated with a sequence U,,N generated by the associated p(yi I u;), YI i p(Y, i tTJ)N = 1  and 0 < p(Y, I U,)N =~ 1 .for each I.  Proof. The assertion of the first part of the theorem is equivalent to the statement that each column of PN sums to unity if  each column of P1 sums to one. Since the stated condition obviously holds for N = 1, it is only necessary to show that if the  condition holds for PN_1 , it holds for PN . But by 2.3 each column sum of PN equals yx1 p(yi I u.i) times the column sum for  PN  which in turn equals unity if the  i= -1 ,  condition holds for PN_1 . If 0 < p(yi I u;) < 1 for all i j pairs, the resulting p(Y, I U,), must fall between zero and one,  because the latter values will all be nonnegative.  If the conditions stated in the theorem hold, we may define in a natural manner the conditional probability of U Y1,N given  U,,N , where the YI,N form some collection of disjoint sequences. The given probability is defined by the equality,  Y (U YI,N I UJ,N) = y, P(YI I uJ)N, i=1 i=1  where 0 <_ p(U 1 Y,,N I U,,N) < 1 in all cases. We may in general define the conditional probabilities for countable unions  and complements, all of which would be in a o-algebra generated by the Y,,N . Hence, we may define the probability space, (Y N  , SY,N , P(YN U,))+ when the conditions of A.1 hold.  Consider again the structural relationship defined in 2.2. It is reasonable to ask if there exists a probability vector,  F(UN), which is mapped onto an analogous probability vector, F(YN), by the linear mapping of 2.2. This condition is assured by  the following theorem.  A.2. THEOREM. For each linear mapping defined in 2.2, there exists some probability vector F(UN) such that the mapping defines  a probability vector F(YN).  324 NAHINSKY  Proof. Let F(UN) be some probability vector as defined in 2.2. It follows from A. l that  KN KN KN KN  Y_ p(YI I UJ)NP(UJ.N) = Y, p(UJ,N) Y, p(YI I UJ)N 1=1 J=1 J=1 I=1  KN  _ Y,, p(UJ.N) = l. J=1  Then, since the p(YI I UJ) are probabilities, the mapping PN - F(UJ,N) = F(YI,N) and the restrictions on the p(UJ,N) imply  that 0 < p(YI,N) < 1 for each Y1. N and that Y_i p(Y1.N) = l.  REFERENCES  BIRCH, M. W. A new proof of the Fisher-Pearson Theorem. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 1964, 35, 817-824.  BURKE, C. J. Application of a linear model to two-person interactions. In R. R. Bush and W. K. Estes (eds.), Studies in  Mathematical Learning Theory. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1959.  ESTES, W. K. Component and pattern models with Markovian interpretations. In R. R. Bush and W. K. Estes (eds.), Studies in  Mathematical Learning Theory. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1959.  FOA, U. G. Behavior, norms, and social rewards in a dyad. Behavioral Science, 1958, 3, 323-334. GREENO, J. G., AND STEINER, T.  E. Markovian processes with identifiable states: general considerations and application to all-or-none learning.  Psychometrika, 1964, 29, 309-333. HEIDER, F. Attitudes and cognitive organization. Journal of Psychology, 1946, 21, 107-112.  HOLLAND, P. A variation on the minimum chi-square test. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1967, 4, 377-413.  HURWICZ, L. Generalization of the concept of identification. In Statistical Inference in Dynamic Economic Models, Cowles  Commission Monograph 10, New York: Wiley, 1950. KOOPMANS, T. C., AND REIERSOL, O. The identification of structural  characteristics. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 1950, 21, 165-181.  NAHINSKY, I. D. A group interaction stochastic model based on balance theoretical considerations. Behavioral Science, 1969,  14, 289-302.  NAHINSKY, I. D. A hypothesis sampling model for conjunctive concept identification. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1970,  7, 293-316.  NAHINSKY, 1. D., AND SLAYMAKER, F. L. Sampling without replacement and information processing following correct responses in  concept identification. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1969, 80, 475-482.  NASH, J. F. Equilibrium points in n-person games. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 1950, 36, 48-49.  NEWCOME, T. M. An approach to the study of communicative acts. Psychological Review, 1953, 60, 393-404.  OSGOOD, C. E. Method and Theory in Experimental Psychology, New York: Oxford University Press, 1953.  IDENTIFIABILITY  325  RAIFFA, H. Arbitration schemes for generalized two-person games. Report M 720-1, R30, Engineering Research Institute of  University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 1951.  RAO, C. R. Advanced Statistical Methods in Biometric Research. New York: Wiley, 1952. REIERSOL, O. On the identifiability of  parameters in Thurstone's multiple factor analysis. Psychometrika, 1950, 15, 121-149.  TRABASSO, T., AND BOWER, G. Component learning in the four-category concept problem. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1964,  1, 143-169.  RECEIVED: February 22, 1973; REVISED: June 13, 1973  Printed in Belgium