10.1016/0022-2496(73)90014-x
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 10, 223-231 (1973)  A Sufficient Condition for Conditional Expectation to be Monotonically Related to Distribution Parameters  JAMES LARIMER  Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122  AND  KERRIS THOMPSON  Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, Florida 33432  In this paper we give a sufficient condition for conditional expectation to be a monotonic function of a parameter of the  joint probability distribution. A second sufficient condition is given for the case where varying the parameter of the joint  distribution leaves the shape of that distribution unchanged. Finally, an application of the condition is illustrated on the  counter models for choice reaction time of LaBerge (1962) and Nickerson (1969).  1. INTRODUCTION  Conditional expectations arise quite naturally in several psychological settings. In the area of testing and evaluation the  average score for a group of individuals who have completed a test or for those who have not completed it is a conditional  expectation. The average score given a particular level of motivation is another example. Theories of test performance must  account for the relations between performance measures and motivational level or the ability to complete a speeded test.  Other conditional expectations come from choice reaction time studies. Here the conditional expectation is the mean reaction  time of a response given that it is: (a) response i, where i could be any of n alternatives; (b) correct or incorrect; (c)  generated by an easy or hard discrimination; or (d) generated under speed or accuracy instructions, etc. One type of choice  reaction time task is the "same" or "different" judgment. A subject is presented with two stimuli simultaneously, and he must  decide if they are the "same" or "different." An empirical finding for this task is that mean reaction time for "different"  decreases as stimulus pair dissimilarity or discriminability increases (Egeth, 1966). In the closely related comparative  judgment task where the subject must decide which of the two stimuli has more of a particular  Copyright c, 1973 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  223  224 LARIMER AND THOMPSON  attribute, a similar empirical finding occurs (Henmon, 1906; Kellogg, 1931; Festinger, 1943).  In the above examples, the discriminability of the two stimuli or the distance between them is a determinant of the joint  probability distribution of the time of the response. It can be regarded as a parameter of that joint distribution. The  conditional expectation is found empirically to be a monotonic function of that parameter. The theorem we shall prove in this  paper aids in deciding whether a particular model or theory predicts monotonic relationships between the parameters of the  joint distribution and the conditional expectation. We shall illustrate an application of the theorem by applying it to a  counter model for the "same" or "different" task.  2. MONOTONIC CONDITIONAL EXPECTATION  Let T be a random variable defined on the interval [a, b] associated with a joint event A (e.g., response A at time t) and let  f (t; Al ..., AN) be the joint probability density function (jpdf) of the random variable T. The parameters of the joint  probability density function, f, are Ai i = 1,..., N, and these depend upon aspects of the task such as the discriminability  of the stimuli, payoffs, etc. The integral of f over [a, b], for fixed values of Al ,:.., A,, is the marginal probability of A  and, therefore, in general, is less than unity. For example, if T is the random variable "respond `same' at time t," then the  integral of f over [a, b] is the probability of the event "respond ,same'."  Before stating the theorem we make the following notational simplification: we will write f (t; Ai) instead of f (t; Al ,...,  A,). In the theorem it is assumed that all of the A; are fixed except for Ai ; the two variables that we consider are Ai and  E(T; Ai), the conditional expectation of T given A as a function of Ai . We also assume that f is continuous and has  continuous derivatives of at least order two. These assumptions are quite minimal and play no important role in restricting  application of the theorem. In the event that one of a or b is infinite we assume that f has finite first and second moments.  THEOREM. Let f (t; Ai) and E(T; Ai) be as previously defined. If  01 log f (t; Ai) {~} 0 for all t, 8t aAi  then  8E(T; Ai) {c} 0. aA;  CONDITIONAL EXPECTATION 225  Proof. The conditional expectation of T given A, E(T; ai), is given by the following:  t t, Ai dt  E(T; A,) fbf(t; A;) dt .  The partial derivative of E(T; Aj) with respect to ai is  aE(T; ~i) b f (t; Aj) dt f "b t of (t; AZ) dt ,I b tf (t; Aj) dt f b of (t; AZ) dt a~i  aAi - P2 '  where P --- j,b f (t; Aj) dt. By relabeling the dummy variables and simplifying, we obtain  aE(T; Aj)  y - x) f (x; A;) f (y; Aj) a tog f (.y; aaZ Ai) dx dy  = iP2 f b f b (y - x) ~ a log f (y' ai) _ a log a(x' Aj) i f (x; Aj) f (y; Aj) dx dy.  Clearly, if  0, log f (t; Ai)  at aAi {<) 0,  for t in (a, b) then the numerator of the preceding fraction will be {Z-~} 0. Q.E.D. Many probability density functions  (pdf's) have parameters which do not change the shape of the distribution when they are varied. The effect of varying the  shape preserving parameters is a uniform stretching along the T axis and a rescaling along the probability density axis. The  variance of the normal distribution and the rate constant of the gamma distribution are examples of shape preserving  parameters. The shape preserving property can be formally stated as follows: there exists a positivevalued function ~(ai) and  a nonnegative function g(t) such that  f (t; Aj) = O(Aj) g(t~(Ai)),  where O(a;) is the appropriate scale constant  bC(.1;)  00i) = Wi)Pl J g(u) du. a40j)  226) LARIMER AND THOMPSON  COROLLARY. If f (t; Ai) is shape preserving with respect to Ai , then  OE(T; Ai) {~} 0 if for all t in (a, b), aAi  COO at ~t a log fi t' Ai) ~ {<) 0.  Proof. By shape preserving,  0, log f(t; Ai) - f(Ai) a a log f(t; Ai)  at aAi Fi) at ~t at  Q.E.D.  Remark 1. Shape preserving implies that all of the conditional moments of T are proportional to the corresponding inverse  power of ~(Ai); that is,  E(Tn; Ai) cc  Remark 2. If f is shape preserving with repect to Ai and if ~(Ai) is monotonic, then if the corollary holds for one value of  Ai, it holds for all values of Ai . Therefore, in testing for monotonicity in practice, it is sufficient to show ~(Ai) is  monotonic and test the corollary at one convenient value of Ai .  Remark 3. If v(t) and u(A) are positive valued functions, then  a2 log f(t; A) 82log[v(t) n(A)f(t; A)]  at aA - at aA  which simplifies application of the theorem.  Remark 4. The freedom in remark 3 in the shape preserving case becomes  aE(T; A) f ~} 0 if f(Ai) at l t a log v(t)at A) f(t; A) } t~} 0,  for all t in (a, b). To prove this we note that the preceding expression does not depend upon u(A). v(t) may be introduced by  replacing f (t; A) by v(t) f (t; A) in the corollary which by remark 3 is allowed.  3. AN EXAMPLE FROM COUNTER MODELS FOR "SAME" OR "DIFFERENT" TASKS  We will illustrate application of the theorem by applying it to a counter model for "same" or "different" judgments. We  suppose that underlying the decision process are two statistically independent counters, one which accumulates information  about  CONDITIONAL EXPECTATION 227  the similarities in the stimulus pair and the other which accumulates information about their dissimilarities. Both counters  are assumed to be noisy in the sense that the amount of information accumulated over fixed time periods varies from period to  period when all else remains constant. A response decision is made whenever one of the counters reaches criterion. An  analogous situation is a race between two horses; whichever horse crosses the finish line first wins. One horse is called  "same," and the other is called "different." We further assume that the criteria for each counter can be chosen independently,  and in the horse race analogy this corresponds to giving one horse a head start.  This model is only a slight modification of the recruitment model proposed by LaBerge (1962) to account for recognition data.  He assumed that each stimulus in a recognition task could be represented by a set of attributes. Given any two stimuli, there  will be some attributes common to both stimuli (overlap elements) and others which are unique to one or the other stimulus  (nonoverlap elements). The "same" counter accumulates information about overlap, and the "different" counter accumulates  information about nonoverlap; the rates at which this information accumulates depend upon the amounts of overlap and  nonoverlap, respectively.  Let To be the random variable "time at which the `different' counter reaches criterion," and let TS be the random variable  "time at which the `same' counter reaches criterion." The response decision rule is: (1) respond "same" whenever TD > Ts and  (2) respond "different" whenever TD < Ts . Let h and g be the probability density functions, pdf's, oTD and TS ,  respectively. The probabilities that the "different" counter has not reached criterion at or before time t, P(TD ;- t), and  that the "same" counter has not reached criterion at or before time t, P(T,S > t), are given by the following integrals:  P(TI) > t) = H(t) = I h(u) du,  and  P(TS > t) = G(t) = J' a g(u) du. r  The random variable "respond `different' at time t," TRD , has the jpdf h - G, and similarly the random variable "respond  `same' at time t," TRs , has the jpdf g - H. The probability of the response "different," P(TD < TS), and the probability of  the response "same," P(TD > TS), are given by the following integrals, respectively:  P(TD < TS) = J h(u) G(u) du, 0  P(TD > TS) = J g(u) H(u) du. 0  228 LARIMER AND THOMPSON  To make the illustration explicit, we assume that h and g are gamma distributions. Gammas are the continuous analogs of the  distributions assumed by LaBerge (1962) and in this sense are a natural choice to illustrate the theorem. Gamma distributions  have two parameters. The first is a rate parameter or time constant which is defined to be the  lim d t-+0  P(dt)  At = time constant,  where P(dt) is the probability of sampling an element that will increase the count during the time period At. The second  parameter is the number of counts necessary for the counter to reach its criterion. Let n, 0 and m, -q be the parameters of  the pdf's h and g, respectively; then  and  h(t; n, 0) = tn_10n e-to/1'(n), (0 > 0, n > 0)  g(t; m, rl) = tin-177m e t"Ir(m), (q > 0, m > 0).  The parameters 0 and -q, the rate parameters, are assumed to be functions of overlap and nonoverlap, respectively, and n and  m, the counter criteria, are assumed to be functions of payoffs, speed accuracy instructions, etc.  We will work only with the expression for the expected time of a "different" response, since the corresponding expression for  the "same" response differs only by the interchanging of the parameters of h and g. The expected time of the response  "different," E(TRD), is given by the following expression:  ,n_1 On-qxl'(n + K f 1)  th(t; n, 0) G(t; m, -1) dt  E(TRD) = P(TD < TS) P(TD < TS) (4)  where  P(TD < TS) _ (0 + B)nKKr(K + i)r(n) ,  and where n and m are taken to be integers. For the purpose of application of the theorem the more general form (3) must be  used. This will result in an interpolation of E(TRD) away from the integer values of n and m. If we then show that this is  monotonic in the parameters, it will still be monotonic when the parameters are restricted to the integer values. From the  theorem, we know that we need only consider the partial derivatives of the jpdf h - G with respect to n, m, 0, and 77 to show  monotonicity.  Remark 3 reduces the problem of showing monotonicity in n and 0 to showing that (82 log h(t)10t 8n) > 0 and that (8'log  h(t)10t 80) < 0; both of these derivatives can be easily computed from the expression given for h in (3), and we leave that  task to  CONDITIONAL EXPECTATION 229  the reader. Establishing monotonicity for the parameters q and m is slightly more difficult. Again by remark 3 this problem  reduces to showing that (a2 log G(t)l at a17) < 0 and that (a2 log G(t)10t am) > 0. Recalling (3) and (1), we write G(t) as  G(t) 1 xn dx. = r(m) f t  By remark 3 G(t) may be replaced by  R(t) = I xm_1 e xn dx,  in the above inequalities. It now follows by straightforward calculation that  a2 log R(t) _ _1 at am R2  (tx)m-1 e(x+t)'n(log x - log t) dx > 0,  and  a2 log R(t) 1  at a-q = R2  (tx)m-1 e(x+t)n(t - x) dx < 0,  as required.  In the gamma distributed version of LaBerge's model (1962) the parameters that correspond to B and 77 are the probabilities p  and q, where p is the probability of sampling a nonoverlap element. In addition to overlap and nonoverlap elements, the  LaBerge type model supposes that there are also noise elements which are not associated with either overlap or nonoverlap.  When a noise element is sampled, neither the "different" nor the "same" counter is incremented. Thus, it is possible to have  situations in which two pairs of stimuli have equal amounts of nonoverlap but differing amounts of overlap or vice versa.  Another possibility is two pairs of stimuli that are identical with respect to overlap and nonoverlap, but due to large  differences in the number of noise elements each pair would be assigned quite different values of p and q (B and n). For many  measures of dissimilarity such as Restle's (1961, p. 44), reaction time would not be completely determined by dissimilarity,  since the same dissimilarity value could be associated with several values of p and q. If the model is further constrained by  assuming that the total number of elements is fixed and that there are no noise elements, which forces p + q = 1 (6 -f- ?7 =  constant), then the question arises "does this additional constraint upon the parameter space of the model guarantee  monotonically decreasing reaction times with increasing dissimilarity?"  Setting B + q = c we obtain  h - G(t) = 0(t, n, m) - 0(B, n) - p(t),  48o/ 10/2-8  230 LARIMER AND THOMPSON  where t, n, m) = tn-le-te/1'(n)F(m), 0(0, n) = 0'n, and  P(t) = et(`-B) f X--1(C - e)m e a(e-e) dx. t  By making the change of variables u = x(c - 0) and y = t(c - 0) we obtain  P(t) = f (.Y) = f (u + A.-I e-u du. 0  Let F(y) = log f (y), then  aF(y) - ay aF(y) = (c - 0) F(y), at at ay  where F(y) = OF(y)/ay. We now apply the theorem to f (y). Note first that  aae at) - -F(y) + (c - 0) ae a ayy) = -F(y) - yFy)  = -(IIf2){ffI +yff" -yff'}, (5)  where f = f (y).  The sign of the bracketed term in (5) determines the sign of the derivative. Computing that term we obtain  ff' + yff" - yf 'f' - (m 2 1) f o~ f o~ [(u + y)2(v + y) + (v + y)2(u + y)  + (m - 2)y{(u + y)2 + (v + y)2)  - 2(m - 1)(u + y)(v + y)] (U + y)m-3(v + y)m-3 e -v du dv  ( 2 ) f o f o {y2(u + v) + (m - 1) y(n - v)2  -{- 4yuv -}- uv(u + v)}(u + y)--3(V + y)m-3 e-n-v du dv  - ~0 when m = 1 positive when m > 1.  Thus, the expected time of a "different" response is decreasing in 0 = c - 77 so long as m > 1. If m = 1, then the curve of  mean reaction time as a function of 0 is constant.  Algebraically this model is equivalent to a model proposed by Nickerson (1969). The difference between these two models is the  interpretation given the two counters.  CONDITIONAL EXPECTATION 231  For both Nickerson and LaBerge, the "different" counter is stimulus controlled, but Nickerson assumes that the "same" counter  acts as an internal clock independently of the stimulus on any trial. Thus, the "same" counter generates a deadline; if the  stimulus controlled "different" counter has not reached its criterion before the deadline, then the response "same" is made by  default.  We have given expressions for the expected reaction times predicted by both models under the assumptions that Tp and TS are  gamma distributed. The two models differ in their respective identification of distribution parameters. The LaBerge model  postulates that both counters are stimulus controlled, and the Nickerson model postulates that only the "different" counter is  stimulus controlled; the remaining counter acts as a deadline. The theorem allowed us to deduce many of the qualitative  predictions of these two models and should be useful in determining properties of models with counter analogs in general.  ACKNOWLEDGMENT  The authors are indebted to David H. Krantz for his many suggestions and criticisms.  REFERENCES  EGETH, H. Parallel versus serial processes in multidimensional stimulus discrimination. Perception and Psychophysics, 1966, 1,  245-252.  FESTINGER, L. Studies in decision. l. Decision time, relative frequency of judgment and subjective confidence as related to  physical stimulus difference. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1943, 32, 291-306.  HENMON, V. A. C. The time of perception as a measure of differences in sensation. Archives of Philosophical Psychology and  Scientific Method, 1906, No. 8.  KELLOGG, W. N. The time of judgment in psychometric measures. American Journal of Psychology, 1931, 43, 65-86.  LABERGE, D. A. A recruitment theory of simple behavior. Psychometrika, 1962, 27, 375-396. NICKERSON, R. S. 'Same'-'Different'  response times: A model and a preliminary test. Attention and performance. 11. Acta psychologica, 1969, 30, 257-275.  RESTLE, F. Psychology of judgment and choice. New York: Wiley, 1961.  RECEIVED: August 8, 1972