10.1016/0022-2496(73)90006-0
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 10, 8E-90 (1973)  A Note on a Paper by Rumelhart and Greeno  STEPHEN E. EDGELL, WILSON S. GEISLER 111, AND JOSEPH L. ZINNES  Department of Psychology, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana 47401  The parameters of the models described by Rumelhart and Greeno in this journal (1971) are constrained in certain ways. Neglect  of this fact in their paper leads them to an inadmissible set of parameter values, and an invalid argument and statement  concerning the equivalence of two models. However, their conclusion that the Restle model fits their data better than the Luce  model remains unchanged.  The parameters v(i) and o(i, j) in the Restle model for binary choices (1961) are assumed to be additive measures defined over  a collection of sets: v(i) is the total measure of set i and o(i, j) is the measure of the intersection of sets i and j. From  this it follows that for three sets, i, j, k,  v(i) > o(i, j) -F- o(i, k) - o(i, j, k),  where o(i, j, k) is the measure of the intersection of all three sets, i, j, and k. However, since  o(j, k) > o(i, j, k),  we can state the somewhat weaker inequality  v(i) > o(i, j) -}- o(i, k) - o(j, k).  The inequalities above show that the parameters of the Restle model are constrained in a specific way. However, in the  Rumelhart and Greeno (1971) test of the Restle model, only a much weaker constraint was placed on these parameters, namely that  o(i, j) 6 min (v(i), v(j)).  They therefore obtained an inadmissible set of parameter values. For example, for the stimuli 4, 5, and 6 in the Rumelhart and  Greeno experiment, the above inequality implies that  v(5) > o(5, 4) + o(5, 6) - o(4, 6), 86  Copyright 1973 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved,  NOTE ON A PAPER BY RUMELHART 87  but from their pooled data in their Table 2, the corresponding parameter values give  .3630 > .3128 + .2248 - .000 = .5376,  which is false.  To test the Restle model on the Rumelhart and Greeno data, it seems easiest to redefine the parameters so that they are  independent, and at the same time to make some simplifying assumptions, which have the desirable effect of reducing the number  of parameters.  Let A(i) be the measure of the set of elements unique to set i, A(i, j) the measure of those unique to the intersection of  sets i and j, and A(i, j, k) those unique to the triple intersection of sets i, j, and k. The nine stimuli (famous persons) in  the Rumelhart and Greeno experiment were selected so that they would fall into three distinct groups determined by their  profession. It seems reasonable therefore at the outset to assume that all the overlap parameters are zero except for A(i, j,  k) when i, j, and k are all from the same profession. (It may be noted that aspects common to all stimuli can be ignored,  because they do not affect the choice probabilities in the Restle model.) Hence, there are 12 parameters in all, one of which  can be set to an arbitrary value. Nine of these parameters are the stimulus parameters A(i), each associated with the unique  aspects of the nine stimuli, and the remaining three parameters are the triple overlap parameters, each associated with a  profession. For convenience, the latter three parameters are designated here by P(1), P(2), and P(3).  If no simplifying assumptions are made, other than the ones made by Rumelhart and Greeno, there would be 21 parameters, one of  which can be fixed a priori. The nine additional parameters come from the three binary overlap parameters A(i, j) for each of  the three groups. By not realizing that the parameters are constrained in the way indicated here, Rumelhart and Greeno were  led incorrectly to estimate 17 parameters rather than the correct number of 20.  Using this notation, the Restle model can be written:  A(i) if i and j are in the same profession A(i) + A(j)  A(i) -{- P(k) if i is in profession k and  A(i) -{- P(k) + A(j) -}- P(m) ' j is in m, and k -A m.  The results using Chandler's iterative search routine (Chandler, 1969) to obtain minimum X2 estimates of the parameters to the  Rumelhart and Greeno pooled data is given in Table 1.  The parameter value A(1) was fixed at 1.00. The X2 obtained was not significant [X2(25) = 30.00, p > 0.22] and is close to the  value obtained by Rumelhart and Greeno [X2(19) = 21.94, p > 0.28]. Thus, the Restle model fits their data well, even  88 EDGELL, GEISLER, AND ZINNES  TABLE 1 Estimated Parameters for Restle Model using all Pooled Data from Rumelhart-Greeno (1971)  A(1) = 1.000 A(7) = 0.164 234 subjects  A(2) = 0.541 A(8) = 0.416 X2 = 30.00  A(3) = 0.393 A(9) = 0.638 df = 25  A(4) = 0.182 P(1) = 0.323 p > 0.22  A(5) = 0.074 P(2) = 0.245   A(6) = 0.181 P(3) = 0.257   with our simplifying assumptions, while the Luce model remains rejected for these data, as indicated by Rumelhart and Greeno.  In the latter part of Rumelhart and Greeno's paper, a comparison is made between the Restle model and one referred to as the  "logistic form of Thurnstone's model" (p. 378). This modified logistic model has scale parameters Si and correlation  parameters rii . An argument is offered to demonstrate that the two models are equivalent. The argument consists of showing  that the parameters of the Restle model, v(i) and o(i, j), can be mapped onto the parameters Si and ri? of the other model by  the transformations  Si = log v(i)  and  rij = I - (log[v(i)IV(i)lllogf[v(i) - z>j)IILVU) - OT)2.  However, an argument of this type is inadequate, because it fails to take into consideration the constraints that exist on  both sets of parameters. Not only are the overlap parameters of the Restle model constrained, as indicated above, but since  correlation matrices must be positive semidefinite, the correlation parameters rii of the second model are also constrained. A  proof of this type therefore ought to show that admissible sets of parameter values of the one model map onto admissible sets  of the other model and vice versa. The argument given by Rumelhart and Greeno fails to do this.  It could turn out, of course, that the Rumelhart and Greeno statement concerning the equivalence of the two models is correct,  even though their logic is faulty. However, the following simple counter-example shows that the statement is false.  Let v(i) >. v(j) + v(k) and v(j) -A v(k). In addition, let o(i, j) = v(j), o(i, k) _ v(k) and o(j, k) = 0. These assumptions  assert that sets j and k are both subsets of set i and furthermore that sets j and k have no overlap. Using these values and  the trans-  NOTE ON A PAPER BY RUMELHART 89  formation linking v(i) and o(i, j) with Si and ria described above, we have for the three correlation parameters the following  values  ri; = 1, rig. = 1, rik, = 0,  which are clearly inadmissible.  No doubt, it is also the case that admissible values of ri; and Si exist which lead to inadmissible values of v(i) and o(i, j)  but it hardly seems worthwhile to look for these values.  Judging from the reaction of the reviewers to this paper, it appears necessary to make some additional remarks.  Our assumption here that the nine binary overlap parameters are negligibly small can of course be questioned. It is not too  difficult to think of ways in which two of the members of one profession have something in common which the third member does  not have. Nevertheless, it seems worthwhile determining whether the Restle model can account for the Rumelhart and Greeno data  using the absolute minimum number of parameters. If it had turned out that this was not the case, then we could have added  more parameters.  The fact that our conclusions concerning the relative superiority of the Restle model over the Luce model agrees with that of  Rumelhart and Greeno does not, it seems to us, indicate anything faulty about the chi-square test. It is always possible to  arrive at correct conclusions using faulty logic.  The Rumelhart and Greeno statement that we have discussed above is a statement in which it is asserted that two models are  equivalent. It is not merely some kind of parameter correspondence statement. On p. 378, Rumelhart and Greeno say, "We assert  that Restle's model is indistinguishable from Thurnstone's general model if the logistic is substituted for the normal and the  following restrictions are met..." Later on p. 380, they say, "The two models will be identical if we set..." It would, on the  other hand, not make much sense for Rumelhart and Greeno to have asserted merely some kind of parameter correspondence,  because if the cardinality of the two sets of parameter values are equal, then it is always possible to set up a  correspondence between them. Indeed this is exactly what one normally means by cardinality.  Our counter-example above shows that the two models are not equivalent and therefore it constitutes a disproof of the main  point of the Rumelhart and Greeno statement. It does not merely provide some limitation on a stated correspondence. In order  for these two models to be equivalent it should be the case that any set of choice probabilities consistent with the one model  are consistent with the other and vice versa. The counter-example shows that there are choice probabilities consistent with  the Restle model but are not consistent with a logistic version of the Thurstone model under the Rumelhart and Greeno  restriction of equal variance and nonnegative correlations. (For convenience let us call this modified Thurstone model  "Thurstonelogistic case RG.") We have conjectured above that there exists choice probabilities  90 EDGELL, GEISLER, AND ZINNES  consistent with the latter model but are not consistent with the former. What Rumelhart and Greeno's argument suggests (not  proves!) is simply that there are choice probabilities consistent with both models, but this is true of most models of choice.  It is certainly true, for example, of the Thurnstone-normal case 5 model and the Luce model.  Table 3 seems to confuse this issue of equivalence somewhat. According to their comments on page 380, the modified Thurstone  model referred to in this table relates to the Thurstone-normal case RG and not the Thurstone-logistic case RG. The fact that  the values in most of the cells of this table do not agree with each other indicates merely that the Thurstone-normal case RG  is not equivalent to the Restle model, but it says nothing whatever about the relationship between the Thurstone-logistic case  RG model and the Restle model. It is the latter two models that were presumed by Rumelhart and Greeno to be equivalent. (The  values reported in Table 3 for the Thurstone-normal case RG are probably not correct, because the estimated values of the  correlation matrix probably do not satisfy the positive semidefinite constraint. At least there is no evidence in the paper  that this constraint was taken into consideration when the correlation values were estimated.)  REFERENCES  CHANDLER, J. P. STEPIT-Finds local minima of a smooth function of several parameters. Behavioral Science, 1969, 14, 81-82.  RESTLE, F. Psychology of judgment and choice. New York: Wiley, 1961.  RuMELHART, D. L., AND GREENO, J. G. Similarity between stimuli: An experimental test of the Luce and Restle choice models.  Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1971, 8, 370-381.  RECEIVED: May 9, 1972