10.1016/0022-2496(74)90027-3
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 11, 335-363 (1974)  Monotone Mapping of Similarities into a General Metric Space'  JAMES P. CUNNINGHAM' AND ROGER N. SHEPARD  Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305  A method of "maximum variance nondimensional scaling" is described and tested that transforms similarity measures into  distances that meet just three conditions: (C1) they exactly satisfy the metric axioms, (C2) they are, as nearly as possible,  monotonically related to the similarity measures, (C3) they have maximum variance possible under the two preceding conditions.  By achieving an appropriate balance between the last two conditions, one can determine the true underlying distances and the  form of the unknown monotone function relating the similarity measures to those distances without assuming that the underlying  space has any particular Euclidean, Minkowskian, or even dimensional structure. The method appears to have potential  applications, e.g., to studies of stimulus generalization and the structure and processing of semantic information.  STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM  In ordinary, nontechnical discussions of the perceived similarities and differences among things (whether faces, voices,  tastes, odors, colors, etc.), we readily make use of a spatial metaphor. Thus we may say that one shade of color is very close  to or, alternatively, far from another; or even that one shade seems to be somewhere between two others. This automatic use of  clearly spatial terms such as "near," "far," or "between" to characterize subjective similarities and differences suggests  that there is an implicit connection, in human cognition, between the concepts of similarity and dissimilarity, on the one  hand, and the concepts of spatial proximity and distance, on the other. Specifically, it suggests that similarities among  objects are related by some sort of monotone decreasing function to distances among points corresponding to those objects in  some sort of metric space.  Two quite distinct objectives have motivated attempts to formalize, explicitly, this implicit connection between similarity  and distance. One, which has generally been  I This work was supported by a research grant (GB-31971X) from the National Science Foundation to the second author, and was  partly completed during the second author's tenure as a John Simon Guggenheim Fellow at the Center for Advanced Study in the  Behavioral Sciences. The authors are indebted to Joseph Kruskal for suggesting the device used to ensure satisfaction of the  triangle inequality and, also, for proposing the term "nondimensional."  2 Now at the University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA.  Copyright 1974 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  335  336 CUNNINGHAM AND SHEPARD  central in applications of multidimensional scaling, is to infer the structure of the underlying metric space implied by a  given set of similarity data and, thus, to learn something about such things as the number, nature, relative importance, and  interrelationship of the psychological dimensions underlying the set of objects studied. The other objective, which has been  more central in studies of psychophysics and of stimulus generalization, is to infer the general form of the monotone function  that uniquely relates the particular type of similarity data of interest (whether judged similarity, probability of confusion,  or discriminative reaction time) to distance between points in the underlying metric space.  The first objective has predominated during the last decade, since computer-based "nonmetric" multidimensional scaling came  into widespread use following its development by Shepard (1962) and Kruskal (1964a, b). For, despite its ability to determine  the form of the unknown monotone function as well, this type of method has been used almost exclusively for the discovery of  patterns in similarity data and, most typically, for the scaling or calibration of stimuli in particular. The second  objective, by contrast, more directly concerns the nature of an underlying psychological mechanism. In this paper we return to  an earlier interest in this second and generally neglected objective-the determination of the shape of a psychophysical  function or gradient of generalization.  In the case of either of these two objectives, however, the problem with which we start is basically the same: We are given  empirically obtained measures of the n(n - 1)/2 psychological similarities, si; , among n distinct objects and we wish to find  a mapping of the n objects into points of a metric space such that the interpoint distances, di; , in this space are, as  nearly as possible, monotonically related to the corresponding measures of similarity, si9 .  The difficulties that we face in trying to approach this problem are the following: (a) We do not wish to assume anything more  about the form of the function that relates the similarity measures to the distances than that it is monotonic and, indeed,  our principal objective may be to determine what the functional form of this otherwise unknown relationship in fact is. (b) We  do not wish to assume anything more about the structure or dimensionality of this space than is absolutely necessary and,  indeed, we may not even be prepared to assume that it has a dimensional structure at all. (c) We know that unless we impose  some additional requirement (such as the requirement of low dimensionality customary in nonmetric multidimensional scaling)  there will always exist a trivial, uninformative, and nonunique solution such as the one in which all n(n - 1)/2 distances  between distinct points are set equal to the same positive constant and in which the recovered function therefore becomes a  simple vertical or horizontal line (with but one discontinuous step to zero, if we consider the distance from each point to  itself). But, at the same time, we cannot impose a requirement of low dimensionality if we arc not even prepared to assume  that the underlying space has a dimensional structure. (d) Finally we know that, if we impose any constraint  MONOTONE MAPPING 337  that will ensure a unique and nontrivial solution, we will not generally be able to obtain a perfect monotonic relation to  real and therefore "noisy" data. Consequently we necessarily must arrive at an appropriate trade-off between the strength of  the constraint that we impose and the degree of departure from the desired condition of monotonicity that we are willing to  HISTORY OF ATTEMPTED SOLUTION  Monotone Satisfaction of the Metric Axioms: Necessary but Not Sufficient  Nearly 20 years ago, in considering a particular type of measure of similarity between stimuli (viz., "stimulus  generalizaton"), Shepard (1955, 1957b) advanced the principle of monotonicity according to which "the probability of a  stimulus confusion is a monotonically decreasing function of psychological distance between the stimuli," and further proposed  that the metric axioms might be assigned a central role in determining the shape of this unknown monotone function: "Instead  of starting with some arbitrary measure of psychological distance in order to study the relation between this measure and  consequent stimulus confusion probabilities, suppose the investigation begins with the confusion probabilities themselves and  then proceeds, in the reverse direction, to discover that function which will transform these probabilities into measures  satisfying the distance axioms" (Shepard, 1955, p. 12).  The axioms referred to were those apparently first fully formalized in 1906 by the mathematician Frechet (see Birkhoff &  MacLane,1953). In the form in which they were stated by Shepard (1955, p. 11) they are as follows (for all stimuli, i, j, and  k):  di i = 0 di; > 0 di; = d;i dii + dik > dik  (identity), (1)  (positivity), (2)  (symmetry), (3)  (triangle inequality). (4)  (As stated, these axioms differ from those usually given in that, more commonly, the limiting equality condition in Eq. (2) is  excluded unless i = j. Such a difference is of no practical consequence here.) What is of central importance here is the  triangle inequality (4) which (in view of the symmetry axiom) says, in effect, that the distance between any two points via a  third point can never be less than the direct distance between those two points.  This approach, in terms of the metric axioms, appeared to have two potentially important advantages over that of classical  multidimensional scaling, as first made practical about four years earlier by Torgerson (1951, 1952). One advantage was that  no one particular form need be assumed in advance for the unknown monotone function. Indeed the possibility was explicitly  acknowledged that this function might  338 CUNNINGHAM AND SHEPARD  well have quite different forms for different types of similarity measures-such as disjunctive reaction times as opposed to  confusion probabilities (Shepard, 1960, 1962). The other advantage was that there was no requirement that the stimuli be  embedded in any particular type of dimensionalized coordinate space-such as, for example, the usual Euclidean. For, the metric  axioms represent the very minimum conditions that any space must satisfy in order to be classified as a true metric space and,  in fact, permit many spaces in which there is not such a thing as a coordinate structure or, even a definable dimensionality  (see Blumenthal, 1953).  However, the satisfaction of these axioms alone is not sufficient to determine a unique and significant result. As we have  already implied, the trivial metric in which di; is the same positive constant for all i =A- j (while di; = 0 for i = j)  satisfies these axioms and also (in its limiting form) the required condition of monotonicity. For this reason, in the early  approach taken by Shepard, the metric axioms had to be supplemented by some further condition that would ensure uniqueness of  the recovered monotone function. Two types of supplemental conditions have so far been tried but each, though sufficiently  restrictive, may in fact be unnecessarily so.  Additivity: Sufficient but Too Restrictive  The first of the two supplemental conditions explored by Shepard was based upon consideration of the fact that in the limit  one of the metric axioms, the so-called triangle inequality, goes over into a strict equality of the following form:  di; -}- d;k = di, (additivity).  Since in ordinary Euclidean space this degeneracy occurs when and only when the three vertices of the triangle fall on the  same straight line, it seemed natural to require that psychological distances be additive in this way, too, whenever the three  points fall on the analog of a straight line, viz., a geodesic, in (possibly curved) psychological space. Presumably it is the  subjective appreciation that three stimuli fall close to such a geodesic that underlies our ordinary tendency noted earlier,  to use the word "between" in certain instances. In any case, this further requirement, referred to as "the axiom of additivity  for geodesic sets of stimuli" (Shepard, 1955, p. 16), seemed to furnish enough additional constraint to make possible the  unique determination of the form of the unknown monotone function.  The most vulnerable step of the argument was that used in practice to arrive at the necessary "geodesic sets." The working  assumption was adopted that, although the to-be-determined psychological space may not be Euclidean, it should depart from the  physical parameter space for the same set of stimuli by no more than a continuous and reasonably smooth deformation  (presumably with continuous partial derivatives up to any order desired). Although this working assumption was not given a  sufficiently careful formulation at the time (as noted by Krantz, 1967), such a requirement of  MONOTONE MAPPING 339  "smoothness" allowed in principle for two things: (a) the acknowledged absence, in the large, of an invariant relation between  distance in psychological space and distance in the corresponding physical space; and, at the same time, (b) the crucial  preservation, in the small, of the constraint that stimuli that vary along a sufficiently short interval of a single physical  dimension should fall very close to a geodesic in psychological space.  For such neighboring unidimensional stimuli, then, the fact that the psychological interstimulus distances should be nearly  additive provided enough additional constraint to approximate the general form of the unknown monotone function. In  particular, the function needed to map confusion probabilities into a metric space in such a way that distances are additive  along geodesics was found to have a consistent and uniquely defined negative logarithmic form, implying inversely, that  stimulus generalization or confusion decreases with increasing interstimulus distance according to a negative exponential  function (Shepard, 1955, 1958a, b). Apparently, by asking what function will transform similarity measures into distances  satisfying certain abstractly formulated properties, it becomes possible to circumvent the once widely accepted objection  (cf., Bush & Mosteller, 1951) that the shape of the "gradient of generalization" (or related psychophysical function) is  necessarily indeterminate because the choice of a measure of interstimulus distance is always either arbitrary or circular.  Still, the further condition of additivity, which made these results possible, has been limited by the fact that its strict  application calls for the stimuli to be continuously variable in a physical parameter space-so that they can be brought as  close together as necessary along a single physical dimension. This requirement of continuous controllability makes  application difficult, if not impossible, for many important classes of stimuli, including naturalistic stimuli, (e.g., human  faces), inherently discrete patterns (e.g., "checkerboard" designs) and, of course, words (e.g., kin terms). Moreover, even  when the stimuli can be continuously varied as required, the theoretical problem remains that the assumption of a continuous,  differentiable, or suitably "smooth" relation between psychological and physical space (even-or especially-if adequately  formulated) may seem undesirably restrictive.  Minimum Dimensionality: Also Too Restrictive  The second of the two previously explored supplemental conditions attempted to avoid the reliance upon a physical parameter  space entirely. In this approach, first suggested by Shepard (1955, 1957b, 1958b) but not developed into a fully general  scaling method until over six years later (Shepard, 1962), an attempt was again made to find a transformation that will  convert similarities into distances satisfying the metric axioms. But this time, uniqueness was not obtained by adding the  condition that distances be additive for stimuli that, in physical space, are suitably close together along a single  dimension. Instead, uniqueness was ensured by requiring that the distances resulting from the transformation be representable  in psychological space,  340 CUNNINGHAM AND SHEPARD  by a configuration of suitably low dimensionality. Since this second approach makes no use of a physical parameter space (it  is purely psychological as opposed to psychophysical), it readily can be and, in fact, has been applied to naturalistic, to  discrete, and to verbal stimuli. Moreover, it has corroborated a central finding of the first approach; namely, that confusion  probability generally decays with distance in approximation to a negative exponential (Shepard, 1962, 1963, 1965, 1972b).  Indeed, this second approach has even provided some evidence that associative probability between words also decays  exponentially with increasing distance in what might be termed a semantic space (Shepard, 1957a).  The two approaches are related in that, in the most extreme case, reduction of dimensionality leads to a one-dimensional space  in which, again, all distances are additive. And, even when the reduction is not carried to this extreme, a generalized kind  of additivity holds in which certain functions of the distances (corresponding to areas of triangles or to volumes of  tetrahedra, in two or three dimensions, respectively) are additive (cf., Bluementhal, 1953).  This second approach does avoid the necessity of invoking a physical space or an assumption of "smoothness." However, it uses  reduction of dimensionality to achieve uniqueness in determination of the unknown function and, so, depends critically upon  the assumption that the psychological space has a dimensional structure. Indeed, the actual scaling methods based on this  approach usually assume far more than a merely dimensional structure. In practice, the space is taken to be a very particular  type of flat, isotropic orthogonal coordinate space such as the Euclidean or, somewhat more generally, one of the so-called  Minkowski power metric spaces (Kruskal, 1964a, b; Shepard, 1962, 1964). Such a coordinate representation is very convenient  when, as in most applications of multidimensional scaling, we want to study the recovered configuration of the stimuli. When  our principal interest is in the function relating the similarity data to distances in some space, however, we may not wish to  assume such a highly specialized structure for the space itself (cf., Beals, Krantz & Tversky, 1968).  MAXIMUM VARIANCE NONDIMENSIONAL SCALING  Proposed Condition of Maximum Variance  In this section we introduce a new condition to supplement the metric axioms-a condition (a) that is considerably less  restrictive than the conditions either of additivity or of minimum dimensionality just considered, and yet (b) that seems to  be just restrictive enough to yield the desired unique result. The single additional condition that we propose is, simply,  that the variance of the to-be-recovered distances be maximum (subject, of course, to satisfaction of the metric axioms and to  an adequate maintenance of monotonicity).  MONOTONE MAPPING 341  The idea of maximizing the variance of the distances derives from the earlier work of Shepard (1962), in which the following  heuristic reasons were adduced in its support: (a) The condition of maximum variance is the exact opposite of the most trivial  and uninformative condition already mentioned above; namely, that in which the distances between all distinct points are  identical. (b) It has been shown mathematically that, when points are randomly distributed in a hyperspherical region of a  space that does have a dimensional structure, the lower the dimensionality of the space, the greater is the variance of the  distances (e.g., Lord, 1954). (c) Conversely, Shepard found that, when variance is forced upward by further stretching large  distances and shrinking small distances, the dimensionality of the least space that will adequately fit a set of points tends  quite generally to decrease. (d) As a particularly simple example of this, if points fall on a semicircle, they can be  isometrically embedded in a Euclidean space only if it has at least two dimensions but, if the large distances are stretched  relative to the small, the semicircular configuration flattens out into a one-dimensional straight line while preserving a  monotone relation between the original and the stretched distances.  The device of stretching large and shrinking small distances in order to reduce dimensionality has been found to work quite  effectively not only in the original method of "analysis of proximities" (Shepard, 1962); but also in subsequent extensions to  the determination of "intrinsic dimensionality" by Bennett (1965) and to "conformal reduction" by Shepard and Chang (see  Shepard, 1972a, pp. 37, 38). In short, even when there is no coordinate space with a well-defined dimensional structure, there  are rather compelling heuristic, analogical reasons for believing that maximizing variance may well achieve the kind of  uniqueness of result that was achieved earlier by minimizing dimensionality.  Note, incidentally, that the previously mentioned connection between the two different approaches already discussed carries  over as a connection, also, with the present new approach: Maximization of variance has a tendency, wherever possible, to  drive triples of distances governed by the triangle inequality (4) towards the limiting condition of additivity (5). Thus,  when the semicircular configuration mentioned above is flattened out into a straight line, all triangles go over into their  "degenerate" colinear form. If there are trully "geodesic sets" of stimuli in psychological space (for which the term  "between" strictly applies), then, this fact should reveal itself in the additive structure of the distances among the  corresponding points.  Problems Posed by the Metric and Monotonicity Conditions  All of this was implicit in the above-reviewed work of 1955 through 1962 but, in order to devise a workable method of  numerical analysis, some way needed to be found to ensure that the satisfaction of the metric axioms would be exactly  maintained during any iterative process-in this case, one of forcing the variance of the distances toward the maximum  attainable value consistent with monotonicity. In the earlier methods of  342 CUNNINGHAM AND SHEPARD  nonmetric multidimensional scaling, the satisfaction of the metric axioms was strictly guaranteed throughout by the fact that  the iterative process merely adjusted the coordinates for the points in some preexisting coordinate space (such as the  Euclidean or Minkowskian). Because, for any values assigned to such coordinates whatever, the distances computed from those  coordinates (by the appropriate Euclidean or Minkowskian rule) can be shown to satisfy all of the metric axioms (see, e.g.,  Beckenbach & Bellman, 1961; Busemann, 1955). In the present case, however, the points are not embedded in a preexisting  coordinate space and, hence, the iterative adjustments can not be applied to coordinates in such an already-metric space.  Rather, the adjustments can only be applied directly to the distances themselves. In this case these adjustments (viz., of  shrinking and stetching) tend to lead to violations of the triangle inequality unless some special mechanism is introduced to  ensure that the limiting case of equality is approached but never transgressed.  By analogy with the usual case in multidimensional scaling, where the metric axioms and indeed the stronger constraints  inherent in the Euclidean or Minkowskian metric are always strictly satisfied, we specify that the results obtained here too  should always satisfy the metric axioms exactly. That is, the metric space fitted to the data must be a true metric space. It  is only the monotone fit of the space to the noisy data-not the space itself-that may be more or less satisfactory.  But, even if a mechanism is introduced that will constrain the distances to satisfy the metric axioms exactly, we are still  left with the problem that the variance of the distances can not be maximized absolutely subject to just this constraint. Such  maximization could be achieved simply by dividing the points into two equal sets and by forcing all the within-set distances  to zero while forcing all between-set distances above all positive bounds. The resulting distances would (trivially) satisfy  the metric axioms but would in general no longer bear a suitably monotone relation to the given similarity data. Even after we  have ensured that the distances will satisfy the metric axioms, then, we must still find a way to strike an appropriate  balance between the maximization of the variance of those distances, on the one hand, and the maintenance of a satisfactory  approximation to a monotone relation of those distances to the similarity data, on the other. This, again, is quite analogous  to the balance that must be struck in nonmetric multidimensional scaling between minimization of dimensionality and  maintenance of monotonicity.  Outline of New Approach  In the next section we turn to a detailed presentation of a method that appears to overcome all of these difficulties by  iteratively optimizing a weighted combination of three terms: one reflecting departures from the requirements of the metric  axioms (specifically the triangle inequality), one reflecting departures from monotonicity, and one reflecting the variance of  the distances. By making the weight associated with the term concerned with the triangle inequality sufficiently large, we can  effectively  MONOTONE MAPPING 343  ensure that the metric axioms are satisfied exactly. And by adjusting the size of the remaining weight, we can secure the  desired balance between maximization of variance and maintenance of monotonicity. (The suggestion that the solution to our  problem of satisfying the triangle inequality might be found by adding a term to the function being optimized was first  proposed to one of us (RNS) by Joseph Kruskal, personal communication.)  The nature of the representation that we seek here is, of course, quite different from that usually sought in multidimensional  scaling. Whereas multidimensional scaling represents the objects in terms of their coordinates in a low-dimensional coordinate  space, the end result of the method proposed here is a set of interpoint distances only. There are no dimensions, no  coordinates and, hence, no immediately picturable configuration. We can nevertheless examine the shape of monotone function  found to relate the given similarity data to the recovered distances. For this purpose, moreover, the method has the  theoretically important advantage that, by avoiding a coordinate space, we have also avoided all of the usual strong  assumptions about this space. We have retained only the most general requirement implied by the axioms (1)-(4); namely, that  it merely be a metric space.  Since there are no dimensions, this method can not properly be subsumed under the term multidimensional scaling. Kruskal  (personal communication) once suggested that such a method be referred to as "nondimensional scaling." However, this term  could as well be applied to other, quite different methods that have meanwhile been developed-including Johnson's (1967)  widely used method of hierarchical clustering (which satisfies the much stronger ultrametric inequality as well as the metric  axioms, and which does not permit the recovery of the functional form of the monotone relation which is of central interest  here). In order to be a little more specific, therefore, we refer to the procedure now to be described as "maximum variance  nondimensional scaling" and adopt the corresponding acronym "MVNDS" to designate the computer program that one of us (JPC) has  developed to carry out the procedure.  Mathematical Formulation  We designate each object (e.g., stimulus) in the set to be considered by an integer i, where i = 1, 2,..., n, and n is the  number of objects in the set. We are given for each of the n(n - 1)/2 unordered pairs of these objects, i and j, an  empirically obtained measure of their similarity, si; . Ideally, we wish to find corresponding numbers, di; , called metric  distances, satisfying the following three conditions:  C 1. The metric axioms. For all i, j, and k, the distances satisfy the previously listed conditions (1)-(3), and,  particularly, the triangle inequality (4).  C2. Monotonicity. For all distinct i, j, k, and l, di; < dkc whenever si; ski .  C3. Maximum variance. Relative to a fixed mean distance, d, the distances have maximum variance possible under constraints Cl  and C2.  344 CUNNINGHAM AND SHEPARD  As we have already noted, in the case of real and therefore noisy data, we can not achieve the desired result by demanding  that C2 be satisfied exactly-any more than we can obtain a suitably low-dimensional solution in the more usual sort of  multidimensional scaling by insisting that there be no residual departures from a perfect monotone relation. In practice,  therefore, we require that only C1 be satisfied exactly, while we seek the best compromise approach to the remaining C2 and C3  that can be achieved simultaneously.  The problem of finding distances that optimally satisfy Cl, C2, and C3, can be readily solved if it is represented in the  proper framework. The m interpoint distances (m = n(n - 1)/2) can be thought of as the components of a vector or the  coordinates of a point in the m-dimensional space of real numbers Rm. Thus we have the vector d = (dl , d2 ,..., d.) where the  di are in one-to-one correspondence with the interpoint distances. In order to facilitate the changing from one representation  to the other and back, this correspondence will be made explicit by the introduction of a function h, which is an isomorphism  from the m unordered pairs of the integers 1 through n to the individual integers 1 through m with the restriction  h(i, j) > h(k, l) :t, si; < skl .  Thus, d,,, and dl correspond to what should be, according to C2, the largest and smallest distances respectively. If h(j, k) =  i, then  di = dh(i.k) = dik ,  and these three names for the same quantity will be used interchangeably, depending upon the context. In this framework, each  point or vector in IIB- can be thought of as a configuration or set of distances between all pairs of n points. The problem  then becomes that of finding the point in Rm that satisfies the constraints Cl-C3.  Since one distance has been assigned to each unordered pair of points, the symmetry condition (3) of Cl will always be  satisfied. If the distance from a point to itself is arbitrarily set to zero, and only solutions with all nonnegative  distances are allowed, then the identity and positivity conditions (1 and 2) of C1 will also be satisfied. However, the  triangle inequality condition (3) of Cl restricts the set of permissible solutions considerably. If there are n objects, then  there are n(n - 1)(n - 2)/2 inequalities of the form  dii + dik > dik ,  which must be satisfied. There are three such inequalities for each unordered triple of points. Each inequality defines a  closed half-space in R-,  dh(i.9) + dh(7.k) - dh(i.k) > 0, (6) in which the solution must lie in order for that inequality to be satisfied. The closed  MONOTONE MAPPING 345  half-space consists of the hyperplane defined by a state of equality in Eq. (6) and all points on one side of it. The  intersection of the [n(n - 1)(n - 2)]/2 closed half-spaces forms a region which contains all solutions that satisfy the metric  axioms.  For convenience, and without loss of generality, the further restriction is incorporated (in C3) that the distances must  always have an arithmetic mean of a prespecified value d. The solution must then lie on the hyperplane defined by  m  which intersects the region containing the solutions satisfying the metric axioms and leaves a closed convex polyhedral  region, Q, in which the solution must lie in order to satisfy C1 and have a mean distance of d.  The problem has been reduced to finding that point in Q which satisfies the remaining constraints, C2 and C3. Any point which  satisfies the monotonicity constraint, C2, must satisfy the set of inequalities,  {dm i dm-1 > dm-1 i d.-21... , d2 >- d1} These can be thought of as defining a set of m - 1 closed half-spaces of the form  di - di-1 >, 0, i = 2, 3,..., m,  and the solution must lie in the convex region formed by the intersection of these closed half-spaces and the polyhedral  region Q in order to satisfy both C1 and C2. However, real data will generally be subject to error which (in the present case  of a monotone-invariant method) manifests itself as a perturbation in the ordering of the similarity measures. Accordingly, we  must provide for some violations of C2. In terms of our representation, we do this by accepting solutions that are relatively  close to, but not necessarily in, the permissible region defined by C2. As a measure of the amount of violation of C2, or  departure from monotonicity, D, we define  D(d1 ,..., dm) _ ~Y (di - di)2J m, a-1  where di is the value of the best-fitting monotone function relating the distances and similarities at the similarity value si  . The monotone function is best-fitting in the sense that the di are computed by the Miles-Kruskal algorithm (Kruskal, 1964b;  Miles, 1959) to be monotonically related to the similarities and, at the same time, to minimize the function D. This measure  has the same desirable properties as the closely related measure called "stress," which Kruskal (1964a) introduced into  "nonmetric" multidimensional scaling. (See, also, Kruskal, 1971.)  The problem is now to select the point in Q that has a sufficiently low value of D and a sufficiently high variance. A  function can be defined that weights increased  346 CUNNINGHAM AND SHEPARD  variance against departure from monotonicity and can be used to choose which point in Q is the best solution. This function on  R- is  f (dl ~ .., d) = [var(d1 ,..., d-)] - w1[D(dl ,..., dm)],  which is  -  .f (dl ,..., dm) = Y (di - d)2 Y(di - di)2,  m i=1 m i=1  where w1 is a weighting factor that determines what size increase in variance will be needed to offset a certain increase in  departure from monotonicity. Thus, the point in Q that has the maximum value of f, for a given w1 , is the result that we seek  as the best metric representation of the given similarity data. The function f is twice partially differentiable at all points  in R-, and can be maximized by one of several optimization algorithms, subject to the constraint that the solution lie in Q.  Numerical Method  We have the function f defined on R-, and the problem is to find max{ f (d) I d E Q C 118-},  where Q is a closed convex polyhedral region defined by one equality constraint, viz., Eq. (7), and a group of [n(n - 1)(n -  2)]/2 inequality constraints of the form  d, + dk - dl >, 0.  The solution space, R-, has a dimensionality that is potentially high enough (for 20 stimuli m = 190, and for 40 stimuli m =  780) to make excessive demands on computation time and storage space if some of the typical optimization algorithms for a  problem of this type are used. For this reason, a simple iterative steepest ascent method of optimization was implemented,  along with a hybrid of the gradient-projection and penalty-function methods of satisfying constraints.  The steepest ascent method is an iterative procedure in which the distance vector on the kth iteration, d[k], is used to  determine the distance vector on the next iteration, d[k+1j, by the relationship  d[k+11 = d[k] + kJg[kJ.  (A variable with the superscript [k] or [k + 1] will always refer to the value of that variable on the kth or (k + 1)th  iteration, respectively.) The g[k] is the vector of partial derivatives of the particular function to be maximized, say f at  the point d[k1, that is,  [k1 - of of of g adlk] , ad2k1 ,..., -ad:['-])'  MONOTONE MAPPING 347  and is called the gradient vector, direction of steepest ascent, or direction of proposed change. The 01[k] is a scalar, and  is the step-size parameter that determines how much change is to be made in the direction of g[k]. The procedure continues  until the length of g[k] approaches sufficiently close to zero, indicating that a maximum (though possibly a merely local  maximum) has been found.  However, it is the constrained maximum off that is desired rather than the absolute global maximum, so the procedure must be  modified in a way that restricts the solution to the region Q. The equality constraint, (7), is maintained by a gradient  projection technique. That is, on each iteration the vector representing the direction of proposed change is projected onto  the constraint hyperplane defined by Eq. (7), thus ensuring the satisfaction of that constraint.  The group of inequality constraints generated by the need to satisfy the triangle inequality, i.e., those of the form of Eq.  (9), are maintained by the use of a penaltyfunction technique. In order to achieve this, consider this group of constraints as  being in some arbitrary order with each constraint being assigned some integer p, p = 1, 2,..., t, where t = n(n - 1)(n - 2)/2  (the total number of such constraints). It is then convenient to refer to an arbitrary constraint as the pth constraint. This  group of constraints can be represented by a t x m matrix, [cpg], where if the pth constraint is Eq. (9), then  1 if q=jork,  C PQ = 0 if q j, k, or l, -1 if q =l.  Define cp as the inner product of the pth row of the matrix [cpv] and the transpose of d, that is  Cp = cpidii . i=1  If the pth constraint is Eq. (9), then cp = d; -}- d, - di . Thus, if cD >, 0, then the pth constraint is satisfied, and if cp  < 0, the constraint is violated by an amount equal to -C 2) .  By adopting a squared-deviation loss or penalty function consonant with Eq. (8), a new function can be defined,  F(dl ,..., dm) = f (d, ~ .., dm) - T Y (Cp)2. CV <0  The function F is made up of the sum of the function f, which is to be maximized, and a penalty function involving cp which  makes F smaller if violations of the triangle inequality occur. The weight w2 then determines the extent, if any, to which  such violations will be tolerated. If F is maximized by a suitable unconstrained steepest  48o/ii/4-2  348 CUNNINGHAM AND SHEPARD  ascent technique, it can be shown that F converges to the constrained optimum of f (Zangwill, 1967).  Using the steepest ascent maximization procedure, for each element of d[k+1] and d[k] we have the iterative relationship,  d [k+1] = d[kj + a[k] 8F  8d[k] t  where  8F - 2 (d[k] - d) - 2w1(d[k] - d[k]) - 2w2 cviw  8di 7 m m M CP <o  In order to ensure the convergence of this iterative process to a local maximum, two  technical requirements are sufficient. One is that CZ[k] be chosen in such a way that  F(d[k] + (Y[k]g[k]) = max{F(d[k] + ag[kl)}.  That is, on each iteration, one must find the maximum of F along the line in 08m defined by d[k] + g[k]. In practice, however,  it is only necessary to approximate this maximum, and any of the standard linear search techniques can be used. The other  requirement is that w2 must increase as the number of iterations increases, since the correct convergence of the penalty  function technique of optimization depends upon the fact that w2 -* oo as the number of iterations grows large (Zangwill,  1967).  The iterative procedure begins with the distances, di, linearly and hence monotonically related to the similarities by  d10 b~1- +a, 0<b< sa , s max{si) - s  where s is the arithmetic mean of the si and b determines the slope of the linear relationship. Using this relationship, d[  = dm) can always be chosen in such a way that d[ cQ by making b sufficiently close to zero. If b = 0 then all of the  distances have the same value which, as we noted before, is a degenerate solution to the present problem, if C3 is ignored.  (This is analogous to the equal-distance starting configuration originally used by Shepard (1962) for nonmetric  multidimensional scaling.) The procedure gradually modifies these distances by the algorithm described above until it finds a  local maximum for F. Because of the regularity of F over 118"x" it appears that the local maximum that is found is always the  same as (or very close to) the global maximum of F so, when the procedure stops, the last value of d[k] is taken as the  desired metric representation of the given similarity data.  MONOTONE MAPPING 349  RESULTS OF TEST APPLICATIONS  Tests with Artificial Data  We first present the results of test applications of the just-described maximum variance nondimensional scaling to eight sets  of artificially generated error-free data, together with a comparison between these results and results obtained by applying  the more usual sort of nonmetric multidimensional scaling to the same sets of data. Each set of artificial data was generated  by constructing a triangular half-matrix of distances that conformed to some particular (though in some cases rather exotic)  metric and by then transforming those distances into similarity measures by some arbitrary monotone decreasing function.  Altogether, five different half-matrices of distances were generated, and two different types of transformations into  similarities were then applied to these.  Four of the sets of metric distances were based in some way upon the random configuration of fifteen points in two dimensions  illustrated in Fig. 1(A). Two of the sets of distances were computed in accordance with the Minkowski power metric advanced  (though not under that name) as a possible model for multidimensional scaling by Torgerson (1958, p. 293); namely,  dii = 0 xiI - xi2 Ir + I xjI - xf2 Ir)IJr (10)  where xi, is the coordinate for point i on dimension k. One of these sets was computed with r = 2 and thus reduced to the  familiar Euclidean metric most commonly assumed in multidimensional scaling. The other set, computed with r = 1, specialized  to the so-called "city-block" metric considered by Attneave (1950), Torgerson (1958),  FIG. 1. (A) Fifteen random points with minimum spanning tree; (B) more ramified or complex tree with fifteen nodes.  350 CUNNINGHAM AND SHEPARD  Shepard (1964), Cross (1965), Hyman & Well (1967), and others. Another set of distances was computed in accordance with the  "exponential metric,"  di; = log(eIxil-xizl + elx;l-xial - 1)  discussed by Beals, Krantz, and Tversky (1968) and Tversky and Krantz (1970). The fourth half-matrix of distances, also based  upon the same random configuration of fifteen points, was generated by calculating the length of the path between each pair of  points along the minimum spanning tree, i.e., the sum over the connecting path of the Euclidean distances between adjacent  points. This tree is illustrated by the dashed line segments connecting the points in Fig. 1(A). The fifth and final set of  distances was also based upon the length of the paths between nodes in a tree, but the tree in this case was constructed by a  random process which ensures somewhat more ramified structures. Figure 1(B) illustrates the tree from which this set of  distances was derived. The distances generated from these two tree structures were of particular interest because, although  they satisfy the metric axioms, they achieve an extreme approach to the bounding condition of additivity (4), they can not be  isometrically embedded in any Euclidean space and are, in fact, inherently nondimensional. Such minimumpath distances are also  suggested by the proposal of Collins and Quillian (1969) and others that concepts may be internally represented at the nodes  of a graph-theoretic network in such a way that the time required to retrieve semantic information is the sum of the times  required to traverse each of the connecting internode links (cf., also, Anderson & Bower, 1973; Quillian, 1968; Rumelhart,  Lindsay & Norman, 1972; Schank, 1972).  One of the functions used to transform the distances into similarity measures was the exponential function  si = ke-za:~ (12)  where k is an arbitrary scale factor. Such a function is of some interest in view of the already-noted consistent finding that  confusion or generalization measures tend to decay exponentially in this way with distance. The other function used to obtain  artificial similarity measures was  Si = k(dis -F. 1)_i, (13)  where k is once again an arbitrary scale factor. This second function is sigmoid in a way that resembles an ogive or part of a  normal density function such as is encountered in psychometric and psychophysical work. Five of the half-matrices of distances  were transformed into matrices of similarities by the exponential function and three were also transformed into matrices of  similarities by the sigmoid function (with k = 100 in both cases). This yielded the eight sets of artificial error-free data  that are listed in Table 1. One half of these sets had underlying two-dimensional representations and  MONOTONE MAPPING 351  the other half, derived from the tree-structure representations, did not have any such dimensional representation.  Our interest is in seeing how well the present scaling procedure, which is both "nonmetric" and "nondimensional," can recover  the shape of the function relating distance to similarity and also how well the interstimulus distances themselves can be  reconstructed from these diverse types of data. We have to be prepared for some imprecision in the recovery of the distances  and hence the function relating those distances to the similarities, since the assumptions upon which this scaling method is  based are relatively weak. Consider, for example that, if C1 and C3 were replaced by the stronger condition that the objects  are to be represented as points in a twodimensional Euclidean space, the method would become equivalent to standard nonmetric  multidimensional scaling. In that case, if the original metric distances from which the similarities were derived also  conformed to that same condition, Shepard (1962, 1966) has demonstrated that almost exact recovery of the interstimulus  distances is usually possible if n is as large as 15. In our case, C1, C2, and C3 were not designed  r F  I I I I I 'I 10 12 14 16 Is 20 22 DISTANCE  FIG. 2. Recovery of underlying exponential decay function from similarity data based upon five different metrics. (The  quantized nature of the computer printout upon which this and the following plots are based accounts for the vertical and  horizontal alignment of symbols.)  L 6  1 8  CITY BLOCK x- EUCLIDEAN  E - EXPONENTIAL T - SIMPLE TREE  COMPLEX TREE (RAMIFIED) +- INTERSECTION OF TWO  OR MORE OF THE ABOVE.  -ORIGINAL TRANSFORMATION  352  CUNNINGHAM AND SHEPARD  to suit any particular metric representation, and this generality might be expected to entail larger discrepancies between the  original and reconstructed distances.  The computer program for maximum variance nondimensional scaling, MVNDS, was applied to the eight sets of artificial data with  wI = 30 and d = 10. The obtained solutions had values of f (and consequently F) ranging from 17.25 to 26.15, with variances  falling between 17.50 and 26.37, and values of D falling between 0.003 and 0.042. In no cases were there any residual  violations of the triangle inequality and, so, the metric axioms were strictly satisfied.  Figure 2 displays the functions relating the similarity measures to the distances recovered for the five sets of similarities  obtained by using the exponential transformation (12), and Fig. 3 displays the similar functions for those three data sets  obtained by using the sigmoid transformation (13). In each case the original transformation itself (12 or 13) is also  displayed. It is clear that in all cases the recovered function is virtually superimposed on the original "true"  transformation with, in general, only minor residual deviations.  E - EXPONENTIAL T - SIMPLE TREE  c -COMPLEX TREE ( RAMIFIED) + -INTERSECTION OF TWO  OR MORE OF THE ABOVE  -ORIGINAL TRANSFORMATION  FIG. 3. Recovery of underlying sigmoid function from similarity data based upon three different metrics.  MONOTONE MAPPING 353  The close agreement between the original transformations and the recovered functions indicates that there must also be close  agreement between the original and reconstructed distances. As can be seen in the left-hand column of numbers in Table 1, the  correlations between the original and the reconstructed distances were all greater than .99. Apparently, maximum variance  scaling can recover the metric structure underlying similarity data with considerable precision-regardless of the nature of  that metric structure, and regardless of the form of the function relating the similarity data to that structure. In fact,  this method, like nonmetric multidimensional scaling, is strictly nonmetric in the sense that it uses only ordinal information  in the similarity data and, so, yields results that in principle, are invariant under monotone transformations of the data.  (The fact that, for each underlying metric, the correlations in Table 1 are slightly smaller for the sigmoid transformation  than for the exponential decay transformation is attributable to the fact that, in the case of the sigmoid transformation  particularly, iteration was not continued until the absolute optimum was exactly attained.)  TABLE 1  Correlations Between Original Distances and Distances Recovered by Two Types of Scaling Methods when Applied to Various Types  of Artificially Generated Similarity Data  Type of similarity data Type of "nonmetric" scaling applied  Function used  Maximum variance Standard nonmetric  to transform Underlying metric of nondimensional multidimensional  distances into distances used scaling scaling  similarities     Euclidean .9975 .9995  City-block .9966 .9778  Exponential Exponential .9968 .9556  decay     function (12) Sum over path in .9937 .9800  minimum spanning tree    Sum over path in .9961 .8386  more ramified tree    Exponential .9944 .9556  Sigmoid Sum over path in .9929 .9801  function (13) minimum spanning tree    Sum over path in .9924 .8386  more ramified tree    354 CUNNINGHAM AND SHEPARD  In order to contrast the solutions obtained by this method of nondimensional scaling with those obtained by a very widely used  method of multidimensional scaling, each of the same eight sets of artificially generated data was also submitted as input to  M-D-SCAL-5M, a recent version of nonmetric multidimensional scaling of the type described by Kruskal (1964a, b). The  multidimensional scaling program was set to find the best two-dimensional Euclidean representation for each set of similarity  data, regardless of the true underlying metric in each particular set. (This is typical of the way multidimensional scaling is  applied in practice when, as usually is the case, the true underlying metric is not known in advance.)  The right-hand column of numbers in Table 1 presents the correlation between each original set of distances and the  corresponding set of distances obtained from the nonmetric multidimensional scaling program. The only case in which  multidimensional scaling came closer to recovering the original distances than did nondimensional scaling was that in which  the underlying metric structure on which that set of data was based was two-dimensional and Euclidean. This is not surprising  since that is exactly the model that was being fit by the multidimensional scaling procedure. In all other cases the  nondimensional scaling procedure was superior, with the superiority naturally being greatest for those structures, such as  ramified trees, which cannot be adequately approximated in a low-dimensional Euclidean space.  Figure 4 indicates, more concretely, the relative inability of standard multidimensional scaling to achieve an accurate  recovery of the functional form of the underlying monotone relation between similarity and distance when the metric is of a  very different type from that assumed by the scaling model. Displayed there is the plot, analogous to that shown in Fig. 3 for  nondimensional scaling, resulting when the multidimensional scaling program was used to fit a two-dimensional Euclidean model  to the artificial data derived from the ramified tree structure by means of the sigmoid transformation. (This solution  corresponds to the bottom cell of the right-hand column in Table 1.) Notice that, although the inflected shape of the sigmoid  is just discernable in the plot, the scatter is so much greater than in Fig. 3 as to leave the precise form of the underlying  function very much in doubt.  Application to Real Data  Since the various sets of artificial data just considered were all error free, the analysis of a set of empirically obtained  data will now be reported to demonstrate that a welldetermined result can also be achieved despite the presence of random  variability. Such variability, inherent in real data, should reveal itself principally in an augmented value of D, the measure  of departure from monotonicity. The data chosen for this purpose were the measures of perceptual confusion between auditorily  presented signals of the Morse Code originally obtained by Rothkopf (1957) and subsequently subjected to nonmetric  multidimensional scaling by Shepard (1963). In order to conserve computing time in reanalyzing these data by means of the  MVNDS program, we used  MONOTONE MAPPING 355  100  .o o o  0 0 ooo 00 .a o  00 000  SO  80  o -RECOVERED VALUE _ BEST-FITTING MONOTONE FUNCTION  TO  ooo .0 aoo  r  50  60  0  40  30  0 0 0 . 00  0 0 o 00  20  00 0 . 0 0  10  0 00 0 0 0  o p 0  . 0 0 0 0 0  o .0 o.  01 I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I  0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 Is 20 22 24 26 28 30 DISTANCE  FIG. 4. Attempt to recover the sigmoid function by applying nonmetric multidimensional scaling to similarity data based upon  the more ramified tree.  the data for a subset of only 21 of the 36 dot-and-dash patterns included in Rothkopf's original experiment. These 21 were  selected so as to cover, in a reasonably uniform way, the two-dimensional space obtained from the earlier multidimensional  analysis of all 36 signals. (The two dimensions of that space were readily interpreted, after rotation, as reflecting (a) the  total number of dot or dash components in each signal, and (b) the relative preponderance of dots versus dashes among those  In applying the MVNDS program to these real data, we followed our earlier convention of setting cZ = 10. But, in order to  allow for the expected increase in departure from monotonicity, D, we reduced the weight wl to 2 (from the value 30 used with  the errorless data). The resulting solution had a variance of 15.86 and a departure value, D, of 0.467, which yields an f of  14.93. The correlation between the recovered distances and those obtained by nonmetric multidimensional scaling is .9540. That  the correlation is this high is an indication that the previously fitted twodimensional Euclidean space did constitute a  reasonably appropriate model in the case of these particular data. Nevertheless, it is significant that, without having to  assume a space with any defined dimensionality, we can recover essentially the same  aoo 0 . o  . o 0000  356  CUNNINGHAM AND SHEPARD  distances as when we make the much stronger (and in this case apparently valid) assumption that the space is two-dimensional  and Euclidean.  Again, since we can determine the distances, we can also determine the form of the relationship between the similarity data  and these distances. This result of the nondimensional scaling is illustrated in Fig. 5. The monotonic fit appears at least as  good and the overall shape seems virtually the same as that evident in the corresponding figure presented by Shepard (1963) on  the basis of the nonmetric multidimensional scaling of the same data. In both cases, there is, as anticipated with real data,  a greater scatter about the best-fitting monotone function than found in the preceding analysis of artificial error-free data.  Also in both cases the scatter is more noticeable in the upper left-hand region of the plot. This is because it is only the  horizontal discrepancies, which stand  100  90  80  70  60  r r  J 50  40  30  20  10  0 I I I I I I I I I I I 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 I8 20 DISTANCE  0  0 0  o -OBSERVED VALUE _ BEST-FITTING MONOTONE FUNCTION ONE-PARAMETER  r EXPONENTIAL CURVE  J 22  FIG. 5. Relation of Rothkopf's (1957) confusion measures of similarity between Morse Code signals to distances derived from  these measures of similarity by MVNDS, together with a simple one-parameter exponential decay function subsequently fitted to  the scatter plot. (Observed values falling within the quantization interval around the points of the monotone function do not  appear in this plot.)  MONOTONE MAPPING 357  out more visibly from the underlying curve in its steeper portions, that are being minimized when we minimize D or Kruskal's  "stress." (The magnitudes of the vertical discrepancies are ignored in order that the result be invariant under monotone  transformation of the scale of similarity.)  Despite the residual scatter, the overall shape of the monotone trend exhibited in this plot clearly manifests the concave  upward shape that we have come to expect for confusion measures of similarity. Indeed, in line with Shepard's more specific  claim about such data, we find that a simple exponential decay function constrained (on theoretical grounds) to pass through s  = 100 at d = 0 can be brought into a rather good fit with the data by adjusting a single parameter (the decay constant).  Again, the residual discrepancies are most evident around the upper left portion of the curve. Three possibilities may account  for the apparently systematic divergence, in this upper region, between the monotone function (solid dots) and the exponential  (smooth curve). The first is the already noted fact that in fitting the monotone function it was necessary to minimize  horizontal discrepancies, whereas in subsequently assessing the extent to which the similarities could be accounted for by  means of an exponential function of the recovered distances it seemed more appropriate to minimize vertical discrepancies.  (And, where there is scatter, the slope of a regression line will of course depend in this way on which variable is regressed  on the other.) The second possibility is that the weight for the maintenance of monotonicity, wl , may still have been a bit  too large. The resulting forces to maintain monotonicity despite random error may therefore have prevented the smaller  distances from being fully reduced to their "true" underlying values. The third possibility (consonant with certain results of  Shepard, 1958a) is that the true underlying function may depart somewhat from the simple exponential in the direction of being  slightly sigmoid near d = 0. (Notice, however, the very similar divergence of the points "T" in Fig. 2 for which the true  underlying function was definitely a true exponential.)  In any case, it does appear possible to approximate the general shape of the relation between similarity data and distances  without having to assume anything in advance about the nature of the metric underlying those distances.  DISCUSSION  Trade-off Between Variance and Monotonicity  In the applications, we have in every case sought representations that satisfied the metric axioms (Condition C1) exactly. In  the case of real and therefore noisy data we can not then strictly and simultaneously meet the two remaining conditions (C2  and C3). To the extent that the data contain random variability, we must settle for some compromise between the competive  requirements of the monotonicity condition (C2) and the maximum variance condition (C3). In practice, this compromise is  determined  358 CUNNINGHAM AND SHEPARD  by the choice of the weight wl . To some extent, then, the solution finally obtained depends upon this choice. This does not,  however, mean that the solution is in any important sense arbitrary or nonunique. Our experience indicates that the shape of  the recovered monotone function is relatively unaffected by variations in zvl over a moderately wide range and, further, that  there are ways of ensuring that wl falls within the appropriate range.  The weight wI governs how strongly monotonicity will be enforced at the expense of driving toward maximum variance. In  general, if we obtain separate solutions with successively smaller and smaller values of wI , the following changes occur: The  recovered distances depart more and more from the trivial equal-distance representation which constitutes the limiting case of  perfect monotonicity. Accordingly, the recovered monotone function becomes more and more stretched out (i.e., decreased in  negative slope from the initial trivial step function) until it approximates the true form of the underlying function. Up to  this point the corrective adjustments of the iterative process are able to maintain the departure from monotonicity, D, at an  acceptably small level (specifically, a value that is essentially zero in the ideal case of errorless data and that increases  only very slowly in the case of real data). With still further decreases in w1 , however, the drive toward maximum variance is  permitted to stretch out the monotone relationship beyond the shape of the true underlying function and, so, the measure of  departure, D, begins to escalate rapidly and very soon reaches unacceptable levels.  (The situation here is quite analogous to that in the original method of nonmetric multidimensional scaling proposed by  Shepard (1962), where reduction to the proper number of dimensions by increasing variance was found to be strongly determined  by the internal constraints of the data in a very similar way. The obtained balance between forces to maintain monotonicity  and forces to increase variance was essentially the critical turning point at which variance was as large as it could be  before departure from monotonicity began to increase more sharply.)  In the present case, the unique optimum solution can generally be determined with little uncertainty by iterating to a  stationary representation separately for each of several values of wI spaced out over a wide range. From the subset of  solutions that achieve a suitably small departure from monotonicity, one then selects as the final result the one that  achieves the largest variance. In other words, one chooses the solution obtained with the smallest w1 that still yields an  acceptably small D.  Of course what is taken as an acceptable departure, D, may depend upon the amount of variability expected in the data. In the  analyses that we presented with errorless artificial data, we wished to keep the residual departures from monotonicity to a  negligible level. For this reason, we set the weight for the maintenance of monotonicity at a relatively large value (wl = 30,  in all cases) and we were alway able to achieve a very close approximation to the true underlying function with very little  departure from monotonicity (D < 0.045 in every case). With the more variable real data, it  MONOTONE MAPPING 359  was necessary to decrease this weight to a much smaller value (w1 = 2) in order to allow the function to stretch out to the  critical point beyond which D would begin rapidly to increase to unacceptable levels. According to the model, this is the  point at which the scatter plot (Fig. 5) should be most representative of the underlying functional relationship. That this is  in fact the case is to some extent corroborated by the close resemblance of that scatter plot to the one obtained for the same  data by nonmetric multidimensional scaling and, perhaps, by the good fit of the repeatedly confirmed exponential decay  function.  If it is not essential to be sure that the best possible approximation to the underlying function is obtained and if computing  time is limited, one can adopt the much less costly strategy of obtaining only one solution with wl set to a value that has  already been found to yield satisfactory results with similar types of data (perhaps in the vicinity of 2.4). Although  variations in w, near the optimum value do have some effect on the resulting measure of departure, D, they appear to have  relatively little effect on the overall shape of the recovered monotone function. So this less expensive strategy should yield  satisfactory results for many purposes.  Pictorial Representation of the Spatial Structure  As it stands, maximum variance nondimensional scaling has one principal advantage over the already widely used nonmetric  multidimensional scaling: It permits the determination of interpoint distances and, hence, the shape of the function relating  the similarity data to those distances without having to assume that the underlying space in which the distances are embedded  has any particular type of metric structure. The space is merely assumed to belong to the most general class of metric spaces  satisfying the metric axioms-a class in which all coordinate, spaces such as are uniformly assumed in multidimensional scaling  are included as highly specialized cases only. This generality may be especially desirable in studying cognitive or semantic  domains which do not correspond to a continuous physical parameter space of welldefined dimensionality and which may be best  represented by some sort of coordinatefree and nondimensional structure such as a tree, graph, or network.  On the other hand it must be acknowledged that the single most common use of multidimensional scaling has been to obtain a  pictorial spatial representation of the objects (usually in a two-or-three-dimensional Euclidean space). Determination of the  functional form of the relation between the similarity data and the distances in this space has generally been of no more than  secondary interest, except in a few investigations specifically into the mechanism underlying stimulus generalization and the  diffusion of traces in memory (Shepard, 1958a, 1965). Possibly concern with the form of the monotone function will attract  renewed interest in connection with more recent reaction-time studies and graph-theoretic formulations of the retrieval of  semantic information. But, so long as the principal purpose of the scaling is to obtain a picturable  360 CUNNINGHAM AND SHEPARD  representation of the objects under study, nondimensional scaling as it stands has the serious limitation that, by avoiding  the strong assumptions of a dimensionalized coordinate structure, it forfeits the readily picturable representation of the  objects obtainable by multidimensional scaling.  There are, however, several different ways in which maximum variance nondimensional scaling might be either extended or else  used in conjunction with currently available methods of multidimensional scaling that would enable the user to obtain the  rather different benefits of nondimensional and multidimensional scaling at the same time. We conclude by briefly mentioning  two such possible conjunctive uses and one possible extension that appears quite promising.  In considering these further possibilities, however, it should be kept in mind that our experience with MVNDS indicates that,  although the program could probably be improved in efficiency, at best it may be somewhat more costly to run than standard  nonmetric multidimensional scaling programs such as M-D-SCAL. Solutions for sets of real data comparable to the matrix of  confusion data for the 21 Morse Code signals seem to require of the order of 100 iterations (the near-perfect solutions for  the errorless artificial data required as many as 250), and the computation time per iteration increases approximately as the  square of the number of objects. (It was for this reason that we did not attempt to reduce D identically to zero, with the  artificial data, and analyzed only a subset of 21 of the 36 Morse Code signals.) On the other hand, this seemingly greater  number of iterations and time per iteration may be offset in many applications by the apparent lack of vulnerability to  entrapment in merely local minima, which we have been finding to be a troublesome problem with M-D-SCAL. (It is also likely  that the number of required iterations could be appreciably reduced if one were willing to accept solutions that meet the  metric condition C1 only approximately rather than exactly.)  One way in which one could obtain a picturable representation of the objects scaled by MVNDS would be simply to treat the  recovered distances as approximations to Euclidean distances and then to compute the implied positions of the objects in the  Euclidean subspace defined by the first two or three principal axes. Following Young and Householder (1938) and Torgerson  (1958), this would be done by computing an estimated matrix of scalar products of vectors from the centroid to all n objects  and by then computing the eigen roots and vectors of this matrix. In effect MVNDS would thus be used to find the monotone  transformation needed to convert the given similarity data into distancelike numbers suitable for classical multidimensional  scaling. To the extent that we are interested in the form of the monotone function, its determination by MVNDS would still not  depend upon the assumption of the Euclidean or any other particular metric. To the extent that we are interested in the  spatial configuration, accumulated experience indicates that, unless the underlying structure has an extreme nondimensional  form such as that of the tree structures contrived for the present test applications, the spatial configuration of the n  objects with respect to the first two or  MONOTONE MAPPING 361  three principal axes will generally be quite robust, i.e., insensitive to departures of the true underlying metric from the  Euclidean. Moreover, one could always evaluate the extent to which the low-dimensional Euclidean representation distorts the  true underlying structure by examining the correlation between the Euclidean distances in the coordinate representation and  the coordinate-free, merely metric distances determined by MVNDS.  Alternatively, one could go on to use the Euclidean approximation obtained in the just-described manner simply as a starting  configuration for iterative nonmetric multidimensional scaling of the sort developed by Shepard (1962) and Kruskal (1964a, b).  The final representation would then no longer be confined to a space with a purely Euclidean metric, but could as well be  embedded in a coordinate space with, for example, some other Minkowski power metric. Moreover, we would then have the  assurance that, within a space of the particular metric chosen, the distances are those that achieve the most nearly monotonic  relation to the given similarity data. The use of MVNDS, for its part, would serve the double function (a) of permitting  estimation of the shape of the unknown monotone function before assuming any particular form for the metric, and (b) of  providing a near-optimum starting configuration for the subsequent determination of a picturable configuration in coordinate  space and, thus, avoiding the often quite troublesome problem of entrapment in local minima.  Perhaps the most appealing way to achieve a picture of the underlying structure of the n objects is by means of an extension  of maximum variance nondimensional scaling to yield, as output, a representation in the spirit of MVNDS in the sense that the  representation itself has a strictly nondimensional and maximally additive (i.e., high variance) structure. We are currently  exploring the possibility of using the maximally additive distances determined by MVNDS to construct a graph or network with n  nodes, representing the n objects, and a minimum set of weighted internode links such that the distances determined by MVNDS  are, as nearly as possible, approximated by the sum of weights over the minimum connected path between appropriate pairs of  nodes in the network. Such an adjunct to MVNDS appears quite straightforward and, as we have suggested, might provide useful  representations of the structure underlying similarity data from various semantic and cognitive domains.  REFERENCES  ANDERSON, J. R., AND BOWER, G. H. Human associative memory. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1973.  ATTNEAVE, F. Dimensions of similarity. American Journal of Psychology, 1950, 63, 516-556. BEALS, R., KRANTz, D. H., AND  TVERSKY, A. Foundations of multidimensional scaling. Psychological Review, 1968, 75, 127-142.  BECKENBACH, E., AND BELLMAN, R. An introduction to inequalities. New York: Random House, 1961.  362  CUNNINGHAM AND SHEPARD  BENNETT, R. S. The intrinsic dimensionality of signal collections. Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University, Department  of Electrical Engineering. December, 1965.  BIRKHOFF, G., AND MAcLANE, S. A survey of modern algebra. New York: MacMillan, 1953. BLUMENTHAL, L. M. Theory and applications  of distance geometry. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1953.  BUSEMANN, H. The geometry of geodesics. New York: Academic Press, 1955.  BUSH, R. R., AND MOSTELLER, F. A model for stimulus generalization. Psychological Review, 1951, 58, 413-423.  COLLINS, A. M., AND QUILLIAN, M. R. Retrieval time from semantic memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1969,  8, 240-247.  CROSS, D. V. Metric properties of multidimensional stimulus control. In D. I. Mostofsky (Ed.), Stimulus generalization.  Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1965. Pp. 72-93. HYMAN, R., AND WELL, A. Judgments of similarity and spatial models.  Perception and Psychophysics, 1967, 2, 233-248.  JOHNSON, S. C. Hierarchical clustering schemes. Psychometrika, 1967, 32, 241-254.  KRANTZ, D. H. Rational distance functions for multidimensional scaling. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1967, 4, 226-245.  KRUSKAL, J. B. Multidimensional scaling by optimizing goodness of fit to a nonmetric hypothesis. Psychometrika, 1964(a), 29,  1-28.  KRUSKAL, J. B. Nonmetric multidimensional scaling: A numerical method. Psychometrika, 1964(6), 29, 115-129.  KRUSKAL, J. B. Monotone regression: Continuity and differentiability properties. Psychometrika, 1971, 36, 57-62.  LORD, R. D. The distribution of distance in a hypersphere. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 1954, 25, 794-798.  MILES, R. E. The complete amalgamation into blocks, by weighted means, of a finite set of real numbers. Biometrika, 1959, 46,  317-327.  QUILLIAN, M. R. Semantic memory. In M. Minsky (Ed.), Semantic information processing. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1968.  ROTHKOPF, E. Z. A measure of stimulus similarity and errors in some paired-associate learning tasks. Journal of Experimental  Psychology, 1957, 53, 94-101.  RUMELHART, D. E., LINDSAY, P. H., AND NORMAN, D. A. A process model for long-term memory. In E. Tulving and W. Donaldson  (Eds.), Organization of memory. New York: Academic Press, 1972.  SCHANK, R. C. Conceptual dependency: A theory of natural-language understanding. Cognitive Psychology, 1972, 3, 552-631.  SHEPARD, R. N. Stimulus and response generalization during paired-associates learning. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Yale  University, 1955.  SHEPARD, R. N. Multidimensional scaling of concepts based upon sequences of restricted associative responses. American  Psychologist, 1957 (a), 12, 440-441 (abstract).  SHEPARD, R. N. Stimulus and response generalization: A stochastic model relating generalization to distance in psychological  space. Psychometrika, 1957 (b), 22, 325-345.  SHEPARD, R. N. Stimulus and response generalization: Deduction of the gradient from a trace model. Psychological Review, 1958  (a), 65, 242-256.  SHEPARD, R. N. Stimulus and response generalization: Tests of a model relating generalization to distance in psychological  space. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1958 (b), 55, 509-523. SHEPARD, R. N. Similarity of stimuli and metric properties  of behavioral data. In H. Gulliksen and S. Messick (Eds.), Psychological scaling: Theory and applications. New York: John  Wiley & Sons, 1960. Pp. 33-43.  MONOTONE MAPPING  363  SHEPARD, R. N. The analysis of proximities: Multidimensional scaling with an unknown distance function. I & II. Psychometrika,  1962, 27, 125-140, & 219-246.  SHEPARD, R. N. Analysis of proximities as a technique for the study of information processing in man. Human Factors, 1963, 5,  33-48.  SHEPARD, R. N. Attention and the metric structure of the stimulus space. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1964, 1, 54-87.  SHEPARD, R. N. Approximation to uniform gradients of generalization by monotone transformations of scale. In D. 1. Mostofsky  (Ed.), Stimulus generalization. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1965. Pp. 94-110.  SHEPARD, R. N. Metric structures in ordinal data. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1966, 3, 287-315.  SHEPARD, R. N. A taxonomy of some principal types of data and of multidimensional methods for their analysis. In R. N.  Shepard, A. K. Romney, and S. B. Nerlove (Eds.), Multidimensional scaling. Vol. 1. New York: Seminar Press, 1972 (a). Pp.  21-47.  SHEPARD, R. N. Psychological representation of speech sounds. In E. E. David and P. B. Denes (Eds.), Human communication: A  unified view. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1972 (b). Pp. 67-113. TORGERSON, W. S. A theoretical and empirical investigation of  multidimensional scaling. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Princeton University, 1951. (Educational Testing Service Research  Bulletin RB-51-14, 1951).  TORGERSON, W. S. Multidimensional scaling. Part 1: Theory and method. Psychometrika, 1952, 17, 401-419.  TORGERSON, W. S. Theory and methods of scaling. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1958. TvERSKy, A., AND KRANTZ, D. H. Dimensional  representation and the metric structure of similarity data. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1970, 7, 572-596.  YOUNG, G., AND HOUSEHOLDER, A. S. Discussion of a set of points in terms of their mutual distances. Psychometrika, 1938, 3,  19-22.  ZANGWILL, W. I. Non-linear programming via penalty functions. Management Science, 1967, 13, 344-358.  RECEIVED: October 3, 1973  48o/r r/4-3