10.1016/0022-2496(74)90012-1
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 11, 59-70 (1974)  A Network Learning Model with GERT Analysis  P. H. RANDOLPH'  Institute of Mathematics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway  AND  R. D. RINGEISEN2  Department of Mathematics, Colgate University, Hamilton, New York 13346  Graphical Evaluation and Review Technique (GERT) can be used to analyze the teaching-learning process. By representing the  teaching-learning process with a stochastic network, it is possible to use a topology equation for a closed network to obtain  some parameters for the total teaching-learning process. To illustrate the techniques, two examples concerning a basic  calculus course are given. In addition, the relation to the familiar Markovian learning models is indicated.  INTRODUCTION  The representation of a teaching-learning process by a network was probably first introduced by Belgard (1971). In this model  the teaching-learning elements (that is, the concepts that can be learned) become the nodes of a network. Directed arcs are  used to join nodes to indicate which nodes follow a given node in a learning sequence. A cost is associated with each arc (the  cost could be computer time, student time, teaching expenses, etc.). Mathematical programming techniques are then employed to  determine a path in the network that minimizes cost or maximizes learning, and thereby determines an optimal teaching sequence.  In this paper an extension of the network model is proposed. This extension uses the new method known as graphical evaluation  and review technique (GERT) which was developed by Pritsker (1966a, b). With this method a teachingAearning process is broken  down into the various elements and the result is the expected number of tasks learned or the expected amount of effort  necessary to learn a sequence of tasks.  1 On leave from the Department of Mathematical Sciences, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, New Mexico.  2 Research supported by the Colgate. University Research Council.  Copyright 1974 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  59  60 RANDOLPH AND RINGEISEN  A GERT analysis allows one to label arcs with a function which combines the probability that the given arc is taken with  another appropriately chosen parameter. A node in the network represents a concept capable of being learned. An are directed  from one node to another means that the second concept may be learned after the first (see Fig. 1). A given network need not  include all plausible arcs from a given node. Indeed, the analysis is often more revealing when one omits certain heretofore  "likely" arcs.  Addition of Rational Numbers)  FiG. 1. Learning nodes.  The objective of this paper is to present a brief introduction to GERT procedures as applied to the teaching-learning  situation and to indicate its potential in learning theory. It will be noted that this approach is very similar to that of  Markov processes which have been used extensively to analyze learning models. This should be expected since flowgraphs have  for some time been used to represent and analyze probabilistic systems (Howard, 1960). In addition, Whitehouse (1965) has  demonstrated that there is a one-to-one correspondence between exclusive-or GERT networks and semiMarkov processes.  DESCRIPTION OF GERT  GERT is a procedure for the analysis of stochastic networks composed of nodes and multiparameter branches. Branches of the  network are described by two or more parameters: the probability that the branch is traversed and the length of the branch.  Nodes are of three types: and, exclusive-or and inclusive-or. This paper will illustrate an application of the exclusive-or  nodes in the teaching-learning context. The exclusive-or nodes are characterized by the fact that although several arcs may  enter a node, only one will be used at a given time. Such nodes are chosen here because certain linear systems analysis  techniques may be used.  To illustrate the exclusive-or GERT procedure consider the example of Fig. 2. It has three nodes plus dummy input and dummy  output nodes. The arcs are labeled 1, 2,..., 6. In the teaching-learning context the arcs can represent the learning effort,  the length of which could be a random variable. Nodes A and B could represent a testing process covering given concepts and  node C a special instructional program for the concept tested in node B. The loop represented by arc 2 and arcs 4 and 5 could  indicate a repeat of the learning process for the concepts tested by nodes A and B, respectively.  NETWORK LEARNING MODEL 61  FIG. 2. Exclusive or GERT procedure.  For each are k a function wk is defined. If pk is the probability that arc k is chosen and if M,(s) is the moment generating  function of the random variable Xk which represents the length of the kth arc, then wk is defined by  wk(S) = YkMk(S) = pk J e" dFXk(xk),  where Fxk is the distribution function of Xk and the integral is the familiar RiemanStieltjes integral.  In order to apply a topology equation from flowgraph theory, a closing arc is added since this equation pertains only to  closed networks. Any network can be depicted by a black box, in which the closing arc creates a single one loop network, where  w, represents the w-function of the closing arc and wE is the w-function of the entire network. This is illustrated by Fig. 3.  c  Fic. 3. The w-function for a network.  Define wE(s) by wE(s) = PEME(s), where PE is the probability of entering the black box and ME(s) is the moment generating  function of the entire network. Since ME(0) = 1, then  PE = WE(O)  Thus,  for any value of s, the function wE(s) will yield the moment generating function from the equation  ME(S) = -E(S)IwE(O)  From this moment generating function all moments, including the mean, for the network can be found, provided that the function  w(s) is known. GERT gives a method for finding w(s).  62 RANDOLPH AND RINGEISEN  A loop is a subnetwork with the property that every node is common to two and only two arcs of the subnetwork, one terminating  at the node, the other emanating from it. A first-order loop is one in which any node in the loop can be reached from any  other in the loop. A loop of order n is a set of n disjoint first-order loops. Suppose a given network has q loops (of  possibly different orders), LI , L2 ,..., L". If m is the order of loop Li and s is the parameter of the moment generating  function, then loop functions, Li(m, s), i = 1,..., q, are defined by the following:  Li(l, S) - f w1(S), ic-Li  when Li is a first-order loop and where j E Li means j is an arc in Li ; and  m  Li(m, S) _ Lk(lI S), r=I  where Li is a loop of order m and the product is taken over all the (disjoint) first-order loops which are in Li .  The networks in this paper are so constructed that the following topology equation for a closed network with exclusive-or  nodes may be used:  1 + Y. I (-1)-Li(m, S) = 0 m i  for all s.  For the above example the closed network is given by Fig. 4. The arc labeled w,,  W  FIG. 4. The closed network form of Fig. 2.  is the closure arc. In this closed network there are three first-order loops, namely LI consisting of arc 2, L2 of arcs 4 and  5, and L3 of arcs 1, 3, 6, c. The corresponding loop functions for the topology equation are  LI(1r S) = w2 I Lz(11 S) = w.wb I L3(11 S) = WIw3WBwa .  NETWORK LEARNING MODEL 63  There are two-first order loops, Ll and L21 that are disjoint; that is, they have no nodes in common. These then also form a  second-order loop, whose loop function is  L(2, S) = L,(1, s) L201 S) = W2Z04205 .  The total number of loop functions is obtained as follows. If r is the number of disjoint first-order loops, then the number  of loops of the kth order is the combination of r things taken k at a time. With the above loop functions the topology  equation for this network is  1 - (ws + w4W5 + W1W3W6We) + w2w4W5 = 0.  In general, WE is the quantity to be extracted from the network calculations. Applying the topology equation for flowgraphs to  the simple one-loop network, in which the black box depicts the entire network, the following equation is obtained:  1-WEw,=0  or  We = lIWE  Substituting this into the topology equation for the example yields  I - (w2 + w4W5 + WIW3we(IIWE)) + w2W4W5 = 0.  This equation now has only one unknown, WE, which can be found quite readily by solving the above equation. Once WE is  obtained, ME follows easily. To get the expected value of X, the total network characteristic, one needs only to find the  first moment from the moment generating function  11E = dME(S)I dS 1,1=0  In a similar way, other moments may be obtained.  The remainder of this paper discusses two examples in which GERT is used to study the problem of teaching a calculus course.  These examples serve to explain the GERT analysis when applied to learning networks.  EXAMPLE 1: TEACHING CALCULUS  Any calculus course can be subdivided into a number of separate topics or concepts. Usually one topic builds on another and  there is thus a definite sequencing that must be followed. Occasionally, there are concepts that may or may not be included. A  typical basic course in calculus is illustrated by Fig. 5, where the numbers on the nodes correspond to concepts according to  Table 1. The random variable Xk will be either 1  2+.9es)  FiG. 5. A calculus course network.  z  d 0 r ro x z  c  x z  Fm. 6. Another calculus network.  m  z  FiG. 7. A self-paced calculus network.  NETWORK LEARNING MODEL E)5  or 0 according to whether or not the concept, as represented by the node following arc k, is learned or not learned,  respectively, given that class was taught the concept from the initial end of the arc. The objective, then, will be to use  GERT to obtain the expected number of concepts learned (in terms of arcs traversed).  Let q be the conditional probability that the concept represented by the node at the terminal end of arc k is learned, given  that the arc is entered. Let Pk be the probability that arc k is entered. The w-function for arc k, wk(s), has the form wk(s)  = pk((1 - q) , qe3), where (1 - q) + qes is the moment generating function for a Bernoulli random variable.  TABLE 1  Node  Concept  1 3 4 5 6 7G  7 8 9  Dummy start node Intuitive limits  e, S limits  Definition of derivative Derivative of x"  Sum, product, and division formulas Maxima and minima with respect to critical points on a curve Maxima-minima problems  Graphing nonpolynomial functions Dummy terminal node  The w-functions for this example are formed using subjective probabilities as assigned by the authors. They are for  illustrative purposes only. For example, the 2-4 arc has written on it .5(.3 + .7e3). This reflects our beliefs that a  calculus class will go from intuitive limits to definition of derivatives 50 % of the time, and that 70  of those taught the definition of derivative after having been exposed to intuitive limits will learn the concept, while 30%  will not.  As we proceed with the GERT analysis, it should be noted that the network has four loops when the 11w, arc is added. They are  as described in Table 2. (Where a - b - c means arc a - b, and then arc b - c.)  TABLE 2  Loop Component Arcs  L, 1-2-3-4-5-6-7G-8-7-9-1  L, 1-2-3-4-5-6-7G-7-9-1  L, 1-2-4-5-6-7G-8-7-9-1  Ls 1-2-4-5-6-7G-7-9-1  66 RANDOLPH AND RINGEISEN  Since there are no loops of order higher than one, the topological equation gives  4 1-Y_Li=0. i=1  Because the 9-1 arc is in every loop, let zi be the product of the w-functions of all other arcs in the loop Li. Then,  1 ~4  1 - - Lr zi = 0, WE i=1  or  For example, z1 is the product of the w-functions of 1-2, 2-3, 3-4, 4-5, 5-6, 6-7i; , 7G-8, 8-7, and 7-9. Completing the  multiplication one obtains  zl = (.001)e48 -}- (.029)e5s + (.096)es8 + (.139)e" -{- (.075)e8s -~ (.003)e9s.  In a similar way, z2, za , and z4 are obtained. Then, summing the zi gives  wE(s) = (.004)e$s -I- (.035)e48 + (.163)e" + (.330)e6s ~- (.326)e's  -}- (.133)ess + (.003)08.  Since there is but one terminal node, it is evident that PE = WE(0) = 1. By actual computation wE(0) = .99, the difference  being due to round-off error. Thus, ME(s) = wE(s). The expected total number of arcs traversed is  dME(s) = 6.42. ds 8=0  Because node 9 is a dummy node, then 5.42 is the expected number of arcs in the learning process. Since ten arcs (omitting the  dummy arc) were available for learning, then the ratio of the average number of concepts learned to the number available is  0.54.  Currently, in mathematical circles, there is some discussion on the value of the E, 8 limits and whether this concept should  be included in elementary calculus. Eliminating F, 8 limits from calculus would result in the network of Fig. 6. Computation  of the new wE(s) function is relatively easy, given the preceeding results. Loops 1 and 2 no longer exist and if z3* and z4*  denote the products of the w-functions for the non 9-1 arcs for this example, then it is easy to see that z3* = 2z3 and z4* =  2z,.  NETWORK LEARNING MODEL 67  This gives  WE(s) = Z3* -}- z4* = (.006)e33 + (etc.) = (.006)e3$ + (.050)e43  + (.188)e53 + (.340)e68 + (.306)e'3 + (.112)e83. Again, wE(0) = 1 so that ME(s) = wE(s), and  dME(s) I = 6.236, ds s-o  and, therefore, the expected number of tasks learned is 5.236. The arcs traversed to arcs available ratio is .65. Note that  the exclusion of limits seems to have little effect on the average number of tasks learned. It seems, therefore, given these  probabilities, that the concept could be introduced as one whose "exposure" is worth the seeing.  It should be noted that the results of this example reflect average performance over several calculus courses.  EXAMPLE 2: INDIVIDUALIZED LEARNING  In recent years many mathematics departments have instituted individualized mathematics courses in which the student is to  learn the successive concepts at his own pace. After completing the study of a concept, he is tested to determine if he  actually learned the material. If he passes the examination, he continues with the next concept in the course. If he fails the  examination, he is to study the material again and then repeat the examination. Usually the examination is an equivalent one,  often generated by a computer. The student repeats his study of the material and continues to be examined on a particular  concept until he passes an examination, at which time he goes to the next concept.  In this example, the random variable on each arc is the constant value 1; that is, the objective of the network analysis is to  determine the average number of trials a student will need to complete the course. Using the example of a calculus course,  each node reflects a testing process covering specific concepts and the arcs the corresponding learning phase. Thus, a loop  implies that the student failed the examination covering a concept and will be required to study and take another examination  over the same material.  The network for a possible calculus course is given in Fig. 7 where the labels on the nodes are described in Table 3. Note  that in this example, a dummy start node is used for convenience. Since the lengths of all arcs are constants, each moment  generating function is of the form e'. As an example of labeling for the w-functions,  48o/IIjr-6  68 RANDOLPH AND RINGEISEN TABLE 3  Label (Test) Concepts covered by test  I Dummy initial node  L Intuitive limits  D Definition of derivative and derivative of x Formulas for derivatives of sums, products, and quotients  M Maxima-Minima  T Dummy terminal node  consider node L. The arc from L to L is labeled .3e$, indicating that it is assumed that there is a 30% chance that a student  will fail intuitive limits. Likewise, the label .7eon the arc L-D indicates there is a 70 % chance of passing intuitive  limits. Note that this is analogous to a one-element learning model.  The GERT analysis of this network is more involved than the other examples. The first order loops are given in Table 4. There  are, thus, six nontouching pairs of  TABLE 4  Loop Component Arcs  Ll I-L-D-F-M-T-I L, IrL  Ls D-D L4 F-F L6 M-M  loops, L2L3, L2L4 , L2Lb , L3L4 , L,L5 , L.L. , four nontouching triples, L2L,L4, LaL4Ls, L2L4Ls, L2LsLs, and one nontouching  set of four loops, L2L3L4Lb .  The topological equation for this network becomes  b b  0 = 1 - E Li +L2 E L j -f" Ls(L4 +L5) i-1 i-S  -{- L4L5 - L2(L3L4 -I- L4Ls -I- L3L5) - LsL4Ls -F. L2LsL4Ls .  NETWORK LEARNING MODEL 69  Notice that only Ll contains the arc labeled 1JwE . Evaluating the Li and solving for wE gives  .196e5s  WAS) _ 1 - 1.3es + .61e 2s - .123ess -}- .009e4s  Because w,(0) = 1, then ME(s) = wE(s). Taking the first derivative of ME($) and evaluating at s = 0, gives the expected total  number of trials  dME(s) - 7.11. ds s=o  Thus, in this simple example a student can be expected to take an average of just over six trials (omitting the first arc from  the dummy start node) to complete the learning of the four concepts.  The relationship between a GERT network and Markov process is illustrated by the transition matrix for this example as given  in Table 5, where a blank indicates a zero entry. As can be seen, the transition matrix is quite sparse. Note that as soon as  node T is realized, the course is completed and thus node T is an absorbing state. Since a GERT network usually also includes  transition times, such processes are generally of the semi-Markov type.  TABLE 5  Transition Probability Matrix for Example 2  I L D F M T  I 1      L .3 .7     D  .2 .8    F   .3 .7   M    .5 .5  T     1  OTHER TYPES OF NODES  Although this paper covered only the "exclusive-or" nodes, a simple example illustrates the "and" and the "inclusive-or"  nodes. Frequently, when a graduate student takes a written comprehensive examination, his answers are reviewed by a  70 RANDOLPH AND RINGEISEN  committee. Suppose the rule is that the student passes if and only if every member of the committee passes him. If one or more  members do not pass him, the student is considered to have failed the examination. Figure 8 illustrates the examination and  review process, where the explanation of the nodes are given in Table 1. The node denoted by P is an "and" node, since this  node will be realized if and only if all arcs leading into it are realized. Node F is an "inclusive-or" node since it will be  realized if one or more arcs leading into it are realized.  P  FIG. 8. Illustration of "and" and inclusive-or nodes. TABLE 6  Node Node Event  E Examination  C Chairman  1, 2, 3 Committee members  P Pass-"and" node  F Fail-"inclusive-or" node  REFERENCES  BELGARD, MARIA R., A Mathematical Model to Optimize the Teaching-Learning Process: The Neturork Model. Paper presented at 40th  National Meeting, Operations Research Society of America in Anahiem, California, November, 1971.  Hope, W. W., AND PRITSKER, A. A. B. Graphical evaluation and review technique. Part I. Fundamentals, The Journal of Industrial  Engineering, 1966a, 17, 267-274.  HOWARD, R. A., Dynamic Programming and Markov Processes, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1960.  PRITSKER, A. A. B., AND WHITEHOUSE, G. E. Graphical evaluation and review techniques. Part II, The Journal of Industrial  Engineering, 1966b, 17, 293-301.  WHITEHOUSE, G. E., Extensions, New Developments and Applications of GERT, Ph.D. Thesis, Arizona State University, 1965.  RECEIVED: April 30, 1973