10.1016/0022-2496(74)90016-9
JOURNAL OF I-VIATHENIATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 11, 163--178 (1974)  Robert R. Bush Early Career  FREDERICK MOSTELLER  Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138  Robert R. Bush left a successful career in physics and became a psychologist. His research contributions in psychology fell  primarily into the area of mathematical learning theory, and his teaching and expository writing were mainly mathematical, but  his acquaintance with the whole of psychology helped him make a contribution as a departmental administrator.  This first paper describes the beginnings of his psychological career and a large part of his research effort, both owhich  occurred at Harvard, and the second paper by R. Duncan Luce and Eugene Galanter describes the major administrative and expos  Copyright 1974 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  163  164 OBITUARY  itory contributions he made while chairing the psychology deparments of first, the University of Pennsylvania, and second,  Columbia University. On leaving Harvard in 1956, he first went to an appointment as Associate Professor of Applied Mathematics  at the New York School of Social Work, Columbia University, where he considerably broadened his knowledge of the uses of  sociology and psychology. Teaching was important to him throughout his career.  EARLY DAYS  Beginning his academic career at Michigan State University, Bush studied electrical engineering (B. S., 1942). From Michigan  State, he went to work in the RCA Laboratories at Princeton, New Jersey (1942-1947, overlapping with his graduate work). There  he participated in a project to develop a frequency modulated magnetron. Harry Fulbright, Bob's thesis director, recalls that  this RCA work stood Bob in good stead when later they worked together at Princeton University (1946--1948) on the redesign of  the frequency modulated cyclotron, a project directed by Milton White. Their subgroup was charged with the design of an  oscillator and a rotating condenser. Bob suggested a slotted plate which was ultimately used, though the hardware and the  details of the design were carried out by others.  Fulbright recalls that Bob paid little attention to his thesis topic until it had actually been demonstrated that the  experimental apparatus (a camera inside the cyclotron) worked, but at that point he took over and with his usual boundless  energy quickly completed the research entitled, "The inelastic scattering of protons from light nuclei." He received his  degree in 1949 and was appointed instructor in physics at Princeton University for 1948-1949.  About 1948, Bob, together with other physics students, organized a seminar held about once a month throughout the year at the  Institute for Advanced Study (in Princeton, N. J.) on the topic "Are the methods of physical sciences applicable to social  sciences?" I understand that such stars as Margaret Mead, Gregory Bateson, and Abraham Kardiner addressed the seminar.  Although this sort of student-produced seminar may seem a commonplace today, it was a first at Princeton at that time and  foreshadowed Bob's move into the social sciences.  At the close of World War II, many physicists were in personal turmoil over some of the military uses of scientific research,  Bob among them, though later he did not talk much about it. He decided to try to move into the social sciences. Several  friends have the impression that J. Robert Oppenheimer, a friend and hero of Bob's, helped him think this step out and somehow  smoothed the way. The National Research Council and the Social Science Research Council jointly gave postdoctoral fellowships  in 1949 for social scientists and natural scientists who wanted additional training in  ROBERT R. BUSH: 1920-1972 165  the other field, and they awarded Bob one of these which, when renewed, lasted two years in all. Since Oppenheimer was on the  committee supervising the program, he may have called this opportunity to Bob's attention. The fellowship program attracted  top-notch people, but only five awards were made in all its years. And so it died for lack of flesh not funds, a peculiarly  successful failure.  POSTDOCTORAL STUDY  Although we do not know how he decided to come to Harvard's three-year-old Department and Laboratory of Social Relations, it  was an exciting and stimulating place in 1949 teeming with clinical and social psychologists, sociologists, and  anthropologists interacting vigorously and productively. The research ran from totally nonquantitative, nonempirical social  philosophy through wide-open anthropological field studies, to the tightest laboratory experiments; from completely empirical  studies, to totally theoretical mathematical ones; and from research in hospitals and in mental institutions to research in  work camps and on psychodrama. Bob found it easy to join in seminars and courses with graduate students and in the discussions  of the faculty. By participating in many of the informal student-faculty study groups, he learned a lot of psychology and  social science and quickly made a reputation for himself that ultimately led to his appointment to the staff.  In those days, preliminary tiptoeing explorations for a special visitor included making sure that someone on the grounds would  be responsible for making the visitor welcome and facilitating his work, and in some cases the possibility of working together  was raised. As a recent Princeton Ph.D. in mathematics myself and a member of the Department of Social Relations with some  ties to the Social Science Research Council, it was natural that these inquiries and suggestions would drift my way.  When reporting orally on his quality, his recommenders gave the underselling forms of high praise very talented people reserve  for other very talented people: "not at all bad," "better than average," and "pretty good." With such gilt-edged assurances  and the fact that Bob was already coauthor of four articles in physics, it seemed reasonable that he would want to start  research as soon as he arrived. He did, and this was the start of our seven or eight years of extensive congenial  collaboration. He came alone, as he and his wife were separated and later divorced.  As a postdoctoral fellow, Bob's primary project was to do a good deal of reading and to attend lectures and seminars, which he  did with a will. On the research side, I suggested three possible areas with a view to our working together on one of them.  They were (1) the study of problem solving in small groups (related to departmental work in progress by R. Freed Bales,  earlier my office-mate), (2) finding relations  166 OBITUARY  between various psychological scaling methods through theory and experiment (based on a course I had given in psychometric  methods), and (3) developing mathematical models for learning (based on some data on the relief from successive doses of  analgesics brought to my attention by Dr. Henry K. Beecher of Massachusetts General Hospital). As soon as Bob came, we spent a  few days looking into these problems.  As for the first, we couldn't see how to get a sharp mathematical wedge into the small-group area though later David Hays and  Bob (Hays & Bush, 1954) wrote a paper using learning theory on a study of small groups. For the second area, in the light of  S. Smith Stevens's later sustained innovative work on scales of measurement and their relations, it may amuse the  psychological reader that he advised us that the field was settled and so there was nothing left to do. We were not put off by  this advice. Bob didn't care for the scaling problem even though it looked tractable both mathematically and experimentally-he  said he wanted something more social. Again this is amusing because Stevens's later work was directed exactly to the social,  or at least societal, uses of scaling. It all belongs to the New Yorker's "Department of the Clouded Crystal Ball." As for the  third area, we both saw ways to start on probabilistic models for learning. And so in a matter of three days, we chose and  began to work on a problem that turned into years of effort.  The speed and specificity of the decisions were rather characteristic of Bob's "let's do something, and let's do it now"  attitude toward work and play. Wherever possible he liked to try alternatives out and see what worked, rather than argue or  even think very hard about what alternative was preferable. Being quick, well organized, and so directly to the point, he was  able to make this approach work, where others might not. In the instance under discussion, if the learning work had not been  productive, we could readily have turned to one of the other two areas, because for both of them we had sounder preparation  than for the one we chose.  When I knew him, Bob started the day with a "grocery list" of what was to be accomplished that day, more or less in the order  planned for doing them; for example,  prepare course for Thursday get laundry  write Madow teach course prove theorem on asymptotes call about typewriter  see student about thesis fix door  write section about asymptotes  ROBERT R. BUSH: 1920-1972 167  He expected to complete his grocery list each day (many of us don't), and when he finished, he felt entirely free to play. He  planned ahead for this as well, but he did not feel comfortable until the grocery list was checked off, and more than once I  remember him working very late at a party at his own house, long after the guests arrived.  With his fellowship, Bob was free most any time and my duties during his first few years at Harvard were only moderate. We  were frequently able to spend half a day at a time together on research and then half a day apart. Memoranda were written very  rapidly. Long phone calls were frequent. We had the aid of a well-trained psychologist and mathematician, Doris Entwisle, as  mathematical assistant. By 1965, she was teaching in both the Departments of Social Relations and Electrical Engineering at  The Johns Hopkins University. Bob pointed out to her as she launched on her own independent research career that it was going  to be hard for her to get the kind of assistance we had had.  When we first worked on learning theory, we were much helped by repeated sessions with well-known psychologists; among these  were Ernest Hilgard, Carl Hovland, William O. Jenkins, George A. Miller, R. R. Sears, Fred Sheffield, and John Whiting, who is  also an anthropologist. I saw Clark Hull just once and had a most encouraging discussion. As Bob learned about conditioning  and reinforcement, he longed to try it out on a human, and that was why my two-year old son used to race up to Bob, whenever  he saw him, shouting, "subset, subset," his first serious word, painstakingly taught by Bob visit after visit.  After Bob took a teaching post in the Department of Social Relations, his time was not quite so free, and because I was acting  chairman in 1953-1954 we had a terrible time finishing our book before I went on sabbatical, but we managed, mainly by working  very late at night. In writing the book, we usually worked out the theory and the statistical analysis together and then one  of us would take the pieces and draft a chapter; the other would later revise it.  TEACHING AT HARVARD  In all of his five formal teaching years at Harvard, Bush gave a seminar in mathematical models in the social sciences, the  first such seminar, I believe, at our university. In addition to models for learning, he drew also, for example, on growth  models, game theory, kinship structure, and simultaneous differential equation models. He taught experimental social  psychology each year. One year, together with Ray Hyman, he taught quantitative methods in the social sciences, our  second-semester course in statistical methods. Beyond these courses, however, he gave many reading courses, participated in a  variety of extra seminars, and directed or participated in the direction of a number of doctoral dissertation. He was generous  168 OBITUARY  he enjoyed working with them. Several of my correspondent have mentioned that from the first he had an attitude of working  with students, as nearly as equals as he could arrange. Among the graduates of the Department of Social Relations expressing  in prefaces appreciation to Bush for his help with their doctoral dissertation where: Bernard P. Cohen, Jacqueline M. Jarrett  Goodnow, David G. Hays, Saul Sternberg, and Thurlow R. Wilson.  He had an especially good deep voice which had had some training in operatic singing. He also had a great sense of humor.  These together with very legible handwriting and well-organized blackboard behavior helped a lot in Emerson Hall at Harvard  where the blackboard were entirely inadequate for mathematical work.  Letters from people who were graduate students and worked with Bob in courses, as project assistants, or in summer institutes  emphasize his warmth, the feeling of excitement he gave a class, the seriousness and honesty with which he appraised his own  work and that of others. More than one emphasizes the encouragement of independent work by the student-encouraging personal  responsibility-but not leaving the student in the cold. The letters tell concrete stories of Bob's work to help  studentshelping one to get a very inexpensive room because his stipend was so low, helping another to get reimbursed for a  stolen typewriter on the grounds that it was to aid project work. It pleased students that he was happy to argue with them on  social science theory and practice as well as on details of mathematical models and statistics. He criticized written material  with thoughtful care and encouraged high standards. He believed in writing things up as quickly as possible and encouraged  students to do the same.  Malcolm Arth, then a graduate student in the Department of Social Relations, says of this period:  Bob was very much a Social Relations Department person. Although his strongest ties were with the social psychologists, his  own experience with psychotherapy and his sympathies with psychoanalytic theory also allied him closely with the clinical  psychologists, and not just experimentally oriented ones. He also had a strong bond with anthropologists and sociologists. His  understanding of the culture concept, and the importance of crosscultural research for all the social sciences, was deeper  than one normally encounters in a non-anthropologist. . . .  I recall as a young graduate student in 1953 that most of us entered with great expectations for the ambitious  interdisciplinary goals of the Department of Social Relations. Some of the zest and optimism of the first years of the  Department had already peaked, but in 1953 there remained enough viable interdisciplinary teaching, research, and theorizing  to make the Department seem often what is was supposed to be. Some members of the faculty had already become fairly isolated  and specialized, but many were still committed to building bridges and cutting across traditional lines. Bob, again typically,  understood both groups and yet always seemed to me to be in the latter camp. Certainly he was when talking and working with  people like me who had that sort of commitment.  ROBERT R. BUSH: 1920-1972 169  THE NATIONAL SCENE  In writing a history (Mosteller, 1974) of the role of the Social Science Research Council (SSRC) in the rise of mathematical  methods in the social sciences, I was impressed with the extent of Bush's contribution to this development. He taught in the  first summer training institute at Dartmouth College in 1953 for the SSRC's Committee on the Mathematical Training of Social  Scientists. He was well liked there as a teacher, indeed everywhere as far as I know.  After the 1953 institute, the teachers and participants reviewed the work carefully, and Bush wrote a section of a paper  "Mathematics for Social Scientists" (Bush, Madow, Raiffa & Thrall, 1954a). In this he suggests first that the content of  mathematics courses for social scientists might well be based on an empirical assessment of those methods that had already  been especially useful. Second, the movtivation of social science students is to strengthen their work in their own field, and  therefore mathematics courses for such students should have social science content. Third, since mathematicians were not then  adequately educated in social science applications of mathematics, some new educational effort was required.  The students' questionnaires supported his second point, and the 1955 summer training institutes were taught with more social  science content. Since more applied materials were needed for the 1955 seminar he was to teach in, Bush, Robert Abelson, and  Ray Hyman (1956) prepared special problem materials in the summer of 1954.  His third proposal was found immediately attractive by the director of SSRC, and a large summer institute to train collegiate  mathematics teachers in mathematical applications in the social sciences was held in 1957.  Bush was a member of the SSRC's Committee on the Mathematical Training of Social Scientists in 1956-1957.  He taught summer school at Harvard in 1956 and then directed a 1957 SSRC summer institute on applications of mathematics. That  was the last of the SSRC summer training institutes, but there were further SSRC research training institutes and research  institutes, and Bush led and participated in these in the summers of 1961 1962, 1963, 1964, and 1966 under the auspices of  either the SSRC or the Mathematical Social Science Board (MSSB).  The MSSB was developed about 1963-1964 partly by SSRC committees and partly by others. Bush together with W. K. Estes, R. D.  Luce, and P. Suppes largely developed the proposal leading to the organization. The MSSB in turn has been very influential in  broadening the use of mathematics in such social sciences as anthropology, history, and political science where it was rarely  used before 1950, and in extending its use in the more traditional areas of economics, sociology, and psychology.  After Bush went to the University of Pennsylvania, we did little more together as we both were chairing departments, though in  1964, he and I committeed together  170 OBITUARY  under the chairmanship of John Kemeny for the Panel on Biological, Management, and Social Sciences of the Committe on the  Undergraduate Program in Mathematics of the Mathematical Association of America. As I recall, Bush's contribution to that work  was, by intermittent urging, to press Samuel Goldberg, Geoffrey Watson, and me to design a statistics curriculum for the  Panel. Looking back on his work, I am astonished at how many committees Bush was not on. For example, among 30 members of the  MSSB, he never appears. I think he was happy to do things but not pleased with the time spent in committee debates. Perhaps at  this later period in his life he preferred, as some have suggested to me, to concentrate his efforts on psychology rather than  on the social sciences, generally, a reversal of his attitudes while at Harvard.  SCIENTIFIC WORK  In the models for learning that Bush and I developed, the fundamental representation was that prior to a trial an organism has  a vector of response probabilities. A stimulus corresponded to a mathematical operator that replaced the organism's current  vector by a new probability vector. In the models in Bush and Mosteller (1955), the effects of previous responses were summed  up in the current vector, independent of the path to the present state. The operators had a linear form, so that if p is a  vector of probabilities (p, , p2 ,..., Pk) and Q is applied to p, the new vector is  Qp = ap + (I - a)A  where A is also a probability vector (A, , A2 ,..., Ak) and a is a scalar, 0 <_ a + 1. If Q is repeatedly applied, the  limiting vector is A, when a + 1.  When there were only two responses, say R and R, if instead of a vector we take p to be the first coordinate so that p =  Prob{R), 1 - p = Prob{R), then we can get along without vectors by merely following the courses of p as various operators are  applied as in  Qip - aip + (1 - ai) Ai  For example, in a T-maze the animal's turning right and being rewarded might have the operator Ql with AI = 1. Turning left  and being rewarded would by symmetry give al p = Q, p (because Qlq = alq + (I - al) and the new value of p is 1 - Qlq = alp).  Turning right and not being rewarded might increase the probability of turning right a little, according to Q3p = a3p + (1 -  a3), or might decrease it, say according to a3p. This is regarded as an empirical question that might depend on the problem.  The paradise fish investigation mentioned below deals with this question in one context.  The particular form of the linear models has an attractive interpretation in terms of conditioning whose essence has been  described by Estes (1950). At the start some elements of the space S are conditioned and some are not. As a result of the  trial a  ROBERT R. BUSH: 1920-1972 171  random set A, whose measure is m (this use of a general measure aids in generalizing Estes's idea of counting elements), is  drawn and all those elements not conditioned are now conditioned. And a set B is also drawn and all those elements in it  already conditioned are deconditioned, overlaps in the sets A and B being unchanged. If a and b are the measures of sets A and  B, respectively, then p is replaced by an amount  p+(1-p)a-pb.  In words, to p is added an amount proportional to its maximum possible increase, and from p is subtracted an amount  proportional to its maximum possible decrease; all - p) had an interpretation as increment in "excitatory potential" in Hull's  theory and the term -bp as an increment in Hull's "inhibitory potential."  Although Bush and Mosteller (1955) develop this particular form of model almost exclusively, we were well aware of other  possible forms of operators and were often dissatisfied with these. We felt though that there was much to be said for taking  one form of operator and pressing hard to make it do as much as possible rather than inventing entirely new forms of operators  on every occasion. That approach has the advantage of creating some unity in the work and of gradually generating some  facility for facing a new problem with the same somewhat limited set of tools. We both found it a congenial way to work  although we did want to explore other possible forms of operators.  In our first paper, "A Mathematical Model for Simple Learning" (Bush & Mosteller, 1951a), we explained the relation between  our approach and that of Estes; we emphasized reinforcement concepts, he association theory. We were all trying to describe  instrumental conditioning or operant conditioning and not Pavlovian conditioning.  Our strong emphasis is on the discrete trial-by-trial approach, but we then try to relate to probabilities, latent time, and  rates. This leads to differential equations and continuous results.  The paper discusses free-responding situations as in bar pressing in Skinner boxes under extinction, fixed ratio, and random  ratio reinforcement conditions, as well as aperiodic and periodic reinforcement. Most of these interpretations required us to  go to differential equations. We never emphasized them so heavily again. We wanted to describe the learning in fine detail.  The differential equations were describing situations where we had little data available for verifying the assumptions we were  making. When a pigeon ballistically put on a burst of pecks at a key, we could not believe that the individual pecks were  independent in the sense of the model. True, one might still be able to fit the actual learning curves because the model may  have several parameters and can fit a complicated shape. But the model should describe the detailed process, not just fit  means. This idea of studying fine structure was new to mathematical learning theory.  To describe experiments in stimulus generalization and discrimination (Bush & Mosteller, 1951b), we need to measure similarity  of stimuli. We generalized and  172 OBITUARY  adapted Estes's set theoretic approach to treat these problems and applied the results to several experiments and to some  related cases with no experimental data available. In an especially ambitious paper, Bush and Whiting (1953) relate the  stochastic learning models, using a set-theoretic interpretation, to displacement. They review Neal Miller's list (Miller,  1948) of assumptions with delicate care, taking exception to some, and explain how Miller's assumptions might be related to  mathematical assumptions in the model. The model is applied to experimental results on pigeons and extended to apply to a  cross-cultural study by Whiting and Child (1953). It is even extended to describe a recovery effect following punishment. The  thrust is to set up the general model, describe possible situations, and then show that the model can produce results  compatible with the experimental or observational findings.  In a paper Bush worked on as a result of some seminars led by R. R. Sears (Brush, Bush, Jenkins, John & Whiting, 1952), a set  of experiments with groups of pigeons tests some aspects of Neal Miller's theory of displacement. Miller had formulated a  theory of generalization under conflict conditions, and Miller and Kraeling (1951) had performed an experiment giving the  theory some support. The experiment reported by Brush et al. (1952) examined generalization under three conditions. Overall,  the outcomes did not support the Miller position, although results for one of the three experimental groups were consistent  with Miller's theory.  Bush used the mathematical learning model formulation to translate the observed results for pigeons from the Brush et al.  (1952) experiment and the rate data from Miller and Kaeling (1951) into somewhat comparable measures.  One of our most important analytical devices was the idea of a statistical subject. We called them stat-rats, so christened, I  believe, by Doris Entwisle. In the kinds of learning experiments we studied, there were many properties that a sequence of  trials could have, and we could rarely measure the actual probability in the animal, except perhaps when it was near 0 or near  1. Consequently it was desirable to simulate an experiment by running stat-rats through it and applying the same mathematical  model to generate the behavior of the stat-rats as the model being fitted to the experimental data was supposed to imitate the  behavior of real subjects. Such simulations, now said to be generated by Monte Carlo method, made it possible to get at many  theoretical properties of the data without mathematically computing extremely complex distributions. We exploited this idea  repeatedly in Stochastic Models for Learning (Bush & Mosteller, 1955) especially in the Solomon-Wynne experiment (Chapter 11)  and in the eight models paper (Bush & Mosteller, 1959) and Bush and Wilson (1956) used it in the T-maze experiment with  paradise fish.  In the paradise fish paper, the distribution of lengths of runs of successes and of failures was of special interest, and may  have been part of the stimulus for work on runs by Bush (1959), Bush and Sternberg (1959), and by Bush and Lovejoy in an  unpublished paper "Learning to Criterion."  We had distinguished between contingent and noncontingent procedures.  ROBERT R. BUSH: 1920-1972 173  Humphreys (1939) had college students guess whether or not a light would flash, and then it did or did not according to a  predetermined schedule. We call this a noncontingent two-choice experiment because the chance of a flash did not depend on the  choice. Brunswick (1939) used a two-choice procedure where the probability of reinforcement on the two sides differed-partial  reinforcement for both We called this contingent. We thought the asymptotic behavior of the subjects might be different in the  two situations. The Bush-Wilson paradise fish experiment was one attempt to look into this. In the control group, the fish  could not see that the other side of the T-maze got the reward, but in the experimental group they could. Two models were  considered for the experimental fish: (1) the information model, the side with the food would increase the probability of the  fish choosing it on the next trial; and (2) secondary reinforcement model, the side the fish went to was reinforced by the  sight of food in the other box.  The data supported the secondary reinforcement model. Bush and Wilson's analysis is thorough and elaborate, looking hard at  the fine-grain structure of the response sequences in the experiment.  An aspect of the work on mathematical learning fits well with the axiomatic ideal. One sets down conditions and from these  flow the legitimate operations. Our feeling was that what we were doing was very empirical and ad hoc-choosing the particular  operators and following them where they led, ordinarily from one set of experimental data or learning theory phenomenon to  another. Once we took a somewhat different tack and asked whether there were essential properties that learning operator for  probability models should have, and if so, what classes of operators would be admissible under these properties.  We came up with what we called the "combining classes" criterion: the probability vector should have the property that if some  classes of behavior were actually treated treated by the organism and by the system of reinforcements in the "same" way, then  it should not matter to the model whether these categories had their probabilities combined before applying the operators or  after combining them. The criterion asks that the operation of combining categories be commutative with the operation we call  the learning operator. We were initially pleased with this idea and after using up a great many paper napkins at the Midget  Restaurant developing it, we made some progress. It was easy to find that the learning operators we had been using had this  property. It was harder to settle what other models had the property. First L. J. Savage, and then later Gerald Thompson,  helped us with this work, and the latter finally proved in Bush, Mosteller, and Thompson (1954) that essentially there were no  probability models other than the linear operators we were using that had the requested property.  Far from pleasing us, this chilled us with the axiomatic approach. We realized that this had been an exercise that showed the  tremendous power of a seemingly small axiomatic request. We knew very well that we wanted to be able to use other models  174  OBITUARY  than those having the form of operators that ours had. We also knew that by insisting on being prepared to combine classes  making irrelevant distinctions, we were also imposing the form of operator on classes where the distinctions were relevant to  learning. Mathematics can be very sneaky that way.  The John and Mary R. Markle Foundation gave money to the Social Science Research Council (SSRC) for some interuniversity  summer research seminars in social science research. S. S. Wilks suggested that we apply for funds to run such an institute.  George A. Miller and I organized it, though he insisted that I be chairman. That summer of 1951 at Tufts University, Cletus J.  Burke, William Estes, George A. Miller, David Zeaman, Bush and I together with William McGill, Katherine Safford Harris, and  Jane E. Beggs worked on learning models. Someone talked about current research progress nearly every day for about an hour and  a half, but the rest of the time was spent on research. We lunched together at the faculty club, sometimes with Leonard C.  Mead who arranged for our quarters and sometimes with the psychologist, Leonard Carmichael, then president of Tufts. It was  the period when Bush and I made our greatest and fastest progress. Toward the close of that summer Bush and I decided to write  a book, but it is a long way from deciding to doing, in this case three years.  In addition to the mathematical material, the book treated experimental data on free-recall verbal learning, avoidance  training, imitation, T-maze experiments, three-choice experiments, and run-way experiments. The run-way experiments dealt with  running times and required special developments to adapt our discrete approach to continuous distributions. We had especially  to face the individual difference problem in a rather virulent form. The fine Weinstock data made this analysis especially  worthwhile for us. In writing the book we had help from a number of research assistants: Lotte Lazarsfeld Bailyn, Doris  Entwisle, David G. Hays, Solomon Weinstock, Joseph Weizenbaum, Thurlow R. Wilson, and Cleo Youtz.  Bush put together a model for what might be called insight or one-trial learning. When he presented it orally to a group of  psychologists, they complained that he already had a model, the linear operator model, and that one model was enough. This  attitude, although perhaps given partly in fun, distressed us both, and so we thought it would be instructive to try to  prepare a set of alternative models for one learning situation. We thought that it would be helpful to see what variety there  would be in mathematical models that attempted to describe various theories of learning. This work led to our paper on eight  models (Bush & Mosteller, 1959).  The data came from Solomon and Wynne's experiment on avoidance training of dogs. The dogs could avoid an intense electric  shock by jumping a barrier within 10 see after the occurrence of a conditioned stimulus. The data were the sequence of 25  shocks (S) or avoidances (A) made by the 30 dogs.  The models developed were: (1) the two-operator linear model, where p,, = probability of avoidance on trial n, q,, =  probability of shock on trial n:  ROBERT R. BUSH: 1920-1972 175  a2gn  qn+1  aign  if S occurred on trial n,  if A occurred on trial n;  (2) a Hullian model that gave pn+1 = p,2 + (1 - a)(1 - pn); (3) a Hullian model with dogs allowed to have individual  differences in their learning parameters; (4) an early Thurstone model where pn = (n - 1)/(n -}- 1 -}- b), and b is a  constant; (5) a late Thurstone model in which learning proceeded through an urn scheme leading to the probability of shock on  trial n as  qii = l /(1 + zc2 + jei), i + j = n - 1  where i is the number of shocks, j the number of avoidances so far; (6) a Markov model with constant transition probabilities,  the probability of S following S being taken as a, of A following A being taken as 1; (7) a Restle model based on the idea of  conditioning of cues, not explained here, led to  pn - 1 e (+ (1_ B1n op i  (8) a Kreshevsky or one-trial learning model, where the organism originally has probability p of avoiding on each trial, but  has probability fl of moving to a probability of 1 of avoiding. This model is a slightly specialized version of the model Bush  had presented to the psychologists. The more general version moved the subject from p top', where p' is not necessarily 1. The  paper encouraged others interested in particular psychological positions to consider improving by judicious complication the  models we had offered. The Restle and the two-operator models fit well and others failed in identifiable ways. Thus someone  wanting to improve on these models would know what difficulties he needed to correct.  We were especially pleased when at least minute we got in the mail the model from Frank Restle which we were able to add to  the list. One trouble with some of our models was that although they represented psychological positions honestly, we were not  always able to give the different models the same number of free parameters. This meant that a model like the one we had  developed with more free parameters could be fitted more closely than another with fewer because of the artifact of having  additional parameters. The matter is not quite this simple because some models may not have good use for an extra parameter  even if it is offered, and how it is inserted makes a difference. The idea of the paper was partly to show that there were  many models that could be brought to bear on a problem, and second that we could, by simulation, find out how models failed.  We were not especially interested in showing which model fit more closely.  The general problem of fitting models and deciding what to regard as the important statistics in circumstances where the  models are not exactly right encouraged a  176) OBITUARY  good deal of work on the statistical properties of the learning models. Bush and Saul H. Sternberg (1959) produced a very  attractive paper on the single operator linear model. If pn represents the probability of error on trial n and pn+i = apn , 0  < a < 1, then they found such results as  1  the expected errors in N trials: Pi IXN 1 - a  variance of total errors in N trials: 1 - aN 1 - a2N 2  Pi 1-a -P12  .2  the distribution, mean, and variance of the number of trials before the first success. They found the expected total number of  runs of errors in N trials, and of the number of error runs of length j in an infinite sequence. This leads to theorems about  autocorrelation of errors, and about trials to a criterion, for example, the mean number of trials until c or more successes.  Since previous theories of runs and trials to criteria had been largely limited to conditions with fixed probabilities, even  though this paper dealt with the simplest linear model, it was a nice opening gun in a series of such papers Bush and his  coworkers developed.  In "Sequential properties of linear models," Bush (1959) presents information about the statistics of runs for four different  simple learning models. He not only derived the formulas but also provided tables and approximations for sums required for  practical work.  "Tests of the `Beta Model',"' by Bush, Galanter, and Luce (1959) compares the fit of a beta model to that of an alpha model.  The "alpha model" is the set of linear models we have largely been describing and the beta model is one that uses a more  complicated function of the previous probabilities. For example,  pn if alternative i occurs. pn+1 __ pn -I-- 9Z(1 - pn)  This paper could be regarded as a supplement to the "eight models" paper in two directions; its adds a model and analyzes two  additional experiments.  Since R. Freed Bales had developed a large project on the study of small groups of people, studying interactions between  people was very popular in the Department of Social Relations. David G. Hays and Bush did an experiment on group action  closely related to Humphreys's original experiment. In the single subject experiment, the subject predicts one of two  alternatives El or E2 , and the corresponding events El or E2 (such as red or green light flashes) occur with fixed  probability (0.75 for El ,  1 Although the paper was written after Bush went to the University of Pennsylvania, I've included it in this series.  ROBERT R. BUSH: 1920-1972 177  0.25 for E,, in this experiment). Instead of a single subject making the prediction, Hays and Bush had groups of three predict.  Using the standard linear model approach, they developed two models, one the group-actor model, the other the voter model. In  the group-actor model, the occurrence of E2 on trial n reduces the probability pn+l of predicting El on the next trial to  pn+i = oPn (when E2 occurs on trial n)  with a similar reduction in the probability of predicting Ei when EZ occurs  qn+i = a4n (when El occurs on trial n).  Essentially the group is acting as a single individual.  In the voting model, each individual is regarded as obeying the same model as the group-actor model, but with a common value  of a, not identical with the one above. If two or more individuals vote for the event Ei , i = 1, 2, it is chosen.  The results of the experiment showed that in several respects both models fitted rather closely. All the same, the authors  thought they should develop a more general model allowing for the possibility of group support-once one person chooses Ei ,  this makes it more likely for the next person. To test the third model required something that had not been kept, data on  individuals. Since this was planned as the first of a sequence of investigations, the article (Hays & Bush, 1954) looks  hopefully into a future which, except for Hays's doctoral diseration, never developed.  When Gardner Lindzey decided to organize the Handbook of Social Psychology, with Gordon Allport's help, he pressed Bush and me  into writing a piece on quantitative techniques (Mosteller & Bush, 1954). 1 pulled the topics together and wrote a draft. Bush  saw the value of making the effort more systematic in two ways: (a) by providing an example of the application of each method;  and (b) by providing tables or approximations in order to use the methods. These additions make the difference between an  assembly of ideas and a practical article for the research worker, and they doubled the length of the article. Nevertheless  Bush was not comfortable with our usual Bush and Mosteller authorship and insisted that we reverse the order for this occasion.  I have asked John M. Roberts to write of his work with Bush on an article in anthropology (Roberts, Arth, & Bush, 1959). He  reports:  My collaboration with Dr. Robert R. Bush began when the Department of Social Relations, Harvard University assigned us to a  joint office in Emerson Hall. He had a number of books on game theory on his shelves, and we fell to talking about them and  about game theory. We developed the idea of conducting a cross-cultural study of games, naively thinking that the ethnographic  descriptions of games would support a fine-grained analysis of game play. We obtained a modest grant and hired Dr. Malcolm  Arth, who was then an undergraduate at Boston University, to travel to Yale to code the game materials in the old  Cross-Cultural Survey files. This he did until the money ran out. At first we  48o/i r/3-2  178 OBITUARY  were disappointed by the poor quality of the materials, but we three eventually published a joint paper based on the data.2  Bush contributed to the enterprise in a number of ways, but his most important contribution was the introduction of a  classification of games which was derived from one advanced by von Neuman whom he had known at Princeton. This classification  into games of physical skill, strategy, and chance has proved to be extraordinarily robust and has been used in a number of  subsequent cross-cultural studies. He also insisted on rigor in the coding, and this made possible the later study.  Bush had an active and stimulating imagination. I found him to be an exciting colleague and a fine collaborator. Those  conversations that we had in Emerson Hall gave me an interest which has influenced my entire professional career. I am very  glad that I knew him then and I am sorry that our contact terminated after I left Harvard.  It seems a fair inference that this positive experience with Bush and corresponding good experiences with some other applied  mathematicians and statisticians partly explains why Roberts, an anthropologist with no special quantitative or mathematical  training, has since then been a leader in encouraging mathematical and quantitative developments in anthropology. Thus through  his research efforts, Bush has influenced the administrative development of applications of mathematics in the social sciences.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  Preparation of this paper was facilitated by Grant GS 32327X1 from the National Science Foundation.  We appreciate help received from the following: Malcolm Arth, Lotte Bailyn, R. Freed Bales, Michael Brown, F. Robert Brush,  William C. Cochran, Bernard P. Cohen, Doris Entwisle, Harry W. Fulbright, Eugene Galanter, John P. Gilbert, David G. Hays,  Eleanor Isbell, Ada Katz, John G. Kemeny, Elijah Lovejoy, R. Duncan Luce, William G. Madow, George A. Miller, Emily Mitchell,  William S. Mosteller, John M. Roberts, David Shapiro, Elbridge Sibley, Richard L. Solomon, Saul Sternberg, Hugh Taylor, John  Whiting, Thurlow R. Wilson, and Donald R. Young.  2 Regarding this paper Malcolm Arth writes: "Typically of Bush, he insisted that this firstyear graduate student (Arth) take  second authorship with himself listed last, because Bush felt he had done the least amount of work on the paper."