10.1016/0022-2496(74)90022-4
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 11, 259-273 (1974)  The Measurement of Loudness Using Direct Comparisons of Sensory Intervals'  BRUCE SCHNEIDER,' SCOTT PARKER,3 AND DAVID STEIN  Department of Psychology, Columbia University, New York, New York 10027  Subjects were required in each trial to directly compare two pairs of tones and indicate which pair of tones had the greater  loudness difference. Ten 1200 Hz tones differing only in intensity were employed. Subjects made binary comparisons among the  45 tone pairs which can be formed from the set of ten tones. The subjects' binary comparisons of the tone pairs were found to  satisfy the transitivity and monotonicity requirements of a positive difference structure. These comparisons of loudness  intervals were used to construct a rank order of loudness difference. A loudness scale was constructed from a nonmetric  analysis of the rank order of loudness difference for the 45 tone pairs and indicated that loudness was a power function of  sound pressure with an exponent of 0.26.  Attempts to construct scales of sensory magnitude have employed a variety of methods. Most frequently employed have been the  direct estimation and crossmodality techniques developed by S. S. Stevens (cf., Stevens, 1958, 1966). For many continua, data  obtained using these methods indicate that sensory magnitude is a power function of stimulus intensity. Many investigators,  however, have been somewhat concerned about the validity of scales established via these direct estimation procedures. Their  concern has centered around the meaning and/or interpretation that can be attached to the numbers generated by subjects and  the meaning to be attached to the matching of magnitudes across continua. Krantz (1972) has considered in detail the kinds of  interpretations (theories) that have been used to account for the data collected via direct estimation procedures (primarily  magnitude estimation and cross-modality matching) and comes to the conclusion that, in these tasks, "the fundamental object  judged by an observer is not a single stimulus, but a pair of stimuli." What this means is that in a magnitude estimation  task, the subject is not  t We would like to thank Dr. Donald Hood and Dr. Norma Graham for their helpful comments on this manuscript. We would also  like to thank Dr. Eugene Galanter for making available to us the facilities of the Psychophysics Laboratory. This research was  supported by NSF Grant No. GB 36211.  a Now at the Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario.  3 Now at the Department of Psychology, The American University, Washington, D.C.  Copyright 1974 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  259  260 SCHNEIDER, PARKER AND STEIN  judging the magnitude of a stimulus but rather the relation of one stimulus to another, in particular, the "sensation ratio."  Furthermore, in a cross-modality experiment, Krantz argues that subjects are matching "sensation ratios" rather than matching  the sensory magnitudes themselves. If, indeed, subjects judge or report relations even when asked to judge single magnitudes,  experiments in which pairs of stimuli are explicitly presented to the observer, and therefore known to the experimenter,  should be employed for the construction of sensory scales. In this way the physical values of the two stimuli entering into  the relation being judged are known to the experimenter.  In addition to the problem of what is being judged in a magnitude estimation experiment ("sensory magnitudes" or "sensory  ratios") there is also the problem of the meaning to be attached to the numbers produced by the subject. Do these numbers have  ratio scale, interval scale, or only ordinal scale properties ? Presumably our confidence in the validity of sensory scales  will depend, to some extent, on the kind of assumptions we make concerning the subject's judgments. Thus, there are two  difficulties with direct estimation techniques. The first concerns what is being judged ("sensory magnitudes" or "sensory  ratios"), and the second concerns the scale properties of the numbers generated by the subject (ratio, interval, ordinal).  These difficulties can be met in part by experiments in which the subject judges stimulus pairs and in which only the ordinal  properties of a subject's judgments are used for scale construction. It is clear that nonmetric techniques which require  relatively weak (ordinal) assumptions are preferred (when they can be employed) to metric techniques which require that a  subject's judgments have interval and/or ratio-like properties. Experiments which use nonmetric techniques to analyze  judgments of differences have been performed by Parker and Schneider (1974) and Rule, Curtis, and Markley (1970). In one  experiment, Parker and Schneider had subjects give magnitude estimates of loudness differences for tonal pairs. The ten tones  used to construct the 45 pairs used in that experiment were identical in frequency and ranged in intensity from 50 to 104 dB.  These magnitude estimates of loudness difference were regarded as analogous to estimates of distance along a line segment.  Shepard (1966) has shown that provided the number of stimuli is > 10, the rank order of interpoint distances can be used to  determine projection values along the line segment which are for all practical purposes unique up to affine transformations.  The rank order of loudness difference judgments was used to determine projections along a line segment for the ten tones.  These projection values presumably represent an interval scale of tonal loudness. Parker and Schneider showed that when these  interval scale values were suitably adjusted by an additive constant that loudness was a power function of sound pressure with  an exponent of approximately 0.26. In addition, they found the same power function representation for magnitude estimates of  loudness similarity (assuming that the complement of similarity judgments is monotonic with interpoint distance). This  indicates that the identical structure underlies at least two ways of ordering tonal pairs differing only in intensity. Rule  et al. (1970) showed that  DIRECT COMPARISONS OF SENSORY INTERVALS 261  a power function representation of the stimuli also accounted for the rank order of magnitude estimates of circle size  difference and difference in lifted weights. However, using the technique of magnitude estimation to order judgments of  sensory "difference" or "similarity" also invites questions concerning the proper interpretation of the numbers assigned by  subjects to represent, for example, loudness differences. In order to obtain a rank order of loudness differences from  numerical judgments, one must assume that the subject, given any two pairs of stimuli, will always assign a larger number to  the pair having the greater loudness difference. Only in this fashion can one argue that the numerical assignments represent  an ordering of loudness difference. This assumption would be unnecessary if we could show that the same rank ordering could be  obtained without requiring that the subject produce numbers. Such a procedure might have another benefit; namely, any  variability inherent in the number-generating process might be eliminated, allowing a more exact determination of the  sensation scale.  The most direct way to obtain a rank ordering of tonal pairs is to have subjects directly compare pairs of tones and indicate  which pair of tones has the greater loudness difference. This, of course, requires only a binary decision on the part of the  subject, i.e., either the tones in pair A or in pair B are judged to be more widely separated in loudness. If ten tones are  employed, 45 distinct pairs can be formed from them. If every such pair of tones is compared to every other pair, there are  990 comparisons among pairs of tones. Fortunately, three reasonable assumptions allow us to reduce the numbers of comparisons  that are required to a more manageable 540. First, tones which are identical in frequency and differ only in intensity vary  along only a single psychological continuum, namely, loudness. We assume therefore that single tones are weakly ordered  (transitive and connected). Second, we assume that the rank order of loudnesses for these tones is a strictly monotonic  function of sound intensity. This allows us to order the tones from loudest to softest. Third, we assume that any pair of  tones whose intensities are bracketed on either side by another pair of tones will be judged to have a smaller loudness  difference than the tones which bracket this pair.4 For example, consider a comparison between a 50-75 dB interval and an  interval of 50-73 dB. If the tones vary along a single psychological dimension, and if their loudnesses are monotonic with  intensity, then the 50-75 dB interval will have a greater loudness difference than the 50-73 dB interval. Therefore, it will  not be necessary to compare pairs of tones if the intensity interval of one pair is "nested" within the intensity interval of  another pair.  These considerations, then, lead to a partial ordering of pairs of tones along the loudness difference dimension. This  ordering is shown in Fig. 1. Since tones 1 and 10 are the softest and loudest tones in the set, their loudness difference is  larger than the  ' Our first and third assumptions are equivalent to Fagot's (1959) empirical consequences 1 and 2. Our second assumption is  needed to determine the rank order of the loudnesses of tones.  262 SCHNEIDER, PARKER AND STEIN  loudness difference of any of the other 44 pairs. In Fig. 1, whenever one pair is nested within another, they are connected by  lines. If we follow all possible descending paths in this illustration from tones 1 and 9 we will find all the pairs whose  loudness difference is nested within the loudness difference of the pair in question. Therefore tonal pair (1, 9) does not  have to be compared with its nested pairs. However, (1, 9) is not ordered with respect to tonal pairs (2, 10), (3, 10),...,  (9, 10). Therefore (1, 9) must be compared with these eight pairs. Eliminating all the nested comparisons leaves us with 540  comparisons among tonal pairs (Fagot, 1959, pp. 165-166). In the present experiment, subjects judged which pair of tones had  the greater loudness difference for each of the 540 comparisons. In this way a rank ordering of the tonal pairs was obtained  and used to determine an interval scale of loudness for the ten tones in question.  (1,e)  (1.7)  -(1,61  ,( 1.5)  '(1,4),  ,U,3}  (1,2)  (3,10)  (4,10)  (5,10)  (6,10)  (7,10)  f 8,10) (8,9) (9,10)  FIG. 1. A partial ordering of loudness intervals. When the intensities of one pair of tones bracket the intensities of another  pair the loudness interval of the first pair is assumed to be greater than the loudness interval of the second pair.  The use of a pair comparison design also permits a test of two critical axioms out of a set of axioms which, if satisfied,  justify the construction of an interval scale of loudness from the rank order of tonal pairs. Krantz, et al., (1971) have  shown that if judgments of pairs satisfy the axioms of a positive difference structure, then interval scale measurement of the  underlying sensory dimension is possible. To show that loudness difference judgments satisfy these axioms we adopt the  following convention: namely, that the designation for a tonal pair whose elements are x and y is (x, y) if and only if the  intensity of x is strictly less than the intensity of y. This convention allows us to represent loudness difference as a  positive interval or difference and is sensible given the assumption that loudness is weakly ordered and monotonic with  intensity.  In the theory of positive difference structures there are six axioms involving binary  DIRECT COMPARISONS OF SENSORY INTERVALS  263  judgments on pairs which, if satisfied, lead to an interval scale representation. Of these only two can be empirically tested  in any meaningful fashion.' The first states that the pairs are weakly ordered, and therefore the ordering is transitive, i.e.,  (r, s) > (t, u) and (t, u) > (x, y) implies (r, s) ~ (x, y).  In the present experiment we tested pairwise transitivity to assess the extent to which the data satisfied axiom 1. The  second, and more critical axiom which we also tested is the so-called monotonicity axiom. This axiom states that if  (a, b) > (x, y) and (b, c) > (y, z) then (a, c) ~: (x, z). (2)  This axiom is illustrated in Fig. 2. It says that pairs behave qualitatively like differences with respect to the ordering >.  In the present experiment we also tested the extent to which the data satisfied the monotonicity condition.  r-__1 r-1 (a,b) 2(x,y)  a b c x y z   AND  7_1 n   a b c x y z (b,c) ) (y,z)  .-.      n   a b e x y z (a, c) ) (x,z)  FIG. 2. An illustration of the monotonicity axiom for points on a line.  METHOD  Subjects. The three authors plus five other persons associated with the Psychology Department at Columbia University served as  subjects in this experiment. The five additional subjects were graduate or undergraduate students and were paid for their  cooperation. All subjects reported having normal hearing.  5 Of the remaining four axioms, one is an Archimedean condition, one is a solvability condition, and both are almost surely  true in a psychophysical situation. The other two axioms for a set of tones A and a subset A* of A x A are:  I. If (a, b), (b, c) e A* then (a, c) e A*  II. I(a, b), (b, c) e A * then (a, c) } (a, b), (b, c)  The first of these is a simple existence axiom and the second we argued previously is almost certainly true of loudness  difference judgments.  264 SCHNEIDER, PARKER AND STEIN  Apparatus. The subject presented himself with one of the two pairs of tones to be compared by pressing button 1. Pressing  button 2 resulted in the presentation of the second pair. The tones in a pair were 750 msec in duration and separated by a  "dead" period of 900 msec. These events were programmed in the following way.  A pure tone (1200 Hz) was generated by a Hewlett-Packard oscillator (Model 200 AB). The output of the oscillator was gated by  a Grason-Stadler Electronic Switch (Model 829D) with a rise and decay time of 10 msec to dampen transients. If the subject  pressed button 1, the output of the Electronic Switch was gated in sequence through attenuators 1 and 2. The time course of  events following closure of button 1 by the subject is illustrated in Fig. 3. When button 1 was pressed, an Iconix timer  (Model 6255) began timing the first of six intervals. At the same time the output of the Electronic Switch was connected to  attenuator 1, and the output of attenuator 1 connected to the earphones, both via relay closure. At the end of the first  timing interval (300 msec) the Electronic Switch was turned on and remained on for the duration of interval two (750 msec).  Consequently a 750-msec tone was presented to the subject with the intensity determined by the dial setting of attenuator 1.  At the beginning of  ATTENUATOR 2 DISCONNECTED CONNECTED  TO EARPHONE    SWITCH TO DISCONNECTED I CONNECTED  ATTENUATOR 2    ATTENUATOR I J CONNECTED DISCONNECTED  TO EARPHONE    SWITCH TO CONNECTED DISCONNECTED  ATTENUATOR I  L_  ELECTRONIC SWITCH  ON OFF ON  BUTTON I  TIME  FIG. 3. The sequence of events which occurred following depression of button l. Each unit on the time scale represents 500  msec.  the third time period the Electronic Switch was turned off. At the end of the third time period (450 msec) the output of the  Electronic Switch was routed to attenuator 2. At the same time the output of attenuator 2 was connected to the earphone. Note  that the switching of the output of the Electronic Switch and the input to the earphones occurred at a time when no signal was  being presented. At the end of the fourth time period (450 msec) the Electronic Switch was again activated for a fifth time  period of 750 msec. The Electronic Switch was turned off again at the beginning of the sixth time period (300 msec). At the  end of that period the output of the Electronic Switch was disconnected from attenuator 2 and the output of attenuator 2 was  disconnected  DIRECT COMPARISONS OF SENSORY INTERVALS 265  from the earphones. As far as the subject was concerned pressing button 1 resulted in presentation of two 750-msec tones  differing in intensity separated by a "dead" period of 900 msec. If button 2 was pressed, the output of the Electronic Switch  was gated to attenuators 3 and 4, respectively, to produce two different tones. The subject was allowed to present himself  with either pair any number of times he wished in order to arrive at a judgment as to which pair had the greater loudness  difference.  At the beginning of a trial the Experimenter set up the four intensities of the tones via attenuators 1-4. Signal frequency  and voltage were monitored with a Dymec Electronic Counter, Model Dy-2501, and a calibrated Ballantine VTVM. Oscillographic  examination of signal waveform for each test tone revealed no apparent distortion or clipping. Voltage levels were converted  to sound pressure via earphone calibrations performed by the National Bureau of Standards in Washington, D.C., with an NBS 9-A  coupler. Listening was monaural (right ear) throughout the entire experiment. The experimenter and subject communicated via an  intercom.  Procedure. The subject, who was seated in an IAC sound resistant booth (Model 300), was required to report which of two pairs  of tones had the greater loudness difference. During the course of eight sessions, he was presented once with each of 540  comparisons among 45 pairs of tones which were constructed from the following set of 1200 Hz tones: 50, 56, 60, 68, 72, 80,  86, 94, 98, and 104 dB. These 540 comparisons were those which were required to turn the partial rank ordering of Fig. 1 into  a complete rank order. Prior to these eight test sessions, he was given a practice session containing 70 comparisons. The  subject made 70 comparisons per session for the first seven of the eight test sessions. In the last session he, of course, had  to make only 50 comparisons. Sessions generally lasted 45-70 min with a 10 min break halfway through the session.  The 540 comparison pairs were presented in a different random order for each of the eight subjects. The four tones presented  in each comparison of pairs occurred in eight different arrangements. Within a pair there were two orders which could occur:  (1) a, b, or (2) b, a. Since two pairs were involved this meant that there were four possible orderings: (1) a, b : x, y; (2)  b, a : x, y; (3) a, b : y, x; and (4) b, a : y, x. Since a pair of tones could occur on either button 1 or 2 this allowed for  eight arrangements. These eight arrangements for a comparison of pairs were randomly assigned across the eight subjects to  counterbalance for order effects.  RESULTS  The raw data for this experiment consist of the number of observers who judged one pair of tones to have a greater loudness  difference than another for each of the 540 comparisons. If tonal pair (r, s) was judged by four or more of the eight  266 SCHNEIDER, PARKER AND STEIN  have a greater loudness difference than tonal pair (t, u) then we write (r, s) > (t, u), and if five or more judge (r, s)  greater than (t, u) we write (r, s) } (t, u). A check of the data revealed that there were five independent violations of weak  transitivity, i.e., there were five independent occasions on which the triplets, (r, s) } (t, u), (t, u) y (x, y), and (x, y)  } (r, s), occurred. Given such a small number of violations we conclude that the relation > is a weak ordering.  To test the monotonicity requirement we examined all possible cases where violations of monotonicity could occur.' There were  2520 instances in all. Of these, 1889 cases constituted tests of the monotonicity requirement, i.e., there were 1889 cases  (a, b) > (x, y) and (b, c) > (y, z). (3)  In 30 of these cases the monotonicity requirement failed, i.e., there were 30 instances in which  (a, b) y (x, y) and (b, c) > (y, z) but (x, z) } (a, c)  or  (a, b) ~ (x, y) and (b, c) } (y, z) but (x, z) } (a, c).  These 30 cases represent 1.6 % of the instances where the pairs (a, b), (x, y), (b, c), and (y, z) satisfied condition 3.  Furthermore, 20 of the 30 violations were borderline cases in the sense that either (a, b) (x, y) or (b, c) ,. (y, z), where  means that exactly four out of the eight subjects judged one pair greater than the other. Hence we can safely conclude that  judgments of loudness difference satisfy both weak transitivity and monotonicity. Given that these two requirements were  satisfied, an interval scale of loudness for the ten stimuli was constructed.  s The total number of cases excludes those pairs in which (a, c) is "nested" in (x, z) or vice versa. The reason for the  exclusion is that "nested" pairs were not compared by the subject but instead it was assumed that if (a, c) is nested in (x,  z) then (x, z) >- (a, c). It can be shown that, with this assumption for nested intervals, the monotonicity requirement cannot  fail for such intervals. The testable cases (excluding those which contain nested pairs) are specified by the inequalities  1 <a<b<c<x<y<z<N, or  1 <a<b<x<{'}<z<N, or (5) 1 <a <x <b <{1} <z <N,  where {,'} means that either order or a tie is permissible. It can be shown that the total number of testable cases specified  by the above inequalities (5) is  4 IN 6 1) + (N 5 1) + ('6).  DIRECT COMPARISONS OF SENSORY INTERVALS 26)7  To construct the loudness scale it was first necessary to rank order the 45 tone pairs. Ranks were assigned to tone pairs in  such a way that whenever  (r, s) ? (t, u) and (t, u) ~ (x, y) then N(r, s) > N(t, u) > N(x, y), (4)  where N stands for a numerical assignment. There were five instances in which it was impossible to maintain this assignment  procedure. These instances were associated with five violations of weak transitivity which were observed among these 540  comparisons, i.e., there were five occasions on which the triplets, (r, s) > (t, u), (t, u) } (x, y), and (x, y) } (r, s),  occurred. For these triplets involving violation of transitivity, it is possible to order the triplets in three different  ways. They are:  (1) N(r, s) > N(t, u) > N(x, y);  (2) N(t, u) > N(x, y) > N(r, s); and  (3) N(x, y) > N(r, s) > N(t, u).  Rank orders were constructed for each of these resolutions of each of the five violations of transitivity. However, for two of  the violations of transitivity, two of the three possible rank orderings would have created additional violations of the  numerical assignment principle. They were therefore not considered in the construction of all possible rank orderings which  would satisfy the numerical assignment principle. In addition, on some occasions it was not possible to determine whether pair  (r, s) should be assigned a higher rank than (t, u); i.e., either way of assigning the ranks had no effect on condition 4. In  this case they were assigned the same rank. There were three such instances.  This assignment procedure produced 27 distinct ways of ranking the 45 pairs. The 27 distinct assignments (3 X 3 x 3) resulted  from the three intransitivities for which there were three ways each of resolving the violations of transitivity. Since there  were no criteria on which to select one of the rank orderings as "better" or more "representative," one-dimensional spatial  solutions were obtained for each of the 27 rank orders. Hence, each rank order was used as an input to a nonmetric scaling  program (Carvellas & Schneider, 1972). This program produces numerical assignments (projection values on a line segment) for  each of ten tones such that the difference in numerical assignments between any two tones best predicts the rank order of the  45 pairs used as input for the program. Furthermore, these projection values are unique up to an affine transformation, i.e.,  these values constitute interval scale measurement.  Stress, Kruskal's (1964) measure of goodness of fit, was computed for each of the 27 sets of projection values obtained from  the nonmetric scaling program. Stress measures the discordance between the predicted distances, d's, and a set of distances,  d, that  268 SCHNEIDER, PARKER AND STEIN  are (1) monotonically related to the rank ordering of pairs that served as input to the program, and (2) are as much like the  d's as they can be within the restrictions imposed by (1). Stress is given by  I/2  [~ (dis - dzi)2/y d2~  often expressed as a percentage. Notice that perfect ordinal agreement produces d = d and, in this case, stress = 0.0. The  stress values for the 27 sets of projections ranged from 0.78 to 1.39 %, with an average stress of 1.08 %. Kruskal (1964)  states that stress values of 2.5 /o or less indicate "excellent" agreement between the d's and J's.  The index of metric determinancy (M), which was originally developed by Shepard, was estimated from Young's (1970) nomogram. M  is the squared Pearson correlation coefficient between the true distances (whose rank-ordering serves as the input to the  algorithm) and the d's produced by the algorithm. Hence, M varies between 0 and 1, and M = 1 means that the true distances  have been perfectly reconstructed. In no empirical investigation using these techniques are the true distances known, but  Young provides a nomogram for estimating M from the number of points, number of dimensions, and stress-all of which are  available. The result is that in nonmetric scaling analysis if M is sufficiently high (above 0.98, say) the point coordinates  produced by the algorithm are properly regarded as an interval scale representation of the original points. In this experiment  M was conservatively estimated as being above 0.99 in all cases. Hence, the projection values may be taken as an interval  scale representation of tone loudness.  Visual inspection of the 27 sets of projection values indicated that they were virtually identical. This is what we would  expect if the five violations of transitivity which forced us to construct 27 different rank orderings resulted from random  error in the judgment process. Correlation coefficients for all pairwise comparisons among the 27 sets of projection values  confirmed the visual impression. All of the 351 correlation coefficients, rounded off to four decimal places, were 0.9999 or  greater.  Since all solutions were essentially identical, the average projection value for a tone was taken as its loudness value. Since  the projection values, P, provide interval scale representation for loudness, L = aP -}- b where L is loudness, P is the  projection value (from the nonmetric scaling program), a and b are constants. If loudness is described by Stevens' law (L =  kIn) then aP + b = kin. Equivalently, P -i- (b/a) = (k/a) In, or P + b' = k7 n, where b' and k' are unknown. Taking logs of  both sides of the equation, Stevens' law describes the present data if there is a b' such that log(P + b') = n log(I) -{- log  k', i.e., if for some b', log(P -{- b') is linear with stimulus intensity in dB. A value of b' was determined which maximized  the squared correlation coefficient (r2) between log(P -F b') and dB. The projection values, adjusted by the value of b' which  maximized r2 are called the adjusted loudness values.  DIRECT COMPARISONS OF SENSORY INTERVALS 269  Figure 4 plots the adjusted loudness values against decibels of sound pressure. The straight line drawn through the points was  determined by the method of least squares and provides a good fit to the data (r2 = 0.990). However, despite the close fit,  the points do appear to deviate systematically from the line. In these coordinates, the points appear to be a negatively  accelerated function of sound intensity up to about 78 dB and have a slight positive acceleration thereafter. However, to a  first approximation, they are well fit by a straight line in these coordinates. The best estimate of the exponent of the power  function from these data is 0.26, i.e., loudness grows as approximately the 0.26 power of sound pressure.  w 20  J Q  (n W  W 10 Z  O J  O W  h 5 V7  Q  I I I I I I  50 60 70 60 90 100 SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL IN dB  FIG. 4. Adjusted loudness values (see text) as a function of decibels of sound pressure.  Since there was only one judgment per stimulus pair per subject, individual loudness functions could not be reliably  determined. Thus, it is possible that individual subjects' loudness functions varied considerably. To check if there were any  gross differences among subjects the following procedure was employed. First, the projection values, obtained from the  nonmetric analysis were used to predict the 540 binary comparisons, i.e., the difference in projection values for the tones in  pair A was compared to the difference in projection values for the tones in pair B, and the larger arithmetic difference was  used to predict which loudness interval a subject should have judged as greater. Second, the actual binary judgments of the  eight subjects were compared with the predicted binary judgments. The subjects' judgments agreed with the predicted judgments  85 % of the time. Furthermore, the degree of agreement was approximately constant across subjects (82, 82, 83, 85, 86, 87, 87,  and 88 %). If one or two subjects had a radically different loudness function from the others', then they should have agreed  less frequently with the predicted judgments than the other subjects did. The fact that the degree of agreement was high and  uniform across subjects indicates that the loudness functions of individual subjects are probably not too dissimilar. However,  270 SCHNEIDER, PARKER AND STEIN  given the weakness of this test, the form and magnitude of any deviations from the mean representation cannot be determined  from these data.  DISCUSSION  The results indicate that judgments of loudness difference satisfy both transitivity and monotonicity : two conditions which  must be satisfied if interval scale measurement is to be achieved. If we assume that binary comparisons of loudness intervals  are based on loudness differences, then the projections obtained from the nonmetric scaling program represent interval scale  measurement of loudness. Furthermore, the loudness scale obtained in this experiment, after suitable adjustment by a constant,  was shown to be a power function of sound pressure with an exponent of 0.26. The recovery of the power function with this  exponent is in agreement with the earlier study by Parker and Schneider (1974), where they had subjects give numerical  estimates of loudness difference and loudness similarity for pairs and used the rank order of these estimates to determine a  loudness scale.  The fact that these three procedures (magnitude estimation of loudness difference, loudness similarity, and the pair-wise  comparison of the present experiment) converge on the same perceptual structure (a power function with a 0.26 exponent)  indicates that the rank orders were essentially identical across procedures. Any deviation in the rank orders from one  procedure to another had very little effect on the projection values determined from these rank orders (the same intensities  were used in all three cases). Consequently, differences in the ranks can be assumed to be largely due to random error in the  judgment process rather than to systematic differences associated with procedural differences. This validates the assumption  made in the earlier experiment, that, when estimating the loudness difference of any two pairs of stimuli, subjects will  assign a larger number to the pair having the greater loudness difference. This assumption is equivalent to one which must be  satisfied in order to develop a relational theory of magnitude estimation (Krantz, 1972). Its power lies in the fact that it  permits the determination of a rank order for a relation defined on pairs without resorting to the pair comparison method. The  present results indicate that the assumption is probably justified.  The loudness function obtained in this experiment also has noticeable curvilinearity in log-log coordinates. The adjusted  loudness values are a negatively accelerated function of sound pressure up to about 78 dB and have a slight positive  acceleration thereafter. This form of second order deviation from a power function has also been noted by other investigators  (Stevens, 1955, 1957; Hellman & Zwislocki, 1961; Robinson, 1957; Green & Luce, 1974). It is, however, slightly more  accentuated in the present study. Possibly, the greater accentuation in relation to studies using numerical estimation  techniques is due to certain biases in the way in which subjects use numbers.  DIRECT COMPARISONS OF SENSORY INTERVALS 271  If the form of the loudness function was like that shown in Fig. 4, subjects who are assigning numbers to represent sensation  "magnitudes" or sensation "ratios" might be reluctant to use extremely large or extremely small numbers. Consequently, soft  tones would be overestimated and loud ones underestimated. This would result in a function which is more linear in log-log  coordinates.  The major difference between the present study and more traditional results concerning the form of the loudness function is  the value of the exponent. Most studies employing ratio estimation techniques find the value of the exponent (as a function of  sound pressure) for monaural listening to be about 0.54 (Reynolds & Stevens, 1960). In the present study, as well as in the  Parker and Schneider results, the exponent was approximately one-half as large (0.26). It is possible that the exponent  obtained in this experiment and the Parker and Schneider experiment resulted from the large range of stimuli employed in the  two experiments. Range effects and other factors which affect the value of the exponent in magnitude estimation experiments  have been discussed by Poulton (1968) and Teghtsoonian (1973) and might apply to the present results. However it seems  unlikely that a change in stimulus parameters could result in a doubling of the exponent. Hence we are left with an apparent  disagreement concerning the value of the exponent for loudness.  Stevens (1971) has argued, however, that this disagreement concerning the value of the exponent is to be expected given that  the 0.26 exponent is based on difference judgments whereas the 0.54 exponent is presumably based on ratio judgments. According  to Stevens, subjects are unable to judge equal intervals at different locations on a prothetic continuum. When they attempt to  do so, a constant difference seems larger toward the lower as compared to the higher end of the continuum. This assymetrical  distortion, Stevens argues, lowers the estimate of the exponent. Note that this model of the judgmental process would indicate  that binary comparisons of loudness intervals were based on a systematic distortion of loudness intervals. In the present  analysis, we have assumed that these binary comparisons reflect loudness differences per se. However, independent of which  interpretation is ultimately preferred, it is clear that a 0.26 power function representation of loudness is appropriate for  judgments of loudness difference, judgments of loudness similarity, and binary comparisons among loudness intervals.  It is also possible that this apparent disagreement in exponents is illusory in the sense that most theories of magnitude  estimation and cross-modality matching concede that the values of the exponents obtained in these experiments are unique only  up to multiplication by a constant. For example, Krantz (1972) has pointed out that the axioms of both mapping and relational  theories of magnitude estimation show that the representing function (f i) for sensory continuum i, is unique only up to a  power transformation, i.e., if fi is a valid representation for sensory continuum i then all other valid representations (gi)  take the form gi = afiB. Let us suppose that for monaural listening, fi = ai(Ia4) where Ii = sound pressure. Then an equally  valid  272 SCHNEIDER, PARKER AND STEIN  representation of sensory magnitude is given by gi = f'-5 = [(ai)(I")]0.5 = (ai')(I24) where ai' = a5. The results  obtained in the present experiment are consistent with Krantz's exposition of theories of magnitude estimation and  cross-modality matching since there is a power transformation which can be applied to the results of magnitude estimation  experiments to yield the representation for loudness obtained in the present experiment and in the earlier study by Parker and  Schneider.  The present results represent a convergence on a common representational form for loudness (power function) for two different  kinds of judgments: ratio judgments (where the subject estimates or matches sensory ratios), and difference judgments (where  the subject estimates sensory differences). Furthermore, since the representation for the difference judgments is unique up to  multiplication and addition of a constant, the value of the exponent of the power function obtained from difference judgments  is uniquely determined. Thus, when only the rank order properties of loudness difference judgments are used, the  representation is consistent with that obtained in magnitude estimation experiments, and points to a power law representation  for the growth of loudness with an exponent (as a function of sound pressure) equal to 0.26.  REFERENCES  CARVELLAS, T., AND SCHNEIDER, B. Direct estimation of multidimensional tonal dissimilarity. Journal of the Acoustical Society  of America, 1972, 51, 1839-1848.  FAGOT, R. F. A model of ordered metric scaling by comparison of intervals. Psychometrika, 1959, 24, 157-168.  GREEN, D. M., AND LUCE, R. D. Variability of magnitude estimates: A timing theory analysis. Perception and Psychophysics,  1974, 15, 291-300.  HELLMAN, R. P., AND ZWISLOCKI, J. Some factors affecting the estimation of loudness. Journal of the Acoustical Society of  America, 1961, 33, 687-694.  KRANTZ, D. H. A theory of magnitude estimation and cross-modality matching. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1972, 9,  168-199.  KRANTZ, D. H., LUCE, R. D., SUPPES, P., AND TVERSKY, A. Foundations of measurement. Vol. I. Additive and polynomial  representations. New York: Academic Press, 1971.  KRUSKAL, J. B. Multidimensional scaling by optimizing goodness of fit to a non-metric hypothesis. Psychometrika, 1964, 29,  1-27.  PARKER, S., AND SCHNEIDER, B. Non-metric scaling of loudness and pitch using similarity and difference estimates. Perception  and Psychophysics, 1974, 15, 238-242.  POULTON, E. C. The new psychophysics: Six models for magnitude estimation. Psychological Bulletin, 1968, 69,1-19.  REYNOLDS, G. S., AND STEVENS, S. S. Binaural summation of loudness. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 1960, 32,  1337-1344.  ROBINSON, D. W. The subjective loudness scale. Acustica, 1957, 7, 217-233.  RULE, S. J., CURTIS, D. W., AND MARKLEY, R. P. Input and output transformations from magnitude estimation. Journal of  Experimental Psychology, 1970, 86, 343-349.  SHEPARD, R. N. Metric structures in ordinal data. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1966, 3, 287-315.  DIRECT COMPARISONS OF SENSORY INTERVALS 273  STEVENS, S. S. The measurement of loudness. Journal of the Acooustical Society of America, 1955, 27, 815-829.  STEVENS, S. S. Concerning the form of the loudness function. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 1957, 29, 603-606.  STEVENS, S. S. Problems and methods of psychophysics. Psychological Bulletin, 1958, 54,177-196. STEVENS, S. S. Matching  functions between loudness and ten other continua. Perception and Psychophysics, 1966, 1, 5-8.  STEVENS, S. S. Issues in psychophysical measurement. Psychological Review, 1971, 78, 426-450. TEGHTSOONIAN, R. Range effects  in psychophysical scaling and a revision of Stevens' law. American Journal of Psychology, 1973, 86, 3-27.  YOUNG, F. W. Nonmetric multidimensional scaling: Recovery of metric information. Psychometrika, 1970, 35, 455-473.  RECEIVED: January 22, 1974  480/11/3-8