10.1016/0022-2496(74)90025-x
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 11, 328-333 (1974)  Note on Guessing Probabilities  WILLIAM BOGARTZ  Department of Psychology, University of Northern Iowa, Cedar Falls, Iowa 50613  A hypothesis of stationary response probabilities (SRP), or that subjects equate the unconditional probability of each  response to its frequency of occurrence in the task, is shown to be equivalent to the proposal of Atkinson et al. (1965) that  guessing may occur only among unlearned responses. This hypothesis is contrasted with the usual assumption of stationary  guessing probabilities (SGP). It is shown that assuming SGP when SRP is true results in a biased estimate of learning which  first increases and then decreases with the actual degree of learning, and is a decreasing function of list length. This can  lead to improper inferences, including erroneous rejection of an all-or-none model and spurious evidence of increasing  difficulty in long lists.  No one denies that subjects occasionally respond correctly in the absence of learning. Nevertheless, the problem of guessed  responses is often ignored by researchers, who fail to realize that by so doing they are generating a significant source of  discrepancy between learning theory and performance characteristics. In other cases, guessing is taken into consideration, but  it is almost invariably assumed that the probabilities involved remain stationary, regardless of the state of the learner. One  notable exception to this rule was the alternative proposed by Atkinson et al. (1965, p. 119), namely that human subjects  might guess only among responses which have not as yet become associated with their respective stimuli, thereby making the  guessing behavior a function of what has been learned at a given time.  The main purpose of this note is to explore the implications of an assumption of stationary guessing on the part of the  theoretician when in fact subjects are restricting their guesses to the set of unlearned responses. It will be shown that  under such conditions the degree of learning will be appreciably overestimated, and that the magnitude of the discrepancy is a  function of both the actual degree of learning and the amount of material being learned. One direct consequence of this  relationship is that a stationary rate of learning would appear not to be so. Another is that spurious support would be  provided for the inference that learning is more difficult when the task is long.  The discussion will be confined to the class of learning, recognition, or concept identification tasks whose structure can be  characterized as a mapping of RM stimuli onto R responses, with each response assigned to M stimuli. Experiments with human  Copyright C 1974 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  328  NOTE ON GUESSING PROBABILITIES 329  subjects are often designed in this fashion so that the responses constitute a well defined set composed of digits, letters,  buttons to be pressed, or the like, in order to minimize questions of response learning. It is nearly always assumed in such  cases that the conditional probability of a correct response by guessing remains constant and equal to 1 /R. This assumption  of stationary guessing probabilities (SGP) is a hypothesis about guessing behavior which states, in effect, that guesses are  distributed equally over all possible responses, independently of what may have been learned at a given time.  The remarks which follow will investigate the alternative assumption that it is the unconditional probability of each response  which remains stationary. It will first be shown that this hypothesis of stationary response probabilities (SRP) implies that  guesses will be distributed over the set of responses which are not associated with their stimuli at the time of the guess, in  such a way that the guessing probability of each response is equal to its relative frequency in that set. Explicit expressions  will then be derived for the expected number of correct guesses, the expected proportion of correct responses (mean  performance function), and the conditional probability of a correct guess, and these expressions will be compared with their  counterparts under SGP.  For concreteness, the problem will be formulated in the language of all-or-none learning, although the range of applicability  of the results is considerably broader than that might suggest. It is assumed first, as indicated above, that there are RM  stimuli in a list, with each of R responses assigned to M stimuli. Now define  n6 the number of stimuli in the ith response class which are in the unconditioned  N P q  state,  the sum of the ni ,  the probability that any given stimulus is in the conditioned state, the probability that any given stimulus is in the  unconditioned state.  The above quantities are defined relative to a particular time. It is further assumed that the stimuli are independent, so  that the distribution of each of the ni is binomial (M, q) at the time in question. Note that while the value of q is  relevant, the way in which it came to have that value is not. In that sense, the analysis which follows is  process-independent. The term "conditioned state," in the present context, denotes the class of states in which a stimulus  will elicit its correct response. A stimulus not in the conditioned state is assumed to be the occasion for a guess. Now let  P9,n(Ri) probability of Ri as a guessed response, given a particular set of values for the ni ,  Pva(Ri) overall probability of Ri as a response, given the ni.  The assumption of stationary response probabilities (SRP) may now be stated explicitly as  P.(Ri) = 1 /R  330 WILLIAM BOGARTZ  But the overall conditional probability of Ri may be expressed as the sum of the probabilities of two disjoint events, i.e.,  occurrences of Ri in response to stimuli to which it is conditioned and occurrences of Ri as a guessed response. That is,  P.(Ri) = (M - ni)IRM + P9In(Ri) NI RM. (2)  Setting the right side of Eq. (2) equal to IIR and solving for PsIn(Ri), we obtain  P9In(Ri) = nil N,  which may be interpreted as the relative frequency of Ri in the set of responses which have not been associated with their  stimuli. It follows that SRP is equivalent, in the present context, to the strategy of guessing only among the unconditioned  responses proposed by Atkinson et al. (1965).  Since the number of stimuli in the unconditioned state whose correct response is Ri is just ni , the conditional distribution  of the number of correct guesses on Ri , given the ni , is binomial (ni , niIN), with a mean of ni2IN. The conditional  expectation of the total number of correct guesses on all Ri , given the ni , is thus Yi n,2/N, unless N is zero, in which  case there are no guesses at all. To find the unconditional expectation of the number of correct guesses, the foregoing  expression must be integrated over the joint distribution of the ni , which are known to be independently binomial (M, q). Let  G expected number of correct guesses.  Then  G = Y, [rl b(nii M, q)] nit/N, (4) n i i  for i = 1, 2,..., R and ni = 0, 1, 2,..., M, under the restriction that N =A 0.  Equation (4) is difficult to evaluate directly, but the problem may be simplified by a roundabout method. Note first that for  fixed N, since one stimulus is as likely to be in the unconditioned state as another, the distribution of ni is hypergeometric  (ni, N, M, RM), with mean and variance   EN(iii) = NI R, (5)  VN(ni) = N(R - 1)(RM - N)I [R2(RM - 1)]. (6)  The conditional expectation of Yi ni2IN, given N, is thus   EN (~ nit/N) = R[EN(ni2)]IN (7)  Z   = R[VN(ni) + EN2(ni)]IN   _ (M - 1)NI(RM - 1) + M(R - 1)I(RM - 1), (8)  NOTE ON GUESSING PROBABILITIES  331  if N 0 0, or zero otherwise. Therefore, unconditionally,  G = (M - 1) E(N)I(RM - 1) -{- [M(R - 1)1(RM - 1)][1 - Pr(N = 0)]. (9)  But N is binomial (RM, q), so that E(N) = RMq and Pr(N = 0) = pRM. The expected number of correct guesses under SRP is then  G = M - [RM(M - 1)p -}- M(R - 1) pRM]I (RM - 1). (10)  Note also that the conditional probability of a correct guess and the overall probability that a given response will occur as  a guess, both of which are equal to the expected value of nil N, are, from Eq. (5), just 11R. This is the same value that  these would have under the assumption of stationary guessing probabilities, yet the expected number of correct guesses is  quite different. The value of that expectation under SGP is of course just  G* = M(1 - p). (11)  If these results appear slightly paradoxical, it is because they are slightly paradoxical. Since the total number of correct  responses over the RM stimuli in the list is the sum of the responses to stimuli in the conditioned state and the responses  which were correct guesses, it follows that the expected proportion of correct responses under SRP is  C = (RMp + G)IRM  = 1IR + M(R - 1)pl(RM - 1) - (R - 1) pRMIR(RM - 1). (12) For comparison, the expected proportion correct under SGP is  C* = IIR + (R - 1) p1R.  (13)  The difference in performance is thus  C - C* = (R - 1) p(1 - pam')1[R(RM- 1)]. (14)  For given values of R and M, the right side of Eq. (14) is a function of p. It is zero when p is zero, rises with increasing p  to a maximum when p equals say, po , and decreases again to zero when p equals one. The value of p for which C - C* is  greatest is  P0 = (RM)-II (Rnt-I), (15)  at which point the difference in expected performance becomes  Co - Co* = [(R - 1)IR] po "'. (16) Suppose now that in an actual experiment the proportion of correct responses has  332 WILLIAM BOGARTZ  been observed to be 0. Under SGP, it is clear from Eq. (13) that by solving for p and substituting C for C*, one may obtain an  unbiased estimate of p, i.e.,  P* = (RO - 1)I(R - 1), (17)  which is in fact a maximum likelihood estimate of p, provided that SGP is true. The right side of Eq. (17) is the familiar  correction for guessing in common use, expressed in terms of proportion correct. If, however, SRP should happen to be true  instead, then the foregoing expression contains a substantial bias. Explicitly, under SRP,  so that the bias is  E(p*) = (RMp - pRM)I(RM - 1), (18)  E(p*) -p = p(1 - pnnt-I)I(RM- 1) (19)  = [RI(R - 1)](C - C*), (20)  which is also greatest when p = pu , so that the maximum bias in estimating p under SGP when SRP is true is just po "'.  The above relations are displayed graphically in Figs. 1 and 2. Figure 1 shows E(fi*) as a function of p for various list  lengths, given that SRP is true. The bias in estimating p as though SGP were true is indicated by the vertical distance of a  curve from the diagonal, which represents zero bias. The discrepancy in expected performance, C - C*, is just (R - 1)IR times  the bias in estimating p. Note that the bias depends only upon list length (RM), while for a given list length, the  performance discrepancy is an increasing function of the number of response categories. The lower curve in Fig. 2 shows the  maximum bias in estimating p, as a function of list length. The maximum discrepancy in expected performance is again (R - 1)IR  times the maximum bias. The upper curve in Fig. 2 shows the point (po) on the mean learning function at which these maxima are  attained.  1.0 .0 .0 .1 .0 .5 .4 .3 .2 .1  0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .0 .1 .0 .9 1.0 P  FIG. 1. E(p*) as a function of p and list length.  NOTE ON GUESSING PROBABILITIES 333  1.1 .1 .I .1 D.5 .4 .3 .2 .1 A  2 1 32 121 511 List Ieegtk  FIG. 2. Point of maximum bias (upper curve) and magnitude of maximum bias (lower curve), as a function of list length.  In conclusion, it is worth emphasizing that the bias inherent in assuming SGP when SRP is true can have serious theoretical  consequences. In the context of an all-or-none learning process, for example, SRP would generate a rise in proportion correct  prior to the trial of last error, which might lead to improper rejection of the all-or-none model. Or, as was previously  stated, the inverse relationship between the magnitude of the bias and list length could be taken as evidence of an increase  of difficulty in long lists, when in truth what happened was an overestimate of learning in short lists. These remarks  constitute just one small example of the necessity for relating learning processes to performance, if theory is actually to  explain behavior.  REFERENCE  ATKINSON, R. C., BOWER, G. 1'1., AND CROTHERS, E. J. An introduction to mathematical learning theory. New York: Wiley, 1965.  RECEIVED: May 20, 1974