10.1016/0022-2496(74)90021-2
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 11, 245-258 (1974)  The Generalization Function Is Determined by One Subject's Probability Learning Data  MICHAEL V. LEvINEI  University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104 and Educational Testing Service, Princeton, New Jersey 08540  In his recent review of probability learning, Estes (1972, p.96) notes that "the chief limitation on effective application" of  the models for learning with a continuum of responses to have emerged from the linear and pattern learning models is the  failure to specify the smearing or generalization function. He notes that "a useful technique has been developed by Levine for  estimating this function from individual data." This paper describes, gives the rationale, and proves the validity of the  previously unpublished technique.  INTRODUCTION  Informing a person that a particular response is correct generally changes his tendency to make not only the "reinforced"  response but also all psychologically similar responses. Many theoretical arguments require a quantification of this sort of  change. A familiar, early example is Spence's ingenious reply to Gestalt theory's attack on the fundamental issue of what is  learned; after making strong quantitative assumptions about generalization, Spence was able to predict the critics' data and  new facts about transposition.  The noncontingent probability learning experiment seems to be especially wellsuited to quantitative studies of generalization.  As I show in the experimental application (Levine, 1974) of the mathematical results reported here, extremely reliable data  can be easily obtained by making repeated observations of individual subjects.  1 This research has been supported in part by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under Contract AF 49(638)-1037, Air  Force Grant AFOSR 62-384, National Science Foundation Grants NSF G-14839 and NSF GB-1462, and Public Health Research Grant No.  MH6154 for Computing from the National Institute of Health. Most of the research was done as part of the author's  dissertation. I wish to thank dissertation committee members Patrick Suppes (Chairman), Richard Atkinson, Gordon Bower, and W.  K. Estes for their advice. I have also received valuable criticism from M. Frank Norman and Jack Kearns. Additional research  and most of the writing was completed while the author was Visiting Fellow in the Mathematical Psychology Seminar of  Educational Testing Service.  Copyright 1974 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  245  246 MICHAEL V. LEVINE  Furthermore, the advanced state of our theoretical and empirical knowledge in probability learning reduces the dangers of  invalid theory and experimental artifact. Critics of the theory for continuous probability learning (e.g., Estes, 1972) have  properly cited the failure to specify the mathematical form of the generalization function as the theory's major weakness. The  purpose of this paper is to convert that weakness to a major source of strength. The argument runs as follows: Suppose that  for any psychological continuum one were able to exploit the remarkable stability of continuous probability learning data in  order to directly, precisely, and easily obtain the subject's generalization function without making any prior assumptions  about shape or mathematical form. Then one would have a powerful tool for investigating several important psychological  questions. For example, I have already applied the results in this paper to analyze the effects of reinforcement history on  the shape of the generalization function. For another example, the one which incidentally provided the original motivation for  this research, one could behaviorally study psychological distance as Shepard has (Shepard, 1965; see also Levine, 1970, p.  412, example 1), by studying the transformations of the generalization function. Such applications are conceivable only  because the subject is free to specify his own generalization function; the theory places no restrictions on the shape or  mathematical form of the function.  In this paper I show that the data from one subject in one learning experiment completely determines the generalization  function, no matter how complicated its mathematical form. The curve fitting, ad hoc parametric assumptions, and averaging  over groups of subjects that complicated earlier attempts to deal with generalization in probability learning are no longer  needed.  The basic idea is conceptually simple and sufficiently general to be applicable to the study of generalization in finite  spaces, multidimensional spaces and some spaces whose dimensional structure is yet to be discovered. Furthermore, it has been  tested with data and found to work very well from both the statistician's and psychologist's point of view: the estimates  converge very rapidly and the results give new insights into the relation between reinforcement history and generalization  (Levine, 1974).  1.1. The Basic Experiment  In the continuous, noncontingent probability learning experiment, the experimenter and subject take turns selecting points on  a physical continuum. The continuum in the referenced studies for this paper was a line segment or the circumference of a  large circle.  The subject is instructed to predict the experimenter's choices as accurately as possible. Thus on a particular trial, the  subject selects a point to indicate his best guess  GENERALIZATION FUNCTION 247  of the experimenter's choice. Immediately after the subject's choice, the experimenter selects a point (called an outcome or  reinforcement) to indicate the correct point for that trial.  In the noncontingent experiment, the experimenter's choices are randomly chosen, independent of the subject's responses and  earlier reinforcements; a random number generator is used to generate a sequence of independent samples obeying a probability  law determined prior to the experiment. Nevertheless, there are local regularities in the sequence of reinforcements and the  subjects apply themselves to the task of predicting as tenaciously as one-arm bandit players.  1.2 Smearing vs. Generalization  In the pattern and linear models for continuous probability learning, the tendency for a reinforcement at y to increase the  tendency to respond at x is measured by a function k(x, y). Since k may be simultaneously influenced by sensory, motor, and  purely associative factors, Suppes introduced the theoretically neutral term, "smearing distribution," for k when he  formulated these models.  That was unfortunate; the new term seems to have obscured the relevance of continuous probability learning to other areas of  psychology. The meaning of k seems close enough to what is called generalization to justify its being called a generalization  function. Consequently k will be called a generalization function throughout this paper; in experimental papers (Levine, 1974)  applying these results, the factors influencing k are disentangled.  2  2.1 The Learning Model, Definitions, and Notation  The results are formulated for the linear continuous model (Suppes, 1959) for noncontingent reinforcement with a  one-dimensional stimulus-response continuum. Although the details have not been worked out, the arguments in the proofs seem  valid for the pattern models as well.  The linear model defines a probability space for sequences of responses and reinforcements or outcomes. The nth response is  denoted by in , the nth outcome by yn . x's and y's with tildes over them are used to denote random variables; the same  symbols without tildes are used for numbers. Thus if jl is the density of xl , then jl(xl) is the density evaluated at the  number xl . The joint density of the vector of random variables (x"n , yat-1 ,...) .yl , 'xl) is denoted by jn . The  conditional density of xn+1 given ( yn , xn ,..., xl) is denoted by cn+1 . The joint density of the vector of random variables  beginning with an outcome (yn , xn ,..., il) is denoted byja*.  The noncontingent learning experiment is characterized by the property  in*(Yn, xn ,..., .yl , xl) = f (yn) Jn(Xn ,..., Y1 , xl)  248 MICHAEL V. LEVINE  where f denotes the density of outcomes that is used on each trial. In other words, the outcomes are independent of all  preceding events and identically distributed.  The learning axiom of the model describes the trial-by-trial changes in the distribution of responses as follows:  C.+I(xze+2 I.y. ,..., xl) _ (1 - 0) c.(xn+1 I.yn.-1 ~..., xt) + 8k(xn+i ,.y.)  where B is a parameter describing the rate of learning, which remains constant throughout the experiment, and k is the  generalization function. In other words, the response density is a linear combination of the previous response density and a  function centered about the preceding outcome.  The probability space is thus defined in terms of the following:  k the generalization function, f the outcome density,  jl the initial response density,  B the rate of learning parameter.  The goal is to deduce k from data after making weak assumptions about k and the other primitives. The results in this paper  are proven only for densities f that are bounded and zero except on a bounded set of numbers, the "support" of f. Similar  assumptions are made about k: k has bounded support and for each y, k(-, y) is assumed to be a bounded probability density.  The initial response density may be any bounded density with bounded support. The rate of learning parameter is assumed to be  a nonzero probability less than one.  The assumptions of boundedness and bounded support are not essential parts of the learning model. They seem sufficiently  general for the intended applications, while at the same time restrictive enough to avoid mathematical complications.  2.2 Earlier Methods and the General Strategy  The earlier methods for estimating k fall into two classes: (a) fitting curves from parameterized families and (b) solving  integral equations.  To fit curves, k is assumed to be of the form  k(x, y) = b(x, y; t)  where b is some parameterized family of functions and t is either a parameter or vector of parameters. For example, b has been  assumed to be the uniform density in x centered about y  - ~ 112t, if I x - y < t,  b(x, y; t) 0, otherwise.  GENERALIZATION FUNCTION 249  The parameter or parameters are then obtained by the method of moments or by maximizing an index of goodness of fit. For  examples see Suppes et al. (1961, 1963). This method has not been successful in obtaining information about k. The maxima for  the fitted parameters tend to be flat. The method has not been sufficiently sensitive to distinguish between different  mathematical forms and shapes for k. Furthermore, the method requires a good initial guess about the form of k. In all  applications it has been used with group data; it remains to be seen if it is sufficiently stable and sensitive for use with  individual data.  To use integral equations, one begins with the observation that the asymptotic response density for the various models is  r(x) = f k(x, y) f (y) dy  where f is the known reinforcement density function.  There are well understood estimates for the asymptotic response distribution (Breiman, 1960). Suppes (1959, pp. 404--405)  recommends assuming that k satisfies the functional equation  k(x, y) = k(x - y, 0). (2)  When this assumption is valid (1) can be treated as a Fredholm integral equation in an unknown function in one variable for  known reinforcement density f and estimated r.  The assumption (2) is an essential part of this argument. We now know (Levine, 1965 and 1974) that (2) is false.  The method in this paper seems entirely unrelated to the earlier methods. No parametric assumptions, fitting or functional  equations are used. The general approach is introduced by the following argument.  Suppose we wish to compute k(x, y) for some particular x = xo and y = yo . One way to do so would be to define a sequence of  statistics {Sn} such that Sn, depended only on the first n observations of responses and outcomes and such that the learning  model implied that Sn converged rapidly to k(xo , yo).  A technical problem prevents direct application of this scheme. If ki and k2 are two different generalization functions such  that kl(x, y) equals k2(x, y) for all values of (x, y) except (xo , ya) then kl and k2 define the same probability space.  Consequently there can be no sequences of statistics capable of distinguishing kl and k2 .  This difficulty is avoided by considering the indefinite integral I of the generalization function, i.e., the function mapping  subsets of the plane A to numbers given by  I(A) = f J' d k(x, y) dx dy  250 MICHAEL V. LEVINE  where the integral is over all (x, y) in A and where A is subjected to the usual restrictions that assure that the integral is  well defined.  There is no loss of information when I rather than k is estimated since k is essentially determined by its indefinite integral  I. Furthermore, I, like any other continuous function, has the added advantage that it is completely determined by countably  many numbers. More precisely, it is possible to select a sequence of sets {A such that I is completely determined when the  numbers I(A,,) are known. Thus the estimation problem can be thought of as an estimation of a set of numbers I(A,,).  To summarize and fill in some details, one begins with a preselected collection of subsets of the plane {A, such as, for  example, the rectangles with corners having rational numbers for coordinates. Then one selects a sequence of statistics  {S,,,} such that S.,may be computed from the first m observations and such that S., converges to I(A.  Most psychologically significant theoretical questions can be answered with finitely many of the I(A or with I at least as  well as with k. But if k is desired, then the I(A are used to estimate the derivative of I.  In the next section I shall summarize the main results in general terms. In the concluding sections I shall fill in some of  the technical details.  2.3 The Main Findings  Roughly, the main finding is that the data sequences for individual subjects completely determine the generalization function:  if one is willing to make enough observations then one can compute k with any desired accuracy.  In more technical terms, this means that it is possible to select a sequence of statistics {S} such that as m increases,  S,,,, converges uniformly to I(A. The sequence can be chosen so that the convergence is either almost sure or, a fortiori,  convergence in probability. In particular, a sequence can be specified in the following pages such that for any positive e and  8, there is an M such that m greater than M implies that with probability at least I - 8 every one of the S,,,,,, is within  epsilon of its limit.  The main concern in this paper is to show that the information is in the data sequences and that the parametric assumptions,  curve fitting and averaging over subjects are unnecessary. Consequently the Sm are selected for their mathematical  convenience rather than for efficient use of data. The sequel to this paper (Levine, 1974) deals with practical data analysis.  3. RESULTS  This section is divided into two parts. First the function h defined by h(x, y) = k(x, y) f ( y)  GENERALIZATION FUNCTION 251  is studied. The function h can be thought of as the generalization function weighted by the reinforcement density and,  consequently, is called the weighted generalization function.  In the first part it will be shown that for any measurable set A there is a sequence of statistics converging in quadratic  mean to the integral of h over A. The results for k, given in the second part, follow from refinements and elaborations of the  arguments used in the first part for h.  3.1 Estimation of the Integral of the Weighted over One Set  Suppose we wish to measure the amount of generalization from an outcome yo to a response xo . Since we are dealing with  measures on continua such that the probability of an event exactly at yo or a response exactly at xo is zero, it is necessary  to reformulate as follows: suppose we wish to measure the amount of generalization from an outcome near yo to a response near  xo .  A sensible first step would be to count the number of responses in a small interval A,, containing xo following an outcome in  a small interval A,, containing yo . If there is a lot of generalization, the count should be large. Of course, this first  step would have to be corrected for the initial tendency to respond near xo , for the influence of other outcomes and for  forgetting. To derive a statistic incorporating all of these corrections some definitions are needed.  Let A be a fixed Borel subset of the plane. For example, A might be the product of the two intervals {(x, y) : x is in Ax and  y in Av}. For each nonnegative integer A and positive integer n, let the random variable z,,, be defined by  if ('.1A , ,y.) c- A, otherwise.  The theoretical expectations E,.,, of these random variables have a very simple form: Each E,,is a linear combination of the  quantity we wish to estimate  f fA k(x, y) f (y) A dy = fA h  and only two other unknown quantities  Eo,l = the expectation of zo,l ,  E. = f fA Lf k(x, t) f (t) dt] f (y) dy. The coefficients of these linear combinations are polynomials in the unknown  learning  parameter 9.  252 MICHAEL V. LEVINE  The following formulas give the theoretical values of the E,,,,  Eo,= (I - B)1,-1EO.l + [1- (I - 0)n-1] Eo, , (1) El,. = (I - 6) Eo.n + B f h,  A  Ex,= (I - B)1-'E,.m + [I - (1 - B)1-1] Eo, , for A >, 1. (3) Equation (1) implies the following formula, which will be  needed soon,  Eo,m = (I - 6)m Eo,. + [I - (I - 6)m] Eo,~ , for n, m >, 1. (4)  The assumptions of boundedness and compact support restricting k and f were made to trivialize the manipulation of multiple  integrals in the derivation of the formulas. The derivation is straightforward and consequently omitted.  These formulas can be used to obtain an index of generalization that is independent of the initial response distribution. Such  an index is obtained by measuring the effect of an outcome occurring A trials before a response relative to a baseline  obtained from the immediately following outcome. More precisely, the difference between za,, and zoo+, has expected value  EA.. - Eo,m+A = 9(1 - B)A-1 If, h - E,,,,  which is independent of E,,,.  The unknown rate parameter B can now be eliminated by summing over successive values of these differences to obtain  M  Y_ E(2A,- io.,A) = f h - E o, - (I - e)M If A  - E0,,.  A-1 _4 A  Since 9 is a nonzero probability and I f A h - Eo, I is bounded by one, for large M, the terms in e will be negligible. The  only remaining unknown quantity is Eo, Equation (1) implies that the asymptotic expected zo,z is Eo,. . Consequently, by  adding zoo to the statistic the unknown Eo,. should be eliminated, at least asymptotically. In fact we have  = f h+(I-g)n-1[E.,-E.,.]-(I-8)MIf h-E.,.,. A  GENERALIZATION FUNCTION 253  Finally, the reliability of the statistic can be increased by averaging over N consecutive values of n to obtain SM,N ,  defined by  which has expected value  f Ah -I- (1 N )N [Eo.1 - E0..] - (1 - B)M If, h - Eo,~].  Clearly as N and M become large, the expectation Of SM,N converges very rapidly to f A h.  Before considering the variance of S,,,, let me comment briefly on its uniqueness. Since the collection of all Es,n is an  infinite set of vectors in a three-dimensional vector space, there are infinitely many other statistics that could have been  used as approximations. No attempt has been made to find an optimal statistic; the purpose of this paper is simply to show  that the generalization function can be directly estimated from data.  The final step-improving the approximation by considering large values of M and N-must be done with some care. It will be  shown that for fixed M, the variance of Sm., tends to zero as N diverges. But unfortunately the expectation does not converge  to f A h. The bias can be removed. by considering large M. But as M diverges, so does the variance of SM,N .  To circumvent these problems, we shall obtain an estimate of the variance of SM,N . With this estimate it will be possible to  specify a sequence SM N such that Mn diverges (and the expectation tends to f A h) but Nn increases fast enough to guarantee  that the variance diminishes to zero, i.e., SM.,,, converges to f A h in quadratic mean. This is summarized and made more  precise in Theorem 1, the main mathematical result.  THEOREM 1. For any A, if two increasing sequences of integers {Mn} and {Nn} are such that (Nn3/Mn) -~ 0, then {SMn,n)  converges in quadratic mean to f A h. Furthermore, the convergence is uniform with respect to A.  The remainder of this section is used for the proof. Note that half of the theorem has been proven already, namely, E(SMn,Nn)  converges uniformly to f A h. It only remains to exhibit a bound on the variance of Sm..,, that is independent of A and that  diminishes to zero. This is done in two steps.  The reason it is possible to obtain sequences with diminishing variance is that well spaced z,,n are almost uncorrelated;  their covariance rapidly tends to zero. This is  254  MICHAEL V. LEVINE  made precise in Lemma 1. Notation for covariances and indicator functions is needed first:  QA, n; A', n') = covariance  _ 1 if (x, y) E A,  AX, y) - 10 otherwise.  LEMMA 1. For m > A > 0,  I QA, n + m; A, n) l < (1 - B)m-1.  The same argument yields a bound for C(A', n + m; A, n) with A' > A, but has not been needed.  Proof. By iterating the learning axiom one obtains for A > 1 and m > A  E(RA,n+m -RA,.) = f "' f X(xn+m+A , yn+m) X(xn+A 9 yn)  A-1  X Y B(1 - B)"-1k(xn+m+A P .Yn+m+r-v) + 6(1 - e)1-lk(xn+,n+A , yn+m) v-1  (1 - B)'Cn+m(xn+m+1 ,.Yn+m-1 ,"-, XI)1  X +m+1-1(Yn+m+A-1 1..., xl) dxn+m+a ... dxl .  (The notational convention E1 = 0 has been used here.) After performing the indicated integrations, this becomes  1-1  E B(l - B)'Eo.. + B(1- B)A-1 f f X(x, y) k(x, y)f(y) dx dy] Ed,. v-1  + (1 - 8)~E('zo,n+m ' zl,n)  By using the formulas for E,,n+m and El,n and simplifying, one obtains  EA.n+.EA,n + (1 - B)1[E(R0.n+m ' zl.n) - E'o.n+ni ' EA,n].  Consequently, C(A, n + m; A, n) equals (1 - 9).1 C(0, n + m; A, n). This formula is obviously valid even when m > A = 0.  GENERALIZATION FUNCTION 255  To approximate C(0, n + m; A, n) the learning axiom is iterated again to obtain for m>A>0  E(zo,n+m ' 2A,n)  f "' f X(Xn+m , yn+m) X(Xn+A , yn) f (yn+m)  m-A-1 , X B(1 - e)v-1k(Xn+m yn+m-v) +' (1 ` e)m- -1~n+A+1(Xn+m yn+A,..., Xl)S v=1  X j+m-1(yn+m-1 ~..., X1) dyn+m '.. dX1 .  By the same type of reasoning as in the preceding this expression can be rewritten first as  m-A-1  6(1 - e)v-1Eo, EA,n + (1 - B)m-A-'E(zo.n+A+1 ' zA.n),  v=1  and then by the formula for Eo, +n = Eo. (n+A+1)+(m-A-1)  Eo.n+.EA.n -I- (1 - e)m-A-1C(0, m -}- A + 1; A, n). Consequently/,  C(0, n + m; A, n) 9)--A-1C(0, n + A + 1; A, n).  Substituting in the previous formula noting that I C 1 gives the desired result. To use this result S,,N is rewritten in the  form  SM,N = Z0,1.N + ~, (ZAA,N - ZO,A+1.N) A=1  where ZA,n,N is defined by  ZA,n,N - N E 2A,n+27 ' p=0  From the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality it follows that the variance of S is no greater than the number of Z's times the sum of  the variances of the component Z's. Since there are only 2M + 1 of the Z's and the sum of their variance is  M M  variance (Z1,n+1,N) + E variance (ZA,1,N) n=1 A=O  the proof of the theorem would be complete if it were shown that the variance of  256  MICHAEL V. LEVINE  ZA,n,N was bounded by 1/N times a linear function of A. For this reason, the proof of the next lemma completes the proof of  the theorem.  LEMMA 2. Variance (ZA,n,N) < {1 + 2A + (2/B))IN.  Proof. variance ( N  N 1 N 2 N-1 N-n  Y, iA.D+m) = K2 Y- var zA,D+m -I- Nz Y Z Cov(iA,n+vi iA.n+m+D) n=1 m=1 n=1 m-1  N2 1  1 + N2 ~ CoV(id.n+2'; ~A.n+m+D)I n=1 n=1 m=1  N-n  - Y- I COv(2A n+Df ~A,n+m+D)I m=A+1  1 2 N-1 A N-n N + Nz Y- ~ Y 1 + Y- (1  n=1 m=1 m=1  1 2A 2 N-1 1 - (1 - B)N  N+N+ Nz 6 n=1  _1 _2a _1 N - 1 <N+N-I-Nz B  N 1 -F- 2A -+- ~2 ~.  3.3 Implications and Generalizations  There are two ways to use the results in the last section to show that the generalization function is determined by individual  data. To express the first, let {All be any countable covering of the plane such that the indefinite integral of the weighted  generalization function h is determined by the integral over each of the A; . Then let the dependence of the statistics SM,N  upon the set A be made explicit by denoting the approximation of the integral over A; by SL', . By using the bound for the  variance of the S 's it is routine to select sequences of integers {Mn} and {Nn} such that if Sn equals Sjn.Nthen Sn  converges almost surely to the integral over A; .  The convergence can be made uniform in the sense that for any e and S, when n is sufficiently large, all of the Si are within  epsilon of their limits with probability at least 1 - S. This is done by redefining the Sn as SnrN so that a different  sequence n.~  of N's may be used for each A; . Details were written out for the (highly impractical but mathematically convenient) sequence  Sn = Sn.2; in Levine (1965).  GENERALIZATION FUNCTION 257  In this sense the indefinite integral of the weighted generalization function is determined by the responses of a single  subject. Since f is known, we could use these results to study the integral of the generalization function. An alternative  strategy will be introduced momentarily.  First note that if Y is a set of outcomes such that  JYf (y) dy = 0  and A is a subset of the plane such that the projection (x, y) --* y maps A into Y, then the integral of the weighted  generalization function over A must be zero. Consequently the indefinite integral of the weighted generalization function  cannot give any information about the integral of the generalization function over A.  This is unavoidable because the likelihood of any data computed with respect to two generalization functions differing only on  A must be the same. Intuitively, there are almost never any outcomes in the set Y and, consequently, generalization from Y can  never affect observables. Thus the strongest result one can hope to prove is that the data from a single observer determine  the integral of the generalization function over those sets projecting into sets Y such that the integral of f over Y is  positive. The alternative introduced below establishes that result.  To introduce the alternative method, recall that to estimate the generalization from an outcome near yo to responses near xo  we considered counting the number of responses in a neighborhood A(xa) following an outcome in the neighborhood A(yu). To  intuitively understand why this leads to an estimate of the integral of the weighted generalization function rather than the  generalization function consider two points y' and y" in A(yo). If f (y') is twice f (y") then y,t is twice as likely to be  y'. Hence the function k(-, y') will contribute to the estimate about twice as often as k(-, y"). This line of reasoning  suggests artificially introducing weights in the counting process to undo the effect off and obtain an estimate of f A k. This  is done by changing the definition of z~,n from  - ~ 1, if (iA_ Yn) E A,  'l,n  (0, otherwise,  to  1 if (in+a , .yn) E A and x(~n =,,~: 0, tia,n - f (.Y.)  0, otherwise.    After this change roughly the same formulas as occurred in the previous section can be proven. However, every occurrence off A  h can be replaced by f A k.  But one important qualification must be made: If the iteration of the multiple  48o/ii/3-7  258 MICHAEL V. LEVINE  integrals in the proofs is to be repeated, then consideration must be restricted to sets corresponding to probable outcomes.  More precisely, let B(A) be defined by  f B(A) = JA f 1 (y) dy.  The uniformity of Theorem 1 is lost because the estimate of the variance in Lemma 2 is proportional to B(A). Nevertheless, the  desired result still can be proven by first selecting a countable collection of sets A; such that B(A;) is finite and the  indefinite integral of k (restricted to sets of points (x, y) such that f ( y) is positive) is determined by the integral over  the A; , and then selecting the N; in the definition of Sn ,  S'=S'  n M_ N j  to compensate for the effects of B(A;). Details are in Levine (1965).  REFERENCES  BREIMAN, L. The strong law of large numbers for a class of Markov chains. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 1960, 31, 801-803.  ESTES, W. K. Research and theory on the learning of probabilities. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 1972, 67,  81-102.  LEVINE, M. V. The generalization function in the probability learning experiment. Stanford University dissertation, 1965  (Available from University Microfilms, Ann Arbor. Order number 65-12809.)  LEVINE, M. V. Transformations that render curves parallel. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1970, 7, 410-443.  LEVINE, M. V. An experimental study of the generalization function in the probability learning experiment, 1974, in  preparation.  RoUANET, H., AND ROSENBERG, S. Stochastic model for the response continuum in a determinant situation: comparisons and  extensions. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1964, 1, 215-232. SHEPARD, R. N. Approximation to uniform gradients of  generalization by monotone transformations of scale. In D. Mostofsky (Ed.), Stimulus generalization. Stanford, California:  Stanford University Press, 1965. Pp. 94-110.  SUPPES, P. A linear model for a continuum of responses. In R. R. Bush and W. K. Estes (Eds.), Studies in mathematical learning  theory. Stanford, California: Stanford University Press, 1959. Pp. 400-414.  SUPPES, P. Stimulus sampling theory for a continuum of responses. In K. J. Arrow, S. Karlin, and P. Suppes (Eds.),  Mathematical methods in the social sciences. Stanford, California: Stanford University Press, 1959. Pp. 348-365.  SUPPES, P., AND FRANKMANN, R. W. Test of stimulus sampling theory for a continuum of responses with unimodal noncontingent  determinate reinforcement. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1961, 61, 121-132.  SUPPES, P., RoUANET, H., LEVINE, M., AND FRANKMANN, R. W. Empirical comparison of models for a continuum of responses with  noncontingent bimodal reinforcement. In R. C. Atkinson (Ed.), Studies in mathematical psychology. Stanford, California:  Stanford University Press, 1963. Pp. 358-379.  RECEIVED: April 26, 1973