10.1016/0022-2496(74)90019-4
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 11, 213-236 (1974)  Fixed and Optional Stopping Models for Two-Choice Discrimination Times  RICHARD G. SWENSSON' AND R. EMERSON THOMAS  Bell Telephone Laboratories, Holmdel, New Jersey 07733  Several current models for choice- or discrimination-time experiments represent the stimulus as a sequence of independent and  identically distributed observations. This paper develops and compares models based on two different stopping rules that a  subject might use to terminate his sampling process and convert his perceptual evidence into an observable response. The fixed  and optional stopping rules yield different predicted forms for the speed/accuracy tradeoff function and for the relation  between mean and variance of response times. These predictions are developed in the general case and then specialized for  certain conditions of symmetry, so that the expressions are easier to apply and to compare between models. A later section  considers how changes in stopping criteria (either between or within experimental trials) affect predictions about mean  response times for correct responses and errors, and then uses these ideas to relate the optional stopping rule for the Random  Walk models to those of the Accumulator models. A final section considers specialized models for stimulus detection and  intensity discrimination that assume Poisson-distributed sensory input, and relates these models to the present fixed stopping  model.  INTRODUCTION  For discrimination judgments it has long been recognized that ". . . the time of judgment is in some way correlated with its  accuracy." Specifically, that the judgment or discrimination response ". . . would grow in accuracy the longer the time taken  to make it, provided that the stimuli remained until the judgment were rendered." (Henmon, 1911, p. 187). Attempts to describe  this speed/accuracy tradeoff relation, and other aspects of discrimination judgments, have given rise to a variety of  theoretical models. Some models regard speed/accuracy tradeoffs as the result of mixing two or more distinct types of  responses, each type determined by a separate process. These include the "fast guess" models (Ollman, 1966; Yellott, 1967 and  1971) and the "deadline" models (Nickerson, 1969; Ollman, 1973; Ollman and Billington, 1972; Swensson, 1972a; Yellott, 1971).  Other models formalize an incremental view of discrimination and explain tradeoffs by changes in how thoroughly the subject  elects to process the incoming sensory information.  1 Now at Harvard Medical School. Send reprint requests to Richard G. Swensson, Department of Radiology, Harvard Medical  School, 25 Shattuck Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02115.  Copyright 1974 by Academic Press, Inc.  1 llrights of reproduction in any form reserved.  213  214 SWENSSON AND THOMAS  Most models in this latter category, such as the "random walk" models (Stone, 1960; Edwards, 1965; Fitts, 1966; Laming, 1968)  and the "accumulator" models (Audley and Pike, 1965; LaBerge, 1962; Pike, 1968; Vickers, 1970), adopt the same perceptual  representation. They represent the stimulus information by a sequence of independent and identically distributed observations  of some periodically sampled random variable. According to these "sampling" models, the subject's ability to discriminate the  stimuli grows as a function of the time spent observing, because he accumulates evidence about the stimulus over successive  observations of his sensory input.  Nothing in this sampling representation of the perceptual process dictates what kind of rule the subject must use for  determining when to stop observing and respond. Two general classes of rules could be used to terminate a sampling process:  optional and fixed stopping. Current models all assume that the subject uses some form of an optional stopping rule, which  lets the length of each observation sequence (hence the response time) depend on the content of these observations; sampling  continues until the evidence for one response first reaches some stopping criterion.  In contrast to optional stopping, a fixed stopping rule makes the number of observations independent of the realized values of  these observations; the subject predetermines the length of his observation sequence, and then bases his response on whatever  evidence these observations provide. Obviously, either type of stopping rule can generate a speed/accuracy tradeoff. For  optional stopping, less stringent response criteria lead to shorter mean sequences; for fixed stopping, a change in sample  size has the same effect.  This paper develops and compares, in parallel, sampling models that assume either fixed or optional stopping rules. Unlike  previous treatments of these models (Audley, 1973; Laming, 1968; Smith, 1968; Stone, 1960), we do not regard them as competing  descriptions of some unique discrimination process. Since both assume the same perceptual representation, we consider sampling  with fixed and optional stopping rules as models of alternative decision strategies that a subject might adopt. This leads to  concern with different methods of introducing time pressure into a discrimination task. The next section discusses how  different experimental procedures might force or encourage a subject to adopt different types of rules for deciding when to  translate his perceptual evidence into an observable response.  If the stopping rule is variable, then valid interpretations of experimental data or tests of the models' perceptual  assumptions depend on insuring the applicability of some particular model by constraining the subject's choice of stopping  rule. As seen later, different assumed stopping rules would lead to different estimates of the rate at which perceptual  evidence accumulated for a given discrimination. The necessary experimental control may be easiest to achieve with methods  that would force the subject to base his discrimination response on a fixed-size sample of observations-whatever his preferred  stopping rule might be.  FIXED AND OPTIONAL STOPPING 215  The Experimental Task and the Stopping Rule  Many discrimination experiments, in one way or another, attempt to gain direct control over the subject's access to the  stimulus information. Any experiment that terminates the stimulus after a brief interval, or follows it with a second  "masking" stimulus, could be considered to limit the interval over which the subject can take observations relevant to the  identity of that stimulus. As a specific example, consider an experiment that presents two stimuli, separated by a brief  interval, and requires the subject to judge which occurred first. If both stimuli remain until the judgment is made, then the  onset of the second stimulus functions as a "mask." After the second onset, the physical display (hence the sensory input) is  always the same for both temporal orders. Thus the interval between the two stimulus onsets would directly limit how long the  subject could sample observations that provided evidence about which occurred first.  An optional stopping rule would be difficult or impossible for the subject to use when the procedure directly controls his  effective sampling interval. A sampling model for these tasks would have to assume he based his decision on some fixed-size  sample of observations. In other types of tasks, such as visual scanning (Neisser, 1963), the subject's own rhythmic motor  actions (e.g., eye movements) might impose a similar kind of limit on his observation time for any individual stimulus item.  In discrimination tasks that impose no direct constraints on observing time, the greater statistical efficiency of an optional  stopping rule might make it the subject's preferred decision strategy. If the sampling time per observation is independent of  the stopping rule, then an optional stopping rule will minimize mean response time (RT), since it minimizes the expected  length of the observation sequence required to attain a specific level of accuracy (Stone, 1960). For the two-choice case with  explicit costs for errors, Edwards (1965) showed that responding as soon as the sampled evidence reaches a preset value (for  each response) will maximize net payoff whenever the cost for time is linear with RT.  However, not all forms of time pressure will encourage the subject to minimize the mean of his RTs; in some experiments the  time pressure implies a cost for time that is distinctly nonlinear with RT. For example, Schouten and Bekker's (1967) "forced  RT" procedure required the subject to synchronize his choice response with the onset of an independent "pacing stimulus."  Snodgrass, Luce, and Galanter (1967) used "band payoffs," in which the subject's cost increased as his RT deviated in either  direction from a specified value. In such experiments it is just as bad for the subject to respond too early as too late; he  must minimize the variability of his RTs about the value specified by the experimenter. Only by adjusting the length of his  observing time (i.e., fixing his sample size) would the subject guard against both early and late responses, and also respond  as accurately as this time constraint allowed.  216 SWENSSON AND THOMAS  The currently popular "RT deadline" method of introducing time pressure (Fitts, 1966; Link, 1971; Link and Tindall, 1971;  Pachella and Fisher, 1969, 1972; Pachella and Pew, 1968) also implies a cost for time that is highly nonlinear with RT. This  technique classifies each response as either "fast" or "slow" relative to some deadline value of RT defined by the  experimenter. Feedback or payoffs based on such an abrupt cutoff define a dichotomous cost function for RT. To insure that a  sufficiently high proportion of his responses would be "fast," the subject might elect to trigger his response at a fixed time  after the stimulus appeared, thereby fixing the size of his observation sample.  The feedback and payoffs that result from slightly different RT-deadline procedures can apparently encourage the use of  distinctly different decision strategies. In a "Yes-No" auditory RT task, Green and Luce (1973) obtained speed/accuracy  tradeoff and ROC functions with quite different slopes, depending upon whether the RT deadline was imposed only on signal  trials or on both signal and noise trials. They interpreted these data as support for a "Poisson Timing" or a "Poisson  Counting" model, respectively.  These models represent the stimulus effect by the pulse rate of a Poisson-distributed variable (Luce and Green, 1972); the  Counting and Timing Models attribute different discrimination strategies to the subject. The relation between these Poisson  models and the present sampling models is discussed in the final section of this paper. However, with equivalent  distributional assumptions about the perceptual input, empirical data cannot distinguish the fixed stopping model from the  Counting model.  To summarize the preceding arguments, a sampling model based on an optional stopping rule might be more appropriate for  experiments in which: (a) the subject has unlimited access to the stimulus for discrimination, and (b) his time cost can be  treated as an increasing linear function of RT, so that he is motivated to minimize his mean RT. A sampling model based on a  fixed stopping rule seems more appropriate when either: (a) the subject's access to the stimulus is limited, or (b) his cost  for RT is nonlinear or discontinuous, such that he attempts to minimize his RT variability about some specified value.  Overview of This Paper  In the following section, we develop a fixed stopping sampling model for the case of two stimuli and two responses,2 and also  sketch a parallel development of the corresponding optional stopping random walk model. In the fixed stopping case, normal  approximations can be used to estimate the ROC curve and the relation between mean RT and error probabilities.  The fixed and optional stopping models yield different predicted forms for the  s Stone (1960) proposed a fixed stopping model for the case of k stimuli and responses, using fairly restrictive assumptions  about the underlying distributions of sensory observations. The same assumptions would make the present model identical to  Stone's for k = 2.  FIXED AND OPTIONAL STOPPING 217  speed/accuracy tradeoff function and the relation between the mean and variance of RT. For greater ease in comparing and  applying these predicted relations we specialize them for certain conditions of symmetry, expressing the speed/accuracy  tradeoff functions in linear form and the RT variance as a function of mean RT. We then compare these predicted functions and  their parameters, and discuss their use with experimental data.  After examining the predictions of sampling models whose fixed and optional stopping criteria remain the same both within and  between experimental trials, we consider how these models are affected by variable stopping criteria. These results are used:  (a) to interpret differences between the Random Walk and the Accumulator types of optional stopping models, and (b) to account  for certain empirical data. A final section considers the Poisson Timing and Counting models for detection and intensity  discrimination tasks (Green and Luce, 1973), specializes the fixed and optional stopping models to the case of a Poisson  stream of sensory input, and discusses the relations between these types of models.  THE PERFORMANCE MODELS  When the subject detects the presence of a stimulus, we assume that he begins taking a sequence of independent observations.  Let X be a random variable generated by each stimulus observation, and let the random variable T be the time required to  sample that observation. We assume that T is independent of both X and the number of observations. At some point he stops  observing and responds Rl or R2 ; the measured RT is the time from stimulus presentation to his response. Hence a sequence of  observations constitutes one trial, resulting in a single observed RT. An error is scored if the stimulus is Bt and the  subject responds R2 , or if the stimulus is 02 and he responds Rt .  In general, the different classes of stopping rules use different kinds of information for deciding when to stop sampling. For  an optional stopping rule, sampling time depends upon the actual observations sampled; the stopping criteria require the  subject to monitor some function of the realized values of X over successive observations. For a fixed stopping rule, sampling  time is independent of the realized values of X for that sample; the subject can base his decision to stop observing only on  the number of observations taken or on some measure of elapsed time. The simplest cases of both classes of stopping rules are  those whose criteria for stopping remain constant over trials. We will treat only these cases in detail, but later consider  the implications of stopping criteria that do change from trial to trial.  The Representation for RT  We assume that the RT on any trial is equal to total sampling time plus some variable delay, C, contributed by processes that  do not depend on sampling time  218 SWENSSON AND THOMAS  or the number of observations sampled (e.g., stimulus input and motor response times). Thus:  n RT=Y,T,+C, 2=1  where n is the total number of observations sampled on that trial. The independence assumptions make it possible to develop  relatively simple expressions for the expectation and variance of RT in the most general case, when n, T, and C, are all  treated as random variables. These can be easily specialized to cases in which one or more of these variables are constant.  For the expected value of RT, independence of n and T implies that:  E(RT) = E(n) E(T) + E(C)  = tE(n) -{- c,  where E(T) = t and E(C) = c can be treated as constants. For the case of fixed stopping with the same value of n on every  trial, obviously E(n) = n.  For the variance of RT, independence between the sampling time (a function of n and T) and the residual time, C, implies that:  V(RT) = V ~~ Tzl + V(C), 2_1  which can be expanded as  V RT = E n Ti 12~ - [E TZ 2+ V(C)  E ~[ n T 2]2~ - [E(n)]2 is + VPi=1  The first term can be broken into two sums, the n values of each Ti multiplied by itself and the n(n - 1) values of each T;  multiplied by every other. Its expectation is:  E(n) E(T2) + [E(n2) - E(n)]t2.  Substituting this result for the first term of (3), and rearranging terms, yields: V(RT) = E(n)[E(T2) - t2] + t2{E(n2) -  [E(n)l21 + V(C)  = E(n) V(T) + t2V(n) -I- V(C), (4) where V(T) and V(n) represent the variances of the variables T and n.  FIXED AND OPTIONAL STOPPING 219  For an optional stopping rule, n is necessarily a random variable and the relation between E(RT) and V(RT) depends on the  relation between E(n) and V(n). This will be developed later. For the simplest case of fixed stopping, n is assumed to remain  constant from trial to trial within a given condition. Then V(n) = 0 and (4) becomes:  V(RT) = [E(RT) - c] V(T)/t + V(C).  In this case, V(RT) is a linear function of E(RT) that is independent of the stimulus parameters and the error rates. Notice  that E(n) >_ 0 implies E(RT) >, c and V(RT) >, V(C). If T is also assumed to be fixed, then V(T) = 0, and V(RT) = V(C) does  not depend on E(RT).  However, the definition of a fixed stopping rule does not require n to be fixed at the same value on all trials, only that it  be determined independently of the observed values xi-the content of the observations sampled on that trial. There exist  plausible types of fixed stopping rules which would not imply that V(n) = 0. For example, the subject might establish a  "deadline" on his estimate of the time from his detection of the stimulus or warning signal, and then use this deadline to  decide when to terminate his sampling. More formally, let T* represent the deadline and t* a specific realization of T* on a  given trial. Then t* is assumed to determine a value of n such that  nt G t* < (n + 1)t. (6)  Thus the distribution of the deadline T* induces a distribution on n that keeps T and n independent with E(T*) - tE(n), as  required by (2).  The precise relation between V(RT) and E(RT) for this type of fixed stopping is seen in (4) to depend upon how V(n) relates to  E(n). However, provided that T* remains independent of stimulus parameters, so will the relation between V(RT) and E(RT). One  way to obtain an explicit relation is to assume that the imposed distribution on n has the property that:  V(n) = gE(n),  where g is some positive constant for all values of E(n). This assumption could be motivated by models of time estimation  (e.g., Creelman, 1962) that view T* as the accumulation of some number of identically distributed variable delays. Such  assumptions about T* would imply that V(T*) remains proportional to E(T*). Equations (7) and (2) convert (4) into  V(RT) = [E(RT) - c][V(T)/t + g] -}- V(C), (8)  which has the same linear form as (5).  220 SWENSSON AND THOMAS  The Representation for Perceptual Integration  This section describes how we represent the integration of perceptual evidence over a sequence of observations. Let Z be the  evidence obtained from a single observation (X), defined as the logarithm of the likelihood ratio that the observation arose  from 02 rather than 01  Z = In[f(X; 02)/f (X; 02)]- (9)  If X is a continuous variable, we assume that f (X; 01) and f (X; 02) represent its density under 0, and 0, ; if X is  discrete, f (X; 0) should be interpreted as the probability that X assumes a particular value, given 0 = 01 or 02 . Although  the following development implicitly assumes that X is continuous, a parallel treatment would establish identical results for  the discrete case.  When the physical stimulus does not change over time we assume that the densities of the observations, f (X; 01) and f (X;  02), remain fixed. This means that E(Z 10), the expected value of Z given stimulus 0, will not change from one observation to  another. Notice that larger values of Z are more likely to occur when the stimulus is 02, i.e., Pr{Z > z 102} > Pr{Z > z 10I}.  Let zn be the cumulative log likelihood ratio for the sample of observations (z,, = Y_ Zi for i = 1,..., n), the total amount  of evidence these n observations provide for discriminating between 01 and 02 . By defining z to be (1/n)z,, , it is easy to  represent E(z 10) and V(z 10), its expectation and variance given that the stimulus is 0, in terms of Z, the log likelihood  ratio for any single observation:  and  E(z 10) = E(Z 10) (10)  V(z 10) = (1/n) V(Z 10). (11)  FixED STOPPING CASE. Suppose that the subject adopts a fixed stopping rule that sets n to the same value on each trial. Then z  is a random variable that depends on n. We assume that the subject sets some criterion k* on z (or an equivalent criterion on  zn), such that he makes Rl if z < k*. As is well known, such a decision rule will maximize expected payoff for any fixed n if  k* is appropriately chosen to reflect the prior odds between 01 and 02 and the relative error costs (Chernoff and Moses, 1959,  p. 332).  In statistical terminology, the Type I and II errors are Pr{z > k* 101} = a and Pr{z < k* 102} = P. These errors can be  written as standard distance functions, kl and k2 , if k* is normalized by the mean and standard deviation of z given 0, and 02  Pr{[z - E(z 10)]/[ V(,& 10)]' 12 > ki 10 = 01} = l - FI(kl) _ (12)  FIXED AND OPTIONAL STOPPING 221  and  Pr{[z - E(z I B))I[V(z 10)]1/2 <, k2 19 = e2} = F2(k2) = 91 (13)  where F,(kl) and F2(k2) are the cumulative distribution functions of z under 61 and 02  ,  respectively. Thus,  and  kI = [k* - E(z I BI)]I[V(z 101)]1/2 =Fi1(1 - , (14)  k2 = [k* - E(z 102)11 [V(z 102)] 1/2 = Fa l(P)_ (15)  If Z has finite variance under 01 and 02, the Central Limit Theorem implies that z will be approximately normal for  sufficiently large n. Then kl and k2 can be estimated from I - a and g, using inverse standard normal functions, 0-I(.). The  symmetry of the normal approximation implies that:  and  rl = (P-1(a) = -0-1(1 - a) - -k, (16a)  r2 = 0-1(1 - g) = -0-1(N) = -k2 l  (166)  where r2 and rl are the standard normal deviates that correspond to the probabilities of 1 - f3 and a. A Receiver Operating  Characteristic (ROC) curve with the usual interpretation follows from (14) and (15) by eliminating k* and applying (10) and  (11):  r2 - {r,[V(Z 101)I V(Z 102)11/21 + ({nl/2[E(Z I e2) - E(Z I BI)1}I[V(Z 102)1'/2)- (17)  Equation (17) is a linear relationship between rl and r2, functions of the error probabilities, over changes in k* for any  fixed n. A change in the value of n displaces the constant in (17) without changing its slope. It is convenient to  characterize the ROC curve for a specific value of n by the point at which (17) intersects the negative diagonal, r2 = -rl .  This specifies the unique values, r2 and rl', for which a = p = e. Then d,', the total standardized distance between E(z I Bl)  and E(z 1 0,), can be defined as  dE - r2' - rl' = 2r2'. (18) Equation (17) yields an approximation for dE  dE' - n112f [E(Z 102) - E(Z 10I)l1[ V(Z)]112), (19)  where by definition,  [V(Z)]112 - If[V(Z 101)1"2 + [V(Z 102)11/2). (20)  Equation (19) indicates that (d,')2 increases in direct proportion to n; (19) becomes  222 SWENSSON AND THOMAS  an equality if Z is normally distributed given 01 and 02 , and guaranteed, if the distributions of the underlying  observations, f (X; 0r) and f (X; 02), are normal.  As in signal detection theory, (17) and (19) simplify considerably under the symmetry assumption that V(Z 10r) = V(Z 10,) -  V(Z). Then r1 and r2 are scaled in the same units and dE' can simply be defined as r2 - r1 . A sufficient condition for V(Z  101) = V(Z 102) is for 01 and 02 to give rise to distributions of X (the underlying observations) that have mirror symmetry  about some point, i.e., for f (X + K; 01) _ f (-X + K; 02). (The proof of this by moment generating functions shows that all  even moments of Z are equal, given 01 and 02 , and odd moments differ only in sign.)  The symmetry assumption, V(Z 101) = V(Z 1 0,), may be reasonable in many experimental contexts. Discrimination experiments  often carefully minimize any asymmetries in the stimuli, which could help justify the assumption that f (X; 0r) and f (X; 02)  are approximate mirror images. For example, in a visual discrimination task 01 and 02 might represent two unique characters or  forms having equivalent brightness and contrast, each equally "discriminable" from the other. However, the symmetry assumption  might be inappropriate for stimuli in brightness or loudness discrimination experiments, when 01 and 02 differ only in their  physical intensity. As discussed later, the Poisson Counting model (Green and Luce, 1973) effectively assumes that if 02 is  the more intense stimulus, then V(Z 10,) > V(Z 10,); hence the ROC curve (17) will have a slope of less than 1.0.  OPTIONAL STOPPING CASE. A full treatment of optional stopping, as a model of choice RT, is available elsewhere (Edwards, 1965;  Laming, 1968; Stone, 1960). This section merely sketches the development of the optional stopping model for these perceptual  assumptions, so that the relations it predicts between E(RT) and error probabilities and between E(RT) and V(RT) can be  compared with those of fixed stopping at a constant n. A later discussion relates this kind of optional stopping rule to that  assumed by the accumulator type of models.  Prior to sampling, the subject is assumed to set lower and upper cutoffs, Z* and Z*, on Z Zi (or equivalent cutoffs on the  posterior odds for 02 versus 01). After each observation the current value of Y_ Zi is compared to these cutoffs. If this  value is less than Z* or greater than Z*, he stops observing and makes response RI or R2 appropriately; if Z* < Y_ Zi < Z*, he  samples another observation. The stopping criteria, Z* and Z*, are assumed to remain constant over trials (similar to the  assumption of a constant n for fixed stopping), but n will be a random variable.  The expected value of n for optional stopping with fixed cutoffs Z* and Z*, given 01 or 02 for E(Z 10) :7~: 0, can be related  to the error probabilities and the expected log likelihood ratio by the well-known approximation from Wald (1947):  E(n 10) - Q(B) ln[(1 - ~)-a~ [1 - Q(e)l ln[~ (1 - a)l (21)  _ E(Z 0) - ,  FIXED AND OPTIONAL STOPPING 223  where Q(O,) = a and Q(02) = 1 - g, are the respective probabilities of reaching Z* (responding R2) given stimulus 01 and 02.  These approximations neglect any "excess" evidence over the decision boundaries at the point of stopping (viz., I z,, - Z* I  and zn - Z*) and they represent the boundary values Z* and Z* by ln[fl/(1 - a)] and In[(1 - 0)/a], respectively. Both sources  of approximation improve as I Z* I and Z* become large relative to I E(Z 10)I, i.e., as E(n 10) increases.  Approximate expressions for V(n 10) under these same conditions are less familiar, but can be obtained from Ghosh (1970; Eq.  5.32) for 0 = 01 or 02  v(n 10) i V(Z 10){Q(0) ln[(l -g)la] + [1 -Q(B)] ln[9,'(1 - a)]}  [E(Z 10)]3  + {ln[(1 In[p/(1 - a)]12 Q(0)[1 - Q(0)] .  [E(Z 10)12 (22)  E(RT) and Error Probability  FIXED STOPPING CASE. Equation (19) relates d,', a function of the error probabilities, to the (fixed) value of n and the  distribution of log likelihood ratios given 01 and 02. The relation between E(RT) and error probabilities can be obtained by  solving (19) for n and substituting into (2):  E(RT) - (t1 D2)(d, )2 + C (23)  where  D = [E(Z 102) - E(Z 101)] [V(Z)]1/2 ,  (24)  [V(Z)]112 is defined by (20), and dE' is estimated from the error rates by normal approximations. These approximations improve  as n increases, i.e., for larger E(RT). If V(Z 101) 1~ VV 102) the estimate of d, does not follow directly from the normal  approximations: r2 - -1(1 - g) and rl - -1(a). As (18) indicates, these estimates must first be transformed by (17) into their  "equivalent" normal deviates, r2' 0-1(1 - e) and r,' - 0-1(e). Since the slope of the ROC curve (17) is independent of n, it  can be estimated by data from a set of experimental conditions that hold n fixed (i.e., hold E(RT) constant) and  systematically vary a and /3 by instructions or suitable payoffs. Once the slope of the ROC curve has been estimated, it  provides the means to transform r2 and r, for any fixed value of n into r2' = -r,' (and hence dE' ~- 2r.,') as follows:  dE' = 2r2' _ [2(r2 - mr,)]I (l + m), (25)  224 SWENSSON AND THOMAS  where m is an estimate of [V(Z 101)IV(Z 102)]1/2, the slope of (17). If V(Z 10,) = V(Z 1 0,), then m = 1.0 and dE' = r2 - rl ,  which can be estimated directly from 0-1(1 - P) and 0-1(a) by (16a and b).  However, estimating m requires fitting the linear relation given by (17) to different values of r2 and rl , both of which  contain measurement error. This leads to the well-known problem of two different regression lines (Kendall and Stuart, 1961)  -hence two different estimates of m-depending on whether estimated rl or estimated r2 is chosen to represent the "independent"  variable. Although there presently exists no completely adequate solution to this general problem, the estimation procedure  used by Green and Luce (1973) seems reasonable; they fitted both regression lines to their ROC curves and used the geometric  mean of these two estimates of m.  OPTIONAL STOPPING CASE. For later convenience in comparing the relations between E(RT) and error probabilities under fixed and  optional stopping we simplify (21) by assuming that: (a) the response cutoffs are symmetric (Z* = -Z* > 0) and (b) the  absolute expected amount of evidence per observation is the same for 0, and 02 , i.e., E(Z 10,) = -E(Z I al) - E(Z) > 0.  Together, these assumptions imply that a = # = e and make E(n 10,) = E(n 102) - E(n). Substituting this approximation for E(n)  into (2) yields:  E(RT) - [t/E(Z)][(l - 2e) ln[(1 - e)/e]] + c. (26)  The same straightforward substitution also yields expressions for E(RT) without the simplifying symmetry assumptions (see  Edwards, 1965; Stone, 1960). Equation (26) becomes much more complex when a 0 fl. Whenever E(Z 10,) =A -E(Z 1 0,), then E(RT  10,) and E(RT 10,) have separate expressions and E(RT) is the sum of these two conditional expectations, weighted by the  stimulus probabilities.  Comparison of Fixed and Optional Stopping  SPEED/ACCURACY TRADEOFFS. The speed/accuracy tradeoff relations predicted by the fixed and optional stopping models with  constant stopping criteria are more easily compared by writing (23) and (26) in the form:  A - b[E(RT) - c], (27)  where for each case A is the appropriate function of error probabilities and b is the expected rate of increase in A per unit  increase in E(RT), once it exceeds c. For the case of optional stopping, under the symmetry assumptions a = = e and E(Z 102) =  -E(Z 101) - E(Z), A and b are given by (26) as  A = (1 - 2e) ln[(1 - s)/E] (28)  b = E(Z)/t. (29)  FIXED AND OPTIONAL STOPPING 225  The same symmetry assumptions reduce A and b for fixed stopping to:  A = [0-1(1 - 9) - (P_1(a)]2  (30)  from (23), (16a) and (16b), and  b = D21 t = [E(Z 10,.) - E(Z 101)]2/[tV (Z)]  = {4[E(Z)]2}/[tV(Z)],  (31)  from (23) and (24).  Equation (27) approximates the predicted speed/accuracy tradeoff function for A and b defined by either a fixed or an optional  stopping strategy. It describes how mean RTs and error rates should covary (negatively) as the subject changes either the size  of his fixed sample of observations (n) or the amount of evidence he requires for a response (Z* = -Z*). Whatever the trade  between speed and accuracy, experimental data from within each condition provide estimates of E(RT) and the error  probabilities. Then A can be estimated by either (28) or (30), assuming that the subject used either an optional or a fixed  stopping rule whose criteria remained constant over all trials. For data from several conditions, each assumed to represent  the same point of this tradeoff function, Isaac (1970) reviews techniques that permit maximum likelihood estimates of E(RT)  and A.  Estimates of the slope and intercept parameters of the tradeoff function (b and c) require fitting the linear relation given  by (27) to data from conditions that reflect different values of E(RT) and A (produced by different values for the stopping  criteria), both of which will contain measurement error. However, some experimental data (Swensson, 1972a; 1972b) indicate  that E(RT) can be estimated with considerably greater precision than A, particularly when e is small (e.g., the estimate of A  from (28) or (30) involves terms approaching infinity as e approaches zero). In such cases, linear regression onto mean RT  (i.e., using estimated E(RT) as the independent variable) will provide smaller variance estimates of the tradeoff parameters b  and c. As an additional refinement, the regression procedure could weight each data point by the relative precision of its  E(RT) and A estimates.  Unfortunately, b is not defined in the same way for both the optional and fixed stopping rules, as can be seen by comparing  (29) with (31). The difference between these definitions means that, even if t were assumed to be the same for both strategies  (whether the subject monitored n or F Zi = zn to determine his stopping), estimates of b from performance under one strategy  will not generally determine the tradeoff function for the other stopping rule. Under the assumptions made about optional  stopping, stimulus parameters affect b only through E(Z), the absolute expected log likelihood ratio per observation. Under  fixed stopping, the value of b also depends  48o/i11/3-5  226 SWENSSON AND THOMAS  on V(Z), which prevents transforming an estimate of b based on one stopping rule into an estimate of b for the other. This is  possible (without specifying either E(Z) or V(Z) a priori) only if V(Z) = gE(Z), where g is some known constant.  The relation between E(Z) and V(Z) depends on the distributional form of the underlying observations X, given 01 and 02.  However, among the better-known standard distributions V(Z) = gE(Z) seems to hold only when the densities f (X; 0r) and f (X;  02) are normal, with means N'1 and N'2 , and equal variance Q2. Then it is possible to define the farnriliar distance function  d' = (N'2 - tLr)fa and show that: (a) E(Z 102) _ -E(Z 101) _ (1/2)(d')2, and (b) V(Z) = (d')2 (see Green and Swets, 1966, p.  272). Substituting these relations into (29) and (31) shows that, for normally distributed observations with equal variance, b  = (dl)21t for fixed stopping and b = (d')2/2t for optional stopping.  Figure 1 plots tradeoff functions for the fixed and optional stopping procedures when observations are normally distributed  with equal variance for both stimuli. Since no transformation of error probability will produce linear tradeoff functions for  both procedures, Fig. 1 plots accuracy in units of (d')2. But notice that the tradeoff function for optional stopping could be  closely approximated by a fixed stopping procedure if the tradeoff function's slope were approximately doubled. The  approximation could be made even better over the range of error rates obtained in most experiments (.O1 <_ e <_ .25) if the  E(RT) intercept (c) were also fitted. This fact suggests that (unless b and c can be estimated independently) curve-fitting  techniques  FIG. 1. Speed/accuracy tradeoff functions for fixed and optional stopping with normally distributed observations and (d')'/t =  1.0. The ordinate is in units of (d' )2 with corresponding values of e on the right. The dashed line is the function for fixed  stopping with (d')$lt = 2.2.  FIXED AND OPTIONAL STOPPING 227  will not be a particularly sensitive way to determine which class of stopping rule produced a given set of data. Both of these  functions, as well as others, seem to provide close two-parameter fits to sets of empirical data generated by changes in  tradeoff (Swensson, 1972a).  E(RT) AND V(RT). For fixed stopping at a constant n, (5) shows that V(RT) is a linear function of E(RT), independent of  whether the stimulus is 01 or 02 and any parameters of the stimuli. This is not true for optional stopping with fixed Z* and  Z*. Expressions that relate V(RT 10) to E(RT 10) for optional stopping can be obtained by substituting (21) and (22) into (4).  Because these equations for V(RT 10,) and V(RT 102) are distinct and individually quite complex, we present only the  simplified function that results from assuming the following conditions of symmetry: (a) symmetric stopping criteria, Z* =  -Z*, (b) E(Z 10,) _ -E(Z 10,)  E(Z) > 0, and (c) V(Z 10,) = V(Z 10,) - V(Z).  These symmetry conditions imply that a = = E, neither V(RT) nor E(RT) depend on 0, and:  V(RT) - V(C) + [E(RT) - c] ~ V (T) -~ bE( )  [E(RT) - c]2 4E(1 - E)  (1 - 2E)2 ~I (32)  where b and c are the slope and intercept of the speed/accuracy tradeoff function given by (27) and (29). Over different  trades between speed and accuracy produced by changing Z* = -Z* , E and E(RT) vary, but all other terms on the right of (32)  remain fixed.  A comparison between (32) and (5) shows that the optional and fixed stopping rules predict quite different relations between  E(RT) and V(RT), even under these highly symmetric conditions, when both rules predict that E(RT 10,) = E(RT I 0z). Both (32)  and (5) have the same intercept, V(RT) = V(C), when E(RT) = c. However, (32) is clearly nonlinear in E(RT) - c; it predicts a  larger V(RT) for all E(RT) > c; and it depends on the stimuli through both the distributional form of the underlying  observations (X) and the slope of the speed/accuracy tradeoff function (b).  All terms on the right of (32) are positive, hence the linear coefficient of E(RT) - c must exceed V(T)/t, which is the slope  of (5). The positive quadratic coefficient implies that (32) is concave downward; since this coefficient goes to zero with E,  V(RT) is asymptotically linear in E(RT) - c as E --> 0. For values of E = .25, .10, .05 and .01, the quadratic coefficient is  approximately .85, .56, .19 and .04. Given the statistical variability of variance estimates, however, this degree of  nonlinearity may often be difficult to detect in empirical data.  228 SWENSSON AND THOMAS  Perhaps the most empirically significant feature that distinguishes (32) from (5) is the fact that the linear coefficient of  (32) depends on b, the slope of the speed/accuracy tradeoff function. In contrast to the independence of (5) from any specific  stimulus parameters, the linear coefficient of (32) increases as the slope of the tradeoff function decreases. This means that  under optional stopping, if the empirically estimated speed/accuracy tradeoff functions differ appreciably in slope for two  distinct pairs of stimuli, then the "less discriminable" pair (with the smaller estimated b) will exhibit a noticeably faster  rate of increase in V(RT) with E(RT).  NONCONSTANT STOPPING CRITERIA  The previous development considered only the special cases of fixed and optional stopping rules whose criteria (n or Z* and  Z*) remain constant over all trials within a single experimental condition. The optional stopping random walk model also  assumed that the criteria fix the error probabilities, and do not change as a function of the number of observations sampled  on any trial. In these cases, both the optional and fixed stopping models imply that E(RT) is independent of whether the  actual response is correct or incorrect. For optional stopping with constant Z* and Z*, the expected proportion of errors is  the same for each value of n at which stopping occurs. As shown by Stone (1960), since this random walk model predicts  precisely the same form for the RT distributions of both correct responses and errors (conditional on R, or R2), both must  have the same value of E(RT). For fixed stopping, the prediction is obvious, since E(RT) must be the same on all trials when n  is constant.  In fact, few experiments have found an approximately equal mean RT for both correct responses and errors. In general,  discrimination experiments that use distinctive stimuli or strong time pressure (e.g., typical choice RT experiments) find a  shorter mean RT for errors than for correct responses; the opposite result occurs in most traditional discrimination  experiments, that use highly similar stimuli and emphasize response accuracy rather than speed (see Audley, 1973; Swensson,  1972a; Wilding, 1971). Both kinds of results can be obtained in the same discrimination task if the subject's speed/accuracy  trade is manipulated over a sufficiently wide range, e.g., by manipulating the explicit costs for errors relative to increases  in mean RT (Swensson, 1972a). With their assumptions of invariant stopping criteria the present sampling models cannot account  for data of this kind.  Stopping Criteria Which Depend on n  For a fixed stopping rule, the values of both n and E(RT) are fixed for all responses by definition. The cutoff criterion (k*)  for deciding between R, and R, could change, causing a change in the relative values of the two error probabilities (a and  /4), but  FIXED AND OPTIONAL STOPPING 229  this does not affect the value of A (see Eq. 30). However, in the case of optional stopping, n is a random variable; any  changes in the criteria, Z* and Z*, affect n. The remainder of this section explores some implications of this dependence by  making Z* and Z* explicit functions of n.  The OPTIONAL STOPPING RANDOM WALK MODEL. As seen earlier, this model represents the total evidence that the stimulus is 02  rather than 01 by a single variable, z,, = Y_ Zi . The direction and length of each stride in the random walk (taken by zn  over successive observations) depends on the value oZ2 for that observation. For this model, the stopping criteria Z* and Z*  control both the error probabilities and E(n) for the two responses. Any systematic change in Z*, as a function of the number  of observations sampled, would result in different values of E(n), and hence E(RT), for correct and erroneous R2 decisions.  Changes in Z* have the same effect for R, decisions. Although formal expressions for E(RT) do not exist for cases in which Z*  and Z* are functions of n, it is easy to see how such rules affect the direction of the difference in E(RT) between correct  responses and errors.  If I Z* I and Z* increase (Z* and Z* diverge) as the number of observations increases, then the subject's criterion for  stopping becomes more stringent over time. This means that slower decisions (at large n) will be more accurate than faster  decisions, which will generate a greater frequency of errors among the faster RTs and make E(RT) smaller for errors than for  correct responses. With such a rule, the subject could be guaranteed to reach a decision boundary for a finite value of n only  if the rate of increase in I Z* I and Z* with n were less than the expected increases in evidence, I E(Z 101)1 and E(Z 10.).  If I Z* I and Z* decrease (Z* and Z* converge as n increases), then the subject's criteria relax as functions of time. This  type of stopping rule would make his slower decisions less accurate than his faster decisions. Since higher error frequencies  would occur among his slower responses, E(RT) would be larger for errors than for correct responses. By letting the stopping  criteria converge to equality (Z* = Z*) for n = n*, such a rule would include the constraint that no individual RT ever exceed  the maximum value set by n*. This might be a useful strategy for controlling mean RT and error rate when the effective  observation interval is limited (Swensson, 1972a), i.e., if E(Z) = 0 for n > n*. In such a case, observations after n = n*  would be wasted; they would increase the subject's mean RT, but could not improve his discrimination accuracy.  Experiments that vary the physical stimulus similarity between trials, hence presumably E(Z), report both slower mean RTs and  higher error rates for trials which require the more difficult discriminations (see Swensson, 1972a, p. 30). It seems  reasonable to assume that the subjects in these experiments made no attempt to identify each stimulus, but rather treated the  stimuli as coming from one of two possible sources, each source identified by its required response. If so, then the  230 SWENSSON AND THOMAS  data suggest that the subjects used an optional stopping rule with criteria that converged as a function of observing time.  OPTIONAL STOPPING WITH AN "ACCUMULATOR" RULE. The "Accumulator" models (Audley and Pike, 1965; LaBerge, 1962; Pike, 1968;  Vickers, 1970) can be viewed as random walk models with an optional stopping rule whose decision criteria relax in proportion  to the number of observations sampled. Instead of a single variable z, which represents the total current evidence that the  stimulus is 92 rather than al , these models assume a separate "accumulator" for the evidence favoring each response: z,,+ =  Y_ (Zi I Zi > 0) and z,,- = Y_ (Zi I Zi G 0). The decision process then resembles a race; the subject sets separate response  cutoffs, (Z-)* and (Z+)*, on each accumulator. He responds Rl or R, as soon as z,,- <_ (Z-),k or zn+ _>- (Z+)*, whichever  occurs first.  To see that this rule affects performance in the same way as progressively relaxing cutoffs for the random walk on z, note  that z= zn- + z. Thus for the accumulator rule, the probability that Rl will be correct when z,,- reaches (Z-)* depends on  the value for z,,+ at that time; larger values for z,,+ (with z constant) imply smaller values of I zI and hence higher  probabilities that Rl will be the incorrect response. Both z,,+ and I z,,- I must increase monotonically as n increases. For  Rl decisions triggered by zn- crossing the boundary at n = n', this monotonicity means that the average value of z+ increases  as n' increases, which produces a smaller absolute value for zn, and a higher error probability. A similar argument shows that  the error probability for R2 decisions also increases as n increases.  Although the decision cutoffs, (Z-)* and (Z+)*, for the accumulator rule do not change as a function of n, the expected amount  of evidence for Rl or R2 at the time of decision decreases as n increases. Thus, the longest decision times do not simply  reflect fortuitously undiagnostic samples, they also represent the decisions that are least likely to be correct. This  inherent characteristic of the accumulator stopping rule makes it perform like the random walk model when Z* and Z* converge  in proportion to the number of observations (until Z* = Z*). In the special case of binary-valued observations, an optional  stopping random walk model whose decision criteria relax by a unit amount with each observation is formally equivalent to the  accumulator model (Pike, 1968).  Between-Trial Variability in Criteria  One way the sampling models could account for the faster mean RTs for errors, usually observed when strong time pressure  forces performance accuracy below its maximum level (Swensson, 1972a), is by assuming some variability in the stopping  criteria from trial to trial. A subject might deliberately change his stopping criteria between trials, e.g., decreasing n (or  I Z* I and Z*) on successive trials until he encountered an error, and then reversing the process. Alternatively,  trial-to-trial  FIXED AND OPTIONAL STOPPING 231  changes in stopping criteria could be inadvertent. As mentioned earlier, any fixed stopping rule that involved a criterion  (T*) based on some estimate of elapsed time would seem quite naturally to imply random variation in n from trial to trial. For  optional stopping with criteria based on expected accuracy, the subject might require feedback from the occurrence of errors  to recalibrate Z* and Z* periodically.  For a fixed stopping rule, (16) through (19) show that a decrease in n decreases E(RT) and increases the error probabilities  (and fl), while an increase in n has the opposite effect. Any changes in n between trials will produce a greater expected  number of errors on trials with smaller values of n (faster RTs). This shifts the RT distribution for error trials, relative  to the distribution for trials on which correct responses occur. Thus, errors would have a faster mean RT than correct  responses if n varied between trials.  As Fitts (1966) pointed out, any between-trial variability in criteria would also lead the optional stopping random walk model  to predict faster mean RTs for error responses. Variation in Z* and Z* makes E(n) vary from trial to trial. Equations (21) and  (26) show that changes in E(n) produce the same effect under optional stopping as do changes in n under fixed stopping. For  the same reasons, therefore, if the subject's optional stopping criteria (Z* and Z*) varied between trials, his errors would  have a faster mean RT than his correct responses.  Laming (1968) suggested another possible source of variability in E(n) between trials for the optional stopping random walk  model. He proposed that, because the subject cannot anticipate precisely when the stimulus will occur, he begins taking  observations before the stimulus appears. Although E(Z) = 0 for each of these premature observations, sampling variability  would make Y. Zi for these observations vary about zero from trial to trial. This random (but usually nonzero) contribution to  the cumulative log likelihood ratio (z would produce between-trial variation in E(n), the expected number of observations  required to move the subject from his initial value of Y Zi to either decision boundary (Z* or 7,*).  SPECIALIZED MODELS FOR DETECTION AND INTENSITY DISCRIMINATION  Models Based on Poisson-Distributed Input  One class of models for detection and intensity discrimination (Green and Luce, 1973; Luce and Green, 1972; McGill, 1967)  assumes that the stimulus input gives rise to a Poisson distribution of neural events ("pulses") whose parameter, A, depends  on the intensity of the physical stimulus B. Identifying 92 with the more intense stimulus (or "signal") and Bl with the less  intense stimulus (or "noise"), these models assume that as > A,. This assumption implies that the Inter-Arrival Time (IAT)  between successive pulses has an exponential distribution with parameter 1/a, where  232 SWENSSON AND THOMAS  1/A, < 1/Al . Green and Luce (1973) propose that the subject can elect either: (a) to fix a time interval and count the number  of pulses that occur during that interval, or (b) to measure a fixed number of IATs between successive pulses. The Counting  model assumes the former strategy and the Timing model assumes the latter.  COUNTING MODEL. This model assumes the subject counts the number of pulses that occur during some fixed interval T* and then  responds with RT = T* + C (independent of 0), where C is the residual time. He makes response R2 if the observed count exceeds  a preset criterion value and responds Rl if it does not. The values of this count have a Poisson distribution with mean and  variance AT*, which is approximately normal for large T*. Green and Luce (1973) show that the ROC curve generated by changes  in the decision criterion for a fixed T* is approximately linear on a normal-normal scale, with a slope of (A,/A2)i/2 < 1.0.  TIMING MODEL. This model assumes the subject fixes n, the number of IATs he observes before responding. He makes response R2  if the mean of these n IATs is less than some preset criterion and responds RI if it is greater. The sum of the observed IATs  has a gamma distribution with mean n/A and variance n/A2, which is approximately normal for large n. The predicted ROC curve  for any fixed n (Green and Luce, 1973; Luce and Green, 1972) is approximately linear on a normal-normal scale with a slope of  A,/A, > 1.0.  The RT is equal to the time needed to observe the required number of pulses plus a residual time. Its expression does not  follow immediately from the gamma distribution for the n IATs because the Timing model introduces an additional complication.  It assumes that the n values of IAT are acquired by counting only k + 1 pulses on each of J independent "channels," where n =  Jk. This means that the decision cannot be made until the slowest of the J channels has received k -}- 1 pulses. Hence, there  is a curious asymmetry between the Counting and Timing models proposed by Green and Luce (1973). While the Counting model  assumes the subject counts all pulses that arrive over any channel within the fixed time interval, the Timing model assumes he  must ignore any additional IA Ts on a channel that has already obtained k + 1 pulses. However, since 1 /AI > 1 /A2 , the time  required to accumulate the n total IATs will always have a larger mean under 0,, which implies that E(RT 10,) > E(RT 102).  Relation to the Sampling Models  The relation between the Poisson models and the present sampling models is most easily seen by noting that the Counting and  Timing models assume the subject observes different functions of the variable sensory input, i.e., the number of pulses or the  IATs. But since the criterion for stopping (the end of a fixed interval or the fixed number of IATs) is not a function of the  stimulus input on any given trial,  FIXED AND OPTIONAL STOPPING 233  both the Counting and Timing models assume fixed stopping rules by the present definition. The correspondence is more  straightforward for the Counting model.  FIXED STOPPING AND POISSON COUNTING. If the present sampling models assume a fixed time between observations, t, and a Poisson  stream of input, then f (X; 0) has a Poisson distribution with parameter At. Since the sum of n Poisson variables (each with  parameter At) is Poisson with parameter Ant, these specialized assumptions make the present fixed stopping model  indistinguishable from the Poisson Counting model with T* = nt.  These assumptions about X lead to the following expressions for Z:  E(Z 10) = t(A1- A2) + At ln(A2/A1) (34)  and  V(Z 10) = At[ln(A2/A1)]2, (35)  where A = A1 , A2 for 0 = 01 , 02 . Then the ROC curve for fixed stopping at a constant n follows from (17):  r2 _f__ r1\Al/A2)112 + (nt)1/2 [(A2 - A1)/Al/2],2l/2],  (36)  where r2 and r1 are defined by (16a and b) as the normal deviates corresponding to 1 - S and a, the respective probabilities  of correct and erroneous R2 responses (to 02 and 01). Equation (36) is identical to the ROC curve for the Poisson Counting  model (Green and Luce, 1973, Eq. 1).  All differences in equations between Green and Luce's Counting model and this specialized fixed stopping model reflect only  different definitions of the location parameter of (36). (Green and Luce define d' as the value of r2 when r1 = 0 and a = 0.5;  we define dE' as the value of r2 - r1 where r2 = -r1 and a = g.) Equation (25), with m = (A1/A2)1/2, can be used to obtain the  value of dE corresponding to any observed values of a and g, once m is obtained by estimating the slope of (36) for any fixed  value of n. Since (d,')2 is proportional to nt, then by (2), it is linear in E(RT). The identity between the two models means  that any data supporting the Poisson Counting model (e.g., Green and Luce, 1973) equally supports this specialized fixed  stopping model.  FIXED STOPPING AND POISSON TIMING. The relation to the fixed stopping sampling model is somewhat more strained for Poisson  Timing than it is for Poisson Counting. The Timing model assumes that the IATs are the observations that underlie the  decision, which makes the time between successive observations (T) a function of 0. In fact, since T and the IAT are the same  variable, T is exponential with mean 1/A and variance 1/A2. This contradicts the sampling models' assumption that T is  independent of 0.  234 SWENSSON AND THOMAS  In the present development of the sampling models, the independence of T from X and 0 was used only to obtain the mean and  variance of the sampling time, and hence of RT. If the assumptions were changed to identify the content of the underlying  observations (X) with the time between successive observations (T = IAT), then the representation for RT could be developed as  for the Timing model (Green and Luce, 1973; Luce and Green, 1972). However, the sampling process is certainly no longer  periodic if the time between successive observations depends on the stimulus, which violates the intuitive conception of  "sampling" in this context and makes the term rather misleading. But the case of X = T is instructive to consider, because it  leads to an explicit formal relation between the present sampling models and the Timing model.  If X -- T is exponential with parameter 1 /A, then:  and  E(Z 10) =1n(a1/a2) - (1 /a)[(1 /Aj) - (1 /AA (37)  V(Z 10) = f (1 /a)[(1 /A2) - (1 /A1)112,  (38)  where A = A1 , A2 for 0 = 01 , 02. The ROC curve for stopping at a fixed value of n follows directly from (17):  r2 - r,(A2/A1) -I- n1/2[(A2/A1) - 11, (39)  where r2 and r1 are the same as in (36) and are defined by (16a and b). Except for notation, (39) is identical to the ROC  curve derived for the Poisson Timing model (Green and Luce, 1973, Eq. 7); its slope is A2/al > 1.0. Calculation of dE' follows  from (25) with m = A2/A1 , the known or estimated slope of the ROC curve (39). Since (d,')2 is proportional to n, it will be  proportional to the expected sampling time required to obtain these n observations, and hence will be a linear function of  E(RT).  To make this specialized fixed stopping model identical to the Poisson Timing model, it must be further assumed that the n  observations are composed of exactly k observations on each of J independent and identical channels, where n = kJ. Then E(RT)  is the sum of the mean residual time (c) and the mean waiting time for the slowest channel to obtain k observations. For this  case, Luce and Green (1972, Eq. 24; Green and Luce, 1973, Eq. 4) derive the approximation:  E(RT) - c + [k + 1 + (k -f- 1)1/2 H(J)l, (40)  where H(J) is the expected value of the largest of J independent samples from a normal distribution with mean zero and  variance 1.0. A somewhat more direct approach to the representation for RT in this special case would simply assume  FIXED AND OPTIONAL STOPPING 235  that all observations were collected until the total reached n. Then the total sampling time would have a gamma distribution  with mean (n + 1)/A and variance (n -}- 1)/A2. The explicit relations for the speed/accuracy tradeoff functions, given BI and  ez , could be obtained by the procedure followed earlier, by using  E(RT) = (n + 1)/A -}- c  in place of (2).  RECEIVED: January 9, 1973  REFERENCES  AUDLEY, R. J. Some observations on theories of choice reaction time. In S. Kornblum (Ed.) Attention and Performance, Vol. 4.  New York: Academic Press, 1973.  AUDLEY, R. J., AND PIKE, A. R. Some alternative stochastic models of choice. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical  Psychology, 1965, 18, 207-255.  CHERNOFF, H., AND MOSES, L. E. Elementary decision theory. New York: Wiley, 1959. CREELMAN, C. D. Human discrimination of  auditory duration. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 1962, 34, 582-593.  EDWARDS, W. Optimal strategies for seeking information: models for statistics, choice reaction times, and human information  processing. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1965, 2, 312-329.  GHosH, B. K. Sequential tests of statistical hypotheses. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1970. GREEN, D. M., AND LUCE, R. D.  Speed-accuracy tradeoff in auditory detection. In S. Kornblum (Ed.) Attention and performance, Vol. 4. New York: Academic  Press, 1973.  GREEN, D. M., AND SWETS, J. A. Signal detection theory and psychophysics. New York: Wiley, 1966.  ISAAC, P. D. Linear regression, structural relations, and measurement error. Psychological Bulletin, 1970, 74, 213-218.  KENDALL, M. G., AND STUART, A. The advanced theory of statistics, Vol. 11. Inference and relationship. London: Charles Griffin  & Company, 1961.  LABERGE, D. A. A recruitment theory of simple behavior. Psychometrica, 1962, 27, 375-396. LAMING, D. R. J. Information theory  of choice reaction times. New York: Academic Press, 1968. LINK, S. W. Applying RT deadlines to discrimination reaction time.  Psychonomic Science, 1971, 25, 355-358.  LINK, S. W., AND TINDAL, A. D. Speed and accuracy in comparative judgments of line length. Perception and Psychophysics, 1971,  9, 284-288.  LUCE, R. D., AND GREEN, D. M. A neural timing theory for response times and the psychophysics of intensity. Psychological  Review, 1972, 79, 14-57.  MCGILL, W. J. Neural counting mechanisms and energy detection in audition. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1967, 4,  351-376.  NEISSER, U. Decision time without reaction time: Experiments in visual scanning. Americal Journal of Psychology, 1963, 76,  376-385.  NICKERSON, R. S. 'Same'- 'different' response times: A model and a preliminary test. In W. G. Koster (Ed.) Attention and  performance II: Acta Psychologica, 1969, 30, 257-275.  236  SWENSSON AND THOMAS  OLLMAN, R. T. Fast guesses in choice reaction time. Psychonomic Science, 1966, 6, 155-156. OLLMAN, R. T. Simple reactions with  random countermanding of the "Go" signal. In S. Komblum (Ed.) Attention and performance, Vol. 4. New York: Academic Press,  1973. OLLMAN, R. T., AND BILLINGTON, M. J. The deadline model for simple reaction times. Cognitive Psychology, 1972, 3,  311-336.  PACHELLA, R. C., AND FISHER, D. F. Effect of stimulus degradation and similarity on the trade-off between speed and accuracy  in absolute judgments. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1969, 81, 7-9.  PACHELLA, R. C., AND FISHER, D. F. Hick's law and the speed-accuracy trade-off in absolute judgment. Journal of Experimental  Psychology, 1972, 92, 378-384.  PACHELLA, R. C., AND PEW, R. W. Speed-accuracy tradeoff in reaction times: Effect of discrete criterion times. Journal of  Experimental Psychology, 1968, 76, 19-24.  PIKE, A. R. Latency and relative frequency of response in psychophysical discriminations. British Journal of Mathematical and  Statistical Psychology, 1968, 21, 161-182.  SCHOUTEN, J. F., AND BEKKER, J. A. M. Reaction time and accuracy. In A. F. Sanders (Ed.), Attention and performance: Acta  Psychologica, 1967, 27, 143-153.  SMITH, E. E. Choice reaction time: An analysis of the major theoretical positions. Psychological Bulletin, 1968, 69, 77-110.  SNODGRASS, J. G., LUCE, R. D., AND GALANTER, E. Some experiments on simple and choice reaction time. Journal of Experimental  Psychology, 1967, 75, 1-17.  STONE, M. Models for choice reaction times. Psychometrika, 1960, 25, 251-260.  SWENSSON, R. G. The elustive tradeoff: Speed versus accuracy in visual discrimination tasks. Perception and Psychophysics,  1972, 12, 16-32(a).  SWENSSON, R. G. Trade-off bias and efficiency effects in serial choice reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1972,  95, 397-407(6).  VICKERS, D. Evidence for an accumulator model of psychophysical discrimination. Ergonomics, 1970, 13, 37-58.  WALD, A. Sequential analysis. New York: Wiley, 1947.  WILDING, J. M. The relation between latency and accuracy in the identification of visual stimuli. 1. The effects of task  difficulty. Acta Psychologica, 1971, 35, 378-398.  YELLOTT, J. I., JR. Correction for guessing in choice reaction time. Psychonomic Science, 1967, 8, 321-322.  YELLOTT, J. I. JR., Correction for guessing and the speed-accuracy tradeoff in choice reaction time. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 1971, 8, 159-199.