10.1016/0022-2496(74)90032-7
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 11, 453-472 (1974)  The Sequential Structure of the Quanta[ Experiment'  DONALD LAMING  Psychological Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, England  A linear model is proposed for the interrelation of successive responses in the quantal experiment. The model is based on a  direct mechanism of response linkage rather than on an indirect relation by means of fluctuations in sensitivity, because  Neisser's published results implicate the former mechanism rather than the latter. The proportion of increments detected is an  unbiased estimator of the detection probability and has a statistical efficiency of only 20 o. In view of this unexpectedly  low efficiency it is possible that rectilinear psychometric results have occurred by means of a biased, but unwitting,  selection of data.  Stevens and Volkmann (1940) proposed that the "true" psychometric function for the detection of increments in the intensity of  a continuous background tone is rectilinear in form, rather than ogival as is often supposed. The particular function they  proposed is shown as the heavy broken line in Fig. 1. It consists of three straightline segments; if P(Ax) is the probability  of reporting an increment of size Ax, then the function may be written:  P(Ax) =0, 0<dx<1,  P(Ax) = Ax - 1, 1 < Ax < 2,  P(AX) = 1, 2 < Ax,  where Ax is measured in units (neural quanta) which are intrinsic to the observer and may depend on the background level. The  neural quantum theory underlying this function has recently been re-presented with great clarity by Stevens (1972), and the  exposition of the theory will not be repeated here. The purpose of this paper is to draw attention to an aspect of the  experimental data adduced in support of the theorythe interdependence of successive responses in the quantal experiment-that  has for the most part been ignored. It is possible that the experimental results are artifactual. One difficulty facing the  neural quantum theory is that convincing confirmatory  1 I thank Dr. F. W. Campbell, Dr. D. M. Green, Dr. J. G. Robson, and Miss M. M. Hayhoe for their comments on the original  draft of this paper.  Copyright 1974 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  453  454 DONALD LAMING  c O  T a 0 a a.  Increment Ax in quanta! units  FIG. 1. The rectilinear psychometric function predicted by the neural quantum theory (broken line) compared with a normal  integral with respect to the square of the increment Ax (continuous curve).  evidence can usually be obtained only with one particular experimental procedure, the quantal experiment. This procedure was  described in detail by Stevens, Morgan, and Volkmann (1941). The observer listened to a series of increments (usually 25 in  number) of fixed size added at regular intervals (every 3 sec) to a continuous background tone. The observer reported by  pressing a key every time he thought he heard an increment, and the proportion of increments thus reported was taken as an  estimate of the probability of detection. An experimental psychometric function was built up by presenting different sizes of  increment in separate 25-trial blocks.  The reasoning behind this unusual experimental procedure runs as follows: If the observer's attention fluctuates during the  experiment, the data obtained will represent performance averaged over different states of attention. Taking "state of  attention" to be related to sensitivity of detection, the experimental psychometric function will reflect a weighted average  over several "true" psychometric functions, each corresponding to a different state of attention. If the "true" psychometric  function is rectilinear as Stevens and Volkmann proposed, and if the state of attention affects, say, the size of the quantal  unit, then the several "true" psychometric functions are each of the rectilinear form shown in Fig. 1 and differ only in their  scale unit. Such a family of functions may be generated only by a lateral transformation (magnification about zero); but the  aggregation of the data is conditional on the physical size of the increment and therefore implies an averaging in the  vertical direction. Such an averaging would round off the corners of the rectilinear form, making the experimental  psychometric function resemble a smooth curve, rather like a normal ogive. Therefore, if the "true" form of the psychometric  function is to be revealed experimentally, everything possible must be done to facilitate a steady state of attention on the  part of the observer.  The quantal experiment represents the utmost in terms of the observer's convenience. But it is also completely lacking in  statistical control, so that a perverse subject could  SEQUENTIAL STRUCTURE 455  guess correctly on every trial, and by present-day standards in these matters it is deficient.  In arguing for the neural quantum theory Stevens (1972) took the mean proportion of detections reported at each level of the  increment as an estimate of the corresponding detection probability. This is the natural way to treat the data, and, if  successive responses in the quantal experiment are independent, it presents an unbiased picture of the psychometric function.  But successive responses in the quantal experiment are not independent; they are known to be positively correlated (Neisser,  1957). Stevens (1972, p. 754) was aware of this autocorrelation, but seems not to have appreciated its significance.  The autocorrelation of successive responses in the quantal experiment raises three questions:  (i) Is the proportion of increments detected still an unbiased, or is it now a biased, estimate of the underlying detection  probability?  (ii) What is the statistical accuracy of the estimate? A sequence of 25 correlated responses will be equivalent to some lesser  number of independent responses. What is that lesser number ?  (iii) Does the sequential structure of the quantal experiment suggest any means of rapprochement between the rectilinear  psychometric function suggested by that procedure and the curvilinear function obtained from more conventional experimental  procedures ?  I intend to answer these questions by setting up a simple model for the sequential fluctuations of detection probability in  the quantal experiment and investigating its properties.  PREVIOUS WORK ON THE INTERDEPENDENCE OF SUCCESSIVE RESPONSES  IN THE QUANTAL EXPERIMENT  Before presenting any model for the sequential interactions in the quantal experiment, it will be helpful to review the  experimental results which such a model must accommodate. There are just three papers which need to be mentioned.  Blackwell (1952)  Blackwell demonstrated a property of the quantal experiment which he called "channelization." Looking at those response  sequences (for blocks of 20 trials) showing a predominance of detections he found that the proportion of detections increased  from the first quarter of each sequence to the last three-quarters; this suggests that if the first few increments in a block  happen to be detected, the probability of detecting  456 DONALD LAMING  subsequent increments is raised thereby. However, no complementary property was found for those response sequences showing a  predominance of failures to detect. Blackwell's analysis shows that the quantal experiment has some sequential structure  requiring investigation, but tells us very little about it.  Jerger (1955)  Against a contemporary background of response interdependence in psychophysical procedures generally (e.g., Senders and  Sowards, 1952), Jerger asserted that in the quantal experiment successive responses were actually independent. This assertion  was based on his analysis of the autocorrelation (of lag one only) of successive responses in a quantal experiment employing  blocks of 20 trials.  Let Ri be the response to the ith increment in a block of size n, and put Ri = 1 if the increment was reported and Ri = 0  otherwise. The critical statistic in Jerger's argument is the cross-product term _ i-i RiRi+i , which has an approximately  normal distribution for large n under the null hypothesis of independence. It is convenient to convert each cross-product to a  standardized normal deviate (z-score) which under the null hypothesis should have zero mean and unit variance. In terms of  z-scores Jerger's mean in a sample of 20 was -{-0.056, with a sample standard deviation of 0.65; evidently the cross-product  terms conformed very well to the null hypothesis of independence. But, if the sample standard deviation was only 0.65 (where  the theoretical value is unity), the sample sum of squares was presumably 8.51 (=20((0.65)2 -f- (0.056)2]) with 20 d.f., which  is significant at the low extremity of the X2 distribution (p > 0.975). This means that Jerger's sample of normalized  crossproducts were grouped more closely about zero than would ordinarily happen by chance; the conformity to the hypothesis of  independence was, thus, too good to be true. One can but conjecture that Jerger's subjects studied to avoid any first-order  patterning in their responding as a matter of deliberate strategy and discard Jerger's result from further consideration for  this reason.  Neisser (1957)  Neisser conducted his experiments under the direction of Stevens at Harvard University, and I therefore take his experimental  procedure and his results to be typical of the quantal method. His most important finding was high positive autocorrelation  amongst successive responses. Using r; to represent the total autocorrelation coefficient at lag j, Neisser reported from his  main experiment median values rl = 0.41, r2 = 0.35, r3 = 0.32, and r4 = 0.25. The level of correlation fell off only slowly  with increasing lag; in addition, Neisser computed a few autocorrelations at lag ten and found them "strikingly high;  correlations of 0.30 at lag 10 are not uncommon" (Neisser, 1957, p. 520).  Neisser considered two alternative explanations of the autocorrelation of responses:  SEQUENTIAL STRUCTURE 457  1. FLUCTUATIONS IN SENSITIVITY. Suppose that the sensitivity of the observer fluctuates from time to time at a rate which is  slow relative to that at which successive increments are presented. During periods of increased sensitivity the probability of  detection will be higher and there will be, accordingly, a greater proportion of increments reported. By this means detections  will tend to cluster together giving positive autocorrelation.  2. RESPONSE LINEAGE. As an alternative explanation suppose that the probability that an increment will be reported is  increased or lowered according as the recent preceding increments were reported or not. Such a process could, in principle,  yield autocorrelation coefficients of either sign.  The relational structures of these two explanations are shown in Fig. 2. The symbol pi stands for the probability of detecting  the ith increment; the response Ri is thus a binomial random variable with pi as parameter.  P; -> R, W P1.i--> R1.t W Pi.2-> RI-2  P;.i--> R;.,  Fic. 2. Relational structure of (a) fluctuations in sensitivity, and (b) response linkage. Broken arrows represent the  observable autocorrelation of responses.  The first explanation says that the detection probabilities for successive increments are related by means of a common  intervening variable, sensitivity, which fluctuates slowly. Mathematically, the basic relation is between pi and pi,, in Fig.  2a. But the pi are unobservable; only the responses can be observed and at this level the autocorrelation is weakened by the  interposition of two random variables, Ri and Ri+i . The linkage from one response to the next (Ri F- pi pi+i , Ri+i) involves  traversing one arrow in the contrary direction and is therefore indirect.  The second explanation, on the other hand, postulates a direct linkage from Ri via pi+i to Ri+i as in Fig. 2b. The basic  relation is between Ri and pi+i , and the autocorrelation at the level of observable responses is weakened by the  interposition of only one random variable (Ri+l). Hence, for a given value of the underlying correlation coefficient (between  pi and pi,, , or between Ri and pi+i , as the case may be), response linkage will lead to the stronger autocorrelation of  responses. So if both processes  458 DONALD LAMING  happen to be operative in the quantal experiment-they are by no means incompatible- the response linkage will tend to dominate  the other.  Neisser's published results generally indicate that the underlying correlational mechanism is a response linkage. This  conclusion is naturally very important with respect to the construction of a mathematical model for the sequential  interactions, and the justification for it will be examined in detail.  FLUCTUATIONS IN SENSITIVITY OR RESPONSE LINKAGE?  Let Ri be the response to the ith increment and put Ri = 1 if the increment is reported and Ri = 0 otherwise. Let pi be the  probability of reporting the ith increment, that is, pi = P(Ri = 1). The probability pi fluctuates from one increment to the  next; let its mean be  p = E(pi), (la)  and its variance  Q2 = Ef(pi -p)2}. (lb)  Fluctuations in Sensitivity  Fluctuations in sensitivity mean that pi+; correlates with pi with coefficient, say, pi; that is,  E{(pi+j - p)(pi - p)}I LE{(pi+, - p)2} E{(pi - p)2111/2 = pi (2)  The autocorrelation coefficients computed by Neisser are  E{(Ri+f - p)(Ri - p)}I LE{(Ri+j - p)2} E{(Ri - p)2)11/2 = r1, (  for j = 1, 2,... . The response variance is  E{(R, - p)2} = E{[(R, - pi) + (pi - p)l2} = E(pi(l - pi) + (pi - p)2},  on taking expectations with respect to Ri ,  = p(l - p),  on taking expectations with respect to pi . The response covariance is  E{(Ri+1- p)(Ri - p)} = Etf(Ri+j - pi+j) + (pi+j - p)l [(Ri - pi) + (pi - P)1} = E{(pi+j - p)(pi - p)},  on taking expectations with respect to Ri and Ri+; , = pJa2,  SEQUENTIAL STRUCTURE 459  on substitution from Eqs. (lb) and (2). Hence, substituting Eqs. (4) and (5) into Eq. (3),  r; = pia21 p(l -p).  Response Linkage  Response linkage means that pi+; correlates p' with Ri (where p' is to be distinguished from p; above). So, instead of Eq. (2),  E{(pi+j - p)(Ri - p))1 [E1(pi+7 - p)2) E{(Ri - p)2)]1/2 = p' . (7)  Equations (lb) and (4) still hold, but the response covariance term in Eq. (3) is now  E{(Ri+.7 - p)(Ri - p)} = E{[(Ri+7 - pi+A) + (pi+.i - p)](Ri - p)) = E{(pi+3 - p)(Ri - p)),  on taking expectations with respect to Ri+; ,  = p;[a2p(1 -p)h/2, (8) on substitution from Eqs. (lb), (4), and (7). Hence, for response linkage,  ri - P'[a21p(l -p)]l/2  by substituting Eqs. (4) and (8) into (3). Equation (9) should be compared with Eq. (6).  In Eqs. (6) and (9), a2 is the variance of pi , subject to an mean p; a2 therefore has a maximum value p(1 - p) which is  achieved only in the case that all the pi are either zero or one. So all p(1 - p) < 1. For a given value of the primary  correlation coefficients (that is, putting pi = p;) response linkage (Eq. (9)) gives values for the r; greater than (or at  least equal to) those given by fluctuations in sensitivity (Eq. (6)). If all p(1 - p) is small, the response linkage process  will dominate the other.  Neisser's Results  Neisser (1957) obtained three results which imply that, if both correlational mechanisms be operative in the quantal  experiment, then the response linkage does indeed dominate the other. He also presented two arguments in favor of fluctuations  in sensitivity, which I shall rebut.  CATCH TRIALS. In one experiment Neisser omitted the stimulus increment at certain isolated positions within each block. The  proportion of false-positive responses on these catch trials was 0.03.  48o/i1/4-9  460 DONALD LAMING  If the autocorrelation of responses is due to underlying fluctuations of sensitivity, the evolution of the process will be  unaffected by the intrusion of a catch trial. Moreover, the response on a catch trial reflects merely the absence of the  increment and tells us nothing about the momentary sensitivity of the observer. Consequently, the probability of reporting the  increment immediately following a catch trial should be unchanged and should also be independent of the response given on the  catch trial. But the data conformed to neither of these predictions. In particular, the conditional probability of reporting  an increment given a failure to report on a preceding catch trial was about the same as the corresponding probability given a  failure to report a preceding (true) increment (see Neisser, 1957, Table II). This means that the conditional probability is  tied to the preceding response and is independent of whether or no an increment was presented on the preceding trial. This  result reflects a direct response linkage of the type illustrated in Fig. 2b.  INTERCHANGE SERIES. In another experiment a few small increments were inserted at certain isolated positions within blocks of  relatively large increments, and isolated large increments were inserted into blocks of small increments. If the underlying  correlational mechanism subsisted in fluctuations of sensitivity, then the unconditional probability of response to, say, a  small increment would be independent of whether that increment was contained in a block of small increments or was isolated in  a block of large increments. Response linkage, on the other hand, implies that it is the conditional response probabilities  which are unchanged between the two conditions; and because a small increment is preceded by a detection more frequently when  it is inserted within a block of large increments, so the unconditional probability of reporting the small increment must be  larger in this case. The results (Neisser, 1957, Table III) unequivocally favor the hypothesis of response linkage.  LENGTHS OF RUNS OF SIMILAR RESPONSES. Positive autocorrelation of responses shows up in the form of runs of similar responses  longer than would ordinarily occur by chance. A response linkage mechanism is tied to the succession of stimulus increments  and therefore implies that the distribution of run lengths is independent of the temporal interval between successive stimuli.  Fluctuations in sensitivity, intrinsic to the observer, on the other hand, are (presumably) tied to the passage of time and  should therefore produce higher positive autocorrelation and longer runs of similar responses when the interstimulus intervals  are short.  Neisser compared four different rates of presenting the increments in the quantal experiment, with interstimulus intervals of  1.5, 2.5, 4.0, and 6.0 sec. There was no significant evidence of any variation in the level of autocorrelation with  interstimulus interval, and the four distributions of run length were virtually identical. This result, too, suggests an  underlying mechanism of response linkage rather than fluctuations in sensitivity.  SEQUENTIAL STRUCTURE 461  ARGUMENTS FOR FLUCTUATIONS IN SENSITIVITY. Neisser presented two arguments for the involvement of fluctuations in sensitivity  as well as response linkage:  (1) If the autocorrelation of responses was due to a response linkage which, in addition, had the structure of a Markov chain,  then the jth-order autocorrelation should be equal to the jth power of the first-order autocorrelation (Miller, 1952); that is,  (10)  Neisser's autocorrelation coefficients do not conform to Eq. (10) (see Table 1 here). (ii) The proportion of detections in a  block of increments varies from block to block more than would ordinarily occur by chance, suggesting an underlying variation  in the mean detection probability (Neisser, 1957, p. 521).  These arguments do not, however, establish Neisser's conclusion:  (1) I shall shortly present a mathematical model-a linear rather than a Markov model-which is based on a mechanism of response  linkage and provides a satisfactory account of Neisser's autocorrelation coefficients. This means that the first argument is  specific to the type of model considered.  (ii) The experimental finding underlying the second argument is explicable on the basis of my linear model and could therefore  arise from response linkage as well as from fluctuations in sensitivity. Indeed, in the appendix it is shown that, if the  autocorrelation coefficients be given, the distribution of Neisser's test statistic is independent of the mechanism underlying  the autocorrelations.  Psychological Interpretation of Response Linkage  The meaning at a psychological level of fluctuations in sensitivity is self-evident, but that of response linkage is not, and  a word of interpretation here will be helpful.  In the quantal experiment the observer knows that increments will be presented regularly every three seconds or so. The  reporting of one increment and the failing to report another in the same block of trials is unrelated to any change in the  experimental events and depends, at best, only on some unmeasured fluctuation in the response of the observer's sensory  apparatus to a fixed stimulus. There is no objective criterion of a correct response. In these circumstances the choice of  response is determined only weakly, if at all, by the pattern of stimulation and will be correspondingly influenced by the  context in which the choice has to be made. In the quantal experiment the only variable context is the pattern of previous  responses, and response linkage is the natural outcome.  Contextual information is used in psychophysical tasks in proportion as the stimulus information is insufficient to determine  the choice of response. In the present case it evidently matters nothing that the context is self-generated and therefore  valueless.  462 DONALD LAMING  Rather, it seems that the observer is uncertain how ready he should be to report the particular size of increment currently  being presented. If recently he has reported a majority of the increments presented, he will assume that the currently  presented increment is of a size that ought to be easily detected and, as a consequence, will be more willing to report  it-maintaining a kind of self-consistency. After failures to report, of course, the observer becomes less ready to detect the  increment. The positive autocorrelation coefficients indicate an influence of prior context on present readiness to detect,  much as the prior signal probability influences the detection probability in signal-detection experiments (Green & Swets,  1966) or the preceding stimuli influence present performance in choice-reaction experiments (Laming, 1969). It would help to  have a simple mathematical model to describe how the observer in the quantal experiment utilises the self-generated  pseudo-information contained in his preceding responses.  THE SINGLE-OPERATOR LINEAR MODEL  As a further preliminary to a mathematical model for the sequential structure of the quantal experiment, it will be helpful to  look briefly at the single-operator linear model. This model is well-known in connection with simple learning and has been  applied, in particular, to binary prediction experiments (see Bush & Mosteller, 1955; Sternberg, 1963; Suppes & Atkinson,  1960; Yellott, 1969). This brief discussion will relate the present problem to other problems with which the reader may  already be familiar. Let pi be the probability of detecting the ith increment. Assume  Pi+1 = api -}- (I - ,  if the ith increment is detected, and  Pi+]L = api ,  if it is not. Putting Ri = 1 if the ith increment is detected and Ri = 0 if it is missed, this basic pair of equations (11)  can be written more succinctly,  pi+l = api + (I - a)Ri . (12)  In application to binary prediction experiments the choice between the two linear transforms (IIa) and (IIb) is usually  contingent on the outcome of the trial, that is, on which response is reinforced; and the response which is designated as  correct is commonly independent of the response made (noncontingent event reinforcement). Yellott (1969), however, has studied  noncontingent success reinforcement and  SEQUENTIAL STRUCTURE 463  especially the condition in which the response actually made is reinforced on every trial. In this condition the outcome is  always determined by the response and Eq. (12) applies.  Yellott (1969, p. 555) has shown that the sequence {pi} generated by Eq. (12) always converges either to zero or to one. This  means that the response sequence always degenerates either into an interminable sequence of detections or into a similarly  interminable sequence of failures to detect. But if this were true of the quantal procedure, it would surely have been  remarked by previous experimenters. In addition, in the limit when successive responses become all the same, the  autocorrelation coefficients tend to one for every lag j. But, as Neisser has shown, autocorrelation coefficients for the  quantal experiment are substantially less than one and decrease, albeit slowly, with increasing lag. So Eq. (12) will not do  as it stands.  It happens that there is a simple modification to Eq. (12) which makes the equation entirely consistent with the available  results. Suppose that the detection probability actually effective on trial i -}- 1 is a weighted average over the value given  by Eq. (12) and a constant "true" detection probability. The range of variation of pi is thereby restricted to be less than  the interval [0, 1], and the sequence {pi} can no longer converge to either zero or one. The autocorrelation coefficients are  therefore less than one and, in fact, decay geometrically with respect to increasing lag j.  A LINEAR MODEL FOR THE QUANTAL EXPERIMENT  In place of Eq. (12) consider the transformation  pi+j = -pi + (1 - [aRi -f- (I - a)p],  (13)  where p is a true detection probability determined by sensory factors such as the size of the increment presented and the  background against which it is to be detected, and also by the allowable proportion of false-positives. (Equation (12) is a  special case of Eq. (13) in which the true detection probability carries zero weight, with (1 - a) = 0.) As before, the  probability of reporting an increment (pi+i) is increased by a positive report (Ri = 1) on the preceding trial and decreased  by a negative report (Ri =0); but the extent to which a succession of positive (or negative) reports can drive the response  probability towards one (or zero) is limited by the additional term in the square brackets. The transformation of response  probability from trial i to trial i + 1 now depends on both response bias and sensory factors, which carry weights a and (1 -  a), respectively. Whereas in the learning of an arbitrary association only a response bias process needs to be taken into  account, in a psychophysical task it is, of course, to be expected that sensory factors will be operative as well.  464 DONALD LAMING  Asymptotic Mean and Variance of the Response Probability  The asymptotic mean and variance of pi are necessary preliminaries to deriving expressions for the autocorrelation  coefficients. It is shown first that the mean of pi tends asymptotically to the true detection probability p.  Equation (13) can be rewritten in the form,  (pa+l - p) - - - (14)  - -(Pi p) + (l a) a(Rj p).   Taking expectations in Eq. (14) conditional on pi ,   E{(pi+l - p) I pi) _ (a + a - aa)(pi - p)   = b(pi -p), (15)  where   b = 1 - (1 - (1 - a). (16)  Applying Eq. (15) iteratively,   E{(pi+l - p) I pl) = bi(pl - p). (17)  Since b G 1, E(pi+l) -* p as i -* oo.  The asymptotic variance a2 may be obtained as follows: Squaring both sides of Eq. (14) and taking expectations,  E{(pi+l - p)2} = -'E{(pi - p)2} + 2-a(1 - a) E{(pi - p)(Ri - p)} + a2(1 - a)2E{(Ri - p)2}_  (18)  At asymptote, E{(pi+l - p)2} = E{(pi - p)2} = E{(pi - p)(Ri - p)} = a2, and E{(Ri_D)2} is given by Eq. (4). Substituting in  Eq. (18),  a2 = [a2 + 2aa(1 - oz)] a2 -{- a2(1 - (X)2 p(l - p),  whence  a2 = a2(l - a)2p(l -p)1[1 - b2 + a2(l - a)2].  (19)  Autocorrelation Coefficients Suppose j > l; then  E{(Ri+j+l - p)(Ri - p)} = E{[(Ri+j+l - pi+.7+1) + (pi+.v+l - p)](Ri - p)}  = E{(pi+a+l - p)(Rj - p)}, (20)  SEQUENTIAL STRUCTURE 465  because E{(Ri+;+1 - pi+j+1)(Ri - p)} = 0. Substituting in Eq. (20) from Eq. (14)  E{(Ri+j+l - p)(Ri - p)}  - E{L-(pi+j - p) + (1 - (X) a(Ri+j - p)](Ri - p)}  = E{La{(Ri+7 - pi+9) + (pi+a - p)} + (1 - -) a(Ri+7 - p)](Ri - p)},  (21a) (21b)  since E{(Ri+; - pi+;)(Ri - p)} = 0. Rewriting Eq. (21b),  E{(Ri+j+l - p)(Ri - p)} = bE{(Ri+a - p)(Ri - p)}.  (21c)  Now, at asymptote,  [E{(Ri+j+l - p)2} E{(Ri - p)2}]1/2 = LE{(Ri+i - p)2} E{(Ri - p)2}]1/2  = p(1 -p), (22)  in view of Eq. (4). Therefore, on dividing the two sides of Eq. (21c) by the corresponding sides of Eq. (22), and substituting  from Eq. (3),  rj+l = br;, j > 1. (23)  The argument above fails in the case j = 0; specifically, Eq. (21a) does not lead to Eq. (21 b) because E{(Ri - pi)(Ri - p)}  ,~ 0. Putting j = 0 in Eq. (21 a) and rearranging,  E{(Ri+l - p)(Ri - p)}  = -E{(pi - p)f(Ri - pi) + (pi - p)]} + (1 -  aE{(Ri - p)2}  = cxa2 + (1 - a) ap(l - p), (24)  on substitution from Eqs. (lb) and (4), since E{(pi - p)(Ri -pi)} = 0. Dividing the two sides of Eq. (24) by the corresponding  sides of Eq. (22) (with j = 0), and substituting from Eq. (3),  rl = U92/p(1 - p) -r-- (1 - a)a = b -I- a2/p(1 -p) - 1],  substituting from Eq. (16); and, finally, from Eq. (19),  rl = b - 1 - b2)1[1 - b2 + a2(1 - 2]. (25) Equations (23) and (25) jointly specify all the autocorrelation coefficients.  466 DONALD LAMING  Parameter Estimates  Neisser's (1957) median autocorrelation coefficients fall approximately into a geometric series with r; N 0.41(0.85)1-1; they  are set out for comparison in Table I.  TABLE I  Neisser's Median Autocorrelation Coefficients Compared with Predictions from the Model  Coefficient Median value Predicted value,  rl 0.41 0.41  r2 0.35 0.348  r2 0.32 0.296  r4 0.25 0.252  r; = 0.41(0.85)'-1.  Useful estimates of the model parameters may therefore be had by putting  rl = 0.41  and (26) b = 0.85.  It is convenient now to put y = all - a), so that b = a + y, from Eq. (16). Substituting these expressions into Eq. (25) and  eliminating a thereby leads to a quadratic in y with positive root (because all - a) > 0) y = 0.28. From this value follows  a = b - y = 0.57,  a = yf(1 - a) = 0.67, (27) Q2/p(1- p) = y21(1 + y2 - b2) = 0.22.  STATISTICS OF THE QuANTAL EXPERIMENT  The reason for constructing a model for the sequential interactions within the quantal experiment was to provide an answer to  the three questions set out at the end of the introduction here. These questions relate to certain statistics of the quantal  experiment. In deriving expressions for these statistics it will be assumed that the sequential process has been started up  some long time previously and is already at asymptote by the time the observations to which the statistics relate are made.  Such a simplification of the resulting expressions is justified, since it appears to be the usual practice in the quantal  experiment to allow the observer to listen to an ongoing regular  SEQUENTIAL STRUCTURE 467  series of increments and to begin responding (to a block of 25 successive increments) when he feels ready (see Stevens et al.,  1941, p. 322; Miller & Garner, 1944, p. 454).  1. EXPECTED NUMBER OF INCREMENTS REPORTED. From Eq. (17),  E(pi+l I p) = p + bi(p, - p),  (28)  where p1 will be taken to relate to the first of a block of n trials at asymptote. The number of increments reported is Y _n,  Ri , which has expectation  E (' Ri I p1) = E (~1 pi 1p)  n  = np + (p1- p) Y bi-1, i=1  (29)  on substitution from Eq. (28). Taking expectations now with respect to p1 in Eq. (29)  (see Eq. (la)),  E (~ Ri) = np. (30) 1  This means that the proportion of increments reported is an unbiased estimator of the true detection probability p.  2. VARIANCE OF THE NUMBER OF INCREMENTS REPORTED. Substituting Eq. (23)  into the expression for this variance derived in the appendix (Eq. (35)),  Var (Y R) = np(1 - p) [1 + 2n1 ~1(n -1) bi-1J (31)  If successive trials had been independent, this variance would have been np(1 -p) (putting r1 = 0 in Eq. (31)). The  experimental variance is therefore increased by a factor  2Y n-1  v = 1 + i (n -1) b'-1 n ~=1  =1+2r1( 1 - 1-bn)1-b n(1-b)2  (32)  Putting r1 = 0.41 and b = 0.85 (the estimated values from Eqs. (26)), and n = 25 in (32), v = 5.04. The proportion of  increments reported had variance vp(1 - p)/n and as an estimator of p it is equivalent in statistical precision to n/v (which  is approximately five) independent trials.  468 DONALD LAMING  3. POSSIBLE ORIGINS OF RECTILINEAR DATA. The answers to my first two questions say that the natural estimate of the detection  probability and the conventional way of presenting the data (as mean proportions detected) are both unbiased; it merely  happens that the precision of the data points is much less than one would ordinarily expect. To some extent these answers are  specific to the model proposed and other models might give different answers. For example, if the difference equation (13)  were nonlinear, then some distortion of the apparent psychometric function might ensue; but, because this equation is linear,  the asymptotic mean of pi is always p. In view of the level of autocorrelation there must be some large loss of statistical  efficiency, whatever the theoretical model; in fact, if all the autocorrelation coefficients be given, the variance of the  number of increments reported (see Appendix, Eq. (35)) is independent of the nature of the underlying mechanism.  The model advanced here is consistent with Neisser's published results and is probably the simplest model that is thus  consistent. The existence of the autocorrelations implicates a sequential model of some sort (linear or Markov). In addition  it was shown earlier that two related findings require the introduction of a true detection probability with positive weight  attaching to it, namely, the circumstantial finding that response probabilities do not converge to zero or one, and the  finding that the autocorrelation coefficients are less than one and decrease as the lag increases. I have not considered a  nonlinear model for the sequential interactions because, apart from the rectilinear psychometric function suggested by the  quantal experiment, there seemed no justification for it. For the rectilinearity 1 prefer an alternative explanation which is  best presented formally as an alternative to the neural quantum theory.  AN ALTERNATIVE TO THE NEURAL QUANTUM THEORY  I have argued elsewhere (Laming, 1973, Chapter 7) that the psychometric function for the detection of an increment presented  against a continuous background is approximately a normal integral with respect to the square of the increment. This argument  is based principally on direct determinations of the psychometric function (e.g., Green, 1960a, b; Green & Sewall, 1962;  Leshowitz, Taub & Raab, 1968). These experiments all used two-alternative forced-choice procedures, and the results obtained  imply that the increment (but not necessarily the background) is subject to a squarelaw transform at some point in the sensory  system prior to the point of decision. Generalising these results to the yes-no task used in the quantal experiment, the true  psychometric function ought to be a normal integral with respect to the square of the increment, but with its location and  gradient now unspecified. Such a function is shown as the continuous curve in Fig. 1. It is located laterally so as to pass  through the same midpoint as the rectilinear function of the neural quantum theory (0.5 probability of detection at 1.5  quantal units) and is scaled to be tangential to the rectilinear  SEQUENTIAL STRUCTURE 469  function at this point. It gives a detection probability of 0.03 when a zero increment is presented and thereby agrees very  well with Neisser's record of nine false-positives in 289 catch trials.  The importance of this function in the present context is not in its exact shape, but rather that it gives a closer initial  match to the rectilinear function of the neural quantum theory than would many arrangements of a normal integral with respect  to the linear measure of the increment (which is the conventional alternative). I now have to explain either: (a) why a  curvilinear psychometric function is obtained from conventional procedures, taking the neural quantum theory as an explanatory  basis; or (b) how rectilinear data may be obtained from the quantal experiment when the true underlying psychometric function  is something like the continuous curve in Fig. 1.  Stevens (1972) has asserted in defence of (a) that there are several possible sources of experimental variability which, if  uncontrolled, might distort a rectilinear psychometric function into an approximate normal ogive. But it is, as yet,  unexplained why, for forced-choice increment detection, such distortion should result in a normal integral with respect to the  square of the increment. I prefer, therefore, to attempt alternative (b).  It is clear from their published papers that those experimenters who have used the quantal procedure have not published all  the data they have collected; (few experimenters do, anyway). What is uncertain is whether the selection of data ultimately  presented is unbiased. Consider the following: everything in the experimental procedure is arranged for the subject's  convenience; every distraction that might deflect his level of attention is eliminated. Suppose, now, that the subject happens  to report only a few stimuli from a block of trials with an increment of a size that is ordinarily easily detectable. Are such  data included in the ultimate average, or is it concluded (after the event) that the observer was subject to some extraneous  distraction and the data discarded for that reason? Neisser (1957, p. 515) discarded individual runs and even entire  experimental sessions if the observer reported any source of distraction, however minute; but such selection of data is not  necessarily biased. Even so, the arrangement of the experiments and the degree of interaction between experimenter and  observer (see, for example, Stevens, 1972, p. 752) makes statistical rigor in this matter of discarding certain data unlikely.  The point A in Fig. 1 corresponds to an increment of one quantal unit in size. At this point the continuous curve gives a true  detection probability of 0.15; this is the maximum discrepancy between the two psychometric functions. If the 25 judgments in  a block of trials were independent, the number of reports in different runs with increments of this size would have a mean of  3.75, a mode of 3, and a standard deviation of 1. 18. But because of the autocorrelation of the reponses, the standard  deviation is :acreased to 3.99, while the mean is unchanged. As a result there is an increased frequency of runs with no  detections at all and also of runs with a relatively large number of detections. In fact, rough calculations suggest that the  number of detections would exceed 7 with a probability of 1/6 and 12 with a probability of 1/30. In practice,  470 DONALD LAMING  of course, the true detection probability is not known to the experimenter a priori; he sees only a distribution of scores  located chiefly about three, but containing some zeroes and also some surprisingly high numbers prima facie evidence of a  wandering attention.  A similar situation obtains at the point B, which is also critical for the comparison. Here the detection probability  according to the continuous curve is 0.93. The numbers of detections in blocks of 25 trials will have a mean of 23.25, a mode  of 24, but a standard deviation (in view of the autocorrelation) of 2.85. Fairly often every increment in the run will be  reported; but in one run in twenty the number of detections will be less than 18.  Assuming that an experimental session involves one run at each incremental value (see Stevens et al., 1941, p. 322) then it  should happen by chance, in view of these considerations, that on some days good clean rectilinear data will be obtained and  on others the data points will be all over the place. The question which needs to be asked then is whether "bad" days occur as  well as "good" days-note that some experimenters have endeavoured to replicate the quantal experiment and consistently failed  to obtain rectilinear data (see Corso, 1956)-and whether the published sets of data have been averaged over "good" days and  "bad" days alike.  The possibility of artifact in the quantal experiment arises because the statistical accuracy of that procedure is much less  than anyone has realized hitherto. Sequences of responses which, by ordinary criteria, look aberrant are, in fact, to be  expected. If there has been a biased selection of data, it has been unwitting, implicit in the elimination of data thought to  be compromised by shifts of attention. A constant state of attention is the raison d'etre of the quantal procedure; the  weakness of that procedure is that the criterion of a sufficiently constant state of attention is subjective. I do not suppose  that after this passage of time the question whether there has indeed been some biased and unwitting selection of the data is  capable of answer. It remains therefore merely a conjecture that may help to reconcile those psychophysical theories which  lead to smooth differentiable psychometric functions with the rectilinear data obtained from certain quantal experiments.  APPENDIX  Analysis of Variation in the Proportion of Increments Detected  If successive responses in the quantal experiment are positively correlated, the proportion of increments reported in a block  of trials will vary from block to block to a greater extent than would happen due to independent binomial variability alone"Ih  his analysis Neisser used a X2 test to compare the numbers of increments reported in different blocks of trials with the same  physical size of increment. Of 42 independent subsets of data, 27 were significant at the 0.01 level.  SEQUENTIAL STRUCTURE  471  Suppose there are m blocks of n increments each. Let xk be the number of increments reported in the kth block and let x be the  sample mean of the xk. The test statistic used by Neisser was  m 2 (xk - x)2 '   T= Y- ~ (xk-x)    k=1 x n-x   'm    n(xk - x)2  (33)  _ ~    (n - )    Under the null hypothesis that the xk are independent samples from a binomial population, T is distributed approximately as X2  with (m - 1) d.f. But if successive responses are correlated, T is distributed as X2 times a constant v, where  v = Var(xk)/np(1 - p). (34)  Put xk = Y_n1 Ri . Then the variance of xk is Var(xk) = E ~ [i (Ri - p)]2~  -1  ~ n n-1 n-i  = E (Ri - p)2 + 2 y Y (Ri - p)(Ri+j - p)~  e_1 i=1 .9=1  n-1  = np(1 - p) + 2 Y- (n -7) rip(1 - p), =1  (35)  in view of Eqs. (3) and (4). Subsituting in Eq. (34),  2 n-1 v=1+-E (n-1)rj~ n j=1  (36)  and if the r; be given, the variance ratio v and also the distribution of T, are independent of the underlying correlational  mechanism.  REFERENCES  BLACKWELL, H. R. The influence of data collection procedures upon psychophysical measurement of two sensory functions. Journal  of Experimental Psychology, 1952, 44, 306-315.  Busx, R. R., AND MOSTELLER, F. Stochastic models for learning. New York: Wiley, 1955.  CORSO, J. F. The neural quantum theory of sensory discrimination. Psychological Bulletin, 1956, 53, 371-393.  472 DONALD LAMING  GREEN, D. M. Auditory detection of a noise signal. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 1960a, 32, 121-131.  GREEN, D. M. Psychoacoustics and detection theory. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 1960b,32,1189-1203.  GREEN, D. M., AND SEWALL, S. T. Effects of background noise on auditory detection of noise bursts. Journal of the Acoustical  Society of America, 1962, 34, 1207-1216.  GREEN, D. M., AND SWETS, J. A. Signal detection theory and psychophysics. New York: Wiley, 1966.  JERGER, J. F. On the independence of successive responses in the quantal psychophysical method. American Journal of  Psychology, 1955, 68, 145-147.  LAMING, D. R. J. Subjective probability in choice-reaction experiments. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1969, 6, 81-120.  LAMING, D. R. J. Mathematical psychology. London: Academic Press, 1973.  LESHOWITZ, B., TAUB, H. B., AND RAAB, D. H. Visual detection of signals in the presence of continuous and pulsed backgrounds.  Perception and Psychophysics, 1968, 4, 207-213. MILLER, G. A. Finite Markov processes in psychology. Psychometrika, 1952, 17,  149-167. MILLER, G. A., AND GARNER, W. R. Effect of random presentation on the psychometric function: Implications for a  quantal theory of discrimination. American Journal of Psychology, 1944, 57, 451-467.  NEISSER, U. Response-sequences and the hypothesis of the neural quantum. American Journal of Psychology, 1957, 70, 512-527.  SENDERS, V. L., AND SOWARDS, A. Analysis of response sequences in the setting of a psychophysical experiment. American Journal  of Psychology, 1952, 65, 358-374.  STERNBERG, S. Stochastic learning theory. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical  psychology, Vol. 2. New York: Wiley, 1963. Pp. 1-120.  STEVENS, S. S. A neural quantum in sensory discrimination. Science, 1972, 177, 749-762. STEVENS, S. S., MORGAN, C. T., AND  VOLKMANN, J. Theory of the neural quantum in the discrimination of loudness and pitch. American Journal of Psychology, 1941,  54, 315-335. STEVENS, S. S., AND VOLKMANN, J. The quantum of sensory discrimination. Science, 1940, 92, 583-585.  SUPPES, P., AND ATKINSON, R. C. Markov learning models for multiperson interactions. Stanford, California: Stanford University  Press, 1960.  YELLOTT, J. 1. Probability learning with noncontingent success. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1969, 6, 541-575.  RECEIVED: November 21, 1973