10.1016/0022-2496(74)90010-8
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 11, 33-41 (1974)  Comment on Bernbach's Prediction of the Invariance of Type 2 d' in Confidence-Rated Recall  DONALD BAMBER  Psychology Service, Veterans Administration Hospital, St. Cloud, Minnesota 56301  Bernbach (1967, 1971) has claimed that empirical findings of Type 2 d' invariance in confidence-rated recall experiments  confirm a prediction of his two-state theory of recognition and disprove strength theories of memory. In order to derive this  prediction from his recognition theory, Bernbach (1967) found it necessary to add to the theory an assumption concerning  recall processes. However, this recall assumption is untenable, as it leads to an empirically false prediction concerning  accuracy on recognition and recall tests. Moreover, an alternative recall assumption proposed by Bernbach and Kupchak (1972)  does not lead to a prediction of Type 2 d' invariance. Thus, Bernbach's theory predicts the invariance of Type 2 d' only with  the aid of an untenable recall assumption. Consequently, empirical findings of Type 2 d' invariance cannot be regarded as  supportive of Bernbach's theory.  Bernbach (1967) has proposed an ingenious theory of recognition memory which has successfully accounted for a number of  phenomena in recognition memory. In this theory, the storage of a stimulus item in memory consists of depositing a stimulus  tag which contains information identifying the stimulus. Every stimulus is in one of two states: State R or State N. If an  item has a stimulus tag stored in memory, then that item is said to be in State R. If an item has either not been presented or  has been forgotten, it is said to be in State N.  Suppose the subject is allowed to study a list of items. He is then given a confidencerating recognition test in which a set  of both old and new items are presented. His task on the recognition test is to rate each item according to his confidence  that the item is old. For this purpose, he is given a scale of n confidence levels running from least confidence to greatest  confidence that the item is old. A special case belonging to this general class of recognition tests is the yes-no recognition  test. In this test, the subject responds either "yes" or "no" to each item according to whether he believes the item to be old  or new.  According to Bernbach's theory of recognition memory, when an item is presented to the subject in such a recognition test, he  compares the item against each stimulus tag stored in memory. For each stimulus tag, a difference score is calculated  representing the discrepancy between the presented item and the stimulus tag. This collection of difference scores is  converted to a unidimensional scale of apparent  Copyright 0 1974 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  33  34 DONALD BAMBER  oldness. A high degree of apparent oldness results if the collection of difference scores contains one or more small scores; a  low degree of apparent oldness results if this collection contains no small scores. In general, presented items in State R  yield high apparent oldness scores whereas presented items in State N yield low apparent oldness scores. However, due to noise  in the process of assigning apparent oldness scores, there will be overlap in the distributions of these scores for items in  State R and State N. In deciding which confidence level to give as his response to an item in the recognition test, the  subject conforms to the following response rule. First, he partitions the scale of apparent oldness into n mutually exclusive  and exhaustive intervals. If the test item's apparent oldness score falls into the mth highest interval, then the subject  responds with the mth highest confidence level.  Let ym denote the event that the subject responds to an item with confidence level m or higher. Let P(y I old) and P(y I  new) denote the conditional probabilities of the event _vm occurring given either an old or a new item, respectively. A graph  in which P(y,n I old) is plotted on the ordinate vs P(ym I new) on the abscissa for each confidence level m may be termed a  P(ym I old) vs P(yn, I new) or Type 1 memory operating characteristic (MOC).  An important theoretical parameter of Bernbach's theory is d*. This equals the mean of apparent oldness scores for items in  State R minus the mean for items in State N, where both means are expressed in units equal to the standard deviation of  apparent oldness scores for items in State N. A basic axiom of the theory is that d* remains constant despite variation in the  number of items in State R.  STUDIES ON THE INVARIANCE OF TYPE 2 d'  Murdock (1966) reported what may be termed a confidence-rated recall experiment. The subjects were presented with lists of  five successive word pairs. After each list, the subject was given a cue which consisted of a word drawn from one of the  pairs. The subject's task was to respond with the other word from the pair. The subject was required to give a response to  every cue and then to rate his confidence in that response.  As before, let y,, denote the event that the subject rated his confidence at level m or higher. Let c and e denote the events  that the response word was correct or was an error, respectively. Consider a graph in which P(y,. I c) is plotted on the  ordinate vs P(y n I e) on the abscissa for each confidence level m. Such a graph is termed a P(y. I c) vs P(ym I e) or Type 2  MOC. From such a graph, the parameter d' of signal detection theory may be estimated. (Following Bernbach and Kupchak (1972),  estimates of d' obtained from Type 1 and Type 2 MOCs will be denoted by d' and d", respectively.) Thus, d" may be considered  to be a measure of the subject's ability to discriminate his correct responses from his incorrect responses.  INVARIANCE OF TYPE 2 d' 35  Murdock calculated d" for each of the five serial positions in the list. He found that although the probability of a correct  response varied from .29 to .85 over the five serial positions, the variation of d" over the five serial positions was not  statistically significant. Thus, d" appeared to remain constant despite large variation in the probability of a correct  response.  Since Murdock's study, several other experiments have tested whether or not, in confidence-rated recall, d" is invariant  despite variation in the probability of correct recall. Bernbach (1967) cited three unpublished studies by Geer, Tanenbaum,  and Hintzman, respectively, which supported d" invariance. (See, however, Hintzman (1972) and Bernbach (1972).) In addition,  Bernbach and Bower (1970) have reported a study supporting this conclusion. However, Donaldson and Glathe (1970) have reported  evidence that d" is not invariant.  BERNBACH'S 1967 RECALL, ASSUMPTION  Assuming that the invariance of d" is a valid finding, this still leaves the problem of determining which theories of memory  predict this finding and which do not. In the form outlined above, Bernbach's theory of recognition memory makes no  predictions concerning whether or not d" should be invariant. However, with the addition of an assumption concerning recall  processes, Bernbach found that his theory could predict the invariance of d". On the other hand, continuous-strength theories  of memory apparently predict that d" and the probability of a correct recall should be positively correlated (Bernbach  (1971)). For this reason, Bernbach considered the evidence for d" invariance to be a critical finding supporting his two-state  theory.  The recall assumption that Bernbach (1967) added to his theory states that, whenever the probability of a correct guess on a  recall test is negligible, an item will be recalled if and only if it is in State R. This implies that a correctly recalled  item is in State R and an incorrectly recalled item is in State N. Thus, a Type 2 MOC in which P(y, I c) is plotted versus  P(y,m I e) is equivalent to an MOC in which P(y. I R) is plotted versus P(y n I N). Therefore, the values of d' obtained from  the two MOCs should be equal. The d' obtained from the former MOC is d"; the d' obtained from the latter MOC is the  theoretical parameter d*. Since d* is invariant despite variation in the number of items in State R, then d" must be invariant  despite variation in the probability of correct recall. Thus, Bernbach's 1967 recall assumption leads to the prediction that  In addition to employing his 1967 recall assumption to predict d" invariance within the context of confidence-rated recall  studies, Bernbach has proposed that this assumption is also valid within the wider context of recall studies in general. Thus,  Bernbach (1969, p. 236) has put forward this assumption as the connecting link  36 DONALD BAMBER  that would establish the compatibility between his two-state theory of recognition (Bernbach, 1967) and his replica theory of  recall (Bernbach, 1969).  Note that Bernbach's 1967 recall assumption implies that the probability of an old item being recalled equals the probability  of that item being in State R. Thus, if P(recall) denotes the probability of recalling an earlier presented item and if P(R I  old) denotes the conditional probability of an old item being in State R, then  P(recall) = P(R I old).  BERNBACH AND KUPCHAK'S 1972 RECALL ASSUMPTION  In a 1972 paper, Bernbach and Kupchak proposed a new recall assumption. According to this assumption,  P(recall) = aP(R I old), (2)  where a is a variable that may take on values between zero and one. It was suggested that a could be interpreted as the  probability of adequate retrieval cues being available in memory. Bernbach and Kupchak did not impose any theoretical  limitations on the behavior of the variable a, other than to suggest that a and P(R I old) should be positively correlated.  Note that Bernbach's 1967 recall assumption corresponds to a special case of Bernbach and Kupchak's 1972 recall assumption,  namely the case where a always equals one.  Bernbach and Kupchak showed that Eq. 2 implies that d' should equal bd*, where  b _ 1 - P(R I old) - 1 - P(R old)  1 - P(recall) 1 - aP(R old)  According to Bernbach's theory of recognition memory, the parameter d* is a constant. Thus, d" will be constant if and only if  b is constant. Now, depending on how a varies as a function of P(R I old), b may be either a constant or a variable function  of P(R I old). Consequently, Bernbach and Kupchak's 1972 recall assumption is compatible with d" being either a constant or a  variable function of P(recall). Thus, the 1972 recall assumption is not sufficiently specific to lead to any prediction  concerning whether or not d' should be invariant.  STATUS OF BERNBACH'S PREDICTION OF d' INVARIANCE  Bernbach has proposed two different recall assumptions [Bernbach (1967), Bernbach and Kupchak (1972)]. The 1967 assumption  leads to the prediction of d' invariance, whereas the 1972 assumption does not. The 1967 recall assumption corresponds to  INVARIANCE OF TYPE 2 d' 37  a special case of the 1972 assumption, specifically the case where the parameter a always equals one.  Evidence controverting the 1967 assumption was obtained in an experiment which Bernbach and Kupchak performed to test their  1972 recall assumption. In this experiment, all estimated values of the parameter a were less than one. Bernbach and Kupchak  did not state whether they were retracting the 1967 recall assumption, or whether they merely felt that the 1967 assumption  was correct in some circumstances but not others.  At any rate, Bernbach did not retract one of the theoretical consequences of the 1967 recall assumption, namely his prediction  of d" invariance. In a paper subsequent to the Bernbach and Kupchak paper, Bernbach (1972) vigorously defended the validity of  empirical findings of d" invariance and strongly implied that this phenomenon is predicted by his theory.  Thus, it is of some importance to show, as is done here, that Bernbach's 1967 recall assumption is untenable. It is shown  below that this assumption leads to an empirically false prediction concerning accuracy on recognition and recall tests.  Without the aid of this assumption, Bernbach's theory no longer predicts the invariance of d".  A PREDICTION RESULTING FROM THE 1967 ASSUMPTION  Suppose a subject is allowed to study a list of items and is then given a confidencerating recognition test on the list.  Suppose, first, that the subject is presented with an old item on the recognition test. An old item may be in either State R  or State N. Consequently,  P(ym I old) = P(ym I R) P(R I old) -}- P(y. I N) P(N I old).  Now, since P(N I old) equals 1 - P(R I old), this equation becomes  P(ym I old) = [P(y. I R) - P(ym I N)] P(R I old) -}- P(ym I N).  Suppose, next, that the subject is given a new item on the recognition test. Since all new items are in State N, P(y, I new)  must equal P(y I N). Consequently,  P(ym I old) - P(y. I new) = [P(y,~, I R) - P(y, I N)] P(R I old).  Let AP be an abbreviation for P(ym I old) - P(y I new). Then, since P(ym I R) - P(y. I N) must be less than or equal to one,  it follows that  AP < P(R I old).  38 DONALD BAMBER  As shown in Eq. 1 above, Bernbach's 1967 recall assumption implies that P(recall) must equal P(R I old). Thus, this assumption  implies that  JP < P(recall).  Note that, although the value of AP will vary from point to point on the P(ym I old) vs P(y. I new) MOC, nevertheless Eq. 3  must hold at every point on the MOC. Thus Eq. 3 is a prediction that follows from Bernbach's 1967 recall assumption. The  validity of this assumption may be tested by examining the results of studies comparing performance on recognition and recall  tests and seeing whether Eq. 3 is verified.  EVIDENCE AGAINST THE 1967 ASSUMPTION  Mandler, Pearlstone, and Koopmans (1969, Expts. 1 and 3) exposed subjects to a set of 100 words and then, either immediately  or after a delay of two or more weeks, gave the subjects a battery of memory tests. This battery consisted of a recall test,  followed by a recognition test, followed by another recall test. In every condition, JP was greater than P(recall). Averaging  over all conditions in both experiments, the mean value for JP was .67, whereas the mean values of P(recall) for the first and  second recall tests were .24 and .34, respectively.  McNulty (1965) had subjects study a list consisting of 16 eight-letter sequences. The subjects were then given either a recall  test, a standard recognition test, or a difficult recognition test (i.e., the new items were highly similar to the old items).  From McNulty's Table 2, it is seen that the mean values of JP for the standard and difficult recognition tests were .69 and  .41, respectively, whereas the mean value for P(recall) was .20.  D'Agostino (1969, Expt. 2) showed subjects a total of 48 words drawn from eight different categories. The subjects then  received either a recognition test or a recall test. The mean values of dP and P(recall) were .65 and .52, respectively.  Cohen (1970, Expt. 2) presented subjects with a sequence of either nine-word or ten-word lists. The subjects were given a  recall test immediately after each list. After every ninth or tenth list, the subjects were given a final recall test and a  recognition test on all the words in the preceding nine or ten lists. At each serial position within each of the two list  lengths, JP was greater than P(recall) for final recall. Averaged over all serial positions, the mean values of dP and  P(recall) for final recall were .42 and .16, respectively.  Kintsch (1968) presented subjects in Expt. 1 with a total of 40 words drawn from four categories. The subjects were then given  either a recall or a recognition test. In both conditions of this experiment, JP was greater than P(recall). The mean values  of the former and latter were .77 and .46, respectively. In Expt. 2, subjects  INVARIANCE OF TYPE 2 d' 39  were presented with a list of 20 CVCs and tested on them. In three out of the four conditions in this experiment, AP was  greater than P(recall). The mean values of the former and latter were .47 and .41, respectively.  Lachman and Field (1965) presented subjects with a list of 50 words. Each subject studied the list for either 1, 2, 4, 8, 16,  32, or 128 trials and, then, was given either a recall or a recognition test. Lachman and Field's Fig. 1 shows that P(recall)  increased from about .3 after one trial to about 1.0 after 128 trials, whereas .JP remained at a fairly constant level of  about .7 or .8 throughout the experiment. Thus, during the early stages of training, JP was greater than P(recall).  The above experimental results show that Eq. 3, which is a theoretical consequence of Bernbach's 1967 recall assumption, is  often (but not always) false. Therefore, as applied to recall in general, the 1967 recall assumption must be invalid. However,  it is possible that while the 1967 recall assumption is often false as applied to recall in general, it might still be valid  within some more restricted context. For example, none of the studies cited above comparing JP and P(recall) involved paired  associates (PA). Thus, it is possible that the 1967 recall assumption might be valid within the context of PA memory. It is  important to examine this possibility because all of the studies of confidence-rated recall which investigated d" invariance  were studies of PA memory.  AP VERSUS P(recall) IN PA MEMORY  Hopkins (1970) presented subjects with a list of 12 PAs for a total of 16 trials. Each trial consisted of a study period  followed by a test period. One group of subjects always received yes-no recognition tests during the test period, whereas  another group always received recall tests. In his Fig. 2, Hopkins plotted the average number of correct responses versus  trials for each of the two groups. From this figure, the probability of a correct response, averaged over all 16 trials, was  estimated to be .84 and .55 for the yes-no and recall groups, respectively. The value of dP for the yes-no group was estimated  by means of the formula:  P(correct) = z [P(yes I old) + P(no I new)]  = z[P(yes I old) + 1 - P(yes I new)]  = AM + AP].  Thus, AP and P(recall) were estimated to be .68 and .55, respectively.  Bernbach and Kupchak (1972) reported a PA experiment which compared the performance of subjects given confidence-rated recall  tests versus the performance of other subjects given recognition tests. In the recognition phase of this experiment, Bernbach  and Kupchak found Type 1 d' values of .89, .87, .72, 1.14, and 1.93, respectively, for the five serial positions in the PA  list. Using a table of the normal  40 DONALD BAMBER  distribution, each of these values of d' may be converted to the value of AP at the point where the MOC crosses the negative  diagonal. The values of AP corresponding to the above values of d' are .34, .34, .28, .43, and .67, respectively. From the  recall phase of the experiment, the corresponding values for P(recall) were found to be .28, .20, .20, .38, and .71,  respectively. Thus, AP was greater than P(recall) at four out of the five serial positions. Moreover, as Bernbach and Kupchak  reported, the estimated values of the parameter a were all less than one.  Thus, the 1967 recall assumption is demonstrably invalid within the context of the Bernbach and Kupchak study. This is  significant because the recall phase of this study is highly similar in experimental design to the unpublished study by Geer  which Bernbach (1967) cited as a demonstration of d" invariance.  CONCLUSIONS  The above results show that Bernbach's 1967 recall assumption is, in general, untenable. It appears that if there are any  conditions under which this assumption is correct, these conditions are quite exceptional. Therefore, this assumption must, in  general, be regarded as false. Without this assumption, Bernbach's theory of recognition memory no longer predicts the  invariance of d". Therefore, empirical findings of d" invariance cannot be regarded as supportive of Bernbach's theory.  REFERENCES  BERNBACH, H. A. Decision processes in memory. Psychological Review, 1967, 74, 462-480. BERNBACH, H. A. Replication processes  in human memory and learning. In G. H. Bower & J. T. Spence (Eds.), The psychology of learning and motivation. Vol. 3. New  York: Academic Press, 1969. Pp. 201-239.  BERNBACH, H. A. Strength theory and confidence ratings in recall. Psychological Review, 1971, 78, 338-340.  BERNBACH, H. A. Confidence ratings for individual items in recall. Psychological Review, 1972, 79, 536-537.  BERNBACH, H. A., & BowER, G. H. Confidence ratings in continuous paired-associate learning. Psychonomic Science, 1970, 21,  252-253.  BERNBACH, H. A., & KuPCHAx, P. G. Recognition and recall in short-term memory. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1972, 9,  237-242.  COHEN, R. L. Recency effects in long-term recall and recognition. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1970, 9,  672-678.  D'AGOSTINO, P. R. The blocked-random effect in recall and recognition. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1969,  8, 815-820.  DONALDSON, W., & GLATHE, H. Signal-detection analysis of recall and recognition memory. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 1970,  24, 42-56.  HINTzmAN, D. L. Confidence ratings in recall: A reanalysis. Psychological Review, 1972, 79, 531-535.  INVARIANCE OF TYPE 2 d'  41  HOPKINs, R. H. Response learning in paired-associate recognition tasks. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1970,  9, 287-294.  KINTSCH, W. Recognition and free recall of organized lists. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1968, 78, 481-487.  LACHMAN, R., & FIELD, W. H. Recognition and recall of verbal material as a function of degree of training. Psychonomic  Science, 1965, 2, 225-226.  MANDLER, G., PEARLSTONE, Z., & KOOPMANS, H. S. Effects of organization and semantic similarity on recall and recognition.  Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1969, 8, 410-423. MCNULTY, J. A. An analysis of recall and recognition  processes in verbal learning. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1965, 4, 430-436.  MURDOCK, B. B., JR. The criterion problem in short-term memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1966, 72, 317-324.