10.1016/0022-2496(75)90001-2
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 12, 387-415 (1975)  The Area above the Ordinal Dominance Graph and the Area below the Receiver Operating Characteristic Graph  DONALD BAMBER  Psychology Service, Veterans Administration Hospital, St. Cloud, Minnesota 56301  Receiver operating characteristic graphs are shown to be a variant form of ordinal dominance graphs. The area above the latter  graph and the area below the former graph are useful measures of both the size or importance of a difference between two  populations and/or the accuracy of discrimination performance. The usual estimator for this area is closely related to the  Mann-Whitney U statistic. Statistical literature on this area estimator is reviewed. For large sample sizes, the area  estimator is approximately normally distributed. Formulas for the variance and the maximum variance of the area estimator are  given. Several different methods of constructing confidence intervals for the area measure are presented and the strengths and  weaknesses of each of these methods are discussed. Finally, the Appendix presents the derivation of a new mathematical result,  the maximum variance of the area estimator over convex ordinal dominance graphs.  ORDINAL DOMINANCE GRAPHS  Suppose two random variables X and Y are given. Let c be an arbirary constant. Consider a graph in which a point is plotted  having as its horizontal coordinate P(X < c) and as its vertical coordinate P(Y < c). Let this point be denoted by T(c).  Suppose that, for all values of c from -co to -F oc, a point T(c) is plotted on this graph. Following Darlington (1973), this  graph will be called the ordinal dominance (OD) graph for X and Y, or the (X, Y) OD graph. More specifically, this graph is a  particular type of OD graph, namely a population OD graph. A second type of OD graph, the sample OD graph, will be discussed  later in this paper.  One interesting property of OD graphs is that they are invariant under orderpreserving transformations. Let m be a strictly  increasing function which is defined over all possible values of the random variables X and Y. Then, the OD graph for X and Y  is identical to the OD graph for the random variables m(X) and m(Y).  OD Graphs for Continuous and Finitely Discrete X and Y  This paper is concerned primarily with the OD graphs of random variables having either continuous or finitely discrete  distributions. By a finitely discrete random  Copyright 1975 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  387  variable is meant a random variable which can equal only a finite number of values with nonzero probability. There are two  reasons for this restricted concern. First, it is convenient. Second, most distributions encountered in psychological  applications are either continuous or finitely discrete. Occasionally, however, other types of distributions will be  considered here.  Continuous X and Y. Suppose X and Y are continuous. Consider the point T(c). The two coordinates P(X < c) and P(Y < c) of T(c)  are always between zero and one. Thus, T(c) is always located within the unit square whose corners are the points (0, 0), (1,  0), (0,1) and (1, 1). When c equals -oc, T(c) is at (0, 0). Then, as c is increased, T(c) traces out a continuous curve which  finally ends at (1, 1) when c equals +oo. Thus, when X and Y are continuous, their OD graph is a continuous curve running from  (0, 0) to (1, 1). This is illustrated on the left side of Fig. 1.  vl  y a  a  01 ___ I 0  0 P(X<_e) I 0 P(X~. e) I  FIG. 1. Two examples of OD graphs. Left: Continuous X and Y. Right: Finitely discrete  X and Y.  Finitely Discrete X and Y. Suppose X and Y are finitely discrete. Let cl,..., ck denote the ordered set of constants (i.e.,  -oo < cl < ... < ck < +oo) which comprise the sole values which either X or Y can assume with nonzero probability. Thus, for i  = 1,..., k, either P(X = ci) > 0 or P(Y = ci) > 0. In addition, let co and ck+1 denote -oo and +oc, respectively. As before,  T(c) is the point having coordinates P(X < c) and P(Y < c). Note that T(co) 7~: T(cl) =A ... =A T(ck) whereas T(ck) = T(ck+i).  Also, note that, if ci < c < ci+1 , then T(c) = T(ci) (i = 0,..., k). Thus, although there are an infinite number of possible  values of c, nevertheless the OD graph for X and Y consists of only k + 1 distinct points: T(co), T(cl),..., T(ck). Moreover,  two of these points, namely T(co) and T(ck), equal (0, 0) and (1, 1), respectively. An example of an OD graph for finitely  discrete X and Y is given on the right side of Fig. 1. Any two distinct points of the form T(ci) and T(ci_1) (i = 1,..., k)  will be referred to as adjacent points of the OD graph.  Generation of a Finitely Discrete OD Graph From a Continuous OD Graph. Let X and Y be two continuous random variables. Thus,  their OD graph is a continuous curve running from (0, 0) to (1, 1). Let s be an arbitrary increasing step function which is  defined over the real line and which consists of only a finite number of steps. Specifically, let the domain of the step  function s be divided into k intervals by the ordered set of constants Y1 ,..., Yk_1 . Let cl ,..., ck be an ordered set of  constants  comprising the range of the step function s. In addition, let yo and yk denote -oo and + oo, respectively, and let co be an  arbitrary value less than cl . Then, if yi-1 < y *~ yi , s(y) = ci (i = 1,..., k).  Obviously, s(X) and s(Y) are finitely discrete random variables. The OD graph for s(X) and s(Y) consists of the k -}- 1  points, respectively, having horizontal coordinates P[s(X) < ci] and vertical coordinates P[s(Y) < ci], i = 0,..., k. (Note  however that these points are not necessarily all distinct.) Now it follows from the definition of s that, for i = 0,..., k,  and  P[s(X) < ci] = P[X < yJ  P[S(Y) < cil = P[Y < yi]  This shows that every point of the [s(X), s(Y)] OD graph is also a point on the (X, Y) OD graph. Thus, the latter OD graph,  which is a continuous curve, passes through every one of the finite number of points comprising the former OD graph. This  result may be termed the superposition principle.  Generation of a Continuous OD Graph From a Finitely Discrete OD Graph. Let X and Y be finitely discrete random variables. Let  cl ,..., ck be the ordered set of values which either X or Y can assume with nonzero probability. In addition, let co be an  arbitrarily chosen value less than cl . Define the function f by setting f (ci) = ci-1 for i = 1,..., k. Let I and J be two  independent random variables uniformly distributed over the interval zero to one. Then let  X* =IX + (I -I)f(X) (1)  Y * = JY + (1 - J)J(Y). (2)  Thus, X* and Y* are continuous random variables. The probability that had been concentrated at the point ci by the random  variable X has now been uniformly distributed over the interval ci-1 to ci by the random variable X*. The same may be said of  Y and Y*. Therefore, the (X*, Y*) OD graph may be generated from the (X, Y) OD graph simply by interpolating straight-line  segments between the adjacent points of the latter OD graph. This is illustrated in Fig. 2.  Equations (1) and (2) imply that if X < Y then X* < Y* and if Y < X then Y* < X*. However, if X = Y then either X* < Y* or Y*  < X*, each with probability 2.  Shapes of OD Graphs and Their Significance  One-Sided OD Graphs. Following Birnbaum and Klose (1957), a random variable X will be said to be stochastically smaller than  or equal to another random variable Y if, for every constant c,  FIG. 2. The (X, Y) OD graph consists of the five dots. The (X*, Y*) OD graph consists of  the line segments between adjacent dots.  Two random variables X and Y will be said to be stochastically comparable if either X is stochastically smaller than or equal  to Y or vice versa. Let the straight-line segment connecting the points (0, 0) and (1, 1) be termed the positive diagonal.  Thus, two random variables X and Y are stochastically comparable if and only if their OD graph lies entirely on or to one side  of (i.e., does not cross) the positive diagonal. Such an OD graph will be said to be one-sided. Alternative terminology has  been employed by Darlington (1973). If the (X, Y) OD graph lies entirely on or below the positive diagonal, then Y is said to  completely dominate X. If the OD graph crosses the positive diagonal, then a situation of mixed dominance is said to exist.  Moreover, he has proposed statistical procedures for determining whether the situation is one of complete or mixed dominance.  One particularly interesting feature of complete dominance has been noted by Darlington. Namely, if Y completely dominates X  and if m is any monotonic increasing function, then the expectation E[m(X)] is guaranteed to be less than or equal to E[m(Y)].  This result is of particular interest in the case where X and Y represent the "true" scores of two populations on a trait and  where the measured scores are monotonically related to the "true" scores.  Convex OD Graphs. Suppose that a random observation is to be sampled from either the X distribution or the Y distribution. Let  W be random variable representing the value of the observation. Let SX denote the event that the observation was sampled from  the X distribution. Assume that the prior probability P(Sx) is 1. Suppose that the value of the observation is c. What is the  posterior probability P(Sx I W = c) ? If X and Y are finitely discrete, then P(Sx I W = c) equals I/[ 1 + P(Y = c)IP(X = c)].  On the other hand, if X and Y are continuous, P(Sx I W = c) equals 1/[l +fr(c)/fx(c)], wherefx andfr are the probability  density functions of X and Y.  Let the likelihood ratio L(c) be defined as being P(Y = c)/P(X = c) for finitely discrete X and Y, and as being fy(c)lfx(c)  for continuous X and Y. Thus, no matter whether X and Y are finitely discrete or continuous, the posterior probability P(Sx I  W = c) equals l/[l +L(c)].  Suppose X and Y are finitely discrete. Let c, ,..., c,, denote the ordered set of values which either X or Y can assume with  nonzero probability. In addition, let co be an arbitrary value less than c, . Then, for i = 1,..., k, L(ci) equals the  interpolated slope between the OD graph point having horizontal and vertical coordinates P(X < ci_1) and P(Y ; c;_,) and the  adjacent point having coordinates P(X < ci) and P(Y <_ ci). Thus, if X and Y are finitely discrete, then L(ci) equals the  slope of the (X*, Y*) OD graph between the points T(ci_,) and T(ci). On the other hand, if X and Y are continuous, then L(c)  equals the instantaneous slope of the OD graph as it passes through the point T(c).  A continuous OD graph will be said to be convex if its shape is either entirely convex upward or entirely convex downward. In  other words, the OD graph must have consistent curvature so that it is not partly convex upward and partly concave upward.  Similarly, if X and Y are finitely discrete, the (X, Y) OD graph will be said to be convex if and only if the (X*, Y*) OD  graph is convex. Obviously, if an OD graph is convex, then it is also one-sided.  A desirable property for two random variables X and Y is that their posterior probability P(SX I W = c) be a monotonic  function of c. If X and Y have this property, they will be said to have a monotonic posterior. For example, suppose that X is  stochastically less than or equal to Y and that the posterior probability P(SX I W == c) is a monotonic decreasing function of  c. Then, the lower the value of the observation c, the more certain it is that this observation was sampled from the X  distribution rather than the I" distribution.  Now, since P(SX i W = c) equals I/[ 1 + L(c)], the posterior probability will be a monotonic function of c if and only if the  likelihood ratio is a monotonic function. Furthermore, since the likelihood ratio equals either the interpolated or the  instantaneous slope of the OD graph, the likelihood ratio will be monotonic if and only if the OD graph is convex. Thus, X and  Y will have a monotonic posterior if and only if the (X, Y) OD graph is convex.  Rotated OD Graphs. Consider a graph consisting of the points having horizontal coordinates P(k > c) and vertical coordinates  P(Y > c) for all values of the constant c. If X and 1' are both continuous or if they are both finitely discrete, then it is  readily shown that this graph is geometrically congruent to the (X, Y) OD graph. Specifically, it is identical to the (X, Y)  OD graph rotated 180about the point (2, 2). For this reason, such a graph will be termed a rotated OD graph.  Area Above the OD Graph  Suppose that an observation is randomly sampled from the X distribution and another random observation is independently  sampled from the Y distribution. Let P(X < Y) denote the probability of the event that the X observation is less than the Y  observation. The quantities P(X < Y) and P(X = Y) may be defined similarly.  Continuous X and Y. Suppose X and Y are continuous. Consider the area above the (X, Y) OD curve. Specifically, this is the  area of the region bounded on the lower right by the OD curve, bounded on the left by the line running (0, 0) to (0, 1), and  bounded on the top by the line running from (0, 1) to (1, 1). This area is illustrated in Fig. 3.  U a  Fic. 3. The area above the continuous (X, Y) OD graph is striped.  Let A(X, Y) denote the area above the (X, Y) OD graph. Let fr denote the probability density function of Y. Then,  A(X, Y) = f 1 P(X < c) dP(Y G c) 0  = f +~ P(X < c)fr(c) do  = P(X < Y).  Since X and Y are continuous, P(X = Y) equals zero. Thus, P(X < Y), P(X < Y) and A(X, Y) are all equal.  Finitely Discrete X and Y. When X and Y are finitely discrete, the (X, Y) OD graph consists of only a finite number of points.  Consequently, the area above the OD graph cannot be defined in the same way as for continuous X and Y. Instead, this area is  defined as being identical to the area above the (X*, Y*) OD graph. Note that this definition of the area above the (X, Y) OD  graph is equivalent to the area as defined by the trapezoidal rule. Thus, A(X, Y) equals A(X*, Y*).  Let ci ,..., ck denote the ordered set of values which either X or Y can assume with nonzero probability. In addition, let co  be an arbitrary value less than cl . The area above the OD graph may be computed by dividing it into trapezoids and computing  the area of each trapezoid. Consider the area Ai of the trapezoid indicated in Fig. 4.  FIG. 4. Calculation of A(X, Y) by the trapezoidal rule.  The height of this trapezoid is P(Y < ci) - P(Y < ci_1) or P(Y = c. The lengths of the top and bottom edges of the trapezoid  are P(X < ci) and P(X < ci_1), respectively. Thus,  Ai = P(Y = ci)[2P(X < ci) + 2P(X < ci-I)] = P(Y = ci)LP(X < ci-I) + W(X = ci)].  Then, since A(X, Y) equals the sum of the Ai's,  k k  A(X, Y) _ P(Y = ci) P(X < c;-,) + z Y P(Y = c;) P(X = ci)  i-I i=I  = P(X < Y) -}- zP(X = Y).  Recall that, when X and Y are continuous, P(X = Y) equals zero. Thus Eq. (3) is valid both for finitely discrete and for  continuous X and Y.  A(X, Y) as a Measure of the Size of the Difference Between Two Populations. Note that A(X, Y) measures the extent to which the  X distribution lies below the Y distribution. Thus, A(X, Y) can take on any value from a minimum of zero to a maximum of one.  The maximum value is attained if and only if the X distribution lies entirely below the Y distribution with no overlap between  the two distributions. Similarly, A(X, Y) equals zero if and only if the X distribution lies entirely above the Y distribution  with no overlap. On the other hand, if X and Y are identically distributed, then A(X, Y) equals 1. Note that A(X, Y) and A(Y,  X) are complementary, in that they always sum to one.  These properties of A(X, Y) make it a useful measure of the size or importance of a difference between two populations  (Darlington, 1973). For example, are urban children more or less aggressive than rural children ? If there is a difference, is  it large or small ? Let X and Y, respectively, represent the scores of urban and rural children on an agression scale.  Equation (3) shows that A(X, Y) may be interpreted  as the probability that a randomly selected urban child will be less aggressive than a randomly selected rural child plus one  half the probability that they will be equally aggressive. The closer A(X, Y) is to zero or one, the larger and more important  is the difference between the two populations. On the other hand, the closer A(X, Y) is to z the smaller and less important is  the difference.  A(X, Y) as a Measure of Discrimination Accuracy. In addition, A(X, Y) may be used to measure how accurately a given test  differentiates two populations. Consider, for example, a test designed to diagnose brain damage. Suppose that it was intended  by the designers of the test that brain-damaged individuals should score low and normal individuals should score high on the  test. Let X and Y denote the scores of brain-damaged and normal individuals, respectively. Then, A(X, Y) measures the extent  to which the test designers succeeded in their goal. Suppose that A(X, Y) equals one. This would mean that the test  discriminates the two populations perfectly. It would mean that there is some critical score below which all brain-damaged  individuals score and above which all normal individuals score. Once this critical score has been determined, the test could  be used to diagnose brain damage with 1000/,', accuracy. If A(X, I') were close to one, then brain damage could be diagnosed  with almost 100% accuracy. On the other hand, if the value of A(X, Y) were only slightly greater than z, then diagnoses based  on this test would be only slightly more accurate than chance. Thus, the test would have little value in diagnosing individual  cases.  RECEIVER OPERATING CHARACTERISTIC GRAPHS  Consider an observer in a signal detection experiment. On each trial of the experiment, he may be presented with either of two  events: a signal event or a noise event. His task is to discriminate the two. On each trial, the observer obtains a sensory  impression of the event presented to him. The strength of this impression is the basis on which the observer infers whether  signal or noise was presented. Signal events tend to produce stronger impressions than noise events. However, the impression  strength induced by both signal and noise events varies greatly from trial to trial. Thus, impression strength is only a  fallible guide as to whether signal or noise was presented.  The Yes-No ROC Curve. Consider the yes-no signal detection task. In this task, the observer is told to respond "yes" if he  thinks that a signal was presented on that trial and to respond "no" otherwise. It is assumed that the observer performs this  task as follows. First, he adopts an impression strength criterion. Then, on each trial, if the impression strength reaches or  exceeds his criterion, he responds "yes." Otherwise, he responds "no." Let P(yes I signal) and P(yes I noise) denote the  probability of a "yes" response on signal trials and noise trials, respectively. These two probabilities suffice to summarize  the results of a yes-no experiment.  Now, there are various manipulations which the experimenter may employ to induce the observer to change his impression  strength criterion (Green & Swets, 1966, pp. 87-88). If the observer can be induced to lower his criterion, then P(yes J  signal) and P(yes I noise) will both become larger. Conversely, they will both become smaller if the observer raises his  criterion.  Consider the following theoretical graph. Let the horizontal axis denote P(yes I noise) and the vertical axis denote P(yes I  signal). Let a separate point be plotted for every criterion that the observer could adopt. Far extremely low criteria, the  plotted point is located at (1, 1). Then, as the observer's criterion is raised, both coordinates decrease and a continuous  curve is traced out. Finally, for very high criteria, the curve ends at (0, 0). Let this graph be called the yes-no receiver  operating characteristic (ROC) curve. This is illustrated in Fig. 5.  P (yes I noise)  Fic. 5. An example of a yes-no ROC curve.  The (Im, , IS) ROC curve. Let IS and I,z be random variables denoting the strengths of sensory impressions aroused by signal  events and noise events, respectively. It is assumed that I, and In are continuous random variables. Let c be the observer's  criterion. Then,  and  P(yes I signal) = P(I,, > c)  P(yes I noise) = P(I,, > c).  Thus, the yes-no ROC curve is identical to a graph in which P(I, > c) is plotted on the vertical axis vs P(In > c) on the  horizontal axis, for all values of the constant c. The latter graph will be termed the (I, Is) ROC curve. Note that it is a  rotated OD graph. Thus, the yes-no ROC curve and the (I,,, I,) ROC curve are both variant forms of an OD graph.  Consider the area below the yes-no ROC curve. This is identical to the area below the (I , Is) ROC curve, which is identical  to the area above the (I", Is) OD graph. Thus, the area below the yes-no ROC curve equals A(IJ,). Recall that, since I,,  and I, are continuous, A(I,,, , IS) equals P(IG Is). Thus, A(I, I3) measures the extent to which the I,,, distribution  lies below the I, distribution. If A(I,,, I,) equals one, then the I,, distribution lies entirely below the IS distribution  and, consequently, it is possible for the observer to be errorless in distinguishing signal events from noise events. However,  if Iand -1, are identically distributed, then A(I,, , I3) equals 2. In this case, impression strength provides no  information and consequently the observer is forced to guess whether signal or noise was presented. Thus, A(I,, , IS) might be  considered to be a measure of the fidelity of information transmitted by the observer's sensory system; or, equivalently, it  may be considered a measure of the fidelity of information available to the observer for inferring whether signal or noise was  presented.  The Rating Method  Now, the (In , I,) ROC curve is a strictly theoretical construct. There is no way to observe this curve in its entirety.  However, there are two experimental methods that make it possible to observe the location of a limited number of points on  this curve. These are the yes-no method and the rating method (Green & Swets, 1966). The yes-no method consists of performing  a number of separate yes-no experiments and inducing the observer to utilize a different criterion for each experiment. Each  experiment generates a separate point on the (I,z , IS) ROC curve. The rating method is described below. From this point  onward, this paper is concerned exclusively with the rating method.  The rating method works as follows. On each experimental trial, the observer is presented with either a signal event or a  noise event. The observer is required to rate his degree of confidence that a signal was presented on that trial. For this  purpose, he is given a confidence scale consisting of k confidence levels. These confidence levels may be coded by the  integers one through k. The integer one is assigned to the confidence level representing lowest confidence that the signal was  presented (i.e., highest confidence that the signal was not presented). The integer k is assigned to the confidence level  representing highest confidence that the signal was presented.  It is assumed that the observer performs his rating task as follows. First, he selects k - 1 boundary points on the scale of  possible impression strengths. These boundary points divide the impression strength scale into k mutually exclusive and  exhaustive intervals. Then, on each trial, if the impression strength aroused by the presented event falls within the mth  interval, the observer responds with confidence level m. Thus, the observer's confidence rating is an increasing step function  of the event's impression strength. Moreover, this step function has only a finite number of steps.  The (R,, , R,) ROC Graph. Let R, and Rbe random variables denoting the observer's confidence ratings on signal trials and  noise trials, respectively. Thus, R, and Rare finitely discrete random variables. Moreover, R, and Rare a monotonic  step function of I, and In , respectively. Consider a graph in which P(R, > c) is plotted on the ordinate vs P(R,,, > c) on  the abscissa, for all values of the constant c. This graph is a rotated OD graph and is termed the (Rn , R,) ROC graph. It  consists of a finite number of points. Because R, and Rn are a monotonic step function of I, and In , it follows from the  superposition principle that every point of the (Rn , R,) ROC graph is also a point on the continuous (I,, , I,) ROC curve.  Since there are a total of k confidence levels, the (Rn , R,) ROC graph consists of k + 1 points. Two of these points are (0,  0) and (1, 1). The remaining k - 1 points may be located anywhere along the (In , I,) ROC curve. Their precise locations on  this curve are determined by the observer's choice of k - 1 boundary points on the impression strength scale.  Thus, the k -}- 1 (R,,, R,) ROC graph points are like beads strung on a wire track. One bead is fixed at each end of the  track. The k - 1 beads in the middle cannot move off the track. However, they are free to slide along the track subject only  to the constraint that they always be strung in the same order. The observer, by his choice of boundary points on the  impression strength scale, indirectly controls the position of the k - 1 movable beads.  A(R, R,) Considered as an Approximation to A(I,, J,). Now, A(Rn , R,) is the area below the (Rn , R,) ROC graph as  determined by the trapezoidal rule. Since the (In J,) ROC curve passes through every point of the (R,, , R,) ROC graph, it  follows that A(I., I,) and A(Rn, R,) should be approximately equal. Thus, A(R R,) may be used as an approximation to A(I,, ,  I,). This approximation has practical value since A(In, I,) is not observable, whereas A(R, R,) is observable. How accurate  this approximation will be depends in large part upon the spacing between the points of the (Rn , R,) ROC graph. This is  illustrated in Fig. 6. Both (Rn , R,) ROC graphs in this figure consist of only five points. However, A(R,,, R,) is only  slightly smaller than A(I, I,) on the left of the figure, whereas A(R, , R,) is considerably smaller than A(I,, , I,) on the  right.  If the (I,,, I,) ROC graph is convex upward then,  2 < A(Rn , Rs) <_ A(In, I,).  FIG. 6. Two (R., R,,) ROC graphs superimposed on the same (IJ,) ROC curve. The area below the solid curve is A(I I. The  area below the dashed line is A(R, R,).  Thus, A(Rn, , RS) will usually be somewhat less than A(In , I,). However, if the number k of confidence intervals is made  large and if there is approximately equal spacing between the k + 1 points of the (Rn , Rs) ROC graph, then A(R,, , R,) can be  brought arbitrarily close to A(In , I,). Now, the number of confidence levels is determined by the instructions given the  observer, while the spacing between points of the (R,, , R3) ROC graph is under the observer's control. For this reason, A(I,,  , IS) may be considered to be a measure of the observer's discrimination capacity, whereas A(R,, , R3) may be considered to be  a measure of the observer's discrimination performance. Unless the observer has made a poor choice of the step function  relating his confidence ratings to impression strength, the performance measure should be only slightly smaller than the  capacity measure.  A well-known application of this approximation is due to Green. Consider a twoalternative forced-choice signal detection task.  On each trial, the observer is presented with a signal event followed by a noise event or vice versa. His task is to indicate  which of the two events was the signal. Presumably the observer selects the event which aroused the stronger sensory  impression and identifies that event as the signal. The probability of the observer being correct P(correct) should equal P(I,  > In). But, P(I,, > I, equals A(I, , I,,). So, P(correct) should equal A(I,, , IS) (Green, 1964; Green & Swets, 1966, pp.  45-17). Now, A(I,,, , I,) is not observable. However, it may be approximated by A(R,, , R.,) as measured in a confidence  rating task. Thus, P(correct) from a two-alternative forced-choice test and A(R, R,) from a confidencerating task should be  approximately equal. Green and Moses (1966) tested this prediction in a recognition memory experiment and found it to be valid.  A(R,, , RS) Considered on Its Own Merits. Up to this point, A(R,n, R,) has been discussed only within the context of signal  detection theory. It would be a mistake, however, to think that A(Rn , RS) has a meaningful interpretation only within the  context of this theory. Moreover, it would be doubly wrong to think that A(R, RS) is meaningful only insofar as it  approximates A(I. , I,). In fact, A(R, R,) may be sensibly interpreted, without any reference to signal detection theory, as  a measure of the observer's discrimination performance. Obviously, the less overlap there is between the R, and Rn  distributions, the better the observer is discriminating signal events from noise events. Recall that  A(& , R,) = P(& < Rs) -I- 41P(& = Rs).  Thus, A(R,n, RS) measures the extent to which the Rn distribution lies below the R,, distribution. Consequently, it is a  measure of the extent to which the observer's confidence ratings separate signal events from noise events.  This interpretation of A(R,, , RS) is exactly analogous to the interpretation of A(X, Y) as a measure of how accurately a  diagnostic test discriminates brain-damaged from normal individuals. In both cases, elements from two populations are examined  by a device. The area above the OD graph measures the accuracy with which the device, by means of an ordinally-scaled output,  discriminates elements from the two populations. In one case, the two populations are signal and noise events, the device is a  human observer, and the ordinally-scaled output are his confidence ratings. In the other case, the two populations are  brain-damaged and normal individuals, the device is a diagnostic test, and the ordinally-scaled output are the test scores.  Thus, even if signal detection theory had never been invented, A(R,, , RS) would be a meaningful measure of the observer's  performance at discriminating signal events from noise events.  The D'(X, Y) Measure  Simpson and Fitter (1973), on the basis of suggestions made by Schulman and Mitchell (1966) and Taylor (1967, p. 394),  proposed the measure of discrimination da . Suppose that In and Is are both normally distributed. Let [kn and ft, denote the  respective means of Iand IS while aand as denote the respective standard deviations. Then, da is defined by  a  = lh's f~a)1lian2 + C,2)/2]1 /2.  Note, that if a, equals an , then dreduces to the well-known measure d' (Green & Swets, 1966, Chap. 3).  Simpson and Fitter showed that da is a monotonic function of A(I,,, , Is). Let the function z denote the inverse of the  cumulative distribution function of a normal random variable with mean zero and unit standard deviation. Specifically, Simpson  and Fitter showed that, if Ia and IS are normally distributed, then  da. = 21/2z[A(I.. , IS)].  These results suggest the following generalization of Simpson and Fitter's proposals. Suppose, for example, that X and Y  represent scores of brain-damaged and normal individuals, respectively, on a diagnostic test. Let  D'(X, Y) = 21/2z[A(X, Y)].  Then D'(X, Y) is a measure of the accuracy with which the test discriminates the two populations. Moreover, D'(X, Y) is  commensurate with d' in the following sense. Consider a human observer in a signal detection task whose d' equals D'(X, Y) for  the diagnostic test. Then, the diagnostic test may be said to discriminate brain-damaged from normal individuals with the same  accuracy that the human observer discriminates signal events from noise events.  POINT ESTIMATION OF A(X, Y)  The remainder of this paper is concerned with the following questions. Suppose that random samples of observations of each of  the random variables X and Y have been obtained. How should A(X, Y) be estimated? What are the properties of the statistic  used to estimate A(X, V)? How should confidence intervals for A(X, Y) be constructed ?  Sample OD Graphs  Recall the definition of a population OD graph. For any constant c, T(c) is the point having the horizontal coordinate P(X <  c) and the vertical coordinate P(Y < c). The population OD graph for X and Y consists of the points T(c) for all c from -oo to  +oo.  A sample OD graph may now be defined. Suppose that a random sample of NX observations of the random variable X and a random  sample of N, observations of Y" have been obtained. Let p(X < c) denote the proportion of the NX observations of X which are  less than or equal to the constant c. Let p(Y < c) be defined similarly. For any c, let t(c) be the point having the  horizontal coordinate p(X < c) and the vertical coordinate p(Y < c). Now, the sample OD graph for X and Y consists of the  points t(c) for all c from -oc to +oo. For any c, each coordinate of the point t(c) is an unbaised estimator of the  corresponding coordinate of T(c). In this sense, the entire sample OD graph for X and Y" may be considered to be an unbiased  estimator of the population OD graph for X and Y.  Note that, because it is constructed on the basis of finite samples of X and Y observations, a sample OD graph always consists  of a finite number of points. If there are no ties in the combined sample of X and Y observations, then the sample OD graph  will consist of NX -;- N,- -{- 1 points. If there are ties in the combined sample, there will be fewer points in the sample OD  graph. Two of these points are always (0, 0) and (1, 1). This property is a basic difference between sample and population OD  graphs. A population OD graph for continuous X and Y is a continuous curve, whereas a sample OD graph for continuous X and Y  can never be anything but a finite set of points.  Area Above the Sample OD Graph  A total of NX observations of X and N,, observations of Y have been randomly sampled. Thus, there are a total of NXNy ways of  pairing an X observation with a Y observation. Let p(X < Y), p(X = Y) and p(X =A Y) denote the proportion of these NXNy pairs  for which X < Y, X = Y, and X ~ Y, respectively. It is evident that p(X < Y), p(X = Y), and p(X =A Y) are unbiased estimators  of P(X < Y), P(X = Y), and P(X Y), respectively.  Let a(X, Y) denote the area above the sample OD graph for X and Y as computed by the trapezoidal rule. It is easily shown that  a(X, Y) = p(X < Y) + 2p(X = Y).  (The proof of this is quite similar to the proof of Eq. (3).) Taking the expected values of both sides of this equation  reveals that a(X, Y) is an unbiased estimator of A(X, Y). Thus, the area above a sample OD graph is an unbiased estimate of  the area above the population OD graph.  The Mann-Whitney U and a(X, Y). Mann and Whitney's (1947) U statistic is defined as being the total number of (X, Y) pairs in  which X < Y. From this definition, it can be seen that a(X, Y) and the Mann-Whitney U statistic are closely related. Thus, if  X and Y are continuous, a(X, Y) equals UlNxN, . This is a fortunate relationship as there is a large body of literature  dealing with the Mann-Whitney U and related statistics. Some of that literature is reviewed in succeeding sections of this  paper.  From this point on, when there is no danger of ambiguity, a(X, Y) and A(X, Y) will be abbreviated by a and A, respectively.  VARIANCE OF a(X, Y)  This section of the paper discusses the variance of a. A variance formula, variance estimator, and upper bounds on the  variance of a are all given. These results will be useful in calculating confidence intervals for A.  It was mentioned above that a is an unbiased estimate of A. Moreover, Lehmann (1951, Lemma 3.2) has stated without giving the  proof that, if X and Y are continuous, then a has the smallest variance of all unbiased estimators of A. Whether this result  also holds for finitely discrete X and Y is not known to the present author.  Variance Formula  A number of writers have derived formulas for the variance of the Mann-Whitney U and related statistics. Unfortunately for  present purposes, most of these formulas were derived under the assumption of continuous X and Y. However, Noether (1967) has  derived the variance of a statistic which is a linear function of a without assuming continuity of X and Y. Let oat denote the  variance of a. Then, from Noether's Eq. (6.5), it is seen that  aa2 = (1l4NxNr)[p(X 7~-- Y) + (Nx - 1) Bxxr + (Nr - 1) BYYx  - 4(Nx + Nr - 1)(A - -)2), (4)  where BxxY and BYYx are defined as follows. Let Yi and Y2 be two independent observations randomly sampled from the Y  distribution and let X be a random observation independently sampled from the X distribution. Then, BYYx is defined by  By-yx = P(Yj, Y2 < X) + P(X < Y,, Y2)  - P(Y1 < X < Y2) - P(Y2 < X < Yi)  and BxxY is defined analogously. Note, that, as Nx and NY approach infinity, oat goes to zero. This shows that a is a  consistent estimator of A.  Estimating O  In order to estimate oat, it is first necessary to estimate BYYx and BxxY . This may be done as follows. Consider triplets of  the form (Yi , Y2 , X) where Yi and Y2 are independent. The total number of such triplets that can be formed from the X and Y  samples is NY(NY - 1)Nx. Let p(Y, , 12 < X) denote the proportion of these triplets for which both Yi and Y~ are less than X.  Let p(X < Yl , Y2) and p(Y, < X < Y2) be defined similarly. Then, set  by), = p(Yj , Y2 < X) + p(X < Yi , Y2) - 2p(Yi < X < Y2).  Obviously, bYYx is an unbiased estimate of B,.rx. It may be computed as follows. First, rank order the combined samples of X  and Y observations. Then, for each X observation, count the number of Y observations that are less than that X and the number  that are greater than that X. Let these two quantities be denoted by ux and vx , respectively. Then,  brrx = Y_ Lux(ux - 1) + vx(vx - 1) - 2uxvx]I[NY(NY - 1) Nx],  where the summation is carried out over all X observations in the sample. In an analogous manner, bxxY an unbiased estimate of  BxxY may be defined.  Now, p(X ~ Y) and a unbiasedly estimate P(X ~A Y) and A. This provides unbiased estimators for P(X =A Y), BxxY , BYYx , and A  which may be substituted into Eq. (4). Note, however, that the expected value of (a - 2)2 is (A - 2)2 -}- Oat. This introduces  a bias which may be corrected by multiplying Eq. (4) by NxNrl(Nx - 1)(N,. - 1). So, let  sae = L1I4(Nx - 1)(Nr - 1)]Lp(X =A Y) + (Nx - 1) bxxY + (Ny - 1) bYYx  - 4(Nx + Nr - 1)(a - 2)2]. (6) Then, sae is an unbiased estimate of Oat.  Maximum Value of aa2  Let am ax denote the maximum possible value of aa2 for fixed A and fixed sample sizes NX and N, . That is, all combinations of  random variables X and Y yielding a fixed value of A(X, Y) are examined. For each such combination of X and Y, aa2 is  calculated for fixed sample sizes NX and Ny. The largest aa2 obtained is denoted 2  amax  Three different expressions for amax are given here. The first expression gives the maximum value of a,,2 for the general case  of any continuous X and Y. The second expression gives the maximum value of aa2 for the case where X and Y are continuous and  stochastically comparable. The third expression gives the maximum value of aa2 for the case where X and Y are continuous and  have a monotonic posterior. Obviously, am ax for the general case is larger than amax for stochastic comparability which, in  turn, is larger than am ax for a monotonic posterior.  In deriving all three of these upper bounds for the variance of a(Y, Y), X and Y were assumed to be continuous. Nevertheless,  these three upper bounds are also valid for finitely discrete X and Y. Suppose that X and Y are finitely discrete. Let X* and  Y* be defined by Eqs. (1) and (2). Then X* and Y* are continuous. Let aa2 and a*2 denote the variances of a(X, Y) and a(X*,  Y*), respectively. An examination of each term in Eq. (4) shows that  2 2 2 as a* <  - amax  General Case. Pollack and Hsieh (1969) investigated the variance of a(X, Y) using Monte Carlo techniques. They studied or,,'  under conditions where NX and N, were equal and where X and Y had either both normal, both rectangular, or both negative  exponential distributions. They found that ua2 was usually close to but less than A(1 - A)INX.  Van Dantzig (1951, footnote 4) and Birnbaum and Klose (1957) have published mathematical proofs that, if X and Y are  continuous, then  am ax = A(1 - A)INL,  where NL denotes the lesser of NX and N,. Thus, the theorems of Van Dantzig and Birnbaum and Klose confirm and extend the  results of Pollack and Hsieh's Monte Carlo investigations.  Stochastic Comparability. Let NG denote the greater of NX and N, and let AG denote the greater of A and 1 - A. Birnbaum and  Klose (1957) have proven that, if X and Y are continuous and stochastically comparable, then  amax = (1 I NGNL){(2NL - 1)AG(1 - AG) - (NG - NL)(1 - AG)2  Monotonic Posterior. It is shown in the Appendix that, if X and Y are continuous and have a monotonic posterior, then  am ax = (1I3NGNc)L(2NG + 1) AG(1 - AG) - (NG - NL)(1 - AG)2]  OD Curves That Maximize vat. What is the shape of the OD curves that maximize a for fixed A and for fixed sample sizes?  Suppose that A > I and Nx < Nr . The particular OD curves that maximize a a2, for the general case, for stochastic  comparability, and for a monotonic posterior, are shown in Fig. 7. Using Eq. (4) to calculate aa2 for these three OD curves  yields the expressions for amax given in Eqs. (7), (8), and (9).  a  P(XLC)  0 2A- I  P(XSC)  FIG. 7. OD curves that maximize vat for fixed NX G Ny and fixed A ;> 1/2. Upper: General case. Middle: Stochastic  comparability (one-sided OD curve). Lower: Monotonic posterior (convex OD curve).  Estimating omaX . How should am ax be estimated ? Let s2niax denote an estimate of Amax . Let aG denote the greater of a and 1  - a. The three am,X's may be estimated as follows. First, replace A with a everywhere in Eq. (7). Replace AG with aG  everywhere in Eqs. (8) and (9). Second, change the denominator in Eq. (7) from NL to NL - 1. Change the denominator in Eq. (9)  from 3NGNL to 3NGNL - NG - NL -{- 1. The purpose of these denominator changes is to convert the estimator sma,x from a bias  toward underestimation to a bias toward overestimation of a,,,.. (Naturally,  when estimating an upper bound, the conservative strategy is to overestimate rather than underestimate.) It is unclear whether  and how a corresponding adjustment should be made in Eq. (8).  ASYMPTOTIC NORMALITY OF a(X, Y)  A particularly useful property of a is that it is asymptotically normal. Mann and Whitney (1947) showed that, if X and Y are  continuous and identically distributed, then, as Nx and N,. approach infinity, the distribution of U approaches the normal  distribution. Lehmann (1951, Theorem 3.2) considerably extended Mann and Whitney's results. Lehmann examined a large class of  statistics. This class includes both the Mann-Whitney U statistic and the a statistic. Lehmann showed that, irrespective of  how X and Y are distributed, the distribution of all statistics in this class is asymptotically normal. In particular,  asymptotic normality holds even if X and Y are discrete and are not identically distributed. Specifically, it follows from  Lehmann's theorem that, if NX and Ny are held in constant ratio, then as Nx and Ny approach infinity, the distribution of  (Nx)I11(a - A) approaches a normal distribution with mean zero and fixed variance.  How large should Nx and Ny be in order to ensure that the a distribution is adequately approximated by the normal  distribution? Mann and Whitney showed that, if X and Y are continuous and identically distributed, then the approximation is  adequate for most purposes whenever Nx and Ny are both eight or larger. Note that, if X and Y are identically distributed,  then A equals 1. Birnbaum (1956) opined that, if A is close to either zero or one, then considerably larger values of both NX  and Ny may be required. Thus, in most cases at present, there is no good way to determine how large Nx and Ny should be to  justify the use of the normal approximation.  There are, however, two principles that can be of some use in this regard. Now, the a distribution has a mean of A and a  standard deviation of a,,. As one travles more and more standard deviations away from A into either tail of the distribution,  eventually a point is reached where the normal approximation breaks down and breaks down badly. The reason for this is simple.  The two tails of the normal distribution stretch off to infinity, whereas the tails of the a distribution end at the values  zero and one. Therefore, somewhere along the way as zero or one are approached, the normal approximation will break down.  Thus, the first principle is that, the more sa's (or smax's) that a is from both zero and one, the better the normal  approximation will tend to be. The second principle is that what may be a sufficiently adequate normal approximation for one  purpose may not be for another. For example, a given value of Nx and Ny may be sufficiently large to justify using the normal  approximation to calculate a 50 % confidence interval, but not a 99 % confidence interval. To calculate the 99 % confidence  interval, it is necessary that the normal approximation be accurate  further out into the tails of the distribution than is necessary for the 50% confidence interval. Thus, while these two  principles do not answer the question of how large NX and Ny should be, they do provide some guidance on the issue.  INTERVAL ESTIMATION OF A(X, Y)  Overview  Several different methods for constructing confidence intervals or confidence bounds for A are given below. Each of these  methods has its good points and bad points. The methods based upon the normal approximation require larger sample sizes but  yield narrower confidence intervals than the methods which are not based upon the normal approximation. Thus, there is a  tradeoff involved in the choice of method: The methods which are less dependent upon large sample sizes and upon possibly  questionable assumptions yield the wider confidence intervals. Unfortunately, it is often difficult to determine whether the  sample sizes are large enough to justify the use of the normal approximation. This can make the choice of the best method  quite difficult.  Application to Psychophysics. The methods described below may be applied in rating studies of signal detection to construct a  confidence interval for A(Rn , Rs). It should be noted, however, that a confidence interval for A(Rn , Rs) is just that; it is  not a confidence interval for A (I,, , I3). An A(Rn , RS) confidence interval is constructed to answer the question: How  accurately has A(Rn , R3) been estimated? It does not provide an answer to the entirely separate question: How accurately does  A(Rn , Rs) approximate A(I, Is) ? Thus, an A(Rn , Rs) confidence interval does not tell how accurately A(In , Is) is known.  Estimating D'(X, Y). The methods given in this paper may also be used to provide point and interval estimators for D'(X, Y).  Suppose A has been estimated by a. Then, (2)1/2 z(a) is a point estimator for D'(X, Y). Moreover, if the confidence interval  for A at confidence level y runs from aloes to ahigh , then the interval from (2)1/2 z(alo,) to (2)12 z(ahigh) is a confidence  interval for D'(X, Y) at confidence level y.  Confidence Intervals Based Upon Asymptotic Normality and s,,  Sen (1967) has proposed the following method of obtaining confidence intervals for A. In developing this method, Sen assumed  that X and Y were continuous. However, as presented here, Sen's method has been slightly modified so that it is valid for both  continuous and noncontinuous X and Y. Govindarajulu (1968) has also proposed confidence intervals which differ from Sen's only  in that a biased rather than unbiased estimate of aa2 is employed.  Let A denote NX/(NX + NY) and let No denote AN,. It is evident from Eq. (4) that, if NX and NY go to infinity in such a manner  that A remains constant, then Noaa2 approaches a limiting value which is a function of A. Let this limiting value be denoted  by wa2(A). Now, consider sae the unbiased estimator of aa2. As NX and NY go to infinity in constant ratio, Nosa2 is a  consistent estimator of wa2(A). Consider the ratio (N,)112(a - A)/(No)112 sa . It is known from Lehmann (1951, Theorem 3.2)  that, as Nx and NY go to infinity in constant ratio, the numerator is asymtptotically normal with mean zero and standard  deviation wQ(A). The denominator is a consistent estimate of wa(A). Then, it follows from a basic theorem (Cramer, 1946,  Theorem 20.6) on the convergence of random variables that (a - A)/s, is asymptotically normal with mean zero and standard  deviation one.  As previously, let the function z denote the inverse of the cumulative distribution function of a normal random variable with  mean zero and standard deviation one. Then, for sufficiently large NX and NY ,  P[I(a - A)lsa i <- z[(1 + Y)/2]] ^ Y.  So, for sufficiently large Nx and NY , a z(2 + y/2) sa may be taken as the two ends of a confidence interval for A at  confidence level y. Similarly, a -{- z(Y) sa may be taken as an upper confidence bound for A at confidence level y. The  problem with Seri's confidence intervals, of course, is that it is difficult to determine whether the sample sizes N,x and NY  are large enough to justify use of the method.  Confidence Intervals Based Upon Asymptotic Normality and smaz  Birnbaum (1956; Birnbaum & Klose, 1957) has suggested that the maximum variance of a, rather than the variance itself, be used  to calculate confidence intervals for a. Now, three different expressions for amax (Eqs. (7), (8), and (9)) were given above.  Which of these amax's should be used to calculate a confidence interval depends upon whether one is willing to make the strong  assumption of a monotonic posterior, the weak assumption of stochastic comparability, or no assumption at all. The following  remarks are valid whichever expression for amax is employed.  As NX and NY go to infinity in constant ratio, Noumax approaches a limiting value which is a function of A. Let this limiting  value be denoted w2 ax(A). Furthermore, Nosn aX is a consistent estimator of wlnax(A). Then, it follows from the previously  cited theorems of Lehmann and Cramer that (a - A)lsmax is asymptotically normal with mean zero and standard deviation  wa(A)/wmax(A).  So, for sufficiently large NX and NY ,  P[I a-A I <z(I +Yl w a (A) I  Smax 2 wmax(A) ' Y.  (10)  408 DONALD BAMBER Then, since wa(A) < wmax(A),  P[I(a - A)/s.. I < z((1 + y)/2)] > y.  So, for sufficiently large Nx and Ny , a + zQ -{- y/2) smax may be conservatively taken as the two ends of a confidence  interval for A at confidence level y. Similarly, a + z(y)smax may be conservatively taken as an upper confidence bound for A  at confidence level y.  Thus, confidence intervals based upon smax are wider than Sen's confidence intervals which are based upon s,,. However, the  need for large sample sizes is presumably less acute when confidence intervals are calculated using sm... rather than sd .  (Note that, even if the sample sizes are not large enough for Eq. (10) to be valid, nevertheless the inequality of Eq. (11)  may still hold.) A further advantage for confidence intervals calculated from smax is that smax is easier to compute than sQ .  Birnbaum-McCarty Confidence Bounds  It is evident that the Achilles heel of the previous methods of constructing confidence bounds for A is the difficulty in  determining whether Nx and Ny are large enough to justify the assumption of approximate normality. In order to avoid this  difficulty, Birnbaum and McCarty (1958) developed a method for constructing confidence bounds which does not depend upon  asymptotic normality. These confidence bounds, however, are highly conservative.  Background. Suppose Nx observations have been randomly sampled from the X distribution. Define the random variables:  D+(Nx) = sup [P(X < c) - p(X < c)] -X+W  D-(Nx) = sup [p(X < c) - P(X < c)]. -.O+x  If X is a continuous random variable, then the distributions of D+(Nx) and D-(N,) are identical and are independent of the  distribution of X. Let M(E) denote 1 - exp(-2E2). Then, if X is continuous,  Ni M P[D+(NX) < E/NXi2] = M(E) (12) x  (Wilks, 1962, pp. 336-339).  Upper Confidence Bounds for Continuous X and Y. Suppose that Nx and Ny observations have been randomly sampled from the X and  Y distributions. Birnbaum and McCarty (1958) showed that, if X and Y are continuous, then  ORDINAL DOMINANCE AND RECEIVER OPERATING GRAPHS 409  Consequently,   P[P(X < Y) << p(X < Y) +.,] > P[DI(Nx) -{- D-(Ny) < E]. (14)  Then, it follows from Eq. (12) that, for large Nx and Ny ,   P[D+(Nx) + D-(Ny) <.E] M[Nx 2(E - ~1)] M'(NY 77) drl, (15)  where M' denotes the derivative of M. Thus, for sufficiently large Nx and N,. , the probability that P(X < Y) is smaller than  p(X < Y) + E is at most equal to the right side of Eq. (15). Confidence bounds constructed in this way are highly conservative  because the inequality in Eq. (14) is quite crude. Note that both upper and lower confidence bounds may be obtained. Thus, for  continuous X and Y, finding an upper confidence bound for P(Y < X) is equivalent to finding a lower confidence bound for P(X <  Y).  Now, the Birnbaum-McCarty confidence bounds are based upon the approximation in Eq. (15). How large must Nx and N,. be for  this approximation to be accurate? Birnbaum and McCarty stated that the approximation is quite accurate when Nx and N,, are  both 50 or larger. Moreover, they claimed (but could not prove) that, for smaller values of Nx and N,- , the left side of Eq.  (15) is larger than the right. This has the effect of making the confidence bounds still more conservative. Thus, the  Birnbaum-McCarty confidence bounds are valid for both small and large sample sizes.  Extension to Noncontinuous X and Y. Owen, Craswell, and Hanson (1964) constructed tables for the Birnbaum-McCarty confidence  bound. As previously, let A equal Nxf(Nx -}- N,.). In their table, one enters the value of A and the confidence level y and  reads out a value S(A, y) such that  P[P(X < Y) < p(X < Y) + S(A, y)l(Nx + Ny)i12] > y. (16)  Owen et al. extended Birnbaum and McCarty's results in two ways. First, they showed that Eq. (16) is valid for any X and Y,  not just continous X and Y. Second, they showed that Eq. (13) and, therefore, Eq. (16) remain valid when P(X < Y) and p(X < Y)  are replaced with P(X < Y) and p(X < Y), respectively. From this, it can be seen that Eqs. (13) and (16) are still valid when  P(X < Y) and p(X < Y) are replaced with A and a, respectively. Thus, given a sample value of a, an upper confidence bound for  A may be constructed using Birnbaum and McCarty's method.  Confidence Intervals. There is a natural way of extending Birnbaum and McCarty's methods in order to obtain confidence  intervals, at least for continuous X and Y (Birnbaum, 1956). However, Govindarajulu (1968) has opined that the confidence  intervals obtained by this method are quite crude because they are so conservative.  Moreover, to the present author's knowledge, tables for the computation of these intervals have not been published.  An alternative method of computing confidence intervals is to combine a BirnbaumMcCarty upper confidence bound with a lower  confidence bound. Thus,  P (A G a + E) > y  and  P(A > a - E) > y  imply that  P(a-E<A<a+E)>2y-1.  Ury's Confidence Intervals  A method of constructing confidence intervals for A which does not depend upon asymptotic normality has been proposed by Ury  (1972). Ury's method involves the use of Chebyshev's inequality in place of asymptotic normality. This inequality states that  the probability that a random variable will deviate from its mean by more than k standard deviations is at most 1/k2. Now, in  the case of a normal random variable, the probability that it will deviate from its mean by more than k standard deviations is  considerably less than l f k2. Thus, use of Chebyshev's inequality in place of asymptotic normality yields a highly  conservative confidence interval.  Now, the expression for am ax for the general case (Eq. (7)) implies that amax is at most 1/(4NL). Together with the Chebyshev  inequality, this implies that  P[I a - A I < 11[4NL(1 - y)]1/2] > y  Thus, a 1/[4NL(1 - y)]1/2 may conservatively be taken as the two ends of the y-level confidence interval for A.  Under certain circumstances, the upper end of this y-level confidence interval will be less (i.e., better) than the y-level  Birnbaum-McCarty upper confidence bound. In particular, for equal NX and Ny , the upper end of Ury's interval will be less  than the Birnbaum-McCarty upper bound when y < 0.925. The reverse is true when y > 0.95.  For most distributions, Chebyshev's inequality is quite crude. Usually, this inequality is considered to have only theoretical  significance rather than any practical value. Thus, the fact that a confidence interval based upon Chebyshev's inequality has  been proposed as a serious competitor to the Birnbaum-McCarty confidence bound serves to underline the extreme conservatism of  the latter bound.  Width of the Various Confidence Intervals  Consider the confidence intervals based upon asymptotic normality. As a approaches either zero or one, sae and all three forms  of smax approach zero. Thus, these confidence  intervals are narrowest when a is near zero or one and are widest when a is near . If NX and Ny are equal, smax for the case  of a monotonic posterior is roughly 2 of SMaX for the general case. Thus, for equal NX and Ny , confidence intervals  calculated from smax for a monotonic posterior are roughly (3)1/2 or 0.82 the width of confidence intervals calculated from  smax for the general case. Depending on the shape of the OD graph, confidence intervals calculated from sa are likely to be  somewhat narrower still.  Suppose ahigh is an upper confidence bound for A at confidence level y. Let the difference ahigh - a be termed the y-level  confidence margin. Thus, the smaller the confidence margin, the better. How do the confidence margins for upper bounds based  upon asymptotic normality compare with the confidence margins for BirnbaumMcCarty upper bounds? For the smax procedure, the  y-level confidence margin is z(y) smax . For the general case, smax reaches its greatest value, which is 1l[4(NL - 1)]112,  when a equals -.'-. So, for the smax procedure, the widest possible confidence margin is z(y)/[4(NL - 1)]1/2. For the  Birnbaum-McCarty upper bound, the confidence margin is S(A, y)/ [N, -}- N,] 1/2. For equal NX and N,. , the BirnbaumMcCarty  confidence margin is roughly twice the largest possible confidence margin for the smax procedure (Govindarajulu, 1968, Table  2.1). Moreover, as a approaches either zero or one, the Sax confidence margin goes to zero, whereas the BirnbaumMcCarty  confidence margin remains constant. Thus, for values of a near zero or one, the Birnbaum-McCarty confidence margin is many  times wider than the smax confidence margin.  Thus, whenever NX and Ny are large enough to justify it, it is always preferable to compute confidence intervals or bounds by  means of the sa or smax procedures rather than the Birnbaum-McCarty or Ury procedures. Unfortunately, this means that in some  cases there will be no good way to compute a confidence interval or bound. Consider the following example. Suppose NX and N,  both equal 25 and a equals 0.990. It is desired to compute a lower confidence bound for A with 0.95 confidence. Now, smax for  the general case equals 0.020. Thus, the lower confidence bound obtained with the smax procedure is 0.958. However, since a is  only one half of a standard deviation distant from one, the assumption of approximate normality is not justified. On the other  hand, using the Birnbaum-McCarty procedure, the lower confidence bound is found to be 0.576, a result which is so conservative  that it is almost useless. Thus, in this example, the smax procedure is efficient but not valid, whereas the Birnbaum-McCarty  procedure is valid but not efficient. At present, there is no procedure that yields a confidence bound which is both valid and  efficient in a case where the sample sizes are small and a is close to zero or one.  APPENDIX  DERIVATION OF amax FOR A MONOTONIC POSTERIOR  The derivation of the value of am ax (Eq. (9)) for continuous X and Y having a monotonic posterior is sketched here. Recall  that X and Y have a monotonic posterior if and only if their OD graph is convex. Thus, it is desired to find the convex OD  curve that maximizes a"2 while A (the area above the curve) and the sample sizes Nx and NY are held constant. Examination of  Eq. (4) shows that aa2 will be maximized if and only if (Nx - 1) Bxxr + (NY - 1) BYYx is maximized.  Let x and y denote P(X <- c) and P(Y < c), respectively. Let the OD curve for X and Y be described by the equation y = g(x).  Let R denote the region above the OD curve and let dA denote the differential of area. Thus  A(X, Y) = J'R dA.  It follows from the definition of BYYx (Eq. (5)) that  BYYx = f 1 g(x)2 dx + f 1 [1 - g(x)l2 dx - 2 f 1 g(x)[l - g(x)] dx 0 0 0  = f 1 [4g(x)s - 4g(x) + 1] dx 0  =1-8fifi (y-1/2)dydx o n (m)  = I -8 fR(Y-1/2)dA.  Similarly, it can be shown that  Bxxr = I + 8 f (x - 1/2) dA. R  Now, define  and  T-= fR(x-y)dA  = fR(x +Y - I) dA.  Then,  (Nx - I) Bxxy + (NY - I) BYYx  =(NX+NY-2)  +4[(Nx+ NY-2)J-+(Nx-NY).l+]. (17)  Assume that A(X, Y) is at least one-half. This entails no loss of generality since either A(X, Y) or A(Y, X) will be greater  than or equal to one-half. Let the value of A(X, Y) be denoted by A,. Consider an arbitrary convex OD curve having area A,  above it. This curve is represented by the smooth convex curve in Fig. 8. Let A and B be two arbitrary points on the arbitrary  convex OD curve which have the property that they are equidistant from the positive diagonal CD. Let this common distance be  denoted by h. Let the distance between A and B be denoted by w. Consider a line drawn through the points A and C and another  line drawn through the points B and D. Let E be the intersection of these two lines. All of the above points and lines are  represented in Fig. 8.  FIG. 8. The OD graph CED and an arbitrary convex OD curve.  Consider the OD graph which consists of the straight line segments CE and ED. Now, the area above the OD graph CED is a  continuous function of w. Let this area be denoted by CED(w). Now, w can assume any value from zero to a maximum of 2112 (the  length of the diagonal CD). Recall that the area above the arbitrary convex OD curve in Fig. 8 is Ao . Since the arbitrary OD  curve is convex, it can be seen that  CED(0) <-A, < lim CED(w). w,21/z  Consequently, there must exist some particular value of w such that  CED(w) = A0. (18)  Let the points A and B be chosen such that Eq. (18) is satisfied. Thus, the areas above the arbitrary convex OD curve and  above the OD graph CED must be equal. Therefore, in Fig. 8, the sum of the areas of the two horizontally striped regions must  equal the area of the vertically striped region. Recall that the arbitrary OD curve is convex and that the points A and B are  equidistant from the diagonal CD. Consequently, everywhere in the vertically striped region, x - y is at least as great as it  is everywhere in the horizontally striped regions. Therefore, J- for the OD graph CED must be greater than or equal to J- for  the arbitrary convex OD curve.  Let the line FG be drawn through the point E and parallel to the diagonal CD. This is illustrated in Fig. 8. Suppose that the  point E is moved back and forth along the line between F and G. No matter where E moves on this line, the area above the OD  graph CED and the value of J- for this OD graph will remain constant. Thus, no matter where E is located between F and G, the  OD graph CED maximizes J- over all convex OD graphs having area Ao above them.  Let E be moved all the way over to the point F. Consider the OD graph CFD. This is illustrated in Fig. 9. The smooth convex  curve in Fig. 9 is the same (arbitrary) convex OD curve as in Fig. 8. The areas above the arbitrary convex OD curve and above  the OD graph CFD both equal A,. Therefore, the area of the vertically striped region in Fig. 9 must equal the area of the  horizontally striped region. Note that, everywhere in the vertically striped region, x + y - 1 must be at least as small as  everywhere in the horitontally striped region. Therefore, the OD graph CFD minimizes J+ over all convex OD graphs having area  Ao above them. Similarly, it can be shown that the OD graph CGD maximizes J+ over all such graphs.  a  FIG. 9. The OD graph CFD and an arbitrary convex OD curve.  Thus, CFD simultaneously maximizes J- and minimizes J+, while CGD simultaneously maximizes both J- and J+. It follows from Eq.  (17) that CFD maximizes vat when Nx < N, and CGD maximizes vat when N, < NX. Calculating ad2 for the OD graphs CFD and CGD  from Eq. (4) yields the expression for Qmax for a monotonic posterior given in Eq. (9).  ACKNOWLEDGMENT  The author thanks Raymond O. Collier, Jr., for his helpful comments on earlier drafts of this paper and Teresa Kucala, David  Plantenberg, Marcia Deuth, and Helen Buerkle for preparing the manuscript and figures.  REFERENCES  BIRNBAUM, Z. W. On a use of the Mann-Whitney statistic. In J. Neyman (Ed.), Proceedings of the Third Berkeley Symposium on  Mathematical Statistics and Probability, Vol. 1. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1956, Pp. 13-17.  BIRNBAUM, Z. W., & KLOSE, O. A1. Bounds for the variance of the Mann-Whitney statistic. Annals of Mathematical Statistics,  1957, 38, 933-945.  BIRNBAUM, Z. W., & MCCARTY, R. C. A distribution-free upper confidence bound for Pr{ Y" < X;, based on independent samples of  X and Y. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 1958, 29, 558-562.  CRAMI?R, H. Mathematical methods of statistics. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1946. DARLINGTON, R. B. Comparing two  groups by simple graphs. Psychological Bulletin, 1973, 79, 110-116.  GovINDARAIULU, Z. Distribution-free confidence bounds for P(X < Y). Annals of the Institute of Statistical Mathematics, 1968,  20, 229-238.  GREEN, D. M. General prediction relating yes-no and forced-choice results. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America  (Abstract), 1964, 36, 1042.  GREEN, D. M., & MOSES, F. L. On the equivalence of two recognition measures of short-term memory. Psychological Bulletin,  1966, 66, 228-234.  GREEN, D. M., & SWETS, J. A. Signal detection theory and psychophysics. New York: Wiley, 1966. LEHMANN, E. L. Consistency and  unbiasedness of certain nonparametric tests. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 1951, 22, 165-179.  MANN, H. B., & WHITNEY, D. R. On a test of whether one of two random variables is stochastically larger than the other. Annals  of Mathematical Statistics, 1947, 18, 50-60.  NOETHER, G. E. Elements of nonparametric statistics. New York: Wiley, 1967.  OwrN, D. B., CRASWELL, K. J., & HANSON, D. L. Nonparametric upper confidence bounds for Pr{ Y < X1 and confidence limits for  Pr{ Y < X} when X and Y are normal. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 1965, 59, 906-924.  POLLACK, I., & HSIEH, R. Sampling variability of the area under the ROC-curve and of d,'. Psychological Bulletin, 1969, 71,  161-173.  SCHULMAN, A. L, & MITCHELL, R. R. Operating characteristics from yes-no and forced-choice procedures. Journal of the  Acoustical Society of America, 1966, 40, 473-477.  SEN, P. K. A note on asymptotically distribution-free confidence bounds for P{X < Y}, based on two independent samples.  Sankhya: The Indian Journal of Statistics, Series A, 1967, 29, 95-102.  SIMPSON, A. J., & FITTER, M. J. What is the best index of detectability? Psychological Bulletin, 1973, 80, 481-488.  TAYLOR, M. M. Detectability theory and the interpretation of vigilance data. Acta Psychologica, 1967, 27, 390-399. (Reprinted  in A. F. Sanders (Ed.), Attention and performance I. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Co., 1967. Pp. 390-399.)  URY, H. K. On distribution-free confidence bounds for Pr{Y < X1. Technometrics, 1972, 14, 577-581.  VAN DANTZiG, D. On the consistency and power of Wilcoxon's two sample test. Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van  Wetenschappen, Proceedings, Series A, 1951, 54 (Also: Indagationes Mathematicae, 13), 1-8.  WILKS, S. S. Mathematical statistics, New York: Wiley, 1962.