10.1016/0022-2496(75)90057-7
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 12, 212-224 (1975)  Additive Measurement with Short Segments of Curves  MICHAEL V. LEVINE  Educational Testing Service, Princeton, New Jersey 08540  Periodic functions and functional equations remove the major remaining obstacle to the direct application of the logic of  physical length and mass measurement to psychological data.  Common sense suggests a simple additive measurement procedure. Although this procedure is commonly applicable in the physical  sciences and plays an important role in the mathematical theory of psychological measurement, it has never been successfully  applied to psychological data. This paper introduces a new procedure, which has the conceptual simplicity of the common sense  procedure and circumvents the major obstacle to psychological applications.  1. HOLDER'S MEASUREMENT PROCEDURE  Consider an unmarked straight rod exactly 1 m long and another rod a little less than twice as long. To approximate the length  of the longer rod in tenths of a meter, common sense suggests reproducing the longer rod ten times to construct a length L  exactly ten times the unknown length and comparingL with multiples of the meter-long rod. If L is between m and m -{- 1 times  the meter rod, then the length of the longer rod is approximately one meter plus m - 10 tenths of a meter. Proceeding in this  fashion, one can approximate the length in hundredths or smaller fractions of a meter.  More generally, in certain kinds of ordered groups' one may associate any pair of positive elements f, g with a unique  sequence of integers {m,,} by requiring that the general term m = m,, satisfies the condition on iterates of f and g  fm < gn < fin+l.  It is well known that the ratio m,,/n converges. The limit is frequently of considerable scientific interest. In fact, the  word "measurement" in common usage frequently refers to approximating this limit.  Because of its role in the proofs of Holder's fundamental theorem of additive  ' Specifically in archimedean, linearly ordered groups.  Copyright Q 1975 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  212  MEASUREMENT WITH SEGMENTS OF CURVES 213  measurement, the process of approximating iterates with iterates described above to compute measurements will be called  Holder's measurement procedure.  I know of no successful application of the procedure to psychological data. Despite its conceptual simplicity, neither this  procedure nor any of its refinements has given useful results with psychological data. The main obstacle is the reliance upon  higher iterates or more generally, as in the case of refinements, upon products with many factors. The higher iterates and  products are needed because the ratio m,Jn converges slowly.  The difficulty with iterates and products is related to two of the thorniest problems in psychological measurement: the  uncertainty of psychological processes and the essential boundedness or tendency for psychological systems to change radically  with extreme variations in range.  This paper introduces a procedure that promises to circumvent the boundedness and uncertainty problems that are commonly  encountered in an important, general type of measurement situation. Some background must precede the description of the new  procedure; the general theoretical framework must be reviewed and the type of data to be considered must be described. This is  done in the next two sections.  2. MEASUREMENT AND THE CONJUGATES OF REAL FUNCTIONS  In the remainder of the paper all real functions (real-valued functions defined on a subset of the real numbers) are assumed  to be continuous and strictly monotonic increasing unless otherwise stated.  Two real functions f and F are conjugate if there is a real function u such that u lfu equals F. Two sets or groups {fl, {F)  of real functions are conjugate if for some u the mapping f -* u-lfu is a one-to-one correspondence of the elements of { f }  onto {F}.  In a series of papers (Levine, 1970, 1972, 1973) it has been shown that many measurement questions can be rephrased as  questions about conjugate sets of real functions { f } and {F}. In general, the f 's are psychologically significant  theoretical or empirical functions and the F's are functions with simple, intuitive, well-understood mathematical properties.  In this paper the F's are the translations  F(x) = x + constant.  Examples of conjugates of translations that lead to important potential applications of Holder's measurement procedure can be  drawn from signal detection theory, mental test theory, stimulus generalization theory, opponent processes theory for visual  brightness, probabilistic choice theory, and other domains. Signal detection theory (SDT) has been chosen because the details  are likely to be familiar to many readers. See Levine (1973, Appendix) for a more detailed discussion of the aspects of SDT  relevant to this paper.  214 MICHAEL V. LEVINE  In signal detection theory the set of all normal, equal variance isosensitivity curves is conjugate to the group of  translations. In particular, each curve is of the form  .f (x) = u 1[u(x) + d'],  where u-1 is the cumulative distribution of the normal probability density and d' is the psychologically significant parameter  measuring the detectability of the stimulus. The calculation of d' is an important measurement problem. If one is willing to  assume that u-1 is normal or has some other particular mathematical form, then routine statistical inference and curve fitting  are sufficient for the estimation of d'. Unfortunately, there is no compelling psychological argument to support the normality  assumption; normality appears to be an ad hoc quantitative assumption that is tolerated because it is mathematically  convenient and because there is no adequately developed alternative.  An argument given in an earlier paper (Levine, 1973, Appendix) suggests that it may be possible to replace quantitative,  arbitrary normality assumptions with qualitative, psychologically significant assumptions by using measurement theory.  Schematically, the argument runs as follows:  (1) Isosensitivity curves generate an ordered group of curves with group operation given by function composition.  (2) Qualitative assumptions imply that the group is conjugate to a group of translations and consequently isomorphic as an  ordered group to a subgroup of the additive real numbers.  (3) The mapping carrying each isosensitivity curve f to its d' is an order-preserving isomorphism.  (4) There is essentially only one isomorphism for such groups.  (5) The isomorphism-and consequently d'-can, in principle, be calculated without making normality or similar quantitative  assumptions by using Holder's measurement procedure.  From the point of view of measurement theory, the general situation is this: A psychological theory implies that a set of  theoretical real functions is conjugate to a set of translations. The one parameter of the translations is psychologically  significant. Holder's measurement procedure applied to the real functions could be used to compute the parameter with any  desired accuracy. Normality assumptions, curve fitting, and sophisticated statistical procedures are not needed.  Unfortunately from the experimenter's point of view the situation is quite different. The experimenter, in general, deals with  empirically obtained approximations of the theoretical functions. In particular, he generally deals with a finite set of  points approximately on the graph of the theoretical function. Even when the approximation is very precise and when the points  are closely spaced, they generally locate only a  MEASUREMENT WITH SEGMENTS OF CURVES 215  segment of the theoretical curve. Some of the iterates may be partially defined in the sense that graphical means can be used  to approximate points on the graph of an iterate, but each iteration lowers the accuracy of the approximation and shortens the  segment on which the iterate is defined. In practice, it is rare for more than five iterates of an empirical curve to be  approximated with any precision.  3. TYPE OF DATA FOR WHICH THE NEW PROCEDURE IS APPLICABLE  The type of data for which the new procedure seems most appropriate is data giving a good approximation of a short segment of  the graph of a conjugate of a translation and a poor approximation of the rest of the graph. For example, over an intermediate  range, points on an isosensitivity curve can be located with little expense and great precision by the usual "yes-no"  detection experiment. However, the unusual instructions and payoffs needed to collect observations for extremely low or high  criteria may affect the subject in ways that make an additive measurement theory inappropriate. See footnote 2 for other  examples.  In this paper the measurement procedure is developed as if data consisted of short segments of the graphs of conjugates of  translations. In practice, only approximations of segments are defined by observations. However, (1) a straightforward  application of the procedure to actual data has been successful, (2) there are several simple ways to increase the accuracy of  the procedure in the typical situation in which the data approximate segments longer than the minimum length needed to apply  the procedure, and (3) the procedure seems valuable as a proof technique in its present form. Some elaboration of points (1)  and (2) is in Sections 5.1 and 5.4 below. For elaboration of (3), see Section 7.  4. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURE  The new procedure is easiest to describe when conjugates of translations are considered. Of course, when conjugates of  translations are available, Holder's procedure is satisfactory and the new procedure is not needed. However, once the basic  logic of the new procedure is clear, the sense in which it is useful for short segments of conjugates and approximations of  conjugates becomes almost obvious. The usefulness for segments of conjugates is proven in the worked example of Section 6;  2 The original example motivating this research was brightness contrast data. The absence of negative luminances and the  physiological damaging effects of high luminances restrict observations to an intermediate range of luminances. At the present  time the algorithm is being developed with mental tests. The rarity of extremely able testees and the instability of the data  for testees doing little better than chance restricts attention to an intermediate range.  48o/12/2-6  216 MICHAEL V. LEVINE  the usefulness for approximations of conjugates is commented upon in the next section and more fully developed in an  application to ability testing (Levine and Saxe, 1973).  To avoid repeated references to a procedure that may be with us for a long time, the new procedure will be called the periodic  procedure. This name is appropriate because periodic functions replace the iterates and products that obstructed previous  applications.  Let f and g be conjugates of translations such that for some real function w and constants k, c  f (x) = w-1 [w(x) -f- k],  g(x) = w 1[w(x) + c].  The function w is some unknown strictly increasing continuous real function. Without loss of generality we assume 0 < k G c.  Since w is a bijection, an ordering of the iterates f'n, gn is defined by  fm < gn iff, f-(x) < gn(x), for some x.  To specify the mn and compute c/k, it is sufficient to know the truth value of  f m < gn ( for each pair of integers m, n. Since f and g are conjugates of commuting translations,  Let p denote the translation x -> x -{- 1. There are infinitely many different continuous increasing real functions satisfying  Abel's equation for f and g,  f = u_ipu,  g = v-lpv.  Abel's equation is discussed in the next section. In spite of the lack of uniqueness of solutions, it is easy to specify  particular solutions u and v.  Let u and v be any solutions. Equation (3) can be written  u lpuv1pv = v-lpvu-lpu.  Equivalently,  vu-lpuv-1 p = pvu lpnv 1  or  where ~ denotes vu-1puv-1.  MEASUREMENT WITH SEGMENTS OF CURVES 217  Let B be the mapping 9(x) = O(x) - x. Using the commutativity of 0 and p expressed in (5), it follows that, no matter which  solutions u and v are used to define 0,  B(x + 1) = BP(x)  = 0Ax) - p(x) = PO(x) - p(x) = O(x) - x  = 9(x)  and B is a periodic function with period equal to one. Consequently, if the restriction of B to an interval of length at least  one is given, B(x) can be computed for any value of x. Since O(x) is 8(x) + x, once the values of theta are specified on any  interval of length one, 0 is defined for all values of x.  To relate 0 to the ordering of iterates and thereby complete the description of the periodic procedure, note that (2) f m < gn  is logically equivalent to  0m(x) < pn(x) for all real x.  Since ~'n is defined recursively by 0m = 0[0"n-1] and pn(x) is just x + n, the truth value of statement (2) can be decided for  iterates of very high order even when there is just enough information to specify a single cycle of B. In other words, by  first calculating B, it is possible to specify the sequence {mn} without referring to higher iterates off and g.  The steps of the periodic procedure are reviewed and illustrated with a numerical example in Section 6. The mathematical  justification of the procedure is summarized in the following theorem, which has just been proven.  THEOREM. Let {f, g} be conjugate to a pair of translations and real functions u, v be any solutions to Abel's equation for f,  g, respectively. If 0 denotes the mapping vu-lpuv-1 where p(x) is x + 1, then  Zff  (i) the mapping x -> O(x) - x is periodic with period equal to one, and  (ii) for any integers m and n  fm < gn w  for some real x, 0-(x) < pn(x).  5. COMMENTS ON THE PROCEDURE  5.1. The periodic procedure is practical; David Saxe and I have programmed the procedure and applied it to mental test data.  We used empirical item test regressions for the Scholastic Aptitude Test to obtain curves. With these curves we tried to  218 MICHAEL V. LEVINE  estimate item difficulties. The procedure is fast, inexpensive, and accurate. One of our programs computes a parameter in less  than 3 sec at a cost of 38 cents on an IBM Model 360/65.3 The item difficulties estimated with the periodic procedure agreed  very closely with maximum likelihood item difficulties computed by Lord (1970) using Birnbaum's logistic latent trait model.  Some of these results were included in papers presented at the Montreal Mathematical Psychology Meeting and at the 1974  Psychometric Society annual meeting. A full report is being prepared for this Journal.  5.2. Since u-1pu equals f, 0 can be written as vfv-1 and only one solution for Abel's equation is needed.  5.3. Abel's equation is one of the oldest and best developed functional equations in mathematics; the results needed for the  implementation of the periodic procedure are available. For a report of some of the literature, a simple algorithm for  computing solutions and a description of all the solutions, see Levine (1970, Section III). The graphical procedure described  there, and possibly known to Abel (1881) over a century ago, defines a solution recursively. The graphical procedure can  generally be used with the restriction of a conjugate of a translation to calculate a restriction of a solution to Abel's  equation. This fact permits the calculation of 0, in some cases, from restrictions of f and g to small intervals; the interval  need only be large enough to permit the calculation of one cycle of a restriction of 0.  5.4. If 8 is defined on a set of length greater than one, then superposition of cycles of 0, Fourier series, and weighted  averages of cycles give linear methods for increasing the accuracy of the approximation of 0.  5.5. If 0 is defined on less than one cycle, then, in the presence of additional assumptions (especially on the smoothness o the solutions to Abel's equation), it may be possible to extend the domain of definition of a restriction of theta to a very  small set by analytic continuation. This has not been attempted.  6. A NUMERICAL EXAMPLE  The following example illustrates some of the key features of the procedure. The functions have been chosen to minimize the  inconvenience of repeating the calculations graphically, with a desk calculator or on a computer. All the calculations  reported below were done with a Monroe Model 1775 desk calculator.  For x between zero and one, let f (x) and g(x) denote the square and cube roots of x, i.e.,  a The more flexible programs being prepared for general use are expected to run for between one and two dollars per parameter.  MEASUREMENT WITH SEGMENTS OF CURVES 219  One of the most important aspects of the new procedure is that it allows precise measurement even when data specify only short  segments of the graphs of functions. The graphs of f and g are shown in Fig. 1. In the calculations that follow, only the  portions of the graphs inside the rectangular window of Fig. 1 have been used.  I -TT- .T-.T. ..F --T r- ~ i 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1.0  FIG. 1. Plot off and g showing segments used in the example.  The set of functions abbreviations  f f, g} is conjugate to a set of translations.  m(x) = minus x, log(x) = logarithm of x, exp(x) = exponential function of x,  For  using the  it is easy to specify constants k, c and a continuous, strictly monotonic real function w such that  f (x) = w 1[w(x) + k], g(x) = w_Ifw(x) + c].  The required constants and functions are  k = log 2 c = log 3  w = m log m log W-1 = exp m exp m.  220 MICHAEL V. LEVINE  When the new procedure is applied to this f and g, an approximation of k/c = log 2/log 3 = 0.6309 is obtained.  The steps in this application of the new procedure are the following  (1) Solve Abel's equation for v.  (2) Specify O(x) for 0 < x < 1.  (3) Specify B(x) for 0 < x < 1.  (4) Use the periodicity of B to calculate on(x) for various values of n. (5) Compute the integers m, .  (6) Approximate the limit of the sequence {m/n}. A solution v for Abel's equation in the form  vg(x) = v(x) + 1  is defined by first defining an integer valued function r. For x between 0.125 and 1, r(x) is defined by  r(x) = 0 if 0.125<x<0.5  ~n if 0.125 < x3" < 0.5.  In other words, r = r(x) is the smallest integer such that 0.5 < g-'(x). It is routine to verify that v given by  (x = 0.125)/0.375, if r(x) = 0  v(x) = (x3* - 0.125)/0.375 -f- r, if r = r(x) zA 0  satisfies Abel's equation for x between 0.125 and 1. For other values of x, v(x) is not needed. The argument used to obtain  this solution was discussed in Levine (1970, Section III.2).  As noted in Section 5.3, ~ can be defined using only v and f. For x between zero and one, O(x) is defined by the formula  ~(x) = of (0.375x + 0.125).  This formula is obtained by noting that 0 equals vfv 1 and that for x in the unit interval v-1(x) equals 0.375x + 0.125.  Using this formula for O(x), for any x between zero and one, B(x) may be computed using the formula  B(x) = O(x) - x.  For other values of x, say x = x' -}- n, where n is an integer and x' is between zero and one, B(x) was computed using the  formula  B(x' -{- n) = B(x').  MEASUREMENT WITH SEGMENTS OF CURVES 221  The graph of 0 is shown in Fig. 2. (By selecting a more complicated solution v to Abel's equation, a 0 with a continuous  derivative can be obtained. See either Aczel (1966) or Kuczma (1968) for a study of smooth solutions.)  0  3 R .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1'0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5  FIG. 2. One-and-a-half cycles of 0.  The first 20 iterates on(X) for x equal to zero were computed using the function 0 just defined and the formula O(x) = 0(x) +  x. They are listed in Table 1. The reader repeating these calculations or computing ~"(0) for larger values of n can check his  results with the noniterative formula O(x) = of nv 1(x).  TABLE 1 Calculation of the First 20 Values of m n 0"(0) mn 0"(0) m 1 0.61 0 11 6.43 6  2 1.23 1 12 7.545 7  3 1.89 1 13 8.17 8  4 2.49 2 14 8.826 8  5 3.13 3 15 9.43 9  6 3.78 3 16 10.08 10  7 4.38 4 17 10.71 10  8 5.04 5 18 11.32 11  9 5.66 5 19 11.99 11  10 6.27 6 20 12.60 12  222 MICHAEL V. LEVINE  m,, is simply the largest integer smaller than On(0). To obtain bounds on k/c and approximate the limit of the sequence  {m,,/n}, the inequalities  mn/n < k1c < (mn -{- 1)ln  are applied. Thus k1c = 0.6309 is between  0.6250 = $ = maximum {m,,/n: n is between 1 and 20}  and  0.6316 = is = minimum {(m,, -}- 1)/n: n is between 1 and 20).  7. THE PERIODIC PROCEDURE AS A PROOF TECHNIQUE  The new procedure was developed as a tool for obtaining global estimates of parameters without using assumptions lacking  psychological content and not as a contribution to the mathematics of measurement. However, the new procedure does seem to  provide a useful new proof technique. For illustration, the following theorem and proof are offered. Notice that the  consideration of special cases normally found in proofs of results of this kind is avoided.  THEOREM. Let U be an open connected subset of the real plane R X R. Suppose that for two pairs of strictly increasing,  continuous real functions u, v and u', v' we have  iff  u(x) + v(Y) < u(X) + v(Y)  u '(X) -I- v'(Y) < u '(X) -}- v'(Y)  for all (x, y) and (X, Y) in U. Then for some constants a, b  u'(x) = au(x) -{- b, v'(y) = av(y) - b  for all x, y such that for some X, Y both (x, Y) and (X, y) are in U.  Idea of Proof. Let--. be the equivalence relation defined with reference to u, v,  (x, y) - (X, Y) iff u(x) + v(y) equals u(X) + v(Y).  For (x, y) in U and y in a suitably chosen subinterval (yi , y2) of the image of U under the projection (X, Y) -> Y, we may  use the fact that v is 1 : 1 to define three functions by  fi(s) = t iff (s, t) _ (x, Yi),  fa(s) = t iff (s, t) - (x, Y),  fa(s) = t iff (s, t) - (x, Ya),  MEASUREMENT WITH SEGMENTS OF CURVES 22,3  If the interval containing y is sufficiently small, then restrictions of conjugates of translations f, g for which the new  measurement procedure is applicable are defined by  f2f =fl fag = f  If u', v' replace u, v in the definition of -, then the procedure converges to the same limit. Consequently,  v'(y) - v,(Yl) v(Y) - v(yl)  v'(Y3) - v'(YI) v(Ys) - v(YI)  from which it follows that for some constants a, b  v'(Y) = av(y) + b.  If y3 - yl is sufficiently small, this equation is valid for all y in (y, , y"). On an overlapping small interval we have  v'(y) = av(y) + b.  Since this is true for infinitely many y's in the intersection, a - a = b - b = 0. The rest of the proof uses standard  arguments.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  I am grateful to David Krantz, Frederic Lord, David Saxe, and Thomas Stroud for the opportunity to discuss this work as it  took shape over a period of years.  REFERENCES  ABEL, N. H. Determination d'une fonction au moyen d'une equation qui ne contient qu'une seule variable. In Oeuvres completes.  Christiania, 1881. Tome II, pp. 36-39.  ACZEL, J. Lectures on functional equations and their applications. New York: Academic Press, 1966.  HOLDER, O. Die Axiome der Quantitat and die Lehre vom Mass. Berichte ueber die Verhandlungen der Koeniglichen Saechsichen  Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften, Mathematicah-Physiche Klasse, 1901, 53, 1-64.  KUCZMA, M. Functional equations in a single variable. Warszawa: Polish Scientific Publishers, 1968.  LEVINE, M. V. Transformations that render curves parallel. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1970, 7, 410-433.  LEVINE, M. V. Transforming curves into curves with the same shape. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1972, 9, 1-16.  224  MICHAEL V. LEVINE  LEVINE, M. V. Nonadditive analogues of the basic mathematics of additive measurement. ETS Research Bulletin 73-34. Princeton,  NJ: Educational Testing Service, 1973. Also, ERIC Document No. 078062. Arlington, VA: ERIC Document Reproduction Service,  CMIC, 1973. LEVINE, M. V., & SAxE, D. An application of Fourier series to mental test data. Paper presented at Mathematical  Psychology Meetings, August 1973.  LORD, F. M. Item characteristic curves estimated without knowledge of their mathematical form-A confrontation of Birnbaum's  logistic model. Psychometrika, 1970, 35, 43-50.  RECEIVED: April 6, 1973