10.1016/0022-2496(75)90027-9
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 12, 304-327 (1975)  Color Measurement and Color Theory: II. Opponent-Colors Theory  DAVID H. KRANTZ  Department of Psychology, University of Michigan, 330 Packard Road, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48104  Quantitative opponent-colors theory is based on cancellation of redness by admixture of a standard green, of greenness by  admixture of a standard red, of yellowness by blue, and of blueness by yellow. The fundamental data are therefore the  equilibrium colors: the set A1 of lights that are in red/green equilibrium and the set AZ of lights that are in yellow/blue  equilibrium. The result that a cancellation function is linearly related to the color-matching functions can be proved from  more basic axioms, particularly, the closure of the set of equilibrium colors under linear operations. Measurement analysis  treats this as a representation theorem, in which the closure properties are axioms and in which the colorimetric homomorphism  has the cancellation functions as two of its coordinates.  Consideration of equivalence relations based on opponent cancellation leads to a further step: analysis of equivalence  relations based on direct matching of hue attributes. For additive whiteness matching, this yields a simple extension of the  representation theorem, in which the third coordinate is luminance. For other attributes, precise representation theorems must  await a better qualitative characterization of various nonlinear phenomena, especially the veiling of one hue attribute by  another and the various hue shifts.  Part I of this series (Krantz, 1975) presented the theory of Grassmann structures. Recall that a Grassmann structure is a  quadruple <A, E+, *, ->, such that <A, 0+, *j is a convex cone (Axioms 1 and 2), - is an equivalence relation (Axiom 3), and  Grassmann's additivity law holds (Axioms 4 and 5). The set A is interpreted as the set of colored lights, or spectral radiance  distributions; (+ and * are interpreted respectively as additive color mixture and multiplication by positive scalars; and ,  is the binary relation of metameric matching. Besides the relation -, which led to a trichromatic Grassmann structure (Axiom  6), we considered related measurement  This paper revises an earlier technical report with the same title, supported by NSF grants GB 4947 and GB 8181. Preparation  of this manuscript was supported by NSF GB 36642X. The author is grateful to Edward Pugh for helping him to see that the need  for rewriting was greater than the need for hasty publication.  Copyright Q 1975 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  304  COLOR MEASUREMENT: II. OPPONENT-COLORS THEORY 305  theories for dichromatic structures and for 1-chromatic Grassmann codes, such as the codes based on photopigment absorption.  From the standpoint of measurement theory, the goal of a color theory is to obtain a simultaneous homomorphic representation  of as many different perceptual relations as possible. This was illustrated in part I by the nearly unique homomorphism which  simultaneously represents normal metameric matching and three independent dichromatic reduction structures. In the present  paper, we develop a measurement theory in which certain perceptual attributes, especially the opponent hue attributes, are  simply represented.  EQUILIBRIUM COLORS  Achromatic Colors  For some colors, hue is absent. We may designate these achromatic colors as a subset B of the set A. Many classical studies  involve determinations of which colors are in B; for example, experiments on complementary wavelengths (Sinden, 1923), least  perceptible colorimetric purity (Priest & Brickwedde, 1938), and whiteness of broad-band lights (Hurvich & Jameson, 1951).  The metamerism relations which were the focus of part I depend only slightly, if at all, on viewing conditions (so long as the  matches are symmetric, i.e., both lights are viewed under identical conditions); but perceptual qualities, such as  achromaticness, vary enormously as a function of adaptation, successive contrast, and simultaneous contrast. The set B should  therefore be subscripted with the viewing conditions. We suppress a formal subscript only to keep notation light.  Not only the set B, but also the qualitative laws or axioms satisfied by B may change with changes in the viewing conditions.  For example, in the neutral-adapted state, with no significant contrast, it may be reasonable to expect that the additive  mixture of achromatic lights is again achromatic, i.e., that B is closed under the operation @+. (Curiously, this rather  important property seems not to have been investigated directly.) But such an additivity property is very unlikely to hold  when colors are viewed with chromatic surrounds. For example, a light b, which in neutral circumstances is pink, may appear  achromatic in a suitably chosen red surround. Yet b (D b (double the intensity) may again appear pink. Thus, b is in B, yet b  G+ b is not.  The term "equilibrium" is applied to achromatic colors by analogy with static equilibrium of forces. The presence of hue is  analogous to the presence of acceleration, i.e., to a nonzero resultant force. The "chromatic vector" can be measured by  finding a complementary color which restores achromaticity, just as the resultant force vector can be measured by  equilibration. We shall see below that this is not a casual analogy: if the achromatic set B is in fact additive with respect  to @+, then the measurement theories of chromatic vectors and resultant force vectors (Krantz, 1973) are isomorphic.  306) DAVID H. KRANTZ  Partial Equilibria: Opponent Hues  Hering (1878) noted that colors can be classified as reddish or greenish or neither, but that redness and greenness are not  simultaneously attributes of a color. If we add increasing amounts of a green light to a reddish light, the redness of the  mixture decreases, disappears, and gives way to greenness. At the point where redness is gone and greenness is not yet  present, the color may be yellowish, bluish, or achromatic. We speak of a partial chromatic equilibrium, with respect to  red/green. The subset of all red/green equilibria is denoted A1 . (It goes without saying that A1 depends on viewing  conditions.)  Similarly, yellow and blue are identified as opponent hues, and we let A2 be the subset of yellow/blue equilibrium colors.  Such colors may be reddish, greenish, or achromatic, but are neither yellowish nor bluish.  Colors are in both partial equilibrium sets if and only if they are achromatic; that is,  A1nA,=B.  Just as the chromaticness vector of a color can be evaluated in terms of the complementary, so the redness of a color can be  evaluated by cancellation with a green light, and vice versa. Such quantitative evaluations were undertaken by Jameson and  Hurvich (1955).  Formally, let al denote a reddish stimulus and let bl denote a greenish one. If c is not in A1 , then c is either reddish, in  which case there exists a positive scale factor t, such that c S (t * b1) is in A1 , or else c is greenish and for some t > 0,  c @ (t * al) is in A1 . The cancellation coefficient 0I(c) can be set equal to t in the former case or to -t in the latter  case. If c is in A1 , then nothing need be added and we set 01(c) = 0.  Figure 1 plots Y'1 values measured by Jameson and Hurvich (1955) by the cancellation technique just described. For b1 , the  greenish cancellation stimulus, they used a monochromatic A2 light (490 and 500 nm for their two observers). For the reddish  cancellation stimulus a,, they used a 700 nm light, which is not an A2 equilibrium (all the extreme long wavelength red lights  appeared slightly yellowish). The unit amounts of al , bl are chosen so that al ~+ bl is an Al equilibrium; thus 01(al) = 1,  01(bl) _ -1. The cancellation observations for Fig. 1 were obtained for a 10 mL equal-brightness spectrum, with a neutral  white adaptation of the same brightness. The data were transformed by multiplying by luminous efficiency, so that the ordinate  plotted in Fig. 1 is 01(cs), where cs denotes a light of wavelength A and unit radiance. (For simplicity we sometimes  abbreviate 01(c,) simply as 01(A).)  Note that the endpoint of the cancellation process, for each wavelength A, is always an A1 equilibrium color, varying from  yellowish white (for A in the orange or yellowgreen range) to bluish white (for A in the far violet part of the spectrum). The  monochromatic A1 lights appear in the yellow, around 580 nm, and in the blue, around 475 nm.  COLOR MEASUREMENT: II. OPPONENT-COLORS THEORY 307  FIG. 1. Opponent-cancellation coefficients for redness (open symbols) and greenness (filled symbols) for observers H (circles)  and J (triangles), for an equal-energy spectrum. Data replotted from Jameson and Hurvich (1955). The solid line is a linear  functional for the CIE Standard Observer (Judd, 1951).  3 0  0  400 500 600 700 WAVELENGTH (nm)  FIG. 2. Yellow/blue cancellation coefficient (details as in Fig. 1).  308 DAVID H. KRANTZ  Similarly, Jameson and Hurvich obtained the yellow/blue cancellation coefficient ~s(c,), shown in Fig. 2. They employed A1  cancellation lights: the equilibrium yellow of Fig. 1 was used to cancel blueness, in amounts shown as negative ordinates in  the short-wavelength end of the spectrum, and similarly, equilibrium blue was used to obtain the ~z values for  long-wavelength, yellowish lights. The figure shows clearly the monochromatic A2 equilibrium around 500 nm and also shows that  all longwavelength lights are slightly yellowish, since a small amount of blue must be added. Other details are the same as  for the red/green function of Fig. l.  Note that measurement of a partial equilibrium is a straightforward one-dimensional procedure. The intensity of any reddish  light can be varied to obtain a measure of greenness, etc. By contrast, finding a full hue equilibrium-a complement, relative  to an achromatic white-is a trickier, two-dimensional operation.  Linearity Assumptions in the Cancellation Procedure  Let us try to formulate precisely the empirical facts about A1 and A2 equilibrium colors that must be assumed if the  above-described cancellation procedure is to have a simple interpretation. First, there is the fact that cancellation is  possible. This can be translated into a formal assumption as follows:  There exist al and bl in A, such that for any c in A - A1 , either c G+ (t * al) or c (+ (t * bl) is in A, , for some t > 0.  The al , bl in question can be used as reddish and greenish cancellation stimuli. We shall not adopt this as a formal axiom,  becaues it follows from other assumptions (Lemma 3 below).  Secondly, the functions of Figs. 1 and 2 would not be very meaningful if they depended on the particular choice of al and bl  used for cancellation. Changing from al to al' should produce a proportional change in all ~i values, corresponding to a  change of units. Formally we require:  If c ~+ (t * al), d (@ (u * al), c 0 (t' t/t' = u/u'.  '), and d 0 (u' * al') are all in A1 , then  This is also a consequence of the axioms we shall assume.  Third, and most basic, the functions plotted in Figs. 1 and 2 are only useful if the cancellation coefficients ~i and ~2 are  linear functionals. That is, we require that the following equations hold:  0i(t * a) = toi(a)>  ~i(a (D b) = Oi(a) + Oi(b).  If Eq. (1) holds, then the cancellation coefficient is proportional to intensity. Thus, the curve for an equal-radiance  spectrum allows predictions for any other radiance values.  COLOR MEASUREMENT: II. OPPONENT-COLORS THEORY  309  Without this property, it would not be useful to transform the measurements for a 10 mL equal-brightness spectrum to equal  radiance. If in addition, Eq. (2) holds, then the curves of Figs. I and 2 can be used to predict the cancellation coefficients  for nonspectral lights; for a light c with a continuous spectral density function c(A) we have the integral formula Oi(c) = f  c(A) Oi(A) dA.  Note that Eqs. (1) and (2) imply the independence-of-cancellation-addend property mentioned above; for if the mentioned colors  all have 0, values of 0, then we obtain -,k1(c) = tol(al) = t'0i(al') and -0i(d) = uoi(al) = u'01(ar'). Therefore t/t'  0i(ai')/0i(ai) --- u/u .  In Figs. 1 and 2 the data points are the cancellation coefficients measured for two observers, as described above, but the  continuous curves are based on a particular linear functional defined on the CIE coordinates, suggested by Judd (1951). The  fit is perhaps as good as can be expected, in view of the fact that there are considerable quantitative differences between  the two observers, yet the linear functional is not based on the individual color-matching functions, rather on the CIE  Standard Observer. Furthermore, the linear functional was not optimized to fit these data.  It might seem that the best way to test linearity would be to determine both the color-matching functions (a homomorphic  representation of the Grassmann structure <A, (D, *, ->) and the cancellation function within the same observer and then to  find the best-fitting linear relationship between them. This would be arduous. And it is unnecessary. The next two subsections  show that a much simpler line of attack is decisive.  Closure Properties for Equilibrium Colors  The linearity equations (1), (2) for cancellation coefficients have two simple implications concerning the equilibrium sets  Ai: (i) closure under scalar multiplication; and (ii) closure under addition/subtraction. More precisely:  (i) If a is in Ai, then t * a is in Ai .  (ii) If a is in Ai , then b is in Ai if and only if a (+ b is in Ai .  These properties bear a strong resemblance to Grassmann's additivity laws (Axioms 5 and 4 of Krantz, 1975) and we shall show  below that in fact they lead to 1-chromatic Grassmann structures for red/green and yellow/blue cancellation equivalence.  Property (i) is closely related to invariance of equilibrium colors with respect to the Bezold-Briicke hue shift and property  (ii) is similarly related to invariance with respect to the Abney hue shift. Experimental tests of these properties, and  discussion of their relations to hue-shift invariances, may be found in Larimer, Krantz, and Cicerone (1974, 1975).  Clearly, the truth of (i) and (ii), like the equilibrium sets A1 and A2 themselves, is tied to the choice of viewing  conditions. It was indicated above that such closure  480/12/3-4  310 DAVID H. KRANTZ  properties may be expected to fail for the achromatic colors, B = A1 n A2 , under conditions of simultaneous contrast; a  similar argument can be applied to each of the partial equilibrium sets, A1 and A,.  Opponent Cancellation and Metameric Matching  Let us consider the consequences of the equilibrium-closure assumptions (i) and (ii) for metameric color matching. Let us  choose as our primaries an equilibrium red a,, an equilibrium yellow a,, and an achromatic light a,. That is, a1 is a reddish  A2 light, a2 is a yellowish A1 light, and a3 is in A1 r) A2 . Suppose that the light to be matched, c, is blue-green. We can  first add just enough red light to c so as to cancel the greenness; i.e., we determine the cancellation coefficient, 01(c) =  -t1 , such that  c (D (t1 * al)  is in A1 . Next we determine the cancellation coefficient 02(c) = -t2 , by cancelling the blueness with yellow:  c (D (t2*a2)  is in A,.  Since c @+ (tl * al) and a2 are both in A1 , by the closure properties,  c @ (tl * a1) @ (t2 * a2)  is also in AI . But by a symmetric argument, it is also in A2 . Therefore it is achromatic. Since t3 * a3 is achromatic for  every t3 (closure property (i), for both A1 and A2), we can vary t3 so as to produce a color match:  cO(t1*a1)O(t2*a2) `vt3*a3.  Therefore the tristimulus coefficients of c, relative to the primaries al , a2 , a3 , are given by the vector  (-tl I -t2 I t3) = (0101 0201 t3).  This argument shows that the cancellation coefficients 01 and 9'2 are two out of three coordinates of a homomorphic  representation for <A, e+, *, -), based on a suitable choice of equilibrium colors as primaries. It follows automatically that  01 and Y'2 are linear functionals on <A, (1), *, ->, and can be expressed as linear combinations of any other coordinate  system (see Krantz, 1975).  The above argument is really the core of this paper. (The only nonrigorous step was the assertion of a match between the two  achromatic colors for suitable choice of t,. This step is intuitive, but in the formal proof below, I shall justify it  COLOR MEASUREMENT: II. OPPONENT-COLORS THEORY 311  on the basis of trichromacy.) It shows how the closure properties (i) and (ii) lead to the conclusion that the cancellation  functions Y'i are linear codes.  Figure 3 illustrates the above argument graphically on the CIE chromaticity diagram. The shaded triangle assumes that b2  (equilibrium green), rather than a2 (equilibrium red) is used as a primary, along with al and a,. (This would be more  practical from the standpoint of instrumentation.) Under the closure properties (i) and (ii), the equilibrium loci A1 and A2  plot as straight lines in the subject's own chromaticity chart (or on the CIE one, if the subject's color matches are those of  the CIE standard observer). In order for one of the color matching functions to coincide with the red/green cancellation  coefficient, it must vanish on the A1 locus, i.e., the other two of the three primaries must lie on the A1 locus. Likewise,  for another color-matching function to be the yellow/blue coefficient, two primaries must lie on the A2 locus. Hence one  primary must lie on both loci, at a3 (white).  goo  x  FIG. 3. CIE chromaticity diagram, showing locus of red/green equilibria (line joining equilibrium yellow (Y) to equilibrium  blue (B)) and locus of yellow/blue equilibria (line joining equilibrium red (R) to equilibrium green (G)). This plot assumes  that both equilibrium loci satisfy the Grassmann-like closure properties (i) and (ii). The shaded triangle is the set of  lights metameric to a positive mixture of equilibrium yellow, green, and white (W) primaries. For spectral lights between B  and G, a negative amount of primary Y is needed to match and the final match lies on the A2 locus. For spectral lights between  700 nm and Y, a negative amount of primary G is needed and the final match lies on the A, locus. For spectral lights between G  and Y, the match consists of a mixture of those two primaries, with a negative amount of the W primary; the match locus is on  the line joining G and Y. Spectral lights between 400 nm and B require negative amounts of both the G and the Y primaries; the  redness and blueness are canceled and the final match locus lies at W. The same holds for lights that are mixtures of 400 nm  and 700 nm, if they lie between 400 nm and the equilibrium red point R. See text for further comments.  312 DAVID H. KRANTZ  REPRESENTATION AND UNIQUENESS THEOREM FOR OPPONENT-COLORS THEORY  The results of the previous section suggest that the following representation theorem can be proved: given a structure <A, +,  *, -, A1 , A2>, we can find a homomorphism 0 into a vector structure ( V, +, -, =, Vl , V2>, where V is a threedimensional  vector space and Vl , V2 are subspaces defined by 9'1 = 0 and Y'2 = 0, respectively. The axioms needed are Axioms (1)-(6) of a  trichromatic Grassmann structure (Krantz, 1975); Axiom (7), which links metameric matching to equilibria by asserting that  metameric lights are in identical equilibrium sets; Axiom (8), embodying the equilibrium-closure properties (i) and (ii)  discussed above; and an Axiom (9), which asserts the existence of suitable cancellation lights. The numbering of axioms,  theorems, and lemmas is continued from Krantz (1975).  THEOREM 6. Let <A, ~+, *, -> be a trichromatic proper Grassmann structure and let A1 , A2 be subsets of A such that for a, b  in A:  (7) if a - b and a is in Ai (i = 1 or 2), then b is in Ai ;  (8) (i) if a is in Ai and t > 0, then t * a is in Ai ;  (ii) if a is in Ai, then b is in Ai if and only if a e+ b is in Ai ;  (9) there exist al , bl in A2 but not in A1 , such that al (D bl is in A1 , and there exist a2 , b2 in A1 but not in A2 , such  that a2 +@ b2 is in A,.  Then there exist real-valued functions `Yl , Y'2 , `Y3 on A satisfying the following properties:  1 - lY'1 , Y'2 , Y'3) is a homomorphism of <A, & into <Re3, satisfying (i)-(iv) of Theorem 1;  (ii) for i = 1, 2 a is in Ai if and only if Oi(a) = 0.  Moreover if 0l', Y'2', Y'3', are any other functions having properties (i) and (ii), then there are constants al , a2 , Nl ,  fl, , and P3 such that al , 012 and 93 -A 0 and  /I/01'\1/ /al 0 0  03 91 92 93 (03 1\1  That is, 9'1 and 02 are unique up to changes of unit and orientation.  It will be shown in the proof that the functions Y'1 and Y'2 , which are unique except for choice of unit and sign, are  determined by cancellation.  Axiom (7) asserts only that if light a is an equilibrium light and b is not, then a - b is false. In conjunction with the  closure axiom, it shows that the cancellation coefficient is a code (Krantz, 1975) for the Grassmann structure <A, ~+, *, ->.  Axiom (8) was discussed above. Note that both these axioms are consequences of the theorem's conclusion; they are logically  necessary for the representation.  COLOR MEASUREMENT: H. OPPONENT-COLORS THEORY 313  Axiom (9) postulates the existence of two equilibrium red/greens, al , b1 , whose additive mixture is neither reddish nor  greenish (therefore al (+ b1 is achromatic, by Axiom 8). Similarly, a,, b2 are complementary equilibrium yellow and blue.  Cancellation coefficients can of course be measured without using equilibrium colors as cancellation stimuli, and indeed, it  is convenient to use a monochromatic nonequilibrium red, as Jameson and Hurvich did. The present assumption could be replaced  by one which says in effect that cancellation is always possible, and indeed, this will be sketched below in order to obtain a  theorem valid for the situation in which only one of the sets Ai satisfies closure. The reason for keeping Axiom (9) in its  present form is that the use of equilibrium cancellation stimuli allows us to obtain the relationship between cancellation  coefficients and metameric matching directly, as sketched at the end of the preceding section.  Axiom (9) also defines the units of bi relative to ai by specifying that ai , bi cancel one another. This saves introducing  correction factors.  Finally, note that we retain from the theorems of Part I the assumption that the Grassmann structure is proper, i.e., no  equation of form a 0 b - a can hold.  Proof of Theorem 6. Let a,, a,, b1 , b2 be elements of A with the properties postulated in Axiom (9). Let a3 be an arbitrary  element of B, e.g., a3 = a1 9~ b1 . In Lemmas 2 and 3, we show that al , a2, a3 are a set of primaries (see Axiom (6ii) in  part I) and that ai , bi can be used for cancellation, i = 1, 2.  LEMMA 2. a1 , a2 , a3 are a set of primaries.  Proof. Suppose not; then there is a color equation  3 3  Y, to * ai ti Y, ui * ai, (4) i=1 i=1  with ti =A ui for at least one i. Now add  (u1 * b1) (+ (u2 * b2)  to both sides of (4). By additivity of color matches (Axiom 4), and rearranging terms on each side (Axioms 1-3), we obtain  (t1 * a1) O (u1 * b1) (D (t2 * a2) (D (u2 * b2) (D (t3 * a3)  (u1 * (a1 (@ b1)) & (u2 * (a2 (D b2)) O u3 * a3 .  By Axiom (8), the right side of (5) is in B, hence by Axiom (7), so is the left side. Applying Axiom (8) to the left side we  obtain that  (t1 * a1) O (u1 * b1) is in A1 ;  (t2 * a2) (D (u2 * b2) is in A2 .  314 DAVID H. KRANTZ  Using Axiom (8) again we infer that tl = ul and t2 = u2 (e.g., if tl > ul , then ((tl - ul) * al) G+ (u1 * (al +~ bl) is in A1  , so al is in A1 , contrary to fact). But by subtractivity (Axiom 4), Eq. (4) reduces to t3 * a3 "  u3 * a3 , with t3 u3 ;  this is impossible in a proper Grassmann structure (e .g., if t3 > u3 , then ((t3 - u3) * a3) a (u3 * a3) N u3 * a3). We  conclude that Eq. (4) cannot hold nontrivially, i.e., if it holds, then ti = ui , i = 1, 2, 3. Q.E.D.  An intuitive restatement of the proof of Lemma 2 may be helpful. If a color equation (4) obtains, involving equilibrium red,  yellow, and white, then we can cancel the redness and yellowness on the right side of the equation by adding appropriate  amounts of equilibrium green and blue to both sides. Since the right side is achromatic, so is the left; hence the  coefficients of the red and yellow components must have been equal in the original equation. Eliminating them from the  equation gives an achromatic color equation, which is then also trivial (isomeric). So the original equation must have been  trivial.  LEMMA 3. For i = 1, 2 and for any c, either c is in A, or there exists a unique ti > 0 such that either c (D (ti * a or c +@  (ti * bi) is in Ai . That is, ai , bi can be used to determine a unique cancellation coefficient for any c.  Proof. By trichromacy (Axiom 6i) there is a nontrivial color equation involving c, al , a2 , and a3 . The coefficients of c on  the two sides must be unequal (otherwise it could be reduced to a nontrivial equation in the ai , contradicting Lemma 2). By  Axioms (1)-(5) we can write the equation as  3 3  c (s; * a;) ,..~ I (u; * a;). (6)  Now add ui * bi to both sides of (6) (i = 1 or 2). By Axiom (8) the right side of the  new equation is in Ai , therefore by Axiom (7) so is the left side; by Axiom (8) again,  c +O (si * aj) O+ (ui * bi)  is in Ai . So if si > ui, let ti = si - ui and obtain c (+ (ti * ai) in Aa ; or if ui > si let ti = ui - si and obtain c @ (ti  * bi) in Ai ; or if si = ui , then c is in Ai .  To show the uniqueness of the cancellation coefficient we examine the various possible cases. For example if c @ (ti * aj) and  c (+ (ti' * ai) are both in Ai , with ti - ti' > 0, we have the identity  c O (ti' * aj) O ((ti - ti') * (ai 0 bi)) _-__ c O (ti * aj) O ((ti - ti') * bi).  However by Axiom (8) the left side is in Ai and the right side is not, which is impossible Similarly if c (1) (ti * aj) and c  +) (ti' * bi) are both in Ai , we have the identity  c O+ (ti * as) O+ (ti' * (ai O+ bi)) = c O+ (ti' * bi) O+ ((ti + ti') * ai).  COLOR MEASUREMENT: II. OPPONENT-COLORS THEORY 315  Again the left side is in Ai but the right is not. The other two cases are handled similarly. Thus t2 is unique. Q.E.D.  An intuitive proof of Lemma 3 is very simple. If red, yellow, and white are used to match c, then if a net amount of red is  added to c in the match, that amount defines the cancellation coefficient; while if a net amount of red occurs on the right  side of Eq. (6), it can be cancelled by equilibrium green, and that amount of green defines the cancellation coefficient.  It is now easy to complete the proof of Theorem 6. Let 0 be a homomorphism of <A, e+, *, -> into <V, -{-, -, _> satisfying  properties (i)-(iv) of Theorem 1. Let 01(c), 0201 03(c) be the coordinates of 0(c) relative to the primaries al , a2 , a3 ,  i.e., relative to the basis 0(al), 0(a2), 0(aa) in V. (Lemma 1 and Theorem 3 assure that the 0(ai) are independent.) By  definition, if Eq. (6) holds, then  0i(c) = ui - s,, i _-_ 1, 2, 3.  By the proof of Lemma 3, Oi(c) = 0 if and only if c is in Ai ; Y'i(c) is precisely the cancellation coefficient relative to Ai  .  To prove the uniqueness statement, let ~1 , 02, ~3 be any other functions with the same properties. For i = 1, 2, let  =  0i'(ai). Since ai is not in Ai , ai =A 0. Since ai (1) bi is in Ai we have 0i'(ba) = -ai.  Suppose that Oi(c) > 0. Then we have from Lemma 3 that c @ (0i(c) * bi) is in Ai ; hence  Y'Ac (D (Y'i(c) * bi)) = 0  = Oj'(c) + Y't(c) Y'i'(bi) = ~AC) - aA(c).  Similarly, if Oi(c) < 0 we have 0i'(c) _-_ aioi(c). This completes the proof of the theorem.  1-Chromatic Grassmann Structures Based on Equilibrium Sets  In this section we develop a slightly different approach to the representation and uniqueness theorem for opponent-colors  theory. We define a -i b if and only if a and b are cancelled by the same stimulus relative to Ai, i.e., if and only if a (+ c  and b @ c are in Ai for some c. Under our assumptions, <A, (+, *, `~a> is an (improper) 1-chromatic Grassmann structure and in  fact is a Grassmann code for the trichromatic structure <A, & *, ti>, corresponding to the linear code y'i .  The importance of this alternative approach is threefold. First, it ties in the properties of equilibria more precisely with  those of Grassmann codes, discussed in part I. Second, it provides a linear representation for either A1 or A2 to cover cases  where the basic closure axiom (Axiom 8) is satisfied by only one othe equilibrium  316 DAVID H. KRANTZ  sets, rather than both as required by Theorem 6. Third, it raises the question of other Grassmann or nonGrassmann codes  defined by perceptual equivalence relations; that topic will become the dominant focus of the remainder of this paper.  LEMMA 4. Let <A, & *> satisfy Axioms (1) and (2) and let Ai be a subset of A satisfying closure (Axiom 8). Suppose that for  any a, b in A, either  (i) for some t > 0, a (E) (t * b) is in Ai , or  (ii) for some t > 0 and c in A, both a 0 c and (t * b) (D c are in Ai . Define  a -i b if there exists c such that a (+ c, b (+ c are in Ai . Then <A, is a 1-chromatic improper Grassmann structure.  In other words, if Ai is an equilibrium subset of lights which is closed under addition and scalar multiplication, such that  any two elements of A either cancel or are canceled by a common light c (after adjustment of relative intensity), then  cancellation equivalence defines a 1-chromatic Grassmann structure.  Proof. First we show -i is an equivalence relation (Axiom (3) of Grassmann structures). Symmetry (3ii) is obvious. For  reflexivity, note that if a is in Ai, then a (1) a is in Ai , whence a ~'i a; or if a is not in Ai , then a (E) (t * a) is  never in Ai , so by (ii) of the hypotheses we have a (+ c in Ai , whence a ^'i a. For transitivity, note that if a 8 c, a' (+  c, a' (f) d, and a" @+ d are all in Ai, then a +~ (a' (+ c (+d) and a" (f (a' +) c @+ d) are in Ai , whence a ~ i a".  Secondly we show additivity (Axiom 4). Suppose a `"i a'. Then we can find c with a (@ c, a' @+ c in Ai , and for any b we can  find d with b @ d in Ai (reflexivity of -i); (a e+ b) (+ (c G+ d) and (a' @+ b) (+ (c (+ d) are in Ai , so a (+ b ~i a' (@ b.  The converse (subtractivity) is immediate. So is the scalar multiplication law. So <A, & *, '"i> is a Grassmann structure. It  is clearly improper since a (+ b -i a if bisinAj.  Finally, for 1-chromacy, it is easiest to construct the vector representation (Theorem I) and to note that the hypothesis  guarantees either O(a) _ -t - 0(b) or O(a) _ -O(c) = t - O(b), so any two vectors are linearly dependent. Q.E.D.  THEOREM 7. Let the hypotheses of Lemma 4 hold, and in addition, let <A, (@, *, ~> be a Grassmann structure and let Axiom (7)  hold. Then -i includes -; so that any representation for <A, (@, *, i> is a linear code for <A, 0, *, ->. (See part 1.)  The proof is easy and will not be given formally. It amounts to saying that if a, b are metameric and c cancels a, then since  a 0+ b, b D c are also metameric, c cancels b, and a, b are thus cancellation equivalent.  Lemma 4 and Theorem 7 show clearly the construction of a linear code for a Grassmann structure from an equilibrium set  satisfying Axioms (7) and (8). They  COLOR MEASUREMENT: II. OPPONENT-COLORS THEORY 317  thus deal with the case where only a single equilibrium set satisfies the crucial closure axioms, (8i) and (8ii). (See  Larimer, Krantz, and Cicerone, 1975) for evidence showing a small nonadditivity in the yellow/blue equilibrium set.) The  1-chromacy of the cancellation structure is guaranteed by the main auxiliary hypothesis of Lemma 4, that any two lights either  cancel or are canceled by a common light. If both of the cancellation structures satisfy Axioms (7) and (8), however, this  auxiliary hypothesis can be deduced using Axiom (9) (see Lemma 3).  Referring to Fig. 3, we envisage a situation in which Al plots as a straight line in the chromaticity chart, but where A2, is  curved or perhaps cannot even be plotted on the chromaticity chart (if Axiom (8i) fails). One can still choose two primaries  on the A1 locus and the third primary anywhere off that locus; the color-matching function for the third primary will be the  red/green cancellation coefficient.  THE STRUCTURE OF PERCEPTUAL ATTRIBUTES  In this section we move away from the study of equilibrium colors, which was the focus of the early part of the paper, and  consider perceptual qualities of nonequilibrium colors. The same sequence was followed by Hurvich and Jameson. Their first  paper (Jameson & Hurvich, 1955) dealt principally with measurement of chromatic responses by cancellation; their second one  (Hurvich & Jameson, 1955) took up the relation of the cancellation codes to the classical attributes of perceived color:  brightness, saturation, and hue. My treatment of these latter questions, however, will be far less ambitious than theirs.  Broadly speaking, I will confine myself almost entirely to phenomena of heterochromatic and heteroluminous matching relations,  and will not, in this paper, venture into the other vast areas of color-perception data: color discrimination, adaptation and  contrast, and color defects.  A Nonlinear Model of Red/Green Perception  To avoid excessive abstractness, I will introduce the various problems and concepts by reference to a specific model of the  code underlying perceived redness and greenness. I don't think that there is much chance that this particular model is  correct; its only virtues are that it is not obviously incorrect, and it is therefore complicated enough to illustrate a  number of important points.  Let us denote by a, P, and y the linear codes corresponding to the sensitivity curves of the short-wavelength,  middle-wavelength, and long-wavelength cone pigments, respectively. Let fi denote a quantitative measure of perceived  redness/greenness. The model consists of the following relation between f, and a, fl, y:  fi = h(w$y - wsg) - h(wi f - . (8)  318 DAVID H. KRANTZ  In effect, three cancellation or subtractive processes are involved. There is an opposition between long-wavelength and  middle-wavelength cones, y, g, resulting in a linear signal way - w./3; and an opposition between middle- and short-wavelength  cones, producing the linear signal wlg - a (we choose units such that the coefficient of a is unity). These two linear signals  go through a compressive transformation, described by the strictly increasing function h. (For example we may try h(x) _  px/(p2 -f- x2)112, which is symmetrically compressive for positive and negative values of the input signal x. The parameter p  determines the level at which h becomes substantially nonlinear.) The two compressed outputs then interact subtractively to  yield the net signal f1 . Positive values of f correspond to perceived redness, negative ones to perceived greenness.  If a is a red/green equilibrium color, then fl(a) = 0. From Eq. (8), this means that h(w3y(a) - w,g(a)) = h(wlg(a) - a(a));  and since h is the same for both signals, we conclude that 01(a) = 0, where  ~1(a) = %y(a) - (w2 -{- wl) fl(a) + a(a). (9)  This shows that the present model is consistent with additive closure of A1 , and that the corresponding linear code 0, is  related to the cone pigments by Eq. (9). Yet fl is nonlinear and is not related in any simple or one-to-one way to `f'1 .  Codes Based on Matching  Previously, we have considered two equivalence relations, '"I and -2, , based on red/green and yellow/blue equilibria, and we  showed that additivity of the equilibrium set implies additivity of the corresponding cancellation-equivalence relation. In  this case, -i is represented by equal values of a linear code ~a ; this linear code can be written as a linear combination of  any linear coordinates and in particular, it can be expressed as a linear combination of cone-pigment codes, as in (9). But  suppose that reddish lights a, b satisfy a ~'1 b; i.e., a, b are equivalent in redness, via the indirect cancellation test.  What about a direct perceptual comparison? Do they look equally red ? More generally, we can consider alternative equivalence  relations, -1' and -2', based on direct heterochromatic and heteroluminous comparisons of redness/greenness and of  yellowness/blueness. Does ^'i' coincide with -i ? If not, what are the properties of tii'; for example, is <A, & *, -i'> a  Grassmann structure? The model embodied in Eq. (8) shows one way in which `"1 and 'vl' could fail to coincide. The functions  fl and Y'I both relate to the photopigments, and they are zero together, on A1 , positive together for reddish lights, and  negative together for greenish lights. But fl cannot be written as a simple function of Y'1 alone. For example if 01(b) = 0,  then 01(a (+ b) _ ~1(a); yet fl(a +G b) will be unequal to fl(a), if h is nonlinear. Since ^'1' corresponds to fi equality and  ^'1 corresponds to 01 equality, it follows that -l' and til do not coincide in this model. (Nor does til' satisfy  COLOR MEASUREMENT: H. OPPONENT-COLORS THEORY  319  additivity or scalar multiplication axioms, except for special forms of h; so fi may be neither a Grassmann nor an invariant  code: see part I.)  Redness/greenness and yellowness/blueness are not the only attributes that can be matched, of course. The classical perceptual  qualities of brightness, saturation, and hue can all be compared directly across stimuli. Though all these sorts of judgments  are quite difficult, they do yield reasonably consistent data. Heterochromatic matching of brightness has been investigated  quite extensively; heteroluminous matching of hue has been used in investigations of the Bezold-Briicke hue shift; and both  heterochromatic and heteroluminous matching of saturation produced excellent results in one study by Indow and Stevens (1966).  Corresponding to these attributes we may postulate equivalence relations ~a , " S , and ^'.  In addition, we need to ask about the third opponent attribute of the Hering theory: white/black. Why is there no equilibrium  structure? Can a third Grassmann code be obtained by direct heterochromatic whiteness matching?  The goal of theory is to determine the structural equations that interrelate these various attributes. The model embodied in  Eqs. (8) and (9) illustrates one part of a proposed solution; Eq. (8) relates fi , the perceived red/green, to cone pigments  and thus indirectly to cancellation coefficients. Even if we knew the functionfi , as well as fz for perceived yellow/blue, we  would still need to know how these relate to hue matching, tix . For example, does the Hurvich-Jameson hue coefficient fil (fi  + fz) predict hue matches ?  The measurement theory approach to these questions is based on the correspondence between qualitative laws (or axioms) and  quantitative descriptions. Given a proposed function such as (8), we must ask what axioms characterize it. Or given the laws  of the phenomenon under study (hue matching, for example) we must ask what functions satisfy the axioms. In many cases, these  questions may be premature; much more needs to be learned about the phenomenon before the functions describing it can be  guessed.  In the remainder of this paper, I shall briefly survey the status of matching relations for opponent attributes, brightness,  hue, and saturation from the above standpoint.  Opponent Hue Attributes and the Veiling Phenomenon  We have already noted that direct matching of a hue attribute yields an equivalence relation -i', which does not coincide with  the cancellation equivalence relation, -i . If b is in Ai , then for any a, a @+ b `"i a. But we cannot expect that a (+ b  "'i' a. For example, suppose that a is an equilibrium green and b is an equilibrium blue. The mixture a 0+ b will be less  greenish than a was. In the limit, if the blue is sufficiently intense, the greenness all but disappears.  I shall use the term veiling to describe this phenomenon. It seems to have been neglected in the color literature.  320 DAVID H. KRANTZ  Hurvich and Jameson (1951) reported that broad-band lights, chromatic at low luminances, are judged "white" if the luminance  is raised sufficiently. We may interpret this as a fact about veiling: whiteness veils hue attributes, and to an increasing  extent at high luminance.  If we could adopt as an axiom the equality of the relations i' and -j, this would imply a simple quantitative relation between  the cancellation code Oi and the perceived hue magnitude fi . They would be linked by a function of one variable:  fi - Mot).  (10)  Because of the veiling phenomenon, this axiom and the resulting equation must be rejected; fi must depend on at least one  other code besides 4'i .  Since -i' must be considered as a distinct entity, the next question is might <A, (D, *, -i'> be a Grassmann structure ? The  following plausible facts are sufficient to reject this possibility. Let a be a bright green light and b a blue light so  intense that a (+ b is only slightly greenish (veiling). Let c be a greenish yellow, at a much lower luminance, selected such  that a +~ b -1' c (match in perceived greenness). Now add a red light d to both sides, such that a (+ d is in red/green  equilibrium. Then a G) b +~ d will be a red/green equilibrium, but c (D d will be reddish. Thus, a @ b (+ d -1' c (+ d fails.  The above results show that measurement axioms can serve as useful guides to thinking, even in cases when they are rejected.  We conclude that -i' =_ -i and that -i' is nonadditive. We do not yet know what laws it does satisfy; so, much work remains  before we can hope to pin down the structural relations of these hue attributes to other codes.  Note that the red/green model presented in Eq. (8) is capable of predicting veiling and also predicts the nonadditivity of  '"1'. Specifically, let q(a) = w3y(a) - u,g(a) and r(a) = wlg(a) - a(a). If we add an equilibrium light b, with q(b) = r(b) =  w, we have from (8)  fi(a (+ b) = h(w + q(a)) - h(w + r(a)).  For suitably chosen nonlinear h (the function suggested above, h(x) = px/(p2 + X2)1/1, will do), f1 approaches 0 as w  approaches o. This shows that veiling can occur. And moreover, since fl cannot be written as a function of a single linear  combination of a, g, y, it is not a Grassmann code.  Note that in this model, the veiling by equilibrium lights is a function of a single linear code, denoted above by q(b). This  implies that veiling effects satisfy restricted additivity properties.' These have not yet been tested experimentally, nor is  it known yet precisely what class of models (including Eq. (8)) predicts such properties.  In short, the functional description of the opponent hue attributes is closely tied  1 This was pointed out to the author by James R. Moeller.  COLOR MEASUREMENT: 11. OPPONENT-COLORS THEORY 321  to the empirical properties of the veiling phenomenon. This is a problem area in which little is known.  Brightness and Luminance Codes  In this section we formulate a more fine-grained representation theorem for opponent colors, in which the first two  coordinates, 01 and 02 , are the cancellation codes for red/green and yellow/blue, and the third coordinate, is related to  luminance or to whiteness.  Hurvich and Jameson could not measure whiteness/blackness by cancellation, because blackness depends on contrast. In the  standard form of their representation, they used for their third coordinate the Y-coefficient, or luminance, in the 1931 CIE  X, Y, Z system. This is by definition a linear functional, which is closely related to the results of certain matching  relations.  Let us assume the existence of a heterochromatic "whiteness" matching relation which yields a 1-chromatic Grassmann structure.  The exact nature of this relation will be discussed briefly later; clearly it cannot be brightness matching, since that is  known to violate additivity. Specifically, we supplement our previous Axioms (1)-(9) with the following:  (7') If a - b, then a "'3 b.  (10) (A, +~, *, -3> is a proper 1-chromatic Grassmann structure.  Axiom (7') is closely related to Axiom (7) for equilibrium sets: metameric lights have identical appearance and so they match  in whiteness. Axiom (10) includes a good many separate assertions (Axioms (3)-(6) of Grassmann structures, with their various  subparts) but the main empirically vulnerable part is Abney's Law, or Grassmann's fourth law: a `"3 b if and only if a (+ c  "'3 b (D c.  THEOREM 8. Let <A, & *, -, A1 , A2 , -3> satisfy Axioms (1)-(6), (7), (7'), and (8)-(10). Let -l , -2 be defined as in Lemma  4. There exist real-valued functions 01 , 02 , Y'3 on A such that  (01 1 02 103) is  of Theorem 1;  a vector representation of <A, (+, *, ->, satisfying (i)-(iv)  (ii) for i = 1, 2, 3, Y'i is a representation <A, (1), *, -i>, satisfying (i)-(iv) of Theorem 1.  If 01', Y'2'+ 0a are any other functions with these properties, then there exist nonzero constants al , 062 , a3 such that 0i'  = ai0i , i.e.,  0 0\1 11 (y, 0  `f'3' 0 0 a3' 03  322 DAVID H. KRANTZ  Proof. Return to the proof of Theorem 6, in which we have three primaries, al , a2 , a3 , which are respectively in A, - A1,  A1 - A2 , and A1 rl A2 (equilibrium red, equilibrium yellow, and achromatic). As before, let ~1 and Y'2 be the coefficients of  al and a2 in three-primary metameric matching.  To construct Y'3 , we first observe that for any c, there is an equation of form C `"3 t * a3 . This follows because the  structure <A, G+, *, -3> is proper and 1-chromatic. So we let ~3(c) = t. Obviously each Oi provides a representation of <A, &  *, `vi>, and the uniqueness theorem is therefore also immediate, from Theorem 2. It remains only to prove that provides a  representation of <A, +, *, ->.  Let Y'3(ai) = pi (note p3 = 1). For any c in A, we combine Eq. (6) (the trichromatic match for c) with Axiom (7') and  additivity of -3 to obtain  3 ,   ~, pisi l a3 w3 C + si*ai  i=1 i=1  3  w3 Y, ui * ai,  i=1  3 3 , ~Y piui i *a3* J  a=1  It follows that NO = Y_3=1 pi(ui - si). That is, 9'3 is a linear combination of the trichromatic matching coefficients  relative to a1 , a2 , a3 , with coefficients pi ; since p3 0 0, Y'3 is linearly independent of 01 , Y'2 . Q.E.D.  The above theorem depends crucially on ~3 additivity. There are a variety of techniques for heterochromatic matching, which  seem to tap slightly different equivalence relations. Recently, the generalization has emerged that techniques involving  minimization of temporal or spatial contrast between two lights yield additivity (see, e.g., Boynton & Kaiser, 1968) while  those that evaluate overall brightness yield nonadditivity (Guth, Donley & Marrocco, 1969). We may therefore identify `v3 with  one of the additive methods. The remaining question is: what sort of theory shall we give for tie , brightness matching ?  The visual significance of the relation -s is emphasized by the congruity of results obtained by several quite different  methods. Figure 4 compares spectral sensitivity functions obtained from the same subjects and the same viewing conditions by  methods of absolute threshold and heterochromatic brightness matching (Wilson, 1964; Jameson, 1969). The two functions  coincide. Congruent results were also obtained by magnitude estimation of brightness at different wavelengths.  The problem is akin to that of constructing theories for the nonadditive hue attributes, discussed in the preceding  subsection. One may expect a function fa ,  COLOR MEASUREMENT: 11. OPPONENT-COLORS THEORY 323  T P d  -.4 w  a. 0  5  3  2  400 500 600 700 wavelength, nm  FiG. 4. Comparison of luminous efficiency functions for absolute threshold and for heterochromatic brightness matching  (Wilson, 1964). The inset shows the stimulus configuration used to achieve identical viewing conditions. During both threshold  determinations and brightness matches, the surround was illuminated with 5500 light and half the bipartite field was  illuminated with 550 nm light, both at 10 mL luminance. (Reprinted from Jameson, 1969 by permission of Musterschmidt,  Gottingen.)  representing quantitative measures of perceived brightness, to depend nonlinearly on all 3 codes that enter Theorem 8 above.  The form of the nonlinear function depends on the axioms satisfied by brightness matching. Wilson's results indicate that fa  may be an invariant code (see Krantz, 1975.  Hue Matching  We now turn to the relation ^', or hue matching, which has been studied primarily in connection with the Bezold-Brucke hue  shift and in connection with standardization of the Munsell color notation.  The absence of a Bezold-Brucke shift would mean that hue is invariant with intensity, i.e., a ^'t * a. Such a result would  be expected if hue depended only on the ratio 0,/0, of the two chromatic cancellation codes. Since the hue does change, an  intuitively attractive idea is to postulate that hue depends rather on the ratio filf, of two nonlinear codes that describe  perceived intensities of red/green and yellow/blue. This accords both with the intuitive idea that "hue" is the ratio of  redness to yellowness (for orange lights) and with the fact that, as luminance increases, the hue shift consists of yellowness  and blueness being emphasized at the expense of redness and greenness. Thus we might expect that (dldt) f,(t * a) is larger in  absolute value than (dldt) f,(t * a). Yager and Taylor (1970) obtained f, and f, measures by magnitude estimation of  324 DAVID H. KRANTZ  yellowness and greenness for yellow and green equilibrium lights varying in intensity. They then tried to predict the hue  shift of a yellow-green wavelength, assuming that the shapes off, and fa as functions of t did not change with wavelength. The  results were close, but missed slightly, as one would expect from consideration of veiling. The function f2 does change shape  when one moves from yellow to yellow/green, because at low luminance the yellow is veiled by greenness.  It seems likely, then, that a suitable theory for tiN will only be developed in conjunction with a theory of veiling, or a  theory of -i'. Quantitative data on both the Bezold-Briicke and the Abney hue shifts are needed; further qualitative  generalizations about these phenomena are even more needed.  Saturation  Saturation actually yields more than a matching relation; lights can be ordered with regard to saturation, with the achromatic  lights being least saturated. This relation is of course extremely nonadditive: if a, b are equally saturated complementary  lights, then a tis b but a (B b -s a (+ a is drastically false, since a +~ b is achromatic.  An intuitive representation for saturation would involve the ratio (I fi I + I f2 J)/J fs 1: total absolute values of  chromatic codes, relative to achromatic. One might hope that the ordering of such ratios would preserve the ordering ~s of  saturations. The axioms that need to be satisfied for such a representation are in fact well known in the general theory of  measurement; the representation is precisely that of distributive conjoint measurement (Krantz & Tversky, 1971). Testing these  axioms presupposes a factorial structure in which the factors are equivalence classes for I fi I -matching, I f2 I -matching,  and I fs (-matching. Thus, one must do extensive determinations of '"i' and tia or tia in order to apply the theory here. And  we have no guarantee that the intuitive representation will work, nor that the quantitative scales fi constructed by conjoint  measurement will give correct quantitative predictions for -H .  Saturation is also noninvariant with intensity, i.e., a tis t * a fails in general. The details of this failure may also  provide clues concerning the representation.  THE ANALOGY WITH FORCE MEASUREMENT  Since force and color are both represented by 3-dimensional vectors, there is an obvious analogy. In part I of this series I  pointed out a less obvious analogy: Not only are the representations isomorphic, but the empirical structures are both  Grassmann structures. In the case of color, the elements of the Grassmann structure are functions of wavelength A, and in the  case of force, the elements are functions of angle B. The value a(A) is the density of radiant power at wavelength A; while  a(B) is the force-magnitude acting at angle 8. The equivalence relation ti is metameric matching, in the case of color, and  equality of the resultant force, in the case of force.  COLOR MEASUREMENT: H. OPPONENT-COLORS THEORY 325  A metameric match is determined more or less directly, but equality of resultants is determined by equilibration: a ti b if  and only if an equilibrating element c can be found such that a (+ c and b +~ c are both equilibrium configurations.  We are now in a position to recognize that the definition of ti for force-magnitude configurations is formally identical to  the definitions of -i and ~s for opponent-colors theory. In all cases, equivalence is determined by equilibration. More  precisely, the theory of the two-dimensional (planar) force table is exactly isomorphic to the theory of 2-chromatic  equilibration, relative to the set B of achromatic colors mentioned in the introduction; and the theory of partial equilibria,  defined by A1 and A2 , is isomorphic to a theory of partial equilibria of planar forces, relative to any two distinct  directions of motion.' The three-dimensional structures for force and color are not isomorphic, however, because the Grassmann  structure of lights is proper-in the absence of contrast, there are no lights that are "equilibria" with respect to the third,  or whiteblack dimension, and if contrast were used to produce them, such equilibria would not be additive.  Anisotropy of Color Space  In the case of force equilibria, partial equilibrium can be defined for any direction. Another way of putting this is that the  component of the resultant force in any direction is directly observable, by constraining motion to occur in that direction  only. But we have developed the color theory in terms of only two special observable "directions" or attributes: red/green and  yellow/blue. The question arises, why not define other opponent pairs linearly related to the two just mentioned ? Why not a  blue-green/orange and a yellow-green/purple dimension?  The reason that these combinations are different can be seen if we consider the definition of partial equilibria and the  process of cancellation. What lights are neither blue-green nor orange ? Achromatic lights, to be sure, but that is not all.  Surely a yellow-green light is neither blue-green nor orange; likewise for a purple light. But the yellow-green "equilibria"  are a three-dimensional set, not a two-dimensional one-all mixtures of equilibrium yellow, equilibrium green, and white yield  yellowgreens. There is no special distinguished plane, in this set, of colors that are precise equilibria for  blue-green/orange. The "equilibrium" set is surely not closed under addition-the sum of a slightly yellowish green and a  slightly reddish blue can be very blue-green. Another way to see this is by considering the cancellation process. Suppose that  a medium blue-green cancellation standard is used to cancel out orangeness. When will the endpoint be reached? Suppose the  orange is a somewhat reddish yellow; then as blue-green is added, the mixture will first become yellow-green, then blue-green.  Is the transition from orange to yellow-green the cancellation endpoint, or is it the transition from yellow-green to  blue-green ? If the former, then the  z See also Krantz (1973).  48o/iz/3-5  326 DAVID H. KRANTZ  cancellation coefficient will be proportional to the red/green coefficient; if the latter endpoint is used, the cancellation  coefficient will be proportional to the yellow/blue coefficient. So nothing new will be obtained. Moreover, if one tries to  cancel the orangeness of a long-wavelength, slightly yellowish light, the transition will not be through yellow-green at all;  as blue-green is added, the first transition will be through equilibrium red to purple, then through equilibrium blue to blue  green. So now the first transition gives the yellow/blue coefficient, the second one, the red/green coefficient. Our given  blue-green standard will only "work" with an orange that is precisely complementary, so that both transitions coincide, via an  achromatic equilibrium point.  These considerations indicate that red/green and yellow/blue are special. The system acts as though only two components of the  resultant vector are directly observable via partial equilibrium, perhaps because they depend on codes that are really  computed in the nervous system. A few other codes-whiteness, brightness, hue, saturation-are also directly observable, though  they do not involve equilibrium structures. These latter are mainly nonlinear, though whiteness may be linear, as discussed in  connection with Theorem 8.  In a way, it is this divergence from the force analogy, via the anisotropy and nonlinearity of the structure of perceptual  attributes or codes, that provides the interesting starting points for color theory.  EXTENSIONS OF OPPONENT-COLORS THEORY  The preceding theory is obviously incomplete, in that the accounts of perceived hue, saturation, and brightness are both  tentative and sketchy. The empirical properties of veiling and of various hue shifts particularly need to be determined. It is  also incomplete because it does not treat three other broad areas of color data: discrimination, context effects, and  defective vision. These were all treated by Hurvich and Jameson in their original development of quantified opponent-colors  theory. However, much more empirical work needs to be done before a detailed representation-theorem summary can be expected.  The area of discrimination is particularly difficult because wholly new empirical relations are involved (threshold  observations of various sorts) and the proper numerical representation of these, in an opponent-color or any other coordinate  system, is uncertain. The present approach may transfer more directly to dealing with context effects and with color defects.  In these areas, at least, one can start with the same kind of equilibrium observations as have been discussed here, and one  can try to compare the properties of equilibrium sets in altered contexts (adaptation,3 contrast) and for various kinds of  abnormal observers.  a See Cicerone, Krantz, and Larimer (1975).  COLOR MEASUREMENT: II. OPPONENT-COLORS THEORY 327  REFERENCES  BOYNTON, R. M., & KAISER, P. K. Vision: The additivity law made to work for heterochromatic photometry with bipartite fields.  Science, 1968, 161, 366-368.  CICERONE, C., KRANTZ, D. H., & LARIMER, J. Opponent-color additivity. III. Effect of moderate chromatic adaptation. Vision  Research, 1975, 15 (in press).  GUTH, S. L., DONLEY, J., & MARROcco, R. T. On luminance additivity and related topics. Vision Research, 1969, 9, 537-575.  HERING, E. Zur Lehre vom Lichtsinne. Vienna: C. Gerold's Sohn, 1878.  HURVICH, L. M., & JAMESON, D. A psychophysical study of white. 1. Neutral adaptation. Journal of the Optical Society of  America, 1951, 41, 521-527.  HURVICH, L. M., & JAMESON, D. Some quantitative aspects of an opponent-colors theory. II. Brightness, saturation, and hue in  normal and dichromatic vision. Journal of the Optical Society of America, 1955, 45, 602-616.  INDow, T., & STEVENS, S. S. Scaling of saturation and hue. Perception and Psychophysics, 1966, 1, 253-271.  JAMESON, D. Brightness scales and their interpretation. In International colour meeting, Stockholm, 1969, Gottingen:  Musterschmidt, 1970. Pp. 377-385.  JAMESON, D., & HURVICH, L. M_ Some quantitative aspects of an opponent-colors theory. 1. Chromatic responses and spectral  saturation. Journal of the Optical Society of America, 1955, 45, 546-552.  JUDD, D. B. Basic correlates of the visual stimulus. In S. S. Stevens (Ed.), Handbook of experimental psychology. New York:  Wiley, 1951.  KRANTZ, D. H. Fundamental measurement of force and Newton's first and second laws of motion. Philosophy of Science, 1973, 40,  481-495.  KRANTZ, D. H. Color measurement and color theory. 1. Representation theorem for Grassmann structures. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 1975, 12, 283-303.  KRANTZ, D. H., & TVERSKY, A. Conjoint-measurement analysis of composition rules in psychology. Psychological Review, 1971, 78,  151-169.  LARIMER, J., KRANTZ, D. H., & CICERONE, C. Opponent-color additivity. 1. Red/green equilibria. Vision Research, 1974, 14,  1127-1140.  LARIMER, J., KRANTZ, D. H., & CICERONE, C. Opponent-color additivity. II. Yellow/blue equilibria and nonlinear models. Vision  Research, 1975, 15, 723-731.  PRIEST, I. G., & BRICKWEDDE, F. G. The minimum perceptible colorimetric purity as a function of dominant wavelength. Journel  of the Optical Society of America, 1938, 28, 133-139. SINDEN, R. H. Studies based on the spectral complementaries. Journal of  the Optical Society of America, 1923, 7, 1123-1153.  WILSON, B. C. An experimental examination of the spectral luminosity construct. Ph.D. dissertation, New York University, 1964.  University Microfilms, Ann Arbor, MI.  YAGER, D., & TAYLOR, E. Experimental measures and theoretical account of hue scaling as a function of luminance. Perception  and Psychophysics, 1970, 5, 360-364.  RECEIVED: November 21, 1974