10.1016/0022-2496(75)90055-3
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 12, 137-177 (1975)  A Mathematical Theory of Learning Transformational Grammar*  HENRY HAMBURGER AND KENNETH WEXLER  School of Social Sciences, University of California, Irvine, California 92664  How to explain the fact that children learn language is a central problem for both psychology and linguistics. Suppes says  that "the linguists' insistence that they will accept nothing less than a complete and detailed account will probably turn out  to be the most important conceptual demand on psychology in this century." This paper speaks to that demand by presenting a  complete formal characterization of the learning process and the language environment in which it operates. The assumptions  are in general accord with psychological and linguistic principles. lt is proved that the system converges; that is, the  learning process, acting on the linguistic information it receives, learns the language, according to a formal criterion.  1. INTRODUCTION'  1. 1. A Dual Claim  This paper presents a reasonable formal theory of language learning, together with a proof that the theory works. It is in  "reasonable" conformity with what is known empirically about natural language and its acquisition. The learning procedure  "works" in the sense that we prove that the learner must ultimately attain a correct representation of language.  It is important to view this dual assertion of plausibility and success as a single claim. When a procedure for learning  language is proposed, it is appropriate to ask in what sense it will succeed, and whether such success can be proven in a  general class of circumstances or may be dependent on a restricted choice of sample situations.  A language-learning theory, of the sort we present here, has four interrelated aspects: (a) the class, G, of possible  grammars, (b) the kind, I, of information made available to the learner, (c) the language-learning procedure, P, and (d) the  criterion, C, of success. The theory must deduce a guarantee that the correct member, g, of G can be discovered by applying  procedure P to information of type I about g. The sense in which g is "discovered" must be made precise by a formal criterion  C, and the proof must hold for arbitrary g in class G.  * This work was supported by the Office of Naval Research and the Advanced Research Projects Agency, ONR Contract N  00014-69-A-0200-9006.  I We wish to thank W. H. Batchelder for an insightful comment on Section 1.  Copyright CI 1975 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  137  138 HAMBURGER AND WEXLER  The above claim that the theory is reasonable rests on the plausibility of G, I, P, and C. We conclude this subsection by  commenting briefly on the first three. For G, we have chosen a class of transformational grammars, because of the unmistakable  importance of transformational theory in current linguistics. Each element of the information sequence (1) is a sentence  coupled with its underlying syntactic structure. Many linguists argue that most aspects of meaning can be defined on deep  structure and here, as a starting point, we make the too strong assumption that the learner can deduce the deep structure from  the situation in which the sentence is presented. One way in which the learning procedure (P) is plausible is that it does not  require explicit memory for past data. It can therefore, like children, make a mistake on a datum even though that datum has  been presented earlier. Ultimately, such errors disappear.  1.2. Main Features of the Theory  The learner is presented with a succession of data, each consisting of a sentence accompanied by its underlying structure.'  His task is ultimately to specify a transformational component' consistent with all such data, including data he has not yet  seen. We investigate the learning of transformations since it is widely agreed by linguists that they are crucial and not  innate.  The most striking characteristic of the learning procedures posited is that only minor changes in the learner's model are made  in response to each input datum. Specifically, the learner can hypothesize at most one new transformation in response to a  datum or can reject at most one of those already hypothesized. Since it alters only one rule at a time, the learning procedure  used here is much more plausible as a psychological model than the procedures considered in the literature of automata theory  (e.g., Solomonoff, 1964) which allow repeated wholesale rejection of entire grammars (sets of rules). Whatever may be the  merits of all-or-none models of leaning for simpler tasks, it is clear that no child learns an entire langauge at a stroke.  Despite the complexity of transformational systems, the constraint of making only minor changes, and the lack of explicit  memory for past data, it is nevertheless possible to guarantee in advance that the learner will always succeed at his task.  That is, he will ultimately guess either the component actually responsible for the data or else another component  indistinguishable from it with respect to all possible data, and having made such a guess he will then stick to it.  The strength of this claim can perhaps be made clearer by contrasting it with the kind of conclusion that can be drawn from  computer simulation studies of language learning. (See, e.g., Klein & Kuppin, 1970). A simulation can show that some  languagelearning procedure seems to be converging to the correct result for some sample input  z A transformational component together with a base component comprise a transformational grammar. The base component  generates or specifies a set of phrase-markers, each of which is the underlying structure of a sentence. The transformational  component acts upon an underlying structure to produce a surface structure, part of which is the surface string, utterance, or  sentence.  LEARNING TRANSFORMATIONAL GRAMMAR 139  sequences from some sample grammars. In contrast, we prove that the procedure must converge for a specified class of grammars  and inputs. This is particularly important for psychological processes like language learning where the fundamental  observation is that every normal child succeeds, as opposed, say, to some kinds of problem-solving tasks, where humans may  indeed fail.  To accomplish this task, the learner is provided with a stream of information of a type which is quite rich but not  implausible. Formally, each datum is an ordered pair consisting of a base phrase-marker and its surface string (but not its  surface structure). The base phrase-marker is close3 to the meaning, while the surface string is the uttered sentence. Thus we  are assuming that the learner is given something like meaning-plus-utterance pairs.  This type of data presentation scheme, in which sentences are presented with their underlying structure, is consistent with  the following summarizing comment by McNeill (1970):  To observe a transformational relation not yet known, an underlying structure that comes only from the child must be made  contiguous with a surface structure that comes only from an adult... In other words, something in the child's mind must be  brought together with something in the adult's speech. (pp. 111-112)  Chomsky (1965) calls providing underlying structure (akin to meaning) a strong claim, adding however that it need not  therefore be incorrect. He goes on to cite evidence4 of Miller and Norman (1964) that "semantic reference... does not,  apparently, affect the manner in which acquisition of syntax proceeds." He notes that situational context may facilitate  language learning in general, but distinguishes this from any effect it might have on particular rules. In this context, our  results show that, if the so-called "strong claim" is made-that underlying structures akin to meaning are presented-then there  is a particular learning procedure which succeeds in learning language (in a prescribed sense) and for which, moreover, the  particular rules leaned are directly influenced by underlying structure.  In a framework for the study of language learnability devised by Gold (1967), the learner is presented with a sequence of data  and must guess, after each datum, what language of a given class he is encountering. He is never told whether his guess is  correct but, if his guessing sequence converges, he is said to succeed. More specifically, if his procedure in all cases leads  to a correct guess sooner or later and then stays correct, then the procedure "identifies in the limit"' that class of  languages. Our own  a In some formulations it is a representation of meaning, while in others it contains all information necessary to assign  meaning. For discussion of the issues involved, see Partee (1971). 4 McNeill (1970, p. 110) cites contrary evidence.  5 Actually, the learner identifies which language in the class is the correct one, but, since he must be able to to it for  whichever member of the class happens to be correct, he is said to identify that class.  140  HAMBURGER AND WEXLER  criterion is similar to this one, but probabilistic. We shall refer to it informally as "learnability."  The reason for speaking of a class of languages instead of a single language is to avoid learning procedures which are too  specific. By requiring procedures to work for any language in a class, we preclude devices whose sole function is to guess a  particular rule for a grammar of a particular language.  We have investigated the learnability of certain classes of transformational mappings of base phrase-markers to surface  strings. We speak of mappings, not languages, because we require that the learner know more than just the set of sentences of  the language. In addition, he must acquire the ability to map each phrase-marker (akin to meaning) to the appropriate surface  string (utterance).  The learner fulfills his task if he attains any transformational component which represents the correct mapping, with respect  to the base grammar. Two transformational components will thus be called "task equivalent" if they induce the same mapping,  with respect to the base grammar. They will also be called "moderately equivalent" in Section 3.2 for reasons given there.  1.3. Content and Process  Chomsky (1965), in summarizing his subchapter on "Linguistic theory and language learning," asserts the following:  The real problem is that of developing a hypothesis about initial structure that is sufficiently rich to account for  acquisition of language, yet not so rich as to be inconsistent with the known diversity of language. (p. 58)  Interpreting our formal work in this context, the base grammar and the learning procedure play the role of initial structure.  More specifically, the learning procedure would be what Chomsky (1965) calls "a schema that is applied to data and that  determines in a highly restricted way the general form... of the grammar that may emerge upon presentation of the appropriate  data" (p. 53).  Slobin (1966) speaks of a "process approach" as opposed to a "content approach" to specify the "innate structure of man... The  [linguistic] universals may thus be a derivative consequence of, say, the application of certain inference rules rather than  constitute the actual initial information in terms of which the child processes linguistic input" (pp. 87-88). In other words,  what is innate is not a grammar (content) but a learning algorithm (process) for acquiring one.  Derwing (1973, Chap. 3, especially pp. 53-56) discusses this problem in some detail and provides a clear statement of a  crucial misconception: that the process approach makes `fewer assumptions about the child's innate capacity for language and  hence is to be preferred on conceptual grounds, all other things being equal" (p. 55; italics in  LEARNING TRANSFORMATIONAL GRAMMAR 141  original). True this approach makes fewer assumptions about innate content, but correspondingly it requires a more complex  innate learning mechanisms  The content-vs-process distinction must be regarded as a continuum, not a dichotomy. The extreme positions are clearly  untenable: "no content at all" presumably would mean a neonate brain of random neural nets, while "no process at all" is ruled  out by the diversity of existing languages. Thus it seems clear that both some structure and a process must be innate. Rather  than taking a position on this contentprocess continuum and trying to defend it, we consider it appropriate to make the  weakest possible assumptions about both content and process, consistent with logical possibility and empirical observation. To  show logical possibility, one demonstrates that if certain assumptions were true-about what content and learning algorithms  are innate-then learning would occur. Such is the purpose of the proofs provided here.  Although a process (a learning procedure) is central to our concerns, that process can only operate meaningfully if certain  content, e.g., the base grammar and the definition of "transformation," is explicitly built into the learner. Other aspects  are built-in in an implicit fashion. One of these is the so-called transformational cycle (see Section 2), which Chomsky  (1969, p. 67) chains must be built in. We prove that this assumption (of the transformational cycle) together with several  other assumptions are sufficient for learning to occur. Anyone who thinks the assumption is not necessary is welcome to try to  devise proofs corresponding to ours without depending on that assumption.  Structure and process have, in a way, given rise to an academic division of labor. Mathematical psychologists in the area of  learning theory have put considerable effort into models of the process of learning but far less into specifying the complex  structures that people actually learn. Linguists, conversely, have been delineating in great detail the nature of the adult  syntactic structure to be learned but, while endorsing the need for a theory of the learning process, have not actively  pursued one. In this paper, complex (syntactic) structure is incorporated into a model of (learning) process. Such a unified  treatment of these two aspects is important because it shows what a complete theory can look like and thereby provides insight  into both learning and syntax.  In this context, it is interesting to compare the situation in the theory of language acquisition with the situation in  learning theory in psychology. Such a comparison will show why it is important for a theory of language acquisition to prove  that it "works" (in the sense of Subsection 1.1).  Traditional learning theory deals with situations in which there is no problem in  6 Derwing and others (e.g., Schlesinger, 1971) seem to have no conception of the complexity of the learning problem. In this  connection, Cold's (1967) proof that no processor of whatever complexity can learn an arbitrary finite state language (a too  simple model for natural languages) from presentation of sentences should provide an intellectual catharsis.  142 HAMBURGER AND WEXLER  conceiving of a mechanism which can learn. There are generally many theories which would allow for learning. Thus the problem  the psychologist faces is to find ways to discriminate among those theories. He does this by studying other phenomena than the  simple one of whether the system is learned. These include, for example, how "correctness" changes over the course of  learning, response times to various kinds of items, and a large number of other phenomena, often ingeniously arranged. The  puzzle is to explain all the phenomena and, if two theories account for all the phenomena, then the problem is to find  (usually by devising experiments) new phenomena. In this way a tradition of psychological investigation has been created.  The situation in language acquisition is quite different, however. Here, given our (i.e., linguistic theory's) account of what  language is, the problem is to find a theory which would account in any way for the fact that language is acquired. Up to the  present, no theory can account for this fact. Thus, if we compare two theories of language acquisition with respect to what  they say about, for example, the course of language learning, we may be comparing theories which could never account for the  fact of language learning. There is no a priori way of knowing, of course, that looking at the course of language acquisition  will or will not aid in the construction of a theory which can account for the fact that language is ultimately acquired, but  we should not lose site of the necessity for finding a theory which is rich enough to allow language to be acquired.  The formal theory given here is presented with somewhat more detail and correspondingly less lucidity in Hamburger (1971).  Critical discussion of assumptions is to be found in Hamburger and Wexler (1973). A proof that surface data alone are not  adequate to insure learnability of related classes of grammar may be found in Wexler and Hamburger (1973). The implications of  this work for the subject of explanatory adequacy of theory of grammar are being treated extensively in Wexler, Culicover, and  Hamburger (in press).  2. THE CLASS OF TRANSFORMATIONAL GRAMMARS  In selecting a particular class of grammars, we have been guided by our twin aims of (i) conforming to the claims of linguists  about an appropriate format for representing the structure of language and (ii) being able to prove learnability by a simple  learning procedure (Section 3), given a plausible form of data presentation.  Subsection 2.1 is a statement of the basic framework of the transformational grammar to be used. For a more general framework,  embracing the constructs of Subsection 2.1 and many other transformational systems in recent use, see Ginsburg and Partee  (1969). (The mathematical psychologist seeking a sophisticated introduction to mathematical linguistics in general may consult  Chomsky (1963) and Hopcroft and Ullman (1969).)  LEARNING TRANSFORMATIONAL GRAMMAR 143  Subsection 2.2 contains certain restrictions on the application of transformations. These restrictions are prominent in the  proofs of learnability in Section 3. Independent linguistic evidence for them is studied in Wexler et al. (manuscript in  preparation) and is touched on here.  The principal result of this section Theorem 3 in Subsection 2.3, depends only on the grammatical framework (as opposed to  data format and learning procedure), but it paves the way for the learnability results in Section 3. In view of the data  scheme and the learning procedure, it has roughly the following import: A learner can afford to ignore sentences of too great  complexity.'  2.1. General Farm  We take a transformational grammar to consist of (i) a base grammar which generates base phrase-markers akin to meanings of  sentences, (ii) transformations, and (iii) regulations for the use of those transformations. Other grammatical devices which  have been suggested in connection with transformational grammar, for example, syntactic features and output constraints, will  not be considered. The transformations, used according to the regulations, associate with each base phrase-marker a surface  string, which is a sequence of morphemes akin to the uttered sentence.  s PQ S   S PH M m  P MS H h  Q -Y NV N n  Q RS D d  V D    (a) The production rules of the context -free grammar, B.  m w  (b) Phrose -marker p generated by the (base) grammar B.  FIGURE 1  More precisely, if the degree of embedding of the sentence in the input datum is greater than a certain bound, then that datum  can be ignored without affecting the possibility of discovering whether the currently hypothesized set of transformation rules  is consistent with all possible data.  144 HAMBURGER AND WEXLER  Several terms will now be introduced by examples; a formal account is provided by Hamburger (1971). Figure 1 shows a  context-free grammar B, which can serve as a base grammar, and a phrase-marker p (a rooted, ordered, labeled tree), which can  be generated from it.'  In p, the node labeled O, which we shall often simply call Q, dominates D since there is a sequence of connections downward  through the phrase-marker from Q to D. There is recursion on the symbol P because one P dominates another. There is also  recursion on S, and the grammar B can generate other phrase-markers in which there is recursion on Q. S is essential to all  recursion with respect to grammar B because recursion on any other symbol must be through' S. (Proof omitted.)  The S's (the nodes labeled S) break up the phrase-marker into levels. The S which dominates w has a level consiting of itself  and that w. The level of the top S includes itself, m, M, P, n, N, d, D, V, and Q. More generally, the level of an S consists  of itself and the non-S nodes that it dominates with no other S intervening.'  The transformational component is a finite set of transformation rules together with specifications of the manner in which  they are used. A base phrase-marker is transformed into a surface phrase-marker by applying the transformational component at  a succession of levels. The labels of the end nodes of this surface phrase-marker, taken in the usual left-to-right order"  form the surface string.  The transformational component is applied at a level only after it has been applied at all dominated levels. Dominance of one  level by another means dominance of the associated S nodes. Thus, in Fig. 1, application at the level of the S right above P  and H must be later than application at the level of the S dominating only w. (This is in effect identical to Ginsburg and  Partee's (1969) "LLS" condition.)  Applying the transformational component at a level means applying a succession of individual transformations at that level. In  this section, we allow only one transformation to apply at a level. (For the more general case, see Subsection 4.1). Thus, we  now define the application of a single transformation at a single level. Each transformation consists of a structural  description and a structural change." The structural de  s Strictly, Fig. 1(a) shows only the production rules of a context-free grammar. A complete specification would state that S  is the start symbol, that m, w, h, n, and d are terminal symbols and that B is context free because each of its rules has a  left-hand side consisting of one terminal symbol. The phrase-marker p is generated in the following manner: Write down the  start symbol S; invoke rule S - PQ to write P and Q, in order, immediately descending from S; etc.  9 "through" and "intervening" are to be taken in the obvious pictorial way. That is, if A dominates B and B dominates C then A  dominates C through B or with B intervening.  to Node A is to the left of node B if for some nodes C, D and E, (i) C dominates (or is) A, (ii) D dominates (or is) B, (iii)  E is immediately above C and D, and (iv) C is to the left of D. (This is not circular since informally (iv) is clear in the  context of (iii).)  "Although this terminology is in widespread use, Ginsburg and Partee (1969) speak of "domain statement" and "change  statement." Our structural descriptions are a special case of their domain statements with their Do required to be empty.  LEARNING TRANSFORMATIONAL GRAMMAR 145  scription is a finite sequence of symbols from the base grammar and ofX's.The symbol X is called a variable and, in effect,  stands for an arbitrary string (possibly empty) of symbols from the base grammar.  If the structural description fits the current phrase-marker, then the structural change is carried out; that is, if the  transformation is applicable, then it must be applied. The transformations are thus said to be "obligatory." We have not  studied learnability properties of components with optional transformations. Clearly, this would be an important area of  future study. We have begun by using obligatory transformations for two reasons: First, determinism makes the learner's task  more manageable and thus simplifies our own task; second, linguistic developments have led linguists to alter some  descriptions to use obligatory instead of optional transformations (e.g., in early accounts of transformational grammar, the  passive was optional, but since Chomsky (1965) it has usually been treated as obligatory).  The ideas of structural description, its fit with a phrase-marker, and structural change can be seen from the example of Fig.  2. A more precise treatment may be found in Ginsburg and Partee (1969).  D E F G H I J K j F I K I G an A  d e f g h i j k f i k i g D E  before application after application of  of T T  FIG. 2. Application of a transformation. T is a transformation consisting of structural description = (A, X, G, H, I, J, K)  and structural change = (6, 2, 0, 0, 5-7, 5, 3-m-1).  The structural description fits phrase-marker p in Fig. 2 with X fitted to F because its symbols appear in p dominating,  respectively, the terminal strings de, f, g, h, i, j, k; that is, its symbols dominate all the nodes of the terminal string,  in left-to-right order (see footnote 10), without overlap.  The numbers 1, 2, 3, of the structural change refer to the first, second, third, etc., symbols of the structural description,  that is, A, X, G, etc. The 2 in second position means the node labeled F, to which X is assigned, is not moved. The 0 in fourth  146 HAMBURGER AND WEXLER  position indicates deletion of H. The 0 in third position together with the appearance of 3 in another position results in the  shift of G. The two occurrences of 5 yield copying of I, and the appearance of m calls for insertion of the morpheme m.  In p, the node C directly dominates J and K, which are sixth and seventh in the structural description; in the structural  change, the sixth and seventh positions include 5, 3, m, and 1. Therefore, C directly dominates I, G, m, and A in the  transformed phrase-marker.  2.2. Restrictions  Uncontroversial restrictions on variables will be followed by more significant restrictions on the use of transformations.  Three restrictions on the use of variables will be needed. Two are present in the general framework of Ginsburg and Partee  (1969), cited earlier; any violation of the third would require a bizarre interpretation. No linguistic arguments have been  raised against any of them.  (i) Variables may not be copied.  (ii) Variables may not be shifted.  (iii) There cannot be two consecutive variables in a structural description.  The shifting of variables, (ii), can cause nondeterminacy in the application of transformations unless adequate conventions  are introduced; its exclusion is thus convenient and linguistically acceptable though not formally necessary for the learning  results. Consecutive variables, (iii), cause inherent nondeterminacy which no conventions can remedy; that is, with two  consecutive arbitrary strings, it is arbitrary where one leaves off and the other begins (unless both are empty).  The restrictions on the use of transformations require the following additional terminology, which, unlike the foregoing, is  not standard. A height-two transformational grammar is one in which the fit of a transformation with a phrase-marker can  depend only on nodes at the level where it is being applied and the level(s) immediately below. These levels are called,  respectively, the upper level and the lower level(s). A node is raised if it is moved from a lower to the upper level; a node  sidesteps if it is moved from one lower level to another. Moreover, a raised node is either explicitly raised or nonexplicitly  raised, depending on whether or not it is involved in establishing the fit of the transformation that raises it.  A node can be marked ineligible for use in establishing the fit of transformations. Only a variable is allowed to fit with an  ineligible node. If a node is ineligible, then all the nodes it dominates are also ineligible. These points are exemplified in  Fig. 3.  Restriction on Base Grammar. The base grammar is context free; one of its symbols is essential to all recursion (see  Subsection 2.1, first three paragraphs, for terminology).  LEARNING TRANSFORMATIONAL GRAMMAR  147  C D E F  IIAI  c G H J f AEF yes  ineligible node- D  structural  description fit (yes/no)  CXJF yes  CGB no  FIG. 3. Eligibility and fit. Ineligibility of D renders G ineligible but not A. CXJF fits with X fitting nodes D and H  (variables may fit ineligible nodes).  Restrictions on the Use of Transformations.  (1) The transformational grammar is height-two.  (2) No sidestepping may occur.  (3) Nodes added by transformations are ineligible.  (4) Nonexplicitly raised nodes are ineligible.  (5) When a node is explicitly raised, some other node at the upper level having the same label must either be deleted or  become ineligible.12  (6) Nodes added by transformations may not be deleted. (Hence nodes dominating them cannot be deleted.)  Figure 4 is a formal example showing how some of these restrictions operate. Some of our assumptions have been motivated not  by strong linguistic evidence but to enable us to prove learnability. We felt it important to demonstrate that positive  results can be obtained. Our working method is to modify assumptions in the direction of linguistic descriptive adequacy while  retaining learnability.  Nevertheless, the following comments on descriptive syntactic adequacy seem warranted. Restriction (1), the height-two  assumption, is equivalent to the "subjacency" principle proposed independently on linguistic grounds by Chomsky (1973).  Although the condition is controversial (see Postal, 1972), it is intriguing that a condition which we initially posited on  learnability grounds has found descriptive support. With respect to Restriction 2, we know of no proposed transformations  which sidestep. It seems that at most what can be done within two lower levels is to delete part of one or possibly to raise a  node from only one of them.  iz The selection of which node becomes ineligible can be accomplished, either by a meta-rule or by specific mention in the  structural change part of individual transformations.  148  HAMBURGER AND WEXLER  FIG. 4. Formal example of restrictions on the use of transformations. There are five S's, hence five levels. Suppose that the  deep structure, in (a), is unaltered at the bottom level and at the next level, but that at the level after that the D above F  and G is raised to replace the D above d. The result is shown in (b), with the eligible structure for the following level  enclosed in the irregular box.  L  the picture to be on the picture to be on  of Sam the table of Sam the table  FIG. 5. Natural language example meeting the Restrictions on the use of Transformations. Specifically, the noun phrase "the  picture of Sam," once raised, is treated as a unit. The raising transformation may be denoted NP V NP VP --(1, (2, 3), o,  4). We follow the usual practice of omitting portions of the phrase-marker not related to the transformation under  consideration.  Restrictions 3-6 are an interrelated set of conditions which involve the notion that certain new structures, once formed,  cannot be analyzed by the structural description of subsequent transformation. This property is shown in the example of Fig.  5. More importantly, it has led to extensive syntactic investigations and has resulted in a new formal linguistic universal,  the Freezing Principle. For thorough discussion and  LEARNING TRANSFORMATIONAL GRAMMAR 149  syntactic details, see Wexler and Culicover (1973), Culicover and Wexler (1973, 1974a) and Wexler et al. (in press).  These raising restrictions also account for the ungrammaticality of sentence (lb). Postal (1972) argues that in sentences like  (la) there is a transformation which raises "the picture of Sam" from the subject position of the embedded sentence ("the  picture of Sam to be on the table") to the object position of the matrix sentence (main clause), as shown in Fig. 5. Suppose  that in place of Sam in the deep structure of (1 a) there appeared the question element "who." Then in the absence of our  restrictions, "the picture of who" could be raised and then the question transformation would yield (lb). However, Restriction  4 renders the "who" node ineligible, so that it cannot be moved to the front of the sentence. Note that, in nonraising cases,  the "who" can be fronted, as in (lc).  (1 a) John believed the picture of Sam to be on the table.  (1 b) *Who did John believe the picture of to be on the table?  (lc) Who did John buy a picture of?  The height-two restriction (1) can be expressed in terms of eligibility. Suppose that the transformational component is to be  applied at some level of a phrase-marker. Then, at that moment, all nodes not at either that level or a level immediately  below are temporarily ineligible. (These and/or other nodes may be permanently ineligible anyway by Restriction (3), (4), or  (5)).  To summarize, a base grammar generates a base phrasemarker. The transformational component is applied at successive levels. At  the time of an application, only certain nodes are eligible, namely those which are not either temporarily or permanently  ineligible. These eligible nodes determine a portion of the (partially transformed) phrase-marker; that portion is called the  eligible structure at that level. This eligible structure contains all the information necessary to establish whether and how  any particular transformation fits. A transformation applies if and only if a fit can be established with currently eligible  nodes.  Each transformational component is a set of transformations to be used in the manner already specified (including adherence to  Restrictions (1)-(6). To specify a particular transformational component of this type, it now suffices merely to list the  transformations in it. We shall therefore speak loosely of a transformational component as simply a set of transformations.  However, many sets of transformations represent nondeterministic transformational components. C is nondeterministic with  respect to the base grammar B if C cannot be applied deterministically to every phrase-marker generated by B. Nondeterminacy  may arise either because some transformation in C fits an eligible structure in two or more ways or because several  transformations in C fit simultaneously. The expression "transformational component" will be noncommittal as to determinacy.  150 HAMBURGER AND WEXLER  We shall require that the actual, adult component be deterministic, but we do not require the learner's guess at each point in  time to be deterministic. 13  Notation.  B: the set of base grammars that meet the Restriction on Base Grammar.  C: the set of transformational components which meet Restrictions 1-6. A(B): that subset of C, each of whose members is  deterministic with respect to B (where B E B).  elig(B): the set of all eligible structures which arise at any level in the application of any C c C to any b E B (where B E  B).14  2.3. Properties  LEMMA 1. For any B E B, elig(B) is a finite set.  Proof. For any b E B, the number of branches coming down from a node of b cannot exceed the number of symbols, r, in the  longest right-hand side of a rule of B. Also, since S is essential to recursion, a "vertical" sequence of nodes (each  dominating its predecessor) within a level of b must have all labels different and so cannot have more nodes than n, the  number of symbols in B. Therefore, a level of b can have at most Y", ri nodes.  For any eligible structure, the same argument applies except that (i) the vertical node sequences may be twice as long  (Restriction 1) and (ii) previous transforming may have raised nodes into the lower levels of the eligible structure.",  However, nonexplicitly raised nodes become ineligible (Restriction (4)), while each explicit raising only adds an eligible  node at a higher level while simultaneously rendering another node ineligible (Restriction (5)), so the total of eligible  nodes at that level is not increased.  13 Indeed, it may not be possible to ascertain, simply by inspecting a set of transformations, whether that set comprises a  deterministic transformational component with respect to the base grammar. Nevertheless, the learning procedure ultimately  (with probability 1) achieves a deterministic-and correct-component by means of rejecting some transformation whenever  nondeterminacy is discovered while processing an input datum. Thus, the definition of deterministic is, in a manner of  speaking, a "behavioral" as opposed to a "structural" definition since it is stated not in terms of forms but in terms of a  property which emerges from a process.  14 The symbol B is used in two senses. If B is a base grammar, then B also represents the set of base phrase-markers generated  by B. elig(B) may be regarded as UCEC elig(B, C, where elig(B, C) is the set of all eligible structures which arise at any  level in the application of C to members of B.  15 Transformations may insert nodes but, by Restriction (3), this will not increase the number of eligible nodes. Sidestepping  (even if it were not ruled out by Restriction (2)) and lowering of nodes causes them to be temporarily ineligible for any  transforming that takes place at higher levels (Restriction (1)). Though not made permanently ineligible, such nodes will  remain temporarily ineligible throughout the transformational process.  LEARNING TRANSFORMATIONAL GRAMMAR 151  Thus the number of nodes in an eligible structure cannot exceed Yzn ri and, since an eligible structure is a rooted, ordered  tree whose labels are among the n symbols of B, it follows that the number of eligible structures formed from members of B by  applying any C E C is less than some function of r and n, which are properties of B. The result follows.  It is worth noting that, although the restrictions on raising make possible Lemma 1, bounding the number of possible eligible  structures, they do not render finite the number of possible transformational components defined with respect to a given base  grammar. More importantly, even if both base and component-to-be-guessed are specified, there is no bound on the number of  "reasonable guesses" one might make as to which transformational component is the one to be guessed. This highly informal  statement depends on what is meant by "reasonable," which in turn depends on the conditions under which guesses are made. The  following example will make things clearer.  For any integer n, consider a base phrase-marker of n levels as in Fig. 6. Suppose that for some reason" the learner  mistakenly thinks that A should always be deleted. Further suppose that he is told that the given base phrase-marker has  surface string a2n-lb. Then after applying his deletion transformation at all levels up to the top, obtaining Fig. 4(b), he  might conclude that at the top level he needs a copying transformation which creates 2n - 2 new copies of C (and hence of a),  thereby yielding the correct surface string. Since for any value of n he might reach this conclusion, any transformational  component consisting of deletion of A and (2n - 2)-fold copying of C is attainable in this way. There are thus infinitely many  transformational components, each attainable by a learner using this rationale.  s  n  0 a b FIGURE 6  is Such a reason could be that A is in fact supposed to be deleted in some context and that the learner has overgeneralized,  concluding that A is always deleted.  480/11212-2  152 HAMBURGER AND WEXLER  Theorem 3 was loosely characterized at the start of Section 2 as the statement that "complex data can be ignored." A direct  assault on that result would be cumbersome and opaque. The source of the difficulty is the possibility of raising nodes from  one level to another. Therefore, we first prove two restricted versions. In Theorem I raising of nodes is ruled out, while in  Theorem 2 it is allowed on a limited basis. The principal ideas of the proof of Theorem 1 are contained in Lemmas 2 and 3,  which in turn require the following definitions.  DEFINITION. A path of a phrase-marker is a sequence of levels in which the first dominates no other level of the  phrase-marker, and each of the others immediately dominates its predecessor."  DEFINITION. The degree of a phrase-marker is one less than the cardinality of its longest path."  DEFINITION. Levels which are immediately dominated by the same level are siblings.  DEFINITION. For B E B, for Cl , C2, E C, and for an ordered set of H levels, each directly above its predecessor in a path of  some b E B, a chunk of height H is an H-tuple of triples, the H successive triples corresponding to the H successive levels.  The first member of each triple is the eligible structure at the particular level, with respect to C,. The second member is  the same with respect to C,. The third member is an integer indicating the position, in left-to-right order, of that level  among its siblings.  Thus, for example, a chunk of height 1 contains a single triple, corresponding to a single level, its "defining" level, so to  speak. But note that the first member of the triple is an eligible structure which itself may have lower levels, in addition  to its upper, or defining, level. When we speak of chunks as being disjoint, we shall mean that the sets of defining levels of  the various chunks are disjoint.  LEMMA 2. For any B E B, let E = I elig(B) I and F = cardinality of the largest set of siblings possible in B. For any Cl , C2  E C and for any b E B of degree greater than HK(EIF)H, b has a path containing levels corresponding to K identical chunks of  height H.  Proof. By definition of degree, there must be a path containing K(EIF)H (not necessarily identical) disjoint chunks of height  H. Each such chunk is an H-trple of triples, elements of the latter being chosen from sets of cardinality at most E, E, and F,  respectively. The chunks themselves are thus chosen from a set of cardinality at most (EIF)H but, since there are K times this  number of chunks, some K of them must be identical. []  11 This definition of degree is equivalent to the usual one, though our definition of path is not standard. Since our use of  paths is only internal to proofs, this situation is acceptable.  LEARNING TRANSFORMATIONAL GRAMMAR 153  DEFINITION. In two identical eligible structures, a lower level of one corresponds to a lower level of the other if they are  in the same left-to-right order among their siblings (see Fig. 7).  d Sk' Sk  -7-      i I I n   S h       e S g  *C.(b) =  I  *C (p) =  f    cddefghijlnmhilIn cd efghi jIn  FIG. 7. The construction for Lemma 3. C - (p) is formed from C - (b) in the manner indicated in the statement of the lemma.  The terminal string *C - (p) is written with some blanks so as to make clear that it is a reduction of *C - (b). Levels m' and  mare siblings; levels m' and k' correspond with respect to the eligible structures of m and k.  Notation. Ck(b) denotes the phrase-marker obtained by applying the transformational component C to the base phrase-marker b at  k levels in an appropriate succession (see Subsection 2.1). If n is the number of levels in b, then C - (b) = C11(b) is the  surface phrase-marker; also, CO(b) = b.  Notation. sub(b, k) denotes the sub-phrasemarker of b which includes level k and all the levels it dominates.  Notation. *b is the terminal string of b.  DEFINITION. q is a reduction of r if q, r, xl , x2 , x3 , x4 , and x5 are strings such that q = xlx3x5  and  r = xlx2x3x4x5  (see Fig. 7).  LEMMA 3. For any B E B and C E C, let b E B be such that the following are true:  154 HAMBURGER AND WEXLER  (i) Level m of b dominates level k, and these two levels have identical eligible structures with respect to C. In these  identical eligible structures let level m' and level k' be corresponding lower levels. Let p be the base phrase-marker formed  from b by replacing sub(b, m') with sub(b, k'). Then (ii) implies (iii) and (iv).  (ii) No raising takes place at levels k and m.  (iii) C - (p) is formed from C - (b) by replacing sub(C - (b), m') with subC - (b), k').  (iv) *C - (p) is a reduction of *C - (b) (see Fig. 7).  Proof. b and p are identical at and below level k' and so must be transformed identically up to and including that level. We  now show that the level of k' is treated identically in p as in b when k' is a lower level. The level right above k' in p has  the same eligible structure as that in b, so the same transformation (if any) applies. Thus the level of k' can only end up  different in b and p by virtue of nodes moved (nonexplicitly) into level k' from other lower levels (siblings) or from the  upper level. But movement from siblings is ruled out by Restriction 2, while the respective upper levels, having not  previously been transformed, have only eligible nodes and hence are identical (levels m and k are identical in base structure  by assumption).  b and p are identical at all other levels below m. Different results at level m in b and in p could only arise from nodes  raised nonexplicitly from levels m' and k', respectively. But there is no raising, by premise. Therefore, (iii) holds and (iv)  follows immediately from (iii).  DEFINITION. When (1), (iii), and (iv) of Lemma 3 hold, the levels removed from b to form p can be cleanly removed.  DEFINITION. Two transformational components disagree with respect to a base phrase-marker if they assign if different terminal  strings.  We are now ready to show, for a restricted class of components, that "disagreements" (as just defined) can be discovered  without looking at sentences of high degree (complexity). In the theorem, members of A(B) play the role of the possible adult  components, while C' includes all possible guesses any learner could ever make.  THEOREM 1. Let C' be that subclass of C for which there is no raising. Then `dB e B, 3 U = U(B), VC E C', VA E A(B) n C', if A  and C disagree on any b c B, then they disagree on some b' e B of degree at most U.  Proof. Let E = I elig(B)l and F = cardinality of the largest set of siblings of B. We show that the theorem holds with U =  10(EIF)I. Suppose that b E B and that the degree of b exceeds U. Let Cl = A and C2 = C. By Lemma 2 with K = 5 and H = 2, b has  a path, Q, containing ten levels, call them qi', qi , qz', qz ..... qs in ascending  LEARNING TRANSFORMATIONAL GRAMMAR 155  tree order, of which all qt have the same eligible structure with respect to C; (j = 1 or 2) and the qi' are corresponding  lower levels of the qi . (Note that the five chunks are not necessarily contiguous; that is, although for 1 < i < 5 qi  directly dominates qit is not necessarily the case that qi+i directly dominates qi).  The conditions of Lemma 3 are now met by replacing levels m, m', k and k' of the lemma with levels qi+i , qi+i , qi , and qi'  (i = 1, 2, 3, 4) here. Therefore, applying Lemma 3 and using the definition following it, levels qa+i down to qi' (i = 1, 2,  3, 4) can be cleanly removed with respect to C; (j = 1, 2). Lemma Al (Appendix) therefore applies, so that a lower degree base  phrase-marker must also yield disagreement between A (=C1) and C (=C2). The argument can be repeated to obtain successively  lower-degree base phrase-markers until one of degree less than U is obtained. 0  The following lemmas will enable us to generalize the above results.  LEMMA 4. For any C E C and B E B, suppose that b E B has a path containing levels k, k -f- 1,..., k -}- Q, each immediately  dominating its predecessor and levels m, m + 1,..., m -}- Q, each immediately dominating its predecessor, with level m  dominating level k + Q, such that the following are true.  (1) The eligible structures are the same at levels k + q and m + q, for q = 0, 1,..., Q.  (2) With respect to the eligible structures in (1), the path includes corresponding lower levels.  (3) At levels k and m there is no raising.  Let p be the base phrase-marker obtained from b by replacing sub(b, m + Q - 1) with sub(b, k -}- Q - 1). Then the following  are true.  (i) C - (p) is formed from C - (b) by replacing sub(C - (b), m -}- Q - 1) with sub(C - (b), k +Q - 1).  (ii) *C - (p) is a reduction of *C - (b).  Proof. Since p is formed by removing part of b, the remaining parts of p are identical, before application of C, to the  corresponding parts of b. Thus the only place where C might act differently is at the "joining point" of p. (Thus far the  argument parallels Lemma 3.) That is, a height-two transformation applied at level m -}- Q might raise elements of level m -}-  Q - 1 or level k + Q - 1 into level m, in processing b or p, respectively. It must be shown that such raised nodes do not  dominate different nodes. Since these levels (m -}- Q - 1 and k + Q - 1) are identical in b by virtue of (1), they must remain  identical under transformation unless nodes are raised into them from levels m + Q - 2 and k -{- Q - 2, to which in turn the  same argument applies. Thus, ultimately it is only necessary to have no reaising at levels m and k as in (3) of the  premises. I,]  156 HAMBURGER AND WEXLER  LEMMA 5. Suppose that (i) of Lemma 3 holds but (ii) is replaced by the following.  (ii') Some node R is raised at k and at every level from k up to m, inclusive.  Then, again, (iii) and (iv) of Lemma 3 hold.  Proof. It is again only necessary to deal with raising at level m where the top and bottom parts of b are joined to form p.  Whereas in Lemma 3 there was no raising at this point, here we do allow raising. However, here the premises imply that the  only node raised at level m be exactly the same one raised at level k, still dominating the same structure since all nodes  under a raised node are impervious to transformations, by Restriction (4). Therefore level m in C - (p) will in fact be the  same, even with respect to ineligible nodes, as level m in C - (b).  Both Lemmas 4 and 5 state conditions for the clean removal of a part of a phrasemarker. This statement can be verified  directly from the definition (of "clean removal", following Lemma 3) for Lemma 4, while for Lemma 5 a change of variable is  all that is needed.  DEFINITION. Let X be a succession of levels, each directly above its predecessor, in some phrase-marker. Suppose that when  transformational component C is applied there is a node R which is raised, successively, at every level in X. Then C raises R  through X.  THEOREM 2. Let C' be that subclass of C for which at most one node can be raised at any level. Then VB E B, I U, VA E A(B) n  C', VC E C', if A and C disagree on any b E B then they disagree on some b' E B of degree at most U.  Proof. Lemma 2 states that, to guarantee the existence of any particular number of identical chunks of any particular size, it  is only necessary to have a phrase-marker of sufficiently high degree. Thus by applying Lemma 2 three times, it follows that  there exists some U such that for any phrase-marker of degree greater than U there must be a "nesting" of identical chunks,  along a path of that phrase-marker, consisting of the following: 5 identical chunks, denoted chunk(1), chunk(2),..., chunk(5),  each large enough to necessarily contain two smaller identical chunks, denoted chunk(1, 1), chunk(1, 2), chunk(2, 1),...,  chunk(5, 2), each large enough, in turn, to necessarily contain two identical chunks of height-two, these last denoted  chunk(1, 1, 1),..., chunk(5, 2, 2). Note that for any i, j, and k, chunk(i, j, k) is part of chunk(i, j), which in turn is  part of chunk(i), provided of course that i, j, and k are chosen so that the chunks are defined. Numbering of chunks is in  order of dominance of the corresponding levels in base phrase-marker. That is, if 1 G i' < i < 5 and j = 1 or 2, then  chunk(i) dominates chunk(i'), chunk(i, 2) dominates chunk(i, 1), chunk(i, j, 2) dominates chunk(i, j, 1).  LEARNING TRANSFORMATIONAL GRAMMAR 157  Also lying along the same path are the following chunks, defined for the same values of i and j as above: X(i, j), extending  from the lower level of chunk(i, j, 2) to the upper level of chunk(i, j, 1), inclusive; W(i), including all levels between  (but excluding) those of X(i, 2) and X(i, 1); Y(i), including exactly the levels included by X(i, 2) and W(i); Z(i), extending  from the lower level of chunk(i + 1, 2, 2) to the upper level of chunk(i, 2, 2), inclusive.  In Fig. 8 are diagrammed the levels of the various chunks, including some of the 10 X's, 5 W's, 5 Y's, and 4 Z's. All X's are  identical to each other, as are the W's and the Y's, but the Z's in general need not be. Therefore we may speak of the  occurrence of raising in X without reference to a specific X(i, j). Similarly, for W and Y.  Z  s z  Y  2  FiG. 8. Configuration of identical chunks for Theorem 2. The thick center line represents the path of the phrase-marker. Other  lines show where the levels of various chunks are. The W, Y and Z in the figure are W(5), Y(5), and 7,(5); the X's are X(5, 2)  and X(5, 1).  Under appropriate conditions (to be described), Lemmas 4 and 5 will allow the clean removal of X, Y, or Z (without affecting  the remaining parts of the surface string). Consider transformation by C (similar comments will apply for A). If, with respect  to C, there is no raising out of the highest level of X, then the Z's can be removed. (In Lemma 3, replace levels m and m', by  the two levels of chunk(i, 1, 1) and replace levels k and k' by the two levels of chunk(i + 1, 1, 1), for i = 1, 2, 3, 4. Note  that the explicit mention of "corresponding levels" in Theorem 1 is not needed here because of the definition of chunk.)  Suppose, on the other hand, that some node R is raised by C out of the highest level of X. Then there are several cases  depending on whether C raises R through X and/or Y. By Lemma 5, if C raises R through X(Y), then X(Y) can be cleanly removed.  By  158 HAMBURGER AND WEXLER  Lemma 4, if C does not raise R through X, then Y or Z can be cleanly removed; also, if C does not raise R through Y, then Z  can be cleanly removed.  (These three sets of applications of Lemma 4 are all accomplished similarly. As an example, if C fails to raise R through X,  then by definition there is no raising at some level of chunk(i, 1) and at the same relative level of chunk(i -}- 1, 1), for i  = 1, 2, 3, 4. These two levels are substituted for levels k and m, respectively, of Lemma 4. The upper levels of chunk(i, 2,  2) and of chunk(i + 1, 2, 2) are substituted for levels k + Q and m -}- Q of the lemma. Substitution of intervening levels is  uniquely determined by dominance relations).  These results are summarized in Fig. 9. The same results hold if C is replaced by A in the foregoing discussion. C and A each  belong to exactly one of the four categories of Fig. 9, and several cases arise depending on which categories are involved.  The method of completing the proof is identical for all cases except for the names of categories and cleanly removed parts, so  only one case will be given here.  C raises R C raises R What is cleanly  Category through X through W removable  I yes yes X,Y  2 yes no X.Z  3 no yes Y,Z  4 no no Y,Z  FiG. 9. Patterns of raising for Theorem 2.  Suppose that C belongs to category 1 and A belongs to category 3. Then any of the five Y's can be cleanly removed with respect  to either C or A. We now invoke the contrapositive of Lemma A21s. The left-hand side of (5) in the lemma is replaced by *C -  (b), and the right-hand side by *A - (b). The clean removal of Y's here corresponds to reductions (see definition) in (5) of  the lemma by removing the 1,'s and at's on the left side and the gi's and ht's on the right. Since *C - (b) =/-- *A - (b), it  follows from the contrapositive of Lemma A2 that, corresponding to either (1), (2), (3), or (4), for some choice o subscripts, *C - (b') ~ *A - (b'), for some b' formed from b by removal of the levels corresponding to one or more of the Y's.  Thus a phrase-marker (namely b') of degree lower than that of b must, like b, yield disagreement between A and C. The argument  can be repeated to obtain successively lower-degree base phrase-markers until one of degree less than U is obtained. 0  THEOREM 3. `dB e B, 3 U, VA e A(B), C e C, if A and C disagree on any b e B, then they disagree on some b' e B of degree at  most U.  18 Only four Y's need be removable to satisfy Lemma A2. Lemma A1 is not satisfied because the Y's, unlike the Z's, are not  vertically contiguous in Fig. 8.  LEARNING TRANSFORMATIONAL GRAMMAR 159  Proof. This extension of Theorem 2 to all of class C requires only a demonstration that explicitly raising more than one but  less than r nodes does not upset the previous argument, where r is the maximum number of eligible nodes in any eligible  subphrase-marker. By Lemma 1, B determines a bound on r.  In Theorem 2, the two components A and C could belong to any categories of Fig. 9, and there would in any case be one of X, Y,  Z cleanly removable for both. Here, instead of checking the two components, we must now check n component-node pairs, where n  < 2r. If all n pairs happen to belong to, say, categories 2, 3, and 4 of the table, then Z's are removable, etc. But for n > 2  there is no guarantee that any of X, Y, or Z will be removable for all n pairs. However, if n-fold instead of two-fold nesting  of chunks is used-replacing Z, Y, X by Xo , Xl ,..., X,'--then there will in all cases be a removable Xi . But n < 2r and by  Lemma 2 there is some degree U such that for all phrase-markers of degree greater than U there will be n-fold nesting of  identical chunks.  3. LEARNABILITY  Many tasks, learning and otherwise, can usefully be regarded in terms of input and output: What kind of information is  provided to the doer or performer as input, and what sort of answer does he have to construct as output in order for us to say  he has succeeded. These three aspects-input, doer, output-found expression in Section 1.3 as information sequence, learning  procedure, and criterion of convergence. In Subsections 3.1 and 3.2 we shall describe these aspects, especially the learning  procedure, in progressively greater detail; Subsection 3.3 contains the proof of learnability.  3.1. Requirements and Outline of Procedure  The input, as noted in Subsection 1.3, is a sequence of pairs, each pair of the form (b, s), where b is a base phrase-marker  and s is the corresponding surface string. Thus, for B e B and C E C, we have, in the notation already introduced, b E B and s  = *C - (b). Each successive pair is chosen according to a fixed probability distribution, independently of past events. That  is, each b E B has a fixed nonzero probability of being the first element in the pair to be presented.  What the learner must attain is a transformational component which accounts correctly for all possible data. That is, he must  construct a mapping which assigns to each base phrase-marker the appropriate surface string (sentence) of the language he is  learning.  It is a celebrated linguistic observation that there are infinitely many potential datain our terms, infinitely many different  (b, s) pairs. Despite this, the probabilistically expected number of input pairs required for achieving a correct guess at the  mapping (and never subsequently deviating from it) must be finite.  160 HAMBURGER AND WEXLER  Moreover, we seek not just any procedure which will perform the required task. As indicated in Subsection 1.1, we consider it  crucial that the procedure be plausible, in particular that changes in the set of guessed rules be gradual and independent of  past data. The following broad outline of the procedure incorporates these requirements.  At each point in time the current guess consists of a set of transformations. This set, together with the current datum, is  acted upon by the procedure to produce two other sets of transformations: a set of candidates for hypothesization and a set of  candidates for rejection. From among all the members of these two sets of candidates, one is chosen at random and is  hypothesized (added to the guessed set) or rejected (removed from it) according to which set of candidates it is from.  We now move to the more detailed matter of how the above-mentioned candidate sets are formed. The base phrase-marker which  constitutes the first half of the datum is transformed according to the current transformational component. If the resulting  surface phrase-marker has a terminal string identical to the correct surface string given as the second half of the input  datum, then no change is made in the current component. This ensures that, when the correct mapping (that is, the correct  transformational component or any component which agrees with it on all possible data) is found, no further changes will be  made. It will then be necessary only to show that the expected value of the time at which the correct mapping is found is  finite.  If, on the other hand, the current component assigns to the input base phrasemarker a wrong surface string or if the component  is nondeterminate in its treatment of that phrase-marker, then the operation of the component up to the point of error  discovery is examined. Error in this connection is said to be discovered either at the lowest level in the phrase-marker where  nondeterminacy is encountered or else, in the case of a wrong derived string, at the top level of the phrase-marker. Any  transformation which has been applied is a candidate for rejection. For each level where no transformation was applied, create  candidate hypotheses by using the hypothesizer H(p, t), where p is the sub-phrase-marker dominated by that level, t is a  terminal string, and H(p, t) consists of all possible transformations which transform p into any phrase-marker with terminal  string t. The terminal string t to be used is the correct surface string, s, given as part of input, whenever p is the entire  surface phrasemarker (that is, when working at the top level). Otherwise, a "string-preserving" transformation is  hypothesized; that is, the terminal string of p is used as t.  3.2. Details of the Learning Procedure  The ideas of the preceding subsection will now be stated more precisely.  Notation. app(b, k, C) is the subset of transformations of C applicable at level k in the application of C to b.  To be applicable at level k, a member of C must fit the eligible structure of the phrase-  LEARNING TRANSFORMATIONAL GRAMMAR 161  marker Ck-1(b), which results from applications of C prior to level k. Moreover, the notation Ck-1(b) itself will be  understood to refer not simply to a phrase-marker, but to a phrase-marker in which each node is marked as eligible or not with  respect to the next level to be transformed, that is, level k.  Some of the following notation has already been introduced, but we shall now no longer define each symbol each time it is  used. Thus, when b is used, we shall no longer bother to state that B E B and b e B.  Notation. (Also see end of Subsection 2.2 for B, C, A(B), and elig(B).)  B: the base grammar (B E B)  b: a base phrase-marker which is part of the input datum (b E B).  n: the number of levels of b.  C: the currently guessed transformational component (C c C)  C - (b): If C can be applied deterministically to b, then C - (b) is the resulting surface phrase-marker. Otherwise, C - (b)  is undefined.  Ci(b): the result of carrying out the computation of C - (b) for only the first i levels; thus, Cn(b) = C - (b).  p: p = Ci(b), for some i. p might be called a partially derived phrasemarker. (In Subsection 2.3, p was used differently.)  *p: the terminal string of a phrase-marker p  A: the correct adult component. A E A(B); also, A (b) defined in same way as C - (b).  s: the surface string from b; that is, s = *A - (b).  d: the input datum; that is, d = (b, s).  the smallest i such that the attempt to compute Ci(b) yields an error (nondeterminacy or incorrect surface string). If *C -  (b) = *A - (b), then i* undefined.  DEFINITION. (Candidates for rejection, rej, and hypothesization, hyp)  (i) H(p, t) _ {T I *T(p) = t},  where t is any string.  (11) Hsp(p) = H(p, *p).  (iii) hy(i) = Hep(Ci-1(b)) for 1 < i < n.  (iv) hy(n) = H(Cn-I(b), s) _ {T I *T(Cn-1(b)) = s}.  (v) hyp(d, C) = U hy(i), icz  162 HAMBURGER AND WEXLER where  Z = {i I app(b, i, C) _ (vi) rej(d, C) = U app(b, i, C).  i <i+  Transformations in H(p,s)  As -x(0,(2)) AB --x((2),0)  As b),0) 'A' B  AB ---(0,(I,b))  D  ob  As b) 0) AB --y ((o),(b))  ACD -  ( (1,310)  ACD--((1),(;)"O0) ACD----x((1),0,(3)) ACD------x(0,(1,3),0)  b ,  FIG. 10. An example of hypothesizer H(p, s).  Ax -x(0,(2))  C B a B A b B A C B a b  Al iti 1AI  B A ,b b o b a B A b  structural description DACB  T2 structural change: ((3), (I), (2), (4))  Base Grommor Includes  S - E D E -; D A D --GCB C-'SBA  B -+b A -a  FIG. 11. Example of a nontrivial string-preserving transformation.  See Fig. 10 and 11 for examples. This definition creates the candidate sets, in (v) and (vi), of transformations which can be  hypothesized or rejected by the learning  LEARNING TRANSFORMATIONAL GRAMMAR 163  procedure to be defined shortly. The set hyp(d, C) consists of contributions from the various levels as set out in (iii) and  (iv). The fundamental building block is the "hypothesizer" in (i) which defines the set of transformations H(p, s) that act  upon phrase-marker p to produce a phrase-marker with terminal string s. The "stringpreserving" hypothesizer in (ii) designates  transformations which alter a phrasemarker without altering its terminal string. A glance at Fig. 10 reveals that the effects  of deletion may be offset, for example, by copying another occurrence of that same letter. One might think that deletion  should be somehow restricted to avoid such effects. But note that it is a strength, not a weakness, of our result that it  holds despite the latitude of deletions allowed. Any principled restriction on deletions that linguists may make will leave  our proofs in tact.  DEFINITION. LP is a learning procedure which" (i) guesses C = 0 initially and, given a datum d = (b, s), when its preceding  guess was C, (ii) guesses C unchanged if *C - (b) = s and otherwise guesses with equal probability among alterations of the  form, (a) reject (remove from C) a member of rej(d, C) or (b) hypothesize (add to C) a member of hyp(d, C).  START  FiG. 12. Flow chart of the learning procedure.  The contribution to hyp(d, C) for i = n, consists of any transformation which, applied at the top level, creates a surface  phrase-marker with the correct terminal  is This definition may appear not to cover the case in which s 4- *C - (b) and both rej(d, C) and hyp(d, C) are empty.  However, Theorem 4, below, shows that such a situation is impossible.  164 HAMBURGER AND WEXLER  string, s. That is, the input base phrase-marker is transformed according to the currently guessed component C up to the top  level, at which point there may or may not be a member of C which is applicable. If there is none, then a check is made to see  if the phrase-marker, as transformed thus far, has the appropriate terminal string as provided by the second part of the  current datum. If it does have the proper string, then the current component need not be altered; otherwise, any  transformation which will remedy the situation becomes a candidate for addition to the guessed set.2o  The contribution to hyp(d, C) for levels other than the top, on the other hand, has a more intricate rationale. It is not  particularly obvious whether any hypotheses should be formed at cycles other than the last cycle. Such hypothesization could  not profitably be based on s, since s is not the correct terminal string at any cycle except the last. Moreover, there is no  obvious easily computed candidate to fill the role played by s for the last cycle. In fact it might be argued that no  hypothesization need be made at cycles other than the last since, for any i G n, the ith cycle is in fact the last cycle for  the base phrase-marker b' = sub(b, i), which occurs as part of a lower-degree datum, d' = (b', s'). However, if a  transformation which is string-preserving with respect to the top level of b' is what is needed, then d' may appear to be  correctly handled by C. That is, it is possible that C - (b') = s'. We are thus led simultaneously to the conclusions that  hypothesization may be necessary at cycles other than the last and that such hypothesization ought to be string-preserving.  The set rej(d, C) simply consists of those members of the current component C which are employed in applying C to the base  phrase-marker b. That is, if C acts on b to produce a wrong terminal string, then any member of C which was involved is a  candidate for rejection. It might be argued that only the transformation (if any) used in the last cycle need be a candidate  for rejection, since each earlier cycle i is identical to the last cycle for the base phrase-marker sub(b, i) and hence could  be rejected when the latter phrase-marker appears. Such a suggestion, however, ignores the possibility that a transformation  may give, for sub(b, i), the correct surface string and yet result in incorrect structure which is not detectable except when,  for b itself, a transformation at a subsequent level uses that faulty structure to give an incorrect surface string.  Implicit in the above is that C could be applied in a determinate manner. (See Subsection 2.2). However, nondeterminacy may  arise either because T E C fits an eligible structure in two or more ways or because Tl , T2 ,..., Tq E C are applicable  simultaneously. In either case, LP may reject transformations applicable at the level of the nondeterminacy or at earlier  levels. Hypothesization is restricted to levels earlier than the nondeterminacy. The rationale here is that nondeterminacy  need not  2Even if such a transformation is added, the resulting guessed set may not handle even the current input correctly, since  the new transformation may be applicable at a lower level. Convergence occurs despite this.  LEARNING TRANSFORMATIONAL GRAMMAR 165  be the "fault" of the transformation(s) directly involved, but may instead arise from improper processing at earlier levels.  3.3. Proof of Learnability  The following theorem (Theorem 4) shows how the various aspects of the learning procedure (LP) combine to ensure that, if the  currently guessed component is not acceptable, then there is at least the possibility that the next datum will induce LP to  make the next guess closer to correct, by either adding a correct transformation or rejecting a wrong one. That this  possibility is not of too small probability will follows from Theorem 5, in conjunction with Theorems 3 and 4. Finally,  Theorem 6, the principal result of this paper, shows that the procedure is successful according to our criterion.  THEOREM 4. If *C - (b) ~A s or C is nondeterminate on b, then at least one of the following holds:  (i) rej(d, C) r) (C - A) =,/= 0 ; (ii) hyp(d, C) n (A - C) 0 0; (iii) for some d' = (b', s'), with b' of lower degree than b,  (ii) holds with d' in place of d. Proof.  (iv) Cb) = Ab), since by definition each is simply b.  (v) Cn(b) =A An(b) since *Cn(b) = *C - (b) =,k s = *A - (b) = *An(b). It is therefore meaningful to define  (vi) i = ominn[Cj(b) -/- Ai(b) or Ci(b) nondeterminate].  C and A thus act upon the phrase-marker differently at level i, so level i must involve the application of a transformation  for at least one, possibly both, of C, A.  Case I: T E app(b, i, C) and app(b, i, A) _ o  If T were in A, it would be applicable at cycle i. Thus (i) holds.  Case II: Tl E app(b, i, C) and T2 E app(b, i, A)  Tl =A Tz by (vi). Tl 0 A for otherwise Ai(b) undefined with both Tl and T2 in app(b, i, A). Thus (i) holds. In cases I and II,  the results hold for any element of app(b, i, C).  Case III: app(b, i, C) = u7 and T E app(b, i, A)  Subcase a: *Ai(b) = *Ai-1(b); that is, A is string-preserving on b at level i. If i = n, then *Cn(b) = *Cn-i(b) = *An-1(b) =  *An (b) = s (using Case III premise,  166 HAMBURGER AND wEXLER  (vi), Subcase IIIa premise, and definition of s), contrary to the premise of theorem. Therefore i < n, so by Subcase IIIa  premise and definition of hyp(d, C),  T E Hsp(C!-1(b)) C hyp(d, C).  Thus (ii) holds.  Subcase b: *Ai(b) =j4-- *Ai-1(b) and i = n.  T E app(b, n, A) implies T(An-1(b)) = An (b).  If i = n in (vi), then Cn-1(b) = An-1(b). Therefore *T(C"`-1(b)) = *An(b) = s or, equivalently, by definition of hy(n), T E  hy(n) - hyp(d, C). Thus (ii) holds.  Subcase c: *Ai(b) :7~-- *Ai-1(b) and i =,4 n.  Let datum d' = (b', s'), where b' = sub(b, i) and s' = *Ai(b').  Since i is the top level of b', conditions equivalent to Subcase b are met for the datum d'. Thus (iii) holds.  Notation: Cardinality, etc. If W is a set or a sequence, I W I is the number of elements it has. If s is a string, I s I is  its length. If p is a phrase-marker or eligible structure, I p I is the number of nodes it has.  For ease of expression, we shall say that the mth datum in the information sequence is presented to the learner at time m.  LEMMA 6. Bound on size of guessed set. At all times, I C I < I elig(B)I.  Proof. A transformation can be added to C only when it is applicable to some level in a phrase-marker where no transformation  currently in C applies. Since applicability depends only upon eligible structure, there is always a mapping from C into  elig(B), taking each member of C to the member of elig(B) which was involved in its hypo thesization. The result follows. []  Note that two (or more) members of C may be applicable to the same member of elig(B), but they cannot both have been  hypothesized from it. A related fact, not used here, is that two members of C cannot have the same structural description.  If T is a transformation with structural description Q and structural change R, we write T = (Q, R). R is a sequence of  sequenccs. Thus in Fig. 2, R5 = (5, 7) and R51 = 7. Taking the elements of elements of R in order yields a single long  sequence which we denote R. For example, in Fig. 2, R would be 6, 2, 5, 7, 5, 3, m, 1. Thus R is a partition of R into  subsequences, some possibly empty. The number of ways an m-element sequence can be so partitioned into n subsequences is an  increasing function of m and n (see Feller, Chap. 2).  The following two lemmas place a bound on the number of different possible hypothesized transformations per level, despite the  unbounded size of the phrasemarker potentially involved.  LEARNING TRANSFORMATIONAL GRAMMAR 167  LEMMA 7. Bound on I H(p, s)1.  Let elig(p) be the eligible structure of p, where p = Ci(b). dx, dy, 3z, if I elig(p)j < x and I s I < y, then  I H(p, s) I < z.  Proof. Suppose T e H(p, s), so that *T(p) = s (see part (i) of the definition of candidate sets). Let T = (Q, R), where R is a  partition of R. The proof consists of showing that Q and R are each of finite length and that each has elements chosen from a  finite set, so that there are finitely many choice for Q, for R, and hence for R and thus finally for (Q, R).  Nonvariables in Q are at most x in number and are chosen from a set of cardinality at most x. Variables in Q are required to  be nonconsecutive (restriction (iii) on variables, Subsection 2.2), hence at most x + 1 in number and chosen from" among  XM,...,  Each element of R is chosen from the finite set consisting of the integers from 1 to Q I and the elements of s. For any  integer i in R, if Qi is not a variable, then Qi fits with a node of p dominating at least one terminal node of p. Therefore  each occurrence of i corresponds to a terminal symbol of T(p), of which there must be I s I < y. Since variables cannot be  copied, R can have at most x + 1 elements corresponding to empty substrings of s. Therefore I R I < y -{-- x + 1, as  required. 0  The next lemma, like the last, helps bound the number of alternatives specified by LP. (The argument culminates in Theorem 5.)  The proofs of the two lemmas are similar except that here there will be no bound on the length of the string, *p - *Ci(b),  used in hypothesization because of possible phenomena like that of Fig. 6. Therefore a slightly more intricate argument is  needed.  LEMMA 8. Bound on I Hp(p) I.  Let del(p) be the set of deletable22 terminal symbols of p, where p = Ci(b). Let I elig(p)~ be as in Lemma 7.  b'x, dy, 3z, if I elig(p)l < x and I del(p) I < y,  then  I Hsp(p) I < z.  Proof. Suppose T e Hsp(p), so that *T(p) _ *p. (See parts (i) and (ii) of the definition of candidate sets, hyp and rej). Let  T = (Q, R), where R is a partition of R. We show bounds for I Q I and I R 1. The rest of the proof parallels that of Lemma 7.  21 For the use of superscript indices, see Ginsburg and Partee (1969).  22 Terminal symbols (and inserted morphemes) which have been added to a base phrasemarker by copying or insertion may not be  deleted subsequently.  48o/I2/2-3  168 HAMBURGER AND WEXLER  As in Lemma 7, J Q I <_ 2x + 1. Let u be the number of deletions caused by T; that is, for u of the Qi there is no i in R.  When T is applied to p, nodes assigned to these deleted Oi must dominate no terminals outside del(p). Thus  IRI < IQI-u+Idel(p)I <2x+1+y.  THEOREM 5. Bound on alternatives specified by LP.  Vx, 3z, V_y, if degree(b) <_ x,  then J hyp(d, Q -f- I rej(d, C)I < z, where d = (b, s) and C are respectively the current datum and the current component, at  time y.  Proof. Let B. be the finite set obase phrase-markers of degree at most x. Let  U=maxi *b~ beBx  and let  y' = b Bx I *A - (b)J.  Further, in view of Lemma 1, let W be the greatest number of eligible nodes of any member of elig(B).  Then  I s I < V, I elig(p)i < W  and  I del(p)l < U, where p = Ci(b)  for any appropriate i and where elig(p) and del(p) are as defined in Lemmas 7 and 8. Lemmas 7 and 8 can now be invoked. From  these and the definition of hyp(d, C) it follows that hyp(d, C) is a bounded union of bounded sets, hence bounded.  DEFINITION. C is moderately equivalent to A, with respect to B iff Vb E B, *C - (b) = *A - (b). This situation is denoted C -  A.  The word "moderate" is employed here with an eye to comparison with the terms "weakly equivalent" and "strongly equivalent"  which are used in studies of formal grammar (see Chomsky, 1963). Moderate equivalence differs from strong equivalence in not  requiring C - (b) = A - (b)-that is, not requiring identical surface structures. On the other hand, it goes beyond weak  equivalence in requiring equality of the mappings defined by A and C with respect to B, not just equality of the respective  surface languages (sets of sentences).  The idea of moderate equivalence is quite important here. On one hand, weak equivalence is inappropriate since success  according to such a criterion does not  LEARNING TRANSFORMATIONAL GRAMMAR 169  imply knowledge of the relationship between meaning and utterance. On the other hand, one could not aspire to any stronger  form of equivalence between C and A, since if C is moderately equivalent to A then the two are indistinguishable with respect  to all possible data. In other words, any sequence of (b s) pairs generated by base B and component A could, if C is  moderately equivalent to A, have been generated using C in place of A. Therefore, once LP guesses such a C, it will never  alter its guess.  We next prove "identifiability in the limit with probability one." The proof consists of showing that there exists an integer  t* and a probability p > 0 such that at any time t either moderate equivalence (of C and A with respect to B) has been  achieved or else the probability of achieving it at or before t + t* is at least p. It follows that at any t the probability  of not achieving moderate equivalence by t -{- Kt* is less than (1 - p)K, a quantity which can be made arbitrarily small by  choosing K sufficiently large. (The base grammar B is chosen from B and is held fixed throughout Theorem 6). For any t, let Ct  be the current component at time t.  THEOREM 6.  V'e > 0, 3t', Prob(C,, - A) > 1 - e.  Proof. For any t and for any C E C, suppose that C is the current component at time t and that C ?4_, A; that is, for this C  and for some b E B,  *C - (b) =,4 *A - (b).  Then by Theorem 3, there exists b' c- B with degree (b') < U(B) such that  *C - (b') zA *A - (b').  Further, by Theorem 4 there exists b" E B such that deg(b") G deg(b') < U(B) and either  (i) rej(d", C) n (C - A) =A  or  (ii) hyp(d", C) n (A - C) =A o,  where d" _ (b", s") and s" = *A - (Y). There are finitely many (b, s) pairs with deg(b) < U(B); let Pl be the smallest  probability assigned to any of them so that Prob(d") > Pl .  In the event that d" is the next datum, there is by Theorem 5 a bound, z, on the number of possible alterations, and therefore  by equiprobable selection (definition of LP) each possible alteration has conditional probability at least P2 = 1/z of  occurring, given the appearance of d". Thus, in view of (i), (ii) above, there is probability at least P2 that occurrence of  d" results in either  170 HAMBURGER AND WEXLER (iii) rejecting an element of C - A  or  (iv) hypothesizing an element of A - C.  Thus with probability at least P1 the next datum is some d" such that the probability that d" results in (iii) or (iv) is at  least P,. The cardinalities of the sets mentioned in (iii) and (iv) are bounded independently of time since at any time  I C - A I < I C I < I elig(B)I (Lemma 6)  and  IA-CI <IAI.  Therefore, there exists a sequence of k ordered pairs of data dti and resulting alterations Zti 7  (v) ((dtl , Ztl), A21 Zt2),...I (dtk , Ztk)), such that (vi)-(ix) hold: (vi) k < M (where M is defined as I elig(B)I -}- I A  I),  (vii) Prob(dti) >, Pi ,  (viii) Prob(Zti I C, Zt,Zt2 ,..., Zt(i-i) , dti) % P2 for i = 1,..., k, where the left-hand side is understood to be the  probability that alteration Zti occurs at time t -{- i - 1, given that the current component at t was C and that Zil ,...,  Zt(i-1) were the next i - 1 alterations and that dti was presented at t + i - 1.  (ix) For some A' r!_- A, the alterations Ztl ,..., Ztk comprise the rejection of all members of C - A' and the hypothesization  of all members of A' - C, so that, if these alterations occur, the resulting current component would be A'. (Alterations of  type (iii) and (iv) would make this true for A' = A unless some other A' A were to become the current component sooner.)  From (vi)-(viii), the probability is at least p = (P1P2)m that (v) will occur, causing (according to (ix)) the current  component at23 time t + M to be some A' ~_- A. This last statement has been shown true for any time t and whatever the current  component at that time may be. Therefore, consider the probability of a succession of K sequences such as (v), where K is an  integer greater than loge/log(1 - p). The probability of reaching some component A' e_- A within time t' = KM is at least  1 - (1 - p)x i 1 - (1 - p)Ioge/log(l-p) = 1 - e.  Therefore t' = KM satisfies the requirement for t' in the statement of the theorem D  23 Actually, p is a lower bound on this probability for some time no later than t -f- M. However, since A', once achieved,  will never be left, the statement in the text is also correct.  LEARNING TRANSFORMATIONAL GRAMMAR 171  A stronger result can be obtained. We have seen in the proof that the probability is always at least p that a correct guess  will be attained within M steps. It follows that the expected time to attain a correct guess cannot exceed  Y_ Mp(1 -p)2 (i + 1), i=o  which converges for 0 < p < 1. This result might be called "learnability in finite expected time."  4. FURTHER RESULTS  In the first three subsections we informally extend the theory in three important directions. Then we turn briefly to a  potential objection to the complexity of the proofs. In the final subsection we permit ourselves a word on ecumensism.  4.1. Several Transformations at a Level  The requirement that only one transformation be used at each level runs counter to much linguistic evidence. This requirement  is dropped in Hamburger (1971, Chap. 6).  A simple one-level base phrase-marker may undergo one transformation to make it passive and then another to make it  interogative. Roughly speaking, the corresponding sentences could be the following.  (i) John hit the ball (base).  (ii) The ball was hit by John (after application of passive transformation).  (iii) Was the ball hit by John ? (after application of interrogative transformation to (ii)).  Not only are two transformations used, but they are used in a particular order. What the passive transformation does, among  other things, is find a noun phrase (here "John") at the beginning of a sentence and move it to the end. The interrogative  transformation moves the auxiliary (here "was") to the beginning. These two operations could not be carried out in the reverse  order since if the auxiliary were fronted first, there would no longer be an initial noun phrase to move.  In a case like this24 the learner does not have to learn the order in which transformations apply, because he cannot apply  them out of order. Assuming that this is the typical case, it is possible to prove learnability while essentially retaining  the advantages claimed for the approach used above (Sections 2 and 3) for the simpler case of one transformation per level.  The proof involves a generalization of the learning procedure  14 This is called intrinsic ordering of transformations.  172 HAMBURGER AND WEXLER  to allow hypothesization of a transformation which, together with other transformations (which may or may not already be in  the guessed component), can accomplish what in Subsection 3.2 a hypothesized transformation had to do alone-that is, yield the  correct surface string at the top level or else be string-preserving at some other level. Here again the procedure seems  plausible because one can see how correct transformations might be guessed, but clearly incorrect ones abound and so the proof  of convergence is quite important.  This rule-hypothesization view of language learning throws an interesting light on an important empirical observation by  Bellugi-Klima (1968). She found that a child may be able to use each of two particular transformations correctly separately  and yet not be able to use them together. Slobin (1971) suggests that "apparently there is some performance limitation, some  restriction on `sentence programming span,' ... at this stage of development." From our viewpoint a tremendous efficiency  advantage would exist for a learner who assumed, at first, that only one transformation was allowed per level, because the  number of combinations of two transformations is vastly larger than the number of individual transformations. Thus we suggest  the temporary limitation might be not on performance but on the class of "possible competences."  4.2. Filtering  Filtering is a capability of a transformational grammar whereby certain base phrasemarkers correspond to no surface string. In  this subsection we provide an example, a comment on the formal theoretical significance of the notion, and finally a brief  argument that filtering can be admitted into our system without undermining the proofs of learnability.  s T  FIG. 13. A base phrase-marker which would be "filtered out" and therefore not be part of any datum.  Consider the base phrase-marker in Fig. 13. Ignoring the .# symbols for the moment, note that, if "box" had instead been  "pen," then a so-called relativization transforma-  LEARNING TRANSFORMATIONAL GRAMMAR 173  tion could apply, replacing the lower-level "the pen" by "that" to give "the pen that fell is old" as surface string.  However, the base phrase-marker as it stands in the figure does not meet the requirement that the lower level and upper level  noun phrases be identical, and so the relativization transformation is not applicable. The resulting surface string, we would  have to admit at this point, would have to be "the pen the box fell is old." Such a string would be meaningless and, to ensure  that our system does not count it a valid sentence, we can "filter it out." This is accomplished by having the base  phrasemarker put in25 the # symbols, called boundary markers, at each level. The relativization transformation removes the  #'s, which are "forbidden" in surface strings. Since the relativization transformation does not fit (meet the requirements for  application to) the phrase-marker in Fig. 13, the #'s are not removed and the would-be surface string contains forbidden  symbols which identify it as a nonsentence.  Filtering is an important theoretical issue because Peters and Ritchie (1973) have shown that it makes certain  transformational grammars" weakly equivalent" to Turing machines. That means there is no computable set of sentences they  could not be used to represent. Thus, to say that natural languages, as sets of sentences, are representable by such  transformational grammars is to say nothing at all.  Sampson (1973) takes the more sanguine position that transformational grammar can still be accepted provided that it enables  linguists to represent natural languages relatively simply and at the same time specifically does not make possible simple  representations of clearly non-natural-language sets of strings. An example of the latter is the set of all strings (over some  vocabulary) with length equal to any prime number.  Without settling this argument, we turn to the significance of Peters and Ritchie's result for learnability. Gold's (1967)  sequence of sentences he calls "text" data, as opposed to "informant" data, which consist of all possible strings over a  vocabulary, with sentential and nonsentential string distinctively labeled. He shows that even  15 This is easily accomplished by the following sequence of changes in the rules of the base grammar: Change every S to S',  insert # before and after S' on the right-hand side of every rule in which it appears, and include the rule S -> # S' #.  Altering the base grammar in this way enables Ginsburg and Partee (1969), to treat level-by-level transforming without talking  about levels as such. In other words they thereby formalize that process. Note that their grammars are not height-two.  2s The transformational grammar used by Peters and Ritchie uses a finite state grammar as a base. Such grammars comprise a  subset of the context-free grammars. Their transformations are not subject to the restrictions introduced in Subsection 2.2.  We do not know whether a result like theirs could be obtained with our form of grammar.  27 Forms of equivalence are discussed in Subsection 3.3. Weak equivalence does not provide definitive conclusions about  natural language but has proved mathematically tractable and has at least provoked linguistic insight. Strong equivalence has  been presumed intractable and has gone virtually unstudied. We hope to have herewith raised some interest in moderate  equivalence.  174 HAMBURGER AND WEXLER  with this stronger form of input data, the class of languages generated by Turing machines is not learnable (not identifiable  in the limit).  Thus the result of Peters and Ritchie and that of Gold, taken together, show that if we are not careful we shall find  ourselves with language and learning theories that predict we cannot learn to speak properly.  We turn now to the question of whether we can extend the transformational system of Section 2 to allow filtering and still  demonstrate leanabilityy. The base is modified, using S' and # as specified in footnote 25, and only (b, s) pairs for which  the string s includes no occurrence of the forbidden symbol # are allowed as data.  Theorem 3 shows that, if A and C, the true and guessed components respectively, disagree on any (b, s) of any degree at all,  then they must also disagree for some (b', s') of degree less than U, where U is a function only of the base grammar. However,  if filtering is allowed, then s' may contain ,-(#, in which case (b', s') would not be a datum (but would be filtered out). We  must show that if (b, s) is allowed as a datum then so is (b', s'). Contrapositively, it suffices to show that if s' contains  # then so does s, and this follows immediately from the fact that s' is a substring of s. Therefore, the filtering property  can be incorporated into our grammar without affecting the claim to learnability.  4.3. Elaborated Structural Descriptions  For various reasons, some linguists have used structural descriptions which have a basic part like those in Section 2 but  which may have other parts as well. These auxiliary parts must fit28 with the phrase-marker just as does the basic part, but  they are not used in the structural change. There may be interrelations between the auxiliary parts and the basic part. For  example, we might have (A, B, D) as basic part and (C, D) as auxiliary part together with the specification that the node  fitting with D be the same in each case. Thus C would, in effect, be required to dominate A and B.  Extending the theory in this way necessitates reworking of the proofs in Section 3, particularly those of Theorem 5 and the  lemmas which immediately precede it. Nevertheless, the general result, Theorem 6, can still be maintained, provided the  auxiliary parts of the structural description are, like the basic part, required to refer only to the currently eligible nodes  of the phrase-marker.  4.4. Insufficiency of Degree-One Data  It might be thought, at first glance, that the learner could deduce a correct transformational component simply from  degree-zero and degree-one data. Degree-zero data would seem to provide evidence for any transformation acting within a single  level, while degree-one data might do the same for transformations acting on a so-called  as More generally, there can be a Boolean condition on additional parts (see Ginsburg & Partee, 1969).  LEARNING TRANSFORMATIONAL GRAMMAR 175  upper-level and its lower levels. The height-two restriction, by this reasoning, would make higher-degree data unnecessary.  Such an argument, if correct, would replace Theorems 3 and 4, thereby saving a lot of effort.  The simple example of Fig. 14 shows that such reasoning is invalid. The only base phrase-markers of degree 0 or 1 for the base  B shown are b, , b2 , and b3 . For none of these can T2 apply so that components Cl and C2 are indistinguishable from each  other in terms of all possible data of degree 0 or 1. Nevertheless, C2 acts differently upon b4 than does Cl , specifically,  *C2 - (b4) = amefcd, as shown, whereas *Cl - (b4) = aefcd. Thus, a learner who guessed Cl and was exposed only to data of  degree 0 or 1 would never have any basis for rejecting that guess. Nevertheless, he would be incorrect.  a s-- as S - feS S-cd  bi: S b2: S b3 S  C d a S f e ~S  a S a S- a m S f e S.- e f S  a d  Ti: fecd -+ (2,1,3,4) T2: aex -91,m),2,3) 91,m),2,3)  Ci = TJ C2 = {TIJ21  FIG. 14. Example showing the insufficiency of degree-one data. The arrow next to an S shows which level has been transformed.  The basic problem is that, although a level cannot directly affect the level which is two levels higher than itself (its  "grandparent" so to speak), it can affect the level immediately above it which in turn affects the next level up. Such effects  need not depend upon raising as can be seen from the example just elaborated.  4.5. Language and Learning  The aspects of grammatical structure which we have incorporated here are not arbitrary but rather have had considerable play  in the linguistic literature of the last fifteen years. The attempt to represent the language structure possessed by an adult,  without reference to acquisition, has been the source of the notions deletion, essential recursion, height-two, filtering,  nondeterminacy, and raising. Ineligibility is a new notion, though worthy of future linguistic study, as we attempt to show in  Wexler et al. (manuscript in preparation).  176  HAMBURGER AND WEXLER  The important point is that new insight into such linguistic devices is provided by the formal study of the logical  possibility of learning the structures which they define. Moreover, such acquisition insight is independent of the structure  insight which linguists base on adult utterances, native judgments, linguists' introspection, etc. The bridge that Chomsky has  reerected between linguistics and psychology bears two-way traffic.  APPENDIX  LEMMA Al. If (1)-(4), then (5), where  (1) exf = uwv,  (2) ecixdi f = ugiwhiv,  (3) ecic;xd;di f = ugig;wh;hiv for  (4) eciCiCkxdkd,di f = ugig;gkwhkh;hiv for  (5) ec1C2C3C4xd4d3d2d,f = uglg,,g3g4wh4h3h,h1v,  i < j,  i < j < k,  where each symbol denotes a string.  LEMMA A2. If (1)-(4), then (5'), where  ee1C2C2C3C3C4C4xd4d4a,,d,d2d2d1J = uglg2g2g3glg4g4wh4h4h3f3h2r`2hlv' (5)  (4)-(1) are formed from (5') by picking one, two, three, or four of 1, 2, 3, 4 and removing from (5') all double-bar symbols  with those subscripts.  Proofs are given Appendix B of Hamburger (1971).  REFERENCES  BELLUGI-KLIMA, U. Linguistic mechanisms underlying child speech. In E. M. Zale (Ed.), Proceedings of the Conference on  Language Behavior. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1968.  CHOMSKY, N. Formal properties of grammars. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush & E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of Mathematical  Psychology, Volume H. New York: Wiley, 1963.  CHOMSKY, N. Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. Cambridge, MIT Press, 1965.  CHomsKY, N. Linguistics and philosophy. In S. Hook (Ed.), Language and Philosophy. New York: NYU Press, 1969.  CHOMSKY, N. Conditions on transformations. In S. R. Anderson & P. Kiparsky (Eds.), A Festschrift for Morris Halle. New York:  Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1973.  CULICOVER, P., & WEXLER, K. An application of the freezing principle to the dative in English. Social Sciences Working Papers,  39. Irvine, CA: University of California, 1974a. CULICOVER, P., & WEXLER, K. Three further applications of the freezing  principle in English. Social Sciences Working Papers, 48. Irvine, CA: University of California, 1974b.  LEARNING TRANSFORMATIONAL GRAMMAR 177  DERWING, B. L., Transformational Grammar as a Theory of Language Acquisition. London: Cambridge University Press, 1973.  FELLER, W. An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications. New York: Wiley, 1957. GINSBURG, S., & PARTEE, B. A  mathematical model of transformation grammars. Information and Control, 1969, 15, 297.  GOLD, E. M. Language identification in the limit. Information and Control, 1967, 10, 447. HAMBURGER, H. On the learning of  three classes of transformational components. Doctoral dissertation, University of Michigan, 1971.  HAMBURGER, H., & WEXLER, K. Identifiability of a class of transformational grammars. In K. J. J. Hintikka, J. M. E. Moravcsik  & P. Suppes (Eds.), Approaches to Natural Language. Dordrecht, Holland: Reidel, 1973.  HOPCROFT, J. E., & ULLMAN, J. D. Formal Languages and Their Relation to Automata. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1969.  KLEIN, S., & KUPPIN, M. An interactive, heuristic program for learning transformational grammars. Technical Report No. 97.  Madison, WI: Computer Sciences Dept., Univ. of Wisconsin, 1970.  McNEILL, D. The Acquisition of Language. New York: Harper and Row, 1970.  MILLER, G. A., & NORMAN, D. A. Research on the use of formal languages in the behavioral sciences. Semiannual technical  report, Department of Defense, Advanced Research Projects Agency. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University, Center for Cognitive  Studies, June 1964. PARTEE, B. H. On the requirement that transformations preserve meaning. In C. J. Fillmore & D. T.  Langendoen (Eds.), Studies in Linguistic Semantics. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1971.  PETERS, P. S., & RITCHIE, R. W. Nonfiltering and local-filtering transformational grammars. In K. J. J. Hintikka, J. M. E.  Moravcsik & P. Suppes (Eds.), Approaches to Natural Language. Dordrecht, Holland: Reidel, 1973.  POSTAL, P. M. On Raising: One Rule of English and Its Theoretical Implications. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1972.  SAMPSON, G. The irrelevance of transformational omnipotence. Journal of Linguistics, 1973, 9, 299-302.  SCHLESINGER, I. M. Production of utterances and language acquisition. In D. I. Slobin (Ed.), The Ontogenesis of Language. New  York: Academic Press, 1971.  SLOBIN, D. I. Comments on "Developmental psycholinguistics." In F. Smith & G. A. Miller (Eds.), The Genesis of Language.  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1966.  SLOBIN, D. 1. Psycholinguistics. Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman, 1971.  SOLOMONOFF, R. J. A formal theory of inductive inference. Information and Control, 1964, 7, 1-22; 1964, 7,224-254.  SUPPES, P. The desirability of formalization in science. Journal of Philosophy, 1968, 65, 651-664. WEXLER, K., & CULICOVER, P.  Two applications of the freezing principle in English. Social Sciences Working Papers, 48. Irvine, CA: University of  California, 1973.  WEXLER, K., CULICOVER, P., & HAMBURGER, H. Learning-theoretic foundations of linguistic universals. In press, Theoretical  linguistics.  WEXLER, K., CULICOVER, P., & HAMBURGER, H. Formal Principles of Language Acquisition (in preparation).  WEXLER, K., & HAMBURGER, H. On the insufficiency of surface data for the learning of transformational grammar. In K. J. J.  Hintikka, J. M. E. Moravcsik & P. Suppes (Eds.), Approaches to Natural Language. Dordrecht, Holland: Reidel, 1973.  RECEIVED: December 19, 1973