10.1016/0022-2496(75)90002-4
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 12, 416-436 (1975)  Methods for Describing Ordinal Data with Cardinal Models  FORREST W. YOUNG  Psychometric Laboratory, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27514  Several methods, both new and old, for describing ordinal data with a cardinal model are discussed in a newly developed and  general context which broadens their applicability beyond their traditional use in multidimensional scaling. The relationships  between the methods is investigated. It is shown that the two most commonly used methods (Guttman's rank-image principle and  Kruskal's least-square monotonic transformation) are the boundary conditions of a newly proposed single parameter family of  methods. An additional method is proposed which is shown to yield an equal-density model space. The commonly made distinction  between "transformation" methods and "transformation-free" methods is shown to be a pseudodistinction. It is observed that all  the methods can be stated as matrix operations on the model space with the conclusion that they try to optimize a linear  combination of the model space.  Motivation and Purpose  It is becoming increasingly common in the behavioral sciences to attempt to describe one's ordinal data with a cardinal model  having either interval or ratio measurement properties. The most common example, nonmetric multidimensional scaling, usually  involves the Euclidian model and an ordinal data matrix containing dissimilarity judgments (Guttman, 1968; Kruskal, 1964;  Shepard, 1962). This example has been recently joined by procedures for applying the simple conjoint (additive) model to  ordinal data (Kruskal, 1965; Lingoes, 1973; Roskam, 1968; Young, 1972), the appli  Written while on leave at the Institute of Data Theory of the University of Leiden, The Netherlands.  The author expresses his appreciation to Jan deLeeuw for his helpful discussions concerning his own work as well as other  topics covered in this paper. Without them this paper would not have been written. The author appreciates the extensive  comments made on an earlier and very different draft of this paper by Joseph Kruskal and James C. Lingoes and also expresses  his appreciation for the generous support of the Institute of Data Theory of the University of Leiden, The Netherlands, and of  the Psychometric Laboratory of the University of North Carolina. This work was supported in part by PHS Research Grant  MH-10006 from the National Institute of Mental Health, Public Health Service, to the Psychometric Laboratory, University of  North Carolina at Chapel Hill and in part by Science Development Program Grant GU-2059 from the National Science Foundation to  the University of North Carolina.  Copyright 1975 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  416  cation of the canonical correlation model to ordinal (and indeed nominal) data (deLeeuw, 1973; deLeeuw, Young and Takane,  1975), the description of ordinal data by the factor analysis model (Kruskal & Shepard, 1974), and the closely related  components model (Lingoes, 1973; Young, 1972) etc. All these examples, which collectively are called nonmetric analysis  procedures, try to find values for a set of parameters to provide a model space that is as nearly as possible equivalent to  the data space. For example, when one attempts to describe data with the conjoint measurement model the goal is to  parameterize the experimental variables such that their additive combinations (the model space) are as nearly as possible in  the same rank order as (equivalent to) the observations obtained in the experiment (the data space).  In this paper we discuss several of these methods in a framework different from that commonly used in the multidimensional  scaling literature. This framework emphasizes the general applicability of these methods to situations involving any type of  cardinal model and ordinal data. Some of the methods discussed in this paper are commonly used, some have been proposed before  but are not often used, and some are proposed here for the first time. For the sake of brevity we do not discuss the methods  proposed by Shepard (1962), Young (1973), Yates (1972) or Gleason (1969) (investigations by the present author indicate that  these methods are seldomly used and somewhat less theoretically justified than the methods to be discussed). The methods which  are discussed are all interrelated mathematically with the most important conclusion being that they may be viewed as  attempting to either (a) optimize the linearity between the model space and some linear combination of the very same model  space, or (b) optimize some linear combination of the model space.  DEFINITIONS  The Data Space  Let us assume that there is a vector of observations whose elements are measured at the ordinal level and have been sorted  into order. An element of this vector is denoted of and the vector itself as O. The elements are arranged so that oi_1 < of <  oi+1 , assuming ascending order and no ties. The assumption that there are no ties does not limit our developments since ties  are thought of as blocks of observations such that all the elements in a block have the same subscript. We may treat the case  where we wish to reproduce the inverse of the order by simply enumerating the the elements in the reverse manner. In this case  oi+, < of < oi_, , which forms no particular difficulties for the ensuing arguments.  The Model Space  Let us also assume that there is another vector whose elements are measured at the cardinal (interval or higher) level. An  element of this vector is denoted by the  symbol zi and the vector by Z. We assume that the two vectors O and Z have the same number of elements n and that there is a  one-to-one correspondence between elements in the two vectors.  The Problem  The problem faced by any nonmetric procedure is to obtain a model space which is as congruent as possible with the given data  space, in an ordinal sense. That is, we wish that zi_1 < zi < zi+1 . This is a trivial problem except when the various zi are  highly interdependent. We require then that the zi be parameterized by many fewer parameters than there are ordinal  constraints: zi = Fi[xl , x,_.]. We will see that the attempt to solve this problem is always approached by defining a  goodnessof-fit function and an algorithm for optimizing the function. These functions will be discussed in detail in the next  sections of this paper.  The definitions of the data and model spaces are restricted to vectors which have the same number of elements. We should not  be concerned that the spaces are restricted to vectors nor that they must have the same number of elements. First, it is very  simple to generalize these developments to the situation where the data and model spaces have a different number of elements.  When there are fewer elements in the model space than in the data space (as when the data are replicated) we must simply  ensure that each model element is assigned to some element in the data space, although the assignment will no longer be  one-one. Perhaps the easiest way to think of this process is as though we were to make several "copies" of a model element,  one for each data element assigned to it, making sure that the copies are enumerated appropriately. For example, if there are  five replications of the data space we could think of these as forming one data space with 5n uniquely enumerated elements  with identical copies of the model space being enumerated as one model space with 5n elements. It is also equally simple to  generalize the following developments to the case where there are fewer data elements than model elements (as when there are  missing data) by simply omitting those model elements which have no corresponding data element. Of course, both of these ideas  may be combined for situations where the mapping between data and model is more complex. For those situations where the number  of observations corresponding to a model element varies from element to element, with there being no observations for some  elements and many for others, we simply force the model vector to have the same number of elements as the data vector by  making sure that there are the same number of identical copies of the element as there are observations of it, including zero  copies when necessary, and by enumerating the elements in the two vectors appropriately.  We should also not be concerned that the discussion here is limited to vectors. The actual data may be classified in many  different ways-for example, it may be a three-way classification of several subjects (way 1) making judgments of the degree  of a variety of attributes (way 2) possessed by various automobiles (way 3)-but for our purposes here it is much simpler to  ignore the classification and simply place all elements into one vector. It should also be of no concern that the order of all  elements may not be defined over the entire data matrix. For example, when each of several subjects rank order, in order of  decreasing preference, a set of automobiles, providing a matrix of conditional rank orders, such data can be thought of as  simply several data spaces of the type we discuss here. Both these notions are simple generalizations of the following  discussion.  METHODS OF FITTING  Monotonic Transformation Methods  The first procedures proposed for relating a cardinal model to ordinal data involved an intermediary, as it were, which served  as an interface between the two different levels of measurement, with the ordinal properties of the intermediary being used  when dealing with the data, and the cardinal properties with the model. The monotonic transformation, as the intermediary is  called, and which we denote as the vector 2 with element ii, must meet two requirements: The ordinal requirement is that the  data space and the transformation be perfectly equivalent at the ordinal level (or at least weakly so), i.e.,  (oi < o;) =>- (zi G z;) for all i < j.  The cardinal requirement is that the 2i be derived, in some clearly stated manner, from the model values, i.e.,  Zi - Gi[z, , Z2 ,..., Zn .  We may think of zi as being a rescaling of the data or as an estimate of the model space. It is both.  The various monotonic transformation procedures can all be looked on as though they attempt to minimize the sum of squared  differences between Z and 2, for some specific way of defining 2. That is, they attempt to find a set of parameters which  yield a model space Z (and, therefore, 2) that minimizes  S - (Zi - Zi)', i  where 2 is defined below. (In practice this generalized fit formula is normalized by the variance of Z to avoid trivial  solutions, but for our purposes we can treat Z as a constant, simplifying the notational problems). Note that all the methods  which  use a transformation principal can be viewed as trying to obtain a model space Z and a transformation space L which are as  linearly related as possible. When we plot 2 versus Z they will tend to be linearly related, with the degree of scatter  depending on the specific definition of 2. In the remainder of this section, we discuss four definitions of 2.  Rank Image and Least Squares  Two procedures for defining 2 are in wide use: The Least-Squares transformation (Kruskal, 1964) and the Rank-Image  transformation (Guttman, 1968). Since both procedures are well documented we will only briefly describe them here.  Guttman defines ii simply as zi sorted (permuted) into the desired order:  where  82, -  S 1, if R[z;] = i 0, if R[z;] i,  where R[z;] is the rank-order position of z; (1 for the smallest z; , n for the largest, etc.).  Kruskal's transformation is a partitioning of Z into blocks with each of the za being the mean of the zi in the blocks. After  a series of "trial" partitionings a final partitioning is found such that the zi are correctly ordered and the sum of squared  differences between Z and 2 is as small as possible:  ii = 8ijzi/~ 8i;  where in this case  1, for j E b  ~0, for j 0 b,  where b denotes the particular block, there being a total of B blocks, each with nb elements.  The Weighted Average Transformation  This transformation, developed here for the first time, is a family of transformations having a single parameter which varies  over the interval 0 to 1. At the lower boundary the transformation is identical to the rank-image transformation and at the  upper boundary to the least-squares transformation.  The weighted average transformation involves four separate operations. The blocking operation involves forming a block of two  or more elements zi. Once a  block has been formed its elements are sorted into order, and then a weighted average is formed to obtain trial values for ii  . These trial values are then compared to determine if they are in the right order relative to the elements in the remaining  blocks (where initially each zi is its own block).  Specifically, we initiate the process by setting each zi = zi (zi is its own block). Two adjacent elements are then selected,  for example, zi and zi+1 , and compared to each other. If they are correctly ordered we set  and proceed with two other elements (zi+1 and zi+2, for example). If their order is incorrect, however, we sort them into  order to obtain a vector whose elements al and  are the two elements zi and zi+1 in correct order.  Now we create yet a third vector, where each element P1 and fl, is a weighted average of each of the  ,  Ni = Y_ Sijaj/Y_ "ij j=1 ~=1  Here, al is weighted most heavily when P1 is being computed, and a2 is heaviest  for P2 , thus ensuring monotonicity:  bz~ - ~ 1 1, for j = i  (c, for jai, 0<c<1.  Now we examine the block to see if its elements, which are properly ordered internally, are properly ordered with regard to  the model values on either side of the block. That is, we check to see if fl, > zi_1 (down-satisfied, in Kruskal's  terminology) and g2 < zi+2 (up-satisfied). If both these inequalities are satisfied we set  ii = 91 -~i+l = 92  and proceed to another pair of adjacent model values.  However, if one or both of these comparisons fail we increase the size of the block to include the incorrectly ordered zi_1 or  zi+2 (or both) and repeat all these operations on the new block. In the general case, we are faced with a block b with nb  elements zi through zi+n,-1 , which are sorted into order and denoted as  through b . We then obtain the weighted average:  /~ nb nb j=1 7=1  where the Si; are defined as before. The process is continued until the block is satisfied in both directions or until no zi  remain to be added. We can see that this process is equivalent to Kruskal's least-squares procedure when c = 1 (each 2i  consists of the mean of the zi in the block) and to Guttman's rank image procedure when c = 0 (each ii is simply the zi whose  ordinal position is correct).  Nonmonotonic (Smoothing) Transformation  The methods just discussed are explicitly monotonic. In this section we propose a method for relating a cardinal model to  ordinal data which for fallible data is non monotonic (although in the perfect case the method is monotonic) and which has the  additional property of being smooth or continuous.  With some of the monotonic transformations, particularly with Kruskal's leastsquares transformation, the result of the process  is a jumpy "discontinuous" step transformation (we are not using "discontinuous" in its mathematical meaning, but, rather, to  indicate a step transformation). That is, there is no variability within steps and high variablity between steps. This is to  some extent true for all the weighted average transformations (except the rank image), where the variance within blocks  -steps-is lower than between them. Thus, one way to obtain a smoother transformation would involve attempting to make the  variance within and between "steps" as nearly equal as possible. This is very difficult unless we have some prior notion of  where the steps will occur, which we almost never have.  A notion similar to that in the previous paragraph, but which does not depend on knowing where the steps are, is to represent  the continuity or smoothness of the transformation by the variance of the differences between the model values which are  ordinally adjacent to each other. That is, we could say that a transformation is smooth when there is not much variation in  the difference between two model values which are next to each other as one "ascends" the transformation (elements zi and  If the transformation is "steppy" then there will be many (zi , 2i+1) pairs whose difference is very small, and a few whose  difference is very large, relative to the average variation in pairs of model values. If the transformation is more or less  smooth then there will be relatively little variation.  It is well known that the variation of a set of numbers around their mean is smaller than around any other number, so we  propose that a continuous or smooth transformation is one whose values are the mean of the adjacent model values, a running  average transformation. We must be careful in how we do this, however. The mean 2(zi + zi+1) is really most appropriate for  some nonexistent datum between of and oi+1 (oi+1 is , as it were), so we must include zi_1 . We are then faced with the  decision as to whether we wish to define zi as the mean of zi with zi+1 and also with zi_,  1 zi-1 + zi z.i -F zi+1 zi-1 '+ 2zi + zi+1  ,zi = 2 1--y- -r 2 -] - - 4 1  as being the mean of the three adjacent values  zi-1 + Zi + zi+i  3  or as simply the mean of the two neighbor values  zi-1 + -i+i  .zi = 2 i = 2, 3,...  However, when we enter each of these definitions into the generalized fit index (1), the resulting indices only differ by a  constant. Thus, we choose the latter definition because it is somewhat faster to compute.  For reasons which will be apparent later, we define  z1 = (z1 + z2)/2,  and  ~n = (zn-1 + zn)/2,  completing the definition of what we call the running average transformation. When the running average transformation is used  with the generalized fit index we have an index of monotonic continuity:  n   CONTIN = 4 Y (2zi - (8)  zi-1 - zt+1)2,   where   zo = zl and zn+1 = zn . (9)  Absolute Value Alethods   Several investigators have proposed methods for fitting a cardinal model to ordinal data which attempt to directly minimize  some function of the ordinal violations in pairs of model values without the indirect artifice of a transformation. These  methods are Guttman's absolute value principle (1969), deLeeuw's positive orthant method (1970), Roskam's triad method (1970),  and Johnson's pairwise method (1973). All these methods involve minimizing a function defined on all pairs of distances such  that when a given pair of distances is not in the order specified by the data, the index is increased, but when they are  correctly ordered the index is left unchanged. The most general index seems to be that of deLeeuw, who proposed the  optimization of the function (in our symbols)  Yi Y-j f li Z3 - Zi I - ('Zj - 'Zg)P F(q) = 21, Ei Y-j I zi - z; IQ ,  for j > i, (10)  where q is a positive real number. This formula can be equivalently written as  F(q) = yi EI Si; I Zi - _,; IF-i Lr9 I Zi - ti;  where  1, if zi > z; when i < j,  Si; = 1, if zi < z; when i > j, (12) ~0, otherwise.  CHARACTERISTICS OF THE METHODS  In this section we present several numerical characteristics of the various methods, and we discuss the implications of these  characteristics. At the beginning of each subsection we will simply state the numerical characteristics without proof. The  interested reader is referred to Young (1974) for proofs of these characteristics and and a fuller discussion.  Weighted Average Transformation  It can be shown that (a) the vector 2 is a linear combination of a permutation of Z, (b) the zi in a block are related to each  other (and to their mean) by a linear function of the corresponding zi (this function has a zero slope in the case of c = 0  and is an identity function in the case of c = 1), (c) the value of the generalized fit index  Least Squares Weighted Average Rank Image  =1) (C=72) (c`0)  0 4 8 12 0 4 8 12 0 4 8 12 O 0 0  FIG. 1. Three weighted average transformations (including the rank-image and least-squares transformations) as illustrated by  the Roskam data. Squares represent the relation between the model values and data. Arrowheads represent the transformation  (relation between transformed values and data values). A block of transformed values is indicated by a group of arrowheads  connected by a solid line. The transformation is indicated by the dashed and solid lines connecting arrowheads. The vertical  and/or horizontal vectors illustrate the regression interpretation of these transformations.  (Eq. (1)) increases as c decreases (for a fixed blocking), and (d) the vector length and range of 2 increase as c decreases  (for a fixed blocking).  In Fig. 1 we present a geometric interpretation of the weighted average transformation family for c values of 4, 2, and 1  (these figures are based on an example due to Roskam (1968)). The solid squares represent the relationship between the model  and data (plot of Z versus O) and the tips of the vectors represent the monotonic transformation (plot Z versus O). The solid  lines running between several vector tips (horizontal lines in the left figure, ascending lines in the middle figure) in the  two left-hand figures represent the fuction for the transformation within blocks. Note that those transformation elements  which are in a block with only one element coincide with the model elements, and both are represented by a square. Since no  function is defined when there is only one element in a block, no function is shown on the plot. The dotted lines are simply  drawn to aid one seeing the entire plot of Z versus O. We see that all blocks have a size of 1 for the rank image  transformation, thus no functions appear. We also see that the functions are a constant for the least squares transformation  and that the functions for c = 1- are not linear, as might have been suspected. This reflects the fact that the linearity of  zi is relative to cXi , not of .  Finally, we note that the vectors which have been drawn for the least-squares transformation are vertical, horizontal for the  rank-image transformation, and are a bit of both for the intermediate one. These vectors are used to represent the processes  underlying the transformations: the horizontal part of the vector represents the sorting operation and the vertical part the  averaging. It seems appropriate to use this kind of representation since the horizontal part of the vector is used to  represent changes occurring in the ordinal variable (the sorting) and the vertical part represents changes in the cardinal  variable (the averaging). Thus, these diagrams provide an interpretation of the weighted average transformation as a  regression problem in which one variable is cardinal and the other ordinal, an interpretation provided by Kruskal (1971) for  the least-squares transformation. We see that for the least squares transformation the ordinal variable is treated as a  constant (no sorting takes place, or is irrelevant) with the regression being entirely in the units of the cardinal variable.  We also see that at the opposite extreme the rank image transformation may be thought of as an (ordinal) regression where the  cardinal variable is held fixed (no averaging takes place, or is irrelevant) with the regression being entirely at the ordinal  level. The analogy holds for the intermediate transformations which may be thought of as a regression,where both variables are  free to vary, one being treated ordinally (sort), the other cardinally (average).  Running Average Transformation  It can be shown that (a) the vector Z is a linear combination of a permutation of the elements of Z and (b) the value of the  generalized fit index is zero only when adjacent elements of 2 are separated by a constant.  The last point is quite important in interpreting the running average transformation. It indicates that a perfectly monotonic  relationship between of and zi does not necessarily imply perfect fit, since the generalized fit index will have a value of  zero only when an additional criterion is met, namely, that adjacent elements of 2 are separated by a constant. As one  minimizes this index one is tending toward a model space which is more than simply monotonic with the data space: One tends  toward a model space which has a continuous (smooth) monotonic relation with the data space, or, in other words, a model space  which tends to be everywhere equally dense. This is in contrast to the least-squares transformation, for example, which tends  to be monotonic but discontinuous, occasionally producing spaces with clusters and "holes." if we normalized CONTIN by the  total model space variance, then the resulting index could be interpreted as the proportion of variance in the model space  which is due to departure from a smooth transformation, i.e., departure from an equal density space.  A somewhat different interpretation can be made based on the fact that optimizing the generalized fit formula (Eq. (1)) can be  viewed as approaching a linear relationship between the model values Z and the transformation values 2. Thus, with the  leastsquares transformation we may say that we attempt to obtain an ordinal transformation of the data which is as linear as  possible with the model, and when we plot the relation between Z and 2 we see that they tend to be linearly related. If we  select some other definition for Z, Guttman's for example, this Z will also tend to be linearly related to Z, but with more  scatter. In the case of perfect fit both types of 2 will be identical (therefore, linear) to their Z, but there may be large  gaps between some (zi , zi+i) pairs, and little or (for the least squares Z) no difference for many such pairs. For the  running average transformation, on the other hand, optimizing the generalized fit index means approaching a linear relation  between an approximately monotonic transformation of the data and an approximately equal interval transformation of the model.  If we plot these Z and 2 they will be identical and all (zi , zi+i) will be separated by equal intervals, avoiding the gaps  and clusters present with other transformations.  It may be, however, that we are not interested in equal intervals, nor do we wish to have them fluctuate freely. We may wish  that the expected intervals be a function of the model values themselves. For example, we might desire that large model values  be separated by large differences, and small ones by small differences, on the average. This can be easily accomplished by  introducing powers (or functions) of the model values so that, for example, z" and zr will tend to be linear and equal  intervals. Thus, if r > 1, we will have effectively made the intervals between large zi small relative to those between small  zi , and conversely for r < 1. If we plot zi versus zi they will still tend toward linearity, but the intervals will be a  function of the values. Another variant which might be useful presents itself from the clustering literature. When we cluster  objects we often attempt to locate them in such a way that there are many small model vaules (within clusters), many large  model values (between clusters),  and few intermediate model values. Thus, we could propose an index which makes the intervals between intermediate zi larger  than between extreme zi .  Another way of interpreting CONTIN is in terms of the expected relation between the zi and the intergers i from 1 through n.  When we have a perfect solution, or as we tend toward one, then the plot of zi and i will take on a linear shape, whereas with  the more standard transformations the shape will be monotonic but otherwise unpredictable.  Absolute Value Principle  DeLeeuw (1970) points out several interesting special cases of Eq. (11). For q --> 0 the index becomes, in the limit,  equivalent to Kendal's Tau (1962):  F(q --' 0) = m-l(m- + nt+),  where m_ and m+ denote the number of incorrectly and correctly ordered pairs, respectively, providing the familiar  interpretation of F(q -* 0) as being the proportion of pairs which are incorrectly ordered. For q = 1 the index is equivalent  to Guttman's absolute value index. For q = 2 the index can be written as  F(q = 2) = Y Y sij(zi - zi)II Y I (zi - ZY, (13)  which is identical to the coefficient discussed by Johnson (1973), who points out that the index can be interpreted as  representing the proportion of variance in the model values which is ordinally inconsistent with the data. When q -> 00, then  the index is a function of only the largest differences. If we denote the largest differences as  Tm=MaxIz.-z;l, (14) i.i  then  F(q--> oo) = Tm-I(Tm_+ Tm+), (15)  where Tm_ is the number of fm for incorrectly ordered pairs and Tm+ is the number of Tm for correctly ordered pairs. Thus,  this index represents the proportion of the largest differences which are also violations. For many applications the largest  difference Tm will be unique, in which case F(q --* co) becomes a binary variable which has a value of 1 when Tm = fm- (is a  violation) and 0 otherwise. Notice that F(q --* 00) may be interpreted as Kendal's Tau defined on the Tm instead of all m.  RELATIONS BETWEEN METHODS  Johnson (1973) notes that when the absolute value principle is compared to the transformation methods, the "fundamental"  difference is that "no monotonic transformation is required." At first glance this seems to be a very fundamental difference.  The generalized fit index (formula (1)) utilizes the transformation L, whereas the absolute value index (11) does not. This  difference was also noted by Guttman (1968, p. 478), who suggested that there were "two major principles... (a) absolute  value, and (b) transformational," and implied that their major differences lay in the use or lack of use of Z.  While it is true that the presence or absence of a transformation is a major conceptual difference, it is equally true that  algebraically there is no major distinction. That the absolute value methods can be viewed (algebraically) as transformation  methods can be seen in the following developments: The numerator of Eq. (I1)-we are not concerned with the denominator in  these developments-which we denote by A, is  A =II8i;IZi-2';  which can be expanded to  = y Y Sii[Ziq + I Zi -Z; I-'din].  If we define  then it follows that  _ Si;[ziq -y~;]  _ I [y 8i;ZiQ - I Si;y~,  which, due to the nature of 8i; , can be written, when Y 8i; z  A 0, as  A=y [  We can now write the absolute value formula (11) as  F(q) _ [(.Zi7 - ~i Bi;J / (Zi - z;) (16)  where  ~, Si1(zi4 - zi - Zi Iq)/~ Sii  which, in this form, appears to be a method involving an admittedly peculiar transformation, contrary to Johnson's statement  and Guttman's implication. (It will be noted that the value of .6i may occasionally be imaginary in which case an equivalent,  though more cumbersome, formula is available.)  Furthermore, deLeeuw has pointed out (1970) that the absolute value methods can be viewed as involving a least-squares  monotonic transformation defined on the space of differences in model values (not the model values themselves). If we define  tk = zi - zi  for those pairs of (zi , z;) for which j > i (thus k = 1, 2,..., n(n - 1)/2), we can write Eq. (10) as  F(q) - Y (I tk - tkJv/2a Y [t,] (17) k k  which can also be written as a transformation index on the space of differences  where the transformation is  = z[1tkI-i--tkl.  We should note that this transformation yields a value for ik which is zero when the pair of model values is in the wrong  order and which is tk when the model values are correctly ordered. Thus, we can say that ik can be viewed as a least-squares  monotonic transformation defined between the space of actual differences and the space of positive (nonnegative) differences.  Since the ordinal information consists only of whether a difference is positive or negative, and since after transformation  all negative differences become zero and all positive differences remain positive, the transformation is monotonic. Since all  negative differences become zero (the "closest" nonnegative value) and all positive differences are left unchanged, the  transformation is a least squared (or, for that matter, a least q'd) differences transformation between the actual differences  and the positive orthant of the differences space. Thus, we may say that the absolute value method has all the numerical  characteristics possessed by the least-squares transformation, but on the space of differences in model values, not in the  model space itself.  It is perhaps more enlightening to state all the "transformation" principles in transformation-free form, i.e., without using  2. This is particularly easy to do using the generalized fit index. By looking at the definitions of the rank-image (Eq. (2)),  least-squares (3), and weighted average (4) transformations we see that they all define Z as a weighted average:  Zi = y_ 8i.7gy_ Sii , (19)  where the definition of the weights varies from method to method. Thus, we can view the fit index as a "transformation-free"  index  (20)  involving a sum of squared deviations between each model value and some kind of weighted average of certain model values,  where the weighting depends on the relationship between pairs of model values and on the particular method. An alternative way  of writing this formula, namely  y [Y, 8ii(-i - ZI)/y S i,,2 (21) i J 77  is instructive when compared with the numerator of the absolute value formula  = I Y_ 8iAzi - Zj)2,  which involves a weighted sum of squared deviations between certain pairs of model values, the weighting depending on the  relationship between pairs of model values. We can see that even though the transformations and absolute value principles are  very similar, they do differ in such a way that "each principle generates a family of coefficients in its own right, and one  principle cannot be derived from the other" as conjectured by Guttman (1968, p. 478). However, the difference between the  principles lies not in the presence or absence of 2, as Guttman also conjectured (and as Johnson stated), but in other  matters. Although the definition of 8i; differs from method to method, it does not appear as though this is the most  fundamental difference. For example, with Guttman's favorite definition of 8ii, the rank image  definition, we note that the two coefficients are identical, due to the fact that Si; is zero for all j except one for which  it is unity, making  It seems then, that the main difference is conceptual, with the conceptual differences yielding the mundane algebraic  difference of whether one squares a difference before or after summing.  It is also quite simple to write the coefficient of monotonic continuity (Eq. (8)) in a fashion very much like the index  developed for the monotonic methods (20). It can be shown that CONTIN (Eq. (8)) can be written as  where  8i;)]2, i  (22)  1, if j=i-}-1 and ion 8i; = l, if j = i - 1 and i =A 1 0, otherwise,  indicating that the index falls in the family of generalized fit indexes (Eq. (20)) but with a unique definition of St; . We  might note that the fact that the index of monotonic continuity is a member of this family proves that we should not think of  the general index as a coefficient of monotonicity. Whether or not a specific member of the family is a strict coefficient of  monotonicity depends on the definition of 8i; . As we have seen the definition used to obtain the coefficient of monotonic  continuity yields a coefficient which is monotonic only in a convergent sense.  We might also note that it would have been equally simple and compelling to define the index of monotonic continuity as an  index closely related to the absolute value index instead of the "transformation" index. That is, we could define  C* = I Y Sii(zi - .zj)2  using the previous definition of Si; . This is equal to  n-1  C* - Y, (Hi - Zi-1)2 + Zi+1)2, i=2  which, upon simplification and normalization allows us to define an index n-1 n  C - ~, ('2"i - Z,+1)2 Y- (Zi -z) 2, (23)  which parallels the absolute value index but with the definition of 8if used with the running average transformation. It is  also instructive to compare Eq. (23) with previous work involving the notion of continuity. Carroll (1963) and von Neumann  (1941) have investigated an index of continuity to be used when fitting a cardinal model to cardinal data. Their index is  identical with Eq. (23) with the major difference that theirs involves the data space, whereas the author's involves the model  space. Thus, the earlier index represents the departure of the data from continuity. Shepard and Carroll (1966) developed a  more complex index involving both the data and model spaces. Their index may be roughly interpreted as representing the degree  to which a smooth relationship is lacking between the data and model spaces. We note, however, that all this work involves the  cardinal properties of the data space, whereas Eq. (23) and the running average transformation only utilize the ordinal  properties of the data.  TRANSFORMATIONS AS MATRIX OPERATIONS  We have seen that all the transformation methods can also be viewed as nontransformation methods. In this section we show that  all the methods can be expressed in terms of certain matrix operations which are performed on the model space. In particular,  we may rewrite Eq. (19) as  where we treat Z and 2 as column vectors and where the transformation matrix T, which is of order n X n, is defined as  T = A-'WP, (25)  where W (generally) is a block diagonal matrix of weights, P is a permutation matrix (a binary matrix with a single 1 in each  row and column), and where A is a diagonal matrix defined as  A = {diag[WW']}1/2. (26)  Perhaps we should emphasize that Eqs. (24) and (25) are a mathematical statement of a characteristic of the transformation  methods which we mentioned earlier: The transformation space 2 can be thought of as a linear combination A-1W of a permutation  P of the model space Z. That is  where  DESCRIBING ORDINAL DATA WITH CARDINAL MODELS 433  The scalar notation used in Eq. (19) relates to the current matrix notation as follows. If we define a matrix  then an element 8i; of this matrix corresponds to the 8i; in the preceeding parts of this paper. We note that the product of a  permutation matrix times its transpose is an identity matrix, which allows us to write  A = {diag[WW'])1/2  = {diag[WPP'W']}112 = {diag[dd']{112,  which shows that A-1 has diagonal elements which are  n  affil = 1 /~ 7=1  thus  tiff - 1  Y afk 8ii  = a-1 8ii  due to the diagonal nature of A. Then it follows that 1  Y a4i &iizi  = affil ~, Sii'zi  = L, 8i.izi/E 8ii ,  which is identical to Eq. (19).  We note that the generalized fit index (20) can now be expressed as  S = (Z - 2)'(Z - -9)  _ (Z - TZ)'(Z - TZ) =Z'(I-T)'(I-T)Z = Z'(I - A-1WP)'(I - A-'WP) Z. (30)  The matrices P, W and A have the following special characteristics for the various  transformations. For the least-squares transformation, P is an identity matrix, the diagonal elements of A indicate the block  size, and W is a block-diagonal binary matrix. For the rank-image transformation both A and W are identity matrices,  indicating that the rank image is simply a permutation. For the weighted average transformation W is a block-diagonal matrix  with 1's on the diagonal and C's off the diagonal. For the running average transformation, P is an identity matrix, A is a  diagonal matrix with 2's on the diagonal, and W is a binary nonblock diagonal matrix with zero's on the diagonal (except for  the first and last elements, which are one) and 1's on the two adjacent diagonals. We conclude, then, that the various  "transformation" methods can be viewed as attempting to optimize the linearity between the model values and a linear  combination of the very same model values. Stated more simply, these methods try to optimize a linear combination of the model  values.  Finally, we also state Johnson's (1973) pairwise index (Eq. 13), which is the absolute value index with q = 2) in matrix  terms. We use the same definition of Z as above (i.e., it is a column vector) but use a new definition of d and introduce two  design matrices G and H. We define d to be an n2 X n2 diagonal binary matrix with elements defined by Eq. 12 (a 1 indicates  the appropriate pair of model elements is in the wrong order). The design matrices G and H are both n2 X n binary  supermatrices consisting of n submatrices which are each n X n. For G the i'th submatrix is all zeros except the i'th column  which is all ones. The matrix H, on the other hand, consists of submatrices each of which is an identity matrix. These  definitions allow us to state the numerator of the absolute value index, with q -- 2, as  A = Z'(G - H)' d(G - H) Z.  Noting that d is idempotent we may write  A=Z'(U-V)'(U-V)Z,  where U = dG and V = dH are identical to G and H for those rows which correspond to stimulus pairs which are in the wrong  order and have zeros for all elements in those rows which correspond to stimulus pairs which are in the correct order. Thus we  may write  A = Z'S'SZ, (31)  where S = (U - V) will consist of rows which are entirely zero for pairs which are correctly ordered, and rows which are zero  except for a single -}-1 and -1 corresponding to the pair of elements whose order is incorrect. This equation is, then, a very  simple type of linear combination of the model values, indicating that the absolute value approach (with q = 2) attempts to  optimize a linear combination of the model values.  DESCRIBING ORDINAL DATA WITH CARDINAL MODELS 435  CONCLUDING REMARK  Upon delving into the details of the several methods for describing ordinal data with cardinal models, this author's most  enduring impression is the strong similarity between the methods. We have seen that all of the methods can be viewed as though  they optimize some sort of linear combination of the model values. The type of linear combination varies between the methods,  but in general the similarities between methods are more impressive than the differences, particularly in the light of the  quarrels among the developers of some of these methods. It is hoped that this paper has clarified the relations between the  various methods as well as some of the details of the methods themselves. Perhaps, if this paper can remove some of the  mystery surrounding methods which seem to magically "convert" ordinal information into cardinal information, we may begin to  better understand not only the characteristics but also the merits of each method. It is the opinion of this author that no  single method is superior to all other methods (as has already been asserted by several investigators about several methods),  but that one method is most appropriate in certain types of empirical situations and another in other situations. Finally, it  is hoped that the common framework within which each of the methods has been discussed may not only reduce the confusion  surrounding these methods, but point the way toward the development of new ways for describing ordinal data with cardinal  models.  REFERENCES  AYER, M., BRUNK, H. D., EWING, G. M., REID, W. T., & SILVERMAN, E. An empirical distribution function for sampling with  incomplete information. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 1954, 25, 724-735.  BARLOW, R. E., & BRUNK, H. D. The isotonic regression problem and its dual. Journal of the American Statistical Association,  1972, 67, 140-147.  CARROLL, J. D. Functional learning: The learning of continuous functional mappings relating stimulus and response continua.  Educational Testing Service Research Bulletin, RB-63-26, Princeton, N. J., 1963.  COOMBS, C. A theory of data. New York: Wiley, 1964.  DELEEUW, J. The positive orthant method for nonmetric multidimensional scaling. Research Note RN 001-70, Department of Data  Theory, University of Leiden, The Netherlands, 1970. DELEEUW, J. Canonical analysis of categorical data. Doctoral  dissertation, The University of Leiden, The Netherlands, 1973.  DELEEUW, J., YOUNG, F. W., & TAKANE, Y. Additive structure in qualitative data: The alternating least squares method,  Psychometric Laboratory Report #139, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, N.C., 1975.  GLEASON, T. C. Multidimensional scaling of sociometric data. Research Center for Group Dynamics, Institute for Social  Research, University of Michigan, 1969.  GUTTMAN, L. A general nonmetric technique for finding the smallest coordinate space for a configuration of points.  Psychometrika, 1968, 33, 469-506.  GUTTMAN, L. Smallest space analysis by the absolute value principle. Paper presented at the symposium on "Theory and practice  of measurement" at the XIXth International Congress of Psychology, London, 1969.  HARDY, G. H., LITTLEWOOD, J. E., & POLYA, G. Inequalities. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1934.  JOHNSON, R. M. Pairwise nonmetric multidimensional scaling. Psychometrika, 1973, 38, 11-18. KENDALL, M. G. Rank correlation  methods. London: Griffin, 1962.  KRANTZ, D. H., LUCE, R. D., SUPPES, P., & TvERSKY, A. Foundations of measurement, Vol. I. New York: Academic Press, 1971.  KRUSKAL, J. B. Nonmetric multidimensional scaling: A numerical method. Psychometrika, 1964, 29, 115-130.  KRUSKAL, J. B. Analysis of factorial experiments by estimating monotone transformations of the data. The Journal of the Royal  Statistical Society, 1965, 27, 251-263.  KRUSKAL, J. B. Monotone regression: Continuity and differentiability properties. Psychometrika, 1971, 36, 57-62.  KRUSKAL, J. B., & SHEPARD, R. N. A nonmetric variety of linear factor analysis. Psychometrika, 1974,39,123-157.  LINGOES, J. C. The Guttman-Lingoes nonmetric program series. Ann Arbor: Mathesis Press, 1973. ROSKADI, E. E. Metric analysis  of ordinal data. Doctoral dissertation. The University of Leiden, The Netherlands, 1968.  ROSKAM, E. E. The method of triads for nonmetric multidimensional scaling. Psychology, 1970, 25, 404-417.  SHEPARD, R. N. The analysis of proximities: Multidimensional scaling with an unknown distance. I and II. Psychometrika, 1962,  27, 125-140, 219-246.  SHEPARD, R. N. Metric structures in ordinal data. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1966, 3, 287-315.  SHEPARD, R. N., & CARROLL, J. D. Parametric representation of nonlinear data structures. In P. R. Krishnaiah (Ed.)  Multivariate analysis. New York: Academic Press, 1966.  TUKEY, J. W. Exploratory data analysis (Limited preliminary edition). Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley, 1971.  VON NEUMANN, J. Distribution of the ratio of the mean square successive difference to the variance. Annals of Mathematical  Statistics, 1941, 12, 366-395.  WAINER, H. & THISSEN, D. Multivariate semi-metric smoothing in a problem of multiple prediction. Paper presented to the  Psychometric Society, March 1974, Stanford, Calif. YATES, A. Nonmetric individual-differences multidimensional scaling with  balanced least squares monotone regression. Paper presented to the Psychometric Society, March 1972, Princeton, N. J.  YOUNG, F. W. A model for polynomial conjoint analysis algorithms. In R. N. Shepard, A. K. Romney, and S. Nerlove (Eds.)  Multidimensional scaling: Theory and applications in the behavioral sciences. New York: Academic Press, 1972.  YOUNG, F. W. The variable monotonic transformation. Paper presented to the Psychometric Society, March 1973, Chicago, Ill.  YOUNG, F. W. On describing ordinal data with a cardinal model. Psychometric Laboratory Report 8.`130, University of North  Carolina, Chapel Hill, 1974.