10.1016/0022-2496(76)90015-8
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 14, 72-90 (1976)  Sufficient Conditions for the Uniqueness of Parameter Estimates from Binary-Response Data'  RENWICK E. CURRY  Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 01239  The procedure of fitting parameterized models to experimental data is that of extremalizing a statistically meaningful  scalar-valued vector function. The existence of multiple local extrema can greatly complicate the search for the global  solution. Sufficient conditions for uniqueness of the parameter estimates are usually determined from the convexity of the  criterion surface: the convexity properties are determined by the statistical criterion, the structure of the model, the  underlying distribution, and the observations (data). In this paper, we seek the combinations of criteria, models, and  distributions which yield sufficient conditions for unique parameter estimates regardless of the observed binary-response data  values.  Under mild sufficient conditions usually satisfied in practice, the Maximum Likelihood, Minimum Chi Square, and Minimum  Transform Chi Square criteria are convex functions when the parameters appear linearly. These results are applied to  equalvariance models of signal detection/recognition, sequential response, and additive learning models with implications on  the experimental design. Unequal-variance models and models of discrete-sensory processing (rectilinear ROC curves) lead to  nonconvex criteria for some observations (saddlepoints are demonstrated). Although convexity cannot be assured for these  cases, the results suggest an efficient search procedure in a lower dimensional subspace to find global extrema. The extension  of these results to more than two response levels is discussed.  The steps generally followed in the development of a mathematical model are those of conceptualization, data collection,  parameter estimation, and model validation, although not necessarily in that order. In this paper, we are concerned with the  parameter estimation phase, a process that can be viewed as one of minimizing (or maximizing) a statistically relevant scalar  function with respect to a vector of unknown parameters (see, for example, Kendall & Stuart, 1967; Cramer, 1945; Rao, 1973).  There are major references devoted to parameter optimization having both a theoretical (e.g., Hadley, 1964; Fiaccio &  McCormick, 1968) and a computational slant (Wilde, 1964). Relevant works on parameter estimation for models related to  Thurstonian  1 This research was supported by NASA Grant NGR 22-009-733 from the Man-Machine Integration Branch, NASA Ames Research Center.  The author wishes to thank the reviewers for their helpful comments.  Copyright C 1976 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  72  BINARY-RESPONSE DATA 73  scaling and the Theory of Signal Detection (TSD) have stressed the Maximum Likelihood criterion for determining parameters  (Dorfman & Alf, 1968; Schonemann & Tucker, 1967; Ogilvie & Creelman, 1968; Grey & Morgan, 1972). Methods utilizing unit  deviates instead of probabilities, the so-called Minimum Normit Chi Square, Minimum Logit Chi Sqyare (or, more generally,  Minimum Transform Chi Square) have also been considered (Abrahamson & Levitt, 1969; Bock & Jones, 1968; and Grey & Morgan,  1972).  This paper goes beyond the considerations of the specific criteria and algorithms to examine the uniqueness of the resulting  parameter estimates. Parameter values at a local, but not global extremum are misleading and may vitiate conclusions and  further research efforts. The investigator, with many other things on his mind, would like to be assured that his parameter  estimates, regardless of the algorithm used, are in fact those which yield the global extremum of the criterion function.  Dorfman (1973) has considered the uniqueness question in an excellent paper; his analysis pertained to Maximum Likelihood  estimates for parameters of equal-variance models utilizing the Gaussian and logistic forms for the underlying distributions.  Otherwise, the "reasonableness" of the parameter estimates has seemed to be the primary criterion for judging whether or not a  global extremum had been obtained. There is a theoretical result which does provide some guidance: as the number of  measurements approaches infinity, the likelihood function has a unique maximum under fairly weak conditions (Kendall & Stuart,  1967). This is somewhat misleading, for it is only true for a likelihood function (model) which is capable of describing the  process generating the observations. Another liability in the use of this result is that it is difficult, if not impossible,  to determine just how many observations are required to ensure a unique maximum.  The topological properties of the criterion surface depend on four factors: the statistical criterion (e.g., Maximum  Likelihood); the structure of the model; the underlying distribution; and the observations (experimental data). It is our  objective to find by convexity arguments those conditions which lead to unique estimates regardless of the observed data. Thus  no matter how poorly the model ultimately fits the experimental data, we can be assured that the resulting parameter estimates  are those of the global extremum-no false summits exist to confuse the search procedure-and algorithms with second order  convergence properties should work well because of the convexity of the criterion surface.  The analysis presented here considers in detail the uniqueness of parameter estimates from binary response data for the  estimation criteria  Maximum Likelihood, Minimum Chi Square, Minimum Transform Chi Square, Minimum Modified Chi Square;  74 RENWICK E. CURRY  the classes of models  Linear in Parameters (e.g., Equal-Variance Models), Multiplicative Parameters (Unequal-Variance Models), Rectilinear ROC  (Discrete Sensory Models);  and the underlying distributions  Gaussian, Logistic, Arc Sine, Uniform.  For the possible combinations of criteria, models, and distributions outlined above, conditions for convexity or strict  convexity (hence uniqueness of estimates) are limited to those models in which the parameters appear linearly. These findings  extend the results of Dorfman (1973) to other criteria and distributions. The sufficient conditions are used to define the  protocol requirements of TSD experiments with multiple signal strengths and experiments in which sequential response behavior  is of interest. For the other models (unequal-variance, rectilinear ROC) it is shown that, in fact, there exist at least some  observations (data) which lead to a nonconvex criterion function. Although the resulting parameter estimates may still be  unique for these conditions, it is virtually impossible to obtain an analytical proof without convexity. In these cases,  however, it is shown that the criterion function is convex in a subspace of the parameter space, and this leads to an  efficient method to explore the global properties of the criterion surface. In the closing discussion, we consider the  extension to more than two responses (successive categories and rating scales) and the relative merits of various estimation  criteria.  SUFFICIENT CONDITIONS FOR CONVEXITY  In this section, we derive sufficient conditions for convexity of the criterion surface using binary response data for several  different estimators. These results will be cast in the form usually encountered in behavioral models, but more general  results (including time-varying distributions) have been obtained by the author. We define a stimulus condition to be a set of  experimental conditions under which a binary response is made. Factors which typically determine the stimulus condition are  the stimulus level, payoff matrix, criterion instructions, a priori probability of signal presentation, and, for learning  models, the sequence number of the stimulus. The effects of different stimulus conditions are summarized by parameters in the  response model, e.g., means, standard deviations, and criterion levels in sensory continuum  BINARY-RESPONSE DATA 75  models. Let the parameter 0 be a point in a convex subset of 1-dimensional Euclidean space; denote by pi(0) (and qi(0) = 1 -  pi(0)) the theoretical probabilities of the observed data under the ith stimulus condition; let ri0 and ril denote the number  of "0" and "1" responses; and further, let  ri = ri0 + ril ,  Yi = rio/ri = 1 - qi,  where fii and qi are the observed probabilities of responding "0" and "1."  Parameter Estimation Criteria  There are many possible criteria that might be used to estimate the model parameters. The ones considered here are in the  class of BAN (Best Asymptotically Normal) estimators (Rao, 1973). Expressions for the estimation criteria mentioned above may  be written (assuming a total of m stimulus conditions)  Maximum Likelihood:  m 1 (2)  JML = I I lik   i=1 k=0   lio - ripi In pi(0), (3)  lil = rigi In qi(0),   Minimum Chi Square:   m   JMcs = Xi2'   i=1   - -   2 (rio ripi(B))2 (ril rigi(e))2 (5)  __ +   Xa   ripi(0) rigi(0) '   pit qi-   = ri -   (6)  pi(B) +   qi(0) 1 >,   2   =X2O+X2 il-ri f   Minimum Modified Chi Square:   m 1 (7)  IMMCs = Y' E, Xik   i=1 k=0   -   .2 (pi pi(B))2   Xio = ri   pi r   - (g)  ,2 (qi gi(0))2   Xil = ri .   gi   76 RENWICK E. CURRY  Other BAN estimators were examined (Hellinger Distance, Kullback-Liebler Separator, and Haldane's Discrepancy (Rao, 1973)),  but offered no advantages over the more common estimators above in establishing convexity conditions.  In the remainder of this paper, we shall restrict ourselves to those probability distributions of a location-scale family,  i.e., where the value of pi (or qi) is specified by the argument of a cumulative distribution function which in turn is a  function of the parameters. Thus  No) = P(ZJ,  Zi = hi(9),  where P(-) is the theoretical distribution function and hi(-) is the theoretical description of the ith argument in terms of  the parameters. This allows us to consider another estimator; let 21 represent the unit deviate (argument) corresponding to  the observed probability pi  2i = P-1(pi).  (10)  The Minimum Transform Chi Square criterion function is Minimum Transform Chi Square:  m  JMTCS = wiei2, (I1) i=1  hi(B), wi > 0. (12)  The estimator minimizing this weighted least-squares criterion will be a BAN estimate if the weights are chosen so that 1/wi  is an unbiased estimate of the variance of Gi (Berkson, 1956), e.g.,  lfwi = fi42/ri[P'(2)]2  (13)  where P = dP/dz. Importantly, it should be noted that the weights depend on the observations and not the parameters 6.  The contributions of the Modified Chi Square and Transform Chi Square criterion functions are not defined if one of the  observed probabilities (pi , 4i) is zero. If this occurs, it is understood in the remainder that 1'i and 4i are suitably  defined to avoid singularities, e.g., replacing the zero observation by the median value 1/(2ri) (Bock and Jones, 1968).  The convexity of the contributing terms will be determined from the Hessian matrix. Let 17(hi(9)) represent either P(hi(e)) or  Q(hi(B)), iri either pi or 4i , and 0 the gradient with respect to 6; the Hessian matrices become  BINARY-RESPONSE DATA 77  Maximum Likelihood:  02(-Ilk) _ (ri-ri/ni2)(n8" - nini ) phi VhiT - riori(IIi /ni) 02hi  (14)  Minimum Chi Square:  02(X2) = (riFi2IIIis)(2IIi2 - IIil7i) Vhj vhir - riir 2(IIi /l7i2) V2 hi , Minimum Modified Chi Square:  (15)  02(Xik) = (2ri/Tri)[~i2 -I-- (`_i -Tri) IliI Vhj Ohir -}- (2ri/iTj)(I7j - iri) 17i' 02 hi,  (16)  Minimum Transform Chi Square:  02(wiei2) = 2wiVh,Oh,T - 2wi(Zi - hi)02hi. (17)  Linear Parameters  A special and important case occurs when the unit deviates are a linear combination of the parameters, viz.  Zi = hi(B) = h,T0' (18)  where hi is an l-vector of sensitivity coefficients for the ith stimulus condition, so that  vhi(0) = hi , v2hi = 0. (19)  We now have the following.  I. If the unit deviates are a linear function of the parameter for each stimulus condition (Zi = h,TO) then for 0 < 17 = P, Q  < 1, the criterion functions are convex for all data values if  (a) II'2 -1717" > 0, negative likelihood function;  (b) 217'2 - IIII" > 0, chi square function;  (c) 17'2 ~- (IT - ff" > 0, modified chi square function;  (d) 1 Zi 1 < oo, transform chi square function.  II. If the conditions in I hold, the criterion functions are strictly convex if and only  if {hi}, the matrix of coefficients, is of full rank (rank l).  The first result follows from the fact that when Conditions I are true, the Hessian Matrix for each of the contributing terms  is of the form  V2( )ik = khih,T' (20)  78 RENWICK E. CURRY  with aik > 0. These matrices admit the following quadratic form for an arbitrary vector s =A 0,  STV2( )iks = aik(slhi)2 ~ 0, (21)  thus proving convexity of each contributing term. The convexity of the criterion functions follow because sums of convex  functions are convex (Hadley, 1964). Strict convexity follows from Condition I if and only if {hi} is of full rank, since if  {hi} is of full rank, no s can be orthogonal to every hi , so at least one quadratic form in the criterion function will be  greater than zero, hence strict convexity of the criterion function; conversely, if the criterion function is strictly convex  there is no s orthogonal to every hi , implying that {hi} is of full rank.  Remarks (i). If a probability distribution results in a concave likelihood function (Condition I a), it will also have a  convex chi square function since Condition I(a) implies I (b). The converse is not necessarily true.  Remarks (ii). A slightly longer proof of Conditions I(a) and II(a) is contained in Dorfman (1973), where the antecedent  conditions do not restrict the results to likelihood functions of additive learning models.  Remarks (iii). There are many strong statements concerning the minimization of convex functions defined on a convex set which  are treated in detail in, for example, Hadley (1964) and Fiaccio and McCormick (1968), and summarized in the present context  by Dorfman (1973). Generally speaking, Condition I is sufficient to ensure that any local minimum is also a global minimum  (although the parameters may not be unique), and Condition II is sufficient to ensure that the local (therefore global)  minimum over a convex set is assumed at a unique point.  Underlying Distributions  Condition I is determined by the characteristics of the underlying distribution, and Condition II by the model structure and  the experimental protocol. Before exploring the latter point in the next section, it should be mentioned that the  all-important normal and logistic distributions satisfy Condition I(a) (Dorfman, 1973) and by virtue of the Remarks above,  they also satisfy Condition I(b). They will satisfy Condition I(d) if any observed probabilities of zero or one are suitable  redefined. They do not satisfy Condition I(c) for the Modified Chi Square criterion function, in general, because II - it may  be either positive or negative.  Note that the uniform distribution defined on [0, 1] satisfies all Conditions I since 17' = 1 and 17" = 0. This distribution,  while of minimal use in conjunction with discriminal dispersion models, will be useful when considering models of the form  pi(e) = Zi = hi'B. (22)  BINARY-RESPONSE DATA 79  The arcsine distribution is also of interest and has been used to describe the underlying distribution in discriminal  dispersion models (see, for example, Bock & Jones, 1968). For this distribution  P(Z) = 2(1 -}- sin Z), -7r/2 G Z <7T/2, (23)  P'(Z) = z cos Z, (24)  P"(Z) = - z sin Z,   from which it follows that   P'2 - PP" = j(1 + sin Z) _ JP,   (25)  Q12 - QQ" = 1(1 - sin Z) = IQ.   Thus we see that this distribution, like the normal and logistic distributions, satisfies Conditions I(a), I(b), and I(d), but  not Condition I(c).  Summary  In this section, we considered the general problem of finding sufficient conditions for the uniqueness of parameter estimates  for binary response data. The most commonly used criteria (and those leading to sufficient conditions) are the Maximum  Likelihood, Minimum Chi Square, Minimum Modified Chi Square, and Minimum Transform Chi Square. Sufficient conditions for  convexity of these criteria were found when the argument of the theoretical distribution function is a linear combination of  the parameters. Application of these results to the Gaussian, logistic, uniform, and arcsine distributions provides those  combinations of criteria and distributions leading to convex criterion functions (and unique parameter estimates, if {hi} is  of full rank). These results are summarized in Table 1.  TABLE 1  Combinations of Estimation Criteria and Theoretical Distributions Resulting in Convex (or Concave) Criterion Functions  Independent of the Observations (Parameters Appearing Linearly)    Minimum Minimum  Maximum Minimum modified transform  likelihood chi square chi square chi square  Gaussian Concave Convex  Convex  Logistic Concave Convex a Convex  Uniform Concave Convex Convex Convex  Arcsine Concave Convex a Convex  a Not convex for some observations and parameters.  48o/i4/I-6  80  RENWICK E. CURRY  APPLICATION TO EQUAL VARIANCE MODELS  In this section we examine several equal-variance behavioral models to determine the applicability of the main result above;  i.e., what is the matrix {hi} and is it of full rank? Although an exhaustive treatment of experimental designs is not feasible  here, the results include many situations encountered in practice and can be used as a guide to evaluate any particular case.  Signal Detection/Recognition  In evaluating the parameters of signal detection/recognition models, the stimulus condition is specified by the stimulus level  and the criterion level (as determined by instructions, payoffs, a priori signal probabilities, etc.). We here order the  stimulus conditions by the two indices for stimulus level (i = 1, 2,..., m) and criterion level (j = 1, 2,..., n). Assuming  the dispersion parameter to be the same under all stimulus conditions, we assign it the value 1 so that the unit deviate for  the ijth stimulus condition becomes  (26)  where c; is the jth criterion level, and ILi is the mean of the underlying distribution when the ith stimulus is presented.  If we consider the parameter vector to be the (n + m) variables c and I., it will be found that the rank of {hi;} is (n -}- m  - 1), reflecting the well-known fact that the origin of the coordinate system is not unique (we have already fixed the scale  by letting a = 1). Let us fix the origin by setting /A, = 0. Now the parameter vector is  T  - (Cl , C2 ,.) Cn ; N'2 , f1'9 ,..., (-1'm  and the kth element of hi; is  (hii)k = 8Jk ,  = 8rk - 8i+n-l.k ,  i=1; j=1,2,...,n  i = 2, 3,..., m; j = 1, 2, ..., m, (27)  and the (n -}- m - 1) X (mn) matrix {hi;} is  m  In I In I  {hi3} _ -__I--_ _--------- ...  0 -u1 , -u1 ,..., -u1  In ----------------- , (28) -nm-l , -um-1 ,..., - um_1  where In is an n X n unit matrix and uD is an (m - 1) vector of zeroes with one in  element p. This matrix is of full rank, and can be seen by taking the first n columns  BINARY-RESPONSE DATA 81  and the first column from the remaining m - 1 partitions, the result being a triangular matrix with determinant If a  particular stimulus condition is not contained in the data to be analyzed, then the corresponding term will contribute nothing  to the criterion function and the hij will be absent from (28). Thus we may state the conditions under which the matrix {h;}  will have full rank.  The matrix of sensitivity vectors will be of full rank if and only if each criterion level and each stimulus level occur at  least once.  The sufficient part is proved by noting that if either a criterion level or stimulus level does not occur, the corresponding  row of the submatrix will contain only zeroes so that the rank of {ha;} is less than (n + m - 1). The necessary part follows  from the fact that all sets of n + m - 1 or more columns will have rank less than n + m - 1 only if a row contains zeroes  which occurs only when a criterion level or stimulus level is missing.  Sequential Statistics  The sequential aspects of decision making in signal detection and recognition have been treated by several authors (Tanner,  Rauk, & Atkinson, 1970; Kinchla, 1966; Carterette, Friedman, & Wyman, 1966). We consider here the Memory Recognition Model  (Tanner et al., 1970) which can be interpreted as though the observer and stimulus generator are a four-state Markov chain,  the states consisting of the four combinations of stimulus-response on any one trial {R4, S; ; i, j = 0, 1}. Of the 16  state-transition probabilities only 8 are independent, and we consider here the transition to the response "1."  P(RCS; I RjSk) = P(R L I S;RjSk) P(Si I RIS,)  = P(Rj I SjRjSk) P(Si). (29)  The last step results when the stimulus is chosen independently of previous stimuli or responses.  Without feedback, the Memory Recognition model can be shown to be equivalent to the following eight expressions  where  P(Ri I SiRjSk) = f(Wi - t; - Sk)> i, j, k = 0, 1, (30)  80,81 wo=0,Nz=d' ti =y+(1-y) to = Y(1 - a)  threshold parameters,  difference in means of stimulus distributions, levels representing the memory trace of the last response,  adaptation parameter,  a priori probability of stimulus S,, normal cumulative distribution function.  82 RENWICK E. CURRY  Under ideal feedback, the criterion level should depend on the last stimulus, not the last response, which implies  P(RI I SiRjSk) = O(FLi - ti - Sj). (31)  Tanner et al. note at the outset that this hypothesis does not agree with the observations and they have postulated a model  based on a linear combination of (30) and (31), with the relative weighting as an additional parameter of their model (a form  which does not satisfy the sufficient conditions outlined above). Their data would appear to be fit equally well by an unequal  variance model to be discussed later.  With the a priori stimulus probability V known, the parameters of the model become  BT = (d', a, So , Si)  and the corresponding matrix of sensitivity coefficients is  0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1  lhi.7kl = Y Y -(1 - Y) -(1 - Y) Y Y -(1 - Y) -(1 - Y)  -1 -1 -1 -1 0 0 0 0  0 0 0 0 -1 -1 -1 -1  (32)  ijk = 000 100 010 110 001 101 011 111  This matrix is of rank 4 (e.g., columns (1, 2, 3, 5)), and although all eight stimulus conditions will appear at least once in  the usual experimental situation, thereby assuring full rank of (32), it is of interest here to specify the conditions  required for full rank.  A submatrix of columns {hi;,} will be less than full rank if and only if the occurrence of one condition (Si or R; or Sk)  within the submatrix determines the occurrence of any other condition within the submatrix.  This will happen, for example whenever i = k, i ,~ k, i etc. To prove this, we note that the columns may be written as  hi k = (i, Y -j, k - 1, -k), i, j, k = 0, 1.  If one condition determines another, there is at least one linear constraint among the subscripts, and hence among the columns  within the submatrix so that its rank will be less than 4. Conversely, if the rank is less than 4, there is a linear  constraint among columns within the submatrix, which is equivalent to one condition being determined by another.  Note that the use of the ideal-feedback model alone would result in a matrix of rank less than 4 since k = j.  BINARY-RESPONSE DATA 83  Additive Learning Models  The application of the results to additive learning models is treated in detail by Dorfman (1973), where necessary and  sufficient conditions for the full rank of {hi} are developed. We mention additive learning models here to emphasize that the  sufficient conditions for uniqueness are applicable to the Minimum Chi Square estimator as well as the Maximum Likelihood  estimator. The Minimum Transform Chi Square estimator is not well suited for additive learning models in single trial  applications because the binomial distributions have only one observation each and it becomes difficult to specify fi and L.  UNEQUAL VARIANCE MODELS  Although many of the models are effective in describing the data under the equalvariance assumption, there are many situations  (see Green & Swets, 1966) in which unequal variances are required. In this case, the sufficient conditions for convexity  derived above are not satisfied because the parameters appear in product rather than linear form. For example, the typical  expression for the unit deviate for stimulus level i and criterion level j is (e.g., Bock & Jones, 1968)  Zij = hij(B) = (ca - pi)1ai = bic? - ai .  (33)  The proof of (strict) convexity relied on the convexity of each of the terms comprising the criterion function. With the  parameters appearing in product form, we have the following for 8'' = (c, a, b).  bi  Vhi; _ -1 , (34) c;  (bi2 -bi bic;  Ohi; ~h _ -bi 1 -c; , (35) bic; -c; c  0 0 1  02hi; = 0 0 0 .  (36)  (1 0 0  The Hessian matrix for each of the terms in the criterion function ((14), (15), (17)) now takes the form  v2( ) = y[ohohT - 7702h]  b2 -b be -  = y -b 1 -c . (38)  (bc - 77 -c c2 )  84 RENWICK E. CURRY  If Conditions I are satisfied, then y > 0, but q may be of either sign. This matrix will be positive definite if and only if  the determinants of the leading principal minors are positive. For this Hessian matrix, those determinants are b2 > 0, b2 - b2  = 0, and -,q2 G 0, hence the matrix is indefinite (unless q = 0). It follows that the criterion function cannot be convex for  all observations since there are data values for which the contributions of all but one term are vanishingly small with the  result that the Hessian matrix of the criterion function is indefinite.  When the variance ratios {bi} are treated as constants, the criterion surfaces are convex in the remaining parameters, thus  ensuring a unique maximum for each value of bi. Plotting the minimum (or maximum) criterion function will reveal the global  properties of the criterion surface in a space of reduced dimension. The process is not unlike facing a ridge of mountains  from the side with the (scalar) b axis running to the right, the other parameters (e.g., c; , aa) straight ahead. We know that  there is only one ridge in front of us (a unique maximum for a given b), but we do not know whether the ridge line itself has  more than one stationary point.  FIG. 1. Maximum log likelihood function and optimal parameters versus standard deviation ratio: observed probabilities equal  to asymptotic values.  BINARY-RESPONSE DATA 85  As a specific example, consider the unequal-variance signal detection/recognition model for which the log likelihood function  is proportional to  2 2  r(B) = E E rii.0 In P(Zif) + rii.1 In[l - P(Zil)] , (40) i=1 ;=1  where ri;,k is the number of "k" responses for stimulus level i and criterion level j; the unit deviates are  ZQ; = bic; - ai. (41)  To remove the origin and scale ambiguities, we arbitrarily assign b1 = 1, a1 = 0. The likelihood function defined by ((40),  (41)) was explored for nominal parameter values of a2 = 0.5, b2 = 1, c1 = 0, c2 = 0.5, with different values of ri;.k. Both  the maximum value of the log function and the optimum parameter estimates are shown in Figs. 1 and 2 for the given value of  b2. Figure 1 is drawn for values of risk corresponding to the asymptotic values of the true parameters; the (unique) maximum  FIG. 2. Maximum log likelihood function and optimal parameters versus standard deviation ratio; observed probabilities not  equal to asymptotic values.  86  RENWICK E. CURRY  value occurs in the allowable range (b > 0) at b = 1, as expected. There is also a saddle point outside the allowable range (b  = -1) so that the surface is not convex throughout the parameter space. In Fig. 2, the responses for the first stimulus level,  second criterion level have been altered, moving the point to the right of the main diagonal in the P(Hit)-P(False Alarm)  plane; this produces a saddle point at b = 2 and a (unique) maximum at b = -0.5. These simple examples are graphic proof that  convexity of the criterion surfaces with unequal variances models does not always exist for all data values.  MODELS LEADING To RECTILINEAR ROCS  The class of threshold models based on discrete rather than continuous sensory processes lead to a prediction of rectilinear  Receiver-Operating-Characteristics (ROC) or isosensitivity curves in the P(Hit)-P(False Alarm) plane (Luce, 1962; Krantz,  1969). The ensemble performance of a rectilinear ROC with s limbs may be written  s   P(Hit) = po + Y dpjS(c - z), (42)  i=1   s   P(False Alarm) = qo -}- Y dgiS(c - i),   i=1   with the constraints   s (43)  po + y, dpi = qo + y dqr = 1, dpi , dqi i 0   where po , dpi , qo and dqi are the parameters describing the rectilinear form of the ROC curve; c is the criterion level (0 <  c < s); and S(-) is a saturation function  S(x) = 0, x < 0,  =x, 0 X<l,  =1, x~l.  The convexity of the entire criterion function or the individual contributing terms cannot be established with the Hessian  matrices because the second derivative of S(-) is not defined. However, it can be shown that there are parameter values for  which the contributing terms are not convex; e.g., let  0 < po < 1, 41 = 01 0 < dp2 ,  BINARY-RESPONSE DATA 87  with c defined on the closed interval [0, 2]. Because the value of In P(Hit) does not change in the interval 0 < c < 1 it is  obvious that the straight line joining In p, and ln(po + dpz) lies above In P(Hit) in that interval; thus In P is not concave.  A similar argument shows that 1 /P (with contributes to the chi square criterion function) is not convex. Because there are  observations for which the contribution of the other terms can be made vanishingly small, it follows that the likelihood  function is not concave and the chi square function is not convex for all observations and parameter values.  DISCUSSION  The most positive results regarding sufficient conditions for convexity independent of the binary responses were found for  those models in which the arguments of the theoretical distributions are a linear function of the parameters. As summarized in  Table 1, we found that with suitable {hi} unique estimates are produced by any combination of the Maximum Likelihood, Minimum  Chi Square, and Minimum Transform Chi Square criteria in conjunction with the Gaussian, logistic, uniform, and arcsine  distributions. Of these distributions, only the uniform will produce a convex Minimum Modified Chi Square criterion function  for all possible observations. There are other criteria (e.g., Haldane's Discrepancy) and distributions (e.g., Student's t)  for which convexity either cannot be established or for which the conditions are so strong as to make the results of no  practical importance (although not all combinations of criterion-distributions have been explored).  Convexity is difficult to establish for models in which the arguments of the distribution function contain parameters in  product form. Unequal-variance models and discrete-sensory process models (rectilinear ROC) are two models of this type and  two models for which sufficient conditions would be most valuable. However, we have shown that there are some observations and  parameter values for which the criterion functions are not convex. This does not deny that there may be a unique optimum  satisfying the Kuhn-Tucker conditions of optimality, but the existence of a unique optimum is virtually impossible to prove  There are exceptions to this, of course and they usually occur when there are no degrees of freedom in the estimation  procedure and an analytical or graphical solution is possible. For example, a two-limbed rectilinear ROC curve with the end  points specified has a unique solution which fits four points (two end points, two P(Hit)P(False Alarm) points) unless three  or more points are colinear. Similarly, it can be shown that a signal detection experiment consisting of two signal levels and  two criterion levels will uniquely determine the parameters a2 , b2 , cl , c2 (with al - 0, bl - 1) if and only if the  observed P(Hit)-P(False Alarm) values do not lie on the same isobias (criterion) curve.  48o/r4/r-7  88  RENWICK E. CURRY  Although convexity cannot be shown when the parameters appear in product form, the results with linear parameters suggest an  efficient procedure for obtaining the global extremum. If one set of the parameters in the product terms is considered a known  constant, then the arguments of the distribution function become linear combinations of the remaining parameters. The  criterion function is convex in that subspace, and one is assured of obtaining unique values of the remaining free parameters  which extremalize the criterion function. The properties of the criterion function can be explored in the subspace of  "constant" parameters. Figs 1 and 2 are an example of this approach: of the four parameters (c, , c2 , a2 , b2), three are  eliminated by maximizing the likelihood function with b2 fixed, reducing the dimension of the parameter space from four to  one. Examination of the likelihood function in this subspace reveals saddle points, extrema outside the allowable range, etc.  That this technique may be applied to unequal-variance models is obvious; the "constant" parameters should be either {bi} or  {c;}, whichever is fewer in number. For the models leading to rectilinear ROC curves, the "constant" parameters must be  restricted to {c;} since it was shown that the criterion functions are not always convex functions of the criterion levels c;  . With {c;} as constants, however, the theoretical probabilities are of the form 172 = h,TB, and we may let Zi = 17i where Zi  is the unit deviate of a uniform distribution. Thus Conditions I (and perhaps II) will apply to the rectilinear models when  the criterion levels are considered known constants.  Only binary response data have been considered to this point. The extension to more than two responses (rating scales or  successive categories) is complicated by the fact that the theoretical probability of response j conditioned on stimulus i is  of the form  P(Ri I sj) = P(Zi.j+,) - P(Zi.?)  where Zi.;+I and Z2.; are the unit deviates separating responses R;+, , R; and R; , R;_1 , respectively. Sufficient conditions  for the uniqueness of Maximum Likelihood and Minimum Chi Square estimates are difficult if not impossible to establish. To our  knowledge, there are neither sufficient conditions for convexity nor counterexamples against convexity when the arguments of  the distribution function are linear functions of the parameters. This is not the case for the Minimum Transform Chi Square  method, for when the parameters appear linearly the criterion function becomes  m  g  I1vtTCS = ~ (Li - Hie)T Wi(Gi - Hie), i=1  (45)  where, for n response levels, Gi is the (n - 1)-vector of unit deviates corresponding to the observed cumulative probabilities  for stimulus condition i, 9 is the 1-vector of parameters, Hi is the (n - 1) X l matrix of sensitivity coefficients, and Wi is  a (semi) positive definite weighting matrix derived from the observed probabilities (Bock &  BINARY-RESPONSE DATA  89  Jones, 1968). Because of the restrictions on Wi, the criterion function is convex; it will be strictly convex if and only if  m  ~, HiTWtH. > 0. (46) i=1  When the parameters appear in product form, the procedure of considering some parameters as constants may be applied equally  well when there are more than two response levels.  The Minimum Transform Chi Square method is attractive for several reasons. When the parameters appear linearly, unique  estimates are obtained for any number of response levels (assuming (46) obtains). Furthermore, this optimal estimate may be  found in one step, because there is an analytical solution available. This would be especially valuable when exploring the  criterion function for various levels of the "constant" parameters. These features would seem to outweigh the "first order  efficiency" enjoyed by the Maximum Likelihood estimator over the Minimum Transform Chi Square and other BAN estimators (Rao,  1962). In defense of the other estimators it must be noted that there are applications where it is difficult to assign unit  deviates to certain null response conditions (e.g., learning models applied to a single sequence of trials), the median  approach (Bock & Jones, 1968) notwithstanding.  REFERENCES  ABRAHAMSON, I. G., & LEYITT, H. Statistical analysis of data from experiments in human signal detection. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 1969, 6, 391-417.  BERRSON, J. Estimation by least squares and maximum likelihood. In Neyman, J. (Ed.), Proceedings of the Third Symposium on  Mathematical Statistics and Probabilities. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1956.  Bocx, R. D., & JONES, L. V. The measurement and prediction of judgement and choice. San Francisco: Holden-Day, 1968.  CARTERETTE, E., FRIEDMAN, M., & WYMAN, M. Feedback and psychophysical variables in signal detection. Journal of the Acoustical  Society of America, 1966, 39, 1051-1055.  CRAMER, H. Mathematical methods of statistics. Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University Press, 1946. DORFMAN, D. D., & ALF, E.,  JR. Maximum likelihood estimation of parameters of signal detection theory-a direct solution. Psychometrika, 1968, 33, 117-124.  DORFMAN, D. D. The likelihood function of additive learning models: Sufficient conditions for strict log-convexity and  uniqueness of maximum. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1973, 10, 73-85.  FIACCIO, A., & MCCORMicK, G. Nonlinear programming: sequential unconstrained minimization techniques. New York: Wiley, 1968.  GREEN, D., & SwETs, J. Signal detection theory and psychophysics. New York: Wiley, 1966. GREY, D. R., & MORGAN, B. J. T. Some  aspects of ROC curve-fitting: Normal and logistic models. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1972, 9, 128-139.  90 RENWICK E. CURRY  HADLEY, G. Nonlinear and dynamic programming. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1964. KENDALL, M. G., & STUART, A. The advanced  theory of statistics. London: Griffin, 1967. Vol. 11, 4th ed.  KINCHLA, R. A. A comparison of sequential effects in detection and recognition. New York: Psychology Department, New York  University, Technical Report 1, 1966.  KRANTZ, D. H. Threshold theory of signal detection. Psychology Review, 1969, 76, 308-324. LUCE, R. D. A threshold theory for  simple detection experiments. Psychology Review, 1963, 70, 61-79.  OGILVIE, J., & CREELMAN, D. C. Maximum-likelihood estimation of Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve parameters. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 1968, 5, 377-391.  RAO, C. R. Efficient estimates and optimum inference procedures in large samples. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society,  1962, 24, 73.  RAO, C. R. Theory of the method of estimation by minimum chi square, Bulletin of the International Statistical Institute,  1956, 35, 25.  RAO, C. R. Linear statistical inference and its application. New York: Wiley, 1973. 2nd ed. SCHONEMANN, P. H., & TUCKER, L. R.  A maximum likelihood solution for the method of sucessive intervals allowing for unequal stimulus dispersions. Psychometrika,  1967, 32, 403-417. TANNER, T. A., RAUK, J., & ATKINSON, R. C. Signal recognition as influenced by information feedback.  Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1970, 7, 259-274.  WILDE, D. Optimum seeking methods. Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall, 1964.  RECEIVED: January 22, 1975