10.1016/0022-2496(76)90021-3
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 13, 243-268 (1976)  Book Review  Subproblems of Semantic Memory: A Review of" Human Associative Memory" by J. R. Anderson and G. H. Bower*,'  WAYNE A. WICKELGREN  Department of Psychology, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 94703  In the first place, I liked the title; human conceptual memory is associative, and it is nice to see that assertion right up  front in the title of this important book. I have always considered the issue of whether any memory system was associative or  nonassociative to be fundamental. The first memory paper I ever wrote (Wickelgren, 1965) presented a definition of one type of  associative memory and one type of nonassociative memory and asserted that the evidence favored the assumption that verbal  short-term memory is associative. Since then, about half a dozen subsequent papers of mine were also concerned with this issue  and related issues concerned with the associative character of verbal long-term memory (Wickelgren, 1972) and the  nonassociative character of visual sensory memory (Wickelgren & Whitman, 1970).  Partly because the general nation of associative memory has been around since Aristotle, the most common reaction to my work  on this topic has been largely "ho hum." Also, the decade of the 60's was not a good time for definitions, arguments, and  evidence favorable to the assumption that human conceptual memory is associative. Computer models and transformational  generative grammar were "in," and, for completely illogical reasons, associative memory was "out." The notion that memory is  associative suffered from "guilt by association." Nearly universal acceptance of the hypothesis of associative memory  throughout the early history of psychology led to the ridiculous notion during the 60's that the assumption of associative  memory was directly linked to a noncognitive, operationist, crassly empirical, S-R approach to psychology. As a consequence, a  lot of psycholoinguists and cognitive memory researchers threw out the baby with the bath water and went off developing  theories of the human mind that either ignored memory altogether or worked with some  * This work was supported by Grant 3-0097 from the National Institute of Education and by contract F 44620-73-C-0056 from the  Advanced Research Projects Agency, D. O. D. to Ray Hyman.  t New York: John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1973.  Copyright (0 1976 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  243  244 WAYNE A. WICKELGREN  primitive and incorrect nonassociative conception of it. Research of the last few years on semantic memory, particularly as  exemplified by the Anderson and Bower book, has gone a long way toward rectifying this grievous error.  In the second place, I liked the overview that Anderson and Bower provided to the different aspects of understanding semantic  memory. As I see it, a complete theory of semantic memory must solve seven theoretical subproblems: the structure of semantic  memory, recognition, acquisition, storage, retrieval, inference, and generation. The structure of semantic memory refers to  the nature of the memory code, including its associative vs. nonassociative nature, the particular types of associations and  elements (nodes), how our knowledge of the world is represented in semantic memory, etc. Recognition refers to the process by  which the familiar portion of new stimulus input is identified and mapped onto already existing representation in semantic  memory, including its dynamics. Acquisition refers to the process by which the new (previously uncoded) portion of input is  encoded into sematic memory, including its dynamics. Storage referes to the nature and dynamics of the changes that take place  in semantic memory over the retention interval between acquisition and usage (retrieval).  Retrieval, inference, and generation could all be subsumed under the rubric of "usage," but the theoretical problems involved  in each seem sufficiently different at the present time to warrant separate treatment. Accordingly, I use the term "retrieval"  in the same way that Anderson and Bower use the term "fact retrieval" to refer to elementary question answering (which differs  from Anderson and Bower's use of the term "question-answering"). Elementary question answering has two principal components:  answering yes-no questions and answering wh-questions (who, what, when, where, and possibly why, and how). This subdivision  corresponds approximately to the distinction in traditional memory research between recognition and recall (approximately, but  not exactly). "Retrieval" will be used to refer to elementary question answering for material directly stored in semantic  memory. By contrast, inference will refer to elementary question answering that requires some combination of separately stored  memory traces in semantic memory (e.g., if Liebnitz was a person and people have four-chambered hearts, then Liebnitz had a  four-chambered heart). Generation refers to spoken or written verbal production (principally speech production). This is  distinguishable from elementary retrieval and inference by virtue of the production of long, syntactically complex utterances.  The processes are not totally independent. For example, recognition is usually involved in acquisition and necessarily in  usage. The last six subproblems refer to processes for which one wants ultimately to specify both the basic nature of the  process and its (temporal) dynamics. The structure of semantic memory has no dynamic aspect and is perhaps the most basic  subproblem to solve, since it may be deeply involved in the solution to most, if not all, of the other theoretical  subproblems. However, studying the structure of semantic memory typically requires at least some minimal assumptions  concerning most of the six process. Despite the likelihood of at least a modest degree  SUBPROBLEMS OF SEMANTIC MEMORY 245  of interaction between each of these seven subproblems, some such analysis is essential to the solution of any complex  scientific problem. This seems like a good one.  One of the strengths of the Anderson and Bower book is the presentation of a subproblem analysis which seems to me to be  equivalent to the one just specified, or nearly so. Furthermore, Anderson and Bower present preliminary examples of a  theoretical solution to each of the first five subproblems and at least discuss the problem of an adequate accounting for  inference in some detail, although their theory of semantic memory has very limited inferential capacity. Anderson and Bower  mention the problem of speech generation, but present no example theoretical solution. Anderson and Bower generally also  discuss a number of empirical findings (their own and others) that confirm or reject various aspects of their theory. In the  scope of both their theoretical approach to semantic memory and the empirical testing thereof, the Anderson and Bower theory  (HAM for human associative memory) has no published rival. It should be noted, that this does not imply that Anderson and  Bower's theoretical solution to any subproblem area is superior to that of Norman and Rumelhart (1975), Schank (1973),  Winograd (1972), etc., to name just a few outstanding recent alternative formulations. The ultimate worth of different  theories, particularly in the most basic area of the structure of semantic memory will take some time to determine. I  certainly am not able to draw any definite global conclusion on this matter at the present.  Before proceeding to a critique of Anderson and Bower's theory, I wish to provide a brief overview of the book's contents and  evaluate its suitability for courses. The book is divided into two parts. The first five chapters are an historical  introduction to semantic memory including various versions of associationism, Gestalt and reconstructive notions of memory  (such as they are), computer simulation or artificial intelligence models of semantic memory, and linguistic contributions to  the understanding of syntax and semantics. This introductory review occupies the first 135 pages and substantially enhances  the value of the book as a text for a semantic memory seminar or an advanced course.  The remaining three quarters of the book presents Anderson and Bower's theory with chapters having some rough correspondence  to the subproblem analysis previously described, though this could have been improved to give a more exact correspondence. In  addition, Anderson and Bower extend their theory to the analysis of the syntactically unstructured materials used in  traditional verbal learning experiments. Finally, at various stages in the book, Anderson and Bower presented some ideas  concerning the propositional representation of image memory. This is very stimulating, whether or not you agree with their  point of view.  Doug Hintzman, Ray Hyman, and I used the Anderson and Bower book as the sole text for a one quarter graduate seminar on  semantic memory, and in my opinion it was an unqualified success. However, many students, particularly those with little or no  background in linguistics, psycholinguistics, or artificial intelligence complained that the book was too difficult to  understand. Personally, I think that is a matter of expecta-  246 WAYNE A. WICKELUREN  tion. Students who are familiar with courses and seminars that are focused on experiments will find a course that is primarily  oriented to the understanding of a relatively complex and precisely specified theory to be conceptually difficult. If students  expect such material to be difficult, to require substantial time for understanding and to require asking a lot of questions,  then a course or seminar based on this book can be completely successful. Despite complaints from a number of students, the  semantic memory seminar we held based on this book has had an enormous impact at the University of Oregon, certainly greater  than any course or seminar I have ever been a part of before.  In my opinion, qualitative and quantitative mathematical psychology have reached the point of development where we should  insist that the vast majority of all students in "experimental" psychology develop some conceptual (mathematical)  sophistication to accompany their experimental and statistical sophistication. Since semantic memory is currently "hot,"  systematic exposure to this book provides an excellent vehicle for increasing the conceptual and theoretical training of  graduate students in cognitive psychology. I do not think that the proper way to introduce the area of semantic memory is by  prior study of linguistics or computer science, since these areas provide less motivation to the student in the form of the  psychological relevance of the conceptual material being learned. Finally, prior study of empirical psycholinguistics is of  only minor value in understanding the theoretical conceptions important in semantic memory and simply lengthens the time to  acquire the necessary sophistication.  STRUCTURE OF SEMANTIC MEMORY  Associative Memory  As in any associative memory, Anderson and Bower's semantic memory is composed of nodes and links (associations). Anderson and  Bower develop the notion that there is more than one type of link connecting the nodes of semantic memory, and they have a  specific proposal regarding the different types of labeled links. However, their proposal may be somewhat open-ended in that  they are concerned with only a simple subset of all English sentences. The propositions that can be represented in HAM have  five principal constituents (subject, verb, object, location, and time). Each of these constituents may be modified by an  adjective or a dependent proposition. Yes-no and wh-questions may be asked concerning any of the five constituents. Anderson  and Bower restricted the form of the sentences that could be input to semantic memory. It was not clear to me whether Anderson  and Bower thought that the set of labeled links which they employed in dealing with this subset of English sentences would be  sufficient to handle the underlying semantic (propositional) structure of all sentences that can be encoded into semantic  memory. As currently formulated, HAM consists of  SUBPROBLEMS OF SEMANTIC MEMORY 247  approximately 30 different types of associations organized in pairs of mutual inverses (forward and backward associations).  In my simplistic intuitive neurophysiologizing, it seems somewhat implausible to imagine that there are say 30 chemically  distinct types of synapses. However, even if there were only one type of synaptic connection in the area of the brain  concerned with semantic memory, for the purposes of an abstract psychological model, it might well be desirable to assume 30  different types of links, especially since we do not know whether psychological links correspond to sets of physiological  synapses (though this has always been the primary hypothesis).  Propositional Nodes  Besides having a multiplicity of labeled links, Anderson and Bower have taken another important step away from traditional  associative memory by assuming that learning consists not of the formation or facilitation of connections between already  existing nodes (ideas, concepts), but rather "vertical" associations between existing nodes for lower-level concepts, phrases  or propositions and higher-level nodes representing phrases and propositions. For example, to encode the phrase "touch  debutante," Anderson and Bower do not assume the formation or facilitation of a single link between the concept "touch" and  the concept "debutante." Rather, they assume that a new node is formed standing for the predicate "touch debutante" to which  both "touch" and "debutante" are linked in both forward and backward directions. Similarly, the proposition "hippie touch  debutante" is encoded in semantic memory, not by direct associations between each of the pairs of concepts, but rather by a  hierarchy of "vertical" associations: (a) "touch" and "debutante" to the predicate nodes "touch debutante" and (b) the  predicate node and the subject "hippie" to the propositional node "hippie touch debutante."  To me this assumption of the existence of phrasal and propositional nodes was the single most important idea in the book.  Anderson and Bower's theory does not quite assume that phrasal and propositional nodes are equivalent to more elementary  concept nodes (and I consider this to be a defect of the theory). However, Anderson and Bower's theory deviates from the  traditional assumption that associations are "horizontal" (directly connecting the component ideas of a proposition) more than  the theories of either Norman and Rumelhart (1975), or Schank (1974).  The assumption that associative memory requires the capability of adding new nodes by means of these vertical associations is  an idea that seems very attractive and necessary to me. For example, I have argued elsewhere (Wickelgren, 1969) in favor of  the assumption that associative memory can add new nodes or elements to stand for new concepts or ideas as they are learned.  Horizontal associations between the attributes of a concept seem completely insufficient to explain our capacity for  representation of concepts. Also, I once used a somewhat similar notion of vertical  248 WAYNE A. WICKELGREN  associations of items to serial position concepts to explain rehearsal grouping phenomena in short-term memory (Wickelgren,  1964, 1967). Miller's (1956) famous chunks and Estes' (1972) control elements also assume that component items can be linked  together by vertical associations to a new superordinate element. Finally, as Anderson and Bower suggest, it is possible to  interpret some aspects of the Gestalt and reconstructionist theories of memory as involving the assumption that nodes can be  added to associative memory. So there are predecessors of this basic idea, but to my knowledge no one before ever proposed the  elegant idea that new nodes might be introduced in memory to represent phrases and propositions. Although Anderson and Bower's  theory does not quite propose this, it proposes something so close to it that, should this idea prove to be useful, it must  rank as a major contribution by Anderson and Bower to cognitive psychology.  Actually, Anderson and Bower economize on the number of nodes in memory by representing conjunctive compounds of phrases and  propositions with single nodes as often as possible in preference to unique node representation of each phrase or proposition.  For example, if HAM has already stored that "John hit the ball" and later is presented with "John touched the debutante," it  will link the new predicate to the old propositional node in such a way as to form a propositional node representing the  compound sentence "John hit the ball and touched the debutante." Similarly, at the phrasal level, if HAM has already stored in  memory that "a hippie touched a debutante" and later receives the sentence that "the same hippie kissed the same debutante,"  HAM will link "touched" and "kissed" to the same predicate node to form a compound predicate representing "kissed and touched  the debutante."  This appears to be a mistake. Individual propositions should have separate nodal representation. One reason for this is to  permit easy encoding of a subsequent contradiction to one element of the compound proposition. As I understand it, HAM's  current method of representing propositional negation, in combination with single node representation of compound  propositions, would not permit one to later contradict a single propositional component of the compound. HAM encodes the  negation of an existing proposition by embedding the proposition into the higher order node "It is false that ..." HAM's  treatment of propositional negation seems correct. The assumption of compound phrasal and propositional nodes seems incorrect.  What appears to me to be a more reasonable way to represent a compound sentence such as "the hippie touched the debutante and  the policeman touched the debutante" is to assume separate propositional and subject nodes, but links to a common predicate  node ("touched the debutante"). An associative semantic memory must recognize the commonality of two predicates, but not at  the price of inability to later independently negate either proposition, to say nothing of the ability to independently  retrieve one proposition without the other. Graphical illustration of the difference between these two modes of representing  compound propositions is shown in Figure 1.  SUBPROBLEMS OF SEMANTIC MEMORY 249  A  Policeman hippie touched debutante  B  Policeman hippie Pouched debutante  FIG. IA. Anderson and Bower's representation of a conjunctive compound proposition. S = Subject, P = Predicate, R = Relation  (verb), O = Object.  FIG. 1B. Independent propositional representation of a compound proposition.  Semantic Memory is a Network  In agreement with all psychological and computer science models of semantic memory with which I am familiar, HAM represents  memory by means of a network, rather than a set of independent hierarchies such as were commonly found representing  propositional material in the early days of the Chomskian revolution in linguistics. I suppose no one ever believed that  semantic memory was a set of independent hierarchies, but it is worth pointing out that in "deep structure" (here interpreted  to be equivalent to semantic memory), as in surface structure, one proposition can be embedded as a constituent of another  proposition. The same node for a concept or phrase should be considered as linked into every propositional structure in  semantic memory in which it occurs.  Between-propositional Analysis  One of the many useful distinctions made in Anderson and Bower's book is the distinction concerning the between-propositional  level of analysis and the withinpropositional level of analysis. The distinction has some analogy to that between  propositional and predicate calculus, though Anderson and Bower's within-propositional constituent structure is far more  detailed than the constituent structure of predicate calculus.  Basically, Anderson and Bower's theory of the between-propositional level of analysis simply states that compound and complex  sentences have as their constituents the propositions represented by the various component clauses of the sentence. I guess  everyone in linguistics and psycholinguistics agrees with this, and, in Chapter 9, Anderson and Bower present some evidence  supporting the psychological reality of this between-propositional level of analysis in the form of positive transfer for  learning new sentences that contain previously learned complete subject + verb object propositions.  Adjectives. Somewhat more debatable is the assumption made by Anderson and Bower (in agreement with Chomsky) that the semantic  memory (deep structure) representation of adjectives is equivalent to that of a modifying dependent clause. That  250 WAYNE A. WICKELGREN  is to say, a sentence such as "John bit a red apple" would be represented by two constituent propositions: "John bit an apple"  and "the apple is red." Although Anderson and Bower appear to assume this deep structure analysis of adjectives, they do not  do experiments using adjectives and appear to have largely ignored the issue. I do not remember the exact experiments that  have been performed on this question, but it is my impression that there is precious little psychological evidence that  supports the separate propositional representation of adjectives. Anderson and Bower might handle adjective and noun phrases  in a manner similar to their treatment of definite descriptions, but the success of such treatment cannot presently be  evaluated.  Within-Propositional Representation  In my opinion, the heart of any theory of semantic memory is its representation of the components of a proposition. There are  quite a variety of different proposals regarding within-propositional representation, including the theory of Anderson and  Bower, but little empirical support for one over another and predictive inadequacies for all of them.  Although Anderson and Bower admit (p. 509) that their within-propositional representation has very little support, it is still  interesting to consider it. In agreement with Chomsky, Anderson and Bower assume a predicate grammar that conjoins the verb  (relation) and object together to form a predicate node and then conjoins the predicate node to the subject (or agent) to form  the fact node.  Context, events, scenarios. The somewhat novel and interesting component of Anderson and Bower's within-propositional  representation is the existence of a context node which is conjoined with the fact node to form the high level propositional  node. The immediate constituents of the context node are location and time. Thus, instead of location and time being modifiers  of the verb or constituents of the predicate, they are high level constituents of the proposition on a par with the (nuclear)  fact node. In HAM all of the facts that occur in a common context are linked to the same context node, which implies that the  context node might be considered to represent an event (although temporal sequences would not be represented). In HAM, such  event representation is done by linking the multiple fact nodes to the same high level propositional node creating a compound  propositional node. However, for the reasons stated previously, it seems superior to create new propositional nodes for each  of the facts that occur in a common context, but link each to the common context node. Thus, either the highest level node in  HAM or the context node in the presently proposed theory represents the event (set of facts occurring in a common context).  This seems intuitively nice, though no way has been specified here to represent the sequence of facts or events (a scenario)  and representation of this might introduce considerable complexity.  SUBPROBLEMS OF SEMANTIC MEMORY 251  Experiments. The experiment in Chapter 9 that demonstrated positive transfer in the learning of new propositions containing a  previously learned fact constituent (subject -}- verb + object proposition) also demonstrated no positive transfer in the case  of previously learned subject + verb, verb + object (predicate) or subject + object constituents. Anderson and Bower's theory  and any theory that asserts a reality to the predicate node would seemingly require positive transfer for the verb + object  constituent in comparison to a no-repetition control condition or the subject + verb or subject + object repetition  conditions. Case grammars of the type used in linguistics by Fillmore (1968) and in semantic memory by Rumelhart, Lindsay, and  Norman (1972) might predict the verb to be closely related to both the subject and the object, obtaining positive transfer for  both of these cases, but not for the subject + object repetition. However, no positive transfer was obtained for any of these  pairs of constituents, which I suspect indicates that something is basically wrong with both of these basic conceptions of the  constituent structure of propositions.  One possible way out is to assume that the fact node decomposes into subject, verb, and object constituents without any  intermediate node structure. However, this suggests that the subject and object are as closely related to each other as the  subject and the verb or the verb and the object. This is contradicted by everyone's structural intuition. Since positive  transfer was obtained for repetition of an entire fact, positive transfer experiments of this type appear to be relevant for  evaluating the nodal structure of semantic memory. Hence, we are faced with a puzzling theoretical problem, the solution to  which may go a long way toward adequate within-propositional representation.  Being verbs. A minor elegant feature in the Anderson and Bower theory is the fact that verbs of being (is, are, was, were,  etc.,) are not represented in the same way as other verbs, but rather are considered to be represented by an undifferentiated  predicate node as shown in Figure 2. The difference in the representation of a sentence with a verb of being compared to one  with a transitive verb is shown in Fig. 1. It should be noted that the representations shown in Figures 1 and 2 are simplified  by deletion of terminal quantifiers from the representation assumed by HANI.  Ftc. 2. Representations in HAM of "A canary is a bird" and "A canary is biting the man in the park." C = context, F = Fact, L  = Location, T = Time, S = Subject, P = Predicate, R = Relation (Verb), and 0 = Object.  252 WAYNE A. WICKELGREN  Subjects or agents. Anderson and Bower waffle considerably concerning whether they prefer to use deep subjects or agents. The  distinction primarily arises concerning the question of the representation of passive sentences. The subject of a passive  sentence is the object of the corresponding active sentence and vice versa. One could assume that passive sentences are  represented with the subjects and objects reversed compared to the representation of the corresponding active sentences.  However, it has appeared parsimonious to many people including Anderson and Bower to assume instead an underlying unitary  representation for both passive and active forms of the sentence, replacing the notion of subject with the notion of agent. A  similar solution might be taken for the representation of "John is taller than Bill" vs. "Bill is shorter than John," where we  might consider the marked form ("Bill is shorter than John") to be represented using the unmarked relation ("John is taller  than Bill").  Unfortunately, experiments performed by Anderson and Bower do not unambiguously support the notion of a common underlying form  of encoding for passive and active sentences, though they do suggest that such sentences are closely related (as one feels  sure must be the case). The need to explain why passive sentences exist in the language in combination with the desirability  of simply representing the equivalence of active and passive forms is another important unsolved problem.  Structural vs. temporal contiguity. The sad state of affairs regarding withinpropositional representation is nowhere more  convincingly demonstrated than in pages 319-329 where physical (temporal) contiguity sometimes provides better prediction than  HAM of what concepts are most closely associated to other concepts within propositions. Only a fool could think that the  physically adjacent words in a sentence constitute the principal structure of semantic memory. Hence, I interpret the failure  of HAM's propositional contiguity by comparison to temporal contiguity to reflect the miserably inadequate state of our  understanding concerning within-propositional representation. This is especially so considering that, once again, the analysis  of between-propositional structure was quite superior to physical contiguity in predicting what is most closely associated to  what in sentence recall.  Quantifiers. Quantifiers are represented in HAM in a very interesting way. Instead of considering a quantifier (all, some,  etc.,) to be a high-level constituent oa proposition which they appear to be in symbolic logic, Anderson and Bower attach  quantifiers to terminal nodes of propositions. Quantifiers have always been somewhat mysterious to me and I do not pretend to  understand very well the implications of Anderson and Bower's decision in favor of terminal quantification. However, the basic  idea is that there is something in common between the concepts for each individual dog that we know in the world, each subset  of dogs, and the concept all dogs. A given proposition refers to some particular dog or to some particular subset of dogs or  to all dogs, but whichever of these particular concepts is referred to in a proposition, that concept is conceived to be  associated via the appropriate quantifier link to the common concept  SUBPROBLEMS OF SEMANTIC MEMORY 253  dog. Hence, if your dog, Rover, bit a particular postman there would be a node representing Rover which was associated via the  set membership link to the concept dog, and there would also be the same type of link between the node representing the  particular postman that he bit and the general concept of postman. Finally, the same type of link would exist between the node  representing the particular act of biting that your dog performed and the general concept of biting.  The representation of Rover bit all postmen is as shown in Figure 3, where the particular node for Rover is linked via the set  membership association (E) to the concept of dog and all postmen is linked via the "generic" association for universal  quantification (b) to postman, and the particular act of biting that Rover (or dogs?) do (does) to postmen (or all people or  no restriction ?) is linked by the generic association to a more general concept of dog-biting ( ?), which in turn is linked  by the subset association (C) to the general concept of biting. Of course this sentence is a bit absurd since it asserts that  Rover is currently biting or has bitten or will bite all postmen that exist. However, I wanted to represent all three types of  quantifiers in HAM using a single diagram. I believe I did this.  FIG. 3. Representation of the three types of quantifiers in HAM: member (e), subset (C), and generic (b' meaning "all" or "for  all").  It seems like a pretty complex structure to attach to the bottom of every terminal node in a propositional structure. However,  this somewhat clumsy looking structure should not be discarded without considering its desirable properties. For one thing,  there are a large number of different concepts of individual dogs which are to be distinguished from the concept of all dogs  and from the concepts for each subset of dogs (Terriers, Dobermans, etc.,). Yet they all have something in common. HAM  represents this, and, although it complicates the structure somewhat to do so, we cannot dispense with this unless we can  propose a satisfactory alternative representation. Perhaps it is unnecessary to distinguish between the particular kind of  biting that a dog does and the particular kind of biting that a lion does in the manner suggested by Anderson and Bower.  However, these are distinct concepts, and it is not clear one way or the other to me, intuitively, how they should be  distinguished in semantic memory.  254 WAYNE A. WICKELGREN  I am not fond of the procedure of labeling the links. One alternative is that "Rover is a dog" could be represented by a  simple subject-predicate construction. A similar solution could be used for all subsets of dogs. However, there are important  subtleties here that Anderson and Bower discuss (somewhat opaquely). For example, the Terrier subset of dogs is not itself a  dog. Each member of the subset is a dog, but the subset is not a dog. The relation between individual elements and subsets of  these elements must be represented. One of the major contributions of the Anderson and Bower book is to draw attention to this  important problem and to suggest one possible solution.  Concepts and words. Anderson and Bower also draw explicit attention to the distinction between the concept (idea) and the word  representing the concept, that is between dog and "dog." The word representing the concept is linked to the general concept  node via the word-idea association. One might try to dispense with unitary word representatives and consider the  representative of a word to be the set of its phonetic (segmental) constituents. However, I suspect that a unitary (chunk or  concept) representation of words is also necessary.  Types and tokens. Finally, linking terminal constituents of propositional trees via quantifier associations to more general  concepts, in my opinion, exhibits a superb use of the type-token distinction. Instead of pretending that we create multiple  tokens willy-nilly every time the same concept appears in a new sentence, Anderson and Bower assume that tokens are introduced  only to represent (sometimes subtle) differences in meaning for the same type. Hence, when the term "the dog" is used in one  sentence, it may refer to Rover, and, in another sentence, it may refer to a different dog. Obviously, we should represent  these by two different concepts. Anderson and Bower introduce nodes to represent these two quite properly different concepts,  linking each of them via the set membership relation (quantifier) to the more general concept of dog. If both of these dogs  have names, then each individual dog concept would be linked to its own word representative. However, many concepts have no  name of their own and require disambiguation by an appropriate context for unique identification. The fact that these concepts  do not have single words associated to them does not mean that the concepts should not have distinct nodes representing them.  Anderson and Bower quite properly decide that they should. Once again, one must be impressed by the deep sophistication that  Anderson and Bower demonstrate in understanding the problems of adequate representation for semantic memory.  I do not personally believe that every individual act of biting should be represented by a new node (token), and it is not  clear what Anderson and Bower believe regarding such matters. It seems to me that, at some point, representation in semantic  memory must ignore subtle differences in favor of completely equivalent encoding of similar concepts in different  propositions, allowing the propositional context to further distinguish the concept in this context.  SUBPROBLEMS OF SEMANTIC MEMORY 255  Verbal Learning  Anderson and Bower also assert that traditional verbal learning material is encoded by somewhat degenerate propositions. This  seems like a reasonable extension of their theory to such material and recent work on the efficacy of various mnemonic devices  that in most instances amount to embedding pairs of verbal items into verbal or imaginal "propositions" is certainly  consistent with this general point of view. Similarly, the importance of serial position concepts and grouping concepts for  the organization of linear orders, such as in serial list learning, also argues for some more abstract prepositional structure  underlying this type of learning as well. In the case of syntactically unstructured material, such as typically used in verbal  learning experiments, it is not clear that much is added by a propositional analysis, other than the distinctly important fact  that all learning is subsumed under a common rubric.  Anderson and Bower's belief that the extension of their theory to verbal learning materials was necessary to generate interest  and experimental testing of their theoretical notions seems to me to be wrong. The interest in Anderson and Bower's book will  surely be primarily from cognitive psychologists, psycholinguists, linguists, and computer scientists interested in theories  of semantic memory, not verbal learning researchers.  Also, I fail to see how two obviously brilliant people such as John Anderson and Gordon Bower can waste their time studying a  hopelessly uncontrolled procedure such as free-recall. Basic research theories of such uncontrolled and complex processes are  a scientific absurdity. Since free-recall also has little practical significance, I consider FRAN a waste of time.  RECOGNITION  The goal of a recognition procedure is to map an input sentence or some portion thereof into some or all portions of an  existing node structure (network of nodes and associations) in semantic memory. Recognition is an important part of the  acquisition of new knowledge in semantic memory, since new knowledge should be associated to old knowledge. Recognition is  also an important part of any memory usage process, since the answering of questions requires one to recognize the question as  referring to some portion of semantic memory. HAM's recognition process basically consists of two parts: the parser and the  MATCH process.  HAM's parser is a top-down, left-to-right predictive parser, which works only because of the simple subset of English  sentences given to it. HAM's parser is neither original nor powerful and has the common flaw of existing parsers in that it  does not take semantic knowledge into account in the parsing process.  The result of the parsing process is an input tree that has the same form as trees stored in semantic memory. That is to say,  HAM's parser does not produce a surface  256 WAYNE A. WICKELGREN  structure, but rather a deep structure (here used to be equivalent to a semantic memory). This seems nice, but my intuition  says that the integration of semantic memory and the parsing aspect of sentence recognition must be much more complete than in  HAM. In HAM, parsing creates a tree structure that is initially isolated from the rest of semantic memory and then MATCHed to  existing semantic memory structure only after completion of parsing the entire sentence.  HAM implements Anderson and Bower's belief that syntactic knowledge should not be represented in the same way as other  knowledge in semantic memory. Maybe this is so, and maybe it is not. My guess is that an adequate recognition routine will  operate more from the bottom-up (starting with word nodes) and will use existing semantic memory structure from the beginning.  Parsing probably proceeds in intimate combination with mapping input words, phrases, and propositions onto existing semantic  memory word concept, phrase, and propositional nodes whenever possible, creating new nodes when needed. I doubt that parsing,  matching, and acquisition are temporally separated at the propositional level, though they may well be somewhat separate  processes that are capable of independent study.  ACQUISITION  Anderson and Bower have little to say concerning acquisition that was not already said in conjunction with the recognition  process. This occurs for several reasons. First, Anderson and Bower have no theory of the dynamics of parsing or acquisition.  They do have a theory of the dynamics of MATCHing, which will be discussed briefly in the Retrieval section.  Acquisition of new nodes and links in semantic memory is accomplished in HAM by the MATCH process which simply grafts all the  unMATCHed portions of the input tree onto the MATCHed portions following the rule of achieving the highest degree of node  economy.  However, as mentioned previously, HAM's MATCH process is a bit overzealous in its efforts to create higher-level node economy  in that it creates compound propositional nodes. This produces the problem of independent contradiction of each proposition.  Although Anderson and Bower did not acknowledge this problem, they did note that their MATCH process can lead to  "multiplication of meanings" (discussed on pp. 243-246). As an example of this, consider that in HAM a propositional node may  join subject-1 with predicate-1, later join subject-1 to predicate-2, and then later join subject-2 to predicate-2. When this  happens, one also gets subject-2 joined to predicate-1, which is not a valid inference. To solve this problem, Anderson and  Bower created another process, IDENTIFY, which inhibits the MATCH process whenever it would produce (unwanted) multiplication  of meanings. Since IDENTIFY is a very ad hoc process which does not solve the problem of independent contra-  SUBPROBLEMS OF SEMANTIC MEMORY 257  diction, a modification of the MATCH process to achieve structures such as shown in Figure lb would seem to be well advised.  Avoiding multiplication of meanings raises the general principle that one good way to evaluate any theory of semantic memory  is to see, not only that it produces correct inferences, but also that it does not produce incorrect inferences. As a  consequence of what appears to be a clear theoretical error in representation and in the MATCH process, Anderson and Bower  have generated a nice example of how this evaluation procedure might be employed in developing theories of semantic memory.  STORAGE  HAM has four different types of memory. First, there is the sensory buffer that contains up to seven words. Second, there is a  push down store that indicates where HAM is at in the parsing process. Third, there is a working memory that holds the tree  structures generated during parsing and for use during the MATCH and IDENTIFY processes. Finally, there is the long-term  semantic memory. This is an excessive number of different memories for my taste. In my opinion, the reasons for this large  number derive primarily from the separation of parsing, matching, and acquisition, top-down parsing, and not enough parallel  processing.  Although Anderson and Bower devote an entire chapter to the topic interference and forgetting, it is clear that Anderson and  Bower's primary efforts were directed to storage. Associations in HAM are "all or none," although the ordering of associations  with identical link labels on the GET lists at each node does provide an unusual kind of gradation. The only storage process  to be found in HAM is that new associations with the same link label at a node "bury" old associations in the recency-ordered  GET list. Retrieval at a given node involves serial search in both recognition and recall, and Anderson and Bower assume that  retrieval stops after some randomly determined period of time. Hence, HAM has a interference mechanism that is similarity  dependent in a reasonable way.  HAM does make one unique prediction concerning storage which is that interference obtained from repeating the same word in  different sentences should be obtained only if the concept denoted by that word has the same relation to the other concepts  presented in the sentence. For example, HAM expects interference if the same concept is used as the subject (or the agent) in  two sentences, but does not expect any interference if the same concept is used as the subject in one sentence and the object  in another sentence (or the agent in one sentence and the object in the other sentence). HAM predicts both relation-specific  negative transfer and retroactive interference. Anderson and Bower obtain the effect in transfer, but not in retroactive  interference. The prediction is obviously "up in the air." I was no more successful than Anderson and Bower in figuring out  why this should have happened.  48o/I3/3-z  258 WAYNE A. WICKELGREN  The most obvious flaw in HAM's storage dynamics is that the ordering of the GET lists is by recency only. However, I doubt  that accounting for frequency effects would pose insuperable difficulties for HAM. Overall, it appears that Anderson and Bower  had no desire to devote much of their theoretical effort to precise formulation of storage processes, being content to  postulate some process that was a crude first approximation which they hoped would not greatly affect their evaluation of the  parts of the theory into which they put more effort. This is a reasonable and necessary way to go about attacking a complex  problem.  RETRIEVAL  I use retrival to refer to yes-no (recognition) and wh-(recall) question answering. Following Anderson and Bower, this  elementary retrieval will be limited to the answering of such questions on the basis of information that was presented to a  subject in a single proposition for direct encoding in semantic memory. Answering these questions requires no inference  (combination of separately stored information). Besides the intrinsic interest of the problem, a precise theory of elementary  retrieval is important in that it permits one to evaluate theories of the structure of semantic memory via predictions  concerning the asymptotic accuracy or dynamics of such elementary question answering.  Essentially all of Anderson and Bower's theory of retrieval is contained in the recognition process which matches a probe tree  to a portion of semantic memory. However, in order to predict times for recognition responses (verification times) and recall  (answers to wh-questions) it was necessary to make a number of quantitative assumptions concerning the MATCH process and the  decision rule concerning whether the retrieved structure matches sufficiently to make a "yes" response in the case of  recognition. In recall, Anderson and Bower had to assume stimulus-input and response-output bias parameters.  Most people, myself included, feel that Anderson and Bower's chapter 10 concerned with recall (wh-question answering) after  sentence learning was completely inconclusive as a means of evaluating either HAM's structural assumptions or its assumptions  on wh-question answering, because of the manifold opportunities for compensating errors in the estimation of the large numbers  of parameters. Some of the qualitative results concerning sentence recall are interesting, but since we already know from  other data that HAM's model of within-propositional structure must be incorrect, it is not clear what comfort should be taken  in partially successful predictions. It seems to me that more attention might have been paid to what Anderson and Bower refer  to as "unpredicted second recalls" and "recalls to inadequate stimuli," since the nature of these unpredicted recalls might  indicate some of the deficiencies of HAM's theory of sentence structure or retrieval processes.  SUBPROBLEMS OF SEMANTIC MEMORY 259  Recognition memory dynamics (verification times) is largely discussed in Chapter 12 (fact retrieval). The first experiment  discussed in this chapter obtained the result that verification time was slower for propositions whose constituents were found  in other propositions in semantic memory as opposed to sentences in which the constituents were unique to that sentence. The  MATCH process in HAM and in any associative theory of semantic memory will develop multiple associations to the same concept  used in several propositions. This leads to the possibility of associative interference.  Anderson and Bower interpret this finding as evidence for a serial search of identically labeled links from a given node.  However, in view of the fact that A-C interpolated learning produces unlearning of A-B associations (as assessed by  recognition tests), it would appear to be at least as reasonable to assume a parallel search process with lower levels of  strength for A-B associations that are followed by A-C interference.  Because of the enormous degree of speed-accuracy tradeoff found in recognition memory retrieval (Reed, 1973, 1974), it is not  possible to draw conclusions regarding the dynamics of memory retrieval processes on the basis of reaction time data alone  without also considering accuracy level (Pachella, 1974; Wickelgren, 1974, 1975), Speed-accuracy tradeoff in memory retrieval  occurs over a substantial period of time on the order of 500 to 1000 msec. (Reed, 1973), and the form of the speed-accuracy  tradeoff function is such that at low levels of error rate, small differences in error rate can translate into tens or  hundreds of msec. of difference in reaction times. It is precisely at low error rate where the possibility is greatest for  drawing erroneous conclusions on the basis of reaction time alone. Furthermore, the existence of substantial speedaccuracy  tradeoff renders meaningless the quantitative prediction of reaction time as the dependent variable, without simultaneous  quantitative prediction of error rates.  Anderson and Bower's attempt to fit a quantitative model for yes-no recognition memory times provides yet another illustration  of the irregularities one encounters when one develops and tests quantitative theories for reaction time without consideration  of speed-accuracy tradeoff. In the first place, the quantitative fit of their model is not too good. In the second place,  there is substantial parameter variation. In the third place, as Anderson and Bower move from one recognition memory reaction  time experiment to another, they shift their assumptions regarding whether the scan is exhaustive or self terminating. Such  unsatisfactory results are precisely what one expects when a basic factor such as speed-accuracy tradeoff is being totally  ignored.  Some interesting experimental results are reported in the rather curious but interesting Chapter 11. These results are  supportive of both HAM's structure of semantic memory and its retrieval process. However, since HAM's theory of  withinpropositional structure appears to be wrong on the basis of other evidence, these results can only be taken as phenomena  that any new theory must predict.  One interesting result was that the probability of recalling the object to the subject, for example, was independent of the  number of sentences in which the verb was involved. So verb repetition does not produce associative interference for  "irrelevant"  260  WAYNE A. WICKELGREN  constitutents of the proposition. Whether this is contradictory to a Gestalt theory seems to me to be undecidable, since  Gestalt theory is so vague and insufficiently developed that it is not clear what predictions it makes. However, the result  would seem to be contradictory to some versions of case grammar in which the verb plays the central role in linking subject  and object. However, if one uses a different node for a verb in every different proposition in which it occurs, as I guess  Norman and Rumelhart do, such a case theory of the structure of semantic memory would not be contradicted by this result.  Nevertheless, the result seems important.  Other interesting results were those involving crossover-cues (pp. 337-341). If a subject learns two sentences such as "The  child hit the landlord" and "The minister praised the landlord," HAM predicts that object recall will be slightly superior for  a sentence that mixes the subject for the first sentence with the verb for the second (e.g., "The child praised the .") than  for a sentence that takes the subject and the verb from the same sentence (e.g., "The child hit the ."). Although the  difference is not predicted to be large, it seems to me that intuition would have suggested the opposite conclusion. In fact,  the experiment showed a small difference in the direction predicted by HAM. The result appears to mean that having two  independent cues for eliciting recall is superior to having two dependent cues (utilizing some of the some links). This  probably says more about retrieval processes involved in wh-question answering than it does about the structure of semantic  memory.  One might well question the ultimate psychological validity of distinguishing fact retrieval for previously stored information  from retrieval that requires inference. Anderson and Bower distinguish these two subproblems, but it may well be that  precisely the same retrieval processes are involved in each case. Regardless of the ultimate outcome of this question, it  seems useful at the present time to distinguish these two subproblems, keeping in mind the attractive possibility of  eventually developing a unified theory for both.  INFERENCE  Anderson and Bower admit that HAM is weak in inferential capacity. However, largely in Chapter 10, Anderson and Bower list and  discuss a large number of semantic inferences that people are capable of making.  Synonyms and Definite Descriptions  Apparently, HAM is programmed to achieve the inference that "If George Washington lived at Mt. Vernon and George Washington  was the first president of the United States then the first president of the United States lived at Mt. Vernon." HAM draws  these inferences automatically at the time of input by virtue of having a single representation for the concept of George  Washington regardless of whether  SUBPROBLEMS OF SEMANTIC MEMORY 2611  he was referred to directly by name or by a description. The same holds for synonyms. It is quite desirable that HAM has this  inferential capacity, but it is also clear from the results on pages 248-251 that subjects are capable of some differential  encoding for sentences with names as opposed to sentences with definite descriptions. There is no elegant accounting for this  difference in HAM, though Anderson and Bower often make noises to the effect that differences like this could be accounted for  by means of a certain degree of auxiliary propositional encoding.  Negation  Anderson and Bower discuss the representation of negation and inferences involving negations. HAM encodes propositional  negation by embedding a negated proposition P as a predicate in a superordinate proposition, "It is false that P."  This is okay for saying no to P in fact retrieval, but how, in general, does one make the inference that Q is false because it  is contradictory to stored information. Perhaps this should be considered a different problem.  Another nice feature of HAM is that it includes encoding of the presuppositions of negation. Anderson and Bower provide the  example of "It wasn't in the park that the hippie touched the debutante." HAM's encoding of this is equivalent to "At some  place the hippie touched the debutante and it is false that the place was the park." One presupposes that the episode occurred  and then denies that its location was in the park. Beside its intuitive plausibility, there is some direct psychological  evidence for the distinction between given information (the presuppositions) and the new information in a variety of sentence  types (Haviland and Clark, 1974).  Verification vs. recognition memory. Recognition memory experiments and verification experiments appear similar in that both  involve two alternative answers that at first glance might appear to be equivalent. Anderson and Bower implicitly regard them  as equivalent probably because their verification experiments were essentially recognition memory experiments. However, in  general, verification (judging truth or falsity) is not equivalent to recognition (judging occurrence), though there is  probably a close relation. In a verification experiment, one might present two contradictory sentences with subjects  instructed to go by the more recent sentence in determining truth. In which case, the answer "true" and the answer "yes"  (sentence has occurred) would have different logical determination. It is even less appropriate to identify "false" with "no,"  since "false" means that the probe is contradictory to stored information, while "no" means something equivalent to "not  stored in memory." Consideration of this issue is the sort of thing that leads one to speculate about the utility of the  threevalued logic where a proposition can be true "true," "false," or "undetermined."  Opposites  Consider opposites both on binary scales, such as "in-out," "open-closed," "samedifferent," etc., where one term implies the  negation of the other and as ends of  262 WAYNE A. WICKELGREN  continua, such as "tall-short," "heavy-light," "top-bottom," etc., where the two terms are contradictory, but the negation of  one end of the continuum does not imply the opposite end. HAM is not currently programmed to perform relevant inferences  involving opposites, but Anderson and Bower think it could be, and their discussion is quite interesting.  Mutually exclusive concepts  Anderson and Bower refer to mutually exclusive concepts as disjoint sets. An example inference here is that if Chicago is  located in Illinois, it cannot be in Florida, since being in Illinois implies not being in Florida. One might regard this as a  simple extension of the inferences involving ends of a continuum and perhaps an adequate theory of mutually exclusive concepts  would handle both binary and continuum opposites and negation as well.  Set Inclusion  An example of such inferences is: "All pets are bothersome, Fido is a pet, therefore Fido is bothersome." As Anderson and  Bower discuss, such set inclusion inferences could be programmed into HAM, but they appear to be rather awkward to achieve. By  contrast, Quillian's (1968, 1969) much more limited model of semantic memory achieves set inclusion inferences quite simply  and automatically. In my opinion, this deficiency of HAM is a critical one to focus on in modifying the theory.  All Implies Some  Such inferences have the form: "If all x are P, then some x are P." It was not clear whether HAM was already programmed to  draw this inference, but it was quite clear that it could be. However, while the rule is trivial for this class of inferences,  the conclusion begins to dawn on one that HAM is handling a large variety of inferences by means of a large variety of rules.  It would be more elegant if a relatively small number of rules handled all the different types of inferences people make.  Exemplar Implies Some  A seventh inference type which Anderson and Bower do not discuss until the epitaph chapter as a deficiency of HAM is that "If  x2 is P, then some x are P. The example given was "If red headed chickens are good layers, then some chickens are good  layers." HAM does not make this inference, and clearly it should.  Disjunction (Or)  For example, "If John drove Mary home, then John or Keith drove Mary home." This does not seem like a very useful example of  disjunctive inference, but human beings clearly have this capability.  SUBPROBLEMS OF SEMANTIC MEMORY 263  Expansion  These are the important class of inferences most cogently identified by Schank (1972) and perhaps best described in the paper  by Schank and Rieger (1973). My favorite example of such inferences is as follows: From "John fell overboard," we are capable  of inferring (perhaps incorrectly but that is no matter) that "John was in a boat; John is now in the water; John is wet; John  is swimming or otherwise struggling in the water, etc."  Schank handles such inferences by means of encoding at the time of the input that expresses an extended meaning for a  proposition in terms of a primitive set of atomic concepts. I think Anderson and Bower are correct to disagree with Schank's  approach to this problem. Anderson and Bower claim that many of these inferences are not made at the time of input, but only  at the time of retrieval. They even cite some verification latency data in support of their prediction, though I think such  experiments should be done using speed-accuracy tradeoff methodology. In any event, my intuition agrees with Anderson and  Bower that many inferences are made at the time of retrieval. However, HAM has no mechanism for achieving such inferences.  Since human beings make these expansions (relational and predicate inferences) easily and frequently in understanding written  or spoken language, an explanation for this inferential capacity is another primary unsolved problem.  Transitive Relations (Linear Spatial Orders)  These inferences are of the form: "A is greater than B and B is greater than C, therefore, A is greater than C." HAM can  encode such linear orderings in an economical way by storing the propositions "A greater than B" and "B is greater than C."  HAM then can use a reasonably simple, but ad hoc, inference rule for the class of transitive relations.  One of the problems of this theory is that it makes the production that verification for a proposition such as, "An elephant  is bigger than a termite" would be slower than verification for a proposition such as, "An elephant is bigger than a tiger."  The proposition "elephant is bigger than tiger" is presumed to be stored directly, but the proposition "elephant is bigger  than a termite" must be verified by the rule applied to a chain of transitive relations. Anderson and Bower discuss some  evidence collected by Potts (1972) which is basically contradictory to this prediction and attempt to explain away Potts'  results. The paradigms used by Potts (1972, 1973) may not yield evidence clearly contradictory to the prediction that  decisions concerning close pairs are made more quickly than decisions concerning remore pairs in a linear ordering. However,  the results of Moyer (1973) suggest that there is a class of linear ordering inferences which possesses the property that  decisions are faster for remote pairs than for close pairs. Such results are incompatible either with Anderson and Bower's  assumptions regarding the representation of linear orderings or with their inference and retrieval assumptions.  264  WAYNE A. WICKELGREN  GENERATION  Much oour usage of semantic memory is in generating connected speech in conversations and soliloquies (and occasionally in  lectures, dictating or writing papers, etc.). Anderson and Bower specifically avoided developing any theory of written or  spoken sentence generation. The question is more complex than simple yes-no or wh-questioning for at least two reasons. First,  the output is more complex than a single word or phrase as in yes-no and much wh-question answering. Problems of mapping  underlying semantic memory structure into surface grammatical structure using syntactic rules come into play.  Second, the input conditions for such a generation of syntactically structured utterances are not so clearly defined as they  are in verification or wh-question answering. What should we assume is the goal in speech generation ? One reasonable solution  to this problem is to imagine that the goal is to communicate fully some subset of the semantic memory network via one or more  sentences. This is probably not a totally satisfactory answer to the input question, since one probably needs to place  restrictions on the types of subsets of semantic memory that can be the input to the generation process. For example, it would  seem unreasonable to require an adequate theory of speech generation to be able to translate any random set of nodes and links  in semantic memory into connected discourse. It must be impossible to achieve a sentence with grammatical surface structure  for most randomly selected subsets of semantic memory. Hence, it is necessary to specify some sort of grammar of appropriate  input subsets from semantic memory.  Then, of course, it is necessary to specify the nature of the speech generation process that maps that subset of semantic  memory into one or more grammatical surface structures. Note that I am ignoring the supposed fact that most spoken speech is  not grammatical. For the moment, we might consider this to be a performance, rather than a capacity, problem and ignore it.  However, psychologists are property suspicious of such solutions, and it may be that we need to know more about the real  grammar of spoken speech than the "ideal" grammar of surface structure as developed from linguistic intuition.'  The only specific suggestion that I have for solving the problem of mapping underlying semantic structure into surface  structure is to use augmented transition networks. For a discussion of augmented transition networks see Kaplan (1975),  Stevens and Rumelhart (1975), and the classic paper by Woods (1970). Curiously enough, augmented transition networks appear to  have been used primarily for speech recognition than for speech production, where they seem less obviously suited. Of course,  it  1 Recent research by Deese (1975) indicates that most of the spoken speech of educated adults consists of grammatical  sentences, contrary to earlier intuitive assertions. Thus, performance appears to be much closer to capacity than previously  supposed.  SUBPROBLEMS OF SEMANTIC MEMORY 265  has always been an attractive hypothesis that the same syntactic knowledge used in speech production is also used in speech  perception. Personally, I find the control ordering characteristic of augmented transition networks to be far more natural for  speech generation than for speech recognition and reading. In any event, augmented transition networks are quite elegant and  basically consistent with an associative memory structure.  IMAGERY  Anderson and Bower use the ideas of Winston (1970) that images are represented not as analog pictures, but rather as sets of  propositions that describe various aspects of the image. The propositional representation of images is a very exciting idea  which currently seems open to extensive theoretical development and ultimately experimental testing. The analog picture notion  has produced some interesting experiments but has so far defied precise theoretical statement (Pylyshyn, 1973).  Anderson and Bower specifically reject the dual encoding position that there is both a verbal semantic memory and a spatial  image memory, and instead opt for a single unified modality of semantic memory in which the construction of images constitutes  only a greater "unpacking" of visual detail from higher order nodes in semantic memory. This is an interesting hypothesis, but  I do not see how it will wash with all the evidence from split brain studies, lateralized brain damage, temporary  immobilization of one hemisphere, and all the other evidence indicating that verbal memory is a separate modality from spatial  image memory.  There are several different issues here. First, there is the question of whether the representation of images is propositional  or analog-pictoral. Second, even if image memory is propositional like semantic memory, there is the question of whether the  propositional structures are equivalent in semantic and image memory. Finally, there is the issue of whether these are two  anatomically and psychologically separate representation modalities in which there might be dual representation.  One possibility is to consider that image memory is propositional, but that the nature of the propositional structure for the  two modalities and/or the nature of the inference processes that accompany these structures are quite different. The nature of  this difference should probably be that semantic memory has greater flexibility for representation of various types of  information, including spatial information, but that image memory is particularly well suited for encoding, retrieving, and  deriving inferences about spatial relations.  I have a strong hypothesis concerning what the difference might be. Semantic memory has an extensive degree of hierarchical  structure for the storage of propositions that are embedded in other propositions. Furthermore, within-propositional encoding  266 WAYNE A. WICKELGREN  probably has some hierarchical structure. In general, this sort of complex embedding capability is quite essential to  representation of human knowledge.  However, perhaps image representation has no propositional embedding and uses a one-level symmetric relational grammar. Thus,  in image memory a scene is encoded as a set of relations with arguments, R&-- x; ... ), where the arguments must be atomic  elements, not propositions containing relations. There is clearly a massive degree of interconnection of various elements of  the scene, since each object or part of an object has multiple relationships to a variety of other elements. However, it  appears to me that scene description does not require embedding. I would appreciate a clear counter example.  If no counter example is forthcoming, this is an attractive idea for the difference between semantic memory and image memory,  since a representation system that avoided embedding would appear to facilitate information retrieval. Even if there is a need  for a certain degree of embedding for adequate scene description, it is conceivable that such embedding is accomplished by the  verbal semantic memory with the rest of the information being stored in image memory. This begins to slip into a position  similar to that held by Anderson and Bower, but preserves the claim that there is something basically different about image  memory from semantic memory, besides the amount of visual detail.  For the moment it seems like the propositional approach to representation of image memory is more productive than the  analog-picture approach. However, Anderson and Bower admit that there are certain phenomena, such as Stromeyer's (1970)  eidetiker and the Shepherd and Metzler (1971) mental rotation phenomena, that appear on the surface to be more consistent with  an analog picture approach. My guess is that we will soon have a number of theories of image memory, with at least a few  having some analog-picture characteristics, even if the highest level image representations are propositional.  CONCLUSION  I hope it is obvious that I regard Anderson and Bower's book as a monumental accomplishment. The failures of various portions  of HAM are often as interesting as its successes, and perhaps even more important. Human Associative Memory is the most  valuable book I have ever read in psychology. I say this despite my guess that HAM will rapidly be superseded by better  theories of semantic memory. But no matter how little of HAM is found in later theories, these theories will owe an enormous  debt to the intellectual work done by John Anderson and Gordon Bower. However, on a lexical-graphemic level, I must declare  that Anderson and Bower's book is frequently "unprincipaled."  SUBPROBLEMS OF SEMANTIC MEMORY  267  REFERENCES  DEESE, J. Thought into speech: statistical studies of the distribution of certain features in spontaneous speech. Paper  presented at the Psychonomic Society Meeting, November, 1975. ESTES, W. K. An associative basis for coding and organization in  memory, lm A. W. Meltin & E. Martin (Eds.), Coding processes in human memory. Washington, D.C.: Winston, 1972. Pp. 161-190.  FILLMORE, C. J. The case for case. In E. Bach & R. T. Harms, Universals in linguistic theory. New York: Holt, Rinehart, &  Winston, 1968. Pp. 1-88.  HAVILAND, S. E., & CLARK, H. H. What's new? Acquiring new information as a process in comprehension. Journal of Verbal  Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1974, 13, 512-521. KAPLAN, R. M. On process models for sentence analysis. In D. A. Norman & D.  E. Rumelhart, Explorations in cognition. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1975. Pp. 197-223.  MILLER, G. A. The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our capacity for processing information.  Psychological Review, 1956, 63, 81-97.  MOYER, R. S. Comparing objects in memory: Evidence suggesting an internal psychophysics. Perception and Psychophysics, 1973,  13, 180-184.  NORMAN, D. A., & RUMELHART, D. E. and the LNR Research Group. Explorations in cognition. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1975.  PACHELLA, R. G. The interpretation of reaction time in information processing research. In B. Kantowitz (Ed.), Human  information processing: tutorials in performance and cognition. Hillsdale, N. J.: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1974. Pp. 41-82.  POTTS, G. R. Information and processing strategies used in the encoding of linear ordering. Journal of Verbal Learning and  Verbal Behavior, 1972, 11, 727-740.  POTTS, G. R. Memory for redundant information. Memory and Cognition, 1973, 1, 467-570. PYLYSHYN, Z. W. What the mind's eye  tells the mind's brain: A critique of mental imagery. Psychological Bulletin, 1973, 80, 1-24.  QUILLIAN, M. R. Semantic memory. In M. Minsky (Ed.), Semantic information processing. Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press, 1968.  QUILLIAN, M. R. The teachable language comprehender: A simulation program and theory of language. Communications of the  Association for Computing Machinery, 1969, 12, 459-476. REED, A. V. Speed-accuracy tradeoff in recognition memory. Science,  1973, 181, 574-576. REED, A. V. The time-course of recognition in human memory. Ph.D. dissertation for the University of  Oregon, August 1974.  RUMELHART, D. E., LINDSAY, P. H., & NORMAN, D. A. A process model for long-term memory. In E. Tulving & W. Donaldson (Eds.),  Organization of memory. New York: Academic Press, 1972. Pp. 197-246.  ScHANK, R. C. Conceptual dependency: A theory of natural-language understanding. Cognitive Psychology, 1972, 3, 552-631.  SCHANK, R. C. Identification of conceptualizations underlying natural language. In R. C. Schank & K. M. Colby, Computer models  of thought and language. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1973. Pp. 187-247.  SCHANK, R. C., & RiEGER, C. J. Inference and the computer understanding of natural language. Stanford Artificial Intelligence  Memo AIM-197, May, 1973.  SHEPHERD, R. N., & METzLER, J. Mental rotation of three-dimensional objects. Science, 1971, 171, 701--703.  STEvENs, A. L., & RUMELHART, D. E. Errors in reading: An analysis using an augmented transition network model of grammar. In  D. A. Norman and D. E. Rumelhart, Explorations in cognition. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1975. Pp. 224-263.  26)8 WAYNE A. WICKELGREN  STROMEYER, C. F. Eidetikers. Psychology Today, 1970, 4, (November) 76-81.  WICKELGREN, W. A. Size of rehearsal group and short-term memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1964, 68, 431-419.  WICKELGREN, W. A. Short-term memory for repeated and non-repeated items. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology. 1965,  17, 14-25.  WICKELGREN, W. A. Rehearsal grouping and hierarchical organization of serial position cues in short-term memory. Quarterly  Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1967, 19, 97-102. WICKELGREN, W. A. Learned specification of concept neurons. Bulletin of  Mathematical Biophysics, 1969, 31, 123-142.  WICKELGREN, W. A. Coding, retrieval, and dynamics of multitrace associative memory. In L. W. Gregg (Ed.), Cognition in  learning and memory. New York: Wiley, 1972. Pp. 19-50. WICKELGREN, W. A. Speed-accuracy tradeoff and information processing  dynamics. Paper presented at The Psychonomic Society Meeting, November, 1974.  WICKELGREN, W. A. Dynamics of retrieval. In D. Deutsch and J. A. Deutsch (Eds.), Short-term memory. New York: Academic Press,  1975. Pp. 233-255.  WICKELGREN, W. A., & WHITMAN, P. T. Visual very-short-term memory is non-associative. Journal of Experimental Psychology,  1970, 84, 277-281.  WINOGRAD, T. Understanding natural language. New York: Academic Press, 1972.  RECEIVED: November 11, 1974