10.1016/0022-2496(76)90026-2
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 13, 127-147 (1976)  Finite Automata and S-R ModeISI.Q  DAVID E. KIERAS3  Carnegie-Mellon University, Schenley Park, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213  Suppes (1969, Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 6) apparently proved that any finite automaton could be mimicked by the  asymptotic behavior of a stimulussampling S-R model, broadly implying that cognitive theory could be reduced to S-R theory.  Here it is shown that the finite automata used by Suppes are more restricted and less powerful than finite automata in  general. Furthermore, the S-R models proposed by Suppes are limited to producing the behavior of only these restricted  automata, and cannot mimic all finite automata. Hence, the formal claim that S-R models are adequate to produce all behaviors  obtainable from finite automata, and the informal claim that cognitive theory reduces to S-R theory, do not follow from  Suppes's (1969) result. Some alternative S-R models and their problems are also briefly discussed.  To many cognitive psychologists, the debate over the theoretical adequacy of S-R theory was settled long ago, with S-R theory  the loser. However, in an influential paper, Suppes (1969a) reopened the issue by apparently showing that an S-R model of the  stimulus-sampling variety could become isomorphic to any finite automaton. The ensuing debate between Suppes and Arbib (Arbib,  1969a; Suppes, 1969b) raised some important points, but failed to properly clarify the scope of Suppes' results and its  application to cognitive approaches to psychological theory.  The significance of Suppes (1969a) lies in the fact that the finite automaton, or abstract machine, is generally accepted as a  general description for any deterministic system. If it is assumed that cognitive processes, and behavior in general, require  only a finite memory capacity, and can be viewed at a satisfactory level of analysis as being deterministic, then the finite  automaton can be used to represent any cognitive mechanism. Meanwhile, as presented by Suppes (1969a, p. 327), S-R theory is  based only on the concepts of stimuli, responses, and conditioned connections between stimuli and responses. If it is true  that any finite automaton can be mimicked by the  1 Thanks are due to D. H. Krantz, J. G. Greeno, and G. J. Groen for helpful criticisms of various versions of the paper.  a Portions of this paper were presented at the Mathematical Psychology Meetings, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, August  28-29, 1974.  s Requests for preprints should be sent to David Kieras, Department of Psychology, CarnegieMellon University, Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania 15213.  Copyright D 1976 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  127  128 DAVID E. KIERAS  asymptotic behavior of an S-R model, then it follows that S-R theory is a formally adequate, though possibly clumsy, theory of  the learning of cognitive structures. Hence, cognitive psychology would be reducible to S-R psychology.  While it must be acknowledged that Suppes made a valuable contribution by applying some of the tools of automata theory to a  key theoretical problem in psychology, his claim is incorrect; the S-R models used in Suppes (1969a) can mimic only a  restricted class of finite automata. The general claim that S-R theory is formally adequate to represent the learning of any  behavior holds only in the following cases: (a) The to-be-learned behavior (represented bv a target automaton) can be  represented by a member of a restricted class of finite automata; (b) certain very strong assumptions are made that have the  effect of changing the learning paradigm; (c) the learning process is assumed to be much more complex than the S-R models of  Suppes (1969a).  Whether the above limitations on the generality of Suppes' (1969a) result indicate the total bankruptcy of S-R theory is a  partisan matter that will not be argued here. However, an important fact is that S-R theory, in its modern "liberal" form, is  flexible enough to meet a criterion of formal adequacy. The formal problem is to distinguish adequate forms of S-R theory from  inadequate forms; the empirical problem is then to determine whether these forms can be applied to data in a way that  investigators feel is acceptable and useful. The goal of this paper is to clarify the formal issues in order to facilitate  sounder discussion of S-R theory and set the stage for empirically based choises among competing models of both the S-R and  cognitive species.  The paper will first introduce some basic definitions and theorems from automata theory, followed by an introduction of  Suppes' (1969a) characterization of automata, which differs from the usual definition. S-R models and their asymptotic  behavior will then be described, followed by a proof of the limited generality of Suppes' result and a section on some  alternate S-R models.  FINITE AUTOMATA AND THEIR BEHAVIORAL EQUIVALENCE  The definitions in this section are conventional definitions with only minor rotational changes and are available in most  current textbooks on automata theory. For fuller coverage the reader should consult Shannon and McCarthy (1956), Gill (1962),  Minsky (1967), Arbib (1969b), or similar sources.  Many psychologists have had contact with the automata used in linguistic theory, which are specialized or restricted versions  of more general forms of automata. The linguistic automaton, or "acceptor," is given a sequence of symbols and then indicates  whether or not the sequence is a valid string in some formal language. Thus, the concern is whether the machine ends up in a  particular set of states after receiving a series of input symbols. In contrast, the conventional automaton has a set of  AUTOMATA AND S-R MODELS 129  internal states that can stand in a many-to-one relationship to a large number of observed responses. The notation is defined  as follows.  DEFINITION 1. M = (S, Q, R, 8, P) is a finite automaton (or machine) iff S is a set of inputs, or stimuli, R is a set of  outputs, or responses, and Q is a set of internal states, where S, Q, and R are finite sets. At time, or trial, t, the state  transition function  8: S X Q - Q: (si.t , qs,t-1) ~-' qk,t , Si", qj , qk e Q  assigns to each combination of present stimulus and previous state a new internal state.4 The state output function  fl: Q --> R: q,. t F-> rk.t , qj E Q, rk E R  specifies the present response for the state.  The reader may recognize this as the definition of the "Moore" machine. There is also the "Mealy" machine, which instead of a  state output function has an output function A: S X Q -> R taking a present stimulus-previous state combination to the  responses, thereby associating outputs with transitions between states, rather than to the states themselves. The two  representatations can each be translated into the other; the Moore form is used here only for convenience.  The natural application of the finite automaton to psychological experimentation is as follows: The experimenter defines the  set S by performing certain specified manipulations of the subject's environment and the set R by observing and recording  certain selected aspects of the subject's activity. Any unspecified environmental influences, unobserved response components,  and strictly internal factors all enter into the definition of the state set Q. For example, in a concept identification  experiment the stimulus set is the various test items, and the response set consists of the categorizing responses, typically  a positive response and a negative response. The states of knowledge of the subject, or alternatively, the states of  processing of the subject's congitive mechanisms, make up the internal state set. As the task proceeds, the subject moves from  one state of processing to another; the emitted response depends on both the stimulus and the internal state.  It is important to point out that the main value of using an automaton to represent behavior lies in the clear distinction  between observed behavior and the unobserved events underlying behavior. For this reason, it would be pointless to include in  the stimulus set and the response set events that are actually unobserved. This means that entities such as implicit responses  are in fact involved with changes of state, and are not members of the response set R.  4 The notation f : X -> Y indicates that the function f maps the set X to the set Y, while f : x i-* y means that f maps x e X  to y e Y.  130 DAVID E. KIERAS  FIG. 1. Machine Ml.  An automaton can be described either by tables specifying the functions 8 and g, or more conveniently by means of diagrams,  such as Fig. 1, which describes machine Ml. The circles represent states and the arrows represent transitions between states.  The digit at the tail of each arrow indicates which input symbol cause the specified transition. The states are labeled ql ,  q2 , qa , and the digits in the circles specify the output when the machine is in that state. Thus, if the input is a long  sequence of is the output will settle into a repeating pattern: ...11011011011... . If the input is always 0, the output will  soon become always 0 as well. Other input sequences will produce more complex output patterns; note that the exact output  pattern depends on which state the machine is started in. The following definition, which will be used throughout this paper,  provides a general way to describe the input-output behavior of a machine:  DEFINITION 2. The behavior function of a machine M, B(M, q, s) = r iff q is the initial state of M, s is a sequence of stimuli  (an element of S*, the set of all possible finite sequences of stimuli including !1, the empty sequence with length zero), and  r is the response produced by M after receiving all stimuli in s, starting in state q.  Computing B(M, q, s) requires applying the state transition function recursively, starting with q and the first element of s,  and concluding by applying the state output function to the final state. Thus, for s = sls2sa , and initial state qu ,  B(M, q0 , s) = P(S(sa I S(S2 r S(Sl r q0))))'  The next two definitions further characterize single machines.  DEFINITION 3. States q, q' EQ in machine M are equivalent iff for all s E S*, B(M, q, s) = B(M, q', s).  AUTOMATA AND S-R MODELS 131  FIG. 2. Machine M2.  DEFINITION 4. Machine M is in reduced form iff q, q' e Q being equivalent implies that q = q'.  Notice that q being equivalent to q' does not imply that q = q' or that S(s, q) _ S(s, q') for all s e S. Rather, it means  that in principle it is impossible to determine in which of the two states M was started by means of any tests on the  machine's behavior, even though the two states are structurally distinct. For example, machine M2 (Fig. 2) has two equivalent  states, qi and qz ; starting the machine in one will yield precisely the same behavior as starting in the other. M2 may be  reduced easily by combining qi and qz into a single state. A machine is reduced if it has no distinct equivalent states. For  example, M1 (Fig. 1) is reduced, since starting in each state will yield a response sequence which for some stimulus sequence  is different from that produced by starting in any other state. The concept of equivalence can also be defined as equivalence  between two machines:  DEFINITION 5. Machines M = (S, Q, R, S, S) and M' = (S, Q', R, S', S') are equivalent iff for every q e Q there exists a q' e  Q', and vice versa, such that  B(M, q, s) = B(M', q', s)  for all s E S*.  Thus, two machines are equivalent in the case that one can find corresponding initial states that result in the two machines  displaying identical behavior. It is important to note that two machines can be equivalent only if they have the same set S of  stimuli and set R of responses. Furthermore, machine equivalence is an equivalence relation, meaning that (a) M is equivalent  to itself; (b) if M is equivalent to M', then  132 DAVID E. KIERAS  M' is equivalent to M; (c) if M is equivalent to M' which is equivalent to M", then M is equivalent to M". Equivalent machines  have the same behavior; machines that have essentially the same structure are equivalent and have exactly corresponding states.  DEFINITION 6. Machines M = (S, Q, R, 8, (3) and M' = (S, Q', R, 8', f3') are isomorphic iff they are equivalent and differ  only in the labeling of states, i.e., there exists a 1-1 onto map h: Q --* Q' such that for all q E Q and s E S*,  B(M, q, s) = B(M', h(q), s).  This section concludes with two basic theorems that will be stated without proof, since they can be found in many automata  theory textbooks.  THEOREM 1. For every machine M, there exists an equivalent machine in reduced form.  THEOREM 2. If machines M and M' are both in reduced form and are equivalent, then M and M' are isomorphic.  These two theorems together state that we can find a unique (except for state labeling) reduced equivalent machine for any  given machine. Since machine equivalence is an equivalence relation, we can deal with whole classes of machines by working  with only the unique reduced forms. '  SUPPES' CHARACTERIZATION OF AUTOMATA  Suppes' (1969a) result is based on a particular characterization of automata and an application of them to learning  situations. Caution is necessary when considering Suppes' use of automata. Starting with the linguistic automata mentioned  above, Suppes explicitly states that responses are to be identified with internal states: "internal state" and "response" are  to be used interchangeably (Suppes, 1969a, p. 329). In terms of Definition 1, this statement means that the state output  function P is restricted to being 1-1 and onto; for every state there is a unique response, and vice versa.  This restricted characterization of automata is at variance with the broader psychological interpretation of Definition 1  discussed above. Note that in an automaton restricted with the P function 1-1 and onto, the state set is actually superfluous  and can be replaced with the response set; in a real sense, such automata do not need a state set. To promote clarity, Suppes'  characterization of automata will be presented as a separate type of automaton, simplified by the removal of the state set:  AUTOMATA AND S-R MODELS 133  DEFINITION 7. X = (S, R, y) is an 8-machine iff S is a finite set of stimuli, R is a finite set of responses, and at each  time, or trial, t, the function  y: S X R -> R: (si,t , r;,t_1) ~-* rk.t , Si E S, ri , rk E R,  assigns to each combination of current stimulus and previous response a new response.  TABLE 1   Sample S-Machine   St rt-1 rt  s1 r1 r1  s2 r1 r2  s1 r2 r2  s2 r2 r1  The S-machine may be described by a table that lists every combination of present stimulus and previous response and specifies  a present response. An example used by Suppes (1969a) appears in Table 1. If the previous response is r,, sl produces rl .  Applying s2 causes the machine to change "state," that is, the response r2 will cause future applications of sl to produce r2  . Applying s2 again will flip the "state" back to the original condition by eliciting rl .  The important property of an S-machine is that it has memory in the sense that its behavior can depend on events previous to  the current stimulus. Hence the Smachine is more powerful than a simple S-R map m: S --> R. However, one would suspect that  the S-machine is less powerful than the finite automaton, since the Smachine's memory is limited to that of its last response,  whereas the memory capacity of the finite automaton depends on the number of states and is not tied to the last response. This  suspicion is in fact the case, as will be shown by the following comparison of S-machines and finite automata.  S-MACHINES AND FINITE AUTOMATA COMPARED  A simple extension of Definition 2 allows us to talk about the behavior of an Smachine in a way analogous to the behavior of  finite automata:  DEFINITION 8. The behavior function of an S-machine X = (S, R, y), B(X, r,, s), is the response produced by X after receiving  all of the stimuli in the sequence s E S*, when the initial response was ro .  134 DAVID E. KIERAS  Using this definition, we can define equivalence between finite automata and S-machines that have the same sets S and R. Since  the S-machines has responses where a finite automaton has states, the following is the natural definition:  DEFINITION 9. An S-machine X = (S, R, y) and a finite automaton M = (S, Q, R, S, P) are equivalent iff for all r e R there  exists a q e Q, and vice versa, such that for all s E S*  B(X, r, s) = B(M, q, s).  For what follows, it will be necessary to know how to construct an equivalent finite automaton for any S-machine, and also how  to construct an equivalent Smachine for any restricted finite automaton. The following theorem establishes this relationship:  THEOREM 3. (a) Let M = (S, Q, R, S, g) be a finite automaton with P 1-1 and onto. The S-machine X = (S, R, y), with y(s, r) =  fl(S(s, P-1(r)) is equivalent to M. (b) Let X = (S, R, y) be an S-machine. The automaton M = (S, Q, R, S, P) with P 1-1 and  onto, and S(s, q) = g-1 (y(s, fl(q))), is equivalent to X.  Proof. (a) Let s' = s,s2 --- s,a , and ro and qo be such that ro = 13(go). Then  B(X, r., s') = Y(s.,..., Y(s1, ro))  Since y(s, r) = fl(S(s, fl-1(r)),  B(X, r., s') = g(S(s. ,..., g-1(fl(S(s1 , g-1(ro)))))) = N(S(S. ,..., S(s1 , qo)))  = B(M, q0, s').  Thus, X is equivalent to M.  (b) Using the same definitions of s', qo , and r,, the behavior of M is B(M, qo , s') = P(S(sn ,..., S(s1 , qo))).  Since S(s, q) = g-1(Y(s, P(q))),  B(M, q0, s') _ fl(ft-1(Y(s. ,..., p(PI (Y(s1 , g(qo))))))) = Y(S. ,., Y(S1 , r0))  = B(X, ro, S,).  Thus, M is equivalent to X. Furthermore, reducing an unreduced machine entails decreasing the number of states; since P is 1-1  onto, Q already has the minimum number of states. Hence, M is reduced.  AUTOMATA AND S-R MODELS 135  The key problem with Suppes (1969a) is that his characterization of automata, the S-machine, is not general, that is, automata  with the restriction that /4 is 1-1 onto, and their S-machine equivalents, are less powerful than automata not so restricted.  This can be shown easily:  THEOREM 4. NONEQUIVALENCE OF S-MACHINES AND FINITE AUTOMATA. If M = (S, Q, R, S, P) is such that the reduced form of M, M',  has P' many-to-one, then there exists no S-machine X = (S, R, y) that is equivalent to M.  Proof. Suppose the equivalent S-machine X does exist; let M" be its reduced equivalent constructed according to Theorem 3; X  will be equivalent to M' as well as M. Since M" and M' are equivalent and are both reduced, they must be isomorphic (Theorem  2), meaning that there exists a 1-1 onto state relabeling function h: Q' --* Q". Then for q' E Q', P"(h(q')) = iP'(q'). Since  fl' is many-one, there exists q,', q,' C- Q', q,' =A qz', such that P'(qi') = #'(q,'). However, since h is 1-1 onto, h(ql') ;  h(q2'), and since i3" is also 1-1 and onto, we have the contradiction:  i3'(gi) = g"(h(gi')) =A g"(h(gti) = 9'(q2) = 9'(qi )  Thus, M" cannot exist, which implies that X cannot exist.  This theorem means that given a set of stimuli and a set of responses, a large class of behaviors can be obtained with  unrestricted finite automata that are impossible to produce with an S-machine. These behaviors are those requiring that the  reduced state set be larger than the response set.  Automata with a many-one output function must not be regarded as bizarre or pathological; indeed, they are more representative  of ordinary behaving systems, both animals and machines, than S-machines. For example, the ordinary computer can have many  billions of states, yet its output at any point in time can be one of only a few symbols. In a psychological context, a  subject in a Sternberg experiment makes only a binary response, but his internal state space is extremely complex,  representing the stimulus list, the test item, and supporting a complicated memory scanning mechanism. In the experiments  performed by Restle and Brown (1970) the subject makes distinct responses consisting of pressing one of six buttons and learns  a sophisticated sequential pattern in which each button can be used several times in the same pattern. Only by maintaining  separate state information is it possible to distinguish between the different appearances of each response.  Thus, it would appear that behaviors requiring many-one state output functions are the rule, rather than the exception;  S-machines do not appear to be general enough to represent most behaviors of interest in psychology. The following sections  show how the S-R models used by Suppes (1969a) are limited to producing the behavior of S-machines.  136 DAVID E. KIERAS  S-R MODELS AND THEIR ASYMPTOTIC BEHAVIOR  What Suppes (1969a) actually proved was that an S-R model of the stimulussampling variety could become asymptotically  isomorphic in its stimulus-response connections to any S-machine. Since automata exist that have no S-machine equivalent, it  appears that these same automata could not be mimicked by these S-R models. If this is true, then Suppes' proof is of limited  scope; we do not yet have a formalization showing under what conditions an S-R model can produce the behavior of any finite  automaton. In order to show this limitation of Suppes' result, and prepare for more general discussion of S-R models, it is  necessary to characterize S-R models appropriately.  The definition of S-R model to be presented here is based on the approach used by Suppes (1969a), with two main differences:  (a) As presented by Suppes, an S-R model does not produce any behavior in particular; rather the asymptotic behavior is  determined by the reinforcement schedule. Rather than separating the model and the target behavior, the definition used here  will include both the model assumptions and a representation of the reinforcement schedule that defines the target behavior.  (b) Suppes described S-R models in terms of becoming "isomorphic" to automata. Since an S-R model essentially creates a map of  the stimulus-response assignments, the term "isomorphic" is appropriate only if the other system also has a maplike structure;  a finite automaton is not conveniently described in such terms. Furthermore, isomorphism implies a similarity in structure;  what we are really interested in is a similarity of behavior, or behavioral mimicry. Hence, S-R models will here be described  in terms of becoming asymptotically equivalent to automata.  The first definition in this section is a restatement of Suppes' (1969a) stimulussampling theory definition of S-R models:  DEFINITION 10. Z = (,E, R, p) is an S-R model iff:  1. Z is a finite set of effective stimuli; R is a finite set of observed responses; p is a reinforcement function, p: E-->- R,  such that r, = p(a) is the correct response for effective stimulus a c E.  2. On each trial, each stimulus element a c E has some positive probability  of being presented.  3. The single presented effective stimulus a is sampled on each trial.  4. Each effective stimulus may be conditioned to only one response at a time.  5. There is a fixed positive probability c that effective stimulus a will be con  ditioned to the correct response, r. = p(a), on each trial, if not already so conditioned.  6. Once an effective stimulus is conditioned to a response, it remains so conditioned.  AUTOMATA AND S-R MODELS 137  7. Conditioning of unsampled (unpresented) stimuli does not change.  8. If a response is conditioned to an effective stimulus, that response is made to the stimulus with probability one.  9. If no response is conditioned to an effective stimulus, each response has some positive probability of being made.  An important point is that the stimulus set I in the above definition is defined as an effective stimulus set, which in a  particular case may not be synonymous with the observed stimulus set S. If this provision were not made, an S-R model  obviously would be limited to producing behaviors of the strict S-R map form, m: S-* R; it is clear that behavior is more  complex. Generally it will be assumed that the effective stimulus specifies the observed stimulus, that is, a function exists,  h: Z--> S, that assigns an. observed stimulus to each possible effective stimulus. Since this function might be many-one,  knowledge of S may be inadequate to predict R; however, knowledge of the effective stimulus should be adequate, since the  reinforcement function p: E-> R defines the target behavior; the correct behavior can be defined in terms of a specification  of the correct response to each possible effective stimulus. The next definition formalizes the criterion of learning in an  S-R model:  DEFINITION 11. An S-R model Z = (Z, R, p) learns iff for trial t, and any v E E,  im P(ri.t I at) = I iff p(a) = ri .  Thus, an S-R model learns in the case that its responses to effective stimuli become identical to those specified as correct  by the reinforcement function.  In order to compare the asymptotic behavior of S-R models to finite automata, we need a method of comparing the behavior of  the two systems that takes into account the fact that an automaton's response can depend on the preceding sequence of stimuli,  rather than only the single current stimulus. Further, since the effective stimulus for the model, and the observed stimulus  that the automaton is given, may not be the same, the comparison has to use corresponding sequences of effective and observed  stimuli:  DEFINITION 12. An S-R model Z = (Z, R, p) becomes asymptotically equivalent to an automaton M = (S, Q, R, 8, P) iff:  1. There exists a function h: E-> S, specifying the observed stimulus for each effective stimulus, such that on trial t, for  any s' E S*, s' = stst+1 " * st+k , there exists a sequence of a' E E*, a' = atat+i ... at+k , such that h(ai) = si , i E {t,  t + 1,..., t -}- k}. 2. The asymptotic behavior of Z is that of M:  lim P(ri,t+k a') = 1 iff B(M, q, s') = ri for some q e Q.  138 DAVID E. KIERAS  This definition means that an S-R model behaves the same as an automaton, in the limit, in the case that, given sequences of  corresponding effective and observed stimuli, the model and the automaton produce the same response after receiving their  stimulus sequence. Since we do not require that the model learn the original initial state of M at t = 0, an appropriate state  of M may be chosen, which corresponds to the model "state," at the time of the comparison. Hence, the second condition in the  above holds for some q, rather than a specific state of M.  In what follows, comparisons are also going to be made between S-R models and S-machines. Rather than define asymptotic  equivalence and prove its properties separately for S-machines, it will suffice to point out that any results involving  asymptotic equivalence for finite automata can be simply extended to S-machines, by appropriate use of Definition 9 and  Theorem 3. Hence, results for finite automata will be applied to S-machines without further explanation.  Notice that unlike simple machine equivalence (Definition 5), asymptotic equivalence is not an equivalence relation. However,  if an S-R model is asymptotically equivalent to some automaton, then it is also asymptotically equivalent to any other  equivalent automaton:  THEOREM 5. Let Z = (E, R, p) be asymptotically equivalent to some finite automaton M = (S, Q, R, 8, P). Let M be equivalent to  another machine M' = (S, Q', R', 8, g'). Then Z is also asymptotically equivalent to M'.  Proof. For any sequence s' E S*, there is a sequence a', meeting the requirements of Definition 12, such that  lim P(ri.t+k I a') = 1  iff B(M, q, s') = ri .  Since B(M', q', s') = B(M, q, s') for some q' and any s',  llm P(ri.t+k I a') = 1 Iff B(M', q', s') = ri ,  and Z is asymptotically equivalent to M'.  Suppes (1969a) proved his main result in one large and rather complex theorem. Here the approach will be more piecemeal. Those  familiar with probabilistic learning models will readily see that models of the form of Definition 10 work, that is, given a  consistent reinforcement schedule, the model will eventually form the correct connections. Since this final behavior of the  model corresponds to a reinforcement function that can be tied to the observed stimuli, it is fairly easy to show that this  final behavior is that of some finite automaton; this automaton can be defined in terms of the reinforcement function and the  function linking effective to observed stimuli. The following theorem provides these results:  AUTOMATA AND S-R MODELS 139  THEOREM 6. EQUIVALENCE LEARNING IN S-R MODELS. Let Z = ('E, R, p) be an S-R model, and let h: E--* S exist. Then (a) Z learns;  (b) Z becomes asymptotically equivalent to some finite automaton M = (S, Q, R, S, g).  Proof. (a) Cf. Suppes (1969a) and Atkinson, Bower, and Crothers (1965, Chap. 8). Let C be a set of conditioning states, where  Ck,t denotes that k elements of E are conditioned to their correct responses on trial t. Note that C is finite, with m =  .{#(E) elements. Let Co be the initial conditioning state. From Definition 10,  P(Ci.t+i I C;.t) = 01 iff i > j + 1 or i < j  =c>0, iff i=j+1,i0m  =1-c, iff i=j,j=Am  =1, iff i=j=m.  It follows that  lim P(Ci,t = Cm) = 1, t'~  meaning that in the limit, the responses of the model are correct:  lim P(rt = p(at)l at) = 1  iff lim P(ri,t I at) = 1 iff t'~  ri = p(a);  hence, Z learns.  (b) It must be shown that there exists an M such that for any s' e S*, with  = st ... st+k , there is a a' = at ... at+k , h(ai) = si , i E {t,..., t + k}, such that  lim P(ri.t+k a') = 1 iff B(M, qo , s') = ri , for some qn E Q. ".  First, consider that p(at) does not depend on the prior stimuli at-I , at-2 ,...; however, P(rt = p(at)I at) can depend on  prior stimuli, since the probability that a is conditioned to the correct response depends on the number of prior  presentations of a (and corresponding reinforcements of p(a)). But, in the limit, the probability of a correct response does  not depend on the prior stimuli. Thus,  lim P(rt = p(at) I at-i .. at-lat) = 1  iff lim P(rt = p(at)I at) = 1 iff lim P(rt I at) = 1  r'. t-+~ iff p(at) = rt .  Hence, for a sequence atat+l - at+k I  lim P(ri.t+k I at ... at+k) = 1 iff p(at+k) =  r  140 DAVID E. KIERAS  Thus, it suffices to show that an M exists such that for some qo and any s',  lim P(ri,t+x I at,,) = 1 iff B(M, q,, s') = ri iff plot,,) = ri . t'.  M can be constructed as follows: Let #(Q) = ,{#(R), and fl: Q --> R be 1-1 onto. For each q E Q, and a E E, define 8 as  8(h(o), q) = fl-1(p(o)).  Then the behavior of M on sequence s' is  B(M, qo, s') _ ~(8(h(at+k),..., 5(h(-t), qo))) = P(ot+k) = ri,  by the above definition of 8. Hence, with this definition of M,  lim P(ri,t+x a~) = 1 iff B(M, q,, s') = ri , t'.  and Z is asymptotically equivalent to M.  Now a restatement of Suppes' (1969a) main result can be supplied. Suppes stipulated that the effective stimulus set was the  set S X R, consisting of compound stimuli made up of the current stimulus and the previous response; the reinforcement  schedule was defined by an S-machine. Suppes proved that the S-R model would become asymptotically isomorphic in its  stimulus-response connections to the S-machine. The corresponding result, in the terms used here, is that an S-R model, with  these definitions of E and p, becomes asymptotically equivalent to the S-machine:  THEOREM 7. SUPPES' RESULT. Let X = (S, R, y) be an S-machine, and let Z = (E, R, p) be an S-R model with E = S X R, at = (st,  rt-1), and p(s, r) = y(s, r). Then (a) Z learns; (b) Z is asymptotically equivalent to X.  Proof. (a) Notice that Z meets the requirements of Theorem 6; the definitions of E and p play no role. Hence, the proof that Z  learns is immediate.  (b) Let h: E-* S be such that h((Tt) = h(st, rt-1) = st. From Theorem 6 we have that Z is asymptotically equivalent to a  machine M; using #(Q) = ##(R), and fl: Q -> R 1-1 onto, for each q E Q and a E E, the definition of 8 is  8(h(o), q) = 8(h(s, r), q) = fl-'(p(-)) = fl-1(P(s, r)).  The behavior of this constructed M, starting in some qo on any sequence s' = sls2 sis  B(M, qo , s') = P(8(sn , 8(sn-1 , .., 8(sl , qo))))-  AUTOMATA AND S-R MODELS 141 Substituting the above definition of 8, and noting that for any t,  rt = p(st , rt-i) = Y(st , rt-i) = Y(st-i ,..., Y(si , ro)), we have for ro = fl(go),  B(M, q0 , s') = Y(sn , Y(sn-1 ,., Y(sl , ro))) = B(X, ro , s').  Hence, M as constructed is equivalent to the S-machine X; by extension of Theorem 5, this implies that Z is asymptotically  equivalent to X.  Theorem 7 means that if the effective stimulus includes information specifying the last response, an S-R model can learn the  behavior of the class of automata equivalent to S-machines. This next theorem proves the fact alluded to earlier. Since  S-machines are less powerful than finite automata, the S-R model with these definitions of E and p cannot mimic all finite  automata:  THEOREM 8. LIMITATION OF S-MACHINE S-R MODELS. Let M be a finite automaton, such that its reduced form, Mr , has #,.  many-to-one. Then there exists no S-R model Z = (E, R, p), with E = S x R, vt = (st, rt-i), that becomes asymptotically  equivalent to M.  Proof. According to Theorem 6, Z becomes asymptotically equivalent to some automaton M'. Suppose that Z did become  asymptotically equivalent to M; Theorem 5 means that M and M' would be equivalent. By Theorem 7, M' is in fact equivalent to  an S-machine X, which would have to be equivalent to M. However, by Theorem 4, if the reduced form of an automaton has fl  many-to-one, there is no S-machine that is equivalent. Hence, X cannot be equivalent to M, which means that M' cannot be  equivalent to M either. Thus, Z cannot be asymptotically equivalent to M.  SOME ALTERNATIVE S-R MODELS  Suppes' (1969a) effort proved that S-R models could produce a more complex range of behaviors than simple S-R maps; however,  the main claim of Suppes is incorrect; finite automata exist that cannot be mimicked by S-R models of the form ((S X R), R,  p). This section discusses some alternate forms of S-R models, in order to clarify what is required to obtain an S-R learning  model with the power to learn any automaton. To prepare for this discussion, it is necessary to be somewhat pedantic, and  present a statement about what S-R theories are. For the purposes of discussion, S-R theory can be portrayed as resting on  three assumptions:  48o/13/2_2  142 DAVID E. KIERAS  ASSUMPTION 1. The units of analysis are stimuli, responses, and conditioned connections between stimuli and responses.  ASSUMPTION 2. The behavior to be learned is specified by means of reinforcement of particular responses made to particular  stimuli.  ASSUMPTION 3. Conditioning is governed by a simple set of uniform laws.  The first assumption has long been broadened by liberal S-R theorists (e.g., Miller, 1959) to include unobserved events such  as implicit responses and internal stimuli. The implicit responses provide an acceptable means of representing internal  states; the effective stimulus is a compound of the current stimulus and an implicit response representing the previous state.  The effective stimulus produces both an overt response and a new implicit response representing the new state. Such a system  is clearly isomorphic to the finite automaton and would be capable of the same range of behaviors. The problem for the S-R  theorist is to account for how such a set of connections can be established within the confines of the second and third  assumptions.  The second assumption means that every behavior should be teachable merely by indicating the correct responses to individual  stimuli in some training procedure. An immediate problem is that unobserved events are involved; the correct response can  depend on an effective, rather than observed, stimulus, and the correct response contains an unobserved state-representing  component. The teacher must either be able to observe the supposedly unobserved events, or else have some training procedure  that will work on the basis of only the observed events.  The third assumption is the one that most definitely distinguishes the spirits of S-R and cognitive theory. SLR theory has  always adhered to a standard of strict parsimony in learning principles; the fundamental nature of learning is assumed to be  simple and general enough to permit capturing it in the form of a few simple and general laws. Conditioning acts in a uniform  way, without regard for the internal or external status of the paired events, or the role of the conditioned connection in the  overall behavior. On the other hand, cognitive theories hold either that the processes involved in learning are general, but  extremely complex, or that there are no general properties of learning; perhaps the underlying processes involved in the way  the subject learns a particular behavior depend in a crucial way on the sensory modalities, the type of material, the amount  and nature of past experience, the nature of the task, and so forth. Hence, the most important characteristic of a good  learning theory in the S-R spirit is parsimony; to the extent that we can account for learning with a simple and uniform set  of conditioning-like rules, modern S-R theory is a valuable theoretical alternative. Given the importance of the third  assumption, the alternative S-R models discussed here are restricted to those that have this character of simple and uniform  learning principles.  AUTOMATA AND S-R MODELS 143  Complete behavior mapping. The behavior of an automaton M is completely specified by a list of values of B(M, qu , s), for all  s E S*. The first alternative model to be considered is the modified S-R model with E = S* and p(a) = B(M, q0, a). The problem  with this model is that S*, the set of all possible finite stimulus sequences, has an infinite number of members. Hence, the  set of conditioning states in the S-R model is infinite; for a particular target behavior, there will always be some effective  stimulus not yet conditioned to the correct response. Clearly, this model is subject to the classic criticism that an S-R  model cannot produce correct behavior to a novel stimulus.  Partial behavior mapping. There is a theorem of automata theory (see Arbib, 1969b, p. 101ff.) that an automaton can be  specified in terms of its behavior by a list of B(M, qo , s), where s E SI), the set of all sequences with length less than  m, where m depends only on the number of states in the reduced form of M. This fact suggests that a model with E = SI) might  work, since the finite set E together with the corresponding values of B(M, qu , a) contains all of the information necessary  to specify M. This type of model would work for those automata whose responses can be predicted from knowledge of the last m  stimuli, but there are automata without this property. Some finite automata, which can be very simple, have the property that  knowledge of a stimulus arbitrarily far back in the past may be required to predict the machine's response (cf. the "infinite  memory" finite automata in Gill, 1962). Hence, storage of some finite number of past stimuli does not always suffice to  determine the correct response, meaning that an S-R model based on this approach would not be general.  State-reinforcement model. This model is general, but exacts a high price for its power. Consider the modified S-R model Z' =  (E, R", p), in which R" = R X R', consisting of pairs of overt responses and state-representing responses in the set R', and E  ---- S X R', consisting of pairs of stimuli and implicit responses. Let M = (S, Q, R, S, f3) be a finite automaton, and let h:  Q , R' be a 1-1 onto map. Define p as  P(st , rt-i) _ ([P(S(St , h-1(rt-i)))l [h(s(St h-1(rt-i)))D  From the proofs of part (a) of Theorems 6 and 7, it is clear that this S-R model will learn to produce the correct compound  response to the effective stimuli. For the sake of brevity, the complete proof that Z' becomes asymptotically equivalent to M  will not be given here, but will be briefly outlined, based on the above definitions and theorems.  The definition of asymptotic equivalence must be changed to take into account that the Z' responses are compound, of the form  (r, r'), whereas M produces only the simple response r.  144 DAVID E. KIERAS The second condition of Definition 12 becomes  lim P(r ,t+k I a') = l  iff B(M, q, s') = hR(r' ),  where hR : R" --* R: (r, r') H r simply maps a compound response to the specified overt response. Making use of a portion of  the proof of Theorem 6, it suffices to show that  lim P(r2 t+k v') = 1 iff lim P(ri;t+k I at+k) = 1 ty7~  iff p(at+k) = r iff B(M, q,, s') = hR(r ), for some q,. Since Z' learns, and from the above definition of p,  hR(P(+k)) = hR(P(St+k , rt+k))  = 9(8(St+k h-1(rt+k-1))) = 9(8(St+k 2 qt+k-1)) _ 9(8(st+k ~..., 8(st, qo))) for some qo = B(M, qo , s'),  it follows that Z' is asymptotically equivalent to M.  Thus, the state-reinforcement model is an S-R model that can indeed mimic any finite automaton. Notice that the model assumes  that reinforcement is applied not only to the overt responses in set R, but also to the state-representing implicit responses  in set R'; psychologically, this means that the learner is getting information not only about what he is to do in response to  a stimulus, but also about what he is to remember until the next stimulus. In his analysis of the learning of addition, Suppes  (1969a, p. 350ff.) makes use of the state-reinforcement approach by assuming that the learner verbalizes whether he is  carrying a digit to the next column; the teacher corrects this verbalization as well as the actual written responses.  It is important to emphasize that although the state-reinforcement model is able to learn any automaton, it does so by virtue  of the fact that the nature of the learning problem has been changed; the unobserved events have been rendered into observed  events. Rather than training the model in terms of a correct r E R for each s E S, we are actually training the model to  produce the correct r" E R X R' for each v E S X R'.  It is an extremely strong claim that the learning of an arbitrary automaton requires conditioning based on reinforcement of  state-representing responses; on the face of it, this claim appears to be false. The subjects in the Restle and Brown (1970)  studies, involving the learning of a complex sequence of push-button responses, may have been emitting state-indicating  responses as they worked, but the training procedure never reinforced such responses. Subjects were never told whether they  were in the appropriate state during the sequence. Of course, if the subject finds himself making  AUTOMATA AND S-R MODELS 145  a wrong response based on apparently correct earlier learning, he could conclude that he made an incorrect state transition at  some point in the past. Likewise, if he produces correct responses consistently, he could assume that his transitions were  correct. However, this delayed and incomplete feedback would require complex processing to be useful and cannot be considered  as simple reinforcement. Hence, state reinforcement does not seem to be required to learn a complex behavior. On the other  hand, the existence of a simple state-reinforcement model suggests that subjects may find learning especially easy when state  reinforcement is available.  Sample and trial models. The state-reinforcement model is based on reinforcements of both explicit and implicit responses. A  good question is under what conditions a model in the S-R spirit could learn any automaton when provided with reinforcement  defined only in terms of the observed stimuli and responses. Clearly, the conditioning process will be more complex in this  case; with enough complexity, a conditioning model would amount to a cognitive model. What remains to be explored is a great  variety of relatively simple learning assumptions that involve a process of sampling and trial of candidate automata.  The simplest model of this sort would sample a particular finite automaton from the set of all possible finite automata (a  denumerably infinite set), according to some scheme such as in order from the simplest to the most complex, and use the  sampled automaton to produce the responses. Upon an error, the system resamples; eventually a correct automaton will be  sampled (cf. Gold, 1967).  Another example of a sampling and trial model is the "simulated evolution" model of Fogel, Owens, and Walsh (1966). An initial  automaton is randomly mutated to produce a set of offspring automata which are tested in the task environment. The one  producing the best performance is the fittest, which survives to produce the next generation of automata for trial.  A model more in accord with S-R theory would construct an automaton by means of conditioning individual connections between  stimuli, implicit responses, and overt responses. Suppose that on each trial, the model choose a state transition and an overt  response, either at random, or according to preexisting connections. If the overt response is correct, the connections  representing the transition and response production are conditioned, if not already present. If the response is incorrect, all  of the established connections are removed and the model reverts to its original learning state. This assumption is clearly  absurd; however, it is well known that under certain conditions, such zero-memory assumptions can work fairly well, as in the  early concept-identification models (Restle, 1962).  Consider the same model, only with a more realistic assumption on the effect of errors: Upon making an incorrect response, the  model removes the preexisting state transition and response connections, if present, that were used on that trial. The model  removes one set of connections at a time, thus allowing the piecemeal removal  146 DAVID E. KIERAS  of incorrect earlier learning. It is not clear that this model would always work; in order to ensure learning, the model would  have to be able to arrive at a set of correct connections from any set of connections that it might acquire in the course of  learning. Whether the model would always achieve a correct set, or get trapped in some loop, would depend on the nature of the  training sequence in some intricate way.  The preceding brief examination shows that there is much work to be done in exploring various simple rules governing the  installation and removal of connections and characterizing the companion training sequences that will ensure successful  learning.  CONCLUDING SUMMARY  Suppes' (1969a) result that S-R models can produce any behavior obtainable from finite automata has been shown to be limited  to those finite automata that can be viewed as S-machines, that is, have a one-to-one state-to-response map. Hence, the  general statement that cognitive structures can be acquired by means of conditioning operations based on the observed stimuli  and responses does not follow from Suppes' result. However, it is the case that any automaton can be constructed by an  extended S-R model if auxiliary state-indicating responses and corresponding reinforcements are available. Furthermore, it is  possible that there exist plausible alternative learning models compatible with the S-R spirit that can learn any automaton  given only reinforcements of the observed responses.  Thus, the general question of the existence of simple general models for learning that are based on conditioning-like  principles is still open. Since a connection principle of the conditioning or associative variety currently stands as one of  the few candidates for simple and general principles underlying learning, further exploration of the formal nature of such  principles would be a valuable addition to the theory of learning.  REFERENCES  ARBIB, M. A. Memory limitations of stimulus-response models. Psychological Review, 1969, 76, 507-510.(a)  ARBIB, M. A. Theories of abstract automata. Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall, 1969. (b) ATKINSON, R. C., BOWER, G. H., &  CROTHERS, E. J. An introduction to mathematical learning theory. New York: Wiley, 1965.  FOGEL, L. J., OWENS, A. J., & WALSH, M. J. Artificial intelligence through simulated evolution. New York: Wiley, 1966.  GILL, A. Introduction to the theory of finite-state machines. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1962. GOLD, M. Language identification in  the limit. Information and Control, 1967, 10, 447-474. MILLER, N. E. Liberalization of basic S-R concepts; Extensions to  conflict behavior, motivation, and social learning. In S. Koch (Ed.), Psychology: A study of a science. New York: McGrawHill,  1959. Vol. 2.  AUTOMATA AND S-R MODELS 147  MINSKY, M. L. Computation: Finite and infinite machines. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1967.  RESTLE, F. The selection of strategies in cue learning. Psychological Review, 1962, 69, 329-343. RESTLE, F., & BROwN, E.  Organization of serial pattern learning. In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation. New York: Academic  Press, 1970. Vol. 4. Pp. 249-331. SHANNON, C. E., & MCCARTHY, J. (Eds.). Automata studies. Annals of Mathematics Studies, No.  34. Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University Press, 1956.  SuppEs, P. Stimulus-response theory of finite automata. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1969, 6, 327-355. (a)  SUPPES, P. Stimulus-response theories of automata and TOTE hierarchies: A reply to Arbib. Psychological Review, 1969, 76,  511-514. (b)  RECEIVED: September 17, 1973