10.1016/0022-2496(76)90016-x
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 14, 91-97 (1976)  The Optimal Number of Alternatives at a Choice Point with Travel Time Considered  BROWN GRIER'  Department of Psychology, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois 60115  The problem of optimal design is considered for tasks that can be represented as n choice points with a; alternatives per  choice point. Examples are mazes or multiple choice tests. Some fixed time t' elapses between choice points, say traveling  from one to the other or reading a question, and additional time t is spent considering each alternative at the choice point.  For fixed total time, the goal is to find the optimum number of choice points and the optimum number of alternatives at each  choice point. In general, the longer the time spent between choice points, the greater the optimum number of alternatives at  each point.  Consider any situation which can be represented as a sequence of n choice points with ai alternatives at the ith choice point.  Examples are mazes, check lists, multiplechoice tests, or perhaps even the day of an executive decision maker. Tversky (1964)  assumed the total number of alternatives fixed (or alternately a unit time to consider each alternative with total time  fixed), and introduced the problem of finding the optimum number of choice points and the optimum number of alternatives at  each choice point. He used as a criteria for optimization the function  n D=jIai, i-~  which he variously interpreted as the power of the test (its ability to protect against guessing), its discrimination capacity  (the number of response patterns it can distinguish), or the uncertainty index (a measure of the information gained using the  test). Note that (1) has a more general interpretation as the volume of an n-dimensional hypercube. The problem is one of  constrained integer optimization; for a fixed "perimeter," to maximize the volume, subject to integer constraints on n and a.  For every integer optimization problem there is an associated continuous optimization problem that is the same except without  the integer restrictions. Solving the associated  I I thank an anonymous referee for suggesting inclusion of the exponent j in the model.  Copyright Q 1976 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  91  92 BROWN GRIER  continuous problem is sometimes informative about the solution of the integer problem, but caution must be used. For example,  the volume of a hypercube is maximum when all sides are of equal length, but the integer solution might consist of a mixture  of lengths. Think of allocating the unit lengths to the dimensions in layers, one per dimension, until the supply of lengths  is exhausted. If there is a fixed supply of lengths you might run out in the middle so that some dimensions would have length  a and some length a -}- 1. Using (1) as a criterion Tversky (1964) found the optimum number of alternatives for the associated  continuous problem to be a* = e = 2.718,..., and the integer solution to be to have as many dimensions as possible of length a  = 3, so long as no dimension has length a = 1. However, the optimality of this solution depends on the assumption that time is  associated only with considering the alternatives. Considered below is the problem of optimum design when time is assumed to  elapse between the choice points, as well as at the choice point considering alternatives.  THE MODEL  Assume that it takes some time t to consider each alternative at a choice point, and that some additional time t' is  associated with each choice point. This additional time can be interpreted as the time to travel between the choice points of  a maze, or the time to read a multiple choice question before beginning to consider the alternatives. The time to complete the  task is then  T' = nt' + ait. i=1  The model will be more general if we write  T' = nit' -}- Y_ aikt. (2) i=1  The exponent k allows the time spent considering the alternatives to be a power function of the number of alternatives at the  choice point, and has at least two interpretations. First, if the alternatives at a choice point are pair-compared, the number  of comparisons and hence the time will go up approximately as the square of the numberof alternatives. Orif thetesttaker  isconsidered as a limited informationprocessor the added alternatives might cause him to forget earlier ones and have to go  back and reread them (or forget the question and have to reread it). Because of these restrictions, time might not be linear  with the number of alternatives.  A second interpretation of k is also interesting. Consider optimizing on the test  OPTIMAL NUMBER OF ALTERNATIVES 93  constructors time. After a question is formed, the first alternative (the correct one) will be easy to write down. But it  might become increasingly difficult to think up each added good distractor.  The exponent j allows the time spent between the choice points to be a power function of the number of choice points and again  there are several possible interpretations. First, suppose that in a maze there is a fatigue factor such that the deeper into  the maze the longer it takes to get from one choice point to the next. Or, in terms of testing it might be that the time to  read and understand the question increases, particularly if the questions are ordered in difficulty or complexity. Second, in  terms of test construction the j might be appropriate for situations where it becomes difficult not only to think of  additional alternatives for a given question, but also to think up additional questions as well.  No generality is lost if the time between choice points is expressed relative to the time to consider a single alternative (t'  = rt) and if t is taken as the unit time so that (2) becomes  n  T = nir -}- Y_ aik. i=1  Suppose some fixed time T is available for the task. The formulation of the constrained integer optimization problem is then  n Maximize D = H ai, i=1  n  Subject to nir -}- ail; < T, i=1  T, r,ai,n>0,  ai , n = integer,  j,k>1,  T, r, j, k = constants.  The logic of the solution will be as follows. The minimum dimensionality of the hypercube is n = 0, associated with there not  being enough time (T) to construct a figure. An upper bound on the dimensionality is obtained from the first constraint as  nmax = [T/(r + 1)], [ ] = integer part of.  Write down the sequence 0, 1, 2,..., nmax . One of these must be the optimum dimensionality. For each dimension number in the  sequence determine the size of  94 BROWN GRIER  the associated maximum volume hypercube. Since n is now a known value in each case the amount of time available for  considering alternatives will be, from the first constraint,  = T - n'r.  Using the method of layering the alternatives, one per choice point, to achieve maximum volume gives n choice points with  a = [((T - n'r)In)l11l (4)  alternatives per point, with a remaining time of  (T-njr)  This remaning time can be used to begin on the next layer of alternatives. Since each additional alternative takes  units of time, there will be  m = [((T - n'r) - na")I((a + 1)" - ak)]  additional alternatives. These m alternatives are again `layered' as far as possible, so that for each value of n the  associated largest volume is  D = (a)n--(a + 1)m. (6)  The desired hypercube is then the one with the largest value of D, and the optimal integer solutions are the associated values  of a, m, and n.  These procedures are illustrated in Table 1 for the case T = 17, j = 1, k = 2, r = 2.6. The first column is the number of  dimensions, and the second is the amount of time left for considering alternatives after the travel time is subtracted. The  values of a and m are from (4) and (5), respectively. The section labeled assignment gives the form of each test, and the last  column gives its criterion value D. The maximum D is D* = 4, and there are two equally good optimal solutions. In the case of  multiple choice tests the design associated with n = 3 does not seem to make much sense because it has a choice point with  only one alternative. However, there may be other situations where having one subsidiary is applicable. For example, near the  end of a day an executive might be better off taking an available action, since there is not time to do otherwise.  If n* was known in advance the remaining optimal values could be readily deter-  OPTIMAL NUMBER OF ALTERNATIVES 95  TABLE 1 Constrained Integer Optimization Example n T - nlr a m Assignment D  1 14.40 3 0 3 3  2 11.80 2 0 2,2 4  3 9.20 1 2 2, 2, 1 4  4 6.60 1 0 1, 1, 1, 1 1  =17,j=1,k=2,r=2.6.  mined. A trial value can be obtained from solution of the associated continuous problem  n  Maximize D = ai, (7)  Subject to nir + nak = T. (8)  Since the volume of a continuous hypercube is maximum only when all sides are equal, (7) can be written  D = an. (9)  Rearranging (8) as  ak = (T - n'r)/n, (10)  and substituting in (9) gives  D = an = (ak)n1k = ((T - n'r)Jn)n1k. (11) The derivative of (11) with respect to n is zero only when  T - nir = 0, (12)  or  (13)  Equation (12) gives a minimum value of D = 0 as can be seen by substitution into (11). Hence (13) is taken as the appropriate  expression for the continuous maximum value of n.  An analytic expression for n does not seem obtainable and numerical methods will have to be used on (13). Since the function  (11) is single peaked with respect to n, once an approximate solution is found an optimal integer solution should be either  the next larger or smaller integer value.  96 BROWN GRIER  To apply the continuous method to the problem in Table 1, the solution of (13) is obtained numerically as n ^- 2.32, and,  hence both n = 2 and n = 3 are candidates. Empirically, the function is sometimes fairly flat so that on occasion more than  just one or two adjacent values of n are equally good.  A continuous expression for a can be obtained by substituting (10) into (13), which yields  al (k In a - 1) = rjnj-i (14)  and an analytic solution for a does not appear obtainable. Note that if r = 0 (no time is spent between choice points) and k =  1 (consideration time is linear with the number of alternatives), (14) reduces to  a(In a - 1) = 0,  which is true only if a = 0, or  a=e=2.718,...,  which is just the continuous optimum value found by Tversky (1964). Therefore the above model contains Tversky's model as a  special case.  Note from (14) that the optimal number of alternatives per choice point does not depend on T, the amount of time available for  the task. For the case j = 1 (time to read the question is uniform throughout the test), Fig. 1 shows the solution of (14)  OW  1 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10  RELATIVE TIME BETWEEN CHOICE POINTS (r)  FIG. 1. The optimum value of a for the associated continuous problem as a function of relative time (r) between choice points  when j = 1.  OPTIMAL NUMBER OF ALTERNATIVES  97  as a function of r for various values of k. For example, suppose it takes about twice as long to read a question as to  consider a single alternative (r = 2). If time is linear with the number of alternatives (k = 1), then the optimum test would  have four or five alternatives per choice point. Also, the larger the value of r (relative time to read the question or travel  between choice points) the greater the optimum number of alternatives at a point.  DISCUSSION  The model can be used to place Tversky's (1964) result regarding the optimality of three-alternative items in perspective.  Consider (11) the associated continuous expression for the volume of the hypercube. This volume will be maximized with respect  to the constants r, j and k, when they are made as small as possible say r = 0, j = 1, k = 1. Volume is reduced as any of them  increases, so in this sense one would try to design tests with the minimum travel time possible (r = 0) and have consideration  time proportional to the number of alternatives (k = 1). But this is exactly Tversky's optimum case.  REFERENCE  TvERSKY, A. On the optimum number of alternatives at a choice point. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1964, 1, 386-391.  RECEIVED: March 18, 1975  Printed in Belgium