10.1016/0022-2496(76)90014-6
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 14, 53-71 (1976)  A Comparison of Two Models for Performance under Fixed Interval Schedules of Reinforcement'  STEPHEN AMBLER  Department of Psychology, University of Lancaster, Lancaster LAI 4YF, Britain  Two models are proposed for responding under fixed-interval schedules of reinforcement. The first model is a Poisson model and  seems suitable for situations in which responding produces a classical "Fl scallop." A second model is then developed to  describe "break and run" performance, which is also known to occur under some Fixed Interval schedules. The models do not  however give any indication of the circumstances under which a particular mode of responding should arise. A comparison of the  models to a small set of data collected from rats performing under an FI 60 sec schedule indicates that for the data  considered, the second model (a State model) produced by far the best fit.  1. INTRODUCTION  The models described in this paper are models for learning under certain kinds of reinforcement schedules. These schedules are  those where reinforcement probability depends only on the time since the previous reinforcement. If T denotes the time since  reinforcement in some learning experiment, then U(T) will be used to denote the probability that a response T seconds after  the last reinforcement will be reinforced. Examples of such schedules are  U(T) = p, p is a constant.  This schedule is of minor interest in the present circumstances. It is usually called the random-ratio schedule. Its  simplicity sometimes makes it useful in illustrating the predictions of a model.  (ii) U(T) = 0, T < d,  = 1, T > d,  d is a constant.  This schedule is the customary fixed-interval schedule and is the most important schedule of this kind.  1 Part of this work was done at the University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand, while the author held a University of  Auckland Post-doctoral Fellowship.  Copyright 1976 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  53  54 STEPHEN AMBLER  It is worth noting here that the schedule defined by  U(T) = 1 - exp(-yT), y is a constant,  i.e., the Random-Interval schedule is not a member of the class of schedules considered here as  U(T I T') = 1 - exp(-y(T- T')).  The probability that a response occurring at T will be reinforced, given that the previous response occurred at T' and was not  reinforced, is dependent on T' as well as T. Norman (1966) provides a proof that the Random-Interval schedule is simply  contingent upon the interresponse time (T - T').  2.1. MODEL I-A POISSON MODEL  The conceptual basis of the model outlined in the following sections closely parallels a model for schedules of interresponse  time reinforcement developed by Ambler (1973). Assume that any instant, T, since reinforcement is characterized by a set of  stimulus elements which depends on the particular value of T. The subject is assumed to sample at random, in time, from these  sets of stimulus elements at a Poisson rate p. At asymptote (i.e., after long training under schedule U(T)) assume that the  mean proportion of elements sampled from the set available at a particular instant, and which are conditioned to the  particular response under consideration, can be denoted by a function T(T), which will be called the response strength  function. (P(T) is then interpreted as follows. Given that a sampling of stimulus elements actually occurs in the small  interval (T, T + ST), which event has probability pST, then a response occurs with probability P(T). This response, if it  occurs, will be reinforced with probability U(T).  The probability of a response in the small interval (T, T -}- ST), given that a reinforcement has not occurred in the interval  (0, T) is thus given by  pq,(T) ST.  This result means that at asymptote, behavior in the periods between reinforcements may be regarded as extracts from a  nonhomogeneous Poisson process, with intensity function pp(T). The properties of such processes have been much studied, and  good descriptions can be found in most texts on Stochastic Processes, (e.g., Parzen, 1965). Since p p(T) represents the  "instantaneous rate of responding," it is naturally identified with what is usually termed the "local rate of responding" in  the operant literature (Catania & Reynolds, 1968). The Poisson process seems to be the simplest and most direct way of  relating response rates to probabilities of responding.  SCHEDULES OF REINFORCEMENT SS  It will be convenient to denote fo pT(y) dy by m(T). As the response process is nonhomogeneous Poisson, some results follow  immediately. The density of the time between the last reinforcement and the next response will be denoted by s(T). This is the  "postreinforcement-pause" distribution. It is given by  s(T) = p4,(T) exp(-m(T)).  The distribution of the number of responses occurring in the interval (0, T) is given by N(k, T) where k is the number of  responses. For the process considered here, it is well known that  N(k, T) _ [m(kI )]k exp(-m(T)). (2)  It is assumed that no reinforcement has occurred in the interval (0, T).  Now let v(T) denote the density function for interreinforcement times and V(T) the corresponding cumulative function. Then, if  reinforcement occurs in small interval (T, T -}- ST), it does so with probability  V(T -}- ST) - V(T) = (1 - V(T)) pp(T) U(T) ST,  and hence,  v(T) = pp(T) U(T) exp (- f T PT(y) U(y) dy). (3)  The distribution of the number of responses per reinforcement can be calculated  from Eqs. (2) and (3), and is  N(k) = f o N(k, T) v(T) dT. 0  All the above derivations assume a knowledge of cp(T), the asymptotic response strength function. Determination of p(T) could  be regarded as a direct experimental problem, i.e., one of determining the local rate of responding from some particular  experiment and then testing to see if this obtained result, when inserted into the equations above, made predictions  consistent with other aspects of data from the same experiment. It is however also of interest to attempt to predict 4'(T), in  terms of U(T), the schedule of reinforcement. This is attempted in the next section.  2.2 THE LEARNING MODEL  An experiment which runs continuously, and where the occurrence of reinforcement is contingent only the time since the  previous reinforcement, is divided up, by the occurrence of reinforcement, into a natural series of "trials." Trial i is the  period  SC) STEPHEN AMBLER  between the ith and the (i + 1)th reinforcements. Such a trial will consist of k responses, where k is a random variable, and  will be denoted by qi(k), where  The T; (1 < j < k) represent the times at which the k responses occurred in the trial. It is implicit that the responses at T;  (1 < j < k - 1) were not reinforced, while the response at Tk was reinforced, and thus terminated the trial.  One of the simplest ways of describing learning is to assume that nonreinforcement and reinforcement cause linear  transformations of the response strength function. For example, suppose a response occurs at T' and is not reinforced. The  effect of this event could be described by  T(T) - 9,(T) - T(T) 00(w(T; T'),  where 00 is a parameter that measures the effectiveness of nonreinforcement in changing (p(T) (0 < 0, < 1) and w(T; T') is a  spread function, which describes how the effects of nonreinforcement at T' generalize to other values of T.  Similarly, the effect of a reinforcement at T' would be described by  9,(T)- 9,(T) + (1 - 9,(T)) 01w(T; T'),  where 01 represents the effectiveness of reinforcement (0 < 01 < 1) and w(T; T') is a spread function, as before.  These last two equations represent commonly made assumptions about the effects of reinforcement and nonreinforcement in linear  models, however, their use here is somewhat ambiguous, which is why the arrow (->) was used, rather than an equals (=) sign,  and no reference was made to trial number. Transformations such as the above are usually assumed to apply on a trial-by-trial  basis; i.e., one or the other of these transformations is applied at the end of each trial. However, the transformations carry  the further implication that one or the other occurs after each response. Often the occurrence of a response marks the end of  a trial, and the two amount to the same, but for trials as defined in the present context this is not so; a trial may consist  of many responses. The problem is, to choose between some kind of trial-by-trial transformation, and a response-by-response  transformation.  The preferred choice would appear to be a response-by-response transformation, but unfortunately this appears to lead to very  complex learning equations for the overall trial-by-trial effects. As a result, a trial-by-trial transformation is suggested,  but one which, it is hoped, produces a reasonable approximation to a response-byresponse approach.  SCHEDULES OF REINFORCEMENT 57  For trial qi(k) define the learning process by  k-1  9,i+1(T I qi(k)) = 9,i(T) - 9,i(T) eo Y w(T; T,) =1  + (1 - 9,i(T)) 91w(T; Tk). (4)  Equation (4) represents the trial-by-trial learning process. Basically it assumes that the effects of the pattern of  reinforcements and nonreinforcements are all applied at the end of the trial, 9'i(T) remaining effectively unchanged  throughout the trial. (If the effects were applied on a response-by-response basis, then the response strength part would be  different for each term on the right-hand side of (4). Each term like 00(pi(T) w(T; T;) would need to be of the form  Bo9'~-1(T) w(T; T;), where the Ta-1(T) would represent 4'i(T) together with the effects of the previous j - 1  nonreinforcements.)  Averaging (4) over all the values of T; (1 < j G k) and reinforcement or nonreinforcement in qi(k) will give pi+1(T I k). The  mean value of the response strength function 9?i+1(T) is then given by summing cpi+1(T I k) over all values of k. Suprisingly,  this averaging and summation can be carried out (it did of course help determine the form of (4)) and yields  Ti+1(T) = 9,i(T) - Bo-pi(T) f o~ w(T; T')(1 - U(T')) pp(T')  T'  X exp (- f o pq,(y) U(y) dy) dT'  + B1(1 - 9,i(T)) f , w(T; T') v(T') dT'. 0  A proof of (5) follows.  Taking expectations of (4) over qi(k) gives  k-1  9'i+1(T) = 9,i(T) - 009,i(T) E ( w(T; Tf)) + B1(1 - pi(T )) E(w(T; Tk)).  Consider E(w(T; Tk)). Expectations are taken over Tk , which is the interreinforcement time. Thus  E(w(T; T')) = f o v(T') w(T; T') dT', 0  where v(T') is the density function of the intereinforcement times, which is known.  58 STEPHEN AMBLER  To calculate E(yk-1 w(T; T )) let f (T T' 8T = P 1 responses occur in (T', T), none of them reinforced, and a response occurs  in (T, T + ST)). Then,  (k-1  E jY 1 w(T; Tj)) -  0o k-1 f f  _ Y_ Y. J f (Tj ,1 10)(1 - U(Tj)) w(T; Tj) J f (Tk , k -j I Tj) U(Tk) dTk dTj.  k=2 j-1 0 T~  Interchanging the order of summation, and putting p = k - j  J 'f (Tj, j 10)(1 - U(Tj)) w(T; Tj) J ~f (Tj+P , p I Tj) U(Tj+P) dTj+P dTj j=1 Pal 0 Tj  _ Y J f (Tj , j 10)(1 - U(Tj)) w(T; Tj) dTj j=1 0  (since the probability is 1 that a trial ends with a reinforcement)  = f (1 - U(T')) w(T; T') f (T', j 10) dT'.  o ;=1  However, by definition,  v(T) = U(T) Y f (T, j 10). j=1  Therefore, using this relation, together with (3), gives  E ( w(T; Tj)) = f (1 - U(T')) w(T; T') pp(T') exp (- J Tl pp(y) U(y) dY) dT'.  -1 0 0  Inserting the above results into (6) leads to (5). At asymptote, putting B = 00/Bl ,  p(T) _ fo v(Tl)zv(T; T)dT l T , f ,*o (9(l - U(T )) -I- U(T,)) w(T; T) p4,(T,) exp(- f o. pp(y) U(y) dy) dT,  terms without suffices indicating the corresponding asymptotic quantities.  SCHEDULES OF REINFORCEMENT 59  To illustrate the result, take U(T) p, i.e., the random ratio schedule. Then, from (7),  v,(T) =pl(B(l -p) +p) =   This is exactly the same result as that obtained by Ambler (1973) when, under a slightly different model, the schedule was  considered as an example of a schedule simply contingent upon interresponse time. The result says that interresponse times on  this schedule are exponentially distributed with parameter p The appearance of this result here is reassuring on two counts:  one, since the schedule is actually temporally noncontingent, a change of temporal baseline should not produce different  predictions for this schedule, and two, this result suggests that (4) may not be too bad an approximation to  response-by-response learning, at any rate for effects that are averaged across a number of trials.  2.3. APPLICATION TO FIXED-INTERVAL SCHEDULES OF REINFORCEMENT  For fixed-interval schedules of reinforcement, (7) becomes  exp(m(d)) f_ a w(T; T') s(T') dT'  ~(T ) ' 0 f o w(T; T') pp(T') dT' -}- exp(m(d)) f o w(T; T') s(T') dT'  However, as w(T; T') is unknown, the general shape of this function is also unknown. Choice of a spread function is difficult,  as very little is known of its likely shape. In view of this, the rather arbitrary choice  w(T; T') = exp[- J((T -- T')IaT')2]  is made, where a is a constant. This is the familiar normal density function without its normalizing terms. (These have been  dropped as w(T; T) is expected to be 1.0.) The term aT' (which is analogous to the "standard deviation") makes the accuracy of  temporal discrimination dependent on T'. Long times since reinforcement are less finely discriminated than short times since  reinforcement.  Computation of an explicit expression for gq(T) is still not possible; however, iterative methods can be used to find p(T)  numerically. Figure la illustrates pp(T), i.e., local rates of responding for p = 5.0, a = 0.1 and 0 = 0.5, 0.05, 0.005, and  0.0005. Decreasing values of 0 are accompanied by a steepening and leftward shift of pm(T ), which is reflected in the  leftward shift of the distribution of postreinforcementpauses (Fig. lb) and in the rightward shift of the distribution of the  number of responses per reinforcement (Fig. lc).  The distribution of responses per reinforcement is easily calculated. If k responses occur to a reinforcement, then k - 1 must  occur in the interval (0, d), the kth occurring  60 STEPHEN AMBLER  Ib sec  .08 .04  FIG. 1. Some illustrative predictions from the Poisson model. Parameters: a = 0.1, p = 5.0, always, 0 = 0,/01, the learning  parameter, takes indicated values (i) 0 = 0.5, (ii) 0 = 0.05, (iii) 0 = 0.005, (iv) 0 = 0.0005. Abbreviations: rsp = response,  rft = reinforcement, rel freq = relative frequency. Reinforcement schedule is fixed interval 60 sec.  after d since previous reinforcement and thus collecting the next scheduled reinforcement. The distribution is thus, from (2),  N(k) = (kan(d))x1)I I exp (-m(d));  i.e., it is a Poisson process over intervals of duration d. It follows that  E(k) = m(d) -}- 1.  The expected number of responses in (0, d) is m(d) and a final one occurs to collect the reinforcement. It is also clear that  Var(k) = m(d). m(d) can be estimated directly from the data (it is the area under the local rates of responding curve between  timesince-reinforcement equals zero, and time-since-reinforcement equals d), without any intervening parameter estimation. The  similarity of this value to the mean (m(d) + 1) and the variance (m(d)) of the distribution of responses per reinforcement  provides a parameter free indication of how well the asymptotic behavior can be described by a nonhomogeneous Poisson process.  To test the learning model it is necessary to estimate values of p, 0, and a, and see how closely the predicted pp(T) can be  made to described the obtained local rates of  SCHEDULES OF REINFORCEMENT 61  responding. Good estimators of these parameters are not known. It is clear from the inspection of (8) that as 0 becomes very  small (i.e., p p(T) will be approximately constant) then p(p(T) becomes rather insensitive to the nature of w(T; T'), but not  to a. This suggests that in general, estimating p, 0, and a, by fitting pp(T) to local rates of responding will not produce  very independent estimates of p, 0, and a. However, at present there seems to be no other way of estimating these parameters.  2.4. AN EXPERIMENTAL TEST  In order to provide some sort of experimental test for the model presented in the preceding sections, a small number of data  have been collected from two rats run on an FI 60 sec. schedule. The two rats were maintained at approximately 80% of their  free weight, and run for one session of 50 reinforcements per day, 5 days per week, for 4 weeks. The reinforcement consisted  of the presentation of a dipper containing sweetened condensed milk, for a period of 3 seconds. The response was a simple bar  press. For the last four sessions, for each animal, the number of responses-perreinforcement was recorded from a counter, and  the postreinforcement-pause was recorded manually, with the aid of a stopwatch.  FIG. 2. The distribution of postreinforcement-pauses used to estimate the parameters a, B, p, for the Poisson model. The  histogram gives the obtained distribution, while the dots give the distribution predicted from the estimated parameter values.  Abbreviations: rft = reinforcement, rel freq = relative frequency.  62  STEPHEN AMBLER  In view of the relatively small number of observations, it is necessary to pool observations into fairly wide classes. The  distributions of responses-per-reinforcement and postreinforcement-pause will be dealt with separately, the  postreinforcementpause being dealt with first.  Figure 2 illustrates the distribution of postreinforcement-pauses, the numbers 10 and 2 referring to the different rats. The  observation were grouped into four second wide class intervals, the first being 1 < T < 5. These distributions are somewhat  messy, which may reflect the small number of observations (200 per graph). The dots give the predicted values for the values  of a, p, 0 given on each graph. No strict procedure was used to estimate these values, rather a few values were tried, and the  fit judged by eye. (Computation of the distribution is rather time-consuming and given the crude nature of the observations, a  sophisticated search procedure seems unwarranted.)  The model makes two predictions of interest. First, given the assumption that the response process is a nonhomogeneous Poisson  process, it predicts a relation between the mean and variance of the distribution of responses-per-reinforcement; second,  TABLE 1 Mean and Variance of the Distribution of Response-per-Reinforcement,  Model Processes Rat 10 Mean Rat 2  specified Mean Variance  Variance  Poisson Response and 23.3 22.3 8.5 7.5  learning (87.5) (667.8) (68.1) (729.9)  Response  86.5  67.1   (87.5) (667.8) (68.1) (729.9)  State Response and 95.5 257.3 65.2 613.8  learning (87.5) (667.8) (68.1) (729.9)  Response  694.8  680.6   (87.5) (667.8) (68.1) (729.9)  a This table compares predictions of the two models using both the response and learning assumptions, and only the response  assumptions. With response and learning assumptions, parameters a, B, p (Poisson) and a, 6, u (State) are estimated by fitting  to the postreinforcementpause distribution. These parameter values were then used to predict the mean and variance of the  distribution of responses-per-reinforcement. When only the response assumptions were used, the mean response-per-reinforcement  is used to predict the variance of this distribution for the Poisson model, (VN = mN - l), and this mean, together with the  mean and variance of the postreinforcement-pause distribution, is used as a predictor of variance for the State model (.1 =  (mN - 2)J(d - md), VN = A(d - m,) -F A2Ve). The terms in parentheses are the observed values. The other values are  predictions. These are given only in cases where a comparison of observed and predicted values is meaningful.  SCHEDULES OF REINFORCEMENT 63  given the values of a, p, B calculated from the postreinforcement-pause distribution by utilizing the additional learning  assumptions, it predicts the numerical values of the mean and variance of the distribution of responses-per-reinforcement.  These two predictions, together with the actual observations, are given in columns of Table 1.  Table 1 shows that the actual values of the mean and variance are strikingly different from the values predicted utilizing a,  p, B and that the actual values also fail to satisfy the appropriate interrelationship.  3.1. MODEL II-A STATE MODEL  The choice of the model type developed in Section 2 was influenced by two main factors. It is a natural extension of a model  for behavior under interresponse-time schedules of reinforcement (Ambler, 1973) and further, it was felt that the gradual  increase in response rate across the Interval it was likely to predict could model the "FI scallop." The FI scallop is usually  taken to be the characteristic form assumed by cumulative records collected from animals responding under Fixed Interval  schedules. If a quick review is taken of basic operant texts over the past few years (e.g., Reynolds, 1968; Rachlin, 1970;  Blackman, 1974), they all provide essentially the same description of Fixed Interval schedule responding: a pause after  reinforcement, and then an accelerating increase in the rate of responding until a reinforcement occurs at the end of the  Interval-the FI scallop. Interestingly, however, they all allude, later in their texts, to an alternative mode of responding  and confess that sometimes a different pattern is found. This second pattern is called "break and run." Each interval begins  with rather a long pause and is then followed by a fairly abrupt transition to a high rate of responding, which is maintained  to the end of the interval. This particular pattern of responding seems to have first been investigated in detail by Schneider  (1969). It is far from clear under what kinds of circumstance the one form of Fixed Interval responding is preferred over the  other. A point of local importance is, however, that the cumulative records generated by the two rats used in the experiment  described in Section 2.4 seem much more typical of a "break and run" pattern of responding than a scallop pattern. If this is  an accurate characterization, it could account for the remarkably poor fit obtained by the Poisson model (while leaving  unanswered the question of whether or not a Poisson model can describe scallop responding). The observation of a break and run  pattern of responding prompted the development of a state model, outlined in the next section.  3.2. THE RESPONSE PROCESS (STATE MODEL)  Assume that a subject may be in one of two states. In state So he makes no suitable responses at all ("break"). Eventually he  moves into a second state Sl , where he responds randomly at a uniform rate A ("run"). He remains in Si until a reinforcement  48o/114/1-5  64  STEPHEN AMBLER  is finally delivered, whereupon he relapses into state So . It will be assumed that the actual state transitions are  determined by a nonhomogeneous Poisson process with intensity function lao(T ). p is simply a fixed scalar multiplier, used so  that the transition function O(T) can be regarded as bounded above by one. It is bounded below by zero. (The following  conceptualization may prove useful: The subject checks, at a random rate ft, the evidence that a transition should be made. On  any such check, the probability is O(T) that the indications are to make a transition.) For periods between reinforcement, the  transition matrix and its associated response vector are  Sl So Response Rate  So [1,,O(T)8T 1 -wO(T)8T] ~ L01.  A number of results now follow directly. For convenience, define  q(T) = po(T) exp (- f T 1o(y) dy). 0  This is the density function of the distribution of transition times. The corresponding cumulative function will be denoted by  Q(T). The average local rate of responding is then  l(T)  AQ(T).  The density of interreinforcement times is  v(T) = l(T) U(T) exp (  f T l(Y) U(Y) dy). 0  Notice the formal similarity between this result and the corresponding result (3) for the Poisson model.  The density of postreinforcement-pauses is the convolution,  s(T) = f r q(T')A exp(-A(T - T')) dT'. 0  Similarly, then distribution of the number of responses, k, in the interval (0, T)  between reinforcements is  N(k, T) = f T q(T')((A(T - T,))klkl) exp(-A(T- T')) dT', 0  and the distribution of responses-per-reinforcement is  N(k) = f N(k, T) v(T) dT. 0  SCHEDULES OF REINFORCEMENT 65  The previous equations describe properties of asymptotic responding when O(T) is known. It seems reasonable to assume that  O(T) is itself subject to a learning process. The simplest assumption to make is that the transition function is subject to  the same kind of learning transformation that the Response Strength function was subject to in the Poisson model. Hence we  have, for learning,  k-1  Oi+1(T 14a(k)) = Oi(T) - Oj(T) 00 w(T; Tf) + (I - Oi(T)) 01w(T; Tk) (10) -1  and asymptotically, on average,  (T) _ , f' v(T) w(T; T') dT '  O T'  f o (0(1 - U(T )) + U(T )) w(T; T) AO(T) exp(-f o Ao(y) U(Y) dY) dT  3.3. THE STATE MODEL AND FIXED-INTERVAL SCHEDULES  For fixed-interval schedules, the asymptotic transition function is rather complex, as direct substitution into (10) will  illustrate. However, if the assumption is made that a transition always occurs before the end of the interval (i.e., Q(T) = 1,  for T >, d) then  v(T) = 0, T < d  = A exp(A(d - T)), T ~>_ d.  This assumption seems a reasonable approximation for Fixed-Interval schedules, provided d is not too small. Using the above  expression for v(T) leads to  exp(Ad) f a exp(-AT') w(T; T') dT'  (T ) - 0 _f 'o' Q(T') w(T; T') dT' -}- exp(Ad) f d' exp(-AT') w(T; T') dT' .  Taking the spread function as that used in Section 2.3, iterative methods can be used to find ~(T), and hence various other  interesting functions.  Figure 3 illustrates some predictions for A = 3, It = 5, a = 0.1, and 0 = 0.5, 0.05, 0.005, and 0.0005. If Fig. 3 is compared  with Fig. 1, it can be seen that there are a number of similarities in the shapes of the obtained functions. The average local  rates of responding are similar in shape in both models, the averaging having concealed the underlying differences. The most  striking differences lie between the families of distributions of response-per-reinforcement. The use of the fixed-interval  Schedule has again simplified the calculation of this distribution, for if k responses occur to a  66  STEPHEN AMBLER  FIG. 3. Some illustrative predictions from the State model. Parameters: a = 0.1, 'U = 5.0, A = 3.0, always, B = 0,/B, takes  indicated values (i) B = 0.5, (ii) B = 0.05, (iii) B = 0.005, (iv) 8 = 0.0005. Abbreviations: rsp = response, rft =  reinforcement, rel freq = relative frequency. Reinforcement schedule is fixed interval 60 sec.  reinforcement, then k - 1 responses must have occurred between the transition to state Sl and the time d. Hence,  N(h) = f od q(T ') [A((k 1/)iz_1 exp(-A(d - T')) dT '.  It is possible to evaluate some simple relationships between the various aspects of the asymptotic model. Let mq , ms , m,,  and Vq , V,, V,, denote the asymptotic means and variances of the transition distribution, the postreinforcement distribution,  and the distribution of responses-per-reinforcement, respectively. Then,  nzq = f Tq(T) dT i---- f a Tq(T) dT,  0 0  assuming that transition always occurs before the end of the interval. Hence,  ma =' [TQ(T )]o - f s Q(T) dT 0  SCHEDULES OF REINFORCEMENT 67  where A is the area under the local rate of responding curve, between zero and d. Now,  Further,  ms= my+(1/A)  = d -}- (I /A)(1 - A).  MN = A(d - ms) + 2,  for on average, the interval between the first response and the scheduling of a reinforcement is d - m,, and in this interval,  responses occur at rate A. Also however, a response must occur to start the responding, and one must occur after d, to  terminate the trial. Eliminating ms gives  MN = A(d - d - (1/A)(I - A)) + 2  This relation also holds for the Poisson model, indeed it must hold for any model of Fixed-Interval responding, and reflects  the nature of the schedule, for A is the mean number of responses in (0, d), while the "1" represents the additional response  needed to secure reinforcement.  The above result shows that we cannot expect to discriminate between models of responding under Fixed-Interval schedules by  looking at this relationship. To discriminate between the models, one is forced to look at the higher moments of the various  distributions involved. The variance Vq of the transition distribution seems to have no simple expression. The variance VS of  the distribution of postreinforcementpauses is,  V = Vq + (I /A2),  as the transition and response processes are independent. The variance of the distribution of responses-per-reinforcement can  be calculated directly, and gives,  VN = A(d - ms) + A2V3.  This prediction differs from that made by the Poisson model, for which,  VN = m(d) = ms - 1.  In both cases, all the parts are known, or calcuable from data on the distribution of postreinforcement-pauses. They thus form  a possible basis for discriminating between the two models.  All the relationships established in the previous paragraph concern the response process and are independent, at asymptote, of  the underlying learning effects. Testing the underlying learning model is difficult, since all that can be done is to search  for parameter values, which when inserted into the transition function O(T) lead to predictions that correspond to the  observed data. However, O(T) is rather removed  68 STEPHEN AMBLER  from its manifestation in the data; for example, the most direct contact is through the empirical average local rate of  responding I(T). This relation is  (T) _ 1j, -log -log (A A(T)  and suggests that, with four parameters involved, it will be rather insensitive to test. However, for the sake of  completeness, and to provide a rudimentary comparison with the Poisson model, such a test has been provided, and is reported  in Table 1.  3.4. AN EXPERIMENTAL TEST  The data of Section 2.4 provide a possible test of some aspects of the State model. The parameter A can be estimated by  A = (MN - 2)1(d - ms).  FIG. 4. The distribution of postreinforcement-pauses used to estimate the parameters a, B, 1-1, for the State model. The  histogram gives the obtained distribution, while the dots give the distribution predicted from the estimated parameter values.  Abbreviations: rft = reinforcement, rel freq = relative frequency.  SCHEDULES OF REINFORCEMENT 69  The parameters a, B, p. were estimated by trying sets of values, and judging the fit to the postreinforcement-pause  distribution by eye. The results are illustrated in Fig. 4. The fits are reasonable, but not impressive. The main discrepancy  is for rat 10, where the incidence of long postreinforcement-pauses is substantially underpredicted. The fits to the  distribution of responses-per-reinforcement are interesting (Fig. 5). They represent a substantial improvement over the  Poisson model predictions. Notice however, the strong underprediction of small numbers of responses-perreinforcement for rat  10. This corresponds to the underprediction of long postreinforcement-pauses for this animal.  Fic. 5. The distribution of responses-per-reinforcement as predicted by the State model. The histogram gives the obtained  distribution, while the dots give the predicted one. Abbreviations: rsp = response, rft = reinforcement, rel freq = relative  frequency.  In comparing the two models, note that the fits of the models to the postreinforcement-pause distribution (Figs. 2 and 4) are  about the same. This outcome is relatively unsurprising, if the families of predicted postreinforcement-distributions are  compared (Figs. 1 and 3). These families are very similar. It is not until the fits to the distribution of  responses-per-reinforcement are compared, that the superiority of the State model is apparent. Figute 5 illustrates the  responses-per-reinforcement distribution predicted by the State model. No illustration of the predictions of the Poisson model  is provided, as the fit to data is abysmal. Table 1 gives further information on this point, and is discussed in the next  section.  70 STEPHEN AMBLER  4. CONCLUSION  Table 1 contains data appropriate to the comparison of the two models. Both models contain sets of essentially independent  assumptions, those about learning, and those about responding. The two models can be examined at two levels, one at which both  learning and responding assumptions are involved, and one at which only responding is involved. Table 1 gives the comparison  between the models at both levels. The important comparisons are among the variances of the predicted and observed  distributions of responses-per-reinforcement, and inspection of the entries in Table 1 clearly shows that the State model is  superior to the Poisson model. Further, there is the implication that the responding process is more accurately modelled than  The above conclusions may, of course, only apply to the present rather restricted set of data, which was collected so that  calculations of the variances could be made, as reports of this statistic rarely occur in the operant literature. If the  collected data had "scallopped" rather than "broke and run" the fits and the conclusions might well have been different. Both  models are too superficial to indicate what ought to be the characteristic behavior under Fixed-Interval schedules.  There are several ways in which the present models could be developed further, though such developments may prove technically  difficult. In principle, both models could address themselves to trial-by-trial changes in behavior. The most direct and  simplest modification to make would be to allow some low rate of responding in the "break" state of the State model. This  would allow the state transition to possibly occur after the first response. This would complicate the calculations. No doubt  it will improve the fit of the model to some aspects of the data, but, since it also introduces another free parameter, how is  that improvement to be assessed? It could well be that the present State model is preferred over such a model as grasping the  simple essence of Fixed-Interval responding, even though technically inaccurate. (There are many parallels in the physical  sciences; e.g., the Ideal Gas v. Van der Waals equation.)  The approach to Fixed-Interval schedules adopted in the present paper stands aside, in many ways, from the traditional  experimental approach. It is chiefly concerned with behavior under a given schedule, rather than with comparisons across  changes in schedule parameters. It thus requires a different attitude to data collection. Several simple interrelations  between different aspects of the same set of asymptotic data have been derived. These interrelations depend on the particular  starting assumptions. Hence a record of all the appropriate aspects of the data is required. Both means and variances must be  recorded. A single overall measure like "overall rate of responding" is essentially useless in such a context. This is not to  deny the importance of behavior changes across changes in schedule parameters, but merely to note that the present models do  not address themselves to such problems. The present approach does leave some aspects of fixed-interval responding  unexplained. Many observations  SCHEDULES OF REINFORCEMENT 71  result "because" of the particular parameter values obtained. There is at present no higher-order theory to say why parameters  have the values they do, or how they might change across schedules. Such theories of parameter changes across changes in  experimental circumstance form a major challenge to all branches of mathematical psychology.  REFERENCES  AMBLER, S. A mathematical model of learning under schedules of interresponse time reinforcement. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 1973, 10, 364-386.  BLACKMAN, D. Operant conditioning: the experimental analysis of behaviour. London: Meuthen, 1974.  CATANIA, A. C., & REYNOLDS, G. S. A quantative analysis of the responding maintained by Interval of reinforcement. Journal of  the Experimental Analysis of Behaviour, 1968, 11, 327-383. NORMAN, M. F. An approach to free responding on schedules that  prescribe reinforcement probability as a function of interresponse time. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1966, 3, 235-268.  PARzEN, E. Stochastic Processes. San Francisco: Holden-Day, 1962.  RACHLIN, H. Introduction to Modern Behaviourism. San Francisco: Freeman, 1970. REYNOLDS, G. S. A primer of operant  conditioning. Glenview, Ill.: Scott, Foresman, 1968. SCHNEIDER, B. A. A two-state analysis of Fixed Interval responding.  Journal of the Experiment Analysis of Behaviour, 1969, 12, 677-687.  RECEIVED: March 18, 1975; revised September 23, 1975