10.1016/0022-2496(76)90013-4
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 14, 1-52 (1976)  A Stochastic Theory of Matching Processes'  JAMES T. TOWNSEND  Department of Psychological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907  A theory of matching processes is developed within which serial models and parallel models based on within-stage independent  intercompletion times are defined. These models are then specialized to a class of processes possessing exponential  intercompletion time densities and equivalence properties of parallel and serial models within this class are investigated.  Nonequivalence theorems are proved that designate possible differences in "same" (-}-) and different (-) matching rates as  important in testing parallel and serial models. An experimental paradigm is then derived with the property that if -F rates  are different from - rates, and if processing is self-terminating, then the parallel and serial models are distinguishable at  the level of mean reaction times. The serial class of models that is tested by this paradigm includes a large number of  stochastic distributions whose central assumption is additivity of element processing times. The corresponding parallel class  of models is currently limited to those assuming exponential intercompletion times. A numerical example and an example of  nonparametric relations predicted by the serial or parallel models are given. Some advantages and limitations of the present  treatment are discussed.  1. INTRODUCTION  Within the realm of human cognition, there are many instances where information from one source or subprocess must make  contact with and be compared with information from another source or subprocess. This paper is concerned with the stochastic  properties of such comparison processes as can be represented by one set of elements matched against another set. Each element  in one set either matches (is identical to) or mismatches any given element in the other set. The applications of the theorems  discussed in this paper are primarily directed to reaction time paradigms with low error rates. However, the mathematical  theory provides the distribution of uncompleted elements at any point in time and this may be paired with deadline and  response bias assumptions to derive predictions of speed-accuracy tradeoff.  111 am grateful to W. K. Estes, Rockefeller University and the National Institute for General Medical Sciences for support of  a visiting Associate Professorship under Grant GM16735, during which time (1972-73) about 40% of the present work was  completed. I am appreciative of the comments on an early draft of this manuscript by W. K. Estes, J. C. Falmagne, S. Link, F.  Norman, and D. Vorberg, and for helpful remarks on exposition by W. Batchelder and two referees.  Copyright Q 1976 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  2 JAMES T. TOWNSEND  Some of the kinds of comparison processing to which this work may be relevant are: (1) Pattern recognition: A single pattern  (e.g., a letter) is presented on each trial and the subject's task is to give a response identifying the pattern (e.g.,  Townsend, 1971a). The match is between the stimulus pattern and memory information, corresponding to the total set of possible  patterns, stored in some fashion in the subject's memory. The term "element," used below in theorizing, might refer to a  feature of a pattern and matching would refer to comparing the stimulus pattern features with features stored in memory. (2)  Multidimensional pattern discrimination: On each trial, two patterns that may differ on one or more dimensions (size, color,  etc.) are compared and the subject responds "same" if the patterns are identical on each dimension and "different" otherwise  (e.g., Egeth, 1966). The elements that undergo comparison or match processing are the dimension values present on a given  trial. (3) Display and memory search: One or more symbols or patterns are given to the subject on each trial followed by a  second display containing one or more symbols to be compared with the memory symbols. Often, visual span of apprehension is  studied by putting only one target symbol in the subject's memory and then giving him a multisymbol display presented for a  short duration (Atkinson, Holmgren, & Juola, 1969). Memory scanning often involves the opposite, namely presenting several  symbols for memory storage followed by presentation of a single target or critical symbol (e.g., Sternberg, 1966). In both of  the latter cases, the subject responds "yes" indicating the presence of the target in the multisymbol set or "no" indicating  its absence. Both of these designs are closely related to a two-alternative forced choice situation invented by Estes and  Taylor (1964). The usual breakdown in these experiments would have the symbols being the elements, but the symbol elements may  themselves be considered as made up of smaller features. In the latter instance, processing questions may be found on both  levels.  This paper is divided into seven sections. In the remainder of the Introduction, previous germane work is briefly reviewed and  the approach and goals of the present study are discussed. The reader interested in moving immediately to the formal  development may wish to bypass the remainder of this section. The second section builds a theoretical framework for  explication of the structure of comparison processing and its modeling. Section 3 introduces the models with which we are  specifically concerned here and gives them a mathematical characterization. Next, Section 4 provides general equivalence and  nonequivalence results for the present serial and parallel models. Following this, a special case (Section 5) closely related  to a contemporary type of matching experiment is developed in detail and is used to illustrate model structure and equivalence  results. The sixth section gives a parallel-serial testing paradigm (PST), derived from considerations of the earlier  theorems, that tests the present serial and parallel models against one another. Some concluding remarks on PST appear in the  seventh and final section. Reading the first two sections (excluding the Introduction) is necessary for understanding the rest  of the  STOCHASTIC THEORY OF MATCHING PROCESSES 3  paper. However, the proofs of the theorems of Section 4 may be skipped and their content garnered from their exemplification  in Section 5. It may also be helpful to read Section 5 in conjunction with Section 3. The last two sections, which develop and  discuss PST, require familiarity with earlier notation and rest upon the theorems of Section 4, but may be read independently  of the latter.  Accompanying the significant interest in theories of how information is processed, stored and used (not to be confused with  information theory, per se are experiments and models addressed to questions of how processing resources are deployed to  complete some finite number of comparisons, as well as how much in the way of resources are available. However, in at least  certain major areas of research not only has there been a general lack of theoretical framework, but rather little in the way  of mathematical treatment seems to have been accorded either models or data analysis.  Attempts have recently been initiated to set up a qualitative framework for some important aspects of processing (Gardner,  1973; Townsend, 1971b) and to provide a mathematical framework and properties of identifiability for these and similar aspects  (Townsend, 1969, 1972, 1974; Townsend & Roos, 1973). Among such aspects of processing mechanisms are the dichotomies of  self-terminating vs exhaustive processing, dependence vs independence of processing, limited vs unlimited capacity and serial  vs parallel processing. (For detailed discussions of these issues the reader is referred to Gardner, 1973; Townsend, 1974.)  Although all of these can be facilely discussed in the mathematical context developed in the above papers, the parallel vs  serial issue (roughly simultaneous vs one-at-a-time processing of several elements) has been emphasized because of its great  interest to investigators (see, e.g., Haber, 1969, Introduction) and the fact that problems of parallel-serial testability  were shown to be much more refractory than was previously recognized. Further, the other issues differ in their interpretation  according as processing is parallel or serial. A brief, more specific review of recent related work follows.  Historically, Christie and Luce (1956) appear to have been the first to engage in a mathematical investigation of parallel and  serial processes within a psychological context. Their work was primarily concerned with processing of all the elements with  constant and equal rates on distinct elements. In their case, an "element" was a component of a decision process, and they  considered the general case of unknown numbers of objects. Typically, experimenters have unfortunately not employed these  results in other than a qualitative manner. Further, it later became apparent that there existed severe problems of  parallel-serial equivalence even when the number of objects to be processed was assumed known (Townsend, 1969, 1971b).  Although the most general results to date on the latter problem have not yet been embedded in the case where the number of  objects is not known, we can probably expect the difficulties in testability to be substantially augmented.  McGill and Gibbon (1965) provided an exposition on the general gamma distribution, in particular with regard to its use in  modeling RT. Reaction time was viewed as  4 JAMES T. TOWNSEND  possibly consisting of a sequence of stages, the random duration of each stage being governed by an exponential density. This  hypothesis corresponds to Townsend's (1971b, 1972) assumption of exponential intercompletion times within stages of processing  a finite number of inputs. That assumption was employed in establishing the primary equivalence results early in the latter  paper (specifically, Townsend, 1972, p. 174-184).  Rumelhart (1970) succeeded in fitting data from a wide array of visual multisymbol processing experiments. His model was  parallel across the various symbols but features were assumed to be extracted one at a time. His intercompletion times for  features were distributed exponentially. Like McGill and Gibbon (1965), Rumelhart was not specifically concerned with the  parallel-serial equivalence question. However, it follows from recent results that the aspect of his model concerned with  processing of features of individual symbols may be equally well expressed as serial or parallel (Townsend, 1971b, 1972). A  remark on the overall characteristics of the model will be made below.  In a development directly germane to parallel-serial testability, Thomas (1969) showed that under certain circumstances,  nonparametric tests can be constructed to test between independent, self-terminating parallel models and nonindependent  self-terminating serial models. The type of independence referred to here is that of total completion times (see Townsend,  1974, p. 152). Some further discussion of Thomas' work will be found in the final section.  A series of studies on parallel and serial processing that the present writer has been involved with over the last few years  can be briefly summarized as follows.  The first paper (1969) dealt with the absolute nontestability of serial models that predict, for example, increasing straight  lines as n, the number of elements to be processed, is varied, and the mathematically equivalent parallel model, both assuming  exponential intercompletion times. The existence of serial models equivalent to certain parallel independent models was also  indicated. Atkinson et al. (1969) listed a special case of the former results. A qualitative note (1971b) summarized these and  some of the results presented in a more mathematical treatment (1972). The latter extended the findings in several directions.  (1) Consider the classes of all parallel and serial models based on independent exponential intercompletion times. The  parallel models further possess the property of independence of processing among the elements during a single stage (the state  of the system between two successive element completions). Mixed serial models assume a set of probabilities, summing to 1, on  the different possible processing orders for each trial. Mixed parallel models assume a set of more than one parallel system,  one of which is implemented on each trial according to a set of probabilities summing to 1. These classes of mixed serial and  mixed parallel models are nonequivalent in that there are models in each class that are not identical to any model in the  other class. However, there are substantial degenerate regions where equivalencies exist. Thus, the class of unmixed parallel  models is contained in  STOCHASTIC THEORY OF MATCHING PROCESSES 5  the class of mixed serial models. The class of unmixed serial models (only one processing order is ever used) may be  approximated arbitrarily closely by the class of unmixed parallel models but is never equivalent to a parallel model. The  classes of models in which these results are based may be viewed as probability mixtures of general gamma distributions of the  type investigated by McGill and Gibbon (1965). (2) There may be difficulty or impossibility of testability at different levels  so that even models that are not mathematically equivalent may give identical predictions at a given level, for example, for  mean reaction times. (3) Related to (2), it may sometimes be feasible to take two nonequivalent models that give the same  predictions at one level, and derive an implied difference in predictions at another level and thus a potential testable  consequence. (4) A functional equation that is necessary for mathematical equivalence of parallel and serial models to hold  was shown and some special cases that did and did not satisfy this equation were pointed out. (5) It was shown that  Rumelhart's (1970) model is a special case of a class of parallel models that is equivalent to a class of hybrid time-sharing  models. The nonhomogeneous aspect of the Rumelhart model does not affect the efficacy of the proof and was omitted. Two  alternate nonparallel interpretations are either as a serial model with a rather bizarre density function or as a serial model  with a variable number of features processed from trial-to-trial rather than the fixed criteria] numbers as the parallel model  supposes. (6) The problem of mimicking by approximation, rather than by actual equivalence, on one or more statistics was  treated. For instance, a parallel independent model is not actually equivalent to typical serial models that predict a  straight mean RT function as n increases. Yet such models can predict this function, since it is dependent only on first  moments, not on other aspects of the model's probability distribution. Such parallel models apparently had been thought to be  falsified by linear RT functions that increase fairly rapidly (Sternberg, 1966), but this is wrong.  Addressing a different type of approximation, a theorem was proved showing that without knowledge of n (e.g., as in the  Christie and Luce (1956) case, the elements might be internal to the human processor) or other ameliorating observable  quantities, a serial model made up of gamma distributions can always be constructed to arbitrarily closely approximate any  parallel processing distribution. (7) Qualitative considerations concerning conclusions based on "naturalness" and "intuitive  value" were entertained.  More recent work includes a detailed treatment of the (parallel vs serial) x (exhaustive vs self-terminating) x (independent  vs dependent) x (unlimited vs limited capacity) processing dimensions emphasizing their logical and mathematical independence,  some of the confusions appearing in recent literature, and the way various combinations of these dimensions may be employed in  model building (Townsend, 1974). Also completed are theorems exhibiting fairly broad conditions (i.e., not restricted to  models assuming exponential intercompletion times) on models satisfying 'a functional equation posed earlier (1972) that is  necessary for parallel and serial models to be equivalent (Townsend, in press).  G JAMES T. TOWNSEND  One of the first obvious conclusions to be drawn from the above work is that many, if not most, of the experimental studies  purporting to test serial vs parallel processing have not in reality done so. Two directions present themselves. One is to  develop mathematical theories of information processing that tell where to look for observable differences between parallel  and serial processing and indeed, other important aspects of processing as well (e.g., self-termination vs exhaustive  processing, etc.). The other is to delve into the physiology of the central nervous system. Although significant progress has  been recorded recently in the latter, it appears that a close and certain linkage of the neuroanatomy and physiology with much  of the cognitive processing literature is not presently at hand.  The former, mathematical theory building can be roughly divided into two approaches. The first is the utilization of finer  grained statistics and distribution information in contemporary and past experiments. To the extent that the underlying  processing distributions are not of the type where equivalence obtains between say, parallel and serial models, this type of  information may be of value. The second is the construction of experimental paradigms, especially designed from consideration  of the pertinent mathematical structures to produce testable empirical consequences.  The second approach is the one followed here. Classes of serial and parallel models are studied in terms of their structure  and equivalence properties. Out of this structure comes an experimental paradigm that tests between these classes of serial vs  parallel models at the level of observable mean RTs.  More specifically, the present work provides a relatively thorough and rigorous treatment of parallel and serial comparison  models based on exponential intercompletion times. Intercompletion time is the time between the successive completion of two  elements. Some results presented earlier (e.g., some of the equivalence mappings in Townsend, 1972) in an informal manner are  special cases of the theorems given here. The generalizations in the work here take three directions: (1) Pairs of elements  are considered to be processed by comparison against each other; previously, only single elements were considered. (2) There  are an arbitrary number of elements in each of two sets (nl in the first, n2 in the second) from which one or more pairs are  drawn for processing or matching; previous proofs are based on two or three elements. Thus, predictions for special cases of  specified numbers may be immediately obtained by plugging the numbers in formulas presented here. (3) The processing rates,  whether serial or parallel, are allowed to depend not only upon the individual stimulus locations of the pair of elements and  the processing order, but also upon whether an identity (+) match or a mismatch (-) comparison is taking place. Items (1) and  (2) allow formulas and theorem results to be applied to any situation involving processing of pairs of elements from two  finite sets, with arbitrary numbers of elements in each. Of course, when only a single set of elements is undergoing  processing, the present formulation gives model structure and predictions by allowing certain parameters to attain degenerate  values.  STOCHASTIC THEORY OF MATCHING PROCESSES  Generalization (3) is the most important. Within classes of models based on exponential intercompletion times, and with rates  dependent only on individual locations and/or processing order, it has been shown that the class of unmixed parallel models is  contained within the class of mixed serial models, but not vice versa, but that mixed parallel models were not contained  within the class of mixed serial models (Townsend, 1972). However, it is shown in the present study that when processing or  comparison rates are different for + comparisons than for - comparisons, the class of unmixed parallel models is neither  contained in nor contains the class of mixed serial models.2 Further, the cases previously found where serial models could not  be mimicked by parallel models often precluded experimental exploitation due to the lack of observable quantities in the usual  experimental settings (see, e.g., Townsend, 1972; Townsend, 1974). When - rates are distinct from + rates, it is possible to  design conditions where fundamental differences are predicted in easily acquired mean RT's. Such an experimental paradigm is  exhibited and testability theorems are proved here, along with comments on potential advantages and pitfalls associated with  its application.  In previous papers (Townsend, 1971b, 1972), two models, one parallel, the other serial, were said to be nonidentifiable if and  only if there existed a mapping between the parallel and serial parameters in such a way that the stochastic processes were  mathematically identical; otherwise they were said to be identifiable. This is consistent with earlier uses of  "identifiability" (e.g., Hurwicz, 1950) when as "model" we take the union of the parallel and serial models we wish to  consider, and when as "data" we take the union of any data defining the parallel and serial processes (e.g., the set of all  realizations of the two processes). Although mathematically correct, this approach is not wholly in line with previous  terminology in psychology (see, e.g., Greeno & Steiner, 1968). It also potentially obscures questions of identifiability that  may arise within a parallel or serial model and with respect to either data that is short of defining a process, perhaps a set  of expectations or data that is sampled, for example a set of observed means. To attempt a more appropriate terminology the  development will follow Greeno and Steiners' usage in referring to "equivalence" between theories (or models, with which we  shall be concerned here) rather than "identifiability." "Equivalence" as employed in the present context is made precise below  and notions of testability are consequent.  It is pertinent to note here that if it were possible and realistic to assume that processing occurred in discrete time  (assuming the concurrent observability problem had been solved) then it might be a simple matter to discriminate parallel from  serial processing, since serial processing excludes the possibility that more than one element can be completed in any single  interval, but parallel processing does not. Even the analog to exponential processing of elements, geometric processing, would  in this case  2 Hereafter, the discussion will be centered on mixed serial models (more than one processing order may occur) and unmixed  parallel models (the same set of parallel rates apply on every trial) and the mixing designation dropped for brevity.  JAMES T. TOWNSEND  present no difficulty. Unfortunately, attempts to represent human information processing as involving immutable time-quanta  have not been notably successful. In the present paper, the mathematics for particular serial and parallel models are  developed that may be applicable when an experiment requires matching or comparison (matching is a primitive with the usual  interpretation of detecting whether or not two elements differ) and show under what conditions they are nonequivalent.  Further, as noted above, it is shown that experiments can be designed where parallel and serial differences in predictions are  obtained at the level of overall mean reaction times.  2. MATCHING: SYSTEMS, MODELS, AND PARALLEL-SERIAL EQUIVALENCE  We shall follow the tack of using informal definitions to aid in the somewhat formidable task of bookkeeping and exposition.  It should not be supposed, however, that the present formulation attempts to be axiomatic in a strict sense.  DEFINITION 1. An experimental trial is a matching trial if and only if a subject matches the elements from one (nonempty)  finite stimulus set, referred to as Sl , with the elements from another (nonempty) finite stimulus set, S,.  It is assumed that the elements of both Sl and S2 may be ordered along at least one dimension, called serial position. It is  also assumed that Sl and S2 have been presented to the subject and that they are themselves subsets of other "alphabets" Y, ,  Y,. Often, 9'i - 2 (e.g., Atkinson et al., 1969) but occasionally one or more elements in one, say S2 may be drawn from a  set with members not contained in 9'i although all elements in Yi are in Y2 . Hence, in the latter case 9, C Y2 (e.g., Egeth,  Jonides, & Wall, 1972). As illustration, let Yi be a set of numerals and 9', be the same set of numerals union the set of  English uppercase letters. In a typical experimental trial, Si , a subset of Yi , is presented to the subject. Following this,  S2 , a subset of 92 , containing zero or more members of Sl , is presented and the subject's task is to indicate whether or  not a member of Sl was in fact contained in S2 . The use of elements in Y2 that are not in Yi allows the study of category  effects in perception and memory (see, e.g., Brand, 1971; Egeth, Jonides, & Wall, 1972). Hereafter, the terms "element" and  "stimulus" will be used interchangeably, although the processing structure developed here is also appropriate to systems  matching totally unobservable elements.  It should be noted that in general, the classes of elements from which the sets 9', , Y2 are drawn will be germane in modeling  specific psychological situations. However, reference to these classes can be suppressed in most of the development here and  to do so will permit simplification of an already complex notation.  STOCHASTIC THEORY OF MATCHING PROCESSES  Corresponding to the notion of a matching trial is that of a simple matching experiment. The latter is relevant to definitions  of parallel and serial models and to establishment of model diversity.  DEFINITION 2. A simple matching experiment is a set of matching trials made up of two types of trials: (a) Tl trials: None of  the elements in Sl match any of those in S2 and (b) T2 trials: One or more of the elements in S, and S2 match each other.  Next, we proceed to give definitions of systems, serial, parallel and hybrid systems, models, total equivalence and  x-diversity. Basically, systems are viewed here as composed of mechanisms made out of living or nonliving material and that  function in real time and space. Models are abstract descriptions of systems. Although the elements referred to immediately  below will subsequently be interpreted as themselves pairs of elements (tuples) from Sl and S2, it seems preferable to employ  "element" in a universal sense here to lend generality to certain of the following definitions. A postulate that applies  throughout the paper is that rates of processing, in systems or models, are finite.  DEFINITION 3. A serial system is a material (i.e., real) entity that (a) processes members of a set of elements one at a time;  (b) each element is completed before another is begun; (c) processing on each successive element may be instituted without  delay when the preceding one is completed; (d) the order of processing may, in principle, be established before processing  actually begins according to the serial positions of the elements; (e) the processing time of an individual element may depend  on its nature (e.g., identity); (f ) but neither the order of processing nor the processing time of an element can depend on  the nature (e.g., identity) of unfinished elements.  Items (d), (e), and (f ) of Definition 3 will be particularly important in establishing differences between parallel and  serial models.  DEFINITION 4. A parallel system is a material entity that (a) begins processing on all members of a set of elements  simultaneously; (b) processing of each element proceeds until it is completed; (c) the order of completion of the elements is  determined entirely by their processing times which in turn may depend on (d) the nature of the elements (e.g., identity) and  their serial positions; (e) but the processing time of an element on a given trial cannot depend on the order (relative to  serial position) of completion of elements completed after it.  As in the serial case, items (d), (e) will be critical in deriving distinctions between serial and parallel models. Definition  5 establishes a category of systems which by fiat exhausts the remaining types of processing systems.  DEFINITION 5. A hybrid system is one that does not satisfy Definitions 3 or 4.  lO JAMES T. TOWNSEND  Figure la shows the activity of a serial and a parallel system, respectively, when two elements of = (a), o2 = (b), are being  processed. The "z" variables are the processing times on the individual elements. That is, zis the amount of time actually  spent by the system on (a) when it happens to be completed first and zbs is the corresponding time spent on (b) on the same  type of trial ((a) completed first) and so on. In Fig. lb, the same activity is viewed in terms of the durations between  completion of the elements, hereafter called intercompletion times. So, tal is the time from t = 0 up until element (a) is  completed, when it is finished first; tbl is the corresponding time when (b) is completed first (not shown in Fig. 1).  Similarly, tba is the duration from  Serial system N Zal~~  Z b2-~I  f f (a)completed (b)completed  Parallel system  f  (a) completed  la  t (b)completed  Serial system  t a l ~~- t b2  f f (a)completed (b)completed Parallel system  -tales  f  (a) completed H-t b2-~I  tal  Ib  f (b)completed  FIG. 1. (a) Schema showing total time system is engaged in processing (a) and (b) in a serial or parallel system when (a) is  completed first. (b) Schema showing intercompletion times in processing (a) and (b) in a serial or parallel system when (a) is  completed first. Figures la and lb reprinted with permission from J. T. Townsend, "Issues and Models Concerning the Processing  of a Finite Number of Inputs," in B. H. Kantowitz (Ed.), Human Information Processing: Tutotials in Performance and Cognition  (Potomac, Md.: Erlbaum, 1974).  STOCHASTIC THEORY OF MATCHING PROCESSES 11  the instant of completion of (a) up until (b) is also finished. Finally, tae is the corresponding time between the instant of  completion of (b) and the completion of (a) where (b) is completed first (not shown in Fig. 1). The intercompletion times tat  , tb1 can also be said to be the durations of stage 1 (no elements completed) and tae , the the durations of stage 2, the time  between the first and the second completions.  It is very important to observe that in a serial system, the element processing times are the intercompletion times. Thus, in  Fig. 1, za1 = tal and zbs = the in the case of serial processing. In parallel systems, on the other hand, only the first  element to be completed will possess a processing time equal to an intercompletion time (e.g., tai = zal). All other parallel  element processing times will be sums of intercompletion times. For instance, in Fig. 1, zbe = tal -}- the in parallel  processing. A primary source of difficulty in experimentally discriminating parallel and serial systems lies in the  nonobservability of the element times themselves, the z's. All we can see in outputs (at best) are the intercompletion times.  As may be inferred from Fig. 1 and this fact, the intercompletion times are an important class of theoretical variables. When  intercompletion times are independent, as they will be in the models considered here, the resulting convenient convolution  properties of characteristic or moment-generating functions are very useful. We shall depend on them a great deal.  The systems of Definitions 3 to 5 are mutually exclusive and together they exhaust the class of processing systems. Examples  of processing systems might be subsystems of a brain, a specific queuing system, a digital computer or a pattern recognition  device. The more subsystems that make up a system and the larger the class of elements to be processed by a system, the less  likely it can be defined as serial or parallel and the more likely it is hybrid. Again, it is critical to note that "system"  is employed here to refer to actual biological or mechanical entities. In many situations, "system" may be (and is) employed  as an abstraction much like we use "model" here. It is probably preferable to use a common word and establish a convention for  its meaning rather than invent neologisms.  Corresponding to systems are their numerical or quantitative descriptions. It is typical of many biological and psychological  systems that such descriptions are stochastic, so that even the most refined and stable data lead to a probability  distribution on observable events and on the events internal and external to the system that together yield the observed  distribution. Thus, investigation of the internal mechanisms and their interaction must be complemented by a theory of  estimation leading to "best" estimates of the parameters of a probability distribution and by a theory of contribution of  external factors to the observed distribution. We will here be concerned with the mathematical description of the internal  mechanisms of systems (of matching processes) with little reference to the latter two problems. For example, the problem of  estimation per se will not be touched on, but consequences of the existence of certain observable statistics (and therefore a  priori assumed susceptibility to estimation) will be considered.  12 JAMES T. TOWNSEND  Our quantitative description will be termed a "model" and "model" will be taken to be a stochastic process. Deterministic  systems (fixed z-variables) may be considered as degenerate stochastic processes.  DEFINITION 6. A model of a processing system is a subclass of the class of stochastic processes whose domain and sigma field  correspond to the processing event possibilities in the system (see, e.g., Loeve, 1955).  Definitions 7 to 9 attempt to capture the basic characteristics of parallel, serial, and hybrid models. In order to conserve  the intuitive aspects of the structure of such processes and because the processes examined in detail below can be expressed  in such a way, Definitions 7 to 9 will be given in terms of probability densities.  It would, in a sense, be most natural to first define serial and parallel models in terms of the z-variables-the actual  processing times. However, all consequent theorems on equivalence are greatly simplified by development in terms of the  (potentially observable) intercompletion times (the t's). Furthermore, the definitions may be written in terms of the  intercompletion times in such a way that no loss of generality is incurred, and this is the course taken here.  The earlier definitions of systems explicitly allow for dependence of an element's or (element-pair's) processing time upon  the specific individual nature of that element. However, the major results in this paper are a joint result of parallel-serial  differences in dependence on serial position, processing order and match (+) vs mismatch (-) times. The identity of the  elements will only be important here in defining a match vs a mismatch. Therefore, the following definitions and derivations  will not take into account processing time or possible order differences that depend explicitly on element identity per se.  In Townsend (1972), only single elements were considered to be processed. This corresponds, of course, to letting Sl or S2  contain one element in a matching experiment so that the "processing" of the multielement set is the matching of them against  the single element in the other set. Since the processing times, and in a serial system the order of processing, may depend on  the serial positions of both elements in a pair, we adopt a lexicographic ordering < on the element pairs <o1i , 02;), 01i E  S1 , 02; E S2 so that <oli , 02;> < <01k , 02m> if and only if either i < k or i = k and j < m. This amounts to taking the  serial position of the Sl element as predominant and secondarily ordering according to the S2 element. For example, <o13 ,  025> G <014 , 024> but <01s , 024) ;:~ <013 , 025>. We may then assign the numbers 1 to nln2 to the consequent ordered list of  pairs and call each number the "serial position index" or simply "serial position" of any particular pair. Therefore the term  "serial position" (of a pair) will be used with this meaning henceforth and ak = <01i , o2i> will be an element pair with  serial position k.  Consider a set of N = nln2 element pairs fail (indexed by serial position) to be processed, i = 1, 2, ..., N and suppose that  stage 1 occupies the time interval from the  STOCHASTIC THEORY OF MATCHING PROCESSES  13  start of processing up until the first pair completes processing, stage 2 occupies the time from the completion of the first  pair to the completion of the second and so on. Let A(kr , r, O, 8, tr) be the parameter set of a specified probability  distribution within a serial model where kr designates the serial position of the pair processed during stage r, O = <ak, ,  ak, , ..., akN> is a vector denoting a particular order of processing the pairs, according to serial position (kl indexes the  serial position of the element completed first), 8 = +1 if the element pair is a match and -1 if it is a mismatch, and tr =  <t, , t2 ,..., tr_l>, is a vector representing the successive intercompletion times and their order, up to stage r.  We then have the following definition of a serial model.  DEFINITION 7. A serial model for matching is a stochastic process specified by the following type of joint probability density  on intercompletion times between the successive completions of pairs of elements.  f(8)(tl t2 ,..., tN , 0) N  - P(O) f(tr I A(kr r~ 0, 8, tr)), r=1  where (s) refers to "serial," A(k,, r, O, 8, tr) is as described above, P(O) is the probability that the order of processing  the pairs is that given in the argument, and tr is the intercompletion time between pair akr-, and a,,. The term f(tr I A(kr ,  r, 0, 8, 1,)) is a probability density conditioned via its parameter set on the order of the various serial positions, whether  or not the pair in position kr is composed of matching or mismatching stimuli, and the previous r -1 intercompletion times. By  convention, t1= (0>; that is, the zeroth intercompletion time is zero. Notably, any term in the product  P(O) = P(ak) P(ak, I ak) ... P(ak,I ak,, ak ,..., akN-,  say P(ak I ak. ,..., akr_,) is independent of whether akr , j > r is a matching (+) or mismatching (-) pair. Similarly, "A" at  stage r is independent of whether any element completed later is a -{- or - comparison (cf. Definition 3).  In cases of particular serial models where the order is selected as processing occurs, rather than before processing begins,  it simply happens that at a stage r, if say, pair a2 is processed, that its rate will be independent of what happens next.  This in no way invalidates Definition 7. What it does mean is that the parameter set A at stage r will, in that case, be  completely determined by t,. and by the first r-1 positions of O. It would also be natural, but no more correct in this  instance where the order is determined as processing proceeds, to write  P(O) = P(ak,) P(ak, I ak,) ... P(a,N I a,,, ak ~..., akN-) .  It can be seen from the constraints on the parameters (P, A) that a serial model is not just a general chain-rule stochastic  definition of a matching trial. It can further  14  JAMES T. TOWNSEND  be seen that certain parallel or hybrid models would, in the case where element processing is not assumed to be an all-or-none  event, specify a very different event space (or sigma field) for a trial. For instance, a time-sharing model with possible  partial processing would not be associated with the same event space as the set of serial models.  The stochastic processes defined by Definition 7 are quite general. If two further conditions hold, processes satisfying  Definition 7 form a two-dimensional Markov process with the state of the system on one dimension and t,. on the other. The  first condition is that A(k, , r, O, S, t,.) = A(kr , r, O, S), that is, that succeeding intercompletion times are independent  of the preceding ones. The second condition is that f(tr I A(k, , r, O, S)) be dependent only on the state of the system at  time t = Yk-i tk , in particular the order up to that point, and not the order of later completed elements. Further, it  follows in this special case that the process formed by recording the state of the system across time, is a semi-Markov or  Markov renewal process (see, e.g., Pyke, 1961a,b). The present paper is concerned with different matters but it may be  interesting in the future to attempt application of semi-Markov machinery to serial and parallel systems.  Assume that Fig. 1 depicts a case where S, consists of two elements, (a) and (b), and S2 consists of one element, say (c), and  that (a) and (b) are processed by being matched against the S2 element. Let (a) have serial position 1 and (b) serial position  2. Since S2 has but one member, it is possible in this case to simply write the order in terms of the elements of Sl and the  serial density of Fig. lb is  fca)(tl, t2 I <a, b>) = I'(<a, b>)f(ti I A(l, 1, <a, b>, S, '1)) A4 I A(2, 2, <a, b>, 6, ts))'  Now, let B(h, r, O(r), S, t,.) play the parameter role for parallel models analogous to that of A in serial models. Therefore,  i=hr, ir, jr will represent an indexing of element pairs that remain unfinished until at least the end of stage r -{- 1, where  there are N-r such indices at stage r. The only difference in A and B is that B uses O(r) = <ak,, axe,..., ak,-,>, that is,  the order of processing through stage r - 1 whereas A is potentially dependent on O = O(N). The term 0 will be used to  demarcate portions of the order vector not yet filled up. The index kr will, as above, designate the element actually  completed at stage r. The supercript (p) below will refer to parallel processing. The function Fis just one minus the  cumulative distribution function. So, for example, F(t2 I BA , 2, O(2), -1, t2)) is the probability that the pair in serial  position h2 has not yet been completed during stage 2 when t2 time units of that stage have elapsed, given that t2 = <tl>,  that is that the time necessary for stage i was tl and h2 refers to a mismatching pair. We could also equivalently write, for  arbitrary stage r:  F(tr I B(hr, r, 0(r), S, tr)) = J f (tr I B(hr , r, 0(r), S, tr)) dt,', cr r  where f is again a density function.  STOCHASTIC THEORY OF MATCHING PROCESSES 15  DEFINITION 8. A parallel model for matching is a stochastic process specified  by the following joint probability density on intercompletion times.  f(P)(tl , t2 ,..., tr, ; O) =F(tl I B(hl , 1, 0(1), 8, tl))F(tl I B(Z1, 1, 0(1), 8, tl))  ... F(t, I B(jl , 1, 0(1), 8, tl)) f(tl I B(k1 , 1, 0(1), 8, tl)) ... F(t2 I B(h2 , 2, 0(2), 8, t2)) F(t2 I B(a2 , 2, 0(2), 8,  t2)) ... F(t2 I B(72 , 2, 0(2), S, 11W N (t2 I B(k2 , 2, 0(2), 8, t2)) ... F(tN-1 I B(hN-1 , N - 1, O(N - 1), 8, tN-1))  ' f (tN-1 B(kN-1, N - 1, O(N - 1), 8, tN-1)) ' f (tN I B(kN, N, O(N), 8, tN)),  where the remaining notation is as in Definition 7.  The most striking difference between Definitions 7 and 8 is that in parallel processing, when say, pair k, finishes first at  time tl, the probability that each of the other pairs has not been completed during that time must be included. Consider as a  special instance the parallel processing illustrated in Fig. 1. The parallel density function for this example, again assuming  two elements (a), (b) in Sl and only one in S2, is  fcPV1, t2 ; <a, b>)  = [F(t, I B(2,1, 0(1), 8, ti)) f(t, I B(1, 1, 0(1), s,'I))lf(t2 I B(2, 2, 0(2), 8, t2)).  The quantity in brackets is the probability expression for stage 1 and the f(t2 I -) expression is the probability density  function for element (b) during stage 2, after (a) has completed comparison against the element in S2.  Observe too that the parallel models are capable of less a priori dependence on order of processing according to serial  position, than the serial models, since the order "evolves" in a parallel system. But, in a general serial system that order  may be viewed as selected beforehand and thus allow say, the parameter for the first pair processed to depend on which serial  position finishes last. A parallel system (and hence a parallel model) cannot realistically do this, since that would make the  model futuristic, in knowing what chance event will later occur (cf. Definition 4).  To illustrate this principle, an example requiring at least three element pairs is required. Let Sl = {a, , b2 , c3) and S2 =  {d} where the subscripts in Sl denote serial positions. Now consider the parallel probability density for the order of  completion <a, , b2 , cs> vs that for the order <a, , ca , b2>:  fcp>(tl , t2 , t3 ; <a, b, c>)  _ [F(tr I B(2, 1, < o, o, o >, 8, tl))  ' F(tl I B(3, 1, <o, o, o>, 8, tI))f(t, I B(l, 1, <o, o, o>, 8, t~))l [F(t2 B(3, 2, <a, o, o >, 8, t2)) f (t2 I B(2, 2, <a, 0,  0 >, 8, t2))l f (t3 I B(3, 3, <a, b, o >, b,ts)),  48o/i4/t-2  16 JAMES T. TOWNSEND  and  (D) t I t2 , t3 <a, c, b>)  _ [F(tl I B(2, 1, < o, o, o >, 3, t,)) F(t, I B(3, 1, < o, o, o >, S,t,))  ' f (ti I B(l, 1, < o, o, 0 >, 8, ti))l [F(t2 I B(2, 2, <a, 0, 0 >, 8, t2)) ' A t2 I B(3, 2, <a, o, o ), S, t2))j f (t,  I B(2, 3, (a, c, >, 8, t3)),  respectively.  The serial terms for the two orders are  PSVI , t2 , t3 ; <a, b, c>)  = P(<a, b, c>)f(ti I A(l, 1, <a, b,c>, S, ti))  ' f (t, I A(2, 2, <a, b, c>, 8, t2)) f (t. I A(3, 3, <a, b,c>, S, t3))  and  P"VI , t2 , t3 ; <a, c, b>)  = P(<a, c, b>)f(ti I A(1, 1, (a, c,b>, S, ti))  ' f (ts I A(3, 2, <a, c,b>, 8, t2)) f (t3 I A(2, 3, <a, c, b>, 8, t3)),  respectively.  The main difference in the serial vs the parallel terms is that in the serial terms, there is explicit dependence on the order  in the density at the very first stage and its alternate with the other order. In contrast, the terms of the first stage of  the parallel model do not express such dependence, that is, the joint probability term for stage one is identical for the two  orders.  It is important to note that this does not mean that the parallel density of the first stage, when conditioned on order,  cannot depend on that order. But the dependence on order has to come from the dependence on the successive intercompletion  times. Thus, since the time to complete (a) may influence whether (b) or (c) is more likely to finish next, the likelihood  that (a) is completed at time tl may depend in a Bayesian fashion on whether (b) or (c) finished second. In models that assume  independent successive intercompletion times, the order-conditional densities are independent of order. With one exception,  all the models in the present paper are based on independent successive intercompletion times. Thus, even the conditional  densities of the present paper are order-independent. This is not an immutable property of models developed from exponential  intercompletion times, as is well known in the study of continuous Markov processes. The exception mentioned above is that the  serial models covered in Theorem 5 are essentially distribution free.  An additional characteristic of the parallel models as defined here is the independence of the processing on the various  elements during a single stage. For example P((a) is 1st at time tl) = P((a) takes time tl and (b) takes longer) =F(tl I B(2,  1, O(1), S, tl)) f (tl I B(l, 1, O(1), S, tl)) reflects this within-stage independence. This is not a necessary property of  parallel models by any means, and could be altered with an increment  STOCHASTIC THEORY OF MATCHING PROCESSES 17  in complexity of notation. Processes that involve exponential intercompletion times (not necessarily completion times) possess  this property of within stage independence, and are the ones on which we concentrate in this paper.  In summary, then, the basic property of a within-stage independent parallel model is that the joint probability density on  intercompletion times is given by a productseries of products, each component product being a measure on the minimum waiting  time of a group of separate processes. This is shown in Definition 8 by the appearance of parameters of all uncompleted pairs  at each of stages 1, 2,..., N.  Since parallelity and seriality are quite obviously very special types of processing, it is most convenient to define as  "hybrid" all other models, or systems. For consistency, Definition 9 is written at the level of stochastic processes that  possess densities but extension to more general processes is possible.  DEFINITION 9. A hybrid model for matching is a stochastic process that possesses a probability density on the joint  intercompletion times of a set of pairs but that does not satisfy Definitions 6 or 7.  Since models have been equated, for our purposes, with stochastic processes, it is natural to define model equivalence in  terms of identicality of the stochastic processes .3 However, it is obvious that two models may be equivalent for one type of  trial or experiment (i.e., context) but not so for another, so the definitions below are stated with regard to context.  DEFINITION 10. Two models, M,, M,, are totally equivalent, Ml - M2 with respect to context C, if and only if they are defined  by equivalent stochastic processes within context C.  DEFINITION 11. Two models Ml , M2 are x-diverse with respect to context C, if and only if there exists some aspect x  associated with their respective stochastic processes that is different for Ml and M2 .  The aspect x is purposely left unspecified in Definition 10; some examples of x are (1) a measurable function on the  underlying event space, (2) one or more moments, (3) a set of possible realizations of the processes, (4) the distribution  itself. Number 4 will be especially useful and will be termed "distribution diverse." Number 4 is the weakest type of  diversity and simply means the two stochastic processes are not totally equivalent. To be distribution diverse does not, of  course, imply that there is no stronger diversity.  DEFINITION 12. Two models M,, M2 are x-testable with respect to context C, if and only if they are x-diverse and x can be  observed or can be estimated within context C.  3 For a reasonably general statement on equivalence of stochastic processes, the reader is referred to Loeve (1955, p. 499).  18 JAMES T. TOWNSEND  In some contexts it may be useful to distinguish between cases where x can be actually observed (for example, a sequence of  responses in a learning experiment) and those where x is a statistic with a sampling distribution (for example, mean reaction  time). This distinction will not be critical for discussion in the present study.  The definitions of parallel and serial model equivalence, diversity and testability are directly implied by Definitions 10 to  12 and are formally omitted. The definitions of parallel and serial systems are centered on simultaneous processing of all  elements versus one-at-a-time processing. It is important to keep the parallel-serial question separate from other related  questions such as limited vs unlimited capacity systems, and independent vs dependent processing systems (see especially,  Gardner, 1973; Townsend, 1974). These aspects of processing as well as others (e.g., self-termination vs exhaustiveness of  processing) are logically independent of the parallel-serial issue, although certain combinations may seem more plausible in  certain experimental contexts.  3. MODELS BASED ON EXPONENTIAL INTERCOMPLETION TIMES  Among the probability distributions so far examined, those involving exponential intercompletion times (times between two  successive element processing completions) appear to offer the most severe problems of equivalence (Townsend, 1971b, 1972).  Certain models defined within rather large classes of exponential-intercompletion-time processes are totally equivalent. On  the other hand it has been shown that there are other models in these classes that are not totally equivalent. Investigation  of exponential processing appears to provide a conservative view of the possibilities for testing serial against parallel  processing. This fact may be of importance in psychological experimentation, since useful information pertaining to specific  characteristics of distributions (e.g., higher moments) is often hard to come by. If parallel processing is distinguishable in  principle from serial processing when exponential processing is assumed, the two will probably be distinguished for other,  more complex distributions. We proceed to develop a theory of serial and parallel processing with exponential intercompletion  times for matching paradigms.  DEFINITION 13. A serial-exponential model (SEM) for matching experiments is a processing model which is characterized by (1) a  probability distribution over the processing order of pairs of elements to be compared on a given trial, and (2) a set of  exponential processing rates for the different pairs which may, in turn, depend on whether a pair matches (-}-) or mismatches  (-), and on the entire processing order specified in terms of the serial position index of each pair in Sl x S,.  As noted earlier, a "serial position index" may be assigned to each of the pairs in Sl x S2 that preserves the information of  the serial positions of the individual elements  STOCHASTIC THEORY OF MATCHING PROCESSES 19  and hence can be of potential use to a serial processor (or ourselves as classifiers) in assigning processing orders on each  trial. It will be convenient in the following to assign an index to each of the N! processing orders, namely the numerals 1,  2,..., N! and to employ this index in parameter descriptions instead of the order itself (O).  The parameter specification is then implied for the serial model when nl elements in Sl are compared with n2 elements in S2 ;  there being nl - n2 = N potential comparisons available for processing.  DEFINITION 14. The serial sets of parameters for matching experiments are given by  (1) JP(K)J, where K = 1, N!, yx ~i P(K) = 1, and {P(K)) is the set of probabilities on the different processing orders, and K  is the index defined above;  (2) {A(kr , r, K, S)}, where {a(-)} is the set of exponential processing rates (A >1 0), which depend on (i) S = +1 or -1,  i.e., whether the pair consists of matching or mismatching elements and, (ii) K, i.e., the processing order given in terms of  the serial positions with k,. denoting the serial position of the element processed at stage r.  As an example of serial parameters, P(3) would be the probability that the third out of the N! possible processing orders is  taken. The parameter a(6, 5, 20, -1) specifies a processing rate for the stimulus pair with serial position index 6, processed  5th in the 20th order out of the possible N! orders and they mismatch. There are N! - 1 unconstrained processing order  probabilities and N(N)! processing rate parameters for each of the two match possibilities, S = 1. This formulation  therefore results in a total of N! - 1 + 2N(N!) parameters under nondegenerate conditions for the serial model. Although K is  obviously sufficient to specify r, the inclusion of r in A(-) will facilitate later theoretical remarks.  In general parallel processing models, we allow for the possibility that as various stimulus objects are completed, the rates  of the remaining stimuli may change. Recall that the term "stage" refers to how many comparisons have been completed; thus,  stage 1 means no comparisons have been finished, stage 2 that one comparison has been completed and so on.  DEFINITION 15. A parallel-exponential model (PEM) for matching experiments is a parallel processing model characterized by a  set of exponential rates that can depend on specific comparisons (+ or - match) and on the past order of completions up to any  specified stage on a given trial.  Just as in the serial model, the rates of the parallel model can depend on processing order. However, unlike the serial model,  the parallel parameters cannot depend on that part of the order that comes at later stages. As noted above, this follows from  a parallel model being basically evolutionary with the probability of a particular order depending on the relative magnitudes  of the processing rates at the successive stages  20 JAMES T. TOWNSEND  while a serial model's processing rates on a particular pair can be selected with regard to what happens after this pair is  processed as well. This historical constraint on parallel processing is illustrated in the next definition.  DEFINITION 16. The parallel set of parameters is given by {v(h, , r, m(r), 8)}, where h,. denotes the serial position of a  pair in Sl x S2 that has not completed processing by the beginning of stage r; r denotes the processing stage, 1 < r < N; m(r)  is an ordered list of the serial positions of the pairs completed in stages 1 through stage r - 1, and 8 is as before.  As an example v(7, 2, <5>, -1) is the processing rate for the pair with serial position 7 at stage 2 when the pair with serial  position 5 was completed in stage 1 and the pair 7 mismatches. That is m(2) = <5> since the complete processing history prior  to stage 2 consists of the pair processed in stage 1 which is indexed by serial position 5 for our example.  By convention we let m(1) _ {QS} to denote that prior to stage 1 there is only one (null) processing history. Then m(1) has N  possible members, m(2) has N(N - 1) possible members, and m(r) has N(N - 1) -- - (N - r -}- 1) possible members. At stage r  there are N - r + 1 unprocessed elements and these elements can take any of N(N - 1) ... (N - r -!- 1) processing rates  depending on the serial positions of the pairs already processed, their order, as well as whether the unfinished pairs consist  of matching or mismatching elements.  Note that although an enumeration of the total set of possible processing orders K was employed in the serial parameter  definition, an ordering of the element pairs by serial position, m(r), is again used in the parallel definition. This is  because it is an aid in some of the proofs below to retain the order itself in the parallel case. In fact, it would be  technically correct to write m(r) = O(r) where O is as before, but a specialization of notation is necessary later that is  best kept separate from the earlier more general case.  It may be seen that the total possible number of parameters for the parallel model is 2N! Y_;' o (1/j!). This is a compact way  of writing 2[(N) + (N) (N - 1) + + (N) (N - 1) ... 2 + (N) (N - 1) ... 2 - 1]. The "2" simply comes from the doubling of the  number of rate parameters due to the +, - match distinction. Inside the brackets, at stage 1 there are N parameters for each  of the N pairs. At stage 2, for each of the possible N pairs there are N - 1 different possible pairs that could have been  completed at stage 1 and hence there is a set of parameters at stage 2 numbering N(N - 1). This continues: The set of possible  histories increases as the stage number gets larger up until at the last stage (N - 1)! histories are possible for each of the  N potential last elements giving N! parameters at the last stage. Note that order of the completions in the histories is  retained as a possible source of rate differences. Note again that the N serial rate parameters can depend on the entire set  of N! orders as contrasted with the parallel model's historical constraints.  STOCHASTIC THEORY OF MATCHING PROCESSES 21  We now are in a position to derive a unique description of the stochastic processes that result from Definitions 13-16. The  device we shall employ exhibits less complexity of notation than would specification of the density functions. The method is  that of joint characteristic functions.4 The "true" characteristic function for the present models would involve summing up  our joint characteristic functions. The set of joint characteristic functions is actually a more precise description of the  stochastic process than is the sum of the members of this set, since each joint characteristic function specifies a certain  order of processing, and together the whole set uniquely determines the stochastic process. Thus, our joint characteristic  functions involve a Fourier transform of the time aspect of the process but also include the transformed probability measure  on the particular processing order.  It is necessary at this point to develop a slightly more detailed notation for the vector of pairs associated with K in order  to indicate individual pairs and their completion position. We let k,(K) be the serial position of the pair that completes  processing rth when the total order is given by K = <kl(K), k2(K),..., k,(K)>. Thus, when useful we may, for example, write  P(K) = P(kl(K), k2(K),..., k,-,(K), k,(K)).  The terms T(k, , r, K, 8), T(k, , r, m(r), S) refer to the serial and parallel intercompletion time random variables from the  (r - 1)th to the rth pair, respectively. It is to be understood that (k, r, K) here corresponds in a 1-1 fashion to serial  position k, in the order K. The terms s(k,, r, K, 8) and s(k, , r, m(r), 8) are the respective Fourier transform variables of  the previous two terms. Since the first two (T(k, , r, K, 8), T(k, , r, m(r), 8)) refer to the same variable in the time  domain and the latter two (s(kr , r, K, 8), s(k, , r, m(r), 8)) refer to the same variable in the transform domain we see that  it is possible to set  T(k, , r, K, 8) = T(k, , r, m(r), 8),  s(kr , r, K, 8) = s(kr , r, m(r), 8),  when equivalence mappings are established between serial and parallel models. It will facilitate exposition to use the same  "time" (t or T) and dummy variable (s) terms for the parallel and serial expressions.  In order to further simplify the still complex notation, we will employ the convention of writing t(kr , r, K, 8) = t, , s(k,  , r, K, 8) = s, , under the integral sign, but the full notation, (k, , r, K), is always implied, and can be immediately  retrieved by way of the other terms in the characteristic function.  With the foregoing considerations in mind, we can write the appropriate joint characteristic function for the serial model;  this is the joint expectation of the terms  4 Where the moment generating function is defined, as is the case here with exponential intercompletion times, it serves as  well as the characteristic function. In fact, by dropping the "i = (- 1)1/1" in the characteristic function, the moment  generating function is obtained in the following characteristic function expressions.  22 JAMES T. TOWNSEND  exp(is,T,), where i = (-1)1/2, r = 1, 2,..., N and the probability function includes the probability for the order of  processing. It will shorten the exponential terms if we use e(x) rather than the usual exp(x) to stand for ex.  LEMMA 1. If a model of a processing system in a matching experiment is serialexponential, then the joint characteristic  function ~cs> (s = serial) for a specified order K, of the intercompletion times, is given by  ~0s)(T(kl , 1, K, 8), T(k2, 2, K, 8),..., T(kN, N, K, 8))  A(k, , 1, K, 8) A(k, , 2, K, 8) . A(kN , N, K, 8)  P(K) A(k, , 1, K, 8) - is, A(k, , 2, K, 8) - is, .. A(kN, N, K, 8) - iSN .  Proof. Following directly from the above definitions and that of joint characteristic functions we have  0111 = E(3)[e(is(kl , 1, K, 8) T(kl , 1, K, 8)) e(is(k2, 2, K, 8) T(k2 , 2, K, 8))  * e(is(kN, N, K, 8) T(kN, N, K, 8))]  P(K) f0-f0 ~ ... f0~ f[A(kl ,1, K, 8) e(--A(k1,1, K, 8) t1) e(isltl)]}  [A(k2 , 2, K, 8) e(-A(k2 , 2, K, 8) t2) e(is,t2)] - ...  [A(kN, N, K, 8) e(-A(kN, N, K, 8) e(iSNtN)] dtl dt2 ... dtN .  Clearly, the separate terms involving the ti may be segregated into the product of the integrals,  00) = P(K) f o A(k, , 1, K, 8) e(-A(kl , 1, K, 8) tl) e(isltl) dtl 0  f A(k2, 2, K, 8) e(-A(ks, 2, K, 8) t2) e(is2t2) dt2 . ... 0  f A(kN, N, K, 8) e(-A(kN, N, K, 8) tN) e(iSNtN) dtN, 0  where A(kr, K, 8) e(-A(kr, K, 8) t,) dt, (r = 1,..., N) is the density function for the rth intercompletion time, and  these may be integrated to yield the proposed result. Q.E.D.  The next lemma gives an analogous result for the parallel models.  STOCHASTIC THEORY OF MATCHING PROCESSES 23  LEMMA 2. If a model of an element processing system in a matching experiment is parallel-exponential then the joint  characteristic function for a specified history m(N -}- 1) of the intercompletion times, ~(v> (p = parallel) is given by  0(v)(T(kl 1, m(1) 8) T(k2 , 2, m(2), 8),..., T(kN, N, m(N), 8))  _ v(kl, 1, m(1), 8)  EN 1 v(h,j , 1, m(1), 8) - is,  v(k2, 2, m(2), 8) ... v(hN.N, N, m(N), 8)  ~N 2 v(h2,, 2, m(2), 8) - is, v(hN.N, N, m(N), 8) - isN ,  where h,j denotes the serial position of one of the N - r + 1 elements as yet uncompleted at the beginning of stage r, and of  course, h,,, = kN .  Proof. The density for each intercompletion time is slightly more complicated  here. This quantity is, for the rth to be finished,  N  v(k, , r, m(r), 8) e(-v(k, , r, m(r), 8) t,) - e -t, v(h,j , r, m(r), 8)) dt, ; j=r+1  the first two terms are the typical exponential probability density elements and the third is the probability that none of the  other (remaining) stimulus pairs completes processing during the interval t, , which begins at time t = tl + t2 - + t,_1 .  The expectation of the product of all such appropriate terms is  oo')  = Dp)[e(is(kI, 1, m(1), 8) T(kl, 1, m(1), 8)) e(is(kz, 2, m(2),8) T(k2, 2, m(2), 8))  e(is(kN, N, m(N), 8) T(kN, N, m(N), 8))]  .. f0 ~ [v(kl , 1, m(1), 8) e(-;,(k, , 1, m(1), 8) tl)  f" 0 0  N  e -tl Y v(h,,, 1, m(1), 8)) e(isltl)] ( j=2  [v(k2, 2, m(2), 8) e(-v(k2, 2, m(2), 8) t2) e -t2 ,(h,,, 2, m(2),8) ) j=3  e(is2t2)] . [v(kN,N,m(N), 8) e(-v(kN,N)m(N), 8) tN) e(iSNtN))] dtl dt2 . dtN.  24 JAMES T. TOWNSEND  Again, we may segregate the terms for the ti's producing a product of integrals  O(P) = f v(kl, 1, m(1), 8) e(-v(k, , 1, m(1), 8) t,) e -tl Y v(h,,, 1, m(1), 8)1  0 ( 7=2  ' e(isiti) dtl f v(k2 , 2, m(2), 8) e(-v(k2 , 2, m(2), 8) t2) 0  N  . e -t2 Y v(h2, 2, m(2), 8)1 e(is,t2) dt2 . ... j=3  - f v(k,, N, m(N), 8) e(-v(kN, N, m(N), 8) tN) e(iSNtN) dtN . 0  Integration of these obtain the joint characteristic function indicated in the statement  of the lemma. Q.E.D.  The two preceding lemmas exhibit the basic canonical forms of the pertinent characteristic functions. They can also be proven  employing more explicitly the fact that the succeeding intercompletion times are independent in the present models. That fact  means that the joint characteristic function can be written as the product of the joint characteristic functions of the  separate intercompletion times and this leads to the above results. Lemmas 1, 2 were proven more directly in order to expose  the structure of the probability functions and their relationships. We should observe that for any fixed experimental  arrangement of duplicated stimuli in Sl and S2 there will be N! different such joint characteristic functions corresponding to  the various N! completion orders. Alternation of the stimulus serial position locations of members of identical pairs in Sl  and/or S2 defines a new set of N! characteristic functions. This new set of characteristic functions may differ from the old  since matching and mismatching pairs, upon which the rates depend, may be located in new serial positions. In the example of  Fig. 1, the serial joint characteristic function is thus found to be  0cs1(T(kl , 1, <a, b>, 8), T(kz , 2, <a, b>, 8))  = I'(<a, b>) A(ki (kl <ab>, b>, 8) is, A(k2 ~k2, , <a, <a, b>, 8) b>, 8) - is,  and that for the corresponding parallel case is  0w)(T(kl , 1, {0}, 8), T(k2 , 2, a, 8))  v(kl , 1, { o }, 8) v(k2 , 2, a, 8)  v(kl , 1, { o }, 8) + v(hl2 , 1, { 0 }, 8) - isl  v(k2 , 2, a, 8) - 1S2 ,  where, of course, h12 = k2 specifying the same pair of elements. Note that m(1) = { 0 ) since nothing has been processed at  stage 1 and hence no history is yet available, but  STOCHASTIC THEORY OF MATCHING PROCESSES 25  at stage 2 in this example, m(2) = kl since the pair specified by serial position kl was completed at the end of stage 1.  Thus, at stage 2 the rate for the element pair a,, = ah,2 may be changed from v(k2 , 1, f 0), S) to v(k2 , 2, a, S) and they  are not necessarily equal. The parallel and serial joint characteristic functions for the other orders can be found in a  similar manner.  4. THEOREMS ON EQUIVALENCE AND DIVERSITY  Equivalence will be investigated for a simple matching type of experiment (Definition 2), in particular, one that includes two  types of trials, the first being with no S2 stimulus elements identical to any Sl stimulus elements (trial type Tl) and the  second being with exactly one of the S2 stimulus elements identical to one of the Sl stimulus objects (trial type TZ).  Theorem 1 considers the context of Tl trials, the results are equivalent to those found from considering (only) trials where  all the stimulus pairs match. Theorem IA states sufficient conditions to ensure that total equivalence does not hold, that is,  that at least distribution diversity does hold. Basically, Theorem IA says that the serial model's rate parameters can differ  in a way depending on order that the parallel model's rate parameters cannot, in order for the parallel and serial models to  be different. Theorem IA works as long as either nl > 1, n2 > 1 or both.  The second part of Theorem 1 (1B) states that the negation of the condition in IA implies total equivalence. Thus, the  condition is necessary and sufficient for total equivalence not to hold.  THEOREM IA. On Tl trials if P(K) =Y= 0 for all K in SEM then the serial exponential model (SEM) and the parallel exponential  model (PEM) are distribution diverse and therefore not totally equivalent if (1) there exist at least two orders Ki , K2 (or  ml(N -}- 1), m2(N + 1)) in which (2) there is at least one stage r such that the orderings (or history) up until r are the  same in Kl, K2 and such that A(V), r, Kl, -1) =A A(kT2), r, K2, -1), where k;l) and kr2> may be the same but are not  necessarily, and are not processed before r in Kl , K2, but each is assumed to be completed at the end of stage r.  1 B. If for all Ki , K; ; for all r, and for all kr9, V), A(kTi), r, Ki , -1) = A(V), r, K; , -1), where Ki , K; are the same  up until stage r, then SEM and PEM are totally equivalent.  Proof. A. Assume there exist Kl , K2, and r such that A(k(l) , r, K,, -1) :F~= A(k(2), r, K2 , -1); then note that at stage r  the PEM survivor function (1 minus the cumulative distribution function) is given for K,, K,, for the intercompletion time  from r - 1 to r, conditionalized on order, by FPEM(t,, Ki) = e(-t,. yN ,tl v(h,; , j, mi(r), -1)), i = 1, 2, and hence FPEM(t,  , Ki) - FPEM(t, , K2) by virtue of ml(r) = m2(r) and the historical constraint on parallel processing, irrespective of the  26  JAMES T. TOWNSEND  specific pair indexed by serial positions k;1), k;.2). Therefore it holds for the pairs indexed by k;.1' and V). On the other  hand, the corresponding quantities for SEM are given by FSEM(tr, K1) = e(-A(k*1), r, K,, -1) tr) ~FsEM(tr, Ks) = e(-A(k((-')  r, K2 , -1) tr) by hypothesis that the A's are unequal. Thus, even if a mapping is otherwise possible, the unequal A  hypothesis precludes total equivalence and yields distribution diversity.  Proof. B. Part B is much more complex since a mapping must be given between the parameter spaces of PEM and SEM that yields  total equivalence. Assume that hypothesis B is true, that is, for all Ki , K; , and for all r, such that mi(r) - m;(r) up  until stage r, A(k(", r, Ki , -1) = A(kT'), r, K; , -1). Then there exists a homeomorphic mapping G, carrying the space of PEM  parameters onto the space of SEM parameters and vice versa. It is well known that this will guarantee equivalent probability  measures for the related processes.  First consider the two pertinent parameter spaces. Each space includes a number of orthogonal dimensions equal to the number  of independent parameters. In the case of PEM, there are thus N! yNo (1lj!) dimensions. SEM now, (under our hypothetical  constraint) also includes the same number: N! - 1 probabilities, and one A for stage 1, N for stage 2, N(N - 1) for stage 3,  and so on down to N(N - 1) ... 2 A's at stage m(N). This results in a total of N! -1 -}- [Y,;- o2 rli=o (N -i) + 1 ] _ ~N as  jli=o (N - i ) which can be written as N! ENa1(1/j!) which is the same number of parameters as that for PEM. The serial  probabilities {P} are, of course, constrained to the open interval (0, 1) by hypothesis.  Now let G be expressed as the proposed PEM --> SEM mapping: For any K, set  P(K) = P[k1(K), k2(K),..., kN-1(K), kN(K)]  = P[k1(K)] - P[k2(K) I k1(K)] ... P[kN(K) I kl(K), k2(K),..., kN-1(K)]  and let  P[k1(K)]  = v(k1 , 1, m(1), -1)/Y (h,;, 1, m(1), -1), P[k2(K) I kl(K)]  = v(k2, 2, m(2), -1)/Y v(h2;, 2, m(2), -1), ,=2  P[kN-1(K) I kl(K),..., kN-2(K)]  _ v(kN_1 , N - 1, m(N - 1), -1)  v(hN-1.N-1, N- 1, m(N- 1), -1) +V(hN-1. N, N- 1, m(N- 1), -1) '  P[kN(K) I k1(K),..., kN-1(K)]  - v(kN, N, m(N), -1) = 1; v(kN, N, m(N), -1)  STOCHASTIC THEORY OF MATCHING PROCESSES 27  where, of course, hii = ki. Further, set  A(kl, 1, K, -1) N  _ v(h,j , 1, m(1), -1),  A(k2 , 2, K, -1)  N  _ Y v(h,j , 2, m(2), -1), j=2  A(kN_t , N - 1, K, -1)  = v(hN_1,N_1, N - 1, m(N - 1), -1) + V(hN-I.N, N - 1, m(N - 1), -1),  A(kN,N,K,-1)  = v(hN.N , N, m(N), -1),  for all k,. processed at stages r = 1, N.  Performing this for every K yields the PEM --> SEM mapping. It may be ascertained that this mapping produces "P's" that sum to  1 by noting that all the denominators for each total joint probability giving the K's are equal; factoring these out and  adding the numerators over the K's yields the product of sums of v's found in the denominator.  At each stage r, there are N(N - 1) ... (N - r + 2) histories m(r), which we shall designate m(r, 1), m(r, 2),..., m(r, rj'i-o  (N - i)). For each one of these histories, there is a set of N - r + 1 pairs yet to be processed which we call h(r, 1), h(r,  2),..., h(r, N - r + 1). Corresponding to these are the probabilities P[h(r, 1) 1 m(r, j)], P[h(r, 2) I m(r,1)],..., P[h(r, N  - r + 1), I m(r, j)] for each j = 1, 2,..., l li=o (N - a), for r > 1; j = 1 for r = 1. These probabilities correspond, of  course, to a particular sequence of pairs so that the product  P[h(l, il) I m(l,ji)] P[h(2, i2) I m(2, j2)] -.. P[h(Ar iv) I m(NjN)] = P(K).  What we have just done is to show how the (serial) probability of a given order K, can be decomposed into a product of terms  written via the historical sequence m(1, jl), m(2, j2),..., m(N, j,). The term P(h(r, i,.) I m(r, j)) gives the probability  that the pair with serial position h(r, i,.) is processed at stage r, conditioned on the specific previous history m(r, j).  This writing of serial probabilities in terms of some parallel structured terms, the m(r, j), is convenient since the  specification of parallel parameters depended  28  JAMES T. TOWNSEND  on the developing history from the start and secondly, it allows a natural language of serial and parallel expressions in G-',  the prototypical SEM -+ PEM mapping:  v(h(1, 1), m(1, 1), -1)  = P(h(1, 1) 1 m(1, 1)) A(h(1, 1), m(l, l), -1),  v(h(1, 2), m(1, 1), -1)  = P(h(1, 2) 1 m(l, 1)) A(h(1, 1), m(l, 1), -1),  v(h(1, N), m(l, 1), -1)  = P(h(1, N) I m(1, 1)) A(h(1, 1), m(1, 1), -1),  v(h(r, 1), m(r, 1), -1)  = P(h(r, 1) m(r, 1)) A(h(r, 1), m(r, 1), -1),  v(h(r, N - r -f- 1), m(r, 1), -1)  = P(h(r, N - r -}- 1) 1 m(r, 1)) A(h(r, 1), m(r, 1), -1),  r-2  v (h(r, N - r -}- 1), m (r, ri (N - i )) , -1 4=0  =P  r-2  h(r, N - r + 1) m (r, rl (N - i))) 0  r-2  A (h(r, 1), m (r, Q (N - i)), -1), 0  v (h(N, 1), m (N, N-2  fj (N - i)  i=o ), -1)  N-2 N-2  = P (h(N, 1) m (N, H (N - i)), -1) A (h(N, 1) I m (N, fj (N - i)), -1). Note that we have supposed, say,  ~-z -z A (h(1, N -1 + 1), m(.1, n (n - i)  0 ), -1) = A (h(1, 1), m (j, n (n - i)  0 ), -l)  as is required by hypothesis. The stage was explicitly given by the argument of h, m, etc., so was otherwise omitted from its  usual position in v, A.  STOCHASTIC THEORY OF MATCHING PROCESSES 29  Next let V3 E E, VP E Z be the vectors with N! Y N01(lj!) places which are contained in the serial (E) or parallel (17)  parameter spaces, respectively. The assumption that the v's are in (0, +oo), the p's in (0, 1), A's in (0, +oo), establishes  the nature of the dimensions. The parallel space given by 17 = x v and the serial by E = (xp) x (x A) are of the same  dimension. Thus, a homeomorphism is at least conceivable, it not being possible to provide homeomorphisms between arbitrary,  or even Euclidian, spaces of arbitrary dimensions (Hurewicz & Wallman, 1948). We now prove that G is a homeomorphism.  (a) G is 1 - 1. Observation of G and G-1 will indicate that each parameter vector is a single valued vector function of the  other for both G and G-1 and therefore Gisl-1.  (b) Next it is obvious that for every point in the spaces II, E there is a corresponding point in the other space via G;  therefore G is onto. This leaves the proposition that G is bicontinuous to be proved.  (c) This proposition will be proved if it can be shown that each coordinate in 17 and E is a continuous function of the  coordinates in the other space, since such a relationship implies overall continuity. But this follows immediately from the  form of these functions, i.e., these functions are of the form  v=A  p = vIEVt , A = Eva , and are undoubtedly continuous, with respect to the Euclidean metric, for example,  in the (open) domains of the respective arguments. Q.E.D.  We will withhold discussion of most implications of this theorem, until the other type of trial is considered and the question  of equivalence within the context of the whole simple matching paradigm can be treated. However, it may be observed that  Theorem 1 A implies that A may differ for different pairs at stage r and produce diversity with PEM or, more significantly,  may differ for the same pair with the same ordering prior to r and a different ordering thereafter and still produce diversity.  On trials when exactly one of the S1 stimulus elements (say o*) is the same as one of the S2 stimulus elements (ol* = o2* =  o*, a T2 type of trial), consider as prototype the order when o1* is in S1 position u, and in S2 is in position v1. Assume  further that this pair (o1*, o2*) with serial position h*+ is processed rlth and designate r2 > r1 as the processing position  of a specific pair that includes o1* as its S1 member and another different stimulus from S2 , the serial position of the  latter pair to be called h*-. We assume for later reference (Theorem 3) that the second, different, stimulus is in position v2  in S2 . It will be helpful to write the joint characteristic functions for this type of trial; these formulas follow directly  from Lemmas 1 and 2.  30 JAMES T. TOWNSEND  For the serial model the joint characteristic function is  )(T(kl, 1 K, T(h*-, rl, K, T(h*-, r., K, T(kN, N, K, -1))  _ A(kl , 1, K, -1) A(h *+, rl , K, -}-1)  - P(K) A(kl , 1, K, -1) - is, ... A(h*+, r,, K, +1) - isr,  ... A(h* ,ra,K,-1) ... A(kN,N,K,-1)  A(h*-, r2 , K, -1) - is,, A(kN, N, K, -1) - isN '  It is useful for the parallel joint characteristic function to separate at each stage the + part from the others. Then we may  express  0(v)(T(kl, 1, K, -1),..., T(h*+, rl, K, +1),..., T(h*-, r2, K, -1),..., T(kN) N, K, -1)) v(kl , 1, m(1), -1)  "' . v(hij, 1, m(1), -1) + v(h*+, m(1), +1) - is,  L v(h*+, r,, m(rl), +1)  ... N v(h,,j ' rl ' m(rl), -1) + v(h*+, r,, m(rl), +1) - is,,  v(h*-, r,, m(ra), -1)  ... N s- v(hr,j, r2 l m(rz), -1) + v(h*-, r,, m(r2), -1) - isrz L.j=r2.h,QJ*h  v(kN, N, m(N), -1)  v(kN, N, m(N), -1) - isN  Theorem 2 states that differential processing speeds for + as opposed to - matches makes distribution diversity a certainty;  now restricting our attention to the context of T2 trials. As before, it is postulated that no order K exists such that P(K) =  THEOREM 2. If + comparisons are processed at different rates than are - comparisons then SEM and PEM are distribution diverse  with respect to T2 trials.  Proof. Consider without loss of generality the alternative order K' which permutes the processing positions of h*+ and h*- but  which leaves the history up until rl , (m(rl)), unchanged. Then if total equivalence were to hold, it must be the case that  N  A(h*+, r,, K, +1) _ v(h,,j , rl , m(rl), -1) + v(h*+, rl , m(rl), +1) j=r1+1  = A(h*-, r,, K', -1).  But, A(h*+, rl, K, -f-1) =/= A(h*-, rl, K', -1) by hypothesis; therefore SEM and PEM are distribution diverse. Q.E.D.  Note that the sum of v's in the proof is the same for K and K' since the ordering up until rl, given by m(rl) is the same for  K, K'. Note also, that Theorem 2 depends on a change in order after stage r as did Theorem IA, but now even if the A's do not  differ  STOCHASTIC THEORY OF MATCHING PROCESSES 31  according to serial position or the order after stage r they may because of -~--, - processing differences and thereby produce  diversity.  An obvious corollary follows.  COROLLARY. If the rates do not differ for -{-, - comparisons and the A's otherwise satisfy the constraint of Theorem I B, SEM  and PEM are totally equivalent on T2 trials.  Theorem 3 also obtains a result of distribution diversity, again following from different processing rates on + and -  comparisons and again involving the context of T2 trials. However, in this case it is PEM that is the more general. Basically,  Theorem 3 uses the fact that the serial (SEM) probability of selecting a given element (stimulus pair) with specified  positions in Sl and S2, for a certain processing position, cannot depend on whether the stimuli in that pair match or do not  match. On the other hand, the -~- and - rates differ in the parallel model (as in the serial), and processing order in  parallel processing is entirely dependent on rates of processing. It therefore follows that the parallel probability of a pair  with specified Sl and S2 positions being completed at a given stage will depend on whether the pair matches or does not.  THEOREM 3. If + comparisons are processed at different rates than - comparisons, then when T2 trials with different placement  of o* in Sl and S2 are considered, SEM and PEM are distribution diverse, if P[m(N + 1)] is different for the distinct  placements.  Proof. Hold K constant and permute o* in Sl and S2 such that ol* is still in position u, but the second, different stimulus is  now in position vl , and in position v2 we place 02* (= ol*).  Since the order K on serial positions is unchanged, according to SEM, P(K) should be invariant with respect to what is in the  stimulus positions of Sl and S2. In particular, P(hr*+ kl, k2,..., k,l_1) = P(h* I kl, k2)..., krl_1), where h*+ is the serial  position of the matching pair (ol* at u and o2* at vl) and hi- is that of a mismatching pair (ol* at u and a different  mismatching stimulus at vl). Thus, h*+ and hi- represent the same stimulus positions in Sl and S2 (and therefore the same  pairwise serial position, hr + _ h*-), but the first pair matches and the second mismatches.  These facts together with Theorem 1 imply that for total equivalence to hold we must simultaneously satisfy  *  P(hrl+ I kl, k2,..., kri-1)  v(h*+, rl , m(rl), +1) -N r1+1 v(hr19 ' rl' m(rl), -1) + v(h*+, rl , m(rl), +1)  = P(hrl I k,, k2 ,..., krl_1)  _ v(h*-, rl , m(rl), -1)  - yNrl+1 v(hrlj , rl , m(rl), -1) + v(h* , rl , m(rl), -1) + v(h*+, r2 , m(r2), +1 . jV=ry  48o/144_3  32 JAMES T. TOWNSEND  on the other hand, if there are, unequal, PEM and SEM are distribution diverse. Q.E.D.  COROLLARY. If the processing rates do not differ for -{- and - comparisons and the hypothesis of Theorem 1 B holds, then PEM  and SEM are totally equivalent even across trials with different (experimental) placement of the "same" stimulus.  Proof. The proof follows immediately from the homeomorphism employed in Theorem 1B. Q.E.D.  Yet another facet of diversity is discovered when Tl trials are compared with T2 trials; that is, in the context of simple  matching experiments. More specifically, if a certain mismatching pair is processed at some stage then its rate may be  presumed to be the same in a serial system whether the other stimulus pairs match or not. But in a parallel system, the  intercompletion rate of that stage quite obviously depends on the composition of the other uncompleted pairs. This type of  diversity is captured in Theorem 4. Here, as in Theorem 3, it is the parallel model that is the more general.  It is assumed that the Sl stimuli are identical in the Tl and T2 stimulus sets to be considered, but that exactly one S2  stimulus is removed from the Tl set and replaced with a stimulus that matches exactly one of the Sl stimuli. Arbitrarily  select a - pair that is found in both the Tl and T2 sets with serial position h*-.  THEOREM 4. If + comparisons are processed at different rates than - comparisons, then SEM and PEM are distribution diverse  with respect to simple matching experiments.  Proof. Fix the order for both the Tl and T2 trials. Refer to the pairs on the T2 trial containing o2* (=o1*) as their S2  member, as "b" pairs and those not containing o2* as "a" pairs. The Tl trial contains only "a" elements. Now, designate the  serial position of "a" tuples as ha and those of "b" tuples as hb and suppose an "a" pair (say a*-) completed at stage r has  serial position h*-.  The SEM exponential intercompletion time survivor function for element pair a*at stage r when conditionalized on order is  e[-A(h*-, r, K, -1) tT] and this is identical on the Tl and T2 trials. Note that this expression is independent of the  composition of the other element pairs, in particular, the uncompleted pairs. On the other hand, the intercompletion time  survivor function of PEM on a*- at stage r, again conditionalized on order, is  r N l  e -Lv(h*-, r, m(r), -1) + v(h,j , r, m(r), -1)J tT~ for Tl trials, j=T}1  and  e -kh* m(r),-1) + y, _ v(hr(a), r, m(r),-1) -+- Y v(h,(b), r, m(r), +1)J t T`  (hajha.#h') {ha}  STOCHASTIC THEORY OF MATCHING PROCESSES 33  for T2 trials. As indicated, the TI and T2 expressions need not be equal; therefore, A cannot be made identical to both  simultaneously and PEM and SEM are distribution diverse in this circumstance. Q.E.D.  COROLLARY. If the processing rates do not differ for + and - comparisons and the hypothesis of Theorem 1 B holds, then PEM and  SEM are totally equivalent with respect to simple matching experiments.  Potential testability (which requires "diversity" but also observability) between SEM and PEM based on the above theorems then  necessitates selecting materials and/or aspects of the processing mechanisms that promote:  (a) Different rates on different serial positions and different possible "pathways" through the (Tl) pairs (Theorem 1).  (b) Different rates on +, - comparisons and different possible "pathways" through the (T2) pairs (Theorem 2).  (c) Same as (b) but also ensure that sets of experimental stimuli for different trials include pairs where the duplicated  stimulus appears in different stimulus positions (Theorem 3).  (d) Different rates on +, - comparisons and use of simple matching experiments (Theorem 4).  In concluding discussion of the above theorems, we note that they were stated in terms of parallel or serial processing of  pairs of stimuli. The theorems are directly applicable to any set of elements that can be characterized with logical structure  similar to that for pairs of stimuli selected from two finite sets.  Another possibility of producing distribution diversity, apart from the above theorems lies in letting some processing orders  K possess zero probability of occurrence; in the extreme, letting one path occur with probability 1. Recall that P(K) =A 0 for  all K was assumed as a postulate for the above developments. The idea here would be that when, for example, P(K) = 1 for  serial K in SEM (and clearly when based on other distributions than the exponential as well), no PEM can be totally equivalent  to it, since to do so violates the part of PEM definition requiring nonzero rates at all times for uncompleted pairs. As can  be seen (with minor extrapolation) from the mapping in Theorem 1 B, PEM can approximate SEM at these cases to an arbitrarily  close degree by letting all but one v be arbitrarily close to zero at any stage, assuming the other hypotheses for total  equivalence are satisfied. In a negative sense, this means that a parallel model can act very much like a  single-processing-order serial model. In a positive sense, it means that if a parallel model is the correct model, it is  nevertheless evolving into or acting like a serial model, since when all the v's but one are zero at any given stage, it is a  serial model.  34 JAMES T. TOWNSEND  Before proceeding it should be pointed out that it is possible to generalize these results to situations where differences  between particular stimuli and therefore stimulus comparison rates, may be present (e.g., it may take longer to compare I and  f than I and O), and be of potential aid in parallel-serial testability. A related line of generalization is to situations  where some of the stimuli are of one category (say numbers) and the others are of a different category (e.g., letters) and the  two categories are processed at different rates. It appears that anything that enhances different processing rates for  different pairs will tend to increase the chances of distribution diversity of the sort shown above for different stimulus  positions, and -}- and - comparisons.  S. A SIMPLE MATCHING DESIGN TO ILLUSTRATE MODELS AND THEOREMS  Although the above distribution diversity developments suggest some indication of where testability of PEM and SEM may lie,  they do not prove that such testability exists. The problem that arises in attempted utilization of the distribution diversity  results, consists in the subtlety of the manifestations in data of PEM and SEM structural differences. Not only is there the  usual possibility of a fairly realistic model possessing more parameters than an experiment possesses degrees of freedom, but  the statistics typically observable may not reveal distinctive differences between parallel and serial processing.  It is pertinent to consider a simple special case of SEM and PEM in conjunction with a typical type of experiment in order to  (1) realize certain intuitions and clarify PEM-SEM structure that may have been partially obscured by the generality of the  above treatment,  (2) indicate how PEM, SEM differences may become submerged or "averaged out" in traditional statistics, and  (3) suggest statistics that do test SEM-PEM models, when and if they can be obtained.  Following that, a more complex type of experimental design that yields SEM-PEM testability will be examined.  Consider a simple matching experiment where the basic types of trials are (1) T, Stimulus of absent from S2 , (2) T2 :  Stimulus of present in position 1 in S2 , (3) T2 Stimulus of present in position 2 in S2 ; where, for example, o,, o,, o3  might be the randomly selected letters c, v, 1. The potential stimulus configurations are determined by the serial positions  of the S2 elements, since it is assumed the serial position of of in Sl is fixed. The S2 configurations, after ordering by  serial position, are of the form <01 , 02), <02, ol), and <02, 03>. Hence, the serial position index of a pair is h,. = 1 if  the S2 element of a pair not yet finished at stage r is from the first serial position  STOCHASTIC THEORY OF MATCHING PROCESSES 35  and h,. = 2 if it is from the second. Of course, we may still use h,. = k,. to denote the element actually completed at the  end of stage r. Note that Sl = of .  Recall that the serial rates are of the form A(pair-serial position, stage, order, type of comparison). Thus, the 2 in A(2, -,  -, -) gives the processing rate of the pair made up of of and the second (right-hand) member of Sz which might be o,, o,, o,.  However, the 2 (in A(-, 2, -, .)) says that the stage is number 2 and the 1 (in A(-, -, 1, -)) means that the order of  processing is number 1 (i.e., compare of with the leftmost member of S2 then do the rightmost). This, plus A(-, , -, +1) tell  us that this particular A applies to an ordering of the S2 elements, S2 : <oz , ol> or <o,, ol> when of and of are being  compared in stage 2 after of and o2 (or o3) have already been compared in stage 1. In conjunction with our previous  definitions, this results in the parameter space determined by the following set of parameters for SEM with nl = 1, n2 = 2.  <p, A(l, 1, 1, +1), A(l, 1, 1, -1), A(2, 2, 1, +1), A(2, 2, 1, -1),  A(l, 2, 2, +1), A(l, 2, 2, -1), A(2, 1, 2, +1), A(2, 1, 2, -1)>,  where p is the probability of comparing the first (Sz) position with the early stimulus first, and the A's are, of course, the  rates for the two pairs at the various stages and duplicative possibilities.  This formulation gives a total of nine parameters which can be verified with the earlier formula  (ni - na)! - 1 + 2(nl - na) ((ni - na)!) _ (1 - 2)! - I + 2(1 - 2) ((1 - 2))! = 9.  In an analogous manner, the parameter space for PEM is generated by  <v(l, 1, < 0, 0>, +1), v(l, 1, <0, 0>, -1), v(2, 2, <1, 0>, +1), v(2, 2, <1, o>, -1), v(1, 2, <2, 0>, +1), v(1, 2, <2, o>,  -1), v(2, 1, <o, 0>, +1), v(2, 1,<0, 0>, -1)>,  the rate parameters which govern the behavior of PEM. Now, <o, o> = m(1), the null history before the first stage is over and  <hl, P1 > = m(2), where hl = 1, 2 is the serial position of the pair (and thus the serial position of the Sz element) that is  completed at the end of stage 1. Of course, the parallel-serial correspondence of order of processing is <1, 2> = 1 and <2, 1>  = 2, although to be sure, the parallel order is determined in this case when the first pair is completed. The other entries  are as in the SEM case. The formula 2(n, n,)! "`1"$ 1 1 ! 2 - 1 - 2)! 1 + 1 8 yields the correct number of parameters.  In this specific situation, the parameter notation can be simplified. In fact, we can write Ai&) to be the SEM rate for hi =  1, 2 at stage j (j = 1, 2) for a (-) comparison (- = +, -). Note that K would be redundant here. The parameter vi&) is defined  in exactly the same way.  36 JAMES T. TOWNSEND  There are six joint characteristic functions for the intercompletion times; two each for the three trial types above. Each  characteristic function will be written as conditionalized on trial type and placement of the duplicated stimulus in S2. Thus,  E(ei3iT i eiS22T22 <+, -)) is the defining function of the joint characteristic function of intercompletion times when the  duplicated (same) stimulus is in S2 stimulus position 1 and the model represents the element processing system as comparing  the early stimulus with that late stimulus in (S2) position 1 first, and so on. Similarly, the order is facilely given in  terms of the +, - comparisons <+, -).  To enhance comparison of the serial and parallel expressions, the two corresponding formulas for the joint characteristic  function will be given together, serial first (S), parallel second (P).  is-T- is T- _ A11 _ _ E[e 11 11 , e 22 22 I -r -~~ - ~11 - 2511 A  V11 vll + v21 - isle  A22 (S), (1)  -    2 2522    V22    "22 - (P); (2)  is22    A1Z (S), (3)  A22 - is        12    V12 (P); (4)  V12 -    2512    ~22 (S), (5)  - 2522    V22 (P), (6)  -    V22 -    2522    A12 (S), (7)  A12 + +. 2512 +    V12 (P); (8)  V12+- ES1+2    A22 (S), (9)  - i+ S22    v22    v2+2 - (P); (10)  ZS22+2    A21 ~' feis21T21 , eis12T12 -, -A - (1 - p) _ A21 - is21  v11 -{- v21 - ZS21  E[eis 1T1+1 , eis22T22 +> ->1 = P A 11 A+ +  11 - 2511 A22  = V11 , + V11 +. V21 - 2511+  V21 -  V1+' +. V21 - ZS21  is-T- is+T+ A11  E[e 11 11 , e 22 22 I -~ +A - P A_ - is1111 11  + ~22  STOCHASTIC THEORY OF MATCHING PROCESSES 37  ~1 A12  21 12 12 +A ~ (I - P) a21 - tS21 "12 - 1512  121 112 Vii -f- 121 - ZS21 112 - ZS12  (S), (11) (P) (12)  First observe those characteristic functions which as a set are intrinsically related to Theorem 1. These correspond to the  trials with no + comparisons (Eqs. (1)-(4)). We note as in the general case, a type of greater generality of the serial  expressions. This can be seen directly by setting the first and second parts of (1), (2) and (3), (4) equal to one another and  solving for the serial variables (using the method of undetermined coefficients of the variable "is").  By way of short cut, however, use of the previously developed mappings shows, and inspection of (1)-(4) makes it intuitively  reasonable that  P = vul (v11 + 121), Au = vt + 1s1 > A z1 = 111 + 121  if equivalence is to hold, even for (1)-(4) alone. But, this constrains au = A21 = ai which, in general, does not have to  hold. The reverse mappings, SEM -* PEM, are of course,  111 = A-, 121 = (1 - P) A,-,  and in both SEM -* PEM and PEM --> SEM, vat = A22 , A12 =vie .  Next, examine the joint characteristic functions for trials when the duplicated stimulus is in S2 position 1 (Eqs. (5)-(8)).  Equations (5)-(8) as a set correspond to Theorem 2, since -}- rates may differ from - rates, a -}- match occurs, but different  orders are pictured. Employing the same type of mapping as earlier, we find that if total equivalence is to hold, that  = vi-,/(v1+1 + 121), A11 = 111 + 121 , A2i = Vll + 121 ,  or equivalently,  vii = PA11 = PA21 , 121 = (1 - P) Ai = (1 - P) A21  ,  and the second stage parameter mappings, as usual, are able to equal one another with complete freedom. Again, the constraints  necessary for total equivalence are placed on the A's, i.e., a21 ='A1 . Notice that even if A did not otherwise differ  according to order, if ,A+ :74- A-, the parallel and serial processes could not be totally equivalent. Equations (9)-(12) and  the two characteristic functions associated with them are  38 JAMES T. TOWNSEND  also pertinent to Theorem 2. The only difference is that here, it will be necessary that Asi = ail in order that total  equivalence occur. In particular,  p=v~l(vTi+v~), A 11 11 21=a2+1 =Al,  or, in reverse,  vu = PA- = PAsi v+ = (I - p) All = (I - p) A91  and the second stage parameters are equal.  As noted, together Eqs. (5)-(12) depict behavior relating to the function with a matching stimulus in Si and S2 . We have  shown immediately above that total equivalence necessitates Au = a21 and Au = As . However, V1+, , v21 , vii , vsi can all be  different, although these ratios, v,+ 11 -- v21), vii/(v11 + v21) must be equal if total equivalence is to hold. These two  ratios must be equal to one another because the PEM -> SEM mapping shows that both of these quantities must equal p. This  illustrates Theorem 3. It was shown there that placement of the matching stimulus in a different place and calculation of the  probability that the same position (in Si , S2) pair is completed during a given stage, resulted in the same serial  probability for the two placements but two different parallel probabilities. Solving for p in (5), (6) and then in (9), (10)  proves this supposition in the present situation. Again, it should be noted that this is an aspect of greater generality of  parallel processing.  The constancy of the p parameter is not the only place where PEM is more general than the serial class. The rates are also  involved via Theorem 4. Note for instance, that A21 and Au both have to equal two different sums of P's for total equivalence  to hold (observe expressions (3), (4), (7), (8), and (1), (2), (9), (10), respectively), vii + v21 and vi + v- both equal A-,  and vii + v21 and 11 + v i both equal aii. Hence, if we look separately at trials with and without a duplicated stimulus in S2  position 2, then conditioned on order of processing, say position 1 first, then the distribution of completion times for the  first comparison will be the same (whether or not a duplicated stimulus is present) for the serial models; the latter given by  ail/('1u - is). The parameters al , A+ do not appear. The analogous conditioned distributions for the parallel models, on the  other hand, will be given by (vii -{- v-)/(vii + v- - is), for trials with no duplicated stimulus and by (vii + vi )/(vii -}-  v21 - is), with a duplicated stimulus object, which are, in general, not equal.  When all the expressions for this particular paradigm are taken together ((1)-(12)) we find that 11 = A- , A- = Aa , '1u =  A2i and so, if total equivalence is to follow it must be that Ail = A- = A1 = Au = A,. That is, there can be no -}- and -  matchrate differences or order-dependent rate differences during stage 1. Similarly, in PEM we learn from the fact that ail =  vii -}- v21 ,iii = vii + v21, etc., and the equality of the A's that vii = vii = vii and v- = v21 = v21 to ensure total  equivalence. Thus, at  STOCHASTIC THEORY OF MATCHING PROCESSES 39  stage 1, the serial rates may not differ according to position or -{-, - distinctions and the parallel rates may differ  according to position but not the -{-, - match difference. On the other hand, SEM has p to represent position effects. At  stage 2, v22 = Ass , via = A- 12 , v2s = A+22 , vi s = A+ , hence at this stage a full latitude of dependence on 12 order (on  history) and + or - matching differences can occur.  The price, of course, of conforming to the equivalence mappings (and thus yielding total equivalence) is that models must give  up the ability to predict different processing rates for + and - comparisons during the first stage. Further, the serial  models even give up the latitude for distinct rates on different positions, being forced to discern position effects by way of  p and the stage 2 rates.  As noted above, in the class of potential statistics that in principle might test PEM vs SEM are mean intercompletion times  conditioned on serial position and order events. For instance, in discussing trials containing a + match, it may be inferred  from Theorem 2 that the distribution to first completion time, conditioned on which S2 Stimulus position contains the  duplicated stimulus and on which comparison takes place first, should exhibit a particular type of greater generality for SEM.  When the duplicated stimulus is in (S2) position 1, the characteristic function for PEM is given by (vii -{- v21)I(v+I -}- v2i  - is), independent of which comparison actually occurs first. In the same fashion, the characteristic function when the second  (S2) position is occupied by the duplicated stimulus is (vil + v+)/(v- + vii - is), independent of whether S2 position 1 or 2  is completed first. But, the analogous distributions for the serial models need not be equal:  Au =A A21 All - is A2 - is  Hence, a statistic that is capable of testing PEM and SEM on this basis is the associated mean (minimum) completion time  (first intercompletion time) conditionalized as above, with resulting values  1 I for PEM and I I . _l 1  vii + v21 vii + vi A i Asi A11 A 1  for SEM  so that if Ali 0 A- , Au =/= Ai , PEM predicts a single mean value when the duplicated stimulus is in position 1 (or 2) but  SEM can predict 2 if a + comparison takes place at a different rate than a - comparison, during stage 1 on position 1 or 2.  Similar remarks can be made for the SEM-PEM differences connected with the other theorems.  The difficulty in applying the above results and the related statistics is connected with the difficulty of discerning  (observing) which stimulus comparisons actually occur first on any given trial in a typical experiment. Apart from such  information,  40 JAMES T. TOWNSEND  which would allow us to use means, stage 2 processing will be blended in and the overall mean statistics will not suffice to  distinguish the models. In the above experiment, for example, the information typically obtainable in a reaction time  experiment, neglecting additional residue latency involvements, are serial position means on + comparison trials and the  overall mean on - comparison trials. These are, for SEM and PEM:  E(T-)=p~A + Al )-~(1-P)~al + al )  11 22 21 12  1 v11 1 V21 1  V11 + V21 Vll + V21 V22 Vll + V21 , V12  E(T1+) = p A1 + (I - P) ( A1 + A1 ) 11 21 12  _ 1 V21 1  V 1 + V21 V 1 + V21 V 2_ r  E(T2+)-p~Al +A1)+(1-p),~+ 11 22 21  1 V11 1  _ + _  -++ ++'+~ V11 V21 Vll V21 V22  (S), (P); (S), (P); (S), (P),  where E(T-) = comparison time on (exhaustive) no-stimulus-duplication trials, E(T2+) = comparison time on (self-terminating)  stimulus duplication trials with i = 1, 2 referring to duplication in S2 1 or 2, respectively.  It is evident that both SEM and PEM have sufficient flexibility relative to these statistics engendered by the convolving of  stages and relatively large numbers of parameters, to fit an elephant. As is evident from earlier work (Townsend, 1971b, 1972)  this does not mean that special cases may not be testable. For example, a PEM submodel with parameters constant across  different histories and values of n2 is diverse at the level of mean processing times relative to say, a SEM submodel with a  constant rate over order and n2 (i.e., all A's equal) parameter; assuming self-termination on -1- matching trials. The rub is  that there are other PEM (SEM) submodels (some of them are quite reasonable in certain contexts) that are totally equivalent  relative to either of these two special cases, and hence, the experiment is not really testing seriality vs parallelity.  In the particular experiment described above, manipulating the number of elements in the early and late sets does not seem to  be very helpful either, since the capacity  STOCHASTIC THEORY OF MATCHING PROCESSES 41  question then enters; that is, there is no a priori reason to expect the rates to be unrelated to the number of elements that  need be compared. Also, the processing path distribution (SEM) or distribution of processing capacity via the rates (PEM or  SEM) may change under these conditions. What is needed is an experimental design that can test a broad subset of PEM (SEM)  models against some subset of the opposing class, preferably at the level of means of some easily obtainable dependent  variable.  (). A PARALLEL-SERIAL TESTING PARADIGM (PST)  Optimally, no submodel of the serial model (SEM) should be able to make predictions, at the level of observable means, that  any submodel of the parallel model (PEM) can make, and vice versa. Further, the ideal experiment would serve, given sufficient  trials, etc., to specify the specific member of the proper model that applies.  This completely optimal aim probably can never be achieved in the realm of "black box" modeling. Nevertheless, the development  below gives an experimental paradigm that can test the total PEM, against the total SEM. In fact, PEM is tested against a  rather large class of additive serial models (i.e., a class including SEM) with the following provision. The rates for matches  must differ from the rates for mismatches. If mean reaction time behavior is of the specified serial nature, then no PEM can  be totally equivalent to this class of serial models and vice versa. Moreover, the models are diverse at the level of  observable means and thus are mean-testable.  The paradigm (PST) may be thought of as an elaboration of simple matching experiments where three converging conditions  contain T,, T2 trial types and a third type of trial with all S2 elements matching the Sl element. These conditions together  with PEM and SEM meet the assumptions of Theorems 1-4 in such a manner that observable mean diversity results. The pertinent  theorems for PST are 3 and 4 and it is therefore likely that other paradigms resting on Theorems 1, 2 or various combinations  of 1-4 may also elicit observable forms of diversity.  The conditions are shown in stylized form in Table 1 with A referring to the (any) Sl stimulus that is duplicated in S2 and B  refers to (any) S2 stimulus that is different from A. It is the logical form of the paradigm that is important, not the  particular realization. For instance, Sl could contain two (A, B) rather than one stimulus and S2 could contain one (A) rather  than two. The designations A, B need not refer to separate stimuli. They might refer to categories or stimulus dimensions, for  Condition I simply demands of S that he determine the S2 position of the target. Conditions II and III require that both S2  stimulus positions contain the target or that at least one contain the target, respectively, in order for a "yes" response to  occur. We will investigate predictions of processing time rather than, say, probability correct. Thus, the present predictions  correspond to a high-accuracy reaction time experiment,  42 JAMES T. TOWNSEND TABLE 1  Condition Response  Early stimulus: A  Late stimulus Set 1, AB yes  Set 2, BA no  Early stimulus: A  Late stimulus Set 1, AA yes  Set 2, AB no  Set 3, BA no  Set 4, BB no  Early stimulus: A  Late stimulus Set 1, AA yes  Set 2, AB yes  Set 3, BA yes  Set 4, BB no  although there is no reason predictions cannot be extended to include low accuracy conditions.  It should not be inferred from Table 1 that the same stimuli are presented on each trial. Rather A simply represents the  target, whatever it is on any particular trial and B any nontarget. In fact, the BB in Condition II and III of Table 1 need  not refer to identical stimuli, as long as neither is identical to the target.  The derivations of the means for the various cases will not be given, since they are completely standard. On the other hand,  it is necessary that some rather tedious algebra be dealt with in proving the nonequivalence results. The proofs are useful in  making apparent the structure of the models relative to the experimental design and the aspects of the models whence diversity  arises.  The present full class of parallel models PEM is considered. The rates can depend on stage, S2 position and whether a  comparison is + or -. The parallel parameters are, therefore (using our simplified notation),  + - + - + - + w11 v11 > v22 + v22 , v12 e v12 ) v21 1 v21~e  where vi1 gives the first stage rate for S2 position i with a (- or +) comparison and v'2 is the same for stage 2.  STOCHASTIC THEORY OF MATCHING PROCESSES 43  The SEM assumes that a + comparison can proceed at a rate different from that of a - comparison and that the rates are in  general dependent on stages, and S2 position, thus yielding the parameter vector,  < .~ + Y, A1+1 , A11, A22+, A22, A12>A12, A+ 21~~21~ Table 2 lists the mean processing time predictions of SEM and PEM for PST. It is assumed that processing is self-terminating.  Thus, in CI, either S2 stimulus element gives full information and the matching process (comparator) never makes more than a  single comparison. Similarly in CII, CII (1) requires exhaustive processing, CII (2) processing concludes whenever S2 position  2 is completed, CII (3) whenever S2 position 1 is finished, and CII (4) processing is curtailed after either of the S2  positions completes its match against S1. Self-evident analogous remarks hold for CIII.  It should be remarked here that if B is known to the subject then he might compare B, rather than A with the S2 stimuli. The  theorems below go through just as well in this case. However, if both A and B are compared simultaneously with the S2 stimuli  with self-termination whenever either type of comparison gains sufficient information to determine a response, I do not know  if the theorems hold. In a number of interesting cases the B's are selected from a rather large set (e.g., all the letters  except a target letter) and it would be very inefficient for the subject to match all members of this set against S2 rather  than the single target against S2 .  An especially interesting aspect, from an experimental point of view, of the succeeding theorem, is that it includes the  presence of arbitrary additive residual reaction time components, tp , is , that may be different (t,, :A ts) for PEM and SEM,  respectively. A point in passing is that it is quite feasible to impose distribution assumptions on t,o and t4 and then test  the entire set of reaction time distribution predictions associated with Table 1. It certainly follows from the earlier  theorems (as well as a fortiori from Theorem 5 below) that the PEM and SEM distributions must be diverse. However, such  questions as that of independence of the residuals tg , tp with respect to the comparison times rather than simply additivity,  immediately arise. So although a distribution approach may prove fruitful, the present development avoids certain pitfalls  surrounding a distributional analysis of processing stages. Theorem 5 presents the chief diversity and equivalence results.  THEOREM 5. (A) If the stage 1 processing rates for either S2 positions 1 or 2 differ for -}- and - comparisons (i.e., Au Au(vu  =A vu) or ' i =/-' As1(v i ~ v21)) then PST provides for observable mean diversity between PEM and SEM, even though to each  PEM and SEM expression for mean processing time is added the residual latency component tD , is , respectively.  (B) If none of the first stage rates of SEM or PEM differ according to whether comparisons are + or -, then SEM and PEM are  observable mean equivalent relative to PST so long as p =,k 0, 1.  TABLE 2 Serial and Parallel Observable Mean RT Predictions for the Parallel-Serial Testing Paradigm (PST)  Serial models Parallel models y  H  CI a 0 p (1 _p)  1  + t 11 21 V+11 P 21  (2) p + (1 - P) -F is 1  A+ V ~_ tD  11 21 11 + + 1  1 1 1 1  (1) p(~+ +~+)+(1-p)(+ +~+)+is 11 22 21 12  1 + y11 + V21 + t  v i -{- v i vi (v i -{- +) (v i + v i)V+ 21 12  (2) p 1 1 (1 - p) G-T A  11 22 21  +  v 1 + V21 V22 (V 1v1+ v21) .{_ _ _ tv  A11 + (I - P)   i1 + + + i2(i1V+ V+) + to    ii + '~12 + i   21     (4) (I P)   1     d- +   V_ V_ + tV    d_ + to   11 +     11 21   21          0  CHI      A       x  (I) (I P)   1     a +   V+ V+ + t9  a  A+ + is   11 +   A  11 21   21       I + V21  b7  (2) ~ +(I-P)(A ++)+tg   + + +(+ -) + tp  00       .4  11 21 12   V11 V21 v12 V11 V21  0       m  (3) (I P)    + t    P (x + --   I +  a  A+~ A+ + t8   _ V22(V11 _V11 -+-  rMr+  11 22 21   Vll + V21 + + +       V21) n         z  I I I I  I + V11 V21  b  (4) P(~- +2=)+(I-P)(~l=  12 +t, 11 + 21 22(v11 + v21) + + tD 0     12(v11 + V21)    u 22 21      by       m       w       b7  46 JAMES T. TOWNSEND  (C) If the conditions of (B) hold with the exception that p = 0, 1, then PEVI approximates SEM to an arbitrarily close degree  in PST, but SEM is not able to mimic PEM for arbitrary PEM parameter values.  Proof A. We proceed by reductio ad absurdum on the assumption that Au + Au . The proofs, if we instead assumed a21 + A21, vii  0 v11 or v i v21, are similar in form. Assume the premise that PEM is not observable mean diverse under the present  characterization. Then from Table 2 we observe that  CI(1) = is + + (I - P) - -  + + ~11 ~21 11  + tp CI(2) = is + ~- +  11 21 11 + v21  CI(1) + CI(2) = pal + VI ) + (1-p) (al + al) + 2ts 11 21 21  +tp,  - + 1 + 1 + +2tp.  v11 + v21 v11 + v21  But we further note that  CII(4) -}- CIII(1) = p ~+ -}- al ) + (1 - P) 1 a1 + A1 ) + 2ts  11 11 21 21  1  - v+ +. v+ 11 21  - 1 +2tp. vu + v21  (14)  Now, Eqs. (13) and (14), being the same in SEM, imply a constraint on a function of the  v's, namely,  CI(1) -{- CI(2) = CII(4) -}- CIII(l)  1 _ + _ 1 - 1 + 1 . (15)  v 1 + v21 v11 + v _  1 11 + V 1 11 + v_ 21  A little algebraic inspection of (15) shows that for PEM - SEM at the level of mean processing times in PST means that PEM -  SEM => [v+21 = v21 = v21 or v11 = vi1 = v11], without loss of generality, set v2 = v21 = v21 . This result comes from the  diversity associated with Theorem 4.  It then follows that in PEM, CI(1) = CIII(1) and CI(2) = CII(4), which is only true in SEM if a21 = a21 or p = 1. If we had  set v11 = vi1 = v11 , then we would have obtained Ail = Ail or p = 0. At this point, those PEM representatives supposing  STOCHASTIC THEORY OF MATCHING PROCESSES  47  neither v21 = v21 nor vi1 = vi1 are excluded, as are those SEM representatives that assume neither that A+1 = A21 nor Ail =  All . But, it must now be verified that the remaining submodels of SEM and PEM also cannot be equivalent.  Assume first that A21 = Asl . Then, with little effort we obtain not only  but also  or  -   CIII(2) (1 p) v21   - CIII(1) _ = (16)  A+ ,   v12 v11 +(++ v21 )   12   CII(3) (1 p) y21   - CII(4) _ -_ - (17)  A12    v12(vll + v21)   CII(1) p y11   - CIII(2) = = (18)  A+ ,   22 v22 +(+ vll + v21 )   CIII(4) y1l   - CII(3) (19)  A22 v22\vll / + v21)   CII(l) 1p)   - CII(2) = p _   A22 21 A12   (20)  +   v11 + v21 v22 v22 ) '12(v12+ v21)   CIII(4) 1 (1 p)   - CIII(3) = p _ - _   A22 A22 + -{-_   A12   (21)  yll 1   = ( y21   - + ) +   vll + v21 v22 v22 v12(vll + V21) )   It can be observed that the constancy of p in (18), (19) is contradicted by  y11 y11 v 1 + v21 v11 + v21  in the same expressions, a result associated with Theorem 3.  More formally, plug the equivalences obtained in (16), (18), (19) into (20) to derive the following equation in the v's.  -  V1+1 _ y11 __ yl+1 1 1 V 2(v l + v21) v22(vll + v21) Y11 + v21 ( V2+2 v22 ) 480/114/31_4  48 JAMES T. TOWNSEND  And it follows immediately that v11 = v11 ; or substituting (17)-(19) in (21) would again imply this result. But now,  substituting vit = vii = vu back into CI(1), CI(2) yields Au = All , which contradicts our original hypothesis.  It remains to show that a contradiction still appears if we assume instead of A2i = A21 , that p = 1. If p = 1 then CII(3) -  CII(4) (recall that v21 = v21) implies that  v211v121v11 + v21) = 0.  Hence either v21 = 0, which is in violation of the tenets of a parallel process, that the rates should be nonzero for all  unfinished comparisons at all stages, or vie = +OC) or vii = -a-oo, which contradicts our postulate concerning finite  processing rates.  In any case, vl+ = vie = +oo (an attendant manipulation gets v12 = +oo) implies that v11 = vl (examine Cl(1), CII(1), CIII(3)  when p = 1, v12 = vie = +oo) which again implies that all = All again resulting in a contradiction. If vl+ = +00 or v11 = +oo  then we cannot even obtain finite predictions for Cl.  Proof (B). Note first that the unobservable t, t, were treated as variables that could only obscure diversity, that is,  promote PEM-SEM equivalence. Hence it is sufficient to show equivalence results when tD = is .  It may then be ascertained through simple algebra that the following mappings constitute equivalent PEM and SEM models.  The SEM ---> PEM mappings. Set  1, 1 _ p -1  v11 = (+ ) - v21 , 11 21  where v21 is fixed at some value such that  Next, let  and  c~) v12  A1 c)  _ ~12 i'21  1 _ p -1  _+ > v21 . A21 )  p 1-p 1 A11 A21 ) 1 - p '  () G) Ir  v22 - ~22 l1 - v21 A11  where - = +, -.  The PEM a SEM mappings. Let p be arbitrary but contained in (0, 1). Next, let  1 _ 1 Ap _1  11 - - ( vll + v21 A21 p  STOCHASTIC THEORY OF MATCHING PROCESSES 49 where A21 is chosen so that the difference in parentheses is greater than zero.  Next, let Air _ (I - P) y12(y1l + y21) A22 = v21  where _ -{-, -, and the proof of B is completed.  Proof C. Without loss of generality, let p = l. Then we obtain from Table 2,  PV22(yll + y21) vll  and  A11  V11 + v21 A22 yll     v22(vll + v21)  0 __ y21 I yil     __   v12(vll + v21) A22 v 2(vll +  0 = y11 .    v12(v11 + v21)    v21)  It is clear that SEM cannot mimic arbitrary parallel behavior. However, the PEM can clearly approximate SEM by picking  appropriate v's, in particular, letting vie and vie be so large that  y21 v12(vll + v21)  and  yll v12(vll + v21)  are as close to zero as desired. Q.E.D.  It may be noted that letting vie , vie be very large in Theorem 5(C) has different connotations from doing the same thing in  5(A). The reason is that in 5(C) no constraints are imposed on other allowable parameters. But, in 5(A), letting vie and vie  be very large results in constraints on the ability of the models to reflect -{-, - processing rate differences in data; for  example, vli must be close to vil in value.  As a simple example of 5(A), assume that the serial model is true with parameters, P = 0.80, A+ = 0.04 comparisons/msec, A- =  0.013 comparisons/msec. That is, there is a fairly high likelihood of processing the tuple with the first-position member of  S2 first and while there is a -}-, - processing rate difference, order and identity of the pair do not otherwise matter. The  value A+ = 0.04 and A- = 0.013 correspond to average elapsed times of 25 and 75 msec/comparison.  Now, recall that SEM predicts that CI(l) -}- CI(2) = CII(4) -I- CIII(1), which is false for PEM unless v2l = v i (or vi = vu).  But, if say, v21 = v 1 , then PEM predicts that CI(1) = CIII(1), CI(2) = CII(4). Since the values of the data are CI(l) _ 35  msec, CIII(l) = 25 msec, CI(2) = 65 msec, CII(4) = 75 msec, PEM is falsified. Similarly, if all the v-'s = 0.013 and the v+'s  = 0.04 comparisons/msec, then CI(1) =  50 JAMES T. TOWNSEND  CI(2) = 18.9 msec, CII(4) = 38.5 msec, CIII(1) = 12.5 msec, and CI(1) + CI(2) _ 37.8 :~L CII(4) + CIII(1) = 51 msec, so in  this case SEM would be falsified.  Of course, in the case of SEM being true, more complicated cases could arise, for instance, with A+ = A- but Ai =A Au , but  similar consequences would nevertheless result. Further, it appears that the structure of the paradigm essentially entails  some nonparametric tests; for example, the predictions by additive serial models (inclusive of SEM) that CI(1) + CI(2) =  CII(4) + CIII(1). This latter is a strong prediction by a very large class of models.  We neglected t,, , is in the example, but with no loss of generality. Methods-ofmoments estimates of all the parameters do not  appear feasible, at least by hand, but least squares or chi-square estimates should permit numerical fits.  The preceding theorem (Theorem 5) demonstrates that the experimental paradigm given in PST is sufficient assuming that "same"  comparisons are processed at a different rate than "different" comparisons to exploit the distribution diversity between SEM  and PEM on an observable mean diversity level; even with the inclusion of additive residual latency components that could be  different for SEM and PEM.  7. CONCLUSION  In addition to analytic tests developed so far, certain types of empirical results are sometimes acquired which are more  intuitively predicted by, say, parallel than by serial processes, or vice versa and some of these are mentioned in earlier  papers (Townsend, 1971b, 1972).  As noted earlier, Thomas has recently contributed to the development of nonparametric tests of parallel and serial  predictions. The tests developed there were limited to mismatching (-1) comparisons and to stage-1 completion times. On these  aspects, the present treatment is more general. However, Thomas' (1969) basic parallel assumption was that of within-stage  independence and hence was more general than the parallel-exponentiality assumed in PEM.  Thomas' results were based on a two-dimensional experimental paradigm with three sets of conditions. One of the conditions  required a positive response if a specified one of two displayed stimulus dimensions was an appropriate value, otherwise a  negative response was to be made. The second condition was just a reversal of the first; a positive response was to be made if  the other dimension attained the proper value, otherwise a negative response was required. The third condition required a  positive response only if both dimensions were at the proper value, otherwise a negative response was to be made. The  nonparametric tests were developed relating the way the negative time distribution in the third condition could be serially or  parallelly composed of those negative response-time distributions from the other two conditions. Thus, an implicit assumption  is that the negative processing distributions remain the  STOCHASTIC THEORY OF MATCHING PROCESSES 51  same in all three conditions. This assumption is not too unlikely from an intuitive standpoint if processing is serial but  there may well be changes in capacity requirements when the number of stimulus dimensions to be attended to in parallel is  altered. One of the prime sources of difficulty in parallel-serial testability has been the intuitively acceptable ability of  limited capacity parallel models to mimic standard serial models in just such experiments (see, e.g., Townsend, 1974). We  finally remark in these connections that the consequences for Thomas' (1969) results have apparently not been investigated  when a residual latency variable (analogous to t,, , ts) with nonzero variance is convolved with the processing time variables.  As far as I can determine, the present development, cultimating in Theorem 5, represents the first case of an experimental  paradigm that can be shown to analytically separate fairly general parallel serial models at the level of observable mean  reaction times. To appreciate the generality of the models one merely has to note that there are only two more degrees of  freedom in the data than there are parameters in the parallel model, PEM, and only one more than the serial, SEM; or that one  can predict positive, negative or no dependence between the processing of individual stimulus elements (that is, between the  comparisons of Sl with the two members of S2). It is axiomatic that any simpler submodels of PEM and SEM are a fortiori also  testable, with the constraint that ,A+ ; A- or v+ 0 v.  One type of generalization of the above theory would take the direction of letting the rate on one comparison depend on  whether another comparison is a match or mismatch. For example, we could write v+- as the parallel rate for the pair with  serial position 1 when it is a + match but the pair in serial position 2 is a - match. The full class of PEM and SEM  extensions of this sort are not observable mean diverse with respect to PST, but there are "Gestalt" subcases where the models  are still testable (Townsend & Snodgrass, 1974).  Finally, a cautionary note should be sounded concerning the possibility that the converging conditions I, II and III of PST  may induce processing of a sort qualitatively different in the three cases (e.g., exhaustive processing in one,  self-terminating in the others, etc.). This is a question that must ultimately be referred to empirical test in any given  cognitive context.  REFERENCES  ATKINSON, R. C., HOLMGREN, J. E., & JUOLA, J. F. Processing time as influenced by the number of elements in a visual display.  Perception and Psychophysics, 1969, 6, 321-326.  BRAND, J. Classification without identification in visual research. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1971, 23,  178-186.  CHRISTIE, L. S., & LUCE, R. D. Decision structure and time relations in simple choice behavior. Bulletin of Mathematical  Biophysics, 1956, 18, 89-112.  EGETH, H., JONIDES, J., & WALL, S. Parallel processing of multielement displays. Cognitive Psychology, 1972, 3, 764-698.  52 JAMES T. TOWNSEND  EGETH, H. Parallel versus serial processes in multidimensional stimulus discrimination. Perception and Psychophysics, 1966, 1,  245-252.  ESTES, W. K., & TAYLOR, H. A. A detection method and probabilistic model for assessing information processing from brief  visual displays. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 1964, 52, 446-454.  GARDNER, G. T. Evidence for independent parallel channels in tachistoscopic perception. Cognitive Psychology, 1973, 4, 130-155.  GREENO, J. G., & STEINER, T. E. Comments on "Markovian processes with identifiable states": General considerations and  applications to all-or-none learning. Psychometrika, 1968, 33, 169-173.  HABER, R. N. Information processing approaches to visual perception. New York: Holt, Rinehard & Winston, 1969.  HURWIcz, L. Generalization of the concept of identification. In T. C. Koopmans (Ed.), Statistical inference in dynamic  economic models. New York: Wiley, 1950.  HUREWICZ, W., & WALLMAN, H. Dimension theory. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1948. LoEvE, M. Probability theory.  Princeton: Van Nostrand, 1955.  McGILL, W. J., & GIBBON, J. The general-gamma distribution and reaction times. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1965, 2,  1-18.  PYKE, R. Markov renewal processes: Definitions and preliminary properties. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 1961, 32,  1231-1242. (a)  PYKE, R. Markov renewal processes with finitely many states. Annuals of Mathematical Statistics, 1961, 32, 1243-1259. (b)  RUMELHART, D. E. A multicomponent theory of the perception of briefly exposed visual displays. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 1970, 7, 191-218.  STERNBERG, S. High speed scanning in human memory. Science, 1966, 153, 652-654.  THOMAS, E. A. C. Alternative models for information processing: Constructing non-parametric tests. British Journal of  Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 1969, 22, 105-113. TOWNSEND, J. T. Mock parallel and serial models and experimental  detection of these. Purdue Centennial Year Symposium on Information Processing, 1969, II, 617-628.  TowNsEND, J. T. Theoretical analysis of an alphabetical confusion matrix. Perception & Psychophysics, 1971, 9, 40-50. (1)  TOWNSEND, J. T. A note on the identifiability of parallel and serial processes. Perception & Psychophysics, 1971, 10, 161-163.  (b)  TowNsEND, J. T. Some results on the identifiability of parallel and serial processes. British Journal of Mathematical and  Statistical Psychology, 1972, 25, 168-199.  TowNsEND, J. T. Issues and models concerning the processing of a finite number of inputs. In B. H. Kantowitz (Ed.), Human  information processing: Tutorials in performance and cognition. Potomac, Md.: Erlbaum, 1974.  TowNsEND, J. T. Serial and within-stage independent parallel model equivalence on the minimum completion time. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, in press.  TOWNSEND, J. T., & Roos, R. N. Search reaction time for single targets in multiletter stimuli with brief visual displays.  Memory & Cognition, 1973, 1, 319-332.  TOWNSEND, J. T., & SNODGRASS, J. G. A serial vs. parallel testing paradigm when "same" and "different" comparison rates  differ. Paper presented to Psychonomic Society, Boston, November, 1974.  RECEIVED: December 10, 1974