10.1016/0022-2496(76)90027-4
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 13,148-162 (1976)  Relative Possibilities of Loops and Redundant Connections in Neural Nets*  J. ZACHARY JACOBSON  Department of Psychology, Queen's University, Kingston, Canada K7L3N6  A model of the cortex (after Hebb) as a randomly connected set of neurons is examined. As traces made of larger numbers of  cells are considered, the fraction of redundant connections likely to be contained in the trace increases. Within the trace,  the fraction of connections likely to be reverberating loops decreases with larger networks.  Speculations concerning the nature of the memory trace have been entertained for centuries, proposing various methods of  storing information. The most compelling evidence now available is that information is stored by causal relations of neural  firing changing at the synapses as a result of internal and external events.  Using what was known in 1949, Hebb produced a major theory of brain function suggesting that the critical units of neural  function were reverberatory circuits. External stimulation was transduced into neural firing at the receptor and transmitted  directly into the central nervous system. In turn, this caused other cells to fire. A loop or eddy would occasionally form  which restimulated itself; this was termed a "cell assembly." Reverberatory firing in the cell assembly would continue for  some time, eventually causing a permanent change in the structures of the synapses involved. Several assemblies might link  together, forming a "phase sequence" representing a concept. In this manner, Hebb suggested, information is stored and  retrieved; the end products are organized impulses driving effector muscles and producing behavior. Information about behavior  as well as behavior-altered sensory input would feed back into the receptors immediately, adding external loops to the  internal loops already posited. The model was extended and elaborated by Milner (1959) and Good (1965).  Hebb's model involved only excitatory synapses in 1949, but it quickly became apparent that inhibitory firing existed in the  CNS and that it was probably as important as excitation in the whole process (Hebb, 1972).  The appeal to common sense in Hebb's theory was strong but the theory was, as Hebb is apocryphally said to have written, "too  specific to be right and too vague to be any good." A cell assembly arrangement could be imagined to account for the  * Research for this paper was supported by grant No. NRC 386-016 to J.Z.J. as well as by  grant No. DRB 204-073-2 to P. C. Dodwell and J.Z.J. 148  Copyright C 1976 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  NEURAL NETS 149  results of almost any experiment-after it had been done. Except perhaps for the study of stabilized images (Pritchard, Heron,  & Hebb, 1960; Pritchard, 1961), prediction was not cell assembly theory's strength.  An equally unpredictive formulation competitive to Hebb's is what we may call "single cell" theory, which was most notably  presented by Konorski (1967). Konorski's suggestions are formally present in some writings (e.g., Walley & Wieden, 1973;  Stent, 1975), and intuitively present in the casual thinking of many psychologists. This holds that there is a single cell  whose activity is tantamount to the organism thinking of a concept or perceiving something. Information is presumed to cascade  through ever more specific orders of feature extraction until all of the neural firing impinges on a crucial or "grandmother"  cell.  While research in single-cell recording is usually thought to support the single-cell sort of theory, (e.g., Hubel & Wiesel,  1962) there is reason to suspect that this is more a result of the nature of the investigations than of an underlying  principle. Konorski postulated "gnostic units," individual cells responsible for the interpretation and response to highly  specific perceived elements. To record from a single cell and look for its effective stimulus could hardly help but provide  support for such a view, but that support might be spurious (Uttal, 1971).  It may not be farfetched to speak of a single cell whose response denotes human beings, for example. But there may not be  enough cells in the nervous system. There must be one for each distinguishable entity in the organism's experience and  imagination. While the multicell notions require many more cells to represent each concept, a cell may exist in a very large  number of disparate sets. There is no requirement that any cell ultimately represent one concept only. Although it is true  that a gnostic unit in a single cell system could also be part of the information extraction leading to many other such units,  there could not be more gnostic units than the number of cells in the central nervous system. This limit does not exist for  the web or cell assembly sort of model. In the latter, any cell can exist in more than one "lattice," and there are a great  many more combinations possible than there are neurons in the system. Further, it is difficult to imagine how information that  a single cell is more (or less) active than usual could be realized as molar behavior of the organism.  For the above reasons, it seems that the multicell sort of theory is more reasonable than the single-cell sort. Lashley (e.g.,  1929), showed that surgical disruption of the cortex-short of extensive ablation-produced little or no observable deficit in  previously learned behavior. It seems unlikely that a single-cell system could withstand some of Lashley's more extreme  manipulations. However, Lashley seldom did symmetric violence to both hemispheres. Therefore if a pair of gnostic unit systems  is postulated, one in each hemisphere (cf. Corballis & Beale, 1970), the single-cell model is partly exonerated.  However, there are data that are inconsistent with any sort of single cell formulation. A word presented visually and masked  by an associated word is easier for subjects to  150 J. ZACHARY JACOBSON  report than the same word masked by a nonassociate, and this effect cannot be ascribed to simple guessing (Jacobson, 1973).  The association effect can easily be accommodated in terms of multicell traces which, in the case of associated words, involve  many of the same elements; masking a word with its associate restimulates part of the target's trace, making less previous  stimulation by the target necessary in order for the subject to report it correctly. Bryden (1972) and Jacobson (1973) argued  that if a single-cell explanation is invoked, it must allow activity in the unit for PLANE (say) to partially excite the unit  for TRAIN, and vice versa. At this point it becomes apparent that the two cells form at least a small reverberatory cell  assembly. If both cells unidirectionally affected a higher-order cell such as TRANSPORTATION, that could not account for the  association effect in masking unless there were downstream effects from the higherorder cell to the two original cells, and  that still would be a reverberatory loop.  The foregoing by itself is not a convincing argument in favor of a diffuse memory trace. Owing to the apparent robustness of  learned behavior in the face of ablation and brain injury, it is doubtful that even a multicell engram would seem reasonable  if an appreciable proportion of its connections could not be shown to be redundant.'  The present paper considers a primitive model of the central nervous system at levels of information processing beyond simple,  complex, hypercomplex cells and so forth, in an attempt to estimate the proportion of the connections in the multicell  "lattice," or engram, which are redundant. A further segment attempts to determine whether or not reverberating loops may  safely be assumed to be the building blocks of the engram.  The lattice of a word, for example, is defined as being the extensive set of interrelated linkages or neurons activated (or  inhibited) by the subject's reading or hearing the word and in which sufficient activation (and inhibition) is tantamount to  the subject's thinking of the word. Likewise, a particular level of activity and caused inactivity is necessary in the lattice  if the subject is to speak or write the word. The causal relations of neural firing must change as a function of the history  of caused events at the synapse: a firing in a cell which is followed sufficiently closely by an event in a downstream cella  firing of the next cell or a suppression of a firing in the case of an inhibitory synapseincreases the probability that  subsequent firing in the first cell will contribute to the cause of similar events in the downstream cell (Eccles, 1972; also  cf. Karczmar, Nishi, & Blaber, 1972).  REDUNDANT CONNECTIONS  Assume that the connections between cortical neurons are random at first, and that each neuron connects to an average of 0  other cells through an average of k synapses.  1 "Redundancy" is taken to mean the condition that pairs of cells joined along one effective pathway are joined again along  another.  NEURAL NETS 151  The cells innervated by a particular cell are a subset of the n cells physically close enough to be fired upon by the first  cell. Because a cell might fire on another cell more than once, 0 < k. Naively, 0 seems likely to be the same as k, or close  to it. However, it is possible to define the relation of the two quantities more precisely.  0, the overall number of cells impinged upon by synapses from a particular cell, is equal to k, the average number of synapses  initiated by a given cell, minus the average number of those synapses by which a particular cell synapses more than once  apiece upon other cells ("repetitions").  To calculate the number of repetitions, consider a sample of k neurons drawn (that is to say, synapsed upon) one at a time,  with replacement, from a population of n cells. (Recall that n is the average number of neurons physically close enough to a  given cell to be synapsed upon by that cell.)  The probability that the first synapse (or draw) will be upon a cell previously synapsed upon by the same cell ("drawn") will  be zero, obviously.  The probability that the second synapse will be upon a cell previously synapsed upon will be 1 /n. (Of all of the n neurons  which might be targeted, exactly one has been targeted before.)  The probability that the third synapse will be onto a cell previously contacted by a synapse from the first neuron is  1 + (1 - (1/n)) n  (This number cannot be 2/n because the expected number of "new" neurons that the second synapse contacted was not exactly 1,  rather it was 1 - (1/n) to accommodate the possibility that the neuron that was synapsed upon the first time was also synapsed  upon the second time.)  The way in which these probabilities are being calculated is to sum the expected number of cells previously synapsed upon and  then to divide that by the number of cells, n, from which the target of each new synapse is selected independently of the  previous selections.  The probability that the fourth synapse will be a repetition is  1 + (1 - (I In)) + {1 - [(1 + (1 - (IIn)))1In) n  and, in general, the probability that the jth synapse will be a repetition is  -1  ((1 - SO*  i=1  where j >, 2  and si is the ith term of the self same probability-of-repetition series: s1 = 0, s, = I In,  152 J. ZACHARY JACOBSON  s3 = (1 + (1 - (Iln)))ln, and so forth. When j = 1, the probability of a repetition is zero, as has been noted already.  The expected number of repetitions in the series of k synapses is then the sum of the probabilities of a repetition by each  synapse:  k j-1  y y ((I - Si)ln) j=2 i=1  and the relation of 0 to k is  k i-1  0 = k - y y ((I - si)ln) j=2 i=1  Note that when n - oo, si -~ 0. Therefore  (I-si) j-1 n n  But] < k, so (j - 1)ln is very small when k is small and n large, and then  j-1 .2(k-1)2-I j=2 n n  which is also small.  For these reasons 0 -)- k when n > k, but otherwise all of the above approximations do not hold, and the difference between 0  and k is considerable. That is to say, if the average number of neurons physically close enough to a given cell to be  contacted by it is large, and if the average number of synapses initiated by a given neuron is smaller by a factor of about  1,000 or more, then the number of different cells contacted may be almost as large as the number of synapses which that cell  initiates. Otherwise there will be a considerable fraction of neurons contacted twice or more by any particular neuron.  If each cell fires (on the average) onto 0 other separate cells, then there are 2paths available, some one, but no more than  two, of which may join two particular cells directly, (The first cell impinges upon 0 other separate cells, one of which might  be the second cell, and the second cell impinges upon 0 other cells, one of which might be the first cell.) If there are A  paths available along which two particular cells may be joined through j other cells, then there are Apaths available along  which the same two cells might be joined through j + 1 other cells,2 Therefore, by induction, there are 2(,Li+1) paths along  which two particular cells might be joined through i other cells.  2 Each cell fires upon about 0 other cells. Each cell that is fired upon fires upon about 0 other cells. Therefore, each cell  initiates  paths with a "lag" or "delay" of one cell.  NEURAL NETS 153  In a cortex comprised of N cells there are N~2 junctions of two cells through one other cell. And, in general, there are  N(Oi+i) junctions of two cells through i other cells.  All pathways of a given length are equally probable. Therefore, given that two cells are at least once joined in an engram,  E, - 2(Oi+I)IN(Oi+1) - 21N  represents the expected number of redundant connections of length i between those cells, over and above the first connection.  It is independent of the length of the first connection. Surprisingly, E is not affected by the length of the second  connection nor anything else have the total number of cells in the random array.  We have assumed that every possible set of connections between a given two neurons form an independent pathway. However, the  pathways with a common portion may not seem to be two independent paths, even though they have been treated as such. Figure 1  shows two paths between A and B that converge at D before B. If the impulse  FIG. 1. Pathways with common portion. Impulse moves from cell A to cell B.  from A along the one divergent arm arrives at D at a different time than the impulse along the other arm, the cell at D will  be independently liable to receive the impulse from A in each of two ways, and so to transmit it toward B. (If there is a  probability x that cell D will receive a given impulse from A along each divergent arm, there will be a probability of x2 that  it will receive impulses along both arms, probability of (1 - x)$ that it will receive no impulse, and a probability of 1 - x2  - (1 - x)2 that it will receive an impulse along exactly one arm.) Thus if the two impulses arrive at D at different times,  the two pathways will truly act independently. If two impulses transmitted from A arrive at D within its absolute refractory  period of each other (that is, within about 1 msec), the matter is not so clear. The combined stimulation of two cells will  make cell D more likely to respond once than single stimulation would; cell D might be able to respond twice in rapid  succession but the synaptic junction is not yet thoroughly enough understood to decide that. At any rate the two paths  certainly behave independently, except perhaps when the arrivals of impulses along the two arms of the pathway coincide almost  perfectly.  The foregoing does not imply that the output from a whole network is affected independently by independent inputs. It shows  instead that some mathematically  154 J. ZACHARY JACOBSON  separate pathways are actually independent in their ability to carry a common impulse between their common end points. The  whole network's output in response to independent inputs will be affected interactively by the degrees and microstructures of  the redundancies among the paths that are excited, the relation of the input events in time and character, past activity of  the pathways, and many other factors.  Figure 2 shows two different paths with common portions both before and after the divergent arms. As just seen, the paths  after the divergence at C behave independently. However, the same cannot be said for the common interval from A to the  divergence.  Fie. 2. Pathways with common portions. Impulse moves from cell A to cell B.  While the paths shown in Fig. 2 are not mathematically identical, they are not completely independent in that an impulse being  conducted along one branch is not totally unaffected by whether or not the impulse from the initial firing of the same initial  cell is carried along the other branch. This is because an impulse from A that does not reach C cannot be passed to B along  either of the divergent arms. We may say that the number of pathways of length i initiating at a given cell as calculated  above is an overestimate of the effective number of independent pathways by some function, f (i), where 0i+1 > f(i) > 0.  Therefore, (3) should more properly be written  E = 2{0i+1 -f(i)}1N{0i+1 - f(i)) = 2/N. (4)  The expected number of redundant connections between two particular cells in a lattice as expressed in (3) and (4) is not  dependent on all mathematically separate pathways being functionally independent. In the final analysis, each neuron can  initiate only 0 fully independent paths. However, it would he foolish to argue in Fig. 2, for example, that A was no more  likely to affect B along both arms of the connection than along one of the arms. So it is more proper to say that each neuron  initiates an average of 0 independent branches after the first delay cell, each of these branches has an average of 0 more  independent branches after the second, and so on. But this cannot affect the relations in (3) and (4).  The results in (3) and (4) are counterintuitive; one would expect that the expected number of redundant connections depends  upon 0. The number of pathways of a given length initiated by any particular cell is obviously dependent upon 0 in exactly the  same manner as is the number of paths of the same length initiated by all cells in  NEURAL NETS 155  the cortex. The chance that two of all of the parths of a given length exist between a particular cell and another particular  cell is therefore the same no matter what 0 is. There may be expected to be some average number, G, of cells involved in an  engram at any one time, although membership may be expected to vary somewhat from time to time. If there are G cells in a  lattice and, from (3) and (4), 21N is the expected number of redundant paths of any given length between two particular cells  in a lattice, then Y(21N) = 2GIN represents the expected number of paths among the G cells of the lattice which redundantly  join those two particular cells. Therefore, of all selections of two cells joined in a lattice, 2G/N represents the fraction  of these that will be joined again with a redundant connection also existing in the lattice.  Good (1965) estimated that the trace of the common word should optimally include about 30 % of the cells in the cortex. (Of  course, any single cell can exist in a great number of separate lattices.) If Good's estimate is accurate, about 60 % of the  pairs of cells joined in a randomly formed lattice are joined at least once more by another path existing in the lattice. If  about half of synapses are excitatory, half inhibitory, then about half of these connections would be "antiredundant" in that  an excitatory connection along one path would be inhibitory along another. While many cells may be joined in a path, some by  inhibitory and some by excitatory synapses, the same two possibilities are all that exist for the whole path's effect on the  final cell. (Fig. 3 shows  O A  inhibitory synapses  FIG. 3. Excitatory pathway involving inhibitory synapses only. Cell A's firing inhibits cell B. Cell B's firing inhibits cell  C. Therefore, cell A's firing tends to raise cell C's firing rate.  how an excitatory connection can include inhibitory synapses.) If about one-half of the connections are excitatory and the  rest inhibitory, then about 30% of the pairs of cells joined in a lattice would be joined once again within the same lattice  in the same mode (excitatory or inhibitory). About 30% of these pairs would be joined redundantly a third time in turn, and so  on. Needless to say, cells joined twice, but in opposite modes, would not behave as though they were redundantly joined.  Of course, a lattice would never during its lifetime be a set of randomly determined connections, except perhaps at its very  outset. Many spontaneous events would occur involving the trace or its parts and there would be a selection acting at every  event to retain redundant connections above all others. More precisely, cells joined redundantly would tend to be retained as  joined; cells joined redundantly through several paths would tend to be retained as joined more readily than cells joined  redundantly through fewer paths. These processes would involve the synaptic changes as a function of past  156 J. ZACHARY JACOBSON  activity mentioned earlier. Good's estimate of the average size of an engram may be in error, but even if it were high by a  factor of 10, 3 % of the connections would be redundant in the random case. This is still high enough for the proportion of  redundant connections to increase quickly to an appreciable fraction of the whole during repeated activations of the lattice.  LOCALIZATION OF FUNCTION  If we recall for a moment that the connections between cells are not truly random and that the probability of any two cells  being joined and being joined redundantly is higher if the two cells are in localized regions of cortex than otherwise, we see  that a very convoluted cortex will tend toward localization of specific functions. Such theories as Hebb's (1949) and Cowan's  (1970) were devised, in part, to account for Lashley's observation of the absence of localized engrams in the cortex. In this  they may have succeeded too well; localizations of function are indeed observed relevant to memory and speech among other  things (e.g., Milner, 1970). It has been suggested that cortical lateralization of function in humans is genetically  determined (Levy, 1969; Levy & Nagylaki, 1972), but it has been difficult to imagine how any localization could set itself up  short of an initial genetic determination of too many specific cortical connections. Considerations of the geometry of  convolutions and physical distance suggest how localization of function could arise in a general form that would be amenable  to genetic selection.  Of course, there are long subcortical pathways which are capable of carrying information intimately among widely separated  parts of the brain just as diffusion of function is the rule rather than the exception in mammalian cortex. Nevertheless that  localization which does occur needs to be accounted for. The foregoing refers to such functional localizations as cerebral  dominance and speech whose causes have been puzzling to many investigators, not to primary sensory projection areas whose  origins seem more directly anatomic.  THE QUESTION OF REVERBERATING LOOPS  While the question of single- or multicell representation in memory seems to have been soluble in the light of experimental  findings, the question of whether or not reverberating loops are the critical units of the multicell trace has not been as  easy. Reverberating loops doubtless exist in the brain, but it has not been possible to say if they are particularly important  in cortical function.  In fact, it may be shown that for any net of neurons containing loops, there exists a functionally equivalent net totally  without loops (Moreno-Diaz & McCollough, 1969, see also Block, 1962; Block, Knight, & Rosenblatt, 1962; a model of a pattern  recognizer  NEURAL NETS 157  which should have included reverberating loops was able to function well even when realized without them.)  Aninos (1972) tested a computer model of small numbers of randomly connected neurons and found that an isolated network will  enter fixed cyclic patterns of activity soon after it is set in action. However the cyclic activity occupies the whole of the  available plexus, and there is no reason to assume that this activity is comprised of the small and quasi-independent loops  being considered here. Moreover, the CNS can never exist for long in the isolation or in the constant input states which  Aninos investigated. Input and probabilities of caused firings change from moment to moment and this can be expected to  greatly change a network's iterative properties (Aninos found that alteration of one synapse was usually sufficient to change  the whole pattern of subsequent firing). Very possibly, as Aninos suggests, this sort of cyclic activity may be a neural  "echo" underlying short-term memory phenomena extant in the first few hundred milliseconds after a brief tachistoscopic  exposure and before any other large amount of further information has been introduced; but this, too, cannot comment on the  matter of whether or not loops are the critical units of the engram. Grossberg (1969) has shown that strong reverberation of  the form of one whole trace (a "point" in Grossberg's terms) exciting another in a sequence that ultimately is recursive is a  situation that would actually be destructive of veridical memory. This would be reverberation not unlike that of a tune that  occupies the consciousness and will not go away-anecdotal evidence that this interferes with proper memory function is rife.  But Grossberg spoke of echoing whole memory traces, not of the reverberations and potential for reverberations among small  numbers of neurons that Hebb (1949) intended, none of which is the memory of a specific item in itself. Unless one takes the  explicit position that Konorski (1967) and Walley and Wieden (1973) take-that single cells are the ultimate repository of  single percepts or memories-Grossberg is speaking of a different sort of reverberation than we are considering, a sort of  reverberation more like that which Aninos finds. But as we have seen, single cells are a poor candidate for the crucial units  of memory or perception.  Thus, it may seem that no objective solution is possible to the problem of whether or not memory traces are mainly comprised  of echoing loops. However, if the present analysis is carried further, the beginning of an answer emerges.  For reverberation to be the most important sort of event occurring in the trace, it must occur often enough to affect  materially subsequent firing patterns. If the conditional probability that a cell will fire given that an excitatory impinging  cell has fired is 2, say, and there are five cells in the ring, the probability of any firing stimulating the whole ring  unaided is (2 )5 = 1/32. The probability of such a firing stimulating the ring to fire twice in succession is that number  squared, and so on. This seems far too seldom to allow such a ring maintaining itself to be the crucial activity. Therefore,  both the size of a loop and the conditional probability of neural firing are important considerations.  48o/113/2-3  158 J. ZACHARY JACOBSON  Milner (1956) observed that each neural firing must cause, on the average, slightly less than one other firing to maintain an  appropriate level of activity within the CNS. At first this might seem to demand that the average causal probability mentioned  above would have to be about Ilk, but this does not take inhibitory synapses into account. If about half of the synapses are  inhibitory then the conditional probability that a firing of one neuron will affect a firing (producing or preventing one) in  a neuron it impinges upon may be much higher than Ilk. Yet that probability cannot be extremely close to certainty-there must  be some possibility for subsequent learning and for nonspecific projection to increase causal probabilities. Thus there is a  limiting size for viable loops. If synapses are not evenly distributed between inhibitory and excitatory, the conditional  probability could not approach certainty, and viable loops would be shorter still. (Doubtless there would also be a limiting  length for nonreverberating connections, but not so critically, for there is no theoretical requirement upon them that an  activity maintain itself long enough to affect subsequent events.) For a conditional probability (m) of 0.9, a loop of three  would usually stimulate itself twice or more in succession, but a larger loop would not. For m = 0.99, that limit, q, is 29;  for m = 0.995, q = 69.  Here and throughout this paper, it is not necessary to assume that a caused neural firing occurs immediately following the  event or events which caused it. The assumption of caused neural events does not require that they occur in haste, only that  they occur at some time after the inducing event. For example, it is possible to consider neurons storing excitations (or  inhibitions) until a threshold is reached, with the event occurring only then.  Different causal probabilities will exist at different synapses, of course. A particular firing of a cell may actually produce  many firings in other cells, but homogeneity of synapses is not necessary for the inferences from averaged causal  probabilities to hold. The overall relation between excitation and inhibition must be near equality in terms of the number of  caused and inhibited firings, otherwise the cortex would increase its total firing rate exponentially if there were too much  excitation, or cease firing altogether if there were too much inhibition; neither case would produce optimum or adequate  behavior (Hebb, 1955).3  s __The number of firings in the CNS at a given time, NTO, may be written as; NT. ETO - ITO -} OT,,, where E TO is the number  of firings produced from excitations within CNS, I TO is the number of firings inhibited, and OTO is the number of firings  stimulated from excitations outside the CNS. Now, if E > I + O over all time, the firings in the later time segment Tl which  includes the firings caused in TO will be more than earlier by the ratio E/(I + O) so that NT, = NT, x (E/(I -{- O)) and in  the nth time segment, the rate of firing will be: NT = NT O x (E/(I d- O))'. That is, the rate of firing will increase  exponentially, and the organism will go into a spastic convulsion. If E < I + O over all time, the preceding equation still  holds, but in this case it describes a situation in which CNS firing decreases continuously, and the organism quickly becomes  comatose. Since organisms normally exist in a state of relative  NEURAL NETS 159  From the previous considerations it is possible to estimate the relative numbers of connections and potentially reverberatory  loops available, and thus to evaluate the possibility that such loops are the main components of cell assemblies.  There are NOi+' possible joinings in the cortex of two cells through i other cells; one-half of these include a path from the  first to the second cell and another path from the second to the first. In turn one-half of these are potentially  reverberatory loops because both paths are inhibitory or both excitatory.  There is a limit, q, upon the size of an average viable loop. Then  ' z Y NfOi+1 -f(i)}  H = N i=o  N foi+l - f (i)}  i=0  (number of effective connections which are loops) (total number of effective connections available in the cortex)  represents the fraction of available connections which are viable loops. It might be argued that the denominator is too large,  and that there might be a limit as low as 2 - q upon the length of a viable nonreverberatory connection. (The limit need not  be as low as q because a connection that is not a loop need not restimulate itself.) The ratio of viable loops to viable  redundant connections is now  I L4 N(.li+1 - f(i)) I24 Nfoi+I -f(i)} .  H' is very small4,5 for any reasonable values of 0 and q. If q < 0 (that is, if the number of cells in a single-stranded  viable loop is much smaller than the average number of cells that a given cell synapses upon, as is reasonable) then f (i),  the correction for nonindependent pathways, will be of little effect in (6) because it appears both in the numerator and in  the denominator. For 0 = 1,000 and q = 12, and ignoring f (i), H' == 2.5 X 10-3'. Considering connections joined redundantly,  the limit of the denominator's connection length could be even larger while still tolerating the same impulse-conduction  uncertainty.  equilibrium, neither going into convulsions nor coma, we may assume that, over all time except for death, E = O -I- I; but the  number of events triggered from outside the CNS, O, is small relative to the number of events going on inside it and we may  write E =' I (cf. Cowan, 1970, p. 8).  Actually, the numerator is too large. Equations (5) and (6) assume that there is a direct connection between the two cells  joined again through i other cells to form a loop. This would not always be so, and only loops where all of the cells total q  or less ought to be counted in the numerator.  6 Empirically, for 0 > 100 and q > 4, H ti 1lq when f(i) is small. This estimate is accurate for 0 as low as 2 if q is as  large as 12.  160 J. ZACHARY JACOBSON  It may be argued that a cell's firing once is not the way that information enters the central nervous system; rather, an  excited cell may fire as often as one thousand times a second while an unstimulated (or randomly stimulated) cell itself fires  a few times each second. Again, that loops were crucial units would depend upon their capacity for self-restimulation. A  formula can be written for B, the (arbitrary) ratio of restimulations to spontaneous stimulations of the loop that must be  achieved if such restimulations are frequent enough to affect other outside activity against the background "noise" or random  stimulations,  B - fmax . pzq q 'ford 'pe  (frequency of loop testimulating itself  on maximal stimulation of one cell) (frequency of loop firing spontaneously)  where fmax is the maximal rate of firing of a stimulated cell and ford , the normal rate of an unstimulated cell's firing. For  any set B, p, fmax , and ford , q may be evaluated. For B of 0.20, f max of 1000, ford of 5, and p of 0.9, q (the longest  length of a viable loop) is 45. For B of 0.05 and the same values of the other parameters, q = 80. However, expression (6) for  H' (the ratio of the number of viable loops available to the number of connections that are not loops) still holds, the only  change being that q is increased and H' is thus decreased. The reason for this is that if one concedes that a loop stands or  falls on its behavior to a series of impingements, not merely to one, then the same concession must be allowed for a pathway  that is not a loop.  CONCLUSION  The fraction of redundant connections in a lattice, GIN, may be appreciable and certainly grows larger with larger lattices.  At the same time the fraction of viable connections that are reverberating loops, H', is very small and gets smaller as longer  connecting paths are considered viable. Therefore it seems that some very powerful selection process would be needed to  maintain and retain loops above other redundant connections if those loops were to be the crucial units of the lattice. In the  absence of evidence for such a process, it does not seem parsimonious to presume that reverberatory loops are such critical  units. This does not mean that such molecular theories of neural function as Hebb (1949) constructed may not be generally  correct; it only means that the reverberating loops are not likely to be the crucial parts of the memory trace.  Of course, this presumes that the counting arguments made here may be extrapolated to the CNS of a living and breathing  organism interacting with its environment. This presumption is not unlikely, however. What we know is how it is reasonable to  expect memory traces to be, given what we know about the nervous systems of  NEURAL NETS 161  living and conscious organisms (mammals, at least). If we are to abandon this position for another model with a different sort  of memory trace, we may only do that on the basis of very persuasive evidence indeed.  ACKNOWLEDGMENT  The author wishes to thank M. P. Bryden, B. O'Neill, P. C. Dodwell, and D. J. K. Mewhort for their comments and material  suggestions.  REFERENCES  ANINOS, P. A. Cyclic modes in neural nets. Kybernetik, 1972, 11, 5-14.  BLOCK, H. D. The perceptron: A model for brain functioning. Reviews of Modern Physics, 1962, 34, 123-135.  BLOCK, H. D., KNIGHT, D. W., JR., & ROSENBLATT, S. Analysis of a four-layer, series-coupled perceptron. II. Reviews of Modern  Physics, 34, 135-142.  BRYDEN, M. P. Perceptual strategies, attention, and memory in dichotic listening. Research Report No. 43, University of  Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario. 1972.  CORBALLIS, M. C., & BEALE, 1. L. Bilateral symmetry and behaviour. Psychological Review, 1970, 77, 451-464.  COWAN, J. D. A statistical mechanics of nervous activity. In Some mathematical questions in biology: Lectures on mathematics  in the life sciences, Vol. 2. Providence: American Mathematical Society, 1970. Pp. 1-57.  ECCLES, J. C. Possible synaptic mechanisms subtending learning. J. C. Eccles & H. G. Karczmar (Eds.), in Brain and human  behaviour. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1972. Pp. 39-62. GOOD, I. J. Speculations concerning the first ultra-intelligent  machine. Advances in Computers, 1965, 24, 247-275.  GROSSBERG, S. Embedding fields: A theory of learning with physiological implications. Journal of Mathematical Psychology,  1969, 6, 209-239.  HEBB, D. O. The organization of behaviour. New York: Wiley, 1949.  HEBB, D. O. Drives and the CNS (conceptual nervous system). Psychological Review, 1955, 62, 243-354.  HEBB, D. O. A textbook of psychology, 3rd ed. Toronto: Saunders, 1972.  HUBEL, D. H., & WIESEL, T. N. Receptive fields and functional architecture in the cat's visual cortex. Journal of Physiology,  1962, 160, 106-154.  JACOBSON, J. Z. Effects of association upon masking and reading latency. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 1973, 27, 58-69.  KARCZMAR, H. G., NISHI, S., & BLABER, L. C. Synaptic modulations. J. C. Eccles & H. G. Karczmar (Eds.), in Brain and human  Behaviour. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1972. Pp. 63-92.  KONORSKI, 1. Inegrative activities of the brain. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1967. LASHLEY, K. S. Brain mechanisms  and intelligence: A quantitative study of injuries to the brain. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1929.  LEVY, J. Possible basis for the evolution of lateral specialization of the human brain. Nature, 1969, 224, 614-615.  162  J. ZACHARY JACOBSON  LEVY, J., & NAGYLAKI, T. A model for the genetics of handedness. Genetics, 1972, 72, 117-128. MILNER, B. Memory and the medial  temporal regions of the brain. In Pribram & Broadbent (Eds.), Biology of memory. New York: Academic Press, 1970. Pp. 29-50.  MILNER, P. M. The cell assembly Mark 11. Psychological Review, 1957, 64, 242-252. MORENO-DIAz, R., & MCCULLOCH, W. S.  Mathematical analyses of neural networks. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Biocybernetics of the Nervous  System. Boston: Little, Brown, 1969. Pp. 145-150.  PRITCHARD, R. M. Stabilized images on the retina. Scientific American, June, 1961.  PRITCHARD, R. M., HERON, W., & HEBB, D. O. Visual perception approached by the method of stabilized images. Canadian Journal  of Psychology, 1960, 14, 67-77.  STENT, G. S. Limits to the scientific understanding of man. Science, 1975, 187, 1052-1057. UTTAL, W. R. The psychobiological  silly season - or - What happens when neurophysiological data become psychological theories. Journal of Genetics and  Psychology, 1971, 84, 151-166. WALLEY, R. E., & WIEDEN, T. D. Lateral inhibition and cognitive masking: A neuropsychological  theory of attention. Psychological Review, 1973, 80, 284-302.  RECEivED: August 7, 1973