10.1016/0022-2496(76)90030-4
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 13, 214-240 (1976)  Verification of Algebra Step Problems: A Chronometric Study of Human Problem Solving*  PAUL G. MATTHEWS AND RICHARD C. ATKINSON  Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305  A class of simple problem solving tasks requiring fast accurate solutions is introduced. In an experiment subjects memorized a  mapping rule represented by lists of words labeled by cue words and made true/false decisions about conjunctions of  propositions of the form "Y is in the list labeled by X," written "X -,- Y". Response times are analyzed using a "stage  modeling" technique where problem solving algorithms are composed using a small set of psychological operations that have real  time characteristics specified parametrically. The theoretical analysis shows that response time performance is adequately  described in terms of the sequential application of elementary psychological operations. Unexpectedly, it was found that the  proposition "X -->- Y and X - Z" was verified as quickly as the apparently simpler "X - Y". A case is presented for the  modeling technique as applied to memory and problem solving tasks in terms of theoretical parsimony, statistical simplicity,  and flexibility in investigative empirical research. Suggestions are made as to possible theoretical relations among fast  problem solving, more complex and slower problem solving, and research in fundamental memory processes.  INTRODUCTION  The dominant theoretical approach to the analysis of problem solving has been to construct a formal model, often in the form  of a computer program, that simulates some qualitative aspects of human problem solving performance such as the protocol  sequences observed in deriving logic theorems (Newell & Simon, 1972). In these analyses emphasis is placed on the integration  of elementary information operations into a problem solving algorithm while less attention is given to the elementary  operations themselves. An approach that has been relatively less well explored is to specify the processing time implications  of proposed algorithms and to determine whether observed human response times (RT's) are consistent with the predicted  pattern. From a statistical point of view, problems that require several minutes to solve or involve extensive searching for a  solution (e.g., looking for the best move in a chess  * This research was supported by National Science Foundation Grant NSF-GJ-443X3, National Institute of Mental Health Grant  MH21747 and a National Research Council of Canada Postgraduate Scholarship to the first author.  Copyright C 1976 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  214  HUMAN PROBLEM SOLVING 215  position, de Groot, 1965) might be expected to have large RT variances even for an individual subject such that it becomes  impractical to model the fine details of RT. However, for simple problems where human subjects are easily able to respond  correctly in a matter of a few seconds, it should be possible to verify the processing time predictions of specific problem  solving algorithms.  One method for deriving RT predictions is to describe problem solving algorithms in terms of the sequential application of a  set of basic psychological operations (procedures, subroutines, or "stages") each of which requires real processing time and  has some probability of producing an error. Leaving the details for later discussion, the theoretical RT for an algorithm  applied to a particular problem can be described as the sum of the processing times of the operations applied and the error  rate is roughly one minus the product of the correct probabilities of these operations. An alternative technique for making RT  predictions is to assign computational complexity measures to the basic operations and to derive the complexity of an  algorithm as the sum of the complexities of its component operations; computational complexity is then directly interpreted as  linearly related to theoretical mean RT. This complexity assignment method yields the same description of mean RT's as does  the corresponding stage model although it does not describe higher RT moments. Note that both methods are easily generalized  to take account of the possibility of mixed (randomized) strategies for applying available algorithms.  On a general theoretical level, the RT analysis of fast accurate problem solving can be a valuable source of evidence in  deciding on a set of basic psychological operations used in human problem solving. The case is similar to that for  chronometric studies of linguistic comprehension (Chase & Clark, 1972), where alternative representations of propositions can  sometimes be discriminated by constructing RT models for processing propositions to make true/false decisions. For problem  solving theories it is desirable to build algorithms working with a set of elementary operations which have some preferred  characteristics, such as corresponding to procedures or subroutines that can be conveniently written as logical units when  programming in a particular language, or, being general in the sense that the same set of operations can be used in solving  several types of problems. Another preferred characteristic is that the set of operations has "psychological validity" insofar  as real time processing aspects of the operations can be defined and verified in observed RT performance.  ALGEBRA STEP PROBLEMS  To pursue these ideas an experimental task was sought where subjects would learn a set of rules (e.g., the moves of pieces in  a board game, or a mapping of one set of objects into another) and be required to solve true/false problems by repeated  application of these rules. It was thought that a model for the single application of a rule  216) MATTHEWS AND ATKINSON  could then be extended to a model for the entire problem solving task by specifying the way rules were applied to solve a  problem.  Consider a small finite set X and a rule that assigns to each element of X a subset of X. Such a rule can be written in the  form of a transition table such as that in Fig. 1  xi x7 X2 -X8 X3 -X9 X4 'x1 > xs X5 -X6 xa  X6 -X3 x4 x7 x2 , x4 , x3 X8 -X9 x3 > xs  X9 -X6 x9 'x1  FIG. 1. ASP transition table.  which was used in an experiment to be described later. A memorized transition table, say where X is a set of  consonant-vowel-consonant (CVC words, might be represented as "lists" in some memory store with "addresses" corresponding to  the elements of X. One of the most basic propositions that can be made about a particular transition table is that xi is  mapped into a list that contains x; , written xi -->- x; as a mapping diagram, where xi and x; are variables standing for  elements of X; this proposition is either true or false. A subject who has memorised a transition table can be presented with  the proposition xi ->- x; and be required to make a true/false decision using his knowledge of the rule as defined by the  table. In the experiment to be described, subjects were presented with logical "and" conjunctions of these simple propositions  and RT's for a true/false decision were measured. The propositional forms or problem types used are listed in Fig. 2 in three  groups (A, B and C) according to the geometric shapes of the mapping diagrams. A problem is true if and only if all the  propositions represented by the arrows or links are true; if just one link is false then the problem is false. For example,  P(---) in Fig. 2 is true only if x; -->-- x; and x; --->- xk and xx -*- xz ; it is false if any one of these propositions is  false. Similarly, P(-G) is true only if xi -->- x; and x; ->- xx and x; ---*- xt ; and P(>-) only if xi --*- xk and x; -~---  xk and xk ->- xl .  In the experiment subjects memorized transition tables of the form represented in Fig. 1 where the elements of X were CVC  words, and were tested with problems of the sort illustrated in Fig. 2. Representing a transition table in memory as stored  lists, an individual link, xi -~- x; , could be verified true or false by using the cue xi to "access" the appropriate list in  memory and then "scanning" the probe x; against this list for a "match"; if a match is obtained then the link is true and  otherwise false. A model for the verification of the conjunctive propositions could then be obtained on the assumption that  verification proceeds one link at a time in some specified order. These notions are developed in the discussion section below.  Since it is possible to verify  HUMAN PROBLEM SOLVING  217  Problem type Mapping diagram ----------------------  P l-) xj-'.-xi  P (--) x;-+-X(-xk  P Xj-Xt-..-Xr-Xj - -----------------------  P (<)  Xk  P (-<) x;-XI < xc  (C)  P(>) x' x Xj k  Xj  Xj> k--X,  FiG. 2. ASP problem types.  mapping diagrams by checking each link in a step by step manner, the test items used in this task are referred to as algebra  step problems (ASP).  ASP items for each problem type were selected from a computer generated listing of all possible items given the transition  table (Fig. 1) such that within each problem type there were an equal number of true and false items. For false problems  exactly one link was false, and for each type the false link occurred with equal frequency at each link position. In addition  an effort was made to match the frequencies of occurrence of CVC words between true and false items within each problem type  so as to avoid a possible source of response bias. The total pool of about 400 distinct items was divided into four blocks;  the same P(-) items occurning in each block but otherwise there was no overlap. Denoting blocks by B1, B,, B,, B41 subjects  were tested over six sessions with one block per day in the order B,B,B,B4B,B2,, where blocks and trials within blocks were  randomised for each subject individually. A set of nine CVC words was randomly assigned to the abstract transition table  scheme for each subject: no two subjects had identical transition tables although all tables had the same formal structure.  The experiment was run using an Imlac Corporation PDS-1 cathode ray tube (CRT) display and keyboard, interfaced with a PDP-10  computer. Six female subjects ran for seven sessions; the first session was devoted to a transition table learning drill  (subjects did not memorize their transition tables prior to the first session), and the remaining six sessions were used for  ASP test items. On a single trial of the drill a cue word was  218 MATTHEWS AND ATKINSON  presented on the CRT and the subject was required to type the appropriate list in serial order (since the CVC words used had  unique initial consonants, the subject typed only the first letter of each word and the computer completed the words with  suitable horizontal spacing). On completing her response to a cue the subject pressed the keyboard spacebar and the correct  list was printed horizontally directly beneath the typed response, providing feedback and an opportunity for study.  Permutations of the nine cue words were run and following each permutation the subject was told her percentage of correct  responses and the time taken to respond to all the cues. Subjects were required to participate in the drill until they could  consistently achieve perfect accuracy with a response time under 25 sec; all subjects met this criterion within 30-50 min of  the drill.  In the problem sessions ASP items were displayed at the center of the CRT and subjects responded true/false using two keys on  the lower row of the keyboard. The subject initiated trials by pressing the spacebar following a ready signal. Items were  preceded by a 1 sec duration fixation cross and appeared just to the right of the cross, remaining on the screen until the  subject responded. Immediately after responding subjects received a feedback message indicating correctness and response time.  Before the first problem session subjects were shown examples of the seven problem types and told to respond "true" if and  only if all the links in an item were true and to respond "false" as soon as they knew that one link was false. Subjects were  informed that there were an equal number of true and false items within each problem type on each day and that false items had  exactly one false link which was equally likely to occur in any position. On the first day of problems subjects were  instructed to be completely accurate for the initial 30 or 40 trials and then to increase their speed as they got a feeling  for the task. For subsequent testing sessions subjects were instructed to respond as quickly they could without making more  than about one error in 20 trials on average. Subjects were explicitly instructed never to guess and never to "think twice"  about their response once they had made a decision.  EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS  To eliminate early practice effects and to facilitate the observation of stable task strategies the data for each subject from  the first of the six testing sessions was discarded together with the first ten trials of the remaining five sessions,  yielding on the order of 550 trials per subject. Only correct RT's excluding outliers were analysed. Correct RT histograms  were plotted separately for each problem type, for both true and false responses, and for each subject to identify possible  outliers. Response times falling more than 1 sec above the main distribution as determined by the mode and the contiguous  tails were eliminated; such outliers constituted about 2 % of the correct RT data.  HUMAN PROBLEM SOLVING  219  Due to the complex description of the ASP items it is not possible to represent all aspects of the data simultaneously in a  single graph or table. However, by collapsing across various subsets of the data we can obtain a reasonable picture of major  effects which can then direct more detailed modeling and statistical evaluation. Since plots of data for individual subjects  showed subjects to be qualitatively comparable, the RT data for all six subjects were pooled to simplify the presentation of  results. Table I presents RT and error rate data classified by problem type and position of the false link (if any). The  notation P(---) TTF indicates that the third link from the left was false; P(>-) FTT that the upper link of the branch (>) was  false; P(-<) TTF that the lower link of the branch (<) was false. Observed means and variances and theoretical means (derived  from a statistical model introduced below) are averages across subjects weighted by the numbers of correct RT's observed.  TABLE I  Group RT Means and Errors False Obs Th Obs Error Total  Type link mean mean SD (%) (N)   (msec) (msec) (msec)    P(-) T 1576 1529 590 5.6 245  P(-) F 2041 1993 741 5.3 243  P(--) TT 2468 2541 905 2.3 251  P(--) FT 2101 1842 862 7.8 117  P(--) TF 3161 3187 1035 3.8 121  P(---) TTT 3631 3584 1103 4.3 388  P(---) FTT 2137 1871 949 7.5 121  P(---) TFT 3374 3086 1252 6.7 125  P(---) TTF 4184 4046 1106 10.5 121  P(<) TT 1580 1567 532 4.5 161  P(<) FT 2287 2068 815 8.3 75  P(<) TF 2152 2014 964 3.0 88  P(-<) TTT 2592 2534 933 4.3 328  P(-<) FTT 1950 1825 994 10.2 112  P(-<) TFT 2972 3001 895 5.9 108  P(-<) TTF 2864 3000 858 6.8 112  P(>) TT 2575 2610 752 5.1 121  P(>) FT 2501 2211 835 5.0 63  P(>) TF 3002 2876 735 3.1 61  P(>-) TTT 3657 3539 1045 3.7 237  P(>-) FTT 2622 2406 1146 4.2 78  P(>-) TFT 3342 2990 1169 6.7 79  P(>-) TTF 4002 4153 1060 1.7 73  By problem type and position of false link.  220 MATTHEWS AND ATKINSON  Figures 3 and 4 are based on the data of Table 1; curves represent theoretical mean RT. Figure 3 plots true and false mean RT  by problem types. A striking feature about these data are the following approximate equalities of mean RT's obtaining among  the problem types:  P(<) = P(-) P(>) - P(--)  and and  p(-<) - P(__) P(>-) - P(---),  Of course these equalities hold among averages including quite distinct items within each problem type, but they do suggest  that the time to verify a left branch configuration (<) is not substantially different from the time for a simple link (-). In  contrast, verifying two links in the (>) configuration appears to take the same time as two links  4  P(-) P(--) P( --- ) P(<) P(-<) P(>) P(>-) Problem Type  FIG. 3. Mean correct RT's plotted by problem type and true/false. (Points are data and  curves are theoretical.)  FTT  TTF  FTT FT(<) TF(-1 FTT TFT TTF Position of False Link  FIG. 4. Mean correct RT's for false items plotted by problem type and position of false link.  HUMAN PROBLEM SOLVING 221  in the (--) configuration. In what follows the (<) configuration will be referred to as a double probe link and (-) as a  single probe link.  Within each of the problem groups RT increases with the number of links. If a sequential processing of links is assumed then  the slopes of the true curves directly reflect the average time taken to verify that a link is true. Note that the three true  curves plotted in Fig. 3 have approximately the same slopes, which together with the equalities remarked above is consistent  with a sequential processing account. A way to investigate order in sequential processing is to examine false RT's for each  problem type in a group as a function of the position of the false link assuming that subjects responded "false" as soon as  they discovered a false link. Figure 4 illustrates graphically this order of processing analysis. Figure 4a shows that for  group A problems RT increases as the false link is moved from the first to the third position with a slope about the same as  the true slopes in Fig. 3: this indicates a strict left/right processing order. Figure 4b shows that for P(-<) the tail link  (-) is almost always verified before the left branch (<), while within the branch there is no strong up/down processing order.  This is interpreted as consistent with the proposal that the double probe link is verified in one step (i.e., not as separate  simple links) which implies that there should be no up/down processing order as such. Figure 4c presents a more complicated  story for group C. While link processing for this group tends to be up/down on the right branch (>) and branch (>) before tail  (-) (i.e., left/right) in P(>-), this order cannot be strict since the RT slopes as the false link position moves are  noticeably less than the true slopes in Fig. 3. A probabilistic order of processing is appropriate for group C problems.  The verification of a link is in some respects similar to memory scanning tasks (Sternberg, 1969a) that require subjects to  decide whether a probe symbol is contained in a memorized set of symbols. For an ASP transition table the number of elements  in a list labelled by a cue word is referred to as the cue set size; Fig. 5 plots true and  3 I I I  U    d    N    d    E 2    N    w    N    c    O    d    N  True  W    c    0  0 Folse  v    0 I I I  I 2 3   Cue Set Size  FIG. 5. Mean correct RT's for problem type P(-) plotted by cue set size and true/false.  48o/I3/2_7  222 MATTHEWS AND ATKINSON  false RT's for P(-) by cue set size to illustrate set size effects analogous to those found in memory scanning tasks. The true  and false curves are separated by a constant, suggesting a simple additive effect on RT of the process differences between  true and false link verifications.  Errors were infrequent under the speed/accuracy instructions given the subjects; the error rate over all conditions and  subjects was 5.2 percent. Group error rates broken down by problem type and position of the false link are presented in Table  I. While the authors recognize the possibility of important theoretical relations between response times and error rates as  for example suggested by Pachella (1974) among others, a rigorous analysis relating the two was not performed for the data  presented here. This omission is partly justified by the empirical observation that while mean RT's showed a consistent  pattern across subjects, error rates did not. Also, from purely statistical considerations when data is so finely classified  that some classifications have twenty or fewer observations, error rates may not be sufficiently reliable for the analysis of  data from an individual subject whereas RT's may still be meaningful in providing insight into psychological processes.  THEORETICAL ANALYSIS  Suppose that for a particular ASP item we have been given a description of the sequence of psychological operations used to  solve it. The stage modeling technique to be used here assigns to each operations or stage, S, of the processing a tuple of  parameters,  <P(S), -'(S)),  corresponding to the theoretical mean and variance of processing time associated with that stage. In cases more general than  that considered here this tuple may become a family of tuples corresponding to various states of the cognitive system that  could exist when the stage operates (i.e., stages are specified conditionally) or tuples may contain additional parameters  such as higher RT moments or the probability of a processing failure in that stage. If stages S,, S2 ,..., S are applied in  sequence to process the item then the RT mean and variance for the item are simply,  l.,(RT) _ Y w(Sj) and az(RT) _ Y -2(S;).  =1 j_1  The additivity of variance follows from the assumption that stage processing times are stochastically independent. Now suppose  that there are two sequences of stages that  HUMAN PROBLEM SOLVING 223  could be applied to the item, Sll , S12 ,..., Sl.1 and S21 , S22 ,..., S2' , and that these two sequences are observed with  probability p and (1 - p), respectively. Let,  m; m;  ~a = l.(Sj;) and oil = a2(Sit), i = 1, 2.  7-1 7=1 Then the mean and variance of the overall RT are  w(RT) = pp, + (1- p) w2 ,  o2(RT) = .Aa12 -{- (1 - p) a22 + p(l - Awl - x'2)2.  Without going into further detail, similar expressions can be derived whenever RT is assumed to arise from the probabilistic  mixture of sequences of stages.  Proceeding on the basis of the observations made in the Results section above, a stage model was constructed using a small  number of inclusive stages that are identifiable (i.e., in the sense of unique parameter estimates) and that have direct  theoretical interpretation. These stages are  Stage Stage description  V% verification of a single probe link with cue set size of n  Wn verification of a double probe link with cue set size of n K orientation, attention, perception and miscellaneous set-up  and bookeeping processes  D decision and response processes that differ between "true" and "false" responses.  Processes involved in the verification of single and double probe links have been summed together in the Vand Wparameters,  respectively. Due to the problem of identifying parameters it is not possible to make definitive interpretations of the stages  K and D. The K stage includes all those operations which are in common across problem items, such as attending to the CRT  display or executing the motor components of a keypress response; in addition, K may be regarded as incorporating incidental  processes required for the logical completeness of the model such as recording the input and output of stage operations. Any  processing differences between true and false responses, including handedness, are incorporated in the D stage. For the  experimental data false responses are slower than comparable true responses; the D parameters reflect this aspect of the data.  Derivation of Theoretical Expressions  The derivation of expressions for theoretical RT means and variances will be illustrated by examples since there is  insufficient space for an exhaustive treatment. In the following, let ni be the cue set size associated with the symbol xi.  224 MATTHEWS AND ATKINSON  EXAMPLE 1. xi -->- x; (T). To solve this simplest problem the subject need only verify one link; hence, exactly the stages  V,,. and K occur. Then,  [,(RT) = ).(V.,) + t,(K),  a2(RT) = a2(V.,) + a2(K).  EXAMPLE 2. xi -->- Xi --->- xk --X1 (TFT). Assuming that P(---) has a strict left right processing order, the subject first  verifies that xi ->- x; is true and then finds that Xi ->- xk is false; the subject responds "false" as soon as she finds this  link so that only stages V,,, , V , K, and D occur. Then,  p(RT) = p(Vn) + p(V.) + p(K) + p(D),  a2(RT) = ,'(V.,) + a2(V.) + a2(K) + a2(D).  EXAMPLE 3. xi ->- x; (TFT). xa  It is assumed that the double probe link (<) is verified in a single operation, W , and that the tail (-) is checked before  the branch (<), so that the stages are V,,, , W , K, and D. Then,  w(RT) = 1-,(V) + p(W.;) + p(K) + W(D), a2(RT) = a2(V) + a2(W + a2(K) + a2(D).  EXAMPLE 4. /xic (FT).  A probabilistic order of processing was suggested for types P(>) and P(>-). This order will be defined by two probability  parameters. Let q be the probability that within a right branch (>) the upper link is checked before the lower link, and let r  be the probability that for P(>-) the branch (>) is checked before the tail (-). In Example 4 the parameter r is not involved.  With probability q the stages are V , K,  HUMAN PROBLEM SOLVING 225  and D, and with probability (1 - q) the stages are Vmt , V , K, and D, with the result that  w(RT) = 1,,(V.,) + (I - q) p(V.;) + p(K) + w(D),  a2(RT) - a2(Vn) + (I - q) a2(V.,) + a2(K) -I- a2(D) + q(1 - q)[w(Vn;)]2.  The expression for a2(RT) is that for the probability mixture of two sequences of stages.  EXAMPLE 5. Xk ->-- xt (TFT).  In Example 5, with probability rq the stages are V,, , V, ,j , K, and D; with probability r(1 - q), V.1, K, and D; with  probability (1 - r)q, V.,,, V.,, V,,J, K, and D; and with probability (1 - r)(1 - q), V,,,,, V, K, and D. Hence,  w(RT) = glz(V.) + p(V.;) + (I - r) p(Vnk) -{- p(K) -I- p(D), a2(RT) = ga2(V,a,) + a2(V.,) -{-- (I - r) a2(V.,,)  + a2(K) + a2(D) + q(1 - q)[p(V.,)]2 + r(1- r)[w(Vnk)]2.  The expression for a2(RT) is an algebraic simplification of a general expression.  EXAMPLE 6. Xk --->-- x, (TTT).  Since all links are true, the same stages must occur whatever the order of processing. Consequently,  p(RT) = /.(V.,) + p(V.) + p(V.,,) + p(K),  a2(RT) = a2(V.) + a2(V.) + a2(Vnx) + -'(K)  These examples should convey the gist of the statistical model. Note that for every  226 MATTHEWS AND ATKINSON  ASP item the theoretical RT mean and variance can be expressed in the following canonical forms:  p(RT) = a1p(V,) + a21''(V2) + a3p(V3) + a4P(W2) + a5p(W3) + a,p(K) + a,t'(D) a2(RT) = a,a'(V,) + a2a2(V 2) + a,a2(V3) +  a4a2(W2) + a,a2(W3) + a,a2(K)  + a,v2(D) -}- b2.  where the ai's (i = 1,..., 7) can be interpreted as the average number of times the corresponding stage occurs, and b2 is the  "mixture variance" (i.e., the variance added by mixing processing strategies where strategies may require differing amounts of  time). Writing the row vectors,  e = <1r(Vi), Iz(v2),1-t(U3),1-,(WZ), t,(W3),1,,(K), tt(D)>,  V _ <a2(Vi), a2(V2), a'(V3), a2(W2), a2(W3), a(K), a2(D)>, a = <a, , a2, a3, a4 , a5 l ae , a,>,  the canonical forms become,  I.(RT) = aeT and a2(RT) = aVT + b2  where eT is the transpose of e, and VT is the transpose of v. For all true items and for false items in groups A and B, each  ai is an integer and b2 = 0; for false items in group C the ai's may be functions of q and r, and b2 > 0 is a function of e, q  and r. Note that ASP items can be classified according to their coefficient vectors, a, and mixing variances, b2; under the  model this classification is a full specification of the items. For the items used in the experiment 46 such classification  categories occurred.  Statistical Evaluation  A discussion of parameter estimation and statistical techniques is presented in the appendix. Best estimates of parameters  were obtained for each subject by numerical methods using a quadratic loss function, and the fit of the model to the RT data  was primarily evaluated by constructing simultaneous confidence regions containing all the RT means and variances predicted by  the model. Parameter estimates are given in Tables II and III; statistics are listed in Tables IV and V.  For the mean RT data the statistics in Table IVA show that while the model does account for a substantial percentage of the  between and total variances (PBV and PTV columns), the maximum modulus t test applied to the group suggests that the model is  probably not a complete account of the data for every subject in the experiment (g* for the group is .004 which is the  probability of observing a t* value of 4.44 or greater). In Table IVA two of six subjects have g* > .10 indicating a good fit  of the model for these individual data, and in Table IVB g* > .10 for three subjects. The third column of Table IV gives the  number of points lying outside a .90 simultaneous confidence interval; any such point implies that g* < .10.  HUMAN PROBLEM SOLVING  227  TABLE 11 Parameter Values, Averaged Estimates Stage P a   (msec) (msec)  Single probe (-) verification:     Cue set size 1 V 1 676 241  Cue set size 2 V2 1169 446  Cue set size 3 V3 1146 563  Double probe (G) verification:     Cue set size 2 W2 924 365  Cue set size 3 W3 1206 412  Set-up processes K 446 210  True/false difference D 466 200  Probability of up before down on (>), q = 0.85; probability of (>) before (-) on (>-), r = 0.89.  TABLE III  Parameter Values, Individual Subjects  Subject 1 Subject 2 Subject 3  !1 a P a IL a  VI 878 566 449 3 571 0  172 1545 676 867 293 1001 450  V3 1587 720 913 593 775 446  W2 968 575 789 399 748 398  W3 1144 442 986 421 768 284  K 475 1 545 1 394 0  D 729 1 346 489 452 0  q 0.79 1.00 0.78  r 0.88 0.48 1.00  Subject 4 Subject 5 Subject 6  V1 956 0 594 259 607 532  V2 1375 671 1430 635 798 230  V3 1348 729 1271 646 980 636  W2 1156 689 1045 31 838 78  W3 1582 720 1455 485 1301 88  K 292 1 462 307 506 414  D 459 1 302 2 506 1  q 0.61 0.92 1.00  r 1.00 0.99 1.00  228  MATTHEWS AND ATKINSON  TABLE IV Statistical Analysis for RT Means    Points    Subject t* 8* outside PBV PTY   A. Model 90% region      classification (46 points)    1 4.44 0.000 2 79.7 42.7  2 2.78 0.182 0* 76.7 35.6  3 3.32 0.029 2 78.6 40.7  4 4.44 0.000 1 79.3 36.5  5 3.86 0.007 2 57.7 28.1  6 2.84 0.157 0* 68.7 27.8  Group 4.44 0.004 3 73.5 35.2  B. Type X false link classification (23 points)   1 3.28 0.014 1 85.6 41.5  2 1.74 0.697 0* 84.3 32.1  3 2.42 0.198 0* 89.5 37.3  4 3.01 0.036 1 83.7 35.8  5 3.44 0.008 1 64.5 26.6  6 2.67 0.101 0* 71.0 24.5  Group 3.44 0.049 2 79.8 33.0  TABLE V Statistical Analysis for RT Variances"    Proportion  Subject t* g* model vs    "same"  1 0.83 0.999 0.478  2 0.63 0.999 0.500  3 1.00 0.999 0.348  4 1.07 0.999 0.522  5 0.85 0.999 0.478  6 0.56 0.999 0.391  Model classification, 46 points.  HUMAN PROBLEM SOLVING 229  Table V presents statistics for RT variances. Due to large sampling variability of variance estimates, the g* statistics are  not very informative since many models would be acceptable within wide limits of variability. The third column of Table V  compares the model to the hypothesis that all RT variances are the same, in terms of the proportion of points for which the  model makes a more accurate prediction. Evaluated using this statistic the model does no better than the "same" hypothesis  although both are acceptable given the variance of estimators. Since the averaged RT variance parameters presented in Table II  appear to be orderly they will be discussed, although no strong conclusions should be drawn.  DISCUSSION  Stage modeling has been conceived of in terms of a formal processing language description of memory operations: stages are  analogous to procedures or subroutines, perhaps probabilistic in their execution, organized by call sequences into memory  processes. Within such a stage modeling framework various levels of detailed description are possible. For example, one might  consider macro stages such as "perception," "memory," and "response," or comparatively micro stages such as "input the symbol  in position p of the stimulus array" or "compare the code for symbol X with the code for symbol Y." No particular level of  detail can be regarded as preferred: theoretical descriptions in stage terms must be evaluated with respect to the relevant  data. However, the stage modeling framework does in principle relate all levels of description in terms of the nesting of  procedures in call sequences, thus providing the possibility of consistently treating the results of simple and relatively  more complex laboratory tasks with the same overall processing model (Atkinson & Wescourt, 1975).  A stage model can be most productively regarded as a rational basis for the construction of statistical models. Each  statistical model stemming from a stage model can be evaluated with respect to the data, successes and failures yielding new  information about the data possibly not apparent on inspection or available from other analyses. In general it is not  necessary that every statistical model derived from a particular processing language description be "successful," but only  that some are, and that these provide a useful characterization of the data. Of course, if a stage model were taken as a  literal model of a specific real time process, say specific interactions among brain centers and layers of brain tissue, it  would be important to verify all the statistical models derived from the stages theory. However, for the analysis of cognitive  performance the authors regard stage models as nonliteral information processing descriptions from which statistical analyses  are derived that provoke a deeper and more adequate characterization of patterns present in the data.  The statistical models for RT means and variances developed above may be regarded as an intermediate level of stages analysis  appropriate to the level of observable data:  48o/I3/2-8  230 MATTHEWS AND ATKINSON  It does not explicitly describe either the component processes of individual link verifications or the overall control  structure in which the problem solving algorithms are embedded. Since these additional levels of analysis are of theoretical  interest, the discussion will turn to bridging these conceptual gaps. The following stages analysis of single and double probe  link verification is given:  Lo determine whether single or double probe (s or d) L1 input cue  L2 access memory list associated with cue  L3 input probe 1; if d, then input probe 2  L4 reset match register 1; if d, then reset register 2  Lb unpack an element from the memory list  Lg match the element against probe 1 and increment match register 1 by the value of the "goodness-of-match"; if d, then match  against probe 2 and increment register 2  L, if the entire list has been unpacked then continue, else return to L5  L8 if d, then add match register 2 to register 1  L9 if s, then if the value of match register 1 exceeds a criterion cs then return true, else return false; if d, then if the  value exceeds cd return true, else return false  Note that the analysis is essentially an "exhaustive scan" model, where matching is not necessarily all-or-none, and where the  representation of lists in memory and the coordinate retrieval or unpacking process may be more involved than reading from a  list of symbols at a uniform rate. Representing a list as a cluster of symbols bound to a memory node by associative linkages  and defining retrieval processes in terms of this representation would be one way of conceiving of an unpacking operation with  more complex characteristics, although such "built-in" characteristics may have limited conceptual and theoretical interest.  The claim is that this model of link verification is consistent with the stage parameter estimates in Table II; for the sake  of simplicity only the average values of parameter estimates are discussed. The parameter values in Table II may be  qualitatively summarized as follows:  P(Vi) < t"(v2) = t,(V3), P(W2) < w(W3),  P(W2) < h(V2), w(W3) P(V3)>  a2(Vl) < Q2(V2) < o2(V3), Q2( W2) < v2(W3),  a2( W2) < 02( V2)1 Q2(W3) <,,,2(V3).  HUMAN PROBLEM SOLVING 231  This summary can be regarded as a hypothesis that, within the sampling variability of the parameter estimates, is not  disconfirmed. A problematic aspect of this summary is that p(W,) < p(V2) by 245 msec, yet p(W2) =,u(V,). This result may be  attributable in some way to the fact that for W2 the number of probes is the same as the cue set size, but in the absence of  additional controls no ad hoc explanations are offered.  If it is assumed that stages L2, L5 , and L9 account for the major part of link verification time, then a gross similarity  would be predicted between single and double probe links. With suitably complex representations of lists the mean unpacking  time for lists of lengths 2 and 3 may be comparable, yielding p(V2) = p(vs); the speed of V, could be explained by the  simplicity of the representation for a list with a single symbol requiring fewer unpacking manipulations.  Single and double probe link verifications differ in stages La and L9 . If the matching process is probabilistic (e.g., due to  variable imperfect coding of symbols) then the final match value in register 1 will be distributed differently for single and  double probes (e.g., double probes will have greater mean and variance for both true and false links). This, together with the  two criteria, cs and c,, might account for decision component differences in ways similar to signal detection models that  relate RT to criteria placements in relation to signal and noise distributions (Thomas, 1971). The observed a?(W2) < a2(V2)  and a2(W3) < al(V3) are interpreted as due to such differential effects in stage L9 .  The value p(D) = 466 is greater than would be expected on the basis of handedness alone, suggesting genuine decision component  differences; again this is interpreted as a stage L9 effect. Since successive link verifications are required by some ASP  items, in order to achieve an acceptable error rate (subjects were instructed to be accurate) it is necessary to make a more  accurate decision for each intermediate verification than would be needed if only a single link were verified on each trial.  Also, since over all items there are more true than false links, stage L9 might be "tuned" for a true verification. The demand  for increased accuracy together with a true verification expectancy could account for the observed value of p(D). The apparent  constancy of p(D) over problem types, even those where only one link is verified, is consistent with the theoretical  conception that the same link verification mechanisms are used for all problems without modification according to problem  type. From these considerations it would be predicted that encouraging speed over accuracy, using only single link problems,  reducing the variety of ASP items used within an experiment, or using multilink items with more than one false link would all  have an effect in reducing the value of p(D).  As an aside, it may be possible to use an empirical speed/accuracy tradeoff to further investigate the verification mechanisms  found in the ASP task. A direct implication of the theory discussed above is that under speed instructions each link  verification will be less accurate as processing is modified for speed or cut short, with the results that errors will tend to  increase relatively more for items with many links compared to  232 MATTHEWS AND ATKINSON  those with few, and that error RT's for multilink true items will decrease relative to correct RT's while error RT's for  multilink false items will increase. Other, quite different effects of speed instructions might be to induce subjects to  implement faster problem solving algorithms, say with some sort of simultaneous verification of links, to "prime" access to  certain algorithms and retrieval mechanisms in anticipation of the next problem, or to adopt sophisticated guessing  strategies. The issues with regard to speed/accuracy effects in ASP problem solving are manifold and may perhaps be most  productively approached by comparing results across experiments to determine what effects might be present.  In stage terms a stable strategy is a problem solving algorithm that is not modified with use. Empirically, stable strategies  would be expected for practiced subjects who have in some sense developed optimal task techniques, with the required amount of  practice depending on the particular task. The present experiment was designed to observe only asymptotic performance, making  it in principle possible to specify a single set of algorithms or strategies governing the processing of ASP items. A theory  as to how these strategies are set up with practice is not developed here; however, the authors do conceptualize an  interactive feedback system where the state space of the system consists of algorithms and the effects of control inputs are  to rebuild algorithms. It is proposed that for tasks where alternative processing strategies are a genuine theoretical  possibility, it may be more appropriate to analyze data from trials early in the experiment in terms of a mixture of  strategies rather than a single stable strategy. For the sake of completeness of theoretical conception it is assumed that the  strategies for the various problem types are called by a controlling stage that on each trial identifies the problem type on  the basis of its mapping diagram configuration and calls the corresponding problem solving algorithm.  Additional empirical work is required to evaluate these conceptual analyses of control and component processes. For example,  one line of experimentation would be to examine more thoroughly ASP verification problems, with manipulations of the  transition table and problem types. Another line would be to examine ASP problems more complex than verification, with the  idea that such tasks could reveal more about the construction of strategies, that is about how component processes are used to  build problem solving algorithms. Alternatively, the verification of isolated single and double probe links could be examined  in greater experimental detail. All these levels of experimental investigation are well integrated within the stage modeling  framework, which is one of the main theoretical motivations for using such a framework as a basis for data analysis.  From a theoretical standpoint a close relationship exists between link verification and some memory scanning tasks. In both  cases a probe item must in some sense be compared against a list of symbols in memory to determine if the probe is a member of  the list. A point of interest is whether memory scanning mechanisms that have been investigated in the laboratory can be  identified as components of relatively more  HUMAN PROBLEM SOLVING 233  complex tasks such as solving ASP verification problems. The model constructed for the ASP problems investigated in this paper  can be regarded as an attempt to tackle this issue. About the simplest relation that could obtain between memory scanning and  ASP problem solving would be that the scanning mechanisms engaged by strategies to yield intermediate results have the same  characteristics as those observed with simple memory scanning tasks. Yet this need not be so. It is conceivable that as  strategies for the more complex storage, retrieval and decision making required by ASP problems are constructed in the memory  system (Atkinson & Wescourt, 1975), new demands for rapid access to a larger volume of stored information, for the recording  of intermediate results which direct further processing, and for controlling error rates when intermediate results are  combined or cascade in a final decision demand scanning mechanisms having different characteristics. The data from the present  experiment are not in themselves conclusive, but the parameter values of Table II as discussed above suggest that the inferred  scanning (link verification) mechanisms and decision processes yield values of RT parameters that differ from those typically  found in the memory scanning literature. There is the unexpected result that verifying a double probe link is as fast as  verifying a single probe link; the fact that for single probe links verification times for cue set sizes 2 and 3 do not differ  from each other but are dramatically different from the verification time for cue set size 1; and the unusually large constant  difference between true and false RT's. Each of these effects is of course subject to further investigation and taken one at a  time are not without some parallel in the memory literature, but the authors believe that they provoke an examination of the  issue of how memory scanning mechanisms relate to the larger human memory system. It is fair to say that proportionally more  effort has been devoted to unraveling the effects of experimental manipulations on basic memory scanning tasks and  constructing sophisticated and interesting models for these data (e.g. Theios, 1972; Anderson, 1973; Shevell & Atkinson, 1974)  than has been devoted to examining the possible roles of memory scanning mechanisms in human memory systems that are  sufficient to support more involved cognitive processing.  The stage model developed for the experiment described here characterized each stage by two parameters, the mean and variance  of processing time; as remarked above, this type of model can be generalized to include more parameters such as the  probability of an error in that stage or higher moments of the processing time distribution. Without changing the nature of  the modeling technique, stage parameters could be expressed conditionally on the state of processing, as for example on the  input to the stage from previously operating stages. Even with these generalizations, parameter estimation and statistical  procedures can be derived in a mathematically simple way. Granted that it is one opinion, the authors feel that statistical  methods such as those described in this paper that are based on a formal but flexible model of psychological processing should  in many cases be both practical and more incisive than the standard linear statistical analyses often found in the memory and  problem solving literature.  234 MATTHEWS AND ATKINSON  Comparison with Hayes' spy problems  Hayes (1965, 1966) has reported studies using a problem solving task similar to that of the ASP problems defined here.  Subjects in Hayes' experiments learned a list of "spy" names together with rules about which spies could talk to each other;  the list of these "talking connexions" may be regarded as a transition table. In the basic experiment, subjects were given two  spy names and required to find a chain of spy-tospy communications conveying a message from the one spy to the other. Subjects  were instructed to "think aloud" and their protocols were analyzed with respect to the overall time taken to solve a problem,  the rate at which links in the communication chain were generated, and diversions into "blind alley" side chains (i.e.,  passing the message to a spy who did not have the connections to get it to the goal spy). Subjects were able to solve spy  problems in a matter of a few minutes, occasionally entering side chains and usually achieving a solution chain longer than  the minimal required chain; the reader is referred to the original papers for Hayes' analysis of his results. In terms of the  type of theory proposed here for ASP problems, the solution of spy problems would be described by algorithms constructed using  a small set of basic psychological operations and following specific search-and-test methods of chain construction. Insofar as  the model stated definite algorithms it would have the potential to account for protocols; as stage models the algorithms  would also make quantitative predictions about the pattern of observed RT's and error rates. Of course the particular theory  of ASP problem solving outlined in this paper is not sufficient in itself to account for Hayes' results such as the  end-acceleration phenomenon: In addition, explicit algorithms would have to be constructed and demonstrated by computer  simulation or by inferential data analysis to produce the observed pattern of results.  The Stage Modeling Technique  It is worthwhile to emphasize the positive aspects of stage modeling as a technique for the analysis of RT tasks. Interesting  arguments related to those presented here have been given by Sternberg (1969b) with respect to the so-called additive factors  method. First, as has been noted, considering psychological processes as procedures or subroutines in the sense of a formal  computer language provides an easily conceived unifying framework for theoretical analysis and a rationale for investigating  memory mechanisms as they occur both in simple and complex laboratory tasks. Second, from a statistical standpoint, regression  models for RT moments can be derived from a stages theory in a relatively simple manner, basically by counting the occurrences  of stages. The parameters in the regression model have direct psychological interpretation in terms oreal processing time,  and the parameters can be estimated by common analytic or numerical methods irrespective of the number of classification  categories or the number of observations in each category. With regard to predictive power, stage models can provide accounts  for RT moments of all orders and together with  HUMAN PROBLEM SOLVING 235  notions of processing variability defined at specific stages can at the same time provide an account of errors. Even though  the technique is mathematically simple, the underlying process representation is that of a quite general sequence of random  variables (or random vectors) corresponding to the definition of a discrete stochastic process (viz., a family of random  variables with a countable index set) with very few restrictions (e.g., most of the random variables can be assumed to be  finite valued). This suggests that many models of memory processes will be at least formally "nearly" equivalent to some stage  model as defined here. The nature of this equivalence can be formalized in terms of the partitioning of the event space of the  experiment (i.e., the set of all possible data points) induced by the inverse mapping of the goodness of fit measure regarded  as a random variable.  Simple and Complex Tasks  The algebra step problems introduced in this paper are, like other artificial memory and problem solving tasks, not advocated  for their intrinsic interest but rather as one experimental paradigm for testing our understanding of human memory systems.  Fast accurate problem solving has on the one hand clear theoretical relations to conceptions of basic memory mechanisms and  the manner in which these mechanisms come to play in a larger memory system, and on the other hand it is a bridge to the  chronometic analysis of more traditional problem solving tasks. While the investigation of simple tasks is indispensable it is  surely necessary to develop theoretical constructions for more complex tasks with equal vigor: the chronometric analysis of  tasks at the level of ASP problems is intended as one step in this direction. In philosophical perspective there is no  assurance that even a detailed understanding of the models required to account for isolated simple memory tasks will  automatically lead to an adequate conception of human memory systems that are capable of supporting such routine cognitive  functions as the retrieval of propositional information (Anderson & Bower, 1973) or grade school arithmetic problems (Suppes,  Loftus & Jerman, 1969). The data and analysis presented in this paper suggest that analysis of RT's on the order of 5 sec is  feasible without undue loss of precision either in the conceptual model or the statistical treatment. Across experiments it  should be possible to identify the characteristics of memory mechanisms as they occur in memory systems where processes  involving alternative strategies, intermediate processing results and decisions about subsequent processing, and rapid access  to large amounts of stored information are operating. Such a program of research has the potential to develop the basis for  more exacting analyses of problem solving tasks in terms of an explicit theory of human memory, to elucidate the role of  control and decision processes, and to qualify our understanding of memory mechanisms discovered through research on simple  tasks.  236 MATTHEWS AND ATKINSON  STATISTICAL APPENDIX  The coefficient vectors a = <a, ,..., a7> define a classification of observations into distinct categories under the model; 46  such classification categories were observed in the experiment (i.e., there were 46 distinct a vectors). The notation below  will be used in what follows: the index "i" refers to the ith subject and "j" to the jth classification category.  n number of classification categories under the model, s number of subjects,  Ni; number of observations, RT sample mean,  Mi+ RT grand sample mean,  S2 RT sample variance,  T? sample variance of S2 (see Kendall & Stuart, 1969).  Parameter Estimation  The approach taken to parameter estimation was to choose a loss function conceived of as a function of the parameters given  the data, and to find parameter values that minimized this function. Since function minima were found using a numerical grid  search method, computationally efficient quadratic (least squares) loss functions were chosen. Parameters were estimated for  each subject individually.  The actual estimation proceded in two steps. First, values of ei, qi, and ri were determined using the loss function  n  LS1(ei , qi , ri) = Nij[(Mij - aijeiT)2/S01 . =I  Second, the parameter values, ei , 4i , i i , were treated as constant and vi estimated with the loss function  n  LS2(Vi I ei , qi , ri) - {[S2 - (aijv.T + b' A 2/T2). ~=1  An alternative procedure would have been to estimate simultaneously all parameters using a combined loss function of the form,  LS = w LS1 + (1 - w) LS, , 0 < w < 1.  However, it was observed that the RT means showed a clearer pattern than the RT variances, so that estimates of the mean RT  parameters "uncontaminated" by possible failures of the model for RT variances were considered appropriate.  HUMAN PROBLEM SOLVING 237  Parameter estimates for individual subjects are listed in Table III. The numerical method used to estimate variance parameters  excluded negative variances with one result that some parameters were estimated to be near zero (the loss function, LS,, would  have been reduced had negative values been accepted for these parameters). An inherent problem in the analysis of RT variances  is that for classification categories with small sample sizes, the variability of the sample variance, S2'- , is large  relative to that for the sample mean, Mii : Consequently, parameter estimates will also have large variability. Note that  variance parameter estimates averaged across subjects are more readily interpretable as variability is reduced through  averaging.  Goodness of Fit Measures  Consider the statistic defined for the ith subject and jth category by  tij = N112(Mii - ai1Q.-T)ISii,  which for suitable models may be assumed to be approximately distributed as Student's t under the hypothesis that the  theoretical mean, ai;e,T, is the true mean of the ijth RT distribution. One method of evaluating the fit of the model to mean  RT's is to construct the smallest possible uniform simultaneous confidence region containing all the ti;'s and to note the  probability of the complement of the region. This probability is the minimum value of a (the probability of a type I error)  for which the hypothesis that the model is true can be rejected; small values indicate that the model is probably not a full  account of the mean RT data. If the distribution of ti; is approximated by N(0, 1) instead of by Student's t, a conservative  bias is introduced in the sense that the value of a is necessarily reduced. Since the normal approximation simplifies the  calculation of a simultaneous confidence region this assumption is adopted.  For the ith subject define  = max I tij 1<75n  If the ti; 's were independent, then for any positive number, c,  Pr{ti* > c} = 1 - Pr{ti* < c}  n  = 1 - fl Pr{-c < ti; < c}  =1  = 1 - [Pr{-c < z < c}]",  where x - N(0, 1). This is the probability that for a fixed i all the tij's are contained within a uniform, symmetric  confidence band of width 2c. But for each i the ti;'s are correlated through the estimation procedure, and with enough  parameters it may be possible to obtain all the ti; = 0, rendering the preceding probability statements meaningless.  Accordingly, some conservative adjustment should be made taking into  238 MATTHEWS AND ATKINSON  account at least the number of free parameters, p. The choice for the present analysis was to take  gi* = 1 - [Pr{-c < z < c}](n-P)  in place of Pr{ti* > c) above. If ti* = c is observed, then gi* is a statistical measure  of the fit of the model for the ith subject. Similarly, for a sample of s subjects define  then  t* = max ti* J = max t-1; I<i<s 1-<i-<s IGj<n  g* = 1 - [Pr{-c < z < c}]8(11-p>  is a goodness of fit measure for the sample as a whole. This procedure is a type of multiple modulus test (Miller, 1966)  referred to here as a "maximum modulus t test" with (n - p) or s(n - p) "degrees of freedom," taking some licence with  terminology.  A related procedure can be followed in evaluating theoretical versus observed RT variances. The statistics defined by  tz; ~ S23 2; - (ai;ViT -- b 2 Tii  can be treated in the same manner as the tij's above, although t'i cannot be regarded as having Student's t distribution and  g* in this case ought to be taken as a transformation of the t?j's reflecting goodness of fit rather than as an approximation  to a true probability.  To obtain a firmer statement about goodness of fit a second measure was sought. Although the model under consideration is not  linear, the total sum of squares can be partitioned in such a way as to yield statistics reflecting the goodness of fit of the  model to RT means in a way similar to the percentage of between variance accounted for and the sample correlation coefficient  in linear regression. Define for any set of theoretical means, {fi;}, for the ith subject:  n  MVi = SS(between) - Ni;(fii - Mi;)2  - 2 Ni;(fi.9 - Mii)(f i - Mi+) I ,  MV,' = max(MVi , 0), PBVi = 100 MVi, , SS(between)  MVi'  PTVi = 100 SS(total)  HUMAN PROBLEM SOLVING 239  If the fit's were determined under a linear regression model using least squares estimation, then  MVi' = MVi = SS (linear regression).  The results of the maximum modulus t, PBV and PTV analyses for RT means are presented in Table IV. Table IVA gives these  statistics for the classification categories determined by the a vectors of the model; Table IVB represents the same analysis  applied to the classification of Table I (problem type X position of false link). From Table IVA it is clear that the model  accounts for a fair proportion of the variance (average PBV is 73.5 and average PTV is 35.2), yet only two subjects have g* >  .10, which is a "reasonable" criterion for a good fit. Additional information about the maximum modulus t test is given by the  number of points falling outside the .90 confidence region; g* > .10 if and only if this number is zero. It should be noted  that points which lie outside the confidence region are not necessarily those which the model fails to account for since when  parameters are estimated simultaneously for all points an "exceptional" point can adversely influence the prediction for other  "normal" points. For the group of six subjects the maximum modulus t test indicates that the model is true can be rejected for  a = .004. It should be noted that one bad data point for a single subject can be sufficient to reject the model for the group  using the maximum modulus t test; the proportion of subjects for which the model is not rejected is perhaps a more appropriate  group statistic. In view of the all too common practice in the literature of presenting statistics for averaged group data, it  is difficult to make a firm statement on this point based on the results of other comparable analyses.  The analysis presented in Table IVB indicates a slightly better fit although it is derived from a less strict interpretation  of the model. Some improvement is expected since more extensive averaging may cancel out effects not accounted for by the  model and estimated error variance is increased slightly as observations with different means are pooled. However, this second  classification does correspond to an intuitively natural division of the data.  Table V presents an evaluation of the model's success in accounting for RT variances. As remarked above the variance of Sif is  large for small sample sizes: for the experimental data this renders the maximum modulus t test uninteresting because for  individual subjects the Tif's are too large to reject any set of ballpark estimates for the variances. Variance predictions  under the model were compared to the hypothesis that all the S 's are the same, using the proportion of points better  accounted for by the model (absolute differences between predicted and observed were compared). Referring to Table V, the  model succeeds about as well as the "same" hypothesis for four subjects and does worse for the remaining two subjects' data.  This is not strong support for the model applied to RT variances but may be interpreted to mean that, compared to the "same"  hypothesis, attempting to infer stage variances did not cost  240 MATTHEWS AND ATKINSON  much in the way of goodness of fit, while at the same time the model's predictions cannot be rejected given the variability of  the S2; estimates.  REFERENCES  ANDERSON, J. A. A theory for the recognition of items from short memorised lists. Psychological Review, 1973, 80, 417--438.  ANDERSON, J. R., & BOWER, G. H. Human associative memory. Washington, D.C.: Winston & Sons, 1973.  ATKINSON, R. C., & WEscouRT, K. T. Some remarks on a theory of memory. In Attention and performance. V. New York: Academic  Press, 1975.  CHASE, W. G., & CLARK, H. H. Mental operations in the comparison of sentences and pictures. In L. W. Gregg (Ed.), Cognition in  learning and memory. New York: Wiley, 1972.  DE GROOT, A. Thought and choice in chess. New York: Basic Books, 1965.  HAYES, J. R. Problem topology and the solution process. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1965, 4, 371-379.  HAYES, J. R, Memory, goals, and problem solving. In B. Kleinmuntz (Ed.), Problem solving: Research, method, and theory. New  York: Wiley, 1966.  KENDALL, M. G., & STUART, A. The advanced theory of statistics, Vol. 1. New York: Hafner, 1969.  MILLER, R. J. Simultaneous statistical inference. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1966.  NEWELL, A., & SIMON, H. A. Human problem solving. Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall, 1972.  PACHELLA, R. G. The interpretation of reaction time in information processing research. In B. Kantowitz (Ed.), Human  information processing: Tutorials in performance and cognition. New York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1974.  Shevell, S. K., & Atkinson, R. C. A theoretical comparison of list scanning models. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1974,  11, 79-106.  STERNBERG, S. Memory-scanning: Mental processes revealed by reaction-time experiments. American Scientist, 1969, 4, 421-457.  (a)  STERNBERG, S. The discovery of processing stages: Extensions of Donder's method. Acta Psychologica, 1969, 30, 276-315. (b)  SUFPES, P., LOFTUS, E. F., & JERMAN, M. Problem solving on a computer based teletype. Educational Studies in Mathematics,  1969, 2, 1-15.  THEIOS, J. Reaction time measurements in the study of memory processes: Theory and data. Report 72-2, Wisconsin Mathematical  Psychology Program. Madison: University of Wisconsin, 1972.  THOMAS, E. A. C. Sufficient conditions for monotone hazard rate: An application to latencyprobability curves. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 1971, 8, 303-332.  RECEIVED: December 30, 1974