10.1016/0022-2496(77)90029-3
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 15, 199-208 (1977)  Data Analysis Implications of Some Concepts Related to the Cuts of a Graph'  LAWRENCE HUBERT  The University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53706  Connections are pointed out between the concept of a cut in a graph and the data analysis problems of hierarchical clustering  and seriation encountered in the social and behavioral sciences. An emphasis is placed on hierarchical clustering by the  criterion of k-edge connectivity and on the relationship between several criteria for object seriation proposed in the  literature and the appropriate graph-theoretical structures.  INTRODUCTION  One of the more significant areas of applied mathematics developed within the last 20 years deals with the concept of flow in  a network or graph (see Ford & Fulkerson, 1962). Although this area of mathematics has already had a substantial influence on  fields related to operations research, as yet, few serious attempts have been made to apply some of its central concepts to  data analysis problems encountered in the social or behavioral sciences. Given the enormous literature dealing with the theory  of flow and closely related ideas, it is reasonable to expect that substantial methodological progress may be possible in  these applied disciplines if only the appropriate correspondences can be identified and developed in sufficient detail. With  this motivation in mind, the discussion below will attempt to point out a number of data analysis tasks that may be approached  from a point of view indirectly suggested from flow theory, with an emphasis on those problems that relate to the cuts of a  graph and, in particular, to the techniques of hierarchical clustering and seriation. General reviews of the connections  between graph theory and these two data analysis subjects are given in Hubert (1974a-c).  Although the basic motivation for the presentation to follow is from the theory of network flow, the concept itself has very  little direct application to the topics actually considered. Secondary characterizations related to flow, however, have  significant relationships for the discussion; thus, our attention will be devoted to these derivative notions and in  rephrasing or modifying some known results to fit the requirements and terminology encountered in the substantive disciplines.  The theory of flow motivates the concepts presented, but most of the time it is technically inconvenient to revert continually  to first principles and make the connections explicit. The reader is referred to the cited sources for specific details that  may be regarded as historical background;  1 Partial support for this research was provided by the National Science Foundation through SOC 75-07860.  199  Copyright Q 1977 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. ISSN 0022-2496  200 LAWRENCE HUBERT  furthermore, since a number of graph-theoretical concepts are used without an extended introduction, the reader should consult  Harary (1969) when necessary for precise definitions and examples.  BACKGROUND: HIERARCHICAL CLUSTERING  In accordance with the standard assumptions used in nonmetric multidimensional scaling or hierarchical cluster analysis, it is  assumed that an n by n data matrix Q = {q(oi, o;)) is available, where q(-, -) is a symmetric nonnegative real-valued function  on S X S and the set S consists of n objects {o. ,..., om}. Intuitively, the proximity function q(-, -) assigns larger  numerical values to the less similar object pairs. Moreover, it is assumed for later convenience that q(-, -) assigns a value  of zero if and only if both function arguments are the same.  In a hierarchical cluster analysis the data matrix Q is used in conjunction with a particular criterion to generate a sequence  or hierarchy of partitions of the set S, say (lo ,..., l n), with the following properties:  class;  (i) to contains all objects in separate classes; lm consists of one all-inclusive object  (ii) 1k+I is formed from lk by a union of certain of the object classes in lk .  It should be observed that the maximum number of partitions in a hierarchy is n, i.e., m = n - 1, and occurs when two and only  two subsets are united in lx to construct lk+I .  As pointed out by Johnson (1967), any partition hierarchy corresponds to a particular type of function on S X S called an  ultrametric. In particular, an ultrametric is a nonnegative real-valued function on S X S subject to three conditions for all  o,, 0j, ox E S:  (i) d(oi , o;) = d(o, , oi);  (ii) d(oi , o;) = 0 if and only if of = o; ;  (iii) d(oi , o;) < max{d(oi , o,), d(ok , o;)).  Clearly, any strictly monotone increasing function of d(-, -) that maps zero to zero also generates an ultrametric. Moreover,  if we define a partition of S by placing any two objects of and o; within the same subset if d(oi , o;) < h and in separate  subsets otherwise, a sequence of partitions is generated as h varies from 0 to oo. Conversely, if a partition hierarchy is  given, then a representative ultrametric can be defined by letting  d(oi, o;) = min{k I of and o; belong to the same subset in lk).  For a further discussion of ultrametrics, the reader is referred to Feinberg (1972) or Jardine and Sibson (1971).  Although the correspondence between ultrametrics and partition hierarchies is of value in the discussion below, it is  convenient to have a different representation in terms of an alternative type of metric, that will be called a max tree  metric. Specifically, fol-  DATA ANALYSIS IMPLICATIONS 201  lowing the standard terminology given in Harary (1969), a tree is a connected graph on n nodes with n - 1 edges. For our  purposes, it is also assumed that each edge is assigned a positive value, i.e., the tree is weighted. Now, since each pair of  distinct nodes of and o; are connected by a unique path or sequence of contiguous edges, it is possible to define the  following function on S X S:  d*(oi, o;) = 0 if of = o; ;  = largest weight assigned to an edge (or edges) in the path between of and o; .  Since every edge in the path between any two distinct nodes of and o; must also be in the set of edges defined by the paths  between of and ok and between ok and o; , it is trivial to verify that d*(-, -) is an ultrametric on S x S. Conversely, any  ultrametric d(-, -) can be represented by such a "max tree metric," and in particular, by the max tree metric generated by a  minimal spanning tree using the given function d(-, -). The reader is referred to Hubert (1974a) for a related discussion of  these ideas.  In summary, the task of hierarchical clustering can be interpreted as imposing a type of tree structure on the set S along  with an associated max tree metric. However, neither the tree nor the metric representations are necessarily unique (a related  problem of nonuniqueness is also reflected in the basic correspondence between one partition hierarchy and a class of  ultrametrics that are related by strictly monotone increasing transformations that map zero to zero).  A GENERAL APPROACH To GENERATING ULTRAMETRICS  The task of characterizing a cut in a network can be approached by first defining a graph G on the n nodes of S = {o. ,...,  o with edges between each pairs of nodes weighted by the symmetric nonnegative real-valued function q(-, -). A cut, denoted  by (Sl , S2), is a set of edges that connect nonempty subsets Sl and S2 , where S10 S2 = 0, S,, U S2 = S. The cut (S,, S2) is  said to separate os and of if os e S, and oe e S2 .  To place the notion of a cut within a larger context, suppose W is the set of all cuts of the set S and define a positive  real-valued function T(-) on the elements c e W. If we characterize a function d,(-, -) on S X S by the condition given in  (1), it can be easily shown that dT(-, -) is an ultrametric:  dT(oi , 0;) = max{T(c) I of and o; separated by the cut c}, of 0 o;;  For example, let of , o; , and ok e S, and let (Sl , S2) be a cut defining d,(oi , o;), where of e Sl , o; e S2 . If ox e Sl ,  then dT(oi , o;) < dT(Ok , o;) and if ok e S2 , then dT(oi , 0;) < dT(oi , 0k). Since either ok e Sl or Ok e S2 , it must be  true that dT(oi , oj) < max{d(oi 1 0k), d(Ok I Oj)} 202 LAWRENCE HUBERT  Alternatively, it can be shown that an ultrametric d(-, -) can be represented by a function defined as in (1). Specifically,  consider a max tree metric defining d(-, -) and let cl ,..., c1 be the n - 1 cuts of S obtained by deleting a single edge  from the tree. Suppose  T'(ci) = weight attached to the edge in the tree that is deleted to form ci ,  and let T' be zero on all other cuts of S. Given these preliminaries, the function dT,(., -) is identical to d(-, -), i.e., if  of and o; are separated by the cut ci , the edge inducing ci in the tree representation must also lie on the unique path  between of and o; ; conversely, any edge in the path between of and o; must generate one of the cuts from the set (C1 ....,  c1}.  In short, the function dT(-, -) is an ultrametric, and thus, can be represented by a max tree metric where the deletion of any  edge in the defining tree induces a cut of S. Consequently, the defining tree can also be characterized by a particular set of  n - 1 cuts of S, say cl ,..., c,,_1 , in which the n - 1 weights on the edges on the tree correspond to the n - 1 values  T(cl),..., T(c1). As one further observation, suppose ci and c; are two cuts given by deleting edges in the tree generating  d,(-, -), and let  Ci - (Sli I S2i); Ci (Sli + S27)  The two cuts ci and c; do not cross one another in the sense that one of the following four sets must be empty:  Sli n Sh , Sli n S2; , S2i n Sh , S2i n S2; .  Since any set of n - 1 noncrossing cuts produces a tree on n nodes and conversely (Buneman, 1971), the expression given in (1)  can also be reinterpreted as a way of selecting n - 1 noncrossing cuts of S.  Several natural definitions of T are available that generate reasonable ultrametrics, and therefore, a hierarchy of partitions  of the set S. For instance, in direct correspondence with a concept used in the theory of network flow, T could be defined as  the weight of a cut (i.e., the sum of weights attached to the edges in the cut); and this suggestion has been illustrated by a  numerical example in Hubert (1974a).2 A second definition of T  s There is an annoying technical difficulty that arises when we use the definition given in (1) along with the weight of a cut  as the specification for T. Specifically, locating maximum weight cuts in a graph is NP-complete, and consequently, has a  computationally difficulty similar to the infamous Traveling Salesman Problem (see Karp, 1972). On the other hand, efficient  routines (i.e., polynomial bounded) for locating minimum weights cuts are available in the standard network flow procedures.  Thus, if we wish to use these flow algorithms, proximities with a similarity rather than a dissimilarity interpretation have  to be used and the maximization in (1) must be replaced by a minimization. This modification, however, would then require  changes in the notion of an ultrametric, and so on. The definition in (1) is easier to deal with conceptually and will be  adopted throughout but with footnotes included whenever some possible ambiguity may occur. Hopefully, this comment will also  clarify some difficulties the reader may encounter in Hubert (1974a); here, an attempt was made to bypass this notational  problem by a rather cavalier definition of a "minimum flow." From a historical point of view, however, this will cause more  confusion than it resolves.  DATA ANALYSIS IMPLICATIONS 203  provides an interesting alternative interpretation of a common hierarchical clustering strategy called the single-link  procedure, i.e., clustering by using hierarchically nested connected components. In particular, let  T1(c) = smallest proximity value in the cut c.  The ultrametric generated by dTj., -) is equivalent to what is generated by the singlelink strategy (see Johnson, 1967). More  generally, this "bottleneck" notion can be extended by defining  T,(c) = kth smallest proximity value in the cut c.  The ultrametric, or more specifically the sequence of partitions generated by the function T,(,) has an interesting  relationship to a general way of decomposing a graph discussed in the literature that can be shown explicitly by the following  theorem:  THEOREM. Suppose Gta is a graph on the n nodes of S with an edge defined between two distinct nodes of and o; if and only if  q(oi , o;) < to , where to is some arbitrary value. The decomposition of Gto into k-edge connected subsets is identical to  some partition within the partition hierarchy induced by T,(c) using expression (1), i.e., two objects are within the same  subset of the partition if and only if they are connected by at least k edgedisjoint paths in Gt, .3  To demonstrate this result and explain its meaning, it is convenient to present several preliminary observations. Suppose c1  ,..., cK are all cuts that separate two specific nodes of and o; and let w1 ,..., wK be the corresponding kth smallest  proximity values in the cuts. If w4 == max{w,. I 1 < r < K} and c* denotes a corresponding cut, then of and o3 are joined by  at least k edge-disjoint paths in the graph Gwi, and by less than k edgedisjoint paths in Gt where t < w . Explicitly, in Gt  for t < w*, any path between of and o. must contain at least one edge in c4 and since there are at most k - 1 edges present in  c?~ for Gt , there are at most k - 1 edge-disjoint paths between of and o; . Alternatively, suppose there are fewer than  k-edge disjoint paths between of and o; in G,,,,. Then, using a standard variant of Menger's theorem (Harary, 1969, p. 49), it  is possible to disconnect G=. by deleting at most k - 1 edges in Gw. in such a way that of and o; are in separate subsets.  But this is a contradiction since by construction of w* , every cut separating of and o; in G,, contains at least k edges.  Now, for the graph Gto , let  = max{w* I w* < to}. i0i  Furthermore, define the tree generated using T,(-) in expression (1) but delete all edges in the tree that have edge weights  strictly greater than w*; thus, a partition of S is constructed. Clearly, two objects of and o; are within the same object  class of the partition if and only if w J < w*, and consequently, are joined by at least k edge-disjoint paths  3 A related but distinct concept involving k-edge connected components would require the k edge-disjoint paths to lie within  the appropriate component.  480/15/2-7  204 LAWRENCE HUBERT  in Gta since they are joined by at least k edge-disjoint paths in G"i. . Conversely, if oi and o; are in different subsets of  the partition, then the weight of the maximal cut separating of and o; , w* , is greater than to . Consequently, in G,o there  are fewer than k edge-disjoint paths between o; and o; , i.e., the partition is the decomposition of Gro into k-edge connected  classes.  In summary, the function used in (1) provides a general way of obtaining ultrametrics that includes as special cases a  graph-theoretic alternative defined by k-edge connectivity. Although the basic motivation for the ultrametric dr(-, -) stems  from an interpretation through the weight of a cut, many other functions T(-) could be considered as well. For example, the  function T(-) could be defined as the sum of the edge weights in the minimal or maximal spanning tree that defines the  bifurcation corresponding to a particular cut (see Hubert, 1974a). Some related work has been done by Matula (1972) for the  specific case of a graph in which the existing edges are all weighted by unity. Matula discusses the concept of k-edge  connectivity, and is concerned with the types of subgraphs formed as k is varied and not in generating a partition hierarchy  for a fixed value of k (see footnote 3).  k-MINIMAL TREES  Extending the implications of this theorem, it is possible to define a k-minimal tree as the tree used to represent the max  tree metric for T,(-) with edges weighted by Tk(cl),._ Tk(c._1) for the n - 1 defining noncrossing cuts cl ,..., c1 . A  maximum edge weight on the path between two nodes of and o; represents the smallest proximity value t for which k  edge-disjoint paths are defined between of and o; in G, . As before, an edge in G, exists between two distinct nodes if and  only if the edge weight is less than or equal to t as defined by the proximity function q(-, -). When k = 1, the standard  minimal spanning tree is found, and furthermore, a well-known procedure for constructing a minimal spanning tree given by  Kruskal (1956) can be used as an analogy to form a k-minimal tree:  Scan the proximity values in sequence and in order of increasing size. An edge with an attached weight is placed between two  nodes if and only if such an addition does not form a cycle in the graph so far constructed, and furthermore, if the weight  attached to that edge, say t, induces at least k-edge disjoint paths between the two nodes in Gt and no smaller value of t  suffices. Clearly, the weights attached to the edges of the tree so obtained correspond to actual proximity values defined by  the function q(-, .), although for k > 1, certain edges in the k-minimal spanning tree have to be assigned the same weight  even when all the original proximity measures are initially distinct. Also, for k > 1, the k-minimal tree is never unique and  does not have to be an actual spanning tree of the original graph.  The partition hierarchy generated by the criterion of k-edge connectivity can be regenerated by deleting the edges in the  k-minimal tree in order of decreasing edge weight, i.e., if the edge (or edges) with the largest weight are deleted first, the  last nontrivial partition in the hierarchy is formed; the edge (or edges) with the second largest weight are deleted next to  form the second to the last nontrivial partition, and so on.  DATA ANALYSIS IMPLICATIONS 205  SERIATION  As we have seen, the concept of a cut can be used to motivate a rather broad class of hierarchical clustering procedures by  varying the function T in expression (1). In a similar way, several strategies suggested in the literature for ordering or  sequencing objects along a continuum can be placed within a more general. framework. The key to this relationship requires an  additional restriction on the framework that has been defined for the hierarchical clustering task. We now look for a set of n  - 1 noncrossing cuts of S, say cl ,..., cn_l , in which the cuts are weighted by T() and the n - 1 cuts define a single path  between two "end" nodes. An obvious optimization criterion would be to maximize the sum F_"-' T(ci) subject to the constraint  that the cuts define a path. To introduce the topic of seriation several preliminary concepts are required:  Suppose Ql and Q2 are two spanning trees on the node set S = {oi ,..., on}. If El = {e1 ),..., en-1) denotes the set of edges  in Ql and E2 = {e12~,..., en-1} denotes the edges in Q2, then a one-to-one mapping between El and E2 exists with the following  property: Let eik) be an edge in El that joins, say, nodes of and o; ; then the image of e('), say e?'', is an edge in the  unique path between of and o; in Q2 . (Adolopson and Hu, 1973.)  In conjunction with the max tree metric generated by expression (1), the implications of this theorem are rather interesting.  Specifically, for any function T, let Ql be the spanning tree corresponding to the induced max tree metric and let Q2 be any  other spanning tree generated by n - 1 noncrossing cuts, say cl ,..., cn_1 , with edges weighted by T(cl),..., T(c._1). Then  the sum of the weights attached to the edges in Ql must be greater than or equal to the sum of the weights attached to the  edges in Q2 . In other words, for each edge in Ql defined, say between of and o; , the weight attached to the edge is greater  than or equal to its image under the one-to-one mapping since its image also defines a cut separating of and o; . Since the  function is one-to-one and this is true for every edge in Q,, the conclusion follows.  Before proceding with several implications of this result, it is necessary to introduce two procedures that have been  suggested in the literature for seriating a set of objects along a one-dimensional continuum:  Let 0 be the set of all one-to-one functions p() from the set of integers N = {1, 2,..., nj to N, i.e., 0 is the set of all  permutations in the first n integers. Then, we wish to find a specific function p such that the objective function in (2) is  maximized:  4(oi , oa) r(p(i), p(J))_ (2)  The definition of r(-, -) as a function on N X N can be varied and depending upon its definition, different seriation  strategies can be defined. Two rather obvious choices have been suggested by Szczotka (1972) and Wilkinson (1971):  Szczotka:  r(i, j) = I i -1 I .  206 LAWRENCE HUBERT  Wilkinson:  if Ii-j1 ~2,  == 0 otherwise.  Both of these criteria can be explained and justified in a number of ways; however, for our purposes it is convenient to  consider the problem from a graph-theoretical point of view. Suppose G is a graph on the n nodes {o. ,..., o, where an edge  exists between every pair of nodes and is weighted by the appropriate value of q(-, -). Any ordering of the objects in S  corresponds to a (Hamiltonian) path in G that passes through each node once and only once. Consequently, the adequacy of any  ordering of the objects in S can be phrased in terms of the set of all Hamiltonian paths in G.  Explicitly, Szczotka's function counts the number of edges in the Hamiltonian path defined by a specific p(-) between any two  nodes and when used with the general expression in (2) can be considered a "correlational" measure between the number of such  edges and the size of the proximity measure for the defining pair of nodes. Wilkinson's function, on the other hand, when used  in expression (2) defines an index that is large when the length of the Hamiltonian path in G is small, i.e., when the sum of  the proximity values attached to the edges in the path is small.  To place both of these functions in a somewhat broader framework, consider an arbitrary tree on the node set S in which the  edges are all weighted by 1.0. Two different functions can be defined by such a tree that relate directly to the expressions  suggested by Szczotka and Wilkinson:  Additive tree function (metric):  ds(oi , o;) = the number of edges in the unique path between of and o; in the tree.  Adjacency tree function:  d,,(oi , o;) = 0 if of and o; are joined by a single edge in the tree; = 1 otherwise.  Instead of searching for a "good" Hamiltonian path suppose we wish to find a tree on the node set S such that  Y q(oi oj) ds(oi , oj) i.7  is as large as possible. If the tree is restricted to be a Hamiltonian path, i.e., a particular form for a tree, then the  problem posed is equivalent to the sequencing task usingi Szczotka's function. It turns out that a tree maximizing (3) is  given by the n - 1 noncrossing cuts using the weight of the cut as the function T in expression (1) (see Hu, 1974; Adolpson  and Hu, 1973). Consequently, the value of the index in (3) for this  DATA ANALYSIS IMPLICATIONS 207  particular tree is an upper bound on the index given in (2) using Szczotka's criterion.4 In a similar way, if the index  ~, q(oi , oj) dw(aa , os) =.s  is defined and the tree is restricted to be a Hamiltonian path, then the problem posed is equivalent to the sequencing task  using Wilkinson's function. Moreover, one particular tree maximizing (4) is given by the n - 1 noncrossing cuts using the  function T&) in expression (1). The value of the index in (4) for this particular tree, i.e., the minimal spanning tree, is an  upper bound on the index given in (2) using Wilkinson's criterion. Computationally efficient algorithms exist for computing  this bound through the minimal spanning tree (see Kruskal, 1956).  In summary, the seriation problem can be viewed as a restricted form of hierarchical clustering and if the appropriate bound  is attained for a sequencing of the objects in S using Szczotka's or Wilkinson's function, then an optimal solution for the  sequencing problem using that criterion has been achieved. It should also be observed that the tree maximizing (3) with edge  weights equal to 1.0 can be interpreted as the closest additive tree metric to the proximity function q(-, -), where the index  of adequacy is a type of unnormalized correlation coefficient. In a similar way, the minimal spanning tree can be viewed as  the closest adjacency tree function to the proximity function, and again, the index of adequacy is an unnormalized correlation  analogue. Clearly, these same type of relations could be developed for T,(-) and the k-minimal tree, but the extension is of  little substantive importance for the seriation problem and will not be persued.  REFERENCES  ADOLPHSON, D., & Hu, T. C. Optimal linear ordering. SIAM Journal of Applied Mathematics, 1973, 25, 403-423.  BUNEMAN, P. The recovery of trees from measures of dissimilarity. In F. R. Hodson, et al. (Eds.), Mathematics in the  archaeological and Historical Sciences. Chicago: Aldine-Atherton, 1971. FEINBERG, V. Z. Finite ultrametric spaces. Soviet  Mathematics Doklady, 1972, 13, 23-33.  FORD, L. R., JR., & FULxERsoN, D. R. Flows in networks. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1962.  GOMORY, R. E., & Hu, T. C. Multi-terminal network flow. SIAM Journal of Applied Mathematics, 1961, 9, 551-570.  HARARY, F. Graph theory. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley, 1969.  HUBERT, L. Spanning trees and aspects of clustering. British Journal of Mathematical andStatistical Psychology, 1974a, 27,  14-28.  HUBERT, L. Some applications of graph theory and related nonmetric techniques to problems of  If the modification in (1) were made as discussed in footnote 2, then the problem formulated by (3) would be a minimization  task with a lower bound for the seriation interpretation generated by what is called the Gomory-Hu tree (see Gomory & Hu,  1961). Since efficient algorithms exist for obtaining the Gomory-Hu cut tree, this change in (1) would be desirable from a  computational point of view.  208 LAWRENCE HUBERT  approximate seriation: The case of symmetric proximity measures. The British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical  Psychology, 1974b, 27, 133-153.  HUBERT, L. Some applications of graph theory to clustering. Psychometrika, 1974c, 39, 283-309. Hu, T. C. Optimum communication  spanning trees. SIAM Journal of Computing, 1974, 3, 188-195. JARDINE, N., & SIBSON, R. Mathematical taxonomy. New York: Wiley,  1971.  JOHNSON, S. C. Hierarchical clustering schemes. Psychometrika, 1967, 32, 241-254.  KARP, R. M. Reducibility among combinatorial problems. In R. E. Miller and J. W. Thatcher (Eds.), Complexity of Computer  Computations. New York: Plenum, 1972, pp. 85-103.  KRUSKAL, J. B. On the shortest spanning tree of a graph and the traveling salesman problem. Proceedings of the American  Mathematical Society, 1956, 7, 48-50.  MATULA, D. W. k-Components, clusters, and slicings in graphs. SIAM Journal of Applied Mathematics, 1972, 22, 459-480.  SZCZOTKA, F. On a method of ordering and clustering of objects. Zastosowania Mathematyki, 1972, 13, 23-33.  WILKINSON, E. M. Archaeological seriation and the traveling salesman problem. In F. R. Hodson et al. (Eds.), Mathematics in  the Archaeological and Historical Sciences. Chicago: Aldine-Atherton, 1971.  RECEIVED: February 7, 1976