10.1016/0022-2496(77)90051-7
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 16, 167-203 (1977)  The Evolutionary Restriction of Aggression within a Species: A Game Theory Analysis  MICHEL TREISMAN  University of Oxford, Department of Experimental Psychology, South Parks Road, Oxford OXI 3UD, England  Can selection based on individual advantage result in limits to the magnitude of the damage animals may inflict on  conspecifics in agonistic encounters? A formulation of intraspecific conflict in terms of game theory introduced by Maynard  Smith (Journal of Theoretical Biology, 1974, 47, 209-221) is used to examine this question. Maynard Smith put forward the  concept of an evolutionarily stable strategy (ESS), one which it will never be to an individual's advantage to depart from,  and the resulting analysis is used here to determine the behaviors that will evolve when aggression is modeled as a game  between two contestants, each of which has two options, "Attack" or "Display." It is assumed that the opponents may be of two  types which differ in the destruction they are capable of inflicting but that prior to a contest a contestant cannot recognize  the type its opponent belongs to. The Weak inflict damage D, when victorious in a contest but the Strong inflict damage DK >  DI and the Strong always defeat the Weak when both attack. It is shown that under selection the Strong will wholly replace the  Weak when DK < V, V being the value of the prize, but that when DK > V an equilibrium between the two types results. Such a  heterogeneous group gives a greater return to its members than a homogeneous group with D < V, and the value of DK will tend  to become large, the probability of an attack decreasing inversely. A population in which two types are initially present but  recognizably different will evolve toward indistinguishability. If a third type is introduced the intermediate strain will  disappear, restoring a bimodal distribution of destructive capacity. In a group whose members are related there will be a  higher proportion of the Weak type at equilibrium and the overall probability of attack will be reduced. Such a group will  offer a greater return to its members than association with randomly selected conspecifics, assuming that the ESS is played in  each case. Under such conditions evolution should favor association with kin. In all cases V constitutes an upper limit to the  expected level of damage in encounters. This defines an intrinsic restriction to the magnitude or the frequency of aggressive  damage.  Why are we not as aggressive as our potentialities allow ? Why, if a contestant is powerful, does he not always attack with  sufficient force to win what he wants? I am not concerned here with predatory aggression, directed against another species,  but with aggression against conspecifics. An animal's investment in the former behavior can be considered in terms of its  economic effect in contributing to his net fitness (Treisman, 1975b). This will not be examined here. But if two opponents of  the same species, equivalent in age and sex, are in competition for some good then it might seem on a simple view that the one  that most ruthlessly pursues his advantage can only benefit  167  Copyright 1977 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. ISSN 0022-2496  168 MICHEL TREISMAN  from doing so, and thus there should be no upper limit to the amount of aggression that may be employed for this purpose. But  in fact the adaptations for mutual conflict within a species may seem remarkably pacific when compared with the lethal  potentialities of their armament. As Hamilton (1971) notes: "Usually ... as soon as it becomes obvious which combatant is  likely to win, and thus just when serious wounding might be expected to occur, the fight stops" (p. 59). And an animal may  give evidence of its faintness of heart-in displacement behavior, or by diluting signals of aggression with those of  flight-which can only weaken its chances in the contest. Why do rattlesnakes in conflict not bite one another? A snake that  departed from this innate prohibition would both shorten and win its battle and the representation of its genes in the next  generation would be likely to increase. The argument from kin selection seems unlikely to be sufficiently powerful to explain  its restraint if encounters are reasonably random and the hypothesis of group selection meets with considerable difficulties  (Treisman, 1975a, 1976; Williams, 1971).  Wilson (1975) has posed the question in the form: "Why do animals prefer pacifism and bluff to escalated fighting?" and  responds: "The answer is probably that for each species, depending on the details of its life cycle, its food preferences, and  its courtship rituals, there exists some optimal level of aggressiveness above which individual fitness is lowered" (p. 247).  Dawkins (1976) asks: "Why is it that animals do not go all out to kill rival members of their species... ? The general answer  to this is that there are costs as well as benefits resulting from outright pugnacity, and not only the obvious costs in time  and energy" (p. 73). A cost-benefit analysis must take account of the more distant effects of a conflict, such as whether  "other rivals may be more likely to benefit from [a rival's] death than oneself" (p. 73). The object of the present paper is  to examine this question more closely by presenting and studying a specific model of conflict from which limits on the  expression of aggression within a species can be derived.  Wilson (1975) suggests that at least two main constraints restrict aggressiveness. The first is kin selection (Hamilton,  1964a,b; Maynard Smith, 1964). A gene leading to the infliction of extreme damage on related animals-who are more likely to  possess that gene than the population at large-will tend to reduce its own representation in the gene pool. This may be an  important but is not a universal factor. Restraint may be shown in conflicts between animals which are unrelated. The second  is that "an aggressor spends time in aggression that could be invested in courtship, nest building, and the feeding and  rearing of young" (p. 248). This is an economic argument but, as phrased, not obviously cogent. Aggression may be not an  alternative but a means to success in procreation, and less time may be invested and more profit gained if a combat is ended  quickly by a death blow than if restraint leads to its inconclusive prolongation.  Another explanation for restraint might be that "we have to live together." This would be a version of the explanation for  altruism (Trivers, 1971). This requires that the cost to the altruist of his kindness is outweighed by the future benefits to  him as recipient of reciprocal altruistic acts. Put another way, altruists perform altruistic acts when the cost to the  altruist is well below the benefit to the recipient, where cost and benefit are defined in terms of reproduction, and the  relation is reciprocal over time (Trivers, 1971). But it is not clear that this explanation can be applied in any simple  GAME THEORY 169  way to aggressive contests. It may seem that if an animal's present restraint lowers the probability of his gaining a present  good but raises the probability that he will win an equivalent reward on a future occasion-when his opponent will be similarly  restrainedthen the cost to him at the present moment is not well below but equal to the benefit to his opponent, and it is not  outweighed by the future gain since the rewards, on average, are the same and an immediate gain is of more benefit than one  delayed, which one may not survive to enjoy.  The present paper will examine the implications of a simple model for a general case of intraspecific aggression. This is  conflict between animals which appear to each other roughly equivalent in their destructive power, in circumstances in which  there is no asymmetric condition, such as prior possession of a territory, which may act to bias the result (Maynard Smith &  Parker, 1976). We consider, initially, contestants selected at random from the population as a whole, with no implicit  altruistic contract and no special degree of relationship between them. The benefit resulting from different types of  aggressive behavior, measured in terms of the contribution made to the animal's fitness, defined as overall reproductive  efficiency, will be determined, and it is assumed that natural selection based on individual advantage will favor those  patterns of behavior which maximize fitness. In more detail, the objects are first, to determine what relations may exist,  under selection, between the damage that may be inflicted in a contest and the value of the prize and, second, to examine  selection between animals which may appear similar to one another but differ in their destructive potential. The focus will be  on determining the strategies which maximize fitness as this is affected by the direct results of the contest. Possible  secondary effects on the time or investment available for other needs will not be considered.  The model is derived from one put forward by Maynard Smith and Parker (1976), and its analysis depends on a powerful concept  introduced by Maynard Smith (1974), who has made ingenious use of game theory to elucidate the evolution of intraspecific  conflict. He proposed the concept of an evolutionarily stable strategy (ESS), one such that any alternative strategy would  have a lower expected utility, and he has used this idea to explain how individual selection might lead to the evolution of  ritualized contests which avoid serious injury. By definition, if a mutant applies an alternative strategy its expected  return, which is equivalent to its fitness, will be less than that of the wild type, whose strategy is the ESS, and thus it  will be selected against. A clear and useful introduction to Maynard Smith's ideas is provided by Dawkins (1976).  Maynard Smith and his colleagues (Maynard Smith, 1974; Maynard Smith & Parker, 1976; Maynard Smith & Price, 1973) have  analyzed conflicts in which the contestants are equal in fighting ability or there is some evident difference between them  which may or may not be correlated with their relative strengths. An example of an uncorrelated difference is that between the  discoverer of a resource and a latecomer. Thev find that when such an asymmetry is present the evolutionarily stable strategy  is usually a pure strategy depending on the asymmetric cue. For example, the discoverer of a resource may always attack, the  latecomer always retreat.  An assumption of their analyses is that a given animal will sometimes feature in one, sometimes in the other of an asymmetric  pair of roles, sometimes discoverer, sometimes  170 MICHEL TREISMAN  latecomer, and it will be evident to both contestants which is which. This is different from the case which it is proposed to  analyze here, in which the differences are covert and permanent features of the contestants which affect their success in all  contests and thus may serve as a basis for natural selection. In the next section the game which will be employed as a general  model for aggressive contests will be described and the basic assumptions of Maynard Smith's analysis outlined. In succeeding  sections his analysis will be extended and applied to the problem of the restriction of aggression.  A summary indication of the argument of the paper may be obtained by reading the initial and final paragraphs of each section  and the Conclusion.  EVOLUTIONARILY STABLE STRATEGIES  Maynard Smith and Parker (1976) have described a game, "Hawks and Doves," which will be used here as a general model for  aggressive conflict between two individuals. In this game each contestant must choose between two acts which inflict different  degrees of damage. Maynard Smith and Price (1973) and Maynard Smith and Parker (1976) have analyzed a version of this game in  which the two choices are:  (a) Display; retreat if opponent attacks.  (b) Attack and continue until either the opponent retreats or one is oneself injured.  If the animals are on average of equal prowess, the value of the prize gained by the victory is V, and the damage sustained  when defeated by an attack is -D, then the payoff matrix is  Attack Display  Attack (V - D)12 V  Display V V/2  0   (M1)  This assumes that if both contestants attack each has an equal chance of victory or of suffering damage, if both display they  have equal chances of winning and neither suffers injury, but if one attacks and the other displays then the former will win  V, the latter nothing. We assume V > 0 and D > 0.  The alternative courses of action may be referred to as "gambits" and a strategy is a rule for choosing between them. If this  rule is probabilistic it is a "mixed strategy," if definitive a "pure strategy." Let EB(A) represent the expected utility of  playing strategy A against strategy B. Then if I is the strategy (p,, 1 -p,), i.e., choose "Attack" with probability p, and  "Display" with probability (1 - pr), with 0 < p, < 1, we have  EI(I) = prfpr(V - D)l2 + (1 -pr) V) + (1 -p )2 Vl2 = Vl2 -pr2Dl2 (1)  GAME THEORY 171  and if strategy J is played against I we get  EI(J) = pr[pr(V - D)/2 + (I -pr) V] + (I -pr)(I -pl) V12 _ (I - pr + pr) V12 - pjpjD12.  The strategy I may be realized in two main ways. The population may be heterogeneous, a proportion p, of the animals always  choosing to attack and the remainder always preferring to display, or it may be genetically homogeneous, individual animals  attacking in a proportion p, of contests and displaying in the remainder. Intermediate cases are also possible. If I is stable  then it is either a pure strategy ("only attack" or "only display") or the expected gain to be won by an attack is equal to  that to be won by displaying, since otherwise the more favorable gambit would increase in frequency until one of the above  states obtains, either, in a basically homogeneous population, because those animals which tend to employ this gambit more  often do better than the rest and so are selected, or because, in a heterogeneous population, members of the more favored type  increase in frequency. Then  E, (Attack) = E, (Display), (2)  p,(V -D)/2 + (I -pi) V = (1 -pr) V12,  and therefore the probability of attack when the strategy for this game is stable is given by  p, = min(V/D, 1),  where "min(x, y)" is to be read "x or y, whichever is the smaller." When V < D we have a mixed strategy and  E,(Attack) = E,(Display) = (V/2)(I - VID)  but when V > D, I is a pure strategy and  E,(Attack) _ (V - D)/2 > E,(Display) = 0.  It should be noted that what is described as a population strategy in this treatment extends the meaning of the term. It is  not necessarily a rule for choosing between the two gambits which can actually be seen to govern the behavior of the  individuals involved and is determined by considerations of personal utility. No animal may follow the population strategy: In  the genetically heterogeneous case the latter is the average effect of the strategies followed by individuals, none of which  may be identical with the population strategy. Thus the latter may be described as a mixed strategy I with p, = 0.5 when the  population consists half of animals which attack with probability one, half  172 MICHEL TREISMAN  of animals which attack with probability zero. The population strategy may refer to the resultant effect of a mixture of  strategies, and it is determined by the maximization of individual fitness by evolutionary forces.  Maynard Smith gives two alternative conditions for an evolutionarily stable strategy, that is, one which will be favored by  selection whatever other strategies may be played against it. He observes that if a strategy I is stable it will be  evolutionarily stable if the expected utility of I played against itself is greater than that of any other strategy J played  Condition 1: EI(I) > EI(J).  However, if these two expectations are equal, I can still be an ESS provided that a bias exists against a drift to J. Thus  when condition 1 does not apply a second condition for an ESS is that for any strategy J such that  Condition 2: E,(I) = EI(J),  we have E,(1) > E,(J).  These conditions will be applied below to the Hawks and Doves game. If strategy I is stable then p, is given by Eq. (3). Note  that if a mutant which plays strategy J = (p, , I - p,), p, :A p, , appears in the population then if p, = 1, EI(J) _ p,(V -  D)/2 < EI(I) _ (V - D)f2, so that Condition 1 applies and I is the ESS. Conversely EI(I) > EI(J) implies that p, < V/D, which  is only true when p, = 1 (Eq. (3)). Thus Condition 1 applies if and only if p, = 1.  If pr < 1 then EI(J) =p,E,(Attack) + (I -p,) EI(Display) = EI(I), from Eq. (2). If we let pr = VID then E,(I) > E,(J) provided  that (V -p,D)2 > 0, which will be true for any value of p, =?,- p, . Thus Condition 2 is applicable when the stable strategy  is a mixed strategy. When p, = V/D < 1, this condition will apply and I will again be an ESS. Selection will oppose the  substitution of any other strategy J for I.  In this section a model employed by Maynard Smith and his method of analysis have been described. In the following sections  the analysis will be extended and applied to the present problem.  THE CONDITIONS FOR AN ESS: SOME COMMENTS  Maynard Smith's arguments do not establish that evolutionary pressures necessarily produce a population of individuals  genetically committed to a particular value of pl, in the homogeneous case. An alternative possibility is that what is  selected is not a value of p, but a disposition to learn from the differential average reward attaching to the two gambits, so  that the more favorable play tends to become more frequent in the behavioral repertoires of individuals who vary their game  and stability is reached when both gambits are equally rewarding. If a group of such animals happens to start with a strategy  J, not the ESS, and if E,(Attack) > E,(Display) this will imply p, < VID. Thus the animals' tendency to increase p, will cause  the latter to approach pl. Conversely, if  GAME THEORY 173  Display is more profitable than Attack, pj must be greater than VID and will decrease as Display becomes more frequent. The  end result will be that a variety of ESS is achieved which might be described as a strategy "stable under learning"; not the  strategy but the capacity to converge on it would be evolutionarily specified.  Note that the ESS is not necessarily identical with the strategy M which maximizes Em(M) if both sides play it. It is evident  from Eq. (1) that M is given by (0, 1); i.e., it is the strategy "Always display" which gives E(M) _-_ V/2. But the  maximizing strategy is not stable since if a mutant arises which plays strategy J against it, E,,(J) ---(1 -{- p,,) V12 >  Em(M), thus violating Condition 1.  A question which arises is whether Maynard Smith's two conditions for an ESS can be extended. Consider a population which  initially consists of a proportion w (0 < w < 1) of wild type animals TI, employing strategy I, and (1 - w) of type T,, ,  mutants who apply strategy J. (Throughout this paper T, will always refer to the wild type, that is, the type originally  constituting the population, whatever its characteristics may be. A type will be defined by the damage it is capable of  inflicting, not by its strategy, which may vary and will be defined in context.) Then the general condition under which I is  more advantageous and selection will proceed against T,, must be that  E,}j(I) = wE,(1) + (1 - w) E,(I) > E,+j(J) _-- wE,(J) + (1 - w) Ej(J),  which implies  E,(I) - E1(J) > [(1 - w)Iw][Ej(J) - Ej(I)].  If we define the advantage of strategy A over strategy B when both are played against strategy C as  Ad,(A : B) = E,(A) - E,(B)  then the general condition for selection to proceed in favor of I may be written as  Ad,(I : J) > [(I - w)/w] Adj(J :1). (5)  The advantage of I over J when played against I, the left-hand side of the equation, may be greater than, equal to, or less  than zero. If we let [(1 - w)Jw] Ad,(J : I) = k, then when I is a stable strategy it will be evolutionarily stable if the  left-hand side is greater than k, i.e., E,(I) > E,(J) + k. Maynard Smith and Parker (1976) argue that the proportion of  mutants playing strategy J, (1 - w), is likely to be very small when they first appear in the population. If so k will  approximate zero at this stage and if the condition holds selection in favor of I will proceed until J is wholly eliminated.  Thus I will be evolutionarily stable if E,(1) > E,(J), which is Maynard Smith's Condition 1.  A new strategy need not always be rare when it first appears. For example, it could arise as a consequence of two previously  separated groups coming together and interbreeding to produce a filial generation in which a new pattern of behavior is widely  shown. In this case k need not approximate zero: will Condition 1 still hold?  174 MICHEL TREISMAN  If Ad,(I : J) > 0 and I is a stable strategy then we have seen that p, = 1 < V/D, for the present game. So it must be that p,  < p, = 1. But with these values Ad,(J : I) > 0 will imply p, >, VID, which is absurd. Thus Ad,(J : I) and consequently k must  both be negative. Thus if Ad,(I : J) > 0, Condition 1 will apply whether the proportion of animals of type T, is initially  small or large.  If the left-hand side of Eq. (5) is zero then if I is stable it is a mixed strategy with p, = VID, as we have seen. If p, has  this value then for any value of p, it follows that Ad,(J : I) is negative and thus we have Maynard Smith's Condition 2.  Equation (5) has a third possible case. The left-hand side of the equation may be less than zero but nevertheless greater than  the right-hand side:  0 > w Ad,(I : J) > (1 - w) Ad,(J : I). (6)  When this holds E,+#) > E,+,(J) and so selection must favor T, animals and tend to eliminate those playing strategy J. Does  this constitute a third condition for an ESS ? It can be seen at once that if it does then neither I nor J can be this ESS.  For if both Ad,(I : J) and Ad,(J : I) are negative it can be shown that either p, < V/D < p, or p, < V/D < p, . Thus neither I  nor J is the stable strategy (for which p = VID, since V/D < 1) and a fortiori neither is evolutionarily stable. If the  population consists of these two types and Eq. (6) holds then selection will proceed in favor of T, for a while but not to  completion. As w increases and (1 - w) declines, w Ad,(I : J) will get smaller and (1 - w) Ad,(J :I) will increase (since the  advantage terms are negative). Selection in favor of I will cease when w reaches an equilibrium value, we , at which these two  expressions are equal:  Condition 3: we Ad,(I : J) _ (1 - we) Ad,(J : I).  If w increases beyond this equilibrium point the direction of the second inequality in Eq. (6) will reverse and selection will  now favor J. Thus when both Ad,(I : J) < 0 and Ad,(J :I) < 0 selection will produce a stable balance of strategies determined  by an equilibrium value of w given by  _ Ad,(J : I)  We Ad,(I : J) + Adr(J : I) '  V - pjD  (pr - pr)D .  (Note that if we were to substitute p, = V/D we would obtain we = 1.)  If both Ad,(I : J) < 0 and Ad,(J : I) < 0 then either p, < V/D < p, or p, < V/D < p.,. This pair of alternative conditions  implies that 0 < we < 1.  Now it might be argued that what we have here is an evolutionarily stable strategy (or mixture of strategies) S given by (ps ,  1 - ps) with Ps = wep, + (1 - we) p, (Maynard Smith, personal communication). It can be shown that ES(S) = E,(I) = ES(J),  EI(S) > El(I) and E,(S) > E,(J), which establishes that S is stable against challenge  GAME THEORY 175  by either of its components, by Condition 2. The reason for this may be seen if we substitute the expression for we given by  Eq. (7) into ps . This gives ps = VI D. Evidently Eq. (6) cannot arise when either I or J is an evolutionarily stable  strategy, and the expression which for convenience we have labeled Condition 3 is not a condition for the evolutionary  stability of I, as are Maynard Smith's two conditions, but defines the balance between two component strategies in a  heterogeneous population such that they constitute a stable mixture of strategies conforming to Condition 2. In general, we  may conclude that if I is an ESS then Ad,(I : J) >, 0.  In this section the conditions for an ESS have been extended by the addition of a condition defining a stable balance between  two strategies, neither itself the ESS, such that the resultant population strategy is the ESS. This condition will be applied  at a later stage when considering mixed populations.  Two TYPES OF CONTESTANT: WEAK AND STRONG INDISTINGUISHABLE  We now proceed to develop the assumptions necessary to analyze the basic problem with which this paper is concerned: the  course of selection when a population consists of two types which differ in the amount of damage they inflict, whether or not  they differ in their probability of inflicting damage, and which are not distinguishable from one another. What balance will  evolution strike between destructive and pacific types?  Consider again the game of Hawks and Doves defined by matrix (M1) for which the ESS was strategy I, defined as (p, , 1 - pl)  with pi = min(V/D, 1). Suppose that a mutant type TK appears which is more destructive when it attacks, either because it is  more heavily armed or because it uses its armament with more abandon. The population will now consist of a proportion w of the  original Weak or wild-type animals which inflict damage -D, when victorious in an attack, and (1 - w) of the new Strong which  always overcome the Weak when both attack and which inflict damage -Dx , DK > D,). The Weak (T,) play strategy I and the  Strong (TK) strategy K, given by (PK , 1 -- PK), The situation might be described by a game with three gambits, "Major  Attack," "Minor Attack," and "Display," with TK never choosing Minor Attack and T, never playing Major Attack, but it is  simpler to represent it in terms of two gambits and different degrees of damage. Then the payoffs for I versus I are given by  matrix (M1) with D, substituted for D, for K versus K by the same matrix with DK substituted for D, and for I versus K by (M2)  below.  K  pK 1 -   pK  Attack Display  p, Attack ~_.__= r 0  - V  K   1 - I7 V12  p, Display    __   176 MICHEL TREISMAN  We assume that the animals cannot identify which type an opponent belongs to -perhaps the destructive mutants fight more  vigorously rather than having visibly larger teeth-and thus each type employs the same strategy against all comers (these are  not necessarily the same for the two types) and we shall attempt to determine the stable strategies, I and K, for each type  and to discover which confers the greater fitness on the type employing it, for different assumptions about the values of the  parameters V, DI, and DK.  This game differs from the asymmetric contests discussed by Maynard Smith and Parker (1976) in that the latter consider  contestants which have an equal chance of occupying either of two asymmetric roles over a series of contests, whereas our two  types differ permanently in their payoff expectations. Thus there is no reason to expect a stable strategy common to both  contestants to emerge, as occurs in the asymmetric contests discussed by Maynard Smith and Parker (1976). Instead, each type  should increase the frequency of the gambit it finds most profitable, as long as it remains so, and thus tend toward a stable  pure or mixed strategy. But though the final values of p, and pK may be stable, this mixture of strategies is not necessarily  evolutionarily stable since one side may outperform and eventually displace the other.  If K is a stable, mixed strategy then pK will be the probability of attack which makes the gain which a Strong animal may  expect when it attacks an unselected member of the population, EI+K(Attack I K), equal to the expected gain when it displays.  Thus we may write  EI+K(Attack I K) = wV + (1 - w)[bK(V - DK)I2 -}- (1 - bK) VI  = E,+K(Display I K) = w(1 -pl) VI2 -I- (I - w)(I - bK) VI2  Here bK is substituted for pK since if there is no stable mixed strategy the solution for bK will not lie in the unit interval  and will thus not be a probability. This solution is  bK = (I -I-- p1w) VI(I - w) DK - (9)  Since V > 0, DK > 0, and 0 < w < 1, we must have bK > 0 but it may also exceed 1. When it is greater than 1, the stable  strategy will be the pure strategy K which has pK = 1. (It can be shown that if bK > 1 then E,+K(K) > EI+K(K') where K' - (pK  , 1 - pK ), 0 < pK' < 1.) Thus we define  PK = min(bK, 1).  (10)  Similarly, for strategy I,  Er+K(Attack I I) = w[bi(V - DI)I2 -f- (I - b,) VI -i- (1 - w)[(I -_ PK) V - PKDKI = EI+K(Display I I) = w(1 - bI) VI2 + (I -  w)(I -PK) VI2 (I I)  which gives  b, = [(I - (I - w) PK) V - 2PK(I - w) DK]IwDI .  (12)  GAME THEORY 177  Thus  p, = intermed(0, b,, 1). (13)  where "intermed(x, y, z)" is to be understood as "x, y, or z, whichever lies between the other two." The expression restricts  p, to the unit interval. If p, = b, and px = bK then  E,,K(Attack I K) = EI+K(Display K) = E,+K(Display I I) = E,+K(Attack I I) (14)  and therefore  px = -w(V + DI)pil(I -- w)(V + Dx).  (15)  Evidently Eq. (14) cannot hold unless both probabilities are zero. Thus at least one of the two strategies must be pure.  In order to assess the balance of advantage between the strains we require Ad,(I : K) and Ad,(K : I). These are given by  Ad,(I : K) = E,(I) - EI(K)  = pl[pr(V - D1)12 + (I - pi) V l + (I - pl)2 Vl2 - PKV - (I -px)(I -pr) Vl2  = [(I +p1)(I -PK) - 1] Vl2 -pr2DIl2 (16)  and  AdK(K : I) = EK(K) - EK(I)  = I'KLpx(V - Dx)12 + (1 -PK) V] + (I -PA)2 Vl2  - pjf(I - PK) V - PKDK1 - (I - pr)(I - px) Vl2  = fI - (I + PI)(I - PK)l Vl2 - px(px - 2p,) DKl2.  (17)  We have now developed the definitions required to analyze selection between types which differ in the damage they inflict,  when the differences in destructive potential are permanent and covert. In the following sections this analysis will be  applied for different degrees of damage.  DAMAGE LESS THAN THE VALUE OF THE PRIZE  We now examine the course of selection when the damage inflicted by the more destructive strain does not exceed the value of  the prize: 0 < D, < DK < V. If the level of damage inflicted by the original members of the population, DI, is low to what  extent will it be replaced by a higher value DK < V ?  178 MICHEL TREISMAN  Here pK must always be 1 (from Eq. (9)) and so b, becomes  b, = V/D, - 2(1 - w) DKIwD, . (18)  Then if  w > w,i = 2DKI (2DK + V - DI) (19)  we will have b, > 1 giving  w,l<w<1.  The symbol w,,l will refer to the value of w, the proportion of the wild type in the population, at which p,4 , the  probability of attack which characterizes type A reaches one and w,,o will be the bound at which p,,, becomes zero. "A" may be  any strain, including the wild type. Bounds for p, and pK are illustrated in Fig. 1.  PK=1  w PI PK  I I I  I   P1=1   WI1 2DK    v 20K-DI    a    d OcPl Ll   a    3    a    x`'10 _ 2DK    0 2DK +V    c    0    p1=0   NVK1 - D K -V    5K I I  I ~ I  I    O/-PK c1  Fir. 1. The bounds (in terms of the proportion of the population which consists of the wild type, T,) at which p, becomes 1 or  0 and at which pK becomes 1 are shown for selection between two types, T, and TK. For purposes of illustration values of w are  shown which may lie outside the unit interval.  GAME THEORY 179  For w >__ wil we have p, = pK = 1, giving   AdI(I : K) _ -(V -}- DI)/2 < 0 (20)  and   AdK(K :I) = (V + DK)I2 > 0. (21)  The expected return for the Strong exceeds that for the Weak (Eq. (5)) who must decline in numbers at least until w = w1l.  Below this point p, is less than l. We have  0 < p, = VID, - 2(l - w) DKIwD, < 1 over the range   w,o = 2DKI (2DK -I- V) < w < 2DKI (2DK + V - DI) _ wn . (22)  These limits rise as DK increases, w,o becoming I when DK = V.   As pK = 1 we have in general   Ad,(I: K) = -(V +pl2D,)I2 < 0 (23)  and   AdK(K : I) _ (V + (2p, - 1) DK)I2 > 0. (24)  For all values of w there will be an advantage in favor of type K, whatever p, may be, and thus selection will reduce w to 0.  If DK < V more destructive animals do better than the wild type: individuals inflicting greater damage replace those whose  aggressive vigor is less, so that a population containing two types is not stable as long as the damage inflicted in attack by  the more aggressive type is less than V. Thus members of a population to which matrices (Ml) and (M2) apply will undergo  selection for a uniform level of damage at least equal to V.  The analysis in this section has shown that if DK < V the more aggressive animals (Tx) do better than the wild type (TI).  Individuals inflicting greater damage replace those whose destructiveness is less. This means that the population is not  stable as long as the damage inflicted in attack by the more aggressive type is less than V. Although type K will completely  replace T, it will in its turn be wholly replaced by any further mutation producing a higher level of damage less than or  equal to V: TK will be replaced by TKif Dx < DK< V. In other words, as long as the original probability of attack (p, = 1)  is less than VIDI, the population will be wholly replaced by any new strain for which PK = 1 < VIDK , provided the difference  (VIDK - pK) is less than (VID, -p,). Thus selection should in the long run produce a homogeneous population with DK = V and pK  = 1: The ESS for this population will be a pure strategy requiring animals always to attack.  This is the conclusion if damage does not exceed the value of the prize. It establishes a lower limit for D, under the  conditions we have considered. Can we define an upper limit to it? The next section will look at the consequences if a strain  appears which inflicts damage greater than V.  180 MICHEL TREISMAN  DAMAGE GREATER THAN THE VALUE OF THE PRIZE  When D < V the population will evolve toward homogeneity with D, = V and p, = 1. If we relax this condition can we define an  upper limit to D and will the population still become homogeneous in its strategy? We start by considering a homogeneous  population of type T, in which initially all the animals inflict a level of damage in successful attack given by DI. If a  mutant strain Tx now appears, inflicting damage Dx greater than D, and also greater than V, and which is always successful in  attack against T' r, what will its fate be? The evolutionarily stable strategy within type K, i.e., the value of pK which will  resist challenge from other strategies executed by TK animals, can be derived from Eq. (25) below, which is an extended form  of Eq. (4). It assumes that K is the stable strategy and is adopted by a proportion, x, 0 < x < 1, of the Strong animals, and  K' = (P'K , 1 - P'K), P'K zA pK , is any alternative strategy. As before we substitute bK for pK in the equation. Since K is  stable for the mutant strain the expected return when K is played against I, K, and K' must exceed that when K' is employed,  i.e.,  E,+K+K'(K) > EI+K+K'(K~)  (25)  or  wE,(K) -}- (1 - w) xEK(K) + (I - w)(1 - x) EK.(K)  > wE,(K') + (1 - w) xEK(K') -{- (1 - w)(1 - x) EKK'),  which reduces to  [bK - p'K] [ (I(1 WP,) y - (xbK -f- (I - x) p'K) DK] > 0.  If we let  bK = (I +prw) V/(I - w) DK  as in Eq. (9), the inequality above becomes  (I - x)[bK -p'K]2 DK > 0,  so that Eq. (25) must hold for pK so defined. PK = 1 if bK > 1, which will be the case when  w > wKI = (DK - V )l (DK -f- PIV )'  Since it can be shown that WKI < w,o , if w = wK, then p, = 0, so we may write this bound more simply as  WKI = (DK - V)/DK . (26)  Similarly, pK = 0 if w < wKO = -1 /p, , which indicates that PK will never fall to zero.  GAME THEORY 181  If D,<V,w,l<1andsoforw>w,l,p,=1andpK=1.  For these values of p, and pK it follows from Eqs. (20) and (21) that selection will proceed against type I.  If V < D, then w,j > 1 and so p, must always be less than 1.  If p, < 1, either because selection has reduced w below w,l or because V < D, , we will have for wlo < w < min(w,l, 1), 0 < p,  < 1 and pK = 1. Then Ad,(I : K) and AdK(K : I) will be given by Eqs. (23) and (24). For p, = 1, Ad,(I : K) is negative and  AdK(K :I) is positive. Selection proceeds against type I, reducing w and so p, (see Eq. (18)) and as this happens Ad,(I : K)  rises and AdK(K :I) falls. When w is reduced to W1,, p, --_ 0 and both expressions are negative, and will remain constant with  any further fall in w. At this point  w,o Ad,(I : K) < (1 - w,,) AdK(K : I) (27)  so further fall there will be: Selection continues against type I until   we Ad,(I : K) = (1 - we) AdK(K : I). (28)  If w declines to a value less than we we will have   w Ad,(I : K) > (1 - w) Ad,(K : I) (29)  (if pK continues equal to one) and selection will act to increase the proportion of type I: Equation (28) determines a stable  equilibrium between the two types. Solving for we we obtain  we = (DK - V)IDK = WKl  (30)  Equilibrium lies at the lower bound to pK = 1. Since p, = 0 here, this equilibrium value is identical with that given by Eq.  (7), with appropriate substitution of symbols. (With p, = 0, the value of D, is immaterial.) Thus in the present case natural  selection will determine the balance between two types defined by Condition 3.  Note that the probability of attack which characterizes the resultant population strategy S, as seen by an observer who cannot  distinguish animals of type I from those of type K, is given by  PS = w-PI --f- (1 - we)pK = I - we = VIDK  and is the ESS, as must be the case when Condition 3 applies. At the point of equilibrium the Strong always and the Weak never  attack, and the evolutionarily stable strategy is realised by a population consisting of a genetically heterogeneous  membership with different individual policies.  We saw that when the damage inflicted is less than the value of the prize the population would tend towards a homogeneous  condition with D, = V and p, = 1. The present  48o/i6/3-2  182 MICHEL TREISMAN  analysis shows that a strain which inflicts yet greater damage will not wholly displace their weaker predecessors. Natural  selection will determine a stable balance between the two types when the proportion of the Strong is (1 - we) = V/DK, the  remainder being Weak. Thus the representation of the Strong will be inversely related to the damage they inflict.  Selection between the types may lead to a greater degree of uniformity than this argument may suggest. Consider, say,  poisonous snakes which engage in contests and which are capable of killing one another if they strike. Assume that the wild  type do not possess behavioral adaptations allowing them to bite a conspecific but that a Strong strain which may do this  appears. Since Dx , the cost of a death, is very large compared to the value of most prizes, the proportion of type K (VI D,)  will be low. If it is sufficiently low random variation may readily cause it to fluctuate down to zero, requiring that it be  reintroduced by mutation to be evident at all. Thus when an increase in Dx would be discrete and large (substitution of a  death blow for a minor form of combat) the population may be found to be homogeneously of the wild type.  Two questions now arise. Although the Weak and Strong together constitute a population which realizes the evolutionarily  stable strategy, it is intrinsically arbitrary that the strains placed in balance by the forces of selection are types I and K  and not some other pair. The result invites the intuition that we have investigated a special case of genetical heterogeneity,  that in which there are exactly two types, and that if the number of strains in a population exceeds two they will settle down  into a complex balance such that the resultant probability of attack is that defined by the ESS. We need to investigate the  consequences of adding an additional strain to two in balance, but before proceeding to do this a qualification to the  conclusion we have reached must first be examined.  STRATEGY SELECTION AND STRATEGY ADOPTION  The argument has proceeded on the assumption that the two types are immutable in their characteristics and selection can only  achieve some balance between them. We may refer to this as selection between types. But there is another possibility. The  statement in the previous section that the advantage terms, as given by Eqs. (23) and (24), will stay constant for w < w,o,  and the employment of this assumption in Eq. (29), with the consequent derivation of a stable balance at w = We, implicitly  assume that for w < we , pK = 1. But we have seen that we = wKi and so for w < we the stable strategy for the Strong type has  pK < 1.  However, pK will remain equal to one as w falls below the equilibrium value if type K is behaviorally rigid; i.e., a new  variant, type K' with pK< 1, must appear and be selected in order for the probability of attack by the Strong type to fall  below one. If so, it will normally be the case that before this can happen natural selection acting on the types already  present may restore the balance determined by Eqs. (28) and (29).  But there are two situations in which type selection will not proceed in quite this straightforward manner. In the first case  instead of all Strong animals evincing the same probability of attack there may be sufficient prior genetic variance in pK for  selection for  GAME THEORY 183  values less than one to proceed at a significant rate. We will refer to this as strategy selection. In the second case the  strategy employed by the Strong is not wholly innate but is affected by learning and may be rapidly responsive to recent  experience: When the circumstances change animals may adopt new strategies. We shall now examine the consequences when  strategy selection or strategy learning obtain.  For w < wKx , the stable value of pK is given by  pK = VI(1 - w) DK = VJV + (WK1 - w) DK] < 1  (31)  from Eqs. (9) and (10). If strategy selection or adoption are sufficiently rapid to produce an effect before type selection  has restored the equilibrium then for any value of w < we the value of pK given by Eq. (31) may be obtained. In this case,  from Eqs. (16), (17), and (31) we have  iv Ad,(I : K) = (1 - w) AdK(K : I). (32)  That is, if w takes any value less than we and pK takes the corresponding value there will be no selective pressure favoring  either type. Now w can be expected to drift between 0 and we . If w falls to 0 then the population will be homogeneously  Strong. But in this case type I animals may be reintroduced by immigration or mutation and they will be under no disadvantage  when this occurs until w exceeds we .  Suppose, for example, that a Strong strain with DK = 3V appears in a previously homogeneous population. Then their number will  increase until they form one-third of the animals. Since they always attack and the Weak never do, an observer who cannot  distinguish between the two types will conclude that the probability of attack in an encounter is one-third. If the Strong  continue increasing in number then the proportion of the weak will fall below wxi = I and Eq. (29) will apply. Now the Weak  will be more successful than the Strong and should be selected, provided the Strong's strategy of always attacking remains  inflexibly the same. Thus type selection may restore the proportion of the Weak type to wxr before a less aggressive Strong  mutant can appear and we will have a stable equilibrium with the Weak forming two-thirds of the population.  But if the strategy of the Strong is not wholly innate but is affected by learning and may be rapidly responsive to recent  experience, or if they are heterogeneous in their tendency to attack and selection for attack rate is more rapid than  selection for one type as against the other, then when w falls below wKi, say to w = 0.5, the Strong will reduce their  probability of attack (top, = a), in accordance with Eq. (31), before the representation of the Weak can recover. If so, Eq.  (32) will apply, and there will be no pressure to restore w to two-thirds. To the observer, the overall probability of attack  We saw that when there are two strains present with DK > V and type selection obtains the population will stabilize with the  proportion of the Strong equal to V/DK. Since the Strong always attack and the Weak never do the resultant population strategy  S is the ESS with ps = VIDK . But when selection for different attack probabilities is  184 MICHEL TREISMAN  rapid as compared with type selection or when learning determined by the overall utility of its behavior to the animal  determines its probability of attack then the proportion of the Strong will still rise to VIDK but may also drift to any value  higher than this level. For any value w < we the attack probability for the population will be ps = (1 - w)pK which whenp, is  given by Eq. (31) reduces to VIDK, the ESS. Between the lower limit and 1 the proportion of the Strong is unstable in that no  selective factor favors one value rather than another. When the ability to modify their behavior by learning is present in a  genetically homogeneous Strong strain the pressures of natural selection are muffled: the point of equilibrium for  behaviorally rigid animals becomes a lower limit for the flexible. The population will tolerate more than the equilibrium  proportion of potentially destructive animals if they can acquire a corresponding ability to restrict the expression of this  potential. They pay for their increasing representation by a corresponding restraint, so that their aggressiveness is  inversely proportional to their prevalence (Eq. (31)).  To the observer who cannot distinguish between the types the populations produced by type selection and by strategy selection  (or adoption) follow identical evolutionarily stable strategies. The two cases could be distinguished by historical  observations which might reveal that the proportion of animals with some proneness to attack varies over time above a lower  limit and that the value of pK for such individuals changes inversely with their proportion in the population.  THREE LEVELS OF DAMAGE  We have seen that a balance may result when two strains are present in the population, with Dx > V. If a third strain is added  does a more complex balance result?  Suppose that mutations have resulted in a population which contains three strains, T,, T_,, and TK, which differ only in the  magnitude of the damage they may inflict: D, < DJ < DK , and which occur in the proportions w, , wJ , and wK , w, + wJ -}- ZVK  = 1. Matrix (M 1) will apply to a conflict between two members of the same strain, and (M2) to a conflict between members of  different strains, with appropriate substitutions for D.  To discover the effects of selection we need to find the stable strategy adopted by each strain and compare the expected gains  attaching to each. The latter are given by  EI+J+K(I) = PIL(1 - pjwj - pKwK) V12 - pjwjDll2 - pjwjDJ - pKwKDKI  (I - p1w, - pjwj - pKwK) V12, (33)  EI+J+K(T) = PJP -{- PIW I - PKWK) V12 - pjwjDJl2 - PKwKDKI  -I- (1 - p,w, - pjwJ - pKwK) V12, (34)  EI+J+K(K) _-_ pKL(1 +plwl +pJw.) V12 -pKwKDK12l + (1 - p1w, - pjwj - pKwK) V12.  (35)  GAME THEORY 185  By setting the return for Attack equal to that for Display, as before, we obtain as the stable strategies for each of the  three types  (1 - (36)  PJWJ - PKWK)V - 2(p.,wjDJ +PKWKDK)   wjDj   - -   bJ + p,w! PKWK) V 2PKWKDK (37)  = (1   w1D1   bx +PIWJ +PJWJ)V (38)  = (1   WKDK   It follows that pK = 1 if and only if  (1 - wJ) DK - (1 +PJWJ)V w~ w Kl = DK + p,V  We shall let w',,i and w',,be the lower bound to p,, = 1 and upper bound to p,, = 0 (in terms of the proportion of the wild  type, T,) in a population containing three types. Equation (38) also implies that pK = 0 if  w, < w'KO = --(1 +PJWJ)/p, < 0.  We can conclude that for all values of w, , pK > 0. If px = 1, pJ will equal 1 if  2(1 - wJ) DK + wjDJ - zv jV wj > w n = 2DK + (1 + p1)V  and Pi = 0 if  2(1 - wJ) DK - WJV w, w Jo = 2DK + (1 +PI)V  For any fixed values of wJ , p, and pJ ,  W 'K1 < W 'JO < W 'J1  so that pJ will fall to zero before pK decreases below 1, and when pJ ---- 1, pK = 1.  When both pJ and pK equal 1 we have  __ 2(wiDJ + (1 - zvj) DK) 2DK -{- V - D,  (39)  and  w __ 2(wjDJ + (1 - wJ) Dx) (40) ,0 2DK -}- V  186 MICHEL TREISMAN For any fixed values of p, and w,,  w Ji < w to < w'n  thus we can write the bounds for pJ and pK more simply as 2(1 - wJ) DK -t- wjDJ - zvjV  w J,  2DK -r-- V 2(1 - wJ) DK - WJV  and  w1Jo =  W 'K1 (1 - wJ) DK - V  Ki D K  2DK + V  (41)  (42)  (43)  The bounds are illustrated in Fig. 2. If pK = pJ = p, = 1, we obtain  EI+J+K(I) < EI+J+K(J) < EI+J+K(K)  Fic. 2. The bounds (in terms of wI) at which p, becomes 1 or 0, pi becomes 1 or 0, and PK becomes 1 are shown for a population  containing three types, TI, TJ, and TK. Values shown may lie outside the unit interval.  GAME THEORY 187  so that selection will proceed against T, (and also T,,) in favor of TK . E,+,+#) will continue inferior to E,+,,+K(J) until  w, falls to w'..1, at which point pK = p,, = 1 and p, = 0, and E,+,,+K(I) = Ei+r+K(J) < E,+r+K(K). Thus both w, and w,, must  continue to fall, and wK to rise. For w, < w',,1, E,+,,+K(J) is always less than E,+r+ic(I) and thus T,, must eventually  disappear completely. With the population reduced to two strains T, will decline until w, = we = wK, , as given by Eq. (30).  We are now in the same position as before. If DK < V, wKl < 0, and a homogeneous population results. If DK > V a balance  between the two types will be obtained, with w,, Weak animals if type selection operates, or w < wKl if strategy selection or  adoption determines the result. In either case, the two types being indistinguishable, the population strategy apparent to an  observer will be (VIDK , 1 - VID01 the ESS implied by matrix (M1). Thus to the observer who cannot distinguish types or  determine the history of individuals, the situation will appear the same as that presented in the introduction, in relation to  which Maynard Smith (1974) assumed that one way in which a mixed strategy might be realized was by genetic heterogeneity in  the population. The contest studied here goes beyond that game in that it links the probability of attacking with the  probability of achieving victory-the Weak who never attack would never defeat the Strong in battle-and it enables us to derive  conclusions about the magnitude of the damage that may be inflicted.  The conclusions for Dx > V apply whatever the value of D, , as long as it is less than DK. This is reasonable since the weak  animals never attack and so D, is not expressed. There is no a priori upper limit less than the cost of a death to the values  of Dx which mutation might produce. If DK < V, TK displaces T, completely and thus Dx must tend toward V. If DK > V, a balance  may be established with T, . This will be unstable in that a yet more destructive mutant may appear, and if so will eventually  replace the previously Strong animals, now of intermediate strength, reducing the number of strains to two. Thus there will be  a tendency for the proportion of Strong animals at which the population is in balance to decrease (or the lower limit to this  proportion, when strategy selection obtains). Although at equilibrium, or when w < wxl in the strategy selection case, the  Strong and Weak are necessarily of equal fitness, when (1 - we) -VIDK is very small the strong are at risk of disappearing  entirely due to random fluctuations. The population would become and remain homogeneous until mutation or immigration  reintroduces a high value of D and so there will be no "absorbing state" for the population. It could also happen that a new  strain appears with D < D,. Type I would now be the intermediate strain and disappear. This too would contribute to a tendency  to polarize into two extreme strains. However, if there is any correlation between the damage inflicted in intraspecific  combat and the ability of an animal to capture prey or to defend itself from predation, this factor will oppose the  introduction of yet weaker strains.  It seems that the population modeled here will not be wholly stable. It will reduce to two strains and the Strong will tend to  become stronger and fewer, sometimes being reduced to zero by random fluctuations, to be reintroduced by mutation. If strategy  selection obtains the Weak may also disappear, and reappear. In either case, as we have seen, the observed strategy (Vf DK , 1  - V I D,) will not vary.  188 MICHEL TREISMAN  The instability of the Strong strain should be less the greater the value of V. If VIDK is reasonably large when DK has its  highest possible magnitude, the cost of a death, DK should eventually achieve this value and retain it stably since, VIDK  being large, the Strong are unlikely to disappear.  If we observe a random series of encounters, then the proportion that result in a "battle," rather than one or the other or  both animals Displaying, will be ps2, where S is the ESS for a population which may be genetically heterogeneous. The expected  damage inflicted in an encounter E(D), would then be given by  Thus  E(D) = ps2DK = [min(V/DK, 1)]2 DK = DK for DK < V,   = V2IDK for V < DK. (44)  E(D) < V.   (45)  The expected damage rises with DK as the latter increases to V and falls as it increases beyond this point.  The value of the prize sets an upper limit to the average injury inflicted. When p. < 1 we can estimate V from the observed  probability of attack and the mean damage taken over all encounters, R(D), or averaged over battles only, 13K  P = P(D)lfis = fisf),  Taking expectations from the point of view of the contestants, any member of the homogeneous population which results when DI  < V can expect E,(I) _ (V - D,)/2. We have seen that D, will rise until it equals V. As it does so E,(I) falls, reaching zero  when D, = V. When we have two strains, with DK > V for the Strong, then at the equilibrium established by type selection (or  for strategy selection or adoption, when the Strong equal or exceed (1 - we) of the population) the return which an individual  can expect is given by  EI+K(I) = (Vl2)(1 -" VIDK) = EI+K(K) = EI+K(I + K)(47)  It follows that when DK > V2/D, (i.e., for any value of DK when D, = V)  EI+K(I + K) > Ef).  (48)  individuals of either type will do better in the mixed population than wild type animals in the homogeneous population. It is  to the advantage of all to have some animals the threat of whose potential destructiveness "polices" the population.  Equation (48) might be seen as the basis for a process of group selection: mixed groups outperforming and replacing  homogeneous groups. But group selection has not  GAME THEORY 189  been assumed here. Although heterogeneous groups have an advantage over uniform groups, the replacement of the latter by the  former results solely from individual selection acting within a group, on the model presented here. There might, of course, be  further selective effects. Thus if animals can, at some stage, choose their associates, those of the wild type which choose to  affiliate to a mixed group will do better than those which select a homogeneous group. Also, if offspring tend to associate,  the possession of recessive genes for high destructive potential, ensuring a small proportion of such phenotypic descendants,  may be of advantage to all. In this case the proportion of Strong animals may be low without there being much risk that they  may disappear completely as a result of random fluctuations.  Note that the identification of groups which include Tx animals as "mixed" in the argument above assumes type selection (or  strategy selection with w > 0). A homogeneous group of type K is possible; in this case the ESS is determined by p, = V/D, and  results in  EK(K) = EI+K(I + K).  (For the mixed group p, = 0, pK = 1.) This homogeneous group represents the extreme of strategy selection in which w falls to  zero, pK falling to VIDK concomitantly.  The analysis in this section has suggested that the population will not achieve an equilibrium with more than two strains  present. Intermediate types are eliminated, resulting in a more or less stable balance between two levels of destructiveness.  Moreover it may be of general advantage that the population should contain some members of high potential destructiveness,  whether we consider the expected damage in an encounter or the expected return to individuals.  So far we have assumed that an animal's destructive potential is not evident to its opponent prior to its exercise. If we  relax this assumption, what effect will this have on the conclusions we have drawn?  WEAK AND STRONG DISTINGUISHABLE  We have assumed that when more than one strain is present they are not outwardly distinguishable. If, however, the level of  threat can be assessed, the Strong being recognizable as such, perhaps by virtue of the dangerous weapons they display, how  will this affect our conclusions ?  The importance of making this extra information available to a contestant is that it enables him to adopt different strategies  against different opponents. We may define p,,s as the probability that an animal of type A will attack an opponent of type B.  Then the stable strategy I which is developed by weak animals will be defined by a probability pof attacking an opponent of  the same type and a probability p,x of attacking an opponent of type TK. The strategy I is then given by the probabilities of  attack conditioned by the types of opponent [p, p,K] and similarly K, the strategy employed by the Strong, is given by [p,,  , pKK]. Each of the two probabilities defining a strategy will  190 MICHEL TREISMAN  tend to stability in the context of the subset of encounters to which it relates. The expected gains will then be  EI(I) _ (V - pIIDI)/2, (49)  EK(I) = (1 -pKI)(1 +puc)V12 -PIKPKIDK, (50)  EK(K) = (V -pKKDK)I2, (51)  EI(K) = V - (I - PKI)(1 +pIK)V12, (52)  and we may apply Eq. (4) or Eq. (5) or the conditions for an ESS which can be derived from them to determine where the  selective advantage lies.  The stable probabilities when Weak fight Weak or Strong fight Strong follow from the analysis in the introduction. By analogy  with Eq. (3) they are  pjj = min(V/DI , 1),  pKK = min(V/DK, 1).  Since  EI(Attack I K) = V > EI(Display I K) = V(1 -pIK)/2 (53)  it follows that the Strong will do best if they always attack when faced with a Weak opponent, whatever the value of pIK , and  thus  PKI = 1. (54)  If so   EK(Attack I I) = V - pKI(V -}- DK) < EK(Display I I) - V(1 - pKI)12 (55)  and thus   PIK = 0. (56)  It follows that for DI < D,v  EI+K(I) = WEI(I) -{- (1 - w) EK(I) < EI+K(K) = wEI(K) -i- (1 - w) EK(K).  Thus when strategy can be matched to the opponent a strain inflicting damage DK will always replace one inflicting DI . The  more DK exceeds V the smaller the probability, pKK = VIDK, that serious conflict will occur among the Strong-while ruthless  toward evident weaklings, the Strong will tend to be pacific among themselves-and this replace-  GAME THEORY 191  ment of the Weak by the Strong will be of benefit to all members of the resulting group since EK(K) = (V/2)(1 - VJDK) will  increase with DK .  This development will tend to take DK to the highest achievable level, perhaps producing a genetically homogeneous placid  population with occasional fights to the death. But another factor may modify the course of this evolution: Animals may appear  which "bluff," i.e., signal the possession of major armament although in fact they are weak. (See Maynard Smith & Parker  (1976) for a discussion of bluff in relation to asymmetric contests.) This will reduce the perfect information about each  other which members of the population would otherwise have. There is almost always scope for deceit of this sort since not  only the possession of arms but also the ability to use them effectively determine the damage which may be inflicted, and the  latter must always be more difficult to assess than the former. If such Pseudo-Strong appear, inflicting damage D, only but  indistinguishable from those threatening Dx , they will be in a better position than the manifestly weak. The latter are  doomed to disppear, but the Pseudo-Strong and the Strong together constitute an indistinguishable population such as the  population we have discussed. Thus, provided DK > V, there will be an equilibrium (or lower limit for the Strong) when the  Pseudo-Strong constitute We of the total population and the Strong the rest. So it will be greatly to the advantage of the  Weak, if they cannot evolve true strength, at least to simulate it and so evade extinction. It follows that a population of  distinguishable Strong and Weak will be under constant pressure to evolve into one whose members are indistinguishable.  The occurrence of a balance between Weak and Strong when they are indistinguishable, but not when they can be told apart,  arises from the different ways in which p, and PK in the former case and pand pKK in the latter are determined. In the  identical-appearing case, when w < WKI we have p, = 0, which gives E,(I) = Vl2, a greater value than is determined by p=  min(V/D,, 1). Similarly PK - 1 at this point, giving a smaller value of EK(K) than is obtained when pKK = V/DK.  When the present model applies we see that when animals are initially distinguishable they will evolve toward the state of  indistinguishability which has been assumed in the earlier analyses above.  Another restriction on the analyses above is the assumption that encounters are random, between unrelated animals. What  consequences will follow if we assume some fixed degree of genetic relationship between the animals in an encounter?  KINSHIP AND CONFLICT  When contestants are not chosen randomly from the population as a whole then it may arise that in a distinguishable proportion  of cases the opponents are genetically related. When this is so the arguments based on individual selection which have been  employed above require modification to take account of the effect of kin selection (Hamilton, 1964a,b; Maynard Smith, 1964).  Kinship should dilute the competitive aspect of a conflict and favor some degree of cooperation. With this in mind it is of  interest to note a formal similarity between the model of conflict employed above and  192 MICHEL TREISMAN  a game which has been much used in the experimental study of competitive and cooperative behavior, the Prisoner's Dilemma  (Coombs, Dawes, & Tversky, 1970).  Matrix (Ml) may be compared with the payoff matrix for the Prisoner's Dilemma:  J  Admit Deny   --_VAD(J) = 0  Admit VAA = 1 VAD(I) - 10  -VVDAW = 10   Deny VDAII) - _' VDD = 5  (M3)  The story of the dilemma (rephrased to facilitate comparison with the present model) is that two prisoners, I and J, have  applied for remission of sentence. Unfortunately, they have jointly committed an infraction of the rules which if discovered  will imperil their remission. Each is interviewed separately and must decide whether to Admit or Deny the misdeed. Admission  will earn some credit for honesty, Denial will avoid all penalties provided the other prisoner also Denies. But if he does  not, Denial will aggravate the first prisoner's offence. Illustrative values of the payoffs are given in (M3). V(I) is the  remission I can hope for and V(J) the remission J will receive for a particular combination of choices (where they are the  same for each prisoner we write simply V). Thus VDA(I) is the remission I will receive if I Denies and J Admits, and VDA(J) is  the remission J will receive in the same event: I Denies and J admits. If both Deny, nothing will be discovered and each will  receive full remission, VDD = 5 years. If I Admits what J has Denied, I will receive increased remission, VAD(I) = 10 years,  but J none at all: VAD(J) = 0. The reverse will result if J gives I away. If both confess, their remission will be small, VAA  = 1. In general, VAD(I) = VDA(J) > VDD > VAA > VDA(I) = VAD(J): the return for treachery is greater than that for cooperation,  which in turn exceeds that for confession (the competitive solution) while the results of misplaced trust are worst of all.  The rational strategy is for I to Admit, since VAA > VDA(I) and VAD(I) > VDD , so that whatever choice J may make the first  row dominates the second. Similarly, it is rational for J always to Admit. But if both follow this strategy the return is  small, while if in some way they bypass the uncertainty inherent in the game and achieve reliable agreement that both will  Deny the reward of this cooperation will be large.  This game has attracted experimental interest because of the opportunity it appears to offer to investigate competitive  behavior (the rational strategy) and cooperative behavior (both Deny), and it has been discussed in relation to the evolution  of selfish and altruistic behavior (Hamilton, 1971). We can see that when V > D the model for intraspecific conflict defined  by (M1) closely resembles the Prisoner's Dilemma: Attack dominates Display for any choice by the opponent but Display by both  gives a better return than Attack by both. It differs from the matrix for the Prisoner's Dilemma in that when  GAME THEORY 193  both animals Attack, or when both Display, they do not each receive the same reward in a given encounter-the matrix entries  show the expected rewards-but it is similar in that the rational strategy for each contestant is to Attack. And we have seen  that this is what they can be expected to do, since when L'" > D, I = (1, 0). The cooperative strategy would be for both to  Display. This is the strategy M = (0, 1) which as we saw earlier maximizes E,(M) if both play it: it followed from Eq. (1)  that E(M) = V,12. But it was not stable, being vulnerable to treachery by a mutant that Attacks. When V G D the first row no  longer dominates the second so that the game is no longer so closely analogous to the Prisoner's Dilemma, and a mixed strategy  becomes appropriate.  Thus strategy I represents strictly competitive behavior, as is appropriate to a situation of genetic competition shaped by  natural selection. But the individuals involved in an encounter may not always have strictly competitive interests. Possible  contestants may range from two randomly sampled members of the species through pairs of varying degrees of affinity to  genetically identical members of a single clone. Thus we now ask whether and to what extent kinship selection will modify the  evolutionarily stable strategies. We commence by considering genetically similar individuals whose encounters are described by  a symmetrical matrix such as (M1).  Genetic relatedness affects the degree to which a contestant may have an interest not only in his own gain but also in that of  his opponent. If they are unrelated his interest is wholly selfish. If they are genetically identical and equal in all  relevant respects (such as age and sex), his evolutionary interest in the success of his opponent will be as great as in his  own. We represent this by defining an index of selfish interest, s, which will represent the contestant's interest in his own  gain, (1 - s) being his investment in the success of his opponent. This will normally be a function of the degree of kinship  between the antagonists. If the opponent is wholly unrelated s = 1, if he is genetically identical s == 0.5. Thus 0.5 < s < 1  (this will be further qualified below) and we define the expected gain for an individual a in a contest with a related  antagonist b as  E(a, s) = sE(a) -{- (1 - s) E(b), (57)  where E(a) is the expected gain for a against an unrelated opponent.  To determine the stable strategy with these assumptions, I = (p,(s), 1 -p,(s)), we must find a value of p,(s) such that  Er+r(I, s) > E,+r(J, s)  (58)  for any strategy J, p.,(s) 0 p,(s), where  Ej+.,(I, s) = w[pr(s)jp(s)(V - D)/2 + s(1 - pr(s)) V )  + (1 - pr(s)){(1 - s) pr(s) V + (1 - pl(s)) Vl2}) + (I - w)Lpr(s){pj(s)(V - D)/2 + s(1 -pj(s)) V) + (1 -pi(s))f(1 - s) pj(s) V  + (1 -pr(s)) V/2})  = f1 + (2s - 1)(pl(s) - pj(s))(1 - w)] Vl2  -PI(s)fp..(s) + (PI(s) -pr(s)) w] D/2 (59)  194 MICHEL TREISMAN and  Er+r(j, s) = f1 - (2s - 1)(pr(s) -pj(s)) w] V12  - pr(s)fpr(s) -f' (pr(s) - pr( )) n'] D12.  (60)  Then Eq. (58) holds when  (b,(s) - pr(s))[(2s __ 1) V - p.r(s) D] - (b,(s) - pr(s))2 wD12 > 0. (61) We have substituted b,(s) for p,(s) as before. This  expression is valid if we substitute  which gives  b,(s) = (2s - 1) VID, (62)  p,(s) = min((2s - 1) VID, 1). (63)  It follows that if the animals are unrelated (s = 1) we obtain the same results as before. But if there is an affinity (s < 1)  then kin selection will reduce the probability of attack characterizing the ESS. In the extreme, when the contestants are  genetically identical, p,(0.5) = 0 for all values of the parameters. In terms of the Prisoner's Dilemma this is wholly  cooperative behavior, the strategy M which maximizes the return for the population provided all play it. Thus, for an  appropriate measure of s, Eq. (63) allows us to relate aggressiveness to affinity.  Just as E,(I) = V12 - p,2D/2, so  Er(I, s) = V12 -pr(s)2 D12.  When pr(s) = p, = 1 there will be no difference in the expected return for s less than or equal to 1.  When s < (V -}- D)12V then pl(s) = (2s - 1) V/D < 1 and E,(I, s) reduces to  Er(I, s) = ('12)(1 - (2s -1)2 VID). (65)  For p,(s) less than p,  E,(I, s) > E,(I). (66)  Thus when D is sufficiently large and s sufficiently low there will be an advantage in coming into conflict with kin rather  than strangers. Kin selection will decrease the probability of releasing a destructive attack against kin. And when the  destructive potential is sufficiently high this will produce an advantage for kin groups as compared with unrelated groups  which could favor selection for a tendency to associate with kin. Under these conditions consanguinity between neighbors may  be not merely an accident  GAME THEORY 195  of restraints on dispersal but may reflect positive selection. This might be opposed by the negative effects of loss of  heterosis if breeding is within the group. The end result could be a tendency to associate with kin except when seeking a  mate. Kin association has also been discussed by Hamilton (1971).  This analysis may be extended to two strains of kin for cases in which we can assume that the difference in destructive  potential between Weak and Strong is determined by a negligibly small proportion of the genetic complement, so that s has the  same value or similar values both within and between the two types.  We assume that contests occur only between opponents which share the same fixed value of the index of selfish interest s < 1.  For strains I and K, inflicting damage D, and Dx , we set the return for an Attack equal to that for a Display and obtain  - - - - -   br(s) (S 1)[I (1 Z') PK(SAV 2SPK(s)(1 w) DK (67)  -   wD,   and   - -   bK(S) (2s -1)(1 S)pr(s) wDK (68)  = +pl(s)w)V 2(1   _   (I - w) DK   Then PI(s) = min(b,(s), 1) and px(s) = min(bK(s), 1). We obtain the bounds   wn(s) D   _ 2sPx(s) DK 1)( PK(s)VK ))Di (69)  2spx( ) -I- (2s - -     - -   wio(s) (s) D (2s (70)  = 2SP2 ~ 1)(1 PK(s))V   '   PK() K + (2s - 1) PK(s)V   - -   wKi ) (s4 DK (2s 1)V (71)  DK + (2s '   -' 1) Pf(s)V + 2(s - 1) Pj(s) DK   and   -   WKO(s) (2s   = 1)V (72)  2(1 .   - s) pi(s) DK - (2s - 1) P,(s)V   When w  = wla(s), p,(s) = 0. If we substitute these two values in Eq. (68) and simplify we find that for s = 0.5, pK(s) = bK(s), but  for s > 0.5, PK(s) < bK(s). This indicates that at wa(s), pK(s) = 1, and that wK,(s) < wj,(s), these bounds becoming equal  when s = 0.5.  For b,(s) >, 0 we can now write  b,(s) = (2s - 1) wV - 2s(1 - w) DK (73) wD,  and for bx(s) < 1  (2s - 1)V (74) bK(s) - (1 - w) DK .  196 MICHEL TREISMAN The bounds become  (s) ^ 2sDK  wn 2sDK -}- (2s - 1) V - DI '  (75)  and  2sDK  wro(s) = 2sDK -F- (2s - 1) V '  (76)  DK - (2s - 1)V  wxi(s) = D K  3 Win(s)  (77)  as shown in Fig. 3. For a fixed value of s the advantage terms are  Ad1(I : K, s) = Ei(I, s) - E,(K, s) = V12 - pl(s)2 DI/2  - IPK(S){pr(S)(SV - (1 - s) DO + (1 -pr(S)) SV)  + (1 -PK(S)){pr(S)(1 - S) V + (1 -p1(S)) V/2}]  _ (2s - 1)((1 +p1(s))(1 -pK(s)) - 1) V/2 -pl(S)2 D1/2  + (1 - S) PAS) PK(s) DK (78)    C  O O  WK1(s)(  I  I )  FIG. 3. As Fig. 1: the bounds for related animals (s < 1).  w  WI1(s)  PK(s)=1  GAME THEORY 197  and  Ad,(K : I, s) = (2s - 1)(1 - (1 +PI(s))(I -PK(s))) V12  -PK(S)(PK(s) - 2spi(s)) DKl2 (79)  and we have  EI+K(I, s) _ [I - (2s - 1)(1 - w){1 - (I -PK(S))(I +pl(s))}] Vl2  - wpl(S)2 DI/2 - SPAS) PK(S)(I - za) Dx (80)  and  EI+K(K, s) = [1 + (2s - 1) w{1 - (I - PK(S))(I + pl(s))}] V/2 - px(s)[2(I - s) pl(s) w + p,(s)(I - w)] DK/2.  (81)  For PK(s) - 1 these reduce to  EI+K(I, s) = [1 - (2s - 1)(1 - w)] V/2 - wpt(s)2 DI/2 - sp,(s)(1 - w) DK (82)  and  EI+K(K, s) _ [I + (2s - 1) w] V/2 - [2(1 - s) PI(s) w + (I - w)] DK/2. (83)  If a Strong strain appears in the population and s > 0.5 then pK(s) = 1 for w > WK,(s). Selection will proceed in favor of the  Strong strain provided that  w AdI(I : K, s) < (1 - w) Ad,(K : I, s). (84)  For pK(s) = 1 an equilibrium value of w can be derived:  We(s) = (2spl(s) - 1) DK + (2s - 1)V (2pt(s) - 1) DK - pr(s)2 DI  (85)  If p,(s) = 0 and p,I(s) > 0, where J is an alternative strategy for the Weak strain, we have  Eli-AI, s) -.- [2(1 - s) + (2s - 1) w] V/2 > EI+K(J, s)  -_ [2(1 - s) + (2s - 1) w] V/2 - wpr(s)2 DI/2 - (I - w) sp.I(s) DK , (86)  which establishes that I = (0, 1) is the ESS for type I.  The equilibrium value will exist, i.e., 0 < we(s) < 1 for 0.5 < s < (DK -I- V)121'. For DK ->- V the upper limit to s is 1:  when this condition obtains the population will always be heterogeneous. For w = we(s)  EI+K(I r s) = EI+K(K, s) = EI+K(I + K, s).  48o/i6/3-3  198 MICHEL TREISMAN  The present equilibrium (at pK(s) = 1 and p,(s) = 0) may be compared with that determined earlier for p, = 1 and p, = 0. For  the present parameter values the population strategy is given by  Ps(s) = we(s) p1(S) + (1 - we(s)) pK(s) = (2s - 1) Vl DK .  The return given by this ESS is  E1+K(I + K, s) _ (V/2)(1 - (2s - 1)2 VIDK) = V/2 -ps(s)2 DK/2. (87)  This may be compared with Eqs. (47) and (65). It appears that the expected return for all members of a group increases as  relatedness increases and also with the destructive potential of the Strong strain, if one is present. In terms of the analogy  with the Prisoner's Dilemma the effect of kinship is to shift strategy in the cooperative direction.  For p1(s) = 0, we(s) reduces to  we(s) = DK - (2s - 1)V > we = D,- V . (88)  DK DK  The proportion of Weak animals at equilibrium increases as kinship increases. A stable population will contain a proportion  (2s - 1) VIDK of the Strong type. When s = 0.5, w does not fall below 1: the Strong can make no inroads.  Genetic relatedness is not the only factor that may distribute selfish interest. An individual of one sex will have an  evolutionary interest in an unrelated animal of the other sex when the latter is its mate, and this can be expressed in terms  of s in the same way. The more difficult to acquire, the more irreplaceable the mate is, the greater will (1 - s) be, and  therefore the lower the probability of attack. It follows that behavior between the sexes may not be symmetrical. If the male  maintains a harem an individual female may be more dispensable to him than he is to her. Thus s in Eq. (63) will be higher for  him than her: He will be overbearing, she submissive.  We have assumed (1 - s) < 0.5 but it is not always the case that interest in the other's success has an upper limit of 0.5.  Not only will genetic similarity determine interest but also reproductive potential. As a parent grows older his genetic  relationship to offspring of a given age does not change but the probability that he will engender further progeny declines  and thus the extent to which his genes will be represented in later generations becomes relatively more dependent on the  future breeding success of his offspring and less on his own. Thus it would be more accurate to describe animal a as having a  selfish interest s in his own reproductive potential, r,, , and a similar interest (1 - s) in the reproductive potential of  his opponent, rb . We can express this by substituting for s the index  s' = sr./(sr. + (1 - s) rb).  (89)  When ra = rb , s' = s, and when r,, = 0, s' = 0. Thus 0 < s' < 1 and p1(s') is then given by  p,(s') = intermed(0, (2s' - 1) V/D, 1). (90)  GAME THEORY 199  This has interesting implications for the relations between parents and young. When r,, < rb (and this is not necessarily the  case when the offspring is young, if infant mortality is taken into account) s' for the parent (a) will be less than s'  calculated for the offspring (b). Thus the parent will be less likely to attack the young than the young the parent (leaving  the requirements of dependence aside) and this difference may increase with age. If the fall in r2 exceeds the decrease in (1  - s) as the relationship becomes more distant, grandparents should show greater forbearance to grandchildren than parents to  children and should be well disposed toward a greater range of less closely related children. In general, r,, < r, implies  that p,(s') may fall to 0 even though genetic relatedness falls short of identity. This point has been more succinctly stated  by Dawkins (1976): "If the grandchildren have the greater expectation of life, genes for grandparent to grandchild altruism  have a higher selective advantage than genes for grandchild to grandparent altruism" (p. 103). The "doting grandparent  problem" has been discussed by Fagen (1976) in terms of Trivers' (1974) theory of parent-offspring conflict.  CONCLUSION  This paper has been concerned with examining the effects of the evolutionary constraints determining the magnitude and  frequency of aggression within a species. These constraints arise because agonistic encounters are a recurring part of the  social life of members of a species and therefore behavior in an encounter is an instance of a pattern whose expected effect  over the life of the animal will contribute to a greater or lesser degree to its overall fitness. A simple model of aggressive  encounters between two conspecifics was described and consequences were derived on the assumption that animals' potential for  inflicting damage is genetically determined and may differ but contestants cannot tell what type of opponent, Weak or Strong,  they are faced with. The model has previously been discussed by Maynard Smith and Parker (1976), who were concerned with  defining the evolutionarily stable strategy when there is an overt nongenetic difference between the contestants in a given  encounter, such as one having come on the scene before the other.  Maynard Smith's (1974) conditions for the establishment of an evolutionarily stable strategy were discussed, and an additional  condition was defined for a stable balance between two overtly indistinguishable strains of different potential  destructiveness neither of which is applying the ESS. When this condition applies the population strategy resulting when both  strains are present is evolutionarily stable.  It is assumed that fitness is directly related to expected gain in an encounter. Then the strategy which maximizes expected  gain for a contestant will maximize fitness and be favored by natural selection. The question arises whether and how such  selection will restrict aggression within a species and whether it will affect the composition of the species. Two aspects of  aggressiveness have been looked at: the probability of launching an attack, and the degree of destruction inflicted if an  attack is launched.  Initially, encounters were considered between randomly selected members of the species who appear similar to one another. We  are not concerned with encounters  200 MICHEL TREISMAN  between adults and infants or between the sexes. Only two aggressive options have been assumed: "Attack," any activity which  when reciprocal results in a victory by one animal and damage to the other; and "Display," a milder form of aggression which  does not result in significant damage to the losers. Populations consisting of one, two, or three strains, which differ only  in the magnitude of the damage they may inflict, have been studied on the assumptions, for the purpose of this analysis, that  the battle is always to the Strong, if battle is joined, and the Weak do no damage to the Strong.  In a population containing two types, I and K, which differ in their destructive potential, D, < Dx , it was found that the  stronger animals will wholly replace the weaker if Dx is less than or equal to the value of the prize, V. Assuming that  appropriate mutants appear, a homogeneous population will result whose members inflict damage D = V in attack. But if stronger  types arise, with DK > V, the population will become heterogeneous, the combination of the strategies of the two types present  being evolutionarily stable. If the Strong type is behaviorally rigid, i.e., there is little variability in attack rate,  either genetic or as a consequence of experience, then at equilibrium the population will contain a proportion VIDK of the  Strong type, the remainder being Weak. The former will always attack, the latter never.  But if there is variability, if selection may proceed for attack rate in the Strong strain, or this rate may be modified by  learning during the life of the animal, then VIDK becomes a lower limit to the proportion of Strong animals in the population.  Their number may rise above this limit. If so, their attack rate will decrease inversely, so maintaining the population  strategy S evolutionarily stable with ps = wp, -}- (1 - w)PK = VIDK . Thus selection may force Strong animals to be pacific,  or learning may induce them to be so, the latter muffling the tight control on the proportions of the two types which  evolution might otherwise enforce.  These conclusions apply to a game with a given value of the prize, V. For different games (different types of contest)  behavior may differ. When V is low the proportion of encounters in which an animal capable of inflicting damage DK will attack  will be less. It is also possible that the magnitude of the damage which an animal may inflict may differ for different games.  An extension of the model to three strains differing in aggressive potential showed that a more complex balance would not  result. Instead the intermediate strain will be wholly eliminated and a balance established between the strongest and weakest  strains. This should favor an underlying bimodality with regard to the distribution of the magnitude of the damage that may be  inflicted, rather than continuous variation, with modes at DK and D,. This hypothetical bimodality may be contrasted with what  is perhaps the common sense belief that "with man ... I think it is clear that most selfishness and much criminality arises  from evolved selfish potentialities which are latent in all of mankind" (Hamilton, 1971, p. 65), if we make the large and  risky extrapolation from the higher degrees of aggressive destruction considered here to, say, criminal violence.  An interesting feature of an evolutionarily stable mixture of two strains is that the expected return to the members of a  heterogeneous population is greater than that for a homogeneous population with D, < V, and the expected return to members of  the  GAME THEORY 201  mixed population increases with DK. The existence of a few members of the species who are potentially highly destructive  results in an overall population strategy which increases the expected return for all. This could have evolutionary  implications. Animals of type I possessing a choice and which can discriminate will do better to join heterogeneous rather  than homogeneous populations, assuming they adopt the appropriate behavioral strategy in each case. It may also be the case  that denies which are mixed will do better than those which are homogeneous and the former are therefore likely to provide  immigrants to the latter, some of whom will be of type k, so spreading heterogeneity.  The generality of this analysis has been extended by considering two special cases. The first is a population with two types  which can recognize each other. It was shown that the discriminable Weak would always be eliminated and so would be under  pressure to evolve, if not strength, then the appearance of it, thus producing a population of indiscriminable animals such as  that considered above. ("Bluff" has also been discussed by Maynard Smith & Parker, 1976.)  The second special case was that in which contestants are related. The results suggest that when genetic identity is not too  close Strong animals may invade the population, establishing an equilibrium at a value of w higher than that for unrelated  animals. For both homogeneous and heterogeneous populations the expected return for an individual will be greater in a kin  group than in a group of unrelated animals. Furthermore, it will be greater when the group contains two than when it contains  one type. The most favorable situation appears to be a well-policed extended family.  The examination of the model possible in this paper has obviously not been exhaustive. The model could be applied to a real  population only with caution. It is schematic and simplified; it has been considered in isolation from other factors which  might affect an animal's behavior, such as the cost of taking time from the pursuit of other goals (Wilson, 1975); it applies  only to animals roughly equivalent in the position they occupy in the species, such as adult males of similar appearance;  variables such as age and sex, random variation, and environmental and other factors which may affect the outcome of contests  and so blur the sharpness of the distinction between Weak and Strong have not been taken into account.  Nevertheless, the model makes predictions or raises questions which may serve as starting points for enquiry. For example, it  suggests that in contests with different values of V members of the same species may be expected to behave differently,  attacking more frequently the greater the magnitude of V and the less the magnitude of the damage inflicted in a given type of  The prediction that members of a population which contains a small number of highly destructive members will do better than  those in a homogeneous group suggests that the former situation is more likely to be found, an evolutionary consequence which  is potentially testable by observation. There is a certain instability inherent in this situation in that when type selection  obtains the higher DK is the lower V/D,, , the proportion of the Strong type, will become, with an increasing danger that they  may disappear wholly from a small population by genetic drift. But if V is reasonably large as compared with the highest  possible Du , the cost of a death, then damage should  202 MICHEL TREISMAN  stabilize at this level. Thus, for example, when mating opportunities are few, fights to the death for this prize may well  occur.  The model suggests that a low proportion of highly destructive encounters may occur in natural populations. Wilson (1975) has  observed, on murder in animals: "The annals of lethal violence among vertebrate species are beginning to lengthen ... murder  is far more common and hence "normal" in many vertebrate species than in man" (p. 246). Despite this conclusion, the  immediately following statement, "I have been impressed by how often such behavior becomes apparent only when the observation  time devoted to a species passes the thousand-hour mark" (Wilson, 1975, p. 246), suggests that, in view of the number of  contests which must surely be seen in 1000 hours of observation, extreme violence may be inflicted by relatively few animals,  or only infrequently, which accords with the present model. The observations do not suggest that it represents an extreme,  often approached, sometimes reached, of a continuum of violence. However, data need to be examined with this question in mind.  The finding that kin selection increases the magnitude of the benefits received by members of the group suggests that it may  be of advantage to an individual, if he has the choice, to associate with related animals. Selection might then favor seeking  a mate outside the group because of the benefits of avoiding inbreeding depression.  The suggestion that selection may favor kin association is favored by evidence for a high degree of relatedness within groups  of social carnivores and primates (Hamilton, 1975). The explanation offered by Hamilton (1975) is that this is a protection  against parasitic behavior in relation to group hunting: "the more cooperation is involved in any endeavour the more scope  there is for the inconspicuous idler" (p. 145).  One traditional question which has not been considered here is the provision of information to an opponent. Maynard Smith  (1974) has argued that a contestant should not do this, but in a different context. It is evident that information often is  given to an opponent which may indicate a low potential for continuing the contest, such as displacement activities, the  dilution of signals of threat with those of fear, stammering, blushing, and so on. This situation might be explained by a  modification of the present model in which escalation from display to attack is gradual and the cost of an encounter is less  when it ends quickly than when it takes more time. A contestant who provides veridical information that the probability of his  escalating to complete attack is low might provoke his opponent to immediate escalation, thus bringing the contest to the same  end that it would reach without this information but more rapidly and cheaply. Why, it might be asked, does he not just turn  tail and run ? The answer may be that if neither animal gives signs of its state the decision to give up must be taken at a  random moment. But at any time if one waits a little longer the opponent may flee instead, and so the game becomes a "war of  attrition" (Maynard Smith & Parker, 1976) and may take a long time. Whereas if each animal provides signs whose relative  intensities can be measured against each other these can be used to predict the outcome of the contest and so bypass its full  cost, to the benefit of both contestants. However, this has not been considered formally.  The restrictions on aggressiveness within a group, based on individual advantage, which have been analyzed here support  Dawkins' (1976) comment: "Maynard Smith's  GAME THEORY 203  concept of the ESS will enable us, for the first time, to see clearly how a collection of independent social entities can come  to resemble a single organized whole" (p. 90).  ACKNOWLEDGMENT  This paper was written while in receipt of support from the Medical Research Council. I would like to thank R. Dawkins for  useful comments.  REFERENCES  COOMBS, C. H., DAWES, R. M., & TVERSKY, A. Mathematical psychology. Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall, 1970.  DAWKINS, R. The selfish gene. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 1976.  FAGEN, R. M. Three-generation family conflict. Animal Behaviour, 1976, 24, 874-879. HAMILTON, W. D. The genetical evolution of  social behavior, 1. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 1964a, 7, 1-16.  HAMILTON, W. D. The genetical evolution of social behavior, II. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 1964b, 7, 17-51.  HAMILTON, W. D. Selection of selfish and altruistic behavior in some extreme models. In J. F. Eisenberg & W. S. Dillon (Eds.),  Man and beast: Comparative social behavior, Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D. C., 1971. Chap. 2, pp. 57-91.  HAMILTON, W. D. Innate social aptitudes of man: An approach from evolutionary genetics. In R. Fox (Ed.), Biosocial  anthropology. London: Malaby Press, 1975. Pp. 133-155.  MAYNARD SMITH, J. Group selection and kin selection. Nature (London), 1964, 201, 1145-1147. MAYNARD SMITH, J. The theory of  games and the evolution of animal conflicts. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 1974, 47, 209-221.  MAYNARD SMITH, J., & PARKER, G. A. The logic of asymmetric contests. Animal Behaviour, 1976, 24, 159-175.  MAYNARD SMITH, J.,& PRICE, G. R. The logic of animal conflict. Nature (London), 1973, 246,15-18. TREISMAN, M. Predation and  the evolution of gregariousness. I. Models for concealment and evasion. Animal Behaviour, 1975a, 23, 779-800.  TREISMAN, M. Predation and the evolution of gregariousness. II. An economic model for predatorprey interaction. Animal  Behaviour, 1975b, 23, 801-825.  TREISMAN, M. The evolution of sexual reproduction: A model which assumes individual selection. Journal of Theoretical Biology,  1976, 60, 421-431.  TRIVERS, R. L. The evolution of reciprocal altruism. Quarterly Review of Biology, 1971, 46, 35-57. TRIVERS, R.  Parent-offspring conflict. American Zoologist, 1974, 14, 249-264.  WILLIAMS, G. C. (Ed.). Group selection. Chicago: Aldine-Atherton, 1971. WILSON, E. O. Sociobiology. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard  Univ. Press, 1975.  REcEivED: September 21, 1976; REVISED: August 3, 1977