10.1016/0022-2496(77)90027-x
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 15, 145-168 (1977)  A Qualitative Model for the Dynamics of Cognitive Processes  DONALD G. SAARI  Department of Mathematics, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60201  A qualitative model is constructed for adaptive processes and, in particular, for Piaget's theory of cognitive development.  One of its main features is to describe the threshold period between stages of development. The basic approach is to isolate  some general properties of Piaget's theory, and then use Thom's catastrophe theory as the major tool to obtain a geometric  representation for a certain aspect of this theory.  INTRODUCTION  The goal of many theories in psychology is to explain behavior resulting from conflicting controls-a conflict which may lead  to a threshold effect. Thus a complete description both of the behavior manifesting this "threshold period" and of the  behavioral patterns before and after this period are needed. For example, portions of E. Erickson's theory of the different  stages of mankind can be viewed in these terms. Here crisis periods describe transition between stages.  Few theories of this type are represented in terms of qualitative models. One, of the complications is the discontinuity in  behavior observed in the "threshold period." Also, since we are dealing with concepts for which only a general and, at best,  first approximation of their ultimate description is available, such a task of constructing a model seems somewhat futile or  premature.  However, this need not be the case. By appealing to some recent advances in mathematics, results primarily due to Thom (1969,  1972), models can be constructed which represent these traits in a generic fashion. Indeed, it seems clear that this theory  initiated by Thom, called catastrophe theory, can and will serve as a valuable tool in the study of the "inexact sciences,"  particularly in the study of threshold phenomena. Of equal importance is the fact that the resulting models are qualitative,  geometric, simple, and their details can be made accessible to nonmathematicians.  This is what we do here. We shall use catastrophe theory as a tool to construct a geometric model which captures some of the  gross aspects of an adaptation process with an emphasis on cognitive development. In particular, our model will be based upon  Piaget's theory (1963, 1971). We choose the study of cognitive processes because various aspects of the resulting model  suggest generalizations and/or extensions to other theories involving partially conflicting controls, in particular, to other  adaptation processes. Indeed, Piaget's theory is primarily a study of adaptive processes. On the other hand, in the study of  cognitive development the basic invariant controls are  145  Copyright 1977 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. ISSN 0022-2496  146 DONALD G. SAARI  reasonably well defined and manageable (with respect to the model). Furthermore, they lend themselves to a dynamical  description. Thus one part of our discussion is an emphasis on the process of attaining a given developmental state, rather  than the state itself.  In addition to Thom's catastrophe theory, some of my ideas were influenced by a paper by Zeeman (1976) where he constructs a  dynamical model for the heart.  2. COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT-MACRO-THEORY  Various theories of cognitive development are described in terms of stages. The criteria usually are the following: (i) within  a stage there is a continuous evolutionary development from a crude to a refined grasp of the material accessible to that  stage, (ii) the structure of a stage is such that it serves simultaneously as the attainment of a previous stage and as the  springboard for the next, and (iii) the order of succession of the stages is constant.  Implicit in such a theory is the notion of discontinuity of the developmental process -the period of movement from one stage  to the next. Indeed, if such a period of discontinuity is not admitted, then the stages would constitute, at best, arbitrary  or convenient demarcation points in a continuum. Instead of a theory of stages, a discussion in terms of a continuous change  would become more appropriate.  While the existence of this discontinuity seems to coincide with observations-and it is characteristic of other theories  leading to a "threshold"-it also seems to be at odds with the basic requirement of stability inherent in criterion (i).  Namely, on the one hand, we require the model to remain impervious to small changes, yet on the other hand we assert that  small perturbations at some distinguished point can result in a precipitous change in developmental level. It is this seeming  inconsistency in what is required of a model which is the source of difficulties in a stage-dependent theory. For example, in  an expository book on the Piagetian theory, Furth [1969, p. 28] cautions that "A theory of stages remains incomplete... as  long as it does not clarify the Contradiction between two concepts of development-the one stressing the complete continuity,  and the other the absolute discontinuity of stages."  A partial purpose of this paper is to show that no such contradiction need exist. In fact, catastrophe theory suggests that  the coexistence of these dual concepts of stability and discontinuous change between stages may be a most natural and even, in  some sense, a "stable" occurrence.  Models in the physical sciences incorporating this seemingly paradoxical situation are well known; capacitors and lightning  are two examples. This type of notion has been abstracted and studied in differential equations under the heading "relaxation  oscillations" (for example, Wasow, 1965; Levinson, 1950; and Sibuya, 1960). However, these physical phenomena are described in  terms of well-developed and very precise mathematical models. What about those sciences for which a sharp model is not yet  applicable and only a general qualitative picture would be meaningful?  This is where Thom's catastrophe theory comes in. He characterized the local generic  COGNITIVE PROCESSES 147  behavior of such singularities for (gradient) vector fields which depend upon various parameters (controls) where the number  of controls is less than or equal to 4. He used some of these results to construct biological models (Thom, 1969; 1972). Also,  see Zeeman (1971, 1973, 1976). We shall employ some of these ideas in our discussion of the geometry of stages.  In order for a discussion of the geometry of stages to be meaningful, it must be accompanied by a description of the laws of  transition of this stage-hopping evolution. That is, the geometry must be described in terms of the dynamics governed by the  underlying theory of cognitive processes. Consequently, our discussion of stages will be imbedded in the topic of a dynamical  model for cognitive development.  As stated earlier, we select one theory, the Piagetian model, as a vehicle to communicate the basic ideas. Thus, the main  thrust of this communication is to propose a qualitative model which describes in mathematical terms my interpretation of some  of the basic tenets of the stage-dependent aspects of the Piagetian theory. However, we discuss only the geometry of the  stages of development and the dynamics of transition. That is, we do not discuss the logico-mathematical models for the stages  given by Piaget (see, for example, Piaget, 1971; Flavell, 1963). The stages are denoted only as "higher" or "lower" levels of  development. The fact that the behavioral characteristics of the stages are not needed for this description should simplify  the transferal of ideas from this model to other situations. In particular, it helps to isolate the behavior of adaptative  processes, a task which is very easy because of the nature of Piaget's theory.  While the proposed model turns out to be very straightforward (indeed, only an elementary knowledge of mathematics is needed  to comprehend it) it is of greater interest in that if the interpretations given here are correct, then, at least in a local  sense, this is the only possible stable geometric model. This local uniqueness statement is part of catastrophe theory and it  follows from the number of parameters we use.  In our discussion, we present the model on two levels. The first, which is the substance of the present paper, is a global  picture of the transitions between stages. This corresponds to parts of Piaget's equilibration-equilibrium model. Here we  shall concentrate on providing a geometrical representation for the Piagetian "discourse" about the dynamics of cognitive  processes, rather than a direct formalization of them. While this is more restrictive, it is by no means trivial; it is of  importance to the study of cognitive processes since the structure of the Piagetian discourse is an essential part of the  Piagetian theory.  Also, this structure is complicated by the various interdependencies required of the basic invariants which are introduced. It  appears that this structure is better conveyed by the geometrical language than by the natural language. In a second paper we  shall concentrate on the "local" properties of the Piagetian theory; this will be more of a direct formalization of dynamics.  At that time the processes and interaction of assimilation and accommodation (see Section 3) will be investigated in more  detail, and that paper will reflect the fact that the Piagetian theory is highly task specific. Indeed, at that time problem  solving and problem-solving ability will play a major role (also, see Saari, 1976).  In this study we selected the Piagetian theory for the pragmatic reason that we are  148 DONALD G. SAARI  somewhat more familiar with it than other theories, but primarily for the mathematical reason that this hitherto descriptive  model is rich in concepts which beg to be described in mathematical terms. It turns out that for the most part the Piagetian  theory is very receptive to such a study, and it is in agreement with predictions based on some basic mathematical assumptions.  3. FUNCTIONAL INVARIANTS  Basic to Piaget's constructive theory of cognitive development are the functional invariants of organization and adaptation.  Adaptation is further subdivided into the invariants, assimilation and accommodation (see, for example, Piaget, 1971). An  oversimplified view of Piaget's theory is that cognitive development takes place with the organization of internal structures.  However, this organization cannot be accomplished until there is a coordination of the traits assimilation and accommodation.  The model works as follows: The environment is meaningless to the organism until it has been interpreted in terms of its  existing structures. This is the function of the invariant assimilation. It takes the environmental stimulus and relates it to  the reacting organism. That is, it expresses an inner agreement, or sameness, between an environmental phenomenon and the  structure within the organism. However, this process of selectively adapting those aspects of the environment which are  meaningful to existing cognitive structures cannot be entirely successful; the environment is not infinitely malleable. This  is where the invariant accommodation comes in.  While assimilation is an inward-directed function, the taking in of data, accommodation is an organism outward-directed  tendency of the inner structure to adapt itself to a particular environmental event. That is, accommodation is the tendency to  achieve an agreement between the structure and the environment.  Clearly, the processing of environmental data involves both of these invariants. "Assimilation can never be pure because by  incorporating new elements into its earlier schemata the intelligence constantly modifies the latter in order to adjust them  to new elements. Conversely, things are never known by themselves, since this work of accommodation is only possible as a  function of the inverse process of assimilation" (Piaget, 1963, p. 6).  A most crucial observation, which will be needed for the construction of the dynamical model, is that the invariants  assimilation and accommodation are basically in conflict with each other. Indeed, the first tries to match and mould  environmental messages to existing structures, while the second tries to change and interpret the structures to match the  message. Clearly chaos must reign until some coordination or accord can be attained. This is the role of the invariant  adaptation. That is, it is the process whereby assimilation and accommodation attain an equilibrium state. However, we also  use adaptation to include assimilation, accommodation, the equilibrium state, and the process. Since one use of the word  pertains to dynamics and the other to a state, there should be no confusion.  It is not until this "external to internal" process has stabilized that "knowing behavior"  COGNITIVE PROCESSES 149  begins. It is at this equilibrium point that the invariant organization performs its internal process of coordinating  schemata, the parts with the whole, etc. (see, for example, Flavell, 1963; Furth, 1969, and Piaget, 1971).  Notice, adaptation, and organization are very closely connected. "The `accord of thought with things' and the `accord of  though with itself' express this dual functional invariant of adaptation and organization. These two aspects of thought are  indissociable. It is by adapting to things that thought organizes itself and it is by organizing itself that it structures  things." (Piaget, 1963, p. 8).  An increase in the degree of sophistication of organization with the improved coordination of the totality of existing inner  structures gives rise to a higher level of cognitive development. But this indissoluble bond between adaptation and  organization, this concept whereby "It is by adapting to things that thought organizes itself," implies that any improvement  in the level of organization must be discussed in terms of concomitant changes in the level of assimilation and accommodation,  plus the strength of the stabilizing efforts of the adaptation process. It is this relationship we model. In doing so we  initially combine the net effects of the improvement of the levels of organization and the manifestations of this improvement  into a single variable which we call the developmental level. We mean "improvement" in the sense of a more complex  organization.  In what follows we represent each of the invariants assimilation and accommodation on a one-dimensional scale. This is a  drastic reduction, but it pays the dividend of simplifying the problem to a manageable level-one which permits our goal of  providing a geometrical language for the Piagetian discourse. In this reduced situation, we describe the interaction between  these basic invariants. A second advantage of this reduction will be mentioned later.  We now give a mathematical interpretation of this theory by depicting it graphically in a three-dimensional Cartesian  coordinate system. Increasing values along the X and Y axes indicate, respectively, higher levels or degrees of sophistication  of the invariants, assimilation and accommodation. Increasing values on the Z axis represent improving or higher developmental  levels. For purposes of identification, the invariants, assimilation and accommodation, will be called controls, and a point  in the assimilation-accommodation plane, that is, a point in the X-Y plane, will be called a control point, or a point in  control space.  The bond between organization and adaptation is represented as an unknown (and perhaps multivalued) mapping from the levels of  assimilation and accommodation to the level of organization. That is, it is represented as a mapping from control space to the  developmental-level axis. This can be graphically represented as a surface in the three-dimensional space, that is, a surface  showing the developmental level corresponding to the equilibrium state of the control variables. If p = (pl , p2) is a point  in control space (pi and P2 correspond, respectively, to the levels of sophistication of assimilation and accommodation), then  the distance above this point to the surface corresponds to the degree of development (see Fig. 1).  But how can we be assured that a correct or meaningful representation of the effects of the controls is some sort of smooth  surface? Couldn't it require some mathematically  150  DONALD G. SAARI  pathological description? Piagetian theory indicates that this is not the case since the basic requirement for this  stage-dependent theory is that at a given stage the improvement in development depends smoothly upon the controls (condition  (i) in the previous section). Thus, at least locally, we would expect the representation to be a smooth surface.  FIG. 1. The equilibrium surface in the assimilation, accommodation, developmental level space.  The purpose of the adaptation process is to coordinate these controls. That is, at a given level of sophistication for the  controls, the adaptation process adjusts and changes the organizational structures in an attempt to reach a state of  equilibrium. Using our geometrical notation, the adjustment process is an attempt to adjust the complexity of the structures  to reach surface M. Geometrically, this can be modeled as a vector field (see Fig. 2). The vectors force the coordinating  process of a point in control space to  FIG. 2. Adaptation vector field forcing the resultant of point p to the equilibrium surface.  COGNITIVE PROCESSES 151  the equilibrium surface. Since the process depends upon the location in control space, the vectors are parallel to the Z axis  and directed toward the surface. We hypothesize that this is a smooth continuous process, that is, we have a smooth vector  field (in the sense of differentiability). Since it changes direction as it passes through the surface, the vector field must  have the value zero along the surface. This corresponds to the notion that the adaptation process is completed on the  equilibrium surface.  Analytically, the above "adaptation vector field" can be represented as some differential equation  dZl dt = I f (Z, p).  This captures the fact that at a certain control point p, adjustments are made in the complexity of the developmental level,  and these adjustments depend upon both the value of p and the current level of the organizational structure. n is a positive  parameter we introduce for flexibility, and it will be discussed in more detail in a following paragraph. The equilibrium set  for this equation is given by E _ {(Z, p) I f (Z, p) = 0}; the zero set of f. Clearly M is a subset of E.  We are now faced with a technical problem, namely how can we be assured that solutions of Eq. (1) will tend to approach M ? In  the setting where Z is one dimensional, this is no problem. But in a later section Z will be permitted to be a vector in a  larger dimensional vector space. Consequently, we will be admitting the possibility of limit cycles, etc., that is, there may  be bounded limiting solutions of the differential equations which are not in equilibrium. All of this violates the spirit of  the above discussion, and in particular it runs counter to the stability requirement posed in Section 2 whereby equilibrium  must be approached.  A widely accepted method of ensuring this type of equilibrium condition imposed by the Piagetian theory is to require f to be  a gradient vector field; that is f (Z, p) = VF(Z, p) = aFlOZ) for some function F: IR3 -> 1181. More general conditions can be  found, but this is a reasonably general yet simple condition to impose. (It also plays a role in applying catastrophe theory  to this discussion.) Furthermore, we assume that F is of the form that no solutions of Eq. (1) tend to infinity. Such a  solution would be inadmissible since it would correspond to an adjustment procedure which is progressively leading to a  stronger disorganization.  Under these technical assumptions, solutions of Eq. (1) (with p held fixed) are either on E, or they tend to those portions of  E corresponding to local maxima of F. Therefore, M is the portion of E corresponding to these local maxima points, namely M is  the portion of E which serves as an attractor for the vector field.  Finally, assuming F is a smooth function, that is, it is differentiable as many times as we need, we can assume that .E is a  smooth two dimensional surface in 1183. This follows from Sard's theorem. If (VF)-i (0) is not a smooth manifold, then a  slight perturbation of F will make it so.  This dynamic description partially displays a geometric representation of the bond between the invariants, organization and  adaptation. It gives the adjustments in the developmental level needed to minimize conflict induced by the controls. As long  as conflict between assimilation and accommodation exists, we cannot expect the invariant  152 DONALD G. SAARI  organization to operate in an efficient fashion. The above description shows how the adaptation vector field aids organization  by attempting to minimize this conflict; that is, solutions tend to Z.  On the other hand, changes in adaptation, more specifically, changes in the level of sophistication of assimilation and  accommodation, cannot be expected unless some order has been imposed by the invariant organization. Without a well-defined  stable order, it is difficult for the process of assimilation to match messages to some structures. A similar statement holds  for accommodation. Thus we would not expect changes, at least major changes, in the values of p to occur until the solution of  Eq. (1) (corresponding to the value of p) is "near" the surface M.  Since we expect both processes of organization and adaptation to be functioning simultaneously these last comments impose a  constraint on the movement of a point in control space. This is a constraint the invariant organization is imposing upon  adaptation, and it completes the cycle of interdependency between these invariants. Mathematically, motion in the p control  space reflecting changes in the invariants, assimilation and accommodation, is restricted to be such that the solution of Eq.  (1) is "near" surface M. This can be expressed analytically by using parameter n and calling on the literature of singular  perturbations.  Intuitively what happens is the following. If parameter p remains fixed, then the solution tends asymptotically to the  equilibrium surface. The larger the value of 7), the stronger the force and the quicker the solution approaches this surface.  If the point p moves "slowly" in control space, then it can be shown (see, for example, Wasow, 1965) that the resultant of the  two motions (the adaptation process and the movement of p) stays near the surface. Thus for large values of ,7 and slowly  moving p, the changes in the developmental level "appears" to be solely a function of p. This will be discussed in greater  detail in a later paragraph.  "Slow movement" of point p means that its speed is small with respect to the value of 77, i.e., larger values of -q can admit  "faster" movements of the point without violating the above paragraph. Indeed, mathematically, -q = oo admits any finite  velocity for p. Thus we assume a "large" value for 77. I suspect that the value of 77 as distinguished from the value off (Z,  p), will depend upon how often the controls are used. Perhaps it has a physiological basis, and it may even depend upon time,  that is, maturation processes. Thus we should expect differences in its strength from individual to individual.  The theory of singular perturbations shows under what conditions the solutions of equations 77-12 = f (Z, p) plus an equation  describing the dynamics on p can be reduced, or more precisely, uniformly approximated by the solutions of the equation 0 = f  (Z, p) and the dynamics on p. One of the conditions is, naturally, that 77 is "large" so that the term n-1Z is "small" or  "close to zero" where "large" is measured in terms of the velocity of the movement of p as given by the dynamics of p. Since  the proofs establishing the validity of this type of statement depend upon this relative scale, the relationship can, of  course, be reversed, and that is what we do here.  That is, instead of allowing the dynamics of p to determine what values of 7) are "large" enough, we impose the condition that  the value of q restricts the upper bound on the velocity of p. We can do this since we have not specified the dynamics of p,  and in general,  COGNITIVE PROCESSES 153  these dynamics must be indeterministic to reflect individualistic differences. The restraint on the velocity of p can be  qualitatively described as being such that Eq. (1) dominates, at least until 7, is near M. Details can easily be supplied by  mimicking the proofs found in Wasow (1965).  With this notation, the discussion of the relationship between organization and adaptation is reduced to a discussion of the  geometry of the surface passing through the space. Correspondingly, this surface is determined by the zero set of function f  (Z, p). Once this surface is known, all we need do is trace the evolution of a point in control space and follow the image of  this point on the equilibrium surface to observe developmental changes (see Fig. 3). This is the goal of the next 'section.  FIG. 3. The evolution of a point in control space and its image on the equilibrium surface.  4. LOCAL PROPERTIES OF THE SURFACE  The whole model now centers around the choice of the equilibrium surface in the "control-developmental-level" space. As we  pointed out, this selection is most crucial since it will reflect the basic properties and consequences of the model.  Therefore, at this point we consider first the properties each developmental stage should possess, and then interpret these  requirements in terms of conditions on the surface and the functions f and F. It is at this point where catastrophe theory  simplifies our discussion. It will turn out that the conditions we impose upon function f select, at least in a qualitative  sense, the zero set of function f (which is the surface).  1. Our first conditions are dictated by a realistic appraisal of the state of the art. It is impossible at current levels of  psychological investigation to hope for more than a crude qualitative approximation to the actual process of cognitive  development. Also, current knowledge is in terms of general characteristics rather than subtle and rare behavior. Indeed, in  the Piagetian theory, the described behavior in terms of assimilation and accommodation is based upon experiments and the  observed behavior of large number of individuals representing the middle ground, rather than the exceptional person.  154 DONALD G. SAARI  Mathematically this means it would be useless to attempt to find an exact equation for F(Z, p); it is useless to attempt to  find a model with tolerances measured in millimeters when the error level of our knowledge is still measured in kilometers.  The best we can do is discuss this problem qualitatively by searching for a model which is representative of a wide class of  surfaces giving rise to a similar qualitative behavior. Thus, we ignore surfaces giving use to an anomalistic description, and  we concentrate on those surfaces which are, in some sense, generic and stable. We expect the selected surface to give the  general outlines of the theory. However, we also expect small changes and perturbations of the surface (reflecting individual  differences) to yield a similar dynamic description. Notice that we are imposing two different types of stability on our  model. The first is to reflect Piaget's condition that the invariants, assimilation and accommodation, must come into  equilibrium. This stability comes from the adaptation vector field. The second type of stability reflects the fact that the  Piagetian theory is a general one. That is, the general results are impervious to minor individualistic differences. This is  the condition on the stability of the surface, or on the zero set of function 8Ff 8z.  An example of a surface which is not stable would be one which includes a vertical wall. Small perturbations would change this  into a sharply inclined hill, or an S (see Fig. 4), both of which lead to different types of dynamics.  FIG. 4. An unstable surface which can be perturbed into an "S" or a "hill."  2. Our choice of a surface must reflect this continuity-discontinuity dilemma between stages. We already have provided for  continuity in two ways. One type of continuity has been obtained by requiring the surface to be smooth. That is, F is a smooth  function. The second type of continuity gives the process a sense of permanence. As long as 17 is "large" vis a vis the  "speed" of the motion of a point in control space, the resultant of a point in control space is given approximately by its  image on the surface. However, the value of q has no influence on the directional movement of p. Thus the model permits,  within a stage, both mobility and continuity in changes in the developmental level with respect to changes in the controls.  Therefore, all we need is for the surface to provide for discontinuities, or jumps to a higher developmental level surface.  3. It was pointed out earlier that our controls are independent. This should be reflected in the choice of the surface.  4. There is an ordering of the stages. Each stage serves simultaneously as a new level of attainment and as the springboard  for the next stage.  COGNITIVE PROCESSES 155  Fic. 5. Locally, the surface is smooth (a), it has a cusp (b), or it has a double fold (c).  We start with Condition 2 which is the easiest to handle. As long as surface M contains no folds or tucks, that is, as long as  it is "smooth" as given in Figs. 5a or 3, then it is clear that the dynamics do not admit discontinuities or jumps  corresponding to different developmental levels. As p moves in control spaces, the resultant of p under Eq. (1) hugs M, and it  reflects the smooth continuous nature of M.  Consequently, if the dynamics of Eq. (1) is to model a stage theory, then surface M must admit some sort of discontinuity or  jump, and this "jump" must be admitted under the constraint that F(z, p) is a smooth function. This can be accomplished by  allowing surface E to admit a fold or cusp of the type given in Figs. 5b and c. Since the resultant of p under Eq. (1) must  stay near M, whenever p passes under the appropriate boundary of one of the folds, then the resultant must "jump" to a  different surface.  In summary, we want E to admit a fold or tuck, but one which satisfies the following constraints.  1. E is given by the zero set of QF(z, p) for some smooth F(z, p). That is, ((p, z) I OF(z, p) = 0}.  2. Z is stable; namely small changes in F cause only minor changes in the qualitative description of E.  This is where catastrophe theory comes in. (See Brocker, 1975; Thom, 1969, 1972, for more elementary expositions see Woodcock  & Poston, 1974; Zeeman, 1971, 1973, 1976.) What elementary catastrophe theory does is to describe the local stable nature of E  for Eq. (1) under the assumption f is the gradient of some function F with respect to the state variables (Z). This  description is in terms of the number of control parameters admitted. For example, if the dimension of control space is 1,  then the only stable folds in E are locally like either the fold in the top or the bottom part of an S (see Fig. 4). For two  parameters, as we have in our problem, the only "tucks" permitted in the choice of E which are stable under small  perturbations of F are given locally by either Fig. 5b or one of the folds in Fig. 5c. As the dimension of control space  increases, these folds become more complicated, but they can be cataloged (see Woodcock & Poston, 1974). We do not discuss the  higher dimensional problem since our problem involves only two controls.  Here we see a second reason for reducing control space to 1182. By making this reduction we can appeal to catastrophe theory  to determine the local generic behavior of surface E,  48o/15/2-4  156) DONALD G. SAARI  something which is unknown should the control space assume a dimension greater than 5 (see Brocker, 1975).  These "tucks" can be expressed analytically. In some neighborhood of the fold there is a coordinate system such that F is  given by Z'3/3 + aZ', where a is some function of p. Notice, coordinate Z' is not necessarily the same as Z. Near the cusp,  there exists a coordinate system such that F is given by (Z'4/4) + (aZ'2/2) -}- bZ' where a and b are functions of p. The fold  in three space is then given locally by Z'3 + a -- 0, and the cusp is given locally by Z'3 + aZ' + b = 0.  This gives the local description of the types of "tucks" Z can admit under the assumption that the constraints 1 and 2 are  met. However, to use this information, we must determine which of these tucks applies to our problem, and we must determine  the location of the tucks in our three-dimensional space. (Recall, this description is only for some local coordinate system  which includes a translation of the origin, etc.) This is done by appealing to the Piagetian theory. The problem of  determining which figure applies to our problem is straightforward, and we handle it first. The location of the cusps is the  purpose of the next section.  Notice that the double fold in (c) can be viewed as part of the cusp in (b) and that (b) is the more complicated figure.  Mathematically, Fig. 5c corresponds to a one-control case where either the second control has no effect on the behavior, or  some combination of the two controls behaves as a single control. This is not the case in our problem as one of the working  hypotheses is that the controls are independent. Hence we can exclude surface (c) as a local representation of our equilibrium  surface. A more complicated surface is precluded by our implicit assumption that these are the only two controls.  Notice that the above gives a local description of the surface. The global surface would be, in general, much more complicated  with several cusps. Indeed, this is exactly what we must do. We use this description of local phenomenon as a tool to design a  global surface.  At this point we interpret these surfaces in terms of the adaptation vector field. In our description we follow the path of a  point in control space and trace the resultant of this point on the developmental surface. An interpretation of this geometric  description in terms of cognitive processes will be deferred until the next section.  Select a point in control space and hold it fixed. According to the properties of the  FIG. 6. The resultant of p lies in a region near the equilibrium surface.  COGNITIVE PROCESSES 157  adaptation vector field, dZf dt, the resultant of this control point is forced toward the equilibrium surface. However, when  the resultant of this point gets "close" to the surface, f assumes a small value. Recall, f = 0 along the surface. This means  that when the resultant is very close to the surface, the process slows down (see Fig. 6).  If a control point moves "slowly" in control space, then the corresponding motion of the resultant will be in a region near  the equilibrium surface. As we mentioned earlier, all of this can be made mathematically precise by choosing 7) to be  sufficiently large (see, for example, Sibuya, 1960; Wasow, 1965).  Thus, while in general the resultant of a control point is not on the surface, it will be sufficiently close to this surface.  That is, the representation of the resultant will be essentially the same as if it were on the surface. The larger the value  of 77, the closer this is to being satisfied. Consequently, the theory remains the same if we slightly abuse the actual  situation and base our discussion upon the assumption that the resultant is on the surface. This we do.  In Fig. 7 the evolution of a control point and its resultant are traced. As an aid to the discussion, some lines are drawn in  control space. The dotted line corresponds to the progress of the control point. Solid lines 1 and 2 forming the cusp  correspond, respectively, to the boundaries of the upper and lower folds. That is, they are the projection of the folds onto  control space.  FIG. 7. The image path in control space.  The image of point 1 can be only on the lower surface; there are no other available sheets above this point in space. To reach  point 2 the control point had to cross line 1. This does not concern us since the image is on the lower surface and line 1  identifies the boundary of the upper surface. Enroute to point 3 the control point crossed line 2. Therefore the image is no  longer on the lower surface. The strong adaptation vector field forced the resultant to the upper surface.  Retracing the path leads us to point 4. At this point the image still remains on the  158 DONALD G. SAARI  upper surface even though line 2 was crossed. This is because the resultant of the path from point 3 to point 4 lies on the  upper surface. Notice, the first cusp line crossed by a path always corresponds to the boundary fold of the other surface. The  image does "fall" to the lower surface once the control point crosses line 1 of the cusp. Note, it is possible to reach the  lower surface without "falling" over the edge by selecting a route which avoids the cusp by going around its vertex.  I would like to stress that a discontinuity of sorts appears whenever the control point crosses the second line of the cusp in  control space. However, in fact, a true discontinuity for the resultant occurs only in the limiting case where 77 = oo. For  finite q, there is a continuous, but comparatively sudden and rapid change caused by the strong vector field dZldt. This  strong adaptation vector field was unleashed by the progress of the control point. When the control point crossed the second  line of the cusp, its resultant was forced outside the region where f is small (near the surface). If ,1 = oc, then the strong  vector field has infinite strength and the image is mapped to the new attracting surface in zero time. For "large" finite  values of q, this change is brought about in a positive but small value of time; and it is this rapid change between surfaces  which serves as our "discontinuity" between stages to satisfy condition 2. The mathematically inclined reader can find a  verification of this discussion concerning the behavior of the solutions along with an interpretation for the term "large" in  Levinson (1950). Actually, Levinson studies a system of differential equations which includes ours as a special case.  Since we are developing a qualitative model, there is the serious question as to whether the type of phenomenon we are  discussing remains invariant with respect to changes of the control variables; namely, we would hope these qualitative results  and discontinuities are invariant with respect to a rescaling of the control parameters. As we indicated when we discussed the  analytic representation of the "tuck," these local results from catastrophe theory hold true for a wide class of smooth  coordinate transformations. Indeed, they hold for any smooth change of the control variables G(p) such that the Jacobian  matrix is nonsingular. Similar changes in the Z scale are also permitted. Furthermore, it can be easily shown that the  qualitative description given in the next section remains invariant under coordinate transformations H such that (1) the  Jacobian matrix of H is nonsingular at each p, and (2) this matrix is monotonic in the sense that it maps the closed positive  orthant of R2 back into itself. In particular, this class includes interval transformations of the separate control variables.  5. CONSTRUCTION OF THE SURFACE  In this section we describe, justify, and discuss our choice for the general global description of the equilibrium surface.  Initially some of these results will seem to be in conflict with Piaget's descriptive model. Hopefully they are not. More  likely what conflict does appear can be resolved by a study of admissible paths in control space. We comment on these dynamics  in a later section.  The central issue of this section is the location of the cusp in the Euclidean developmental space. Since this determines the  dynamcal description of the stage theory,  COGNITIVE PROCESSES 159  we must return to a discussion of these invariants. That is, we use the definitions, properties, and interactions of the two  controls to derive probable properties of the surface E. It must be stressed that the appeal is made to the abstract  properties of these controls to determine the positioning of E. This abstract approach is necessary to derive the properties  of surface E, because some of the necessary information corresponds to changes in controls which cannot be realized in any  organism. This is, of course, nothing more than the usual problem encountered when a model is constructed by abstracting  properties of some real event.  For example, according to Piaget (1971, p. 172-185), assimilation and accommodation are inseparable; neither can function  without the other. Consequently the resultant of any p corresponding to a zero level of either control must be zero. This  means that surface M must have a zero value for Z along both the assimilation and the accommodation axes.  A low level of accommodation implies a resistance toward modifying internal structures to "accommodate" incoming messages.  Couple a low level of accommodation with an increase in the level of assimilation, and we should expect greater facility of  the organism to match a larger portion of the environment to the existing structures, but a resistance toward a modification  of structures. Nevertheless a larger portion of the environment is being interpreted which should correspond to a larger value  for Z. Mathematically, a line parallel, and near the assimilation axis should correspond to increasing values of ZonM.  Notice what is occurring. The developmental level, which reflects the state of organization, shows a slight level of increase  with increasing levels of assimilation; but this is due to the fact that the organization of events is dependent upon  assimilation to compensate for the low level of accommodation. In a whole-part terminology, this is an obvious extension of  the sentence "If there were no parts and no processes, partial or differentiated, there would be not an organization but a  homogenous totality playing an inert role in its own conservation," Piaget (1971, p. 149).  The reverse is also true. A low level of assimilation corresponds to a lack of ability to attempt to mold or match messages  from the environment to existing structures. However, an increase in the level of sophistication of accommodation would  correspond to an adjustment of the organism to create new structures in order to match messages. Consequently this description  corresponds to the organization of events relying upon the accommodation control to compensate for the low level of  sophistication of assimilation.  Of course, the sharpest increase in the developmental level should correspond to a region where the controls are in some sort  of balance, where the level of both controls are essentially equal. Since all of this is being done in a qualitative fashion,  we represent this state of "balance" as the region near the 45diagonal in control space. In this region the controls are  performing in a complementary, supportive fashion, rather than the compensatory fashion as described in the preceding two  paragraphs. Consequently we would expect the sharpest rise in the values of Z on M to correspond to values of p on this  diagonal.  Now consider a "large value" along the assimilation axis but a small value for accommodation. Hold the assimilation control  fixed and increase the accommodation control.  160 DONALD G. SAARI  This results in an increase in Z reflecting the fact that more flexibility has been introduced in interpreting the messages.  Nevertheless, the organization of the events is still in terms of assimilation compensating for a low value of accommodation.  Once this organization can be represented as both controls operating in a complementary fashion, then there should be a sharp  increase in the values of Z, that is a sharp increase in Z should occur when the two controls are more equally balanced. A  similar discussion helds for the opposite situation where accommodation is held fixed and the level of assimilation varies.  Although they are task dependent, conservation experiments convey the basic ideas of the above discussion. For example,  initially a child identifies the depth of water in a vessel with the volume occupied by the water. Without modification in the  cognitive structures, the child's progress in this area is limited. With sufficient experience there is a realization that the  variable width plays a role in determing volume. This is due to a slight extension of the structure (accommodation), but the  structure remains essentially the same-volume is determined by one dimension. Thus assimilation is playing an important role,  and it is to a large extent compensating for the lack of new structures. Of course eventually new structures are introduced  which admit the possibility that two (or more) dimensions are required inputs to determine volume, and here we see the  complementary role of the two controls. Nevertheless, it is easy to imagine the result of a situation which accommodation is  fixed, and assimilation is making more sophisticated one-dimensional-to-volume interpretations.  We are now prepared to piece these comments together to determine the locations of the cusps of M as given by catastrophe  theory. This surface will then be described in terms of hypothetical paths in control space.  Recall that since the process is required to have the threshold effect of a jump discontinuity, the surface must contain,  locally, the cusp described in the preceding section. Our choice for the surface is given in Fig. 8. The projection of this  surface into control space is given in Fig. 9.  FiG. 8. The equilibrium surface.  COGNITIVE PROCESSES 161  z z  0. 0 0 u d  Assimilation 1 11  FIG. 9. Projection of equilibrium surface into the control space.  Notice that the surface has two cusps. Assume that a plane perpendicular to control space is passed through points 1 and 2.  The "edge" of the plane corresponds to the dotted line passing through points 1 and 2. This plane will intersect the  equilibrium surface in a curve, which is similar to a 0 (the solid line in Fig. 10). Notice that the tails of this  cross-section curve start at zero and increase toward the center. This reflects Piaget's observation that (i) cognitive  process cannot start without input from both assimilation and accommodation and (ii) the developmental level increases with a  balancing of the two invariants. This last observation also explains the crown on the head of the 0, a point corresponding to  a perfect balance between the controls. The slope from the right is sharper than that from point 2. This reflects Piaget's  belief that assimilation is the more important and dominant invariant (Flavell, 1963; Furth, 1969; Piaget, 1971).  Passing a point through point 1' and 2' results in a similar S2 figure except that everything is higher (see Fig. 10). This  increase in height reflects the notion that the developmental level is, in some sense, monotonically related to the degree of  sophistication of the two control invariants. Another way to express this is to require the image of any straight line in  control space passing through the origin to be increasing.  We now describe this model in terms of an hypothetical path in control space which leads to a discontinuity (see Figs. 11 and  12).  FIG. 10. A comparison between a cross section passing through 1 and 2 (the solid line) and a cross section passing through 1'  and 2' (the dotted line).  162  DONALD G. SAARI  r O vd u w v 0 U V d  s y  Assimilation  FIG. 11. A path in control space.  G O M JJ ro v 0 0 V U d  Assimilation  FIG. 12. Path 1 leads to a smooth reorganization. Path 2 leads to a reorganization with a small discontinuity. A much larger  change occurs in path 3.  Our starting point is given by point l. Point 2 shows an improvement in assimilation and an attendant improvement in the  developmental level. Nevertheless the developmental level is still at the same stage.  Improvement of the developmental level within a given stage means that the traits characterising the invariant organization  (for this stage) are now becoming sharper and more pronounced. That is, within a given stage the abstracted characteristics  are not acquired immediately. Instead there is a gradual evolution toward the final form, and during this evolution the  properties become sharper and in focus in a continuous fashion.  Traveling from point 2 to 3 involves a sharp increase in the use of control accommodation with a resulting improvement in the  developmental level. Notice from Fig. 9 or Fig. 10 that there is a substantial improvement in the developmental level  corresponding to this change, or the awakening of accommodation. This is a consequence  COGNITIVE PROCESSES 163  of the substantially richer structure provided by this invariant, which in turn sharply increases the portion of the  environment which can be handled by an already relatively sophisticated assimilation. However, the changes are continuous.  In moving from point 3 to 4, the path crosses the second line of the cusp. This forces a jump to the upper surface, and to a  different stage in development. Since this is the transition between stages, we pause at this point to examine this jump in  more detail.  To cross the second line, it was necessary to increase the levels of the assimilation and accommodation controls. This means  new structures are being created (accommodation) and more of the environment can be incorporated and matched to these  structures (assimilation). Before the second line was reached, it was possible to organize these events within the established  thought processes.  When the path reaches the second line, the process has finally reached a rupture point. The inner structures have become so  rich and the region of the environment which can be comprehended becomes so large, that the invariant organization can no  longer coordinate all of this material in the previous fashion without contradictions, etc. A massive reorganization is  needed. That is, there is no longer accord between adaptation and organization, and a change in the developmental level is  needed to attain an equilibrium. This is the jump between surfaces. To adequately reorganize the richer input, we would expect  a more sophisticated equilibrium point, that is, a higher level surface or developmental level.  Between stages, the image of the control points is not in equilibrium. Consequently one would expect a somewhat confused  behavior to manifest itself in this transition stage. Namely, the individual would exhibit characteristics peculiar to both  stages, or the Piagetian concept of a decalage. (In a model describing growth of personality and social development, such as  in Erieksonian model, this reorganization would correspond, for example, to an "identity crisis.")  We are not assuming the limiting model where _ oo, but rather a model where 71 is finite. Consequently there is a positive,  rather than infinitesimal, transition time between stages. The stronger the adaptation process is in an individual (that is,  the larger the value of '7), the shorter the transition period will be.  Corresponding to control point 4 is a more sophisticated level of development, a level where the actions are characterized by  a richer and more complicated logicomathematical system.  But suppose the path in control space should now travel to point 5. That is, for some reason there is a decline in the level  of accommodation with the resulting loss in the richness of the structures. Since the path has not crossed the second line of  the cusp, the image is still on the upper surface. Consequently, the actions will be characterized by the more sophisticated  developmental traits. The reorganization still holds. This is an important point. If the point had traveled directly from  point 3 to 5 without crossing the second cusp line, i.e., without going to point 4, the image would be at the lower level of  development. The coordination between the controls was not strained to the rupture point, and consequently there was no  significant change in developmental level. In other words, corresponding to a given point in control space there may be more  than one possible developmental level. The achieved developmental level is a consequence of  164 DONALD G. SAARI  the location of the point in control space and the path by which this point was reached! Namely, the history of a point and of  the process is most important.  In this description we have considered a path which initially runs parallel to the assimilation axis, and then turns in the  direction of the accommodation axis. However, note that the model permits other qualitatively different paths. For example it  would be possible for the path to run parallel to the accommodation axis and then turn the direction of increasing  assimilation. This would again lead to a discontinuity when the path crosses the second curve of the cusp in control space.  A third type of curve would be a diagonal from the origin which would correspond to an even match of the two controls.  However, in this case the higher level of development would be attained in a continuous fashion, a statement which seems to be  in contradiction with the Piagetian theory. But this need not be the case. Rather, it is a statement as to what types of paths  in control space are admissible, and in particular, that this type of path is not admissible.  Notice in our first two paths one control dominated. This domination "colored" and strongly influenced the organization  corresponding to an equilibrium between the controls. If the other control had dominated then one might expect a second type  of cognitive development, or organization, to materialize. This reflects our earlier comment that one control is forced to  partially compensate for the other. For example, in the second path where accommodation initially dominates and then  assimilation is increased we would expect the actions to reflect a strong tendency to adjust to the environment by creating  new internal structures. Presumably this means that new structures are being created for messages from the environment, even  similar ones, somewhat like an extreme case of rote learning where, for example, one addition type problem is deemed separate  from another. It is not until there is an improvement in assimilation that the structures are pulled together and subsumed  under some grand structure. This is all in contradistinction from the first path where the notion is, presumably, from the  general to the specific. Notice, in general the history of the path is important in determining the ultimate organization.  As already stated, this model satisfies the first two requirements posed in the previous section. I now claim that it also  reflects the basic independence between controls which is the third requirement. Indeed, if the controls were completely  supportive rather than partially in conflict or in a compensatory role, the surface should increase in a smooth fashion with a  maximum peak corresponding to the diagonal in control space. Thus it is the jump, or the reorganization of the equilibrium  position, which partially manifests this independence.  But the total picture is deeper than this. This independence is also reflected in the choice of the cusp over the double  folds, i.e., the fact that mathematically the fold corresponds to a single-control situation. If the two controls are both  weak, then the actions manifesting the equilibrium position of the controls should be ill defined. It should be smoothly  changeable depending upon which control will eventually dominate.  If this holds true, we would expect the behavior in these initial substages to lack a tight discipline and stability when  directed toward cognitive problem requiring the skills of that stage's development. This is in accord with the earlier  statement that at  COGNITIVE PROCESSES 165  initial locations in a state the defining traits are not well established or defined. Since the organization is still ill  defined, it can still be influenced by which control begins to dominate. Also, this reorganization should be relatively  smooth. It is only when there is a sharply defined organization that one would expect large jumps or bifurcations to manifest  reorganizations.  This is what occurs in this model. If a path (path 1 in Fig. 12) misses the vertices of the cusps, then the changes in the  organization are smooth. If a path should cross both boundaries of the cusp near a vertex, (path 2), then the "jump" is small,  which means that there is a minor readjustment in the organization. Of course, the farther the path is from the vertex, the  larger the jump will be.  So far, this model admits only one stage. Thus it needs to be modified to allow for the succession of stages required by the  fourth condition of the previous section. However, this is easily done by introducing more cusp folds in the surface to  correspond to the additional stages. The projection of the boundary of these folds into control space would appear as in Fig.  13. Notice that a cross section of the equilibrium surface taken at a position which includes several stages would look like a  succession of 92 warts growing on the intial d2.  That there is an ordering of the stages and that one stage simultaneously serves as an improvement of the previous stage and  as the springboard for the next follows immediately from the foregoing discussion (see Fig. 14).  FIG. 13. Control space with several stages.  FIG. 14. A cross section of the stages.  166 DONALD G. SAARI  6. CONSEQUENCES  At this point I would like to discuss some of the consequences of this incomplete model. The first is that it admits a  continuum for the developmental level. That is, it is not the state of the developmental level which exhibits the  discontinuity, but rather it is the internal dynamics of the individual which determines his path in control space. It is this  path in control space and the conflict in the controls (manifested by the cusp in the surface) which produces the  discontinuity between stages. Indeed, there may be paths which permit a smooth change in the developmental level! Again while  at first reading this seems to be in conflict with the Piagetian theory, it need not be. Actually it may be a statement  concerning the dynamics, or permissable paths of points in control space.  Second, there is not a unique transition point between stages, but rather a continuum of them. This fact that there is a line  of threshold points has some interesting consequences. For example, it admits the possibility of one individual remaining at a  lower stage while a second individual has already progressed to the next stage; yet when the first individual finally does  reach the upper surface, he may be more advanced than the second. This suggests that a strong well-developed performance at  one level can lead to a sharper immediate performance when the next level is reached, if it ever is reached.  This model permits regressive behavior. If one of the invariants should suddenly deteriorate, then it is possible for the  developmental level to drop to an earlier stage! An example of such a path can be obtained from Fig. 11 by extending the path  from point 5 and on ward to the assimilation axis. The path in this figure leads to a sudden jump due to the increase in one  control which accompanied the decrease in the other. However, an equable decrease in both controls might avoid the second line  in the cusp in control space, which would lead to a smooth regression in the development.  Again, either this violates Piagetian theory, or it is a comment concerning the difficult question of the dynamics of a point  in control space. I tend to believe it is the latter and that it implies that the controls can move only into the positive  orthant translated to the current location of a control point.  Up to this point the invariant organization has been represented as a one-dimensional state called the developmental level. A  deeper adaptation-organization model can be constructed by making a more detailed representation of the invariant  organization. This would require a higher dimensional state space to represent the different aspects of this model. (See, for  example, the logico-mathematical models of Piaget, 1971.)  This can easily be worked into the discussion because the main tool, Thom's catasstrophe theory, admits any finite number of  dimensions for the state space. The local description of the threshold behavior with respect to the controls depends upon the  dimension of control space.  The main modification in the discussion is that Z is now vector valued, so in place of OFIOZ, we need (8F18Z1, 8F18Z. ,...,  BFlcaZ,,) _ VF. Since Z is vector valued, we may now have cusps corresponding to changes in various dimensions of  organization, with a resulting control space which may have overlapping cusps. Notice that this gives  COGNITIVE PROCESSES 167  rise to substages, etc. Also, with this more general theory, we would expect both smooth and threshold entry into substages.  With this added flexibility of additional dimensions for state space, the invariant organization can be decomposed into its  various components as described in the logicomathematical structures identified by Piaget. However, there are two differences  in interpreting the theory.  Since there are additional dimensions for Z, when a path crosses a catastrophe cusp, Z does not necessarily change in  magnitude only in one component, but it may change in several.  A crossing of a cusp may result in, say, Zl increasing slightly in value but, say, Zz increasing significantly. Let me  illustrate this with an example. Suppose component Zl represents simple implications such as "if A, then B." So, it may be  possible for ZI to include, or permit, the recognition that "if A, then B," and "if B, then A," without recognizing  reversibility in this situation. Once a cusp line in control space is crossed, then a recognition of the equivalence of A and  B may be admitted. If this recognition is reflected by coordinate Z2 , then an increase in the value of this component would  accompany the attainment of this new level of understanding.  A second point is that in the higher dimensional case, crossing a cusp results in a sudden change in the value of Z only if  the resultant of the control point is near a "fold" of the surface Z. That is, the cusp may be the projection of a "fold" in Z  which is not located near the resultant of the point p. Again, we see the effects of the history, or path assumed by the point  p in control space.  By admitting higher dimensional representation for organization, we run into a series of substages. As we pointed out earlier,  different stages or substages, can lead to different organizations. But notice that the process of reaching a substage need  not be continuous in the sense that nearby paths need not lead to similar organizations. One path may pass on one side of a  vertex of a cusp in control space, while another "near-by" path may pass on the other side, leading to a different type of  organization.  Notice how a small difference in the paths can lead to significant differences in the organization. Perhaps this is partially  what is behind J. E. Littlewood's (1968) advice to young researchers in mathematics. He suggests that when they try to solve a  wellknown unsolved problem that they should not read too much of the literature, i.e., they should not direct their path to an  organizational direction already proved to be incapable of solving the problem. However, a detailed examination of the  Littlewood advice, or other techniques employed in problem solving, can not be accomplished with the general, global nature of  this model. This local, task-dependent analysis will be made in the sequel to this paper. Also, a more precise representation  for the invariant organization will be given at that time.  We conclude our discussion with a comment about the model. It illustrates the effects the history of the adaptation process  has on the organization, the discontinuity between stages, and the gradual evolution of the complexity of the organization  within a given stage. But it is still stronger in the sense that it raises several questions. For example, as it was pointed  out earlier, there is not a unique threshold point between stages, but rather a continuum of them. Indeed, if the transition  between two stages occurs at a  168 DONALD G. SAARI  higher level of the first stage, then the immediate organization at the second stage should be more sophisticated. But if the  goal is to get to a certain point on the developmental scale in a minimum time, then what is the optimal path? This depends  upon 'Q and the dynamics of p in control space.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  I would like to thank B. Chartoff and R. Lesh for their patience in listening to early versions of this work, and E. Saari for  the impetus he gave to this study. This research was partially supported by N.S.F. Grant #MCS76-06635.  REFERENCES  BR6CKER, TH. Differentiable germs and catastrophes. London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series. Cambridge: Cambridge  University Press, 1975.  FLAVELL, J. H. The developmental psychology of Jean Piaget. Princeton: Van Nostrand, 1963. FURTH, H. G. Piaget and knowledge;  theoretical foundations. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1969. LEVINSON, N. Perturbations of discontinuous solutions of  nonlinear systems of differential equations. Acta Mathematic, 1950, 82, 71-105.  LITTLEWOOD, J. W. Some problems in real and complex analysis. Lexington, Massachusetts: D. C. Heath, 1968.  PIAGET, J. Biology and knowledge. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1971. PIAGET, J. The origins of intelligence in  children. New York: Norton, 1963.  SAARI, D. G. A dynammicl model for cognitive development with applications to problem solving. In A. Osborne (Ed.), Models for  learning mathematics, pp. 121-144. Columbus, Ohio: ERIC Center for Science, Mathematics, and Environmental Education; Ohio  State University, 1976. SIBUYA, Y. On perturbations of discontinuous solutions of ordinary differential equations. Natural  Science Report of Ochanomizu University (Japan), 1960, 11, 1-18.  WAsow, W. R. Asymptotic expansions for ordinary differential equations. New York: Interscience, 1965.  WOODCOCK, A. E., & POSTON, T. A. Geometrical study of the elementary catastrophes. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1974.  THOM, R. Topological models in biology. Topology, 1969, 8, 313-335.  THOM, R. Stabiliti structurelle et morphoginise. Reading, Massachusetts: Benjamin, 1972. ZEEMAN, E. C. The geometry of  catastrophe, (London) Times literary supplement, December 10, 1971.  ZEEMAN, E. C. Differential equations for the heartbeat and nerve impulse. In M. M. Peixoto (Ed.), Dynamical systems, pp.  683-743. New York: Academic Press, 1973.  ZEEMAN, E. C. Catastrophe theory, Scientific American, 1976, April.  RECEIVED: March 16, 1975