10.1016/0022-2496(77)90064-5
JOURNAL. OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 16, 153-160 (1977)  Bargaining Ability, the Utility of Playing a Game, and Models of Coalition Formation  ALVIN E. ROTH  Department of Business Administration, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois 61801  A utility function for playing a given position in a game is developed as a natural extension of the utility function which  defines the rewards available in the game. This function is determined by a player's opinion of his bargaining ability. A  characterization of such utilities is obtained which generalizes previous results that the Shapley value and Banzhaf-Coleman  index are both cardinal utility functions which reflect different bargaining abilities. The approach taken here is related to  models of coalition formation.  1. INTRODUCTION  Considerable literature is devoted to the study of making choices which involve probabilistic uncertainty. In particular, the  theory of expected utility (von Neumann and Morgenstern, 1947; Herstein and Milnor, 1953; Fishburn, 1970; Krantz et al. 1971)  considers the question of how to evaluate, a priori, the relative worth of lotteries, whose outcomes can be described  probabilistically. Game theory, on the other hand, is primarily concerned with decisions involving strategic, rather than  probabilistic uncertainty. The outcome of a game is uncertain because it depends on the strategic interaction of rational  players, which cannot be completely described by probability distributions.  Thus the problem of evaluating, a priori, the relative value of playing in different games appears to be quite different from  the problem of establishing a utility for lotteries. The most famous approach to this problem is due to Shapley (1953), and  values for restricted classes of games have been proposed by Banzhaf (1968), and Coleman (1971).  However, a recent paper (Roth, 1977a) has shown that the Shapley value is itself a von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function.  In fact the Shapley value of a game is an extension of the utility function (for lotteries) used to define the game. In this  paper we shall characterize all such extensions. We will show that an individual's utility for playing a particular position  in a game is determined by his opinion of his own bargaining ability. We shall also explore the connection which arises  between this assessment of bargaining ability and models of coalition formation.  153  Copyright 1977 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. ISSN 0022-2496  154 ALVIN E. ROTH  Z. DEFINITIONS  A game consists of a finite set of positions' N = {1,..., n} and a superadditive function v from the subsets of N to the real  numbers such that v(O) = 0. The function v denotes the payoff obtainable by each subset of positions acting together (i.e., by  each coalition of players) in units chosen to be linear in the utility function (for lotteries) of a given observer.  Since we shall be interested in comparing different games, we take N to be the common set of positions for all games. Thus n  is the maximum number of players who can take part in a game (e.g., n could be the population of the world). In order to  distinguish those positions which have an active role in a given game, we define a carrier of a game v to be a subset T of N  such that for all subsets S of N, v(S) = v(S n T). The smallest carrier in a game can be viewed as the set of positions with  an active role in the game, since only this set of positions has any effect on the utility obtainable by a coalition. A  position which is not in every carrier of a game thus has no effect, and is called a dummy position in the game. 2 The  smallest carrier will be called the set of strategic positions in the game.  If ar is a permutation of N (i.e., a one-to-one mapping from N to N) then for all subsets S of N we donate the image of S  under iT by 7rS, and define the game rrv by 7rv(lrS) = v(S). We will denote the class of all games by G.  3. COMPARING POSITIONS IN GAMES  In order to make comparison between positions in a game and in different games, we shall consider a preference relation  defined on the set N X G of positions in a game. Write (i, v) P(j, w) to mean "it is preferable to play position i in game v  than to play position j in game w." The letter I will denote indifference, and W will denote weak preferences  We will consider preference relations which are also. defined on the mixture set4 M generated by N X G. That is, preferences  are also defined over lotteries whose outcomes are positions in a game. Denote by [q(i, v); (1 - q) (j, w)] the lottery which  with probability q has a player take position i in game v, and with probability (1 - q) take position j in game w. We will  henceforth only consider preference relations which have the standard properties of continuity and substitutabilitys on M  which insure the existence of an  1 We speak of "positions" rather than the more customary "players" since we are interested here only in the structural  properties of the game. We shall be concerned with the problem of evaluating the different positions from the point of view of  a player who must choose among different positions.  $ This terminology is slightly unconventional; the standard definition of a dummy is a position i such that v(S v i) = v(S)  -1- v(i) whenever i 0 S.  s So alb means neither aPb nor bPa, and aWb means aPb or alb.  A mixture set has the properties that for all a, b e M[la; Ob] = a, [qa; (1 - q)b] = [(I - q)b; qa], and [q[pa; (1 - p)b];  (I - q)b] = [pqa; (I - pq)b] (cf. Fishburn, 1970).  6 Compare Herstein and Milnor (1953).  BARGAINING ABILITY 155  expected utility functions unique up to an affine transformation. Denote this function by B, and write Bi(v) = B((i, v)), and  6(v) = (B#),..., ev)).  The utility for a position in a game is given by'  Bi(v) = OW, v)) = gab((Z, v)) - gab(ro) gab(r1) - gab(r0)  where a, b, rl , and ro are elements of M such that aW(i, v)Wb, and aWr,ProWb, and the numbers gab(y) are probabilities  defined for any y in M such that aWyWb by y1[gab(y)a; (1 - gab(y))b]. The elements rl and ro determine the origin and scale,  since B(rl) = 1, and B(ro) = 0.  Since the games themselves are defined in terms of a player's utility for lotteries, we may expect that his preferences for  positions in a game will satisfy some additional regularity conditions. That is, his preferences for positions in games, and  the resulting utility function should be consistent with his utility function for lotteries.  It will be convenient to define, for each position i, the game vi given by  vi(S) = 1 if i E S,  = 0 otherwise.  All positions other than i are dummies in games of the form cvi , so that the player in position i may be sure of getting a  utility of c. (This observation will provide the appropriate normalization for the utility B.) Denote by vo the game in which  all players are dummies, (i.e., the game vo(S) = 0), and let Di be the class of games in which position i is a dummy.  The regularity conditions which we impose on the preferences are as follows.  Rl. For all i E N, v E G and for any permutation 7r, (i, v) I(ari, 7rv). This condition says simply that the names of the  positions do not affect their desirability. An immediate consequence is the following.  LEMMA 1. B(ITV) = 9i(v).  The second regularity condition is  R2. If v e Di , then (i, v) I(i, vo). Also, (i, vi) P(i, vo).  This condition says that being a dummy in a game is not preferable to being a dummy in the game vo , and that the position (i,  vi) is preferable to playing a dummy position. The last regularity condition is considerably stronger, but follows naturally  from the fact that the games are defined in terms of an expected utility function.  R3. (i, (qw + (I - q)v)) I[q(i, w); (I - g)(i, v)]  6 An expected utility function on a mixture space has the property that u([qa; (1 - q)b]) _ qu(a) -{- (1 - q) u(b). That is,  the utility of a lottery is its expected utility.  Compare Herstein and Milnor.  1567 ALVIN E. ROTH  This says that a player is indifferent between playing position i in the game (qw  (1 - q)v) or having the appropriate lottery between the games w and v. In Roth (1977a) this condition is called ordinary risk  neutrality, since it specifies the preferences over lotteries.  The next sections will study the class of utility functions for positions in games which arise from preferences obeying the  above conditions. Section 4 will study properties shared by the entire class of utilities, subject to the natural  normalization that ei(vi) = 1, and ei(vo) = 0. Section 5 will show that a specification of an individual's beliefs about his  bargaining ability uniquely determines his utility for a position in a game.  4. EXTENDED UTILITY FUNCTIONS  A utility function on positions in games which reflects the conditions of the previous section will be called an extended  utility function. This terminology is justified by the following theorem.  THEOREM 1. For any c > 0, and any (i, v) E N x G, Bi(cv) = cei(v).  Proof. Without loss of generality, take c ->- 1. Note that (i, v) = (i, ((1 Jc)cv (1 - (1/c))vo)) I[(1/c)(i, cv); (1 - (1/c))  (i, vo)] by R3. So ei(v) = (1/c)0i(cv) -}- (1 - (1/c)) ei(vo) = (1 /06#4 Q.E.D.  In particular, Bi(cvi) = c, so the utility function 0 can be regarded as an extension of the utility function in terms of  which the games are defined. The following theorem also holds for extended utility functions.  THEOREM 2. For any v, w E G, 0(v -{- w) = 0(v) + 0(w).  For each i E N, ei(v + w) = 0i(2(Jv + 2w)) = 20i(2v -f- 2w) by Theorem 1. But by R3, ei(2v -}- 2w) = ei([Jv; 2w1) = 10i(v) -{-  2ei(w), since 0 is an expected utility function. So ei(v + w) = ei(v) + Bi(w).  5. STRATEGIC RISK POSTURE  Any game with more than one strategic position involves some potential uncertainty as to the outcome, arising from the  interaction of the strategic players. This kind of uncertainty we call strategic risk. In order to describe a given player's  preferences for situations involving strategic risk, it will be convenient to consider for each subset R of N, the game vR  defined by  VR(S) = 1 if R C S,  = 0 otherwise.  BARGAINING ABILITY 157  A game of the form vR is essentially the simplest game that can be played among r strategic players."  To measure a player's opinion of his own bargaining ability, consider how he evaluates the prospect of being a strategic  player in a game of the form vR . The prospect will be more desirable if he thinks he is a strong bargainer than if he thinks  he is a weak bargainer.  Define the certain equivalent of a strategic position in a game vR to be the number f (r) such that the prospect of receiving  f (r) for certain is exactly as desirable as the prospect of playing the strategic positions That is, f (r) is the number such  that (for i e R)  (t, VR) I(t, f (r)Vi)  Note that f (1) = 1.  Using the terminology of Roth (1977a), we say that the preference is neutral to strategic risk if f (r) = 1/r for r = 1,...,  n. The preference is strategic risk averse if f (r) < 1/r, and strategic risk preferring if f(r) > 1/r. The utility of playing  a position in a game vR is given by the following lemma.  LEMMA 2.  8i(vR) = f (r) if i e R,  = 0 otherwise.  Proof. If i 0 R, then vR e Di and Bi(VR) = Bi(vo) = 0, by R2. If i e R, then Bi(vR) _ ei(f (r)vi) = f (r) Bj(vx) = f (r), by  Theorem 1.  It turns out that an extended utility function is completely determined by the numbers f (r). In fact, we have the following  REPRESENTATION THEQREM. An extended utility function has the form  Bi(v) _ Y k(t)[v(T) - v(T - i)] TCN  where  k(t) - (-l)r-t \r - t) f (r) r=t  Proof. Every game v is a sum of games of the form vR . In fact, (cf. Shapley, 1953),  V - IRCN CRVR where cR = Y-TCR (- 1)" v(T). By Theorems 1 and 2,  ei(V) - E CRei(VR) = E CRf(r) = y E (-1)r-tv(T)f(r).  RCN RCN RCN TCR  ieR ieR  e The cardinality of sets R, S, T is denote r, s, t.  We take the point of view that a player does not know who will occupy the other positions in a game, Consequently, his certain  equivalent for a game vR depends only on r.  48o/i6/z-5  158 ALVIN E. ROTH  Reversing the order of summation, Bi(v) = LrTCN {LRCN.R:) (TlJil (-1)r-tf(r)} v(T). If we denote the term in brackets by  gi(T), then we note that gi(T) _ -gi(T - i) when i e T. So BXV) _ ETCN.i.Tgi(T)[v(T) - v(T - i)]. But there are (r-e)  coalitions of size r which contain T, so gi(T) = Y; t (-1)'-t(r-t) f (r) = k(t). Since [v(T) - v(T - i)] = 0 unless i E T, we  are done.  As mentioned earlier, one function which has been extensively studied is the Shapley value 0 = (01 ,..., 0, given by  Mv) _ y- (s - 1) n(n - s) ! [v(s) - v(S - i )]. SCN  This is the extended utility function corresponding to a posture of strategic risk neutrality. More formally, we have the  following corollary.  COROLLARY 1 (Roth, 1977a). If f (r) = 1 /r then the extended utility function equals the Shapley value.  Another function which has received some attention in the literature (cf. Owen, 1975; Blair,1975; Dubey, 1975; Roth, 1977b,  c)1is the Banzhaf-Coleman index b = (b1,..., b,,) given by  bi(v) _ Y 1/(2"-1)[v(s) - v(S - a)]. SCN  The Banzhaf-Coleman index is an extended utility function reflecting preferences averse  to strategic risk.  COROLLARY 2 (Roth, 1977b). If f (r) = 1/(2''_1) then the extended utility function equals the Banzhaf-Coleman index.  Thus the Banzhaf-Coleman index is a utility function in which a player's utility for a strategic position in a game vR is  inversely proportional to the number of ways the r - 1 other strategic players can form coaliations.  (). PROBABILISTIC MODELS OF COALITION FORMATION  Many of the experimental studies of coalition formation have concentrated on the class of simple games. A game v is simple if  for all subsets S of N v(S) = 0 or 1, and if S is contained in T, then v(S) = 1 implies v(T) = 1. A simple game can be  characterized by the class W of winning coalitions, defined by W = {S C N I v(S) = 1}. Position i is critical in a coalition S  if S is winning, but S - i is not.  Under some circumstances it may be possible to assess the probability that a given winning coalition will form. Komorita  (1974) argues that this probability is a function of the coalition size. In this case, the probability that a player in  position i will be a critical  10 Some of these papers are concerned primarily with the class of simple games (see Section 6).  BARGAINING ABILITY 159  member of a winning coalition is given by Ps = L.Tew.T-i P(t), where P(t) is the probability that a coalition of size t will  form. But F_TEIV,T_i0W P(t) = F-TCN P(t)[v(T) - v(T - i)], since [v(T) - v(T - i)] equals one if position i is critical in T,  and equals zero otherwise.  If player i expect to receive a reward of r(t) when he is a critical member of a winning coalition of size t (and a reward of  zero otherwise), then his expected reward is equal to L.TCN r(t) P(t)[v(T) - v(T - i)]. Thus the expected reward has the form  of an extended utility function. Conversely, the Shapley value and Banzhaf-Coleman index are often interpreted as expected  reward functions in which r(t) = 1.  7. CONCLUSION  In Sections 1-5 we consider how to determine the utility of playing a position in a game. The derivation of this utility  function depends on comparisons between different games. In particular, a player's extended utility function is uniquely  determined by his opinion of his bargaining ability, as expressed in his evaluation of games of the form vR .  In Section 6, motivated by the experimental work of Komorita and others," we considered a probabilistic model of coalition  formation. An expression for the expected reward of a player in a given position of a particular game was given. Rather than  depending on a comparison between different games, this expression depends on detailed consideration of the game in question.  In particular, the expected reward depends on an assessment both of how well the player will do if a given coalition forms, as  well as the probability that the coalition will form.  As noted, the expressions for the expected reward and for the extended utility have the same functional form. The connection  is more than a purely formal one, since a player's experiences in a game (which influence his assessment of the expected  reward) should influence his opinion of his bargaining ability, while his opinion of his bargaining ability should influence  his expectations of reward in a given game.  REFERENCES  BANzHAF, J. F., III. One man 3.312 votes: A mathematical analysis of the electoral college. I'illanova Law Review, 1968, 13.  BLAIR, D. H. Power valuations of finite voting games. Presented at Econometric Society Winter Meeting, 1975.  COLEMAN, J. S. Control of collectivities and the power of a collectivity to act. In B. Lieberman (Ed.), Social Choice. New  York: Gordon & Breach, 1971.  DuBEY, P. Some results on values of finite and infinite games. Ph. D. thesis, Cornell University, 1975. FisHBuRN, P. C.  Utility theory for decision making. New York: Wiley, 1970.  HRRsTEIN, I. N., & MILNOR, J. An axiomatic approach to measurable utility. Econometrica, 1953, 21. KOMORITA, S. S. A weighted  probability model of coalition formation. Psychological Review, 1974, 81.  11 Compare Murnighan et al.  160  ALVIN E. ROTH  KRANTz, D. H., LucE, R. D., SUPPEs, P., & TVERSKY, A. Foundations of measurement volume I. New York: Academic Press, 1971.  MURNIGHAN, J. K., KOMORITA, S. S., & SwAjKOwsKI, E. Theories of coalition formation and the effects of reference groups.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 1977, 13.  OwEN, G. Multilinear extensions and the Banzhaf value. Naval Research Logistics Quarterly, 1975, 22.  ROTH, A. E. The Shapley value as a von Neumann-Morgenstern utility. Econometrica, 1977a, 45.  ROTH, A. E. A note on values and multilinear extensions. Naval Research Logistics Quarterly, 1977b, forthcoming.  ROTH, A. E. Utility functions for simple games. Journal of Economic Theory, 1977c, forthcoming. SHAPLEY, L. S. A value for  n-person games. Annals of Mathematics Study, 1953, 28.  voN NEUMANN, J., & MORGENSTERN, O. Theory of games and economic behavior. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1944, 1947, 1953.  RECEIVED: July 12, 1976