10.1016/0022-2496(77)90039-6
JOURNAL OF :MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 15, 1-45 (1977)  Neurodynamics: A Critical Survey* ALwyN C. SCOTT  Mathematics Research Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53706  Following a brief introduction to the functional complexity of an individual nerve cell, the current status of neural network  dynamics is reviewed. This survey is then used as a basis for suggesting some fundamental difficulties in developing a science  of the human mind.  I. INTRODUCTION  One of the great problems for modern thought is to understand the human mind in the context of natural philosophy, to  appreciate its mysteries without invoking the mysticism of the past. A central issue is this: Are the rational, reductive, and  statistical tools of classical science appropriate for understanding the mind? My primary purpose here is to suggest some  answers to this question. The paper begins with a review of current achievements in neuromathematics. This work is firmly  rooted in the notions of classical science, and it serves as a basis for a critique of efforts to extend such notions into  psychology.  In this critique I will attempt to make the following points. (i) The "elements of thought" are not identical, as are the  atoms in a crystal of salt, the hydrogen bonds in a protein, or the bees in a hive. (ii) Using very conservative assumptions  for neural structure, it is readily seen that the number of behavioral patterns or thought trains which may be exhibited is  immense. This term is used in a technical sense to imply that statistical methods are not appropriate tools for investigating  many aspects of complex behavior. (iii) Cognitive systems, such as the human mind and human societies, which use languages  rich enough to be inconsistent are not predictive, but indeterminate. (iv) Psychologists who would reduce some aspect of human  behavior to a rational scheme must assume the responsibility for showing that their tools are valid. Those who fail to do this  are not being scientific, but merely naive.  A key objective in neuroscience is to relate the "elements of thought" to the nerve cells or neurons of the brain, and in the  following section we will consider just how complex these little fellows can be. Then, in Section III, we survey some attempts  to understand the dynamic behavior exhibited by networks of neurons. An important concept which emerges in this section is the  cell assembly, which was introduced by Hebb in 1949. In Hebb's view, cell assemblies are the elements of thought, and an  individual  * Sponsored by the United States Army under Contract No. DAAG29-75-C-0024, and the National Institutes of Health under Grant  No. LM-02281.  1  Copyright m 1977 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. ISSN 0022-2496  ALWYN C. SCOTT  neuron may participate in many of them just as an individual member of society may participate in many "social assemblies"  (e.q., as a citizen of Chicago, as a member of the Sierra Club, the Irish-American community, the Catholic Church, the  socialist party, a neighborhood brass band, a credit union, a poker club, a nuclear family, a clan). The mathematical analysis  of neural nets indicates that a given cell assembly may be active or inactive depending upon such factors as the current  spectrum of sensory inputs, activity levels of other assemblies, and the "threshold level for firing" of the assembly.  Although this picture may oversimplify the properties and structure of neural networks, one conclusion emerges which is  difficult to fault: The elements of thought are largely different from person to person and from culture to culture.  OCCIPITAL LOBE  ( c)  FIG. 1. Some views of the human brain.  NEURODYNAMICS 3  At this point it may be appropriate to regard the object of our study. As Fig. la indicates, a most striking feature of the  brain is the reflection symmetry (with respect to the line AA') which conforms to the general bilateral symmetry of the body.  Figure lc shows the left cerebral cortex (or covering) which communicates to the right cortex through a massive bundle of  fibers called the corpus ca'llosum, indicated in Fig. lb. Each half of the cortex contains a number of neurons, which has been  estimated by six anotamists since 1899 (Shad6 & Smith, 1970) as from 5 billion to 9.2 billion with a mean of 7.0 billion, so  the frequently mentioned value of 101neurons in the entire cortex is a reasonably conservative estimate. The cerebellum  lying close to the spinal column (Fig. lb) seems to mediate muscular activity and store the knowledge of graceful motor  skills. A unique feature of the human brain is the speech region of the cortex, which is located predominately in the left  hemisphere. This asymmetry is genetically determined, since it can be anatomically detected on a fetus as young as 5 months  (Eccles, 1973). It may serve as the basis for human culture.  As Polanyi (1962, 1965, 1968) and Anderson (1972) have emphasized, the scientific study of life falls naturally into a  hierarchy of boundary conditions. Leaving aside the development of atomic structure from quantum theory, a comprehensive  investigation of the human brain must consider at least the following levels:  (1) biochemistry from the chemical elements;  (2) membrane electrodynamics from biochemistry;  (3) neuron behavior from membrane dynamics and electromagnetic theory;  (4) neural network dynamics from neuron behavior;  (5) the elements of thought from network dynamics;  (6) psychology from the elements of thought;  (7) human personality and culture from psychology.  Each level of this hierarchy introduces additional "higher principles" which exist not in conflict with the principles of  physics but in addition to them. Levels (1) and (7) are beyond my ken, but levels (2) and (3) have been considered in a recent  review (Scott, 1975), and levels (4) and (5) are discussed in the next two sections of this paper. In Section IV, I attempt to  establish a philosophical perspective from which to appreciate a brief discussion of level (6).  II. THE MULTIPLEX NEURON  Those of us with a background in the physical sciences often underestimate the functional complexity of a single nerve cell,  describing it simply as a device that compares a weighted sum of dendritic (input) signals with some threshold level above  which an output pulse is transmitted along a branching axon. No better introduction could be suggested to the variety of  structures exhibited by real nerve cells than a few hours with Ram6n y Cajal's Histologie du Systeme Nerveux. From this  classic work I extract only  4 ALWYN C. SCOTT  Fic. 2. The Purkinje cell of the human cerebellum.  one drawing, the Purkinje cell in the human cerebellum shown in Fig. 2. The vast aborization of the dendritic fibers accepts  some 80,000 synaptic inputs each from an individual parallel fiber (Eccles, 1973, p. 124). Recent studies with the electron  microscope (Hamlyn, 1963; Poritsky, 1969) indicate a very complex encrusting of the cell body, and even the axon, with  synaptic contacts, as is indicated in Fig. 3. On the axonal (output) side it is often assumed that the "parent" fiber excites  all "daughters" at each branching point so the signal travels without interruption to every distal (distant) twig, but  experiments by Barron and Matthews (1935), Krnjevic and Miledi (1959), Chung, Raymond, and Lettvin (1970), Parnas (1972), and  Grossman, Spira, and Parnas (1973) cast doubt on this simple picture. In these studies, the branch points of some axons emerge  as  NEURODYNAMICS  5  FIG. 3. Synaptic contacts on the cell body of a cat's motoneuron (Poritsky, 1969). Reproduced with permission.  regions of low safety factor, where high-frequency blockage, alternate firing, and other forms of information processing can  occur. Branch point conductance might be influenced by small changes in local geometry and electric coupling, thus providing  locations for modification of neural transmission or learning. On the dendritic (input) side of the nerve cell body, the  situation is even less clear. There are experimental results indicating that information proceeds through the dendritic trees  of some neurons by purely passive means (Purpura & Grundfest, 1956; von Euler, Green, & Ricci, 1965; Grundfest, 1958), and a  corresponding mathematical theory of passive dendrites has been developed (Rail, 1959, 1962a, b; Butz & Cowan, 1974; Rinzel &  Rail, 1974; Jack, Noble, & Tsien, 1975) that essentially involves a linearized diffusion equation with space dependent  coefficients. But experiments indicating passive dendritic conductance are open to various interpretations (Bishop, 1958;  Eccles, 1960; Rail & Shepherd, 1968; Rail, 1970; Bogdanov & Golovchinskii, 1970), and there have been several studies implying  that action potentials can propagate at least on the larger branches of some dendritic trees (Lorente de N6, 1947; Cragg &  Hamlyn, 1955; Eyzaquirre & Kuffler, 1955; Fatt, 1957; Spencer & Kandel, 1961; Hild & Tasaki, 1962; Anderson, Holmquist &  Voorhoeve, 1966;  6 ALWYN C. SCOTT  Luk'yanov, 1970) and, in particular, those of Purkinje cells (Llinas, Nicholson, Freeman & Hillman, 1968; Nicholson & Llinas,  1971; Llinas & Nicholson, 1971). It has been pointed out by Lorente de N6 (1960), Arshavskii et al. (1965), Llinas (1969),  Pastushenko, Markin, and Chizmadzhev (1969a, b), Gutman (1971), Berkinblit et al. (1971), Scott (1973), and Gutman and  Shimoliunas (1973) that the dendrites should be able to perform elementary logical operations at branching points if they can  propagate action potentials or even decremental pulses. In simple terms (Scott, 1973), the branch will act as a logical "OR"  if a pulse on either daughter can supply sufficient charge to excite a pulse on the parent; otherwise it will be "AND." Some  time ago, Tauc and Hughes (1963) demonstrated such effects under antidromic (backward) stimulation of mollusk axons.  FIG. 4. The multiplex neuron. Shaded regions have low threshold and may perform logical operations. Courtesy of Dr. S. G.  Waxman, Harvard Medical School from Brain Res. 47, 269 (1972).  Thus we are led to consider a nerve cell to be at least as complex as the "multiplex neuron" suggested by Waxman (1972) and  reproduced in Fig. 4. He describes four distinct regions of information processing in a single cell: (1) The dendritec region,  in which both excitatory and inhibitory synaptic inputs are summed and (possibly) logical decisions are made at branches  (shaded). (2) The nerve body and initial axon segment, as shown in Fig. 3. Even the initial segment receives synaptic input to  assist in its decision to fire the axon. (3) The axonal tree, which is often covered by a myelin sheath which restricts  membrane current to active nodes and thereby speeds conduction (Scott, 1975). Temporal pulse codes along the main axon may be  translated to a spatial code at the tips of the axonal tree (Chung, Raymond & Lettvin, 1970). (4) The synaptic outputs,  NEURODYNAMICS  which can be modified by input contacts from other cells. In the jargon of integrated circuit technology, a nerve cell is more  like a "chip" than a single "gate."  In 1943 McCulloch and Pitts proposed that neurons might be approximately described by the following assumptions.  (1) The activity of the neuron is an "all-or-none" process.  (2) A certain fixed number of synapses must be excited within the period of latent addition in order to excite a neuron at any  time, and this number is independent of previous activity and position on the neuron.  (3) The only significant delay within the nervous system is synaptic delay (T).  (4) The activity of any inhibitory synapse absolutely prevents excitation of the neuron at that time.  (5) The structure of the net does not change with time.  Under these assumptions, McCulloch and Pitts began the development of a calculus of neural nets (see McCulloch, 1965, for a  collection of the important papers). Analytical implementation of the ideas expressed in (1)-(5) can be performed in several  ways. Under (1) it is inviting to represent the activity of a neuron as a logical proposition and write the neuron output as  where  a[x] = -}-1, for x > 0,  is the "signum" function. In (1) Yf takes values of , while the synaptic weights (a;) and the threshold (0) are real  numbers. The synaptic delay is represented by -r and often it is convenient to assume time to be quantized in units of T.  Equation (1) fails to express the possibility that a firing decision might depend upon inputs at times more remote than r  (dendritic memory), but this can be included by writing  Yf(t) = a[~ J t w;(t - t')~c(t') dt' - 0(t)], (3)  where wi(t) is a (real) function which (i) is zero for negative argument, (ii) rises to a maximum in a time of order T, and  (iii) eventually falls back to zero as t -* oo. On a longer time scale it is often of interest to consider the neuron as an  analog processor of information expressed as the rates of pulse trains. Then we can write  F(t) = S[~ affi(t)]. (4) s  Here F and the fi are real positive functions of time representing average firing rates,  and S[-] is a "sigmoid" type monotone increasing function (see Fig. 11).  ALWYN C. SCOTT  In their initial study, McCulloch and Pitts (1943) emphasized the distinction between neural nets with "circles" (i.e., closed  causal paths for logical feedback) and those without. "Nets without circles" lack the capacity for reverberatory activity and  are therefore analyzed with much less difficulty. In the survey of approaches to neural net analysis presented in the  following section, nets without circles are considered first. But Eqs. (1), (3), and (4) are approximate representations of  assumptions (1)-(5), which in turn seem an outrageously oversimplified description of the multipliex neuron in Fig. 3. One  justification is to suppose a single real neuron to be represented by several hundred or more formal neurons. This net  describing a real neuron is without circles, but counting is affected. Thus the above mentioned number of 101cortical  neurons should perhaps be interpreted as 1013 "formal neurons."  Since my aim is to suggest some difficulties in establishing a "calculus of mind," the formal neuron of McCulloch and Pitts is  accepted as an appropriately conservative assumption.  III. NEURAL NETWORKS  1. Nets without Circles  The study of neural nets without closed causal loops was vigorously pursued from the late 1950's to the mid 1960's. One focus  of this activity was the "Perceptron" idea, which began at Cornell as an attempt to construct computing machines that mimic  brains (Rosenblatt, 1962; Block, 1962; Block, Knight & Rosenblatt, 1962). A second was the ADALINE (acronym for ADAptive  LINear Element) developed at Stanford to implement some of the ideas on reliability of computation which had concerned von  Neuman (Widrow & Angell, 1962) and the related Lernmatrix introduced by Steinbuch (1961). An extensive bibliography of this  work is included in the excellent book Learning Machines by Nilsson, from which I extract here only the most elementary  concepts.  Suppose the Oi's in (1) are coordinates in an n-dimensional pattern space and Yf is to indicate which regions satisfy a  certain condition (Yf = +1) and which regions do not (1P = -1). Defining a weight vector  W = (al , 0421 ..., a. , B) (5)  and an augmented pattern vector   P - (9'1 102, ...10.,_01 (6)  the threshold condition (at which the argument of a[-] is zero) is   W - P = 0. (7)  This is evidently an (n - 1)-dimensional hyperplane in the space of the ~i's which  NEURODYNAMICS  attempts to divide those regions for which Yf should be +1 from those where IF should be -1. As a simple example consider Fig.  Sa, where n = 2 and Y is the predicate  TA = -f--1, if the pattern has property A,  = -1, if the pattern does not.  In this case there is a one-dimensional hyperplane (ai~i + 42 = B) which discriminates the patterns with property A. A  slightly more complex situation is indicated in Fig. 5b, where a single hyperplane that can discriminate property A does not  exist. However,  A  A  A  82  2v  (t)   FIG. 5. Discriminant hyperplanes for pattern recognition by Perceptrons.  10 ALWYN C. SCOTT  using the two predicates IF, and 'IJ2 indicated on the figure, it is clear that F,, can be computed as  11',, = VI, AND Y'2 . (8)  Often it is interesting to "train" (5) to classify correctly. Let us suppose it does not. That is to say, there is some  augmented pattern Pl with property A for which IF = -1 or  W-PI<0.  Changing the weight vector to  W --- W' = W -}- CPl  means that  WI .P1=W.PI+CIP112,  which is greater than zero if c satisfies the inequality  c > (-W - Pl)/I Pl 12.  (10)  Note that the threshold condition W - Pl = 0 is a hyperplane perpendicular to Pl in the space of the weight vector W. Thus a  change of W in the direction of Pl is the shortest distance to cross the threshold and, in this sense, (9) is an efficient  scheme for weight adjustment. The essence of the fundamental training theorem for a Perceptron is this: Assuming a  discriminating hyperplane exists, one will be found by iterating the weight adjustment indicated in (9). A satisfactory  hyperplane is, of course, not necessarily unique.  These ideas are so simple and appealing that it is difficult to avoid becoming overly enthusiastic. Thus the careful  evaluation of the Perceptron concept by Minsky and Papert (1969) is an important contribution which should be studied by all  who are interested in this subject. Choice of the O's is a crucial consideration, so Minsky and Papert restrict themselves to  the situation sketched in Fig. 6. Patterns are presented to a "retina" of R points, each of which may be black or white, and  each 0 is computed from a certain subset of the retinal points. A Perceptron is defined as follows. Consider a pattern, X, a  property or predicate IF (e.g., convexity, connectedness, the letter A, etc.) and a set of functions  = {Y'1 102, ..., `Y-} The predicate F(X) is linear with respect to 0 if there exist real numbers  ,..., aand 8 such that 'Y(X) is "true" (i.e.,  +1) if and only if  -101(X) + .. + a.0n(X) > e.  (12)  NEURODXNAMICS 11  RETINA CAN HAVE AN ARBITRARILY LARGE (R) # OF POINTS  FIG. 6. Diagram of a Perceptron.  We can then write  Y"(X) = Q[~ 4AX) - B,,  (13)  which constitutes a Perceptron for the predicate Yf(X). If pattern X has the property Yf, VV) = -F-1; if not, -(X) = -1.  The repertory of a set 0, L(O), is defined as the set of all predicates that can be computed as in (13) with appropriate  choice of the weights. The "game" of Minsky and Papert is to put restrictions on 0 to see what can be learned about the  corresponding L(O). They are particularly concerned with the following problems. (i) To view the retina as an R-dimensional  space of 2R pattern vectors obscures the real geometrical properties of patterns on R. There are meaningful geometric  properties which cannot be computed by Perceptrons. (ii) Size range for the weights is an important consideration. Predicates  in L(O) which require an impractically large range of the s are of limited interest. (iii) Time of convergence must be  considered in evaluating the learning scheme. A Perceptron can always "learn" by cycling through all weight vectors, but this  is impractical.  Minsky and Papert define diameter limited Perceptrons for which the inputs to any lie within a fixed distance and order  limited Perceptrons for which the number of points in the retina seen by each 0 is bounded by the order. Typical negative  results obtained for computation of "connectedness" are: (i) no diameter limited Perceptron can compute connectedness, and  (ii) an order limited Perceptron must be of order R (i.e., some 0 must look at every point in the retina) to compute  connectedness. Typical positive results are that simple geometrical figures (triangles, rectangles, alphabetical letters,  etc.) can be computed by diameter limited Perceptrons and by Perceptrons limited to low order.  12 ALWYN C. SCOTT  Perceptron ideas have been used to train a digital computer to play checkers (Samuel, 1959), and recently it has been  suggested independently by Marr (1969) and Albus (1971) that the Purkinje cell of the cerebellum (Fig. 2) may be essentially a  Perceptron which tunes muscular activity. But one should not jump to conclusions; considerably greater computing power would  be obtained (see Fig. 5b) if logical decisions were made at dendritic branches (see Fig. 4). Marr (1970) has extended his  picture of the cerebellum to a detailed discussion of information processing in the cerebral cortex. Here, however, it is'  necessary to consider also the influence of reverberatory activity.  2. Reverberatory Neutral Nets  In 1949 Hebb published his now classic Organization of Behavior, in which he attempted to bridge the gap between  neurophysiology and psychology by postulating the existence of a new hierarchical entity which he called the cell assembly. A  carefully developed introduction to this concept is contained in his recent textbook (Hebb, 1972) but the central notion is:  Any frequently repeated, particular stimulation will lead to the slow development of a "cell assembly," . . ., capable of  acting briefly as a closed system, delivering facilitation to other such systems and usually having a specific motor  facilitation. A series of such events constitutes a "phase sequence"-the thought process. Each assembly action may be aroused  by a preceding assembly, by a sensory event, or-normally-by both. The central facilitation from one of these activities on the  next is the prototype of "attention."  Hebb marshaled substantial psychological evidence to support this view against the conflicting claims of "field theory," which  denied the importance of individual neural connections, and "switchboard theory," which asserted direct connections between  sensory and motor neurons throughout the cortex. Something like the phase sequence is a palpable fact of thought. It can be  dramatically experienced as a "jumping" between perceptions of profile and front views in Picasso's (1937) painting of  Marie-Th6r6se Walter (Fig. 7), and Teuber (1974) has recently argued that the work of the Dutch engraver M. C. Escher was  directly influenced by early readings in Gestalt psychology. Another easily experienced sequence is the thought train of  dreaming, a vivid example of which has recently been given by Roszak (1973):  A sphere appears in my dream ... and becomes a ball, a familiar childhood toy I had forgotten. At once the dream begins to  heap up associations around this ball. It plays exuberantly with the word "ball" . . . with every possible rhyme, pun, slang  connotation, homonym. Suddenly, there are elegant people dancing on and around the ball; it has become a fancy-dress ball ...  where people are having a ball ... balling the jack ... drinking highballs ... getting drunk to the eyeballs ... Balls: a  man's balls ... to have balls ... to be on the ball. Ball: to ball a woman ... to ball up the job ... to bawl like a baby.  Ball: bald. Ball: fall ... as hair falls ... leaving you bald as a billiard ball. People named Ball: John Ball ... George Ball  ... Lucille Ball. Ball: Baltimore ... the Baltimore and Ohio ... highballing down the line ... And the dream plays too with  the form of the ball, until it reflects every sort of round, rolling, bouncing thin ... globes, planets, wheels, balloons,  bubbles, circles, eggs, oranges, coins, fireballs, goof balls, golf balls, footballs ... a baseball which is "the old apple" .  . , forbidden fruit ....  NEURODYNAMICS 13  FIG. 7. I'icasso's "Marie-Therese Walter." Either mirror image can (with practice) be viewed in front or profile, but practice  with (b)-the original-does not help with (a). From Goodbye Picasso by David Douglas Duncan, Copyright 1974 by David Douglas  Duncan. Used by permission of Grosset & Dunlap, Inc.  Hebb viewed the cell assembly as a "closed solid cage-work, or three-dimensional lattice, with no regular structure," and  supposed it to develop under the following conditions.  When an axon of cell A is near enough to excite a cell B and repeatedly or persistently takes part in firing it, some growth  process or metabolic change takes place in one or both cells such that A's efficiency, as one of the cells firing B, is  increased.  Although Hebb favored the strengthening of synaptic connections as an explanation for learning, the above assumption involves  no specific mechanism. It does, however, consider only an increase in firing efficiency. A computer test was conducted by  Rochester et al. (1956) that modeled 99 neurons as in (3) with no inhibition and assumed time to be quantized. They found a  diffuse reverberation with a period of the order of the refractory time, but they could not demonstrate the growth of cell  assemblies. Rochester et al. then talked with Milner, who was revising Hebb's learning assumption to include inhibition as a  decreasing efficiency of firing (Milner, 1957). Rochester et al. (1956) subsequently modified their program to include  inhibition in 512 neurons with 6 "external" neurons excited every 10 time steps by an organized signal plus noise. Cell  assemblies were found to develop with excitatory contacts between cells in the same assembly and inhibitory contacts between  adjacent assemblies. Thus two such assemblies could act as a "flip-flop." Griffith (1967) has demonstrated that a  "habituation" effect which gradually raises the  FIG. 8. Free running oscillation of two cell assemblies with mutual inhibition and habituation (redrawn from A View of the  Brain, by O. S. Griffith, Oxford University Press, 1967). Reproduced with permission.  threshold of a neuron during activity can change such a flip-flop into the "multivibrator" indicated in Fig. 8. When assembly  A ("Mode A" in Griffith's terminology) fires, it inhibits assembly B, but eventually the thresholds for neurons in assembly A  rise and it becomes extinguished. This removes the inhibition from assembly B, permitting it to fire. A significant aspect of  this study is the extremely rapid "turn-on", in usually one or two time increments.  Hebb discussed a hierarchical organization of cell assemblies, making particular reference to visual perception. Although we  will consider this concept in greater detail below, it seems appropriate to introduce the gist of it here. Noting that neural  mapping from the retina to area 17 of the visual cortex (see Fig. 1) is topological in the sense that angles are carried to  angles, he proposed lines and angles positioned through eye movement as the first-level cell assemblies (subassemblies)  localized in area 17. Since the connections from area 17 to area 18 are no longer topological but difFuse, this area can serve  as a location for assemblies which organize lines and angles into perceived geometrical figures such as triangles, rectangles,  circles, etc. And so on through the cortex.  In 1961 Caianiello proposed a detailed analysis of neural systems composed of elements as in (3), paying particular attention  to reverberatory states and their relation to thinking and consciousness. Caianiello, de Luca, and Ricciardi (1967)  investigated the reverberatory character of N formal neurons described as in (1) with every B (threshold) equal to zero, a  normal system. Time was assumed to be quantized in units of the synaptic delay, T; and a real variable, v, was introduced to  represent signal strength before proces-  NEURODYNAMICS 15  sing by the signum function. Thus the input to the firing decision for neuron h at time t -f- r is related to the states of  all neurons in the net at time t by  vh(t + r) - E ahk-[vk(t)]- (14) k  Introducing a vector description of the states of the N neurons at time t = mr as  vl(mr)  v,. - v(Mr) - 7J2(Mr) (15) vm-r)  permits (14) to be written in matrix form as  vm+l = Ao[vm~, (16)  where A :- [ahk] is the N x N matrix of interconnection strengths. A reverberation is defined as a sequence of states  vm --" vm+l --" ... ~ vm+R = vm ,  (17)  and Rr is the period. Even this greatly oversimplified model for a neural system has 2N states, and a reverberation that  cycled through them all would have a period of 2Nr sec. Taking N = 100 neurons and T = 10-2 sec. implies a period of about  1027 sec, which is much longer than the age of the universe! Caianiello, de Luca, and Ricciardi showed how the rank (K) of the  connection matrix could be used to establish an upper bound on the period of a reverberation. By partitioning the matrix A as  B B!1 )K rows  A  MB MBl1 - K  ) rows  (18)  K (N- K) columns columns  and defining g reduced vector vm' as  vm, _  v2m V Km  and also vm  vK+l.m tiK+2.m  ,  VN.m  (19a, b)  (16) can be written  vm+1 Lv" m+1  }(NB i BA o[v r,]  f _ (20) LMB MBA Iv[v" .  m]  480/151_2  16 ALWYN C. SCOTT  Thus  vm+r = B[-[vm ] + Ila[Mvm ]], (21)  i.e., the reduced vector at time m -{-- 1 depends only upon the reduced vector at time m. At any time v",, = Mvm', and  therefore a[v,,, ] has just 2K states. The signum function has the property o[xy] = a[x] - a[ y]. Thus we can write  a[Mvm] = a[M] a[vm] (22)  if we assume that the matrix M has only a single element in each row and column. Then the period of a reverberation is bounded  by  Without assuming quantized time or zero threshold, Caianiello, de Luca, and Ricciardi also showed that the reverberatory  system would have (N - K) constants of the motion. To see this rewrite (16) as  v(t) = Aa[v(t - T)] - 9, (24)  where A - col(B. ,..., B, is a threshold vector. Taking the scalar product of (24) with a constant, N component vector y  gives  g(t) = y - v(t) = y - Av[v(t -,r)] - y - 9.  If y is chosen so  then  YA = (0, 0,..., 0) (25)  g= -Y-e. (26)  For A and N X N matrix of rank K, there are (N - K) independent vectors, y, which satisfy (25) and give (N - K) constant  values for g in (26). See Aiello, Burattini, and Caianiello (1970) for further discussion of constants of the motion and  learning invariant rank.  A system of N neural elements and, therefore, 2N states can also be described in terms of a state diagram which indicates the  evolution that the system undergoes as time increases. For three elements there are eight states of the vector (nl , n2 , n3)  where nz = l , and, as indicated in Fig. 9, each of these can be designated by a point. Only one arrow leaves each state  indicating the unique state for the next time increment, but any number of arrows can enter a state. Thus emerges a basic  nerve net property: irreversibility in time. Reverberations are related to the closed cycles, and "transients" to paths which  are not  NEURODYNAMICS 17  Fic. 9. One of the 23state diagrams for a logic machine with three elements.  included in cycles. If the system is initiated in state (111), it will go through state (-111) before entering a reverberation  of period 2.  In general, each of the neural elements may be an arbitrary Boolean function with N inputs. Since there are 2N input  combinations and the output can be 1 for each, there are  22N  Boolean functions of N inputs. Each of the N neural elements can be any of these functions so there are  XB - 2N2N  (27)  possibilities for the system. If we restrict the neural elements to the threshold calculation indicated in (1), not all of  these possibilities can be realized. The simple state diagram of Fig. 9, for example, demands that the first element decide -1  when the inputs are (111) and (-1 - 1 - 1), but it must decide +1 for other inputs. As was indicated in Fig. 5, this decision  cannot be made by a threshold element. The number of threshold logic functions of N inputs is not exactly known, but for large  N it is approximately (Yajima, Ibaraki & Kawano, 1968)  2kNi  where 2 < k < 1. The corresponding number of N element threshold systems is then  XT - 2kN3. (28)  The ratio -NTI.NB falls rapidly to zero as N increases; for only seven neural elements it is 0.548 x 10-2. Thus it is  important to know whether a neuron computes an arbitrary Boolean function (as might be inferred from the "multiplex neuron of  Fig. 4) when making numerical estimates of the dynamical possibilities for a neural system.  Consider next a system for which only m < 2N of the state transitions are specified.  18 ALWYN C. SCOTT  Yajima et al. define R(m, N) as the ratio of threshold systems to the total number of Boolean systems with this specification  and show that  R(oN, N) , 0, for a > 2,  -> 1, for a < 2,  as N --> oo. Thus threshold logic imposes little restriction on the realization of an N element system as long as less than 2N  transitions in the state diagram are specified.  SALIVATION  GASTRIC SECRETION  INTERACTION REGION  VISCERAL CONTROL  I  FIG. 10. Schematic representation of Pavlov's classical conditioning experiment (redrawn from Ishihara, 19716). Reproduced  with permission.  These considerations may be useful for extending and evaluating the discussions by Ishihara (1971a, b) of the interactions  between reverberations. Referring to Fig. 10, he describes Pavlov's classical conditioned reflex experiment in the following  manner. The food-salivation mechanism is assumed to be established as a reverberation A in area 19, where the loop of dots  represents a sequence of states (as in Fig. 9) rather than the successive firing of individual neurons. When the bell is  repeatedly rung, a correponding train of pulses passes through the thalamus and projects to areas 41 and 42 of the temporal  lobe (see Fig. 1), eventually establishing reverberatory activity B in area 22. Simultaneous stimulation by the bell and the  meat leads to the development of an interaction between assemblies A and B, which eventually permits A to be stimulated by the  bell via B without the presence of the meat. Ishihara has been primarily concerned with the representation of such an  interaction in the context of Caianiello's neuronic equations (16); below we will consider some more physical descriptions of  how such a long-range interaction could occur.  The computational difficulty of dealing with a dynamic system as complex as a hundred or more formal neurons led Shimbel and  Rapoport (1948) to consider the development  NEURODYNAMICS 19  of a statistical neurodynamics, and Rapoport (1952) used this approach to study the "ignition" phenomenon in a neural network.  Smith and Davisdon (1962) presented a simple description of this effect, which assumed a network of N neurons each having e  excitatory connections coming randomly from the other neurons. Time was assumed to be quantized and inputs were summed over s  time units. Calling the activity or fraction of cells firing F the probability of a cell receiving i units of excitation over  the previous s time units on e inputs is'  (se) i  . Fi(1 - r+)se-i _ Se Fi(1 -F)--i  i!(se - i)! - i '  The probability of firing, S, is the sum of this quantity for all i > 0 (the threshold) so i=9  An equilibrium condition for substained activity is  S(F) = F (30)  Stable F  FIG. 11. Solution plot for (30).  1 As any craps shooter should know. '  20 ALWYN C. SCOTT  which is easily shown to be satisfied for F = 0 (no activity) and F ---- 1 (maximum activity). If 1 < B < se, S(F) has the  sigmoid shape indicated in Fig. 11, so there is an intermediate equilibrium at which  dS/dF > 1. (31)  Thus a slight increase (decrease) in F causes a greater increase (decrease) during the next time increment and the  intermediate equilibrium point is always unstable. Ashby, von Foerster, and Walker (1962) saw this effect as "something of a  paradox" because the brain does indeed exhibit an intermediate state of activity. Confusion arises here because the completely  statistical representation of a nerve net fails to distinguish between (say) 1 % of the neurons firing at maximum rate and all  the neurons firing at 1 % of the maximum rate. Thus, in the context of Hebb's discussion, the paradox can be resolved by  supposing that (29) and Fig. 11 apply to the neurons of a particular cell assembly with inhibitory connections to neighboring  assemblies.  Statistical neurodynamics might be considered as a procedure for establishing the "laws of thought" from network dynamics  (level (5) in the introduction) just as statistical thermodynamics derives the gas laws from molecular dynamics. For careful  treatments see Rozonoer (1969), Amari (1971, 1974), and also the combined numerical and analytic study by Burattini and Liesis  (1972). The difficulty, of course, is that the organization of a neural mass into (say) cell assemblies determines which  aspects of the mass may be treated statistically, and it is just this organization which is not evident from the study of  neural nets. Some notion, such as the cell assembly, is necessary as a working hypothesis in order to proceed.  White (1961) was among the first to consider the dynamics of cell assemblies in relation to the "ignition" phenomena displayed  by random neural nets. For a net with N neurons he began with a simple version of the equilibrium condition (30) in the form  F = S(P -}- PNF), (32)  where P is an external input to the net and P is a coefficient which expresses interconnectedness. Inhibition is included by  supposing P to be originally negative; it gradually becomes positive as the net develops into an assembly under repeated  stimulation by P. Rewriting (32) as  S-1(F) = P -}- #NF (33)  and referring to Fig. 12a and 12b, it is clear that for fl negative or positive but less than the minimum slope  dS-i(F)/dF I min ,  F will return to zero as P is reduced to zero. However, when repeated stimulation by P increases fl so it satisfies the  inequality  P > dS-1(F)/dF min, (34)  there are two stable states of activity, as shown in Fig. 12c.  NEURODYNAMICS 21  S-' (F) -  j8<0  P  S kF)  F  Resting State  F  (a) (b) (cl  FIG. 12. Solution plot for (32) showing the growth of a cell assembly.  For two cell assemblies, N1 and N,, equilibrium equations can be written  S-1(Fi) = P1 + N11N1F1 -f- i912N2F2, (35a)  S-1(F2) = P2 + 1921NIF1 -I- N22NA - (35b)  Let us assume that 91, and 92, both are large enough so the assemblies can be individually ignited. Then if N21012) is also  positive, it is impossible to ignite assembly 1(2) without also stimulating assembly 2(1). This is in agreement with the  computer studied by Rochester et al. (1956) and Griffith (1967) which indicated the need for inhibition between assemblies. If  912 and P21 are both negative, a variety of solutions to (35) can be obtained involving the ignition of one or both assemblies.  Following an initial attempt by Harth and Edgar (1967) to model the cortex as a mass of association neurons which were highly  damped so reverberations would not occur, Harth et al. (1970) turned to the idea of cell assemblies (called netlets). They  begin with a careful review of the biological evidence supporting Hebb's theory, which includes: (i) the experiential response  to electrical stimulation of the cortex (Penfield & Perot, 1963); (ii) Mountcastle's (1957) observation of radial columns of  neurons in the somatosensory cortex of the cat which appear to act as "elementary units of organization"; (iii) the suggestion  by Hubel and Wiesel (1962) of a functional hierarchy for cell pools in the cat's visual cortex; and (iv) intracortical  microstimulation of the cat's motor cortex by facilitating currents as low as 2pA (Asanuma et al. 1968), which indicates that  "the basic design of motorsensory cortex includes radially arranged colonies of functionally related neurons." Since the  cortex contains some 101neurons, any attempt at a holistic description must greatly reduce the number of parameters  considered. Cell assemblies serve as appropriate "macrostates" which are random in the small and organized in the large. Harth  et al. carefully stake out their position:  0<je<  1-s-:11 dmin  P  Unstable 1/7 p> dS''j dF min  22 ALWYN C. SCOTT  It should by no means be taken for granted that such neuronal macrostates must exist, nor that their description can be made  sufficiently simple to be of practical value. However, both will be assumed here. It is difficult to see how significant  progress in understanding the brain can ever be achieved unless these two assumptions are justified.  They then describe the ways in which cell assemblies could interact in the cortex to process information and to model the  conditioned reflex. Learning is assumed to proceed according to Caianiello's (1961) adiabatic learning hypothesis under which  the coupling coefficients (the ahk in (14)) change slowly on the time scale for reverberatory activity. The detailed  mathematical analysis is described in a companion paper by Anninos et al. (1970). In a series of subsequent papers, Anninos  (1972a, b, 1973) and his associates (Anninos & Elul, 1974; Cyrulnik et al. 1974) present a variety of numerical results on the  dynamical behavior of single cell assemblies.  In a more detailed discussion, Wilson and Cowan (1972) consider two subpopulations of neurons; excitatory and inhibitory, for  which the fraction firing per unit time are described by two dependent variables E(t) and I(t). After a cell fires, it is  assumed to be refractory for a time r, so the fraction of excitatory cells ready to fire at time t is  1 - f tt r E(t') dt' 1 - rE(t),  with a corresponding expression for the inhibitory cells. Assuming the delay time for firing to be a value r, Wilson and Cowan  write a dynamic equation  E(t -{- r) = [1 - rE(t)] Se[1PlE(t) - 92I(t) + P(t)], (36)  where Se is a sigmoid response curve for the excitatory neurons, P(t) is an external input to the excitatory neurons, and both  fl, and N2 are positive interconnection constants. Using the approximation  r E(t + r) - E(t) .. r dE r dt '  (36) becomes an ordinary differential equation for E(t)  r dE = -E -{- (1 - rE) SeL8,E - #2I -I- P] (37a)  and similarly for I(t), the inhibitory subpopulation,  r dt = -I -}- (1 - rI) Si[sE - #aI -I- Q], (37b)  NEURODYNAMICS 23  where Q is an input specifically directed to the inhibitory neurons. Equilibrium conditions from (37) can be written  PsI = PE + P - Se' (1 ErE1  PsE = 941 - Q + SO (1 I rll'  for dE = 0, (38a)  for dt =0 . (38b)  From (38b), E is a monotone increasing function of I along the locus (in the E-I phase plane) where dI/dt = 0. From (38a),  however, I is not necessarily a monotone increasing function of E along the locus where dEf dt = 0. Two possibilities are  displayed in Fig. 13, where the directions of trajectories along the equilibrium lines can be established frorn reference to  (37). A larger value of #I and a smaller value of P4 favor the formation of stable equilibrium points indicated in Fig. 13a  over the oscillatory behavior in Fig. 13b. Transitions from one equilibrium point to the other in Fig. 13a can be accomplished  by moving "the dEldt = 0 locus" right and left through the excitatory input P or by moving the "dIldt = 0 locus" up and down  with Q.  E  E  FIG. 13. Phase plane trajectories for excitatory and inhibitory subpopulations from (38).  Having suggested the notion of a cell assembly as an atomistic entity, it is interesting to consider how many assemblies might  exist in the human brain. This is a difficult question, but Legendy (1967) has obtained some results from a rather simple  model. He assumes that the brain is already organized into "subassemblies" and discusses their organization into assemblies.  The assembly and one of its subassemblies variously represent "a setting and a person who is part of it, a word and one of its  letters, an object  24 ALWYN C. SCOTT  and one of its details." Interconnections are assumed evenly distributed over the brain to avoid the complications of spatial  organization. Subassemblies and assemblies are like neurons in that a threshold of excitation must be exceeded for ignition,  but they are also bistable; as indicated in Fig. 12c, they may remain in an active state (subject to the constraints of  habituation) as well as in a resting state. While the threshold for a subassembly is assumed to be a certain number of active  neurons, the threshold for an assembly is a certain number of active subassemblies. Assembly storage has two advantages over  neuron storage: (i) Physical damage will not destroy specific assemblies, but degrade many by roughly equal degrees; and (ii)  the development of interconnections is much more plastic for assemblies than for neurons.  Legendy considers the subassemblies to be formed through "weak" contacts, and assumes assemblies to develop from subassemblies  through the change of "latent" into "strong" contacts between neurons. In his notation,  B = number of neurons in the brain,  C = maximum number of assemblies in the brain, N = number of neurons in a subassembly,  y = number of subassemblies in an assembly, and a = number of strong (latent) contacts per neuron.  Legendy furthur assumes that half of the strong (latent) contacts make output (axonal) connections and the other half make  input (dendritic) connections. Then he defines  m = maximum number of strong contacts from an assembly to one of its subassemblies.  The number of output contacts from an assembly is ( 2 Nya) and those connecting to a subassembly reach a fraction NIB of the  neurons in the brain. Therefore,  m = N2ya/(2B). (39)  The maximum capacity of the brain is reached when about one-half of the latent contacts have become strong; thus  C = Ba/(2my).  Substitution of (39) into (40) gives an estimate for the maximum number of assemblies which can be stored in the brain as  C = (Bl(Ny))2. (41)  This estimate is insensitive to the maximum number of strong contacts assumed for each  NEURODYNAMICS 25  neuron and to the number of subassemblies. Taking B = 101neurons in the brain, N = 104 neurons/subassembly, and y = 30  subassemblies/assembly gives  C = 109 assemblies.  Considering how much more complex is the "multiplex neuron" of Fig. 4 than the simple representation employed by Legendy, this  may be a conservative estimate for "the number of elementary things the brain can know"; but, as he points out, 109 is the  number of seconds in 30 years. Griffith (1971) has reviewed various estimates for the storage capacity of the brain which  indicate a lower bound of 108 bits (about equal to the information content of the Encyclopedia Britannica estimated at one bit  per character) and an upper bound of 1011 bits (corresponding to an average storage rate of 50 bits/sec. for 60 years). He  feels that a reasonable value lies in the range from 109 to 1019 bits.  3. Spatial Effects  Up to this point we have ignored spatial organization of the neural interconnections. Such organization is clearly evident  from Fig. 1 and such questions as: "How could an auditory reverberation in area 22 communicate or interact with an optical  reverberation in area 19?" will now be considered. Beurle (1956) began the analysis of wave effects by assuming the "neural  medium" to be composed of p threshold elements per unit volume and for which  P(x) dx = the average number of connections from one cell to an infinite plane of thickness dx and distance x away,  F = the activity or the fraction of cells becoming active per unit of time, R = the fraction of cells which are sensitive,  i.e., not refractory,  0 = the probability of a sensitive cell being stimulated above threshold per unit time, and  T = the operating (synaptic) delay.  Assuming that the cells after firing remain in a refractory state (unable to fire) for a time which is longer than the  duration of the disturbance being considered, each firing diminishes the fraction of sensitive cells, R. Thus  2R/8t = -F. (42)  The firing rate at t + T is equal to R times the probability of a sensitive cell being stimulated above threshold. Thus  F(t + T) = R(t) 0(t)  or, as in (37)  T(8F/8t) = (RO -F). (43)  26 ALWYN C. SCOTT  Partial derivatives are indicated in (42) and (43) because dependence upon distance (x) is considered as well as upon time  (t). Beurle assumed P(x) to be an exponentially decreasing probability of interconnection and showed  where m is a real proportionality constant. More generally,  0 = p(e - 1) J F(x', t) P(x - x') dx' (45)  = p(B - 1) F ~, (45')  where (D indicates the convolution operation in (45) and p(B - 1) is the probability of a cell being just one input pulse  below threshold. If p(B - 1) is assumed constant and the spatial extent of #(x) is small compared with that of the disturbance  being considered, (45) reduces to (44) with m equal to p times the area under P(x).  Here we will assume (44) and suppose F and R to be the traveling wave solutions of velocity u shown in Fig. 14. Then  F(x, t) = F(x - ut) = F(e), (46a)  R(x, t) = R(x - ut) = R(e), (46b)  For 0  RO  R  -i ~-ut  f  (c) f' x-ut  FIG. 14. Propagation of a wave of activity in a neural medium.  NEURODYNAMICS 27  where  is the space coordinate in a frame moving with the assumed velocity u. Equations (42) and (43) become  u d~ = F, (47a)  UT d~ = F(1 - mR), (47b)  or   T dF/dR = 1 - mR, (48)  which can be integrated over R to obtain the parabolic trajectory   F = K + R - (m/2) R2, (49)  sketched in Fig. 14d. Note that the velocity (u) at which the wave of activity propagates is not determined by the  calculation. This indeterminacy is connected with the wave instability of the wake (R2), discussed by Beurle (1956). Given a  R2 = (2/m) - RI, (50)  as indicated in Fig. 14d, but it is unstable against growth to Rl or collapse to zero. The reason for such instability is that  no inhibition has been assumed, just as in Fig. 11.  Beurle suggested qualitative features of the interconnection probability which might stabilize a wave, and went on to consider  mechanisms for embedding the engrams of a time sequential memory in a neural mass which are quite similar to more recent  discussions for "holographic" information storage in the cortex (van Heerden, 1963; LonguetHiggins, 1968; Gabor, 1968a, b,  1969; Pribram, 1969, 1971; Borsellino & Poggio, 1972). These, in turn, are related to quasi-harmonic modal representations of  cell assemblies developed by Greene (1962) and by Ricciardi and Umezawa (1967) which have been experimentally demonstrated  (Scott, 1971).  A much more detailed analysis has recently been published by Wilson and Cowan (1973) which assumes subpopulations of  excitatory and inhibitory neurons to be described by the firing rates E(x, t) and I(x, t). The result of their study was an  augmentation of (37) to the form  T at = -E + (1- rE) S.[P.E O gee(x) - PiI O Nie(x) + Pl, (51 a)  T at = -I -}- (1 - rI) Si[PeE O Pei(x) - Pi, O Nn(x) + Ql, (51b) in which Pee(x), Pie(x), Nei(x), Nii(x) are the  "excitatory-excitatory," etc., interconnection  28 ALWYN C. SCOTT  probabilities and 0 stands for the convolution operation defined in (45). Equations (51) evidently reduce to (37) when the  /3's have a spatial extent which is small compared with the disturbance under consideration.  Numerical studies of (51) with physiologically reasonable assumptions for the constants and connection probabilities have  already yielded a variety of interesting results, some of which are reproduced from Wilson and Cowan (1973) in Fig. 15.  0.2 E(x,tl) 0.1 1(x0)  0 0.2  E(x,t2) 1(x,t2) E(x,t3) I( x,t 3 )  0 0.2 0.1 0  ~ttttt~ttttt~ttttts~  M  0.4 E(x,t,) 0.2 1(x0) 0  E(x,t2) 0.4 1(x,t2)  0.2  0.4  E(x,t )  3 0.2 1(x,t3)  0  04  E(xJ,)  0.2  1(x0) 0  0.4 E(02) 0.2 1(x,12)  E(x,t3)0..2 1(x,13 ) 0.2  Lam.  0 200 600 1000 0 .200 600 1000 0 200 600 1000  X (microns) X (microns) X(microns)  (a) (b) (c)  FIG. 15. Numerical solutions of the Wilson-Cowan equations (51): (a) a local disturbance; (b) an example of binocular fusion;  and (c) a wave of excitation and inhibition (redrawn from Wilson & Cowan, 1973). Reproduced with permission.  In Fig. 15a, a localized transient is observed in response to the localized stimulation  P(x, t) = 0, for x < 20 f,m,  x > 800 I.m,  = P, for 200 Ncm < x < 800 pm, 0 < t < t,.  This transient exhibits a latent edge enhancement effect.  In Fig. 15b, the steady-state response is observed for localized inputs at two adjacent points. Once a double response has  formed (B) it can be maintained at a much smaller input separation (C) than originally at (A), This "hysteresis" effect  closely simulates that observed by Fender and Julesz (1967) of binocular fusion.  In Fig. 15c, Q has been set to a constant positive level and a localized input is observed to stimulate outward traveling  waves. These waves are qualitatively similar to FitzHughNagumo waves on the nerve fiber (Scott, 1975) with I(x, t) playing the  role of "recovery variable." They differ from Beurle's waves (Fig. 14) because the refractory time (r) is short compared with  the duration of the disturbance; thus a single neuron can fire several times during passage of the pulse.  NEURODYNAMICS 29  IV. KNOWLEDGE OF THE MIND  1. Toward an Inductive Strategy  In the introduction to this paper, I mentioned the hierarchical structure exhibited by modern scientific knowledge. That this  structure is a present-day fact must be accepted; whether it will necessarily remain as scientific knowledge continues to  evolve is a question to which scientists provide no unified answer. There is certainly a tendency to consider some levels of  knowledge as more "fundamental" than others. Such levels are generally those in which the reductive and analytical techniques  of classical science have proven most successful. Scientists working at other levels of the hierarchy often evaluate  themselves according to the degree with which they can imitate the more fundamental levels. Psychology and sociology, for  example, are considered "soft" studies because they lack simple basic laws from which relevant phenomena can be derived. For  those who feel that all knowledge will eventually be related to the logical foliation of a few fundamental laws  (characterized, perhaps, by a parsimonious and aesthetic appeal which reflects their divine nature), these soft studies are  simply incomplete. As they mature, many feel, they will assume more and more the character of "real" science. But there is an  ingenuous air about this point of view which is difficult for many scientists to accept (Weyl, 1949; Bohr, 1950, 1958;  Bronowski, 1966; Platt, 1966; Elsasser, 1958, 1963, 1969; Blackburn, 1971; Mehra, 1973; Wheeler, 1974; Weizenbaum, 1975). One  obvious reason for the successes of classical physics is that eighteenth and nineteenth century physicists directed their  attention toward the simplest outstanding problems; they chose the easy paths and then claimed these to be fundamental. It is  unfortunate, in my view, that this attitude tends to set the style for scientific efforts at other levels.  General scientific activity can be resolved into inductive and deductive components. Inductive science is creative. It  requires the imagination of new"paradigms" (perceptions, notions, or beliefs) which are more acceptable than former ones  (Kuhn, 1962). In classical science, most of the professional activity is deductive; the logical implications of currently  accepted ideas are exhaustively explored. At levels (6) and (7) of the hierarchical scheme outlined in the Introduction,  however, no widely acceptable paradigms are available, thus the activity must remain primarily inductive.  Suppose that our aim is induct a theoretical basis for level (6) which is modeled upon classical physics. There are at least  two impediments which we must evaluate and try to overcome: indeterminacy and complexity. Let us take them in order.  Indeterminacy. A predictive theory of dynamic behavior requires that it be possible (in principle, at least) to make  measurements of initial data from which the future course of events can be computed. Difficulties arise, however, when a  prediction is made of the behavior of a cognitive system that, in turn, learns of the prediction. Since the prediction then  becomes part of the initial data, that prediction is not necessarily valid. If I decide to prove a behaviorist wrong, any  "prediction" he makes of my future activity can serve as a key element in my choice. A "prediction" of social catastrophe may  induce compensating countermeasures.  30 ALWYN C. SCOTT  A second source of indeterminacy at level (6) can arise from linguistic ambiguity. A simple example of the sort of logical  contradiction which can appear in linguistic systems is given by the statement: This statement is false. If we assume it is  false, then it is obviously true; but if we assume it is true, it is easily proven to be false. The contradiction arises  because the statement refers to itself. Bronowski (1966) has emphasized that any reasonably rich linguistic system contains  self-references and is therefore potentially self-contradictory. This observation is closely related to a skeleton in the  closet of twentieth century science: Godel's (1931) incompleteness theorem. This theorem demonstrates that arithmetic cannot  be given a satisfactory axiomatic basis. If such axioms are assumed to permit the proof of all true theorems, it will be  possible to prove false theorems; and if the axioms are restricted so no false theorems can be proved, then there will always  be true theorems which cannot be proved. Although the implications of Godel's theorem for the "man-machine" controversy have  probably been overemphasized (Nagel & Newman, 1958; Arbib, 1964; George, 1972), the implications for the style of scientific  endeavor have been almost completely ignored. We must admit that the various languages employed in human intercourse are as  rich as arithmetic and are riddled with self-reference. Since the idea that all truth can be developed from a few postulates  does not even apply to arithmetic, there is very little justification (beyond a vaguely sentimental desire for certainty in  the midst of chaos) to expect the knowledge of life to be organized in this way.  Predictive indeterminacy is not unfamiliar to physical scientists. To compute the trajectory of a classical particle (a  baseball, rocket ship, planet, etc.) it is necessary to measure both its position and its velocity at some instant of time.  But for very small particles (e.g., electrons) measurement of position destroys knowledge of velocity and vice versa. This  palpable failure of classical science has been elevated by physicists to the "Heisenberg principle of indeterminacy."  According to Herman Weyl (1949), Niels Bohr was  inclined to widen the domain of uncertainty by adding a specific biological principle of indeterminacy (the precise content of  which is still unknown) to Heisenberg's well-established quantum-mechanical principal of indeterminacy. He has pointed out in  this connection that an observation of the state of the brain cells exact enough for a fairly definite prediction of the  victim's behavior during the next few seconds may involve an encroachment of necessarily lethal effect-and thereby make the  organism predictable indeed. Bohr maintains that in this way analysis of vital phenomena by physical concepts has its natural  limits; just as one had to put up with complementarity as expressed by Heisenberg's principle of indeterminacy in order to  explain the stability of atoms, so are further renouncements demanded of him who tries to account for the self-stabilization  of living organisms.  Skinner makes the point (and I agree) that "neurology" and "behaviorism" should be considered as distinct levels in the  scientific hierarchy, and the experimental difficulties of one should not be permitted to impede the other. Yet even in terms  of the behaviorist, "complete initial data" imply knowledge of all stimulations and conditionings throughout the life of the  organism. Although it is certainly possible to predict something with limited initial data, substantial data difficulties are  necessarily involved in the prediction of everything. As Bohr (1958) put it,  NEURODYNAMICS 31  The decisive point is that, if we attempt to predict what another person will decide to do in a given situation, not only must  we strive to know his whole background, including the story of his life in all respects which may have contributed to form his  character, but we must realize that what we are intimately aiming at is to put ourselves in his place.  In response to such difficulties, Skinner (1969) lists a dozen indications of technical progress which has been made in the  experimental analysis of behavior over the past 35 years. These include: (i) "Experiments last, not for an hour, but for many  hours, days, weeks, or even months"; (ii) "The past history of the organism is more carefully controlled, possibly from  birth"; (iii) "Many more species have been studied, including man (retardates, psychotics, normal children, and normal  adults)"; (iv) "Many more reinforcers have been studied-including, in addition to food and water, sexual stimulation, the  opportunity to behave aggressively, and the production of novel stimuli"; and (v) "The experimental space often contains two  or more organisms with interlocking contingencies which generate `synthetic social relations'."  Such experimental difficulties introduce the second impediment to establishing a classical science at level (6):  Complexity. Platt (1966) suggests that if dynamic complexity could be translated into visible brightness, "An earthworm would  be a beacon, a dog would be a city of light, and human beings would stand out like blazing suns of complexity, flashing bursts  of meaning to each other through the dull night of the physical world between." A scintillating metaphor, the skeptic might  comment, but what does it mean? Can complexity be measured? :Is there any reason to suppose (in the age of the digital  computer) that the behavior of complex dynamic systems cannot be predicted just as well as simple systems?  In attempting to answer such questions, we must remember that at level (6) we are engaged in an inductive activity. To  determine regularities of behavior, it is necessary to run a number of experimental trials which is large compared with the  number of possible experimental results. Take, as a simple example, the problem of determining whether a particular die is  "loaded." In any given trial, there are 6 possible results; thus 6 or 12 or 18 rolls will tell almost nothing about the  relative tendencies of the faces to appear. But 6000 or 6,000,000 rolls will. Another approach, of course, would be to cut the  die into thin slices and analyze each for nonuniformities of density. In this way we would get the answer at the cost of  destroying the subject of study. The difficulty at level (6) is that one very readily comes upon dynamic systems for which the  number of distinctly different modes of behavior becomes too large to handle.  How large is "too large" ? This question has been carefully studied over the past 20 years by Elsasser (1958, 1966, 1969) in  an "elaboration and substantial extension of Bohr's germinal ideas." He uses the notion of a finite universe to determine a  number  M N 10110 N 2365  which is the product of the number of protons in the universe times the number of microseconds in the lifetime of the  universe. Numbers large compared with M are called immense, and any set with an immense number of elements cannot be studied  by statistical  480/15/1-3  32  ALWYN C. SCOTT  methods. A similar notion has independently been suggested by Bremermann (1967) as a fundamental limit of computing machines.  Consider now (27), which gives the number of state diagrams that can be formed from N arbitrary Boolean elements with N  inputs. For N =--= 1, .NB = 4 state diagrams which are easily sketched. But suppose we ask how big N must be for .Ns > M. The  answer is 6. Only six model neurons (each of which can compute an arbitrary Boolean function of the states othe six neurons)  can exhibit an immense number of state diagrams! If the neuron computations are restricted to threshold discriminations, as in  (28), then 9 or 10 elements are required to obtain an immense number of state diagrams.  Suppose that we have before us a "black box" which contains a dozen or so interconnected model neurons. There are at least two  reasons why the immense number of possible states might be of little practical interest. (i) We might know exactly how the  model neurons are interconnected and what each of them computes. This would allow us to precisely determine the particular  state diagram embodied by the box. In this case the box could be considered a "machine" in the normal sense of the word. One  of an immense number of possible configurations, it is nonetheless quite simple and well understood. (ii) The various state  diagrams might be functionally equivalent for the application of interest. We might, for example, use it to generate flashing  lights at an art show. Then only the average firing rate of the neurons would be of interest, and many of the state diagrams  would be functionally equivalent. Or we could use it as a paperweight, making all the state diagrams functionally irrelevant.  But, on the other hand, we might be in the position of not knowing how the neurons in the box are connected and wishing to  understand the dynamics of the corresponding state diagram. If we are not allowed to open the box, the only recourse is to  investigate and record its dynamic behavior.  Perhaps a comment is appropriate here on the definition of a "machine." The word is often used to imply a causal and  determinate system of known structure for which the behavior can be predicted. But when the term appears in such a phrase as  "The brain is merely a meat machine" it seems to imply no more than a dynamical system of undetermined predictability and  complexity. I have no quarrel with either usage if the intent is clear, but it is a long leap to assume that rejecting belief  in magic automatically eliminates mystery. Nowadays, indeed, dynamical systems constructed by engineers are not necessarily  understandable in times short enough to be of practical interest (Wiener, 1960; Weizenbaum, 1972).  Let us return to the problem of constructing a predictive theory for the mind of a particular human subject. In addition to  isolating the subject from all knowledge of our predictions, we must communicate in a language which has been purged of  inconsistencies. Poetry would be tabu and even puns might cause difficulty. Finally, of course, we would have to investigate  the behavior of the subject in some nondestructive way. Can we expect an immense number of interesting behavioral sequences?  To answer this, suppose the subject to have C cell assemblies each representing a particular face, word, picture, idea, etc.  Consider the counting of phase sequences in which n assemblies are activated:  n = 0, 1 state (comatose);  n = 1, C states (each representing the activation of a single assembly).  NEURODYNAMICS 33  For n = 2, we must form all possible pairs of assemblies. With each assembly, (C - 1) others can be paired, but the product  C(C - 1) counts each pair twice. Thus  n = 2, 1 C(C - 1) sequences (similes, metaphors, puns),  n ---- 3, [1 /(2 - 3)] C(C - 1)(C - 2) triplet sequences,  i  n = n, n~(C,C1. n)1 - ( n ) n-fold sequences.  The sum of all these sequences  is immense for C > 365 assemblies; but this is not an important observation because thought trains involving large numbers of  perceptual elements are impractical. One must sleep. Much more interesting is the question: How many assemblies must we  include in a phase sequence for the number of sequences to become immense? For what n is (n) > M? This question is readily  answered, since for n < C,  For C = 109 (as we estimated in the previous section), (n) is immense when n > 12. Thus Roszak's thought train (quoted above)  appears to be one of an immense set. A more significant example is presented at the end of this paper.  The difficulties which beset those attempting to establish psychology as a classical science are analogous to the problems  faced by physicists in developing a dynamics for subatomic particles. This analogy is more than superficial, as De Luca and  Termini (1971) have emphasized; there is "a very strong relation between the new epistemological problems raised by  cybernetics and quantum mechanics." In both cases, the aim is to construct a dynamical theory at a level of the scientific  hierarchy which lies obscured by mists of uncertainty. The theory should predict those properties which have been and can be  observed. For families of subatomic particles, however, the corresponding mass spectra provide precisely known numerical  ratios which are appropriate theoretical goals. Any dynamical theory with stable stationary states characterized by fixed  quantities that exhibit the ratios of a known mass spectrum would be of scientific interest. Psychological theorists, on the  other hand, do not have a finite set of numbers to predict. Their analog of the mass spectra should be the full range of human  behavior. Although this includes the, facts of experimental psychology, it is not limited to them.  2. A Science of the Mind?  Over the past decade Stephen Grossberg has published an extensive series of papers which attempt to provide a deterministic  mathematical structure for some experimental  34 ALWYN C. SCOTT  facts of psychology. Those unfamiliar with this work are advised to consult three carefully written reviews (Grossberg, 1969,  1974, 1975), from which I extract a brief introduction to his basic ideas.  Grossberg (1974) begins by considering the problem of teaching of list AB of letters, or "events," to a learning subject M.  This problem can be rephrased as a problem of classical conditioning. He emphasizes:  In daily speech and listening, a letter is never decomposed into two parts. To maintain close contact with experience, we  assume that a single state vA in M corresponds to A.  Thus given any n simple behavioral units ri , i = 1, 2,..., n, he defines n states vi in M to represent these units:  M  r2 -> v2 (52) rn -~ . vn .  These states vi are ultimately interpreted as populations of nerve cells. He then develops systems of differential equations  that represent the interaction of short-term memory (STM traces xi(t) at each vi, and long-term memory (LTM) traces z;k in the  pathways eik from v; to vk , where i, j, k = 1, 2,..., n. These variables obey systems of the form  n  .ti - Aixi + Y, Bkizki + Ci(t), k=1  (53)  zik = Dikz1k + Eikxk  (54)  Grossberg analyzes these systems given very general choices of Ai , Bik , Dik , and E;k . For example, Caianiello's law (14)  may be considered as a discrete time version of a special case of (53). This generality enables Grossberg to make the  following formal assertion. A system of type (53)-(54) can learn arbitrary space-time patterns in an essentially arbitrary  anatomy and given arbitrary data processing. Thus, were such a system invented at a given time in evolution, it could be  adapted to any later evolutionary specialization; it is universal in this sense. In particular, this analysis guarantees that  if network operations are performed in the order described by (53)-(54) (for example, addition, multiplication, time  averaging) then universality is assured.  The terms in (53)-(54) have the following heuristic interpretation.  (1) Term Aixi in (53) represents the decay of the STM trace xi. For example, if Ai(t) = - a > 0, then the decay rate is  exponential.  (2) Term Bki(t) in (53) represents the mean signal from vk to vi in the brief time interval [t, t + dt]. For example, if  Bki(t) = Ski max[xk(t -  NEURODYNAMICS 35  then a signal is emitted from vk to vi at time t only if xk(t) exceeds the threshold Oki ; the signal influences vi7ki time  units later.  (3) Term Bkizki in (53) says that the signal from vk to vi is gated by the LTM trace zki before it can influence xi. The total  signal Y_n-i Bkizki is a sum of gated signals from all vk to vi .  (4) Term Ci(t) in (53) is the experimenter's input to stimulate xi. Input C,,(t), for example, might represent visual or  auditory presentation of the letter A.  (5) Term D;kz;k in (54) represents decay of the LTM trace z;k. For example, if  Djk(t) = Elk max[x;(t - -1k) - B7k , 01+  then z;k can decay at time t only if v; emitted a signal into eik at time t - T;k .  (6) Term Eik in (54) also represents a signal from v; to vk . Signal E;k is distinguished from Bik in (53) because the aspects  of the signal from v; which influences STM in vk (namely, Bak) and those which influence LTM in eik (namely, Eak) can differ.  (7) Term E;kxk in (54) says that learning by z;k is due to the product of the signal from v; to vk times the STM trace at vk .  In fact, (54) says that zik is a time average (with averaging rate D;k) of the product E;kxk .  Within system (53)-(54) Grossberg proves that the unit of LTM is a spatial pattern, namely, the relative activity levels  across a field of populations vi . He also shows that a stimulus sampling operation exists, and suggests a neural  interpretation of stimulus sampling theory. Given this foundation, he studies such problems as how arbitrary space-time  patterns can be learned by "command neurons", analyzes some of the factors that produce bowing and skewing of the serial  position curve, develops a theory of instrumental conditioning, and suggests a real-time theory of attention (Grossberg, 1975)  that contains a discussion of such phenomena as overshadowing, peak shifts, and behavioral contrast in discrimination  learning, and partial reinforcement acquisition effect.  Grossberg develops his theory using his "method of minimal anatomies." He tries to attack the problem of biological diversity  by seeking organizational principles that have evolved in response to environmental pressures to which a surviving organism  must adapt. These principles are expressed as psychological postulates which are translated into the minimal neural network  that realizes the postulates. The method is described (Grossberg, 1974):  Given specific psychological postulates we derive the minimal network of embedding field type that realizes these postulates.  Then we analyze the psychological and neural capabilities of this network. An important part of the analysis is to understand  what the network cannot do. This knowledge often suggests what new psychological postulate is needed to derive the next, more  complex network. In this way, a hierarchy of networks is derived, corresponding to ever more sophisticated postulates. This  hierarchy presumably leads us closer to realistic anatomies, and provides us with a catalog of mechanisms to use in various  situations.  Since each network is "embedded" into the next evolutionary stage, another sense of the term appears (Grossberg, private  communication). The basic concept embodied in (52)  36 ALYN C. SCOTT  seems consistent with the reverberatory neural theory- outlined above; in particular, the vi of M can be considered to  represent cell assemblies. The problem is to understand how well it is possible to understand the dynamics of their activity.  Behavioral psychologists tend to assume a rather precarious stance in relation to this question. In his recent book Beyond  Freedom and Dignity, B. F. Skinner boldly asserts (p. 192) "Man is much more than a dog, but like a dog he is within range of  scientific analysis." To this the eminent neuroscientist John C. Eccles (1973, p. 233) responds, "Skinner's theory and the  technique of operant conditioning were developed from his experiments on pigeons and rats. Let them be the beneficiaries!"  Clearly the matter is in some doubt. But it should not be assumed that the behaviorists are evil men who wish to turn us into  social insects; they are motivated by concern for the problems faced by humankind. As Skinner (p. 3) puts it,  What we need is a technology of behavior [italics added]. We could solve our problems quickly enough if we could adjust the  growth of the world's population as precisely as we adjust the course of a spaceship, or improve agriculture and industry with  some of the confidence with which we accelerate high-energy particles, or move toward a peaceful world with something like the  steady progress with which physics has approached absolute zero (even though both remain presumably out of reach). But a  behavioral technology comparable in power and precision to physical and biological technology is lacking, and those who do not  find the very possibility ridiculous are more likely to be frightened by it than reassured. That is how far we are from  "understanding human issues" in the sense in which physics and biology understand their fields, and how far we are from  preventing the catastrophe toward which the world seems to be inexorably moving.  From the viewpoint of natural philosophy, however, the issue is not what we want or even what we need but what we can have.  Angels, too, could solve our problems quickly enough.  To appreciate the complexity of real mental activity, let us take a very simple example. We return to the notion of a phase  sequence of serially excited cell assemblies (Hebb,  G  d  FIG. 16. Diagrams related to Hebb's discussion of learning to perceive a triangle.  NEURODYNAMICS 37  1949) and consider how an infant might learn to perceive the triangle EFG shown in Fig. 16a. The constituent sensations of the  vertices E, F, and G are first supposed to be centered on the retina by eye movement and topologically mapped onto area 17 of  the cortex (see Fig. 1). Corresponding cell assemblies e , f , and g then develop in area 18 through diffuse (nontopological)  connections with area 17. The process of examining the triangle involves a phase sequence of the form  e--*f--). e->g--* e->f->e--*f-->g-->, etc.  Gradually the subassemblies e , f , and g will fuse into a common assembly for Gestalt perception of the triangle t ,  with, perhaps, intermediate perceptions of double vertices such as e -{- f . Thus the phase sequence experienced upon  examining the triangle eventually becomes (say)  g-*f-* f +g--'e-{-f-*t-->e-*e-}-g  -* t -* f ---* t -; g --> t -~, etc.  With further development of the assembly t (which reduces its threshold through strengthening of the internal connections), a  glance at a corner plus a couple of peripheral cues can ignite t ; as, for example,  e --* e + f -> e + g -* t .  The perception t is then ready to serve as one of the states vi in Grossberg's learning theory.  Those who consider this discussion an unnecessary complication of a simple perceptive event should read von Senden's Space and  Sight. Originally published in 1932, this unique account of 65 cases, in which congenital blindness from cataracts had been  corrected between the ages of 3 and 46 years, provided much of the experimental basis for Hebb's theory. One of the few  uniformities in these cases, writes von Senden, is that the process of learning to see "is an enterprise fraught with  innumerable difficulties, and that the common idea that the patient must necessarily be delighted with the gifts of light and  colour bequeathed to him by the operation, is wholly remote from the facts." Subjects who were entirely dependent upon tactile  impressions before the operation had an awareness of space (if it can be so called) that was totally different from a normal  visual awareness. At first, "The patient feels visual impressions to be something alien, intruding on his mind without action  on his own part," and later, "Given that attention is present, the stimuli impinging on the visual organ from an objective  shape merely occasion the act of perception as such, but do not determine its outcome.... The final development up to the  fully formed idea of shape involves a series of transitional forms as intermediate stages, which develop one from another, and  are liable to vary between individuals, since it is the individual who himself creates them."  38 ALWYN C. SCOTT  As currently constituted, Grossberg's theory might be applied to describe the growth of an assembly from its subassemblies.  The development of t from e , f , and g , for example, could be interpreted as a learning of the list E, F, and G in any  order. But a difficulty is this: After the assembly t has been formed, a corresponding state (see (52)) should be added to the  description of M. This problem can be rephrased as follows. How does a network generate a state that codes the new "gestalt" ?  How is self-organization of codes effected ? Recently Grossberg (1976a, b, c) has suggested some mechanisms for doing this.  His point of departure is data concerning the reorganization of cell response profiles in the visual cortex of kittens and  monkeys by visual experience during a critical developmental period. His model shows how a combination of STM and LTM  mechanisms can be used to generate a self-organizing pattern classifier. He shows how experience can retune feature detectors  to respond to a prescribed convex set of spatial patterns. In particular, the detectors automatically respond to average  features chosen from the set even if the average features have never been experienced. Hierarchies of these classifiers can be  constructed that are capable of generating cells that can learn to code highly complex sets of features.  The linear interaction of groups of neurons has been studied by Anderson (1972) in connection with the problem of memory. Blum  (1967) describes a class of cortex theories in which the cell assemblies can communicate by sending and receiving wave pulses.  Spatial regions of constructive interference are then favored for action of active assemblies upon inactive ones, and spatial  constraints cease to be important in determining the probability of an interaction. The structure of the major assembly, upon  which consciousness is directed at a particular moment, is not limited by any predetermined hierarchical structure. One of  Blum's objectives is to suggest "a new area of analogies, mechanistic in its primatives, which may be more appropriate to the  problem of understanding central nervous system function" and "open our eyes to the insidious preconceptions for biology of  our particular mathematical culture, which is based upon centuries of successful involvement with physics." Some consideration  has also been given by Good (1965) to the interaction of assemblies through their common subassemblies. He suggests that  interactions at least as high as the sixth order should be important, but he finds fundamental difficulties in defining  statistical interaction parameters. Since his main objective is the design of an "ultraintelligent machine," however,  understanding that machine is of secondary interest.  In considering the spectrum of possibilities for cell assembly interactions, we should not forget the complex capability for  information processing which is available to a multiplex neuron (Fig. 4). On the axonal side, Chung, Raymond, and Lettvin  (1970) have suggested that temporal pulse trains may be mapped onto a subset of the distal branches as a meaningful spatial  pattern, and on the dendritic side, arbitrary Boolean functions of the spatiotemporal input patterns may be computed. If  individual neurons "speak with meaning" and also participate in cell assembly activity, the assembly interaction could be very  sophisticated indeed.  Hebb's theory, it should be emphasized, is descriptive rather than computational. He has proposed a reasonable development of  the concepts of psychology from the elements of thought: a sketch for level (6). He makes a careful distinction between the  NEURODYNAMICS 39  concepts of "sensation" and "perception." Sensation is an automatic neural response to sensory input such as, for example, the  excitation which appears in area 17 after the vertex E is centered on the retina; whereas perception involves the activation  of an appropriate cell assembly. Sensation is determined, while perception (see Fig. 7 again) is often ambiguous. This concept  of perception should be compared with that of the Perceptron, which can rather easily recognize simple geometrical forms  (i.e., circle, square, triangle, letters of the alphabet, etc.) but has great difficulty with the same figures appearing in  the context of other lines and angles.'  In 1949 Hebb suggested that a phylogenetically significant parameter for evaluating the cortex of an animal brain is the ratio  of association area to sensory area or  AJS.  For lower creatures, such as insects (and currently available computers), this ratio is essentially zero, but with higher  species the AI S ratio grows, bringing both a useful ability to modify motivation according to perceptions and a potentially  dangerous tendency to confuse those perceptions with the external world. Thus it seems naive to extrapolate to human behavior  from that of a dog.  3. Concluding Remarks.  As at other levels of the scientific hierarchy, psychological facts might be viewed as spatiotemporal entities that form in a  sea of cell assemblies. The appropriate "chemistry," however, is vastly more complex than that leading from the atomic  elements to the wonders of cytology. In each person's head are a large number of major assemblies; perhaps a billion (perhaps  more) could exist in the mind of a highly developed individual. The nature of these will vary from person to person, from time  to time and from culture to culture; the ways in which they might interact are even more obscure. Our minds are exotic gardens  and each may grow different from the next. Indeed, one of the important functions of human culture appears to be the  imposition of some order, through training and taboo, on the potential chaos of human experience. By means of this order  (Bohr, 1958) "latent potentialities of human life can unfold themselves in a way which reveals to us new aspects of its  unlimited richness and variety." In this sense we have had many technologies of behavior since the stone age villages. Clearly  mankind now faces a challenge to develop a world culture with appropriate local variations which will permit us to survive and  prosper. Although we scientists (and in particular the behavioral psychologists) may have something to contribute toward this  development, we have not yet shown an appreciation for the complexity of human nature which would qualify us to take charge.  We have largely ignored the burden of proof imposed upon us by the cognitive difficulties outlined above.  What we face in the investigation of human nature are dynamic processes that (although we suppose them to be entirely natural)  are so uncertain, so complex and, at the same time,  2 Perhaps the Perceptron should better have been named the "Sensatron."  40 ALWYN C. SCOTT  so interesting that they must be individually experienced. Maslow (1968) has courageously directed his colleagues toward the  depths of these mysteries with his emphasis upon the "positives psychology" of fully functioning and healthy human beings. In  The Psychology of Science, he presents a strong appeal for scientists to reestablish the primacy of experience as the source  of knowledge. "The basic coin in the realm of knowing," he asserts, "is direct, intimate, experiential knowing." The aim of  human knowledge should not be prediction and control but understanding and self-realization. As Rogers (1961) put it, the  emphasis should be On Becoming a Person. Just as the elementary particle physicist is forced to renounce the possibility of  predicting and controlling trajectories, the behavioral psychologist must admit that important areas of human activity lie  beyond his ken. Behaviorism is not wrong but simply incomplete and irrelevant for understanding such psychic phenomena as the  peak experiences of "being cognition" studied by Maslow. Although the reality of these experience is attested by every honest  poem, there is perhaps no better description than that given by Martin Buber, in recalling his perception of the linden tree.  I can accept it as a picture: a rigid pillar in a flood of light, or splashes of green traversed by the gentleness of the blue  silver ground.  I can feel it as movement: the flowing veins around the sturdy, striving core, the sucking of the roots, the breathing of the  leaves, the infinite commerce with earth and air-and the growing itself in its darkness.  I can assign it to a species and observe it as an instance, with an eye to its construction and its way of life.  I can overcome its uniqueness and form so rigously that I recognize it only as an expression of the law-those laws according  to which a constant opposition of forces is continually adjusted, or those laws according to which the elements mix and  I can dissolve it into a number, into a pure relation between numbers, and eternalize it. Throughout all of this the tree  remains my object and has its place and its time span, its kind and condition.  But it can also happen, if will and grace are joined, that as I contemplate the tree I am drawn into a relation, and the tree  ceases to be an It. The power of exclusiveness has seized me. This does not require me to forego any of the modes of  contemplation. There is nothing that I must not see in order to see, and there is no knowledge that I must forget. Rather is  everything, picture and movement, species and instance, law and number included and inseparably fused. Whatever belongs to the  tree is included; its form and its mechanics, its colors and its chemistry, its conversation with the elements and its  conversation with the stars-all this in its entirety.  REFERENCES  AIELLO, A., BURATTINI, E., SS CAIANIELLO, E. R. Synthesis of reverberating neural networks. Kybernetik, 1970, 7, 191-195.  ALBUS, J. S. A theory of cerebellar function. Mathematical Biosciences, 1971, 10, 25-61.  AMARI, S. Characteristics of randomly connected threshold-element networks and network systems. Proceedings of the Institute  of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 1971, 59, 35-47.  AMARI, S. A mathematical theory of nerve nets. Advances in Biophysics, 1974, 6, 75-120. ANDERSON, J. A. A simple neural  network generating an interactive memory. Mathematical Biosciences, 1972, 14, 197-220.  NEURODYNAMICS  41  ANDERSON, P., HOLMQUIST, B., & VOORHOEVE, P. E. Entorhinal activation of dentate granule cells. Acta Physiologica Scandinavia  and Supplementum, 1966, 66, 448-460.  ANDERSON, P. W. More is different. Broken symmetry and the nature of the hierarchical structure of science. Science, 1972,  177, 393-396.  ANNINOS, P. A. Mathematical model of memory trace and forgetfulness. Kybernetik, 1972a, 10, 165-167.  ANNINOS, P. A. Cyclic modes in artificial neural nets. Kybernetik, 1972b, 11, 5-14. ANNINOS, P. A. Evoked potentials in  artificial neural nets. Kybernetic, 1973, 13, 24-29. ANNINOS, P. A., BEEK, B., CSERMELY, T. J., HARTH, E. M., & PERTILE, G.  Dynamics of neural structures. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 1970, 26, 121-148.  ANNINos, P. A., & ELUL, E. Effect of structure on function in model nerve nets. Biophysical journal, 1974, 14, 8-19.  ARBIB, M. A. Brains, machines and mathematics. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964. Chapter 5. ASANUNIA, H., STONEY, S. D., JR., &  ABzuG, C. Relation between afferent input and motor outflow in cat motorsensory cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology, 1968, 31,  670-694.  ASHBY, W. R., VON FOERSTER, H., & WALKER, C. C. Instability of pulse activity in a net with threshold. Nature (London), 1962,  196, 561-562.  ARSHAVSKII, Yu. I., BERKINBLIT, M. B., KOVALEV, S. A., SMOLYANINOV, V. V., & CHAILAKHYAN, L. M. The role of dendrites in the  functioning of nerve cells. Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR, 1965, 163, 994-997; translated in Doklady Biophysics, New York, 1965.  BARRON, D. H., & MATTHEWS, B. H. C. Intermittent conduction in the spinal cord. Journal of Physiology, 1935, 85, 73-103.  BERKINBLIT, M. B., VVEDENSKAYA, N. D., GNEDENKO, L. S., KOVALEV, S. A., KHOLOPOV, A. V., FOMIN, S. V., & CHAILAKHYAN, L. M.  Interaction of the nerve impulses in a node of branching (investigation on the Hogdkin-Huxley model). Biophysics, 1971, 16,  105-113.  BEURLE, R. L. Properties of a mass of cells capable of regenerating pulses. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of  London. Series A Mathematical and Physical Sciences, 1956, 240, 55-94. BIsHop G., H. The dendrite receptive pole of the  neurone. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology Supplement, 1958, 10, 12-21.  BLACKBURN, T. R. Sensuous-intellectual complementarity in science. Science, 1971, 172, 1003-1007.  BLUM, H. A new model of global brain function. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 1967, 10, 381-408.  BOGDANOv, K. Yu., & GOLOVCHINSKII, V. B. Extracellularly recorded action potential and the possibility of spread of excitation  over the dendrites. Biophysics, 1970, 15, 672-681.  BOHR, N. On the notions of causality and complementarity. Science, 1950, 111, 51-54. BOHR, N. Atomic physics and human  knowledge. New York: Wiley, 1958.  BORSELLINO, A., & POGGIo, T. Holographic aspects of temporal memory and optomoter responses. Kybernetik, 1972, 10, 58-60.  BREMERMANN, H. J. Quantum noise and information. In Proceedings 5th Berkeley symposium on mathematical statistics and  probability IV. Berkeley: Univ. California Press, 1967.  BRONOWSKI, J. The logic of the mind. American Scientist, 1966, 54, 1-14. BUBER, M. I and thou. New York: Scribner's, 1970.  BURATTINT, E., & LIESIS, V. A method of analysis of the models of neural nets. Kybernetik, 1972, 10, 38-44.  BUTZ, E. G., & COWAN, J. D. Transient potentials in dendritec systems of arbitrary geometry. Biophysical journal, 1974, 14,  661-689.  CAIANIELLO, E. R. Outline of a theory of thought-processes and thinking machines. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 1961, 1,  204-235.  CAIANIELLO, E. R., DE LUCA, A., & RICCIARDI, L. M. Reverberations and control of neural networks. Kybernetik, 1967, 4, 10-18.  CHUNG, S. H., RAYMOND, S. A., & LETTVIN, J. Y. Multiple meaning in single visual units. Brain, Behavior and Evolution, 1970,  3, 72-101.  42  ALWYN C. SCOTT  CRAGG, B. G., & HAMLYN, L. H. Action potential of the pyramidal neurons in the hippocampus of the rabbit. Journal of  Physiology London, 1955, 129, 608-627.  CYRULNIK, R. A., ANNINOS, P. A., & MARSH, R. Complex symptomatology simulated by unstructured neural nets. Canadian Journal of  Neurological Science, 1974, 1, 17-22.  DE LUCA, A., & TERMINI, S. Algorithmic aspects in complex systems analysis. Scientia, 1971, 106, 659-671.  DUNCAN, D. D. Goodbye Picasso. New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1974. P. 142.  ECCLES, J. C. The properties of the dendrites. In Structure and function of the cerebral cortex. New York: American Elsevier,  1960.  ECCLES, J. C. The understanding of the brain. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1973.  voN ECONOMO, C. L'architecture cellulaire normale de Z'ecorce ceribrale. Paris: Masson, 1927. ELSASSER, W. M. The physical  foundation of biology. New York: Pergamon, 1958.  ELSASSER, W. M. Acausal phenomena in physics and biology: A case for reconstruction. American Scientist, 1969, 57, 502-516.  voN EULER, C., GREEN, J. D., & Rlcci, G. The role of hippocampal dendrites in evoked responses and after discharges. Acta  Physiologica Scandinavia, 1956, 42, 87-111.  EYZAGUIRRE, C., & KUFFLER, S. W. Further study of soma, dendrite and axon excitation in single neurons. Journal of General  Physiology, 1955, 39, 121-153.  FATT, P. Electric potentials occurring around a neurone during its antidromic activation. Journal of Neurophysiology, 1957,  20, 27-60.  FENDER, D. H., & JULSEZ, B. Extension of Panum's fusional area in binocularly stabilized vision. Optical Society of America  Journal, 1967, 57, 819-830.  GABOR, D. Holographic model of temporal recall. Nature (London), 1968, 217, 584, 1288.  GABOR, D. Associative holographic memories. IBM Journal of Research Development, 1969, 13, 156-159.  GEORGE, F. H. Mechanism, interrogation and incompleteness. Kybernetes, 1972, 1, 109-114. GODEL, K. Cber formal unentscheidbare  Satze der Principia Mathematica and verwandter Systeme. Monatshefte fur Mathematic and Physik, 1931, 38, 173-198.  GOOD, 1. J. Speculations concerning the first ultraintelligent machine. Advances in Computers, 1965, 6, 31-88.  GREENE, P. H. On looking for neural networks and 'cell assemblies' that underlie behavior. Bulletin of Mathematical  Biophysics, 1962, 24, 247-275 and 395-411.  GRIFFITH, J. S. A view of the brain. London/New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1967. GRIFFITH, J. S. Mathematical neurobiology. New  York: Academic Press, 1971. GROSSBERG, S. Embedding fields: A theory of learning with physiological implications. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 1969, 6, 209-239.  GROSSBERG, S. Classical and instrumental learning by neural networks. Progress in Theoretical Biology, 1974, 3, 51-141.  GROSSBERG, S. A neural model of attention, reinforcement, and discrimination in learning. International Review of  Neurobiology, 1975, 18, 263-325.  GROSSBERG, S. On the development of feature detectors in the visual cortex with applications to learning and  reaction-diffusion systems. Biological Cybernetics, 1976a, 21, 145-159. GROSSBERG, S. Adaptive pattern classification and  universal recoding, I: Parallel development and coding of neural feature detectors. Biological Cybernetics, 1976b, 23, 121-134.  GROSSBERG, S. Adaptive pattern classification and universal recoding, 11: Feedback, expectation, olfaction, and illusions.  Biological Cybernetics, 1976c, 23, 187-202.  GROSSMAN, Y., SPIRA, M. E., & PARNAS, I. Differential flow of information into branches of a single axon. Brain Research,  1973, 64, 379-386.  GRUNDFEST, H. Electrophysiology and pharmacology of dendrites. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology Supplement,  1958, 10, 22-41.  GUTMAN, A. M. Further remarks on the effectiveness of the dendrite synapses. Biophysics, 1971, 16, 131-138.  NEURODYNAMICS  43  GUTMAN, A., & SHIMOLIUNAS, A. Finite dendrite with an N-shaped current-voltage characteristic for the membrane. Biophysics,  1973, 18, 1013-1016.  HAMLYN, L. 11. An electron microscope study of the pyramidal neurons in the Amon's Horn of the rabbit. Journal of Anatomy  (London), 1963, 97, 189-201.  HARTH, E. M., CSERMELY, T. J., BEEK, B., & LINDSAY, R. D. Brain functions and neural dynamics. Journal of Theoretical Biology,  1970, 26, 93-120.  HARTH, E. M., & EDGAR, S. L. Association by synaptic facilitation in highly damped neural nets. Biophysical journal, 1967, 7,  689-717.  HEBB, D. O. Organization of behavior. New York: Wiley, 1949.  HEBB, D. O. Textbook of psychology. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1972. 3rd ed.  vAN HEERDEN, P. J. Theory of optical information storage in solids. Applied Optics, 1963, 2, 393-400. HILD, W., & TASAKI, 1.  Morphological and physiological properties of neurons and glial cells in tissue culture. Journal of Neurophysiology, 1962, 25,  277-304.  HUBEL, D. H., & WIESEL, T. N. Receptive fields, binocular interaction and functional architecture in the cat's visual cortex.  Journal of Physiology, 1962, 160, 106-154.  ISHIHARA, T. Local reverberations in the nervous system and conditioned reflex. Mathematical Biosciences, 1971a, 12, 23-31.  ISHIHARA, T. Local reverberations in the nervous system and memory. Mathematical Biosciences, 1971b,12,225-233.  JACK, J. J. B., NOBLE, D., & TsiEN, R. W. Electric current flow in excitable cells. Oxford: Clarendon, 1975. Chapter 3, 4.  KRNJEVIC, K., & MILEDI, R. Presynaptic failure of neuromuscular propagation in rats. Journal of Physiology, 1959, 149, 1-22.  KUHN, T. S. The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press, 1962.  LEGENDY, C. R. On the scheme by which the human brain stores information. Mathematical Biosciences, 1967, 1, 555-597.  LLINAS, R., & NICHOLSON, C. Electrophysiological properties of dendrites and somata in Alligator Purkinje cells. Journal of  Neurophysiology, 1971, 34, 532-551.  LLINAS, R., NICHOLSON, C., FREEMAN, J. A., & HILLMAN, D. E. Dendritic spikes and their inhibition in alligator Purkinje cells.  Science, 1968, 160, 1132-1135.  LLINAS, R., NICHOLSON, C., & PRECHT, W. Preferred centripital conduction of dendritic spikes in alligator Purkinje cells.  Science, 1969, 163, 184-187.  LORENTE DE N6, R. Action potential of the motoneurons of the hypoglossus nucleus. Journal of Celluar anti Comparative  Physiology, 1947, 29, 207-287.  LORENTE DE N6, R. Decremental conduction and summation of stimuli delivered to neurons at distant synapses. In Structure and  function of the cerebral cortex. New York: American Elsevier, 1960.  LONGUET-HIGGINS, H. C. Holographic model of temporal recall. Nature (London), 1968, 217, 104. LUK'YANOV, .A. S. Generation of  action potentials by dendrites in the frog optic tectum. Fiziologicheskii Zhurnal SSSR, 1970, 56, 1130-1135. Translated in  Neurosciences Translations, 19701971, 16, 74-78.  MARK, D. A theory of the cerebellar cortex. Journal of Physiology, 1969, 202, 437-470.  MARR, D. A theory for the cerebral neocortex. Proceedings of the Royal Society, London Series B, Biological .Sciences, 1970,  176, 161-234.  MASLOW, A. H. The psychology of science. New York: Harper & Row, 1966. MASLOW, A. H. Toward a psychology of being. Princeton,  N.J.: Van Nostrand, 1968. MCCULLOCHW. S., & PITTS, W. H. A logical calculus of the ideas immanent in nervous activity.  Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics, 1943, 5, 115-133.  MCCULLOCHW. S. Embodiments of mind. Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press, 1965.  MEHRA, J. Quantum mechanics and the explanation of life. American Scientist, 1973, 61, 722-728. MILNER, P. M. The cell  assembly: Mark II. Psychological Review, 1957, 64, 242-252. MOUNTCASTLE, V. B. Modality and topographic properties of single  neurons on cat's somatic sensory cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology, 1957, 20, 408-434.  44  ALWYN C. SCOTT  NAGEL, E., & NEWMAN, J. R. Go'del's proof. New York: New York Univ. Press, 1958.  NICHOLSON, C., & LLINnS, R. Field potentials in the alligator cerebellum and theory of their relationship to Purkinje cell  dendritic spikes. Journal of Neurophysiology, 1971, 34, 509-531. NILSSON, N. J. Learning machines. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1965.  PARKAS, I. Differential block at high frequency of branches of a single axon innervating two muscles. Journal of  Neurophysiology, 1972, 35, 903-914.  PASTUSHENKO, V. F., MARKIN, V. S., & CHIZMADZHEV, Yu. A. Propagation of excitation in a model of the inhomogeneous nerve  fibre. III. Interaction of pulses in the region of the branching node of a nerve fiber. Biophysics, 1969a, 14, 929-937.  PASTUSHENKO, V. F., MARKIN, V. S., & CHIZMADZHEV, Yu. A. IV. Branching as a summator of nerve pulses. Biophysics, 1969b, 14,  1130-1138.  PENFIELD, W., & PEROT, P. The brain's record of auditory and visual experience-A final summary and discussion. Brain, 1963,  86, 595-696.  PLATT, J. R. The step to man. New York: Wiley, 1966.  PORITZKY, R. Two and three dimensional ultrastructure of boutons and glial cells on the motoneuronal surface in the cat spinal  cord. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 1969, 135, 423-452. PRIBRAM, K. H. The neurophysiology of remembering. Scientific  American, January, 1969, 73-85. PRIBRAM, K. H. Languages of the brain. Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall, 1971.  PURPURA, D. O., & GRUNDFEST, H. Nature of dendritic potentials and synaptic mechanisms in cerebral cortex of cat. Journal of  Neurophysiology, 1956, 19, 573-595.  RALL, W. Branching dendritic trees and motoneuron membrane resistivity. Experimental Neurology, 1959, 1, 491-527.  RALL, W. Theory of physiological properties of dendrites. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1962a, 96, 1071-1092.  BALL, W. Electrophysiology of a dendritic neuron model. Biophysical journal, 1962b, 2, 145-167. RALL, W. Dendritic neuron  theory and dendrodendritic synapses in a simple cortical system. In F. O. Schmitt (Ed.), The neurosciences: Second study  program. New York: Rockefeller Univ. Press, 1970.  RALL, W., & SHEPHERD, G. M. Theoretical reconstruction of field potentials and dendrodendritic synaptic interactions in  olfactory bulb. Journal of Neurophysiology, 1968, 31, 884-915.  RAM6N Y CAJAL, S. Histologie du Systeme Nerveux. Con. Sup. de Inv. Cientificas, Madrid, 1952. RAPOPORT, A. `Ignition'  phenomena in random nets. Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics, 1952, 14, 35-44.  RICCIARDI, L. M., & UMEZAWA, H. Brain and physics of many-body problems. Kybernetik, 1967, 4, 44-48.  RINZEL, J., & RALL, W. Transient response in a dendritic neuron model for current injected at one branch. Biophysical journal,  1974, 14, 759-790.  ROCHESTER, N., HOLLAND, J. H., HAIBT, L. H., & DUDA, W. L. Tests on a cell assembly theory of the action of a brain using a  large digital computer. IRE Transactions on Information Theory, 1956, IT-2,80-93.  ROGERS, C. R. On becoming a person. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1961. ROSENBLAT, F. Principles of neurodynamics. New York:  Spartan Books, 1962. RosZAK, T. Where the wasteland ends. New York: Anchor, 1973.  ROZONOER, L. 1. Random logical nets. Automatika i Telemekhanika, 1969, 5, 137-147; 6, 99-109; 7, 127-136. Translated in  Automata.  SAMUEL, A. L. Some studies in machine learning using the game of checkers. IBM Journal of Research and Development, 1959, 3,  210-223.  SCHADe, J. P., & SMITH, J. Computers and brains. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1970.  SCOTT, A. C. Tunnel diode arrays for information processing and storage. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics,  1971, SM-1, 267-275.  SCOTT, A. C. Information processing in dendritic trees. Mathematical Biosciences, 1973, 18, 153-160.  SCOTT, A. C. The electrophysics of a nerve fiber. Reviews of Modern Physics, 1975, 47, 487-533.  NEURODYNAMICS  45  VON SENDEN, M. Space and sight. London: Methuen, 1960. A translation of Raum- and Gestaltauffassung bei Operierten  Blindgeborenen, published in 1932.  SHIMBEL, A., & RAPOPORT, A. A statistical approach to the theory of the central nervous system. Bulletin of Mathematical  Biophysics, 1948, 10, 41-55.  SKINNER, B. F. Contingencies of reinforcement. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1969. SKINNER, B. F. Beyond freedom and  dignity. New York: Bantam/Vintage, 1971.  SMITH, D. R., & DAVIDSON, C. H. Maintained activity in neural nets. Association for Computing Machinery journal, 1962, 9,  268-279.  SPENCER, W. A., & K.ANDEL, E. R. Electrophysiology of hippocampal neurons: IV. Fast prepotentials. Journal of Neurophysiology,  1961, 24, 272-285.  STEINBUCH, K:. Die Lernmatrix. Kybernetik, 1961, 1, 36-45.  TEUBER, M. L. Sources of ambiguity in the prints of Maurits C. Escher. Scientific American, 1974, 231, 90-104.  WAXMAN, S. (3. Regional differentiation of the axon: A review with special reference to the concept of the multiplex neuron.  Brain Research, 1972, 47, 269-288.  WEIZENBAUM, J. On the impact of computers on society. Science, 1972, 176, 609-614. WEIZENBAUM, J. Computer power and human  reason. San Francisco: Freeman, 1965. WEYL, H. Philosophy of mathematics and natural science. Princeton, N. J.: Princeton  Univ. Press, 1949. P. 282.  WHEELER, J. A. The universe as a home for man. American Scientist, 1974, 62, 683-691.  WHITE, H. The formation of cell assemblies. Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics, 1961, 23, 43-53. WIDRow, B., & ANGELL, J. B.  Reliable, trainable networks for computing and control. Aerospace Engineering, September, 1962, 78-123.  WIENER, N. Some moral and technical consequences of automation. Science, 1960, 131, 1355-1358. WILSON, H. It., & COWAN, J. D.  Excitatory and inhibitory interactions in localized populations of model neurons. Biophysical journal, 1972, 12, 1-24.  WILSON, H. R., & COWAN, J. D. A mathematical theory of the functional dynamics of cortical and thalamic nervous tissue.  Kybernetik, 1973, 13, 55-80.  YAJIMA, S., IBARAKI, T., & K.AwANO, I. On autonomous logic nets of threshold elements. IEEE Transactions on Computers, 1968,  C-17, 385-391.