10.1016/0022-2496(77)90047-5
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 16, 51-59 (1971)  Sub-semiorder: A Model of Multidimensional Choice with Preference Intransitivity*  YEW-KWANG NG  .14onash University, Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia  The paper develops a model of choice called a sub-semiorder which is a generalization of Luce's semiorder to multidimensional  choice. The same reason (imperfect discrimination) that gives rise to the intransitivity of indifference in a semiorder gives  rise to the intransitivity of preference in a sub-semiorder. This provides a rational explanation of intransitivity of  preference without resorting to the lexicographic semiorder of Tversky. It is shown that the "apparent underlying preference"  of a sub-semiorder is transitive but unfortunately it is not complete. However, with a mild condition, there exists a maximal  element.  The traditional algebraic theories of choice assume transitivity of both preference and indifference. Transitivity of  indifference involves perfect discriminatory power clearly contrary to common sense and experimental studies. Luce's  definition of a semiorder (Luce, 1956, p. 181) overcomes this shortcoming of the traditional theory of an ordering. However, a  semiorder still involves transitivity of preference which has been seen to be violated in many experiments. This violation has  not usually been observed if transitivity is defined stochastically. In a remarkable paper, Tversky (1969) shows that  consistent and predictable violation of stochastic transitivity also can be demonstrated. The theory advanced by Tversky to  explain this intransitivity is that of a lexicographic semiorder (LS) where a semiorder is imposed on a lexicographic  ordering. In this paper, I advance the hypothesis that choices are characterized by a sub-semiorder, which is a generalization  of a semiorder to multidimensional choice. It can be seen that rational choice without lexicographic ordering may give rise to  preference intransitivity (Section 1). Section 2 gives a formal definition of a sub-semiorder and Section 3 shows that the  "apparent underlying preference" of a sub-semiorder is noncyelic, transitive, but not, in general, complete.  1. MULTIDIMENSIONAL CHOICE AND PREFERENCE INTRANSITIVITY  The definition of a semiorder was prompted by the recognition of imperfect discrimination which gives rise to intransitivity  of indifference. Transitivity of preference is nevertheless preserved if we confine our study to variation over one dimension  only. Intuitively,  * I am grateful to the editor and a referee for very helpful comments.  51  Copyright All rights of Q 1977 reproduction by Acadinemic any Press, Inc.  reserved. ISSN 0022-2496  52 YEW-KWANG NG  a dimension refers to any aspect over which the elements of the set may differ from each other. But obviously, we will be  interested only in those aspects that affect the preference of the individual concerned. The number of relevant dimensions can  be any positive integer. If we represent the set in an n-dimensional Euclidean space (really, just the ordered n-tuple  property of the space is needed) or some subset thereof, n is the number of dimensions.  If we examine choices involving more than one dimension, it can be shown that imperfect discrimination alone may give rise to  intransitive preference. For example, suppose that I prefer thick white paper. In Fig. 1 the dashed lines mark off the level  of my discrimination for whiteness and thickness. Along any vertical or horizontal line, my preference is a semiorder.  However, if we let both dimensions vary, my preference is not a semiorder. For example, I prefer x to y as I can observe that  x is thicker than y but cannot observe any difference in whiteness. Similarly, I prefer y to z. But I am indifferent to the  choice between x and z.  Thickness  1 I I  I I 1  1 I 1  I 1 --  1 I   I I I  1 I   1 1   1 1 1  TZ I I  I I   I I y I  I I 1  I I I  1 I 1  1 1   Whiteness  FIGURE I  In the above two-dimensional case with equal weight on each dimension, we do not have cyclicity of preference. However, if we  have unequal weights, or if we have three or more dimensions, cyclicity may arise. For example, suppose a subject is able to  discriminate a difference of any dimension involving more than one unit. He prefers high values to low and gives equal weight  to each of the three dimensions. His preference over variation in any one dimension is a semiorder. But (1.2, 0, 0) P (0, 0.5,  0.5) P (0.5, 1.2, -0.6) P (1.2, 0, 0), which is cyclic. To show cyclicity for the case of two dimensions with unequal weights,  suppose he regards the second dimension as three times more important than the first, but his discrimination ability is the  same with respect to both dimensions, being able to tell a difference of one unit. Then (1.2, 0) P (0, 0.6) P (-1.2, 1.2) P  (1.2, 0).  MULTIDIMENSIONAL CHOICE 53  2. SUB-SEMIORDER  A binary relation R over a set X is called an ordering of X if it is complete, reflexive, and transitive. For most purposes,  xRy represents "x is preferred to or indifferent from y," or "x is perceived to possess at least as high a value (in certain  attributes) as y," or some other similar meaning. If both xRy and yRx, we write xly; if xRy and not yRx, we write xPy.  A semiorder was first defined rigorously by Luce (1956, p. 181). In the following definition, I use a slightly different  formulation which proves to be useful in the generalization to a sub-semiorder.  DEFINITION 1. A binary relation R over the set X is called a semiorder of X if the following are satisfied (throughout the  paper, dx stands for dx E X, etc.):  (Al) Reflexivity: (`dx) (xRx)  (A2) Completeness: (dx, y: x ~ y) (xRy v yRx)  (A3) Weak Transitivity: ('dr, x, y, z) (rPxJyPz v rIxPyPz => rPz)  It may be noted that the requirement rPxPylz =>- rPz is not needed as it is implied by Al-A3. It may also be noted that Al and  A3 imply xPyPz => xPz. In other words, transitivity of preference is implied.  For the definition of a sub-semiorder, let us adopt the following notations. For all x, xE (note the superscript; subscripts  are used later to denote different x's) denotes the value of x in dimension i. If x! = y' for all but (possibly) one i E {l,  2,..., n}, we write xDy, where D reads "does not differ in more than one dimension."  DEFINITION 2. A binary relation R on the set X is a sub-semiorder of X iff it is reflexive and complete and satisfies:  (A3') Mild Transitivity: (Vx, y: xDy)  (xPrRyPs v xRrPyPs ~> xPs; sPxRrPy v sPxPrRy => sPy).  It is clear that (A3') is a weakening of (A3) since an additional requirement regarding dimensionality is imposed. Hence, a  sub-semiorder is a generalization of a serniorder. In other words, a semiorder is a sub-semiorder, but a sub-semiorder is not  necessarily a semiorder.  3. THE NATURE OF A SUB-SEMIORDER AND ITS UNDERLYING PREFERENCE  If a binary preference relation R is a semiorder, we may adopt the following notations to represent its "underlying preference  structure":  (i) xBy p (3r: xPrIy v xlrPy);  (ii) xAy (not xBy and not yBx);  (iii) xLy p (xBy v xAy)  54 YEW-KWANG NG  where "B," "A," and "L" may be interpreted as "better than," "as good as," and "at least as good as," respectively.  One can show that, for a semiorder, the underlying preference relation L is an ordering, i.e., it is complete, reflexive, and  transitive. With some additional requirement, it can then be represented by a real-valued utility function.'  For a sub-semiorder, since the preference relation is necessarily a semiorder only over variation involving one dimension, we  adopt the following notations:  (iv) xBy p xDy and 3r: xPrly v xIrPy  (v) xAy p not xBy and not yBx and xDy  (vi) xLy p xBy v xAy  (vii) xAy a 3x1 , x2 ,..., x : XAx1Ax2 ... AX.AY  where m may be any nonnegative integer, including zero (i.e., xAy =~- xAy) (viii) Ay c- 3x1 , X21 ..., xm : XLx1Lx2 ... LxmLY,  where at least one of the L is B (ix) xBy - xAy v xBy  It may be noted that, if a sub-semiorder is not also a semiorder, it is not appropriate to use L as its underlying preference,  and B cannot be appropriately used as "better than," as it is not transitive (similarly with A). It is for this reason that  the barred and double-barred notations are designed instead. The binary relation L may be regarded as the "apparent underlying  preference" of a sub-semiorder. The reason for adding the adjective "apparent" is because the "intrinsic" underlying  preference may not be completely revealed in the definition of L. This will become clearer later, when we have proved a few  propositions.  PROPOSITION 1. For a sub-semiorder, for any pair of alternatives x, y such that xDy, one and only of the following is true:  xAy, xBy, yBx (or xAy, Ay, yBx).  Proof. Since the definitions of "A" and "B" are exhaustive, it is tautologically true that at least one of xAy, xBy, yBx is  true. So we only have to show that only one is true. If this is not so, then there exist some x and y such that, either (i)  xAy and xBy; or (ii) xBy and yBx. The former cannot be true from the definition of "A". If (ii) is true, then 3r: xPrRy v  xRrPy and 3s: yPsRx v yRsPx. Hence at least one of the following  i This representation and related problems have been tackled by a number of writers. In particular, Scott and Suppes (1968)  prove that a semiorder over a finite set is closed interval representable with constant intervals. Fishburn (1973, Theorem 6)  provides necessary and sufficient conditions for a semiorder to be closed-interval representable. These conditions involve  some density requirement as well as countability whose meaning is not intuitively clear. In Ng (1975), representation is  proved by adopting standard assumptions on explicit preference and then showing that the underlying preference must also  satisfy certain conditions well known to ensure the existence of utility function. The definition of "underlying preference"  here is slightly different from the one used in Ng (1975), making the proof slightly more tedious but involving similar  arguments.  MULTIDIMENSIONAL CHOICE SS  has to be true: (a) xPrRyPsRx, (b) xPrAyRsPx, (c) xRrPyPsRx, (d) xRrPyRsPx. It is easy to check that each of these violates  (A3') since xDy. Q.E.D.  PROPOSITION 2. For a sub-semiorder, x1Lx2 --- Lx =:> (i) not x"Bxl ; (ii) x1Lx,, , with x1Ax(x1Bx) if none (at least  one) of the L's is B.  Proof. First take the case where none of the L is B, so x,Ax2 ... Ax,, . If the proposition is not true for this case, we have  xBxl or x1Bx . Then 3r: xmPrRxl v x,,,RrPxl v x1PrRxm v x,RrPx,,, . Suppose xPrRx, is the case. (Other cases are  similarly proved and will not be repeated.) Compare x_1 with r. From A2, either x,,-,Pr, x_llr, or rPx_, . The last two  cannot be true because otherwise xPrRx_1 => xBxm_1 , violating P1 (i.e., Proposition 1), since xDx_1 . So x._1 PrRxl  => x._1Bx1. Proceed to compare x,,n_2 with r in a similar fashion, and we can establish that x_2Bx1 . Repeating the process,  we get x2,Bx1 , violating the given fact that x1Lx2(P1). So x1Ax and not x.Bxl establishing the proposition for this case.  Now take the case where at least one of the L is B, and take this to be xjBxi+i . So 3r: xiPrRxi+1 v xiRrPxi+l . Again suppose  xiPrRxi+1 . (The other case is similarly proved.) Compare r with xi+2 . It cannot be true that xi+2Pr since xi+,Lxi+2 . So,  rRxi+2 , giving xiBxi+2. Repeating the process, we have xiBx n . Then compare xi_1 with r, establishing xi_1Bx . Repeating  the process, we get x1Bx . To show that x.Bxi cannot be true, we do the similar comparison as we did in proving the first  part of the proposition. Q.E.D.  COROLLARY. The apparent underlying preference of a sub-semiorder is noncyclic, i.e., xLx1L ... Lxm ~ not xmBx.  PROPOSITION 3. The apparent underlying preference L of a sub-semiorder is a partial ordering (satisfying reflexivity and  transitivity).  Proof. Reflexivity is easily established, since it is easy to see that xAx and xAx. Either one of these is sufficient for xJx.  Transitivity is also not difficult to establish. If xLyLz, taking y to be one of the connecting links between x and z, we have  xLz. Q.E.D.  PROPOSITION 4. In general, the apparent underlying preference of a sub-semiorder is not an ordering.  Proof. Consider an explicit preference relation Ron E2 (Euclidean plane) defined by: yP -_~> (yl > xl -{- k & y2 ~ x2 - k)  v (y2 > x2 + k & y' >, x1 - k) v (yl + y2 > xl + x- + k) where k is a constant. yPx p not yP and not xP. This is  illustrated in Fig. 2. The idea is that the individual can observe a difference of larger than k in each dimension. If there  is an observable difference in each of the two dimensions, the difference in the differences has to be larger than k for the  individual to prefer one to another. Incidentally, the set { y: yPOx} is closed at the boundaries indicated by the dotted  lines. Any point (excluding the lower extreme points) on these dotted lines is a member of {y: yP}, but any arbitrary  neighborhood of it contains a point not in {y: yP}. This is  56 YEW-KWANG NG  clearly incompatible with the usual continuity requirement (e.g., see Debreu, 1959, p. 56). Hence, an interesting technical  problem is raised which, however, need not concern us here.'  ly : ypoxl  X  ly : XRoyl  FIGURE 2  From the definition of R it is clear that it satisfies reflexivity and completeness. To check that mild transitivity is also  satisfied, note that x differs from y in no more than one dimension for this property (i.e., A3'). Since the definition of R is symmetrical about the two dimensions, we may take x' = yl without loss of generality. From the definition of P xPOr  (xI > rl + k & x' > r2 - k) v (x2 > r2 + k & xl > ri - k)  v(xi+x'>rl+r'+k). (1)  And rROy implies   (yl < rl + k v y2 < r2 - k) & (y2 < r2 -f- k v yi < rl - k)   &(yi+y2 <ri+r2+k). (2)  Since x1 = yl, it is easy to deduce from (1) and (2) that x2 > y2. Hence, for x, y such that xDy, xPROy => x% > yi.  Similarly, it can be shown that xRPOy => xi > yi. With this result, it can easily be seen that mild transitivity is  satisfied. For example, xPOrROYPOs =~, xPOs. Since xi > yi, yPos must imply xPOs from the definition of P This demonstrates  that RO is a sub-semiorder on E2.  2 If we make the model stochastic, I think the discontinuity will be eliminated.  MULTIDIMENSIONAL CHOICE 57  To show that the apparent underlying preferences Lis not an ordering on E2, it suffices to show that it is not complete.  First note that xL implies that y = x or y is due west or due south of x, i.e., if x1 = y I, x> y2. Thus, xLOy implies  that y = x or y is southwest (including due south and due west) of x, i.e., xi > yi i-- 1, 2. Now for any given point x,  consider a point z which is northwest or southwest of x. Then, not xL and not zL, violating completeness. Q.E.D.  The fact that the apparent underlying preference of a sub-semiorder is not, in general, an ordering does not mean that its  "intrinsic" underlying preference cannot be an ordering. Thus in the example used in the proof of Proposition 4, it is  reasonable to regard the intrinsic underlying preference L as defined by XLy xi + xz > yi -;- v2, which is an ordering on E2.  However, the ease with which we discover the intrinsic underlying preference Lfrom Ris deceptive. This is due to the  highly simple nature of the case in question. First the relevant set E2 is only two-dimensional and convex. Second, RO is  symmetrical about the two dimensions (equal weights) and monotonic. Third, the discrimination threshold k is constant  throughout. In the general case where the set of alternatives may involve many dimensions and may not be convex, where the  discrimination threshold may vary, and where different dimensions may have disimilar effects on preference, it is very  difficult, if not impossible, to discover the intrinsic underlying preference. Moreover, even in the above simple case, the  definition of the intrinsic underlying preference is in terms of the objective measures (the numerical values of xl and x")  and not in terms of the explicit binary preference relation P and I. I must admit that I have not been able to construct a  satisfactory definition of the intrinsic underlying preferences of a sub-semiorder in terms of the explicit preference, for  the general case anyway.  It can, however, be shown that there is a F3-maximal element x in X (i.e., vpx for no y in X) for a sub-semiorder that  satisfies a rather mild condition.  DEFINITION 3. A binary relation > on a set X is said to satisfy the Well-Ordering Condition if, for each subset of X on which  > is a linear order (as defined in Fishburn, 1972, p. 29), there is an element in X which is > maximal on that subset.  In the example used in the proof of Proposition 4, each straight line is linearly ordered by R. But there does not exist a  maximal element if X is unbounded. If we are confined to compact (bounded and closed) sets, then the Well-Ordering Condition  is very likely to be satisfied. For unbounded sets, the condition may also be satisfied if we have satiation.  PROPOSITION 5. If R on X is a sub-semiorder whose apparent underlying preference relation R satisfies the Well-Ordering  Condition, then there is an x in X that is R-maximal on X.  Proof The proof is a straightforward application of Zorn's lemma (for a discussion of which, see Fishburn, 1972, Chap. 6),  since, from Proposition 2, B on X is a strict partial order if R on X is a sub-semiorder. Q.E.D.  58 YEW-KWANG NG  4. CONCLUDING REMARKS  Multidimensional choices may, but need not, necessarily violate the requirement of a semiorder. If a number of dimensions  combines to exert their influence on preference in a related way, the preference relation may be a semiorder over these  dimensions. For example, my preference for a dish of sweet and sour fish may be a function of both sweetness and sourness. But  the two dimensions may combine to assert their influence such that my preference is a semiorder. This is likely to be so  because both sweetness and sourness are tasted at the same instance. For other cases, such as the location and the appearance  of a house, the different dimensions are likely to be more independent of each other and hence preferences are more likely to  violate the requirement of a semiorder.  Many problems associated with the weakening of preference from an order into a semiorder can be resolved relatively easily  since the underlying preference of a semiorder is an order. The weakening of preference into a sub-semiorder seems to raise  more formidable problems since its apparent underlying preference is not generally an order and its intrinsic underlying  preference is difficult to define in an operationally meaningful way. However, it is reasonable to regard the intrinsic  underlying preference as that pattern of preference if the individual has perfect discriminating ability. The explicit binary  preference is a reflection of this intrinsic preference subject to imperfect discriminatory ability. Hence, the explicit  preference, while not a perfect representation of the intrinsic preference, is nevertheless "close" to it in some sense.  Hence, if we are careful enough in interpreting the explicit preference, and if we adopt some helping devices, such as  confining direct comparisons to variation over one dimension only and using indirect comparison (Ng. 1975, Sect. 9) for  variations over many dimensions, it would not be impossible to get a close enough representation of the intrinsic preference.  The imperfection in preference discrimination may be due to two different reinforcing causes. First, it may be due to  imperfect knowledge or inadequate anticipatory ability. For example, I may be unable to decide whether I prefer house A to  house B or the other way round and hence register an indifference between them because I am not sure which house will suit my  requirements better at the moment of choice. However, if I am given a chance to live in both houses for a sufficient period of  time, I may be able to be quite sure that I prefer A to B. This is similar to what Georgescu-Roegen (1936, 1958) calls the  threshold in choice. This threshold is, as a rule, a decreasing function of the amount of time allowed for the choice.  Georgescu-Roegen believes that, at "the limit when the time of experimenting is infinite, the threshold is zero" (1966, p.  152). Preference threshold need not be zero if we recognize a second cause of imperfect discrimination. This is what I call  "finite sensibility," which refers to the fundamental limitation in human capability of feeling. If the amounts of sugar in  two cups of coffee are close enough, one cannot tell a difference no matter how carefully one tastes it. Thus, even if we rule  out by assumption imperfect knowledge, uncertainties, etc., we may still have imperfect discrimination due to finite  sensitivity.  The distinction of imperfect discrimination as due to imperfect knowledge and as due to finite sensibility is of some  importance. For some problems we may be more  MULTIDIMENSIONAL CHOICE 59  interested in individual preference representing his actual feeling without "distortion" by imperfect knowledge and the like.  Now it can be argued that the feeling of an individual at any moment otime is either affected by one factor (dimension) or  affected by a number of factors which combine to exert their influences such as the case of sweet and sour fish discussed  above, since, by definition, an individual has only one mind. Hence, individual feeling at any moment of time is a semiorder.  A fuller development of this argument as well as the consideration of the complication introduced by the element of time can  only be dealt with in another paper. Apart from this extension, the concept of sub-semiorder seems to provide a few other  challenges for further development such as making the model stochastic (Luce, 1958), analyzing the intrinsic underlying  preference, conducting experiments to ascertain the usefulness of the model, and comparing the model with other psychological  theories of choice such as the elimination-by-aspects theory (Tversky, 1972), the similarity-between-stimuli theory (Rumelhart  and Greeno, 1971), etc.  REFERENCES  DEBREU, G. Theory of value. New Haven, Conn.: Yale Univ. Press, 1959.  FISHBURN, P. C. Mathematics of decision theory. Atlantic Highlands, N. J.: Mouton. 1972. FISHBURN, P. C. Interval  representations for interval orders and semiorders. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1973, 10, 91-105.  GEORGESCU-ROEGEN, N. The pure theory of consumer behaviour. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1936, 50, 545-593. [Reprinted in  Analytical economics. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press, 1966).]  GEORGESCu-ROEGEN, N. Threshold in choice and the theory of demand. Econometrica, 1958, 26, 157-168. [Reprinted as above.]  LUCE, R. D. Semiorders and a theory of utility discrimination. Econometrica, 1956, 24, 178-191. LucF, R. D. A probabilistic  theory of utility. Econometrica, 1958, 26, 193-224.  NG, Y.-K. Bentham or Bergson ? Finite sensibility, utility functions, and social welfare functions. Review of Economic  Studies, 1975, 42, 545-570.  RUMELHART, D. L., and GREENO, J. G. Similarity between stimuli: An experimental text of the Luce and Restle choice models.  Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1971, 8, 370-381.  SCOTT, D., AND SUPPEs, P. Fundamental aspects of theories of measurement. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 1958, 23, 113-128.  TvERsKY, A. Intransitivity of preferences, Psychological Review, 1969, 76, 31-48.  TVERSKY, A. Elimination by aspects: A theory of choice, Psychological Review, 1972, 79, 281-299.  RECEIVED: February 24, 1976