10.1016/0022-2496(77)90045-1
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 16, 1-29 (1977)  Natural Connectives: A Chomskyan Approach  DANIEL N. OSHERSON  Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19704  Contents. 1. Introduction. 1.1. Natural Connectives. 1.2. Formalizability under Restrictive Conditions as One Approach to the  Problem of Natural Connectives. 2. The Theory. 2.1. Fitch Logics. 2.2. Minimal Fitch Logics. 3. Five Kinds of Natural  Connectives. 3.1. Alethic Modal Logic. 3.2. Chronological Logic. 3.3. Deontic Logic. 3.4. The Logic of Rational Belief. 3.5.  Predicate Logic. 4. An Unnatural Connective. 5. Conclusions. Appendix: Proofs of Propositions 5, 6, and 7. References.  1. INTRODUCTION  1.1. Natural Connectives  Some concepts seem to be designed for easy expression in English whereas others are expressed only grudgingly. The former  category includes the meanings encoded by individual lexical items, along with many of the meanings that result from  elementary combinations of these items, as in "dark gray." The latter category includes Goodman's (1965) concept "grue,"  characterized this way (Skyrms, 1966, p. 57): "A certain thing X is said to be grue at a certain time t if and only if X is  green at t and t is before the year 2000, or X is blue at t and t is during or after the year 2000." Interchanging "blue" and  "green" in this definition yields a related concept, "bleen."l What needs explaining is not the relative comprehensibility o syntactically simple structures of natural language compared to syntactically complex structures, but rather the difference  between concepts assigned simple syntactic realizations in a natural language (at the limit, lexical items) and concepts whose  expression is perforce more cumbersome.  It is expressibility in English that is crucial, not expressibility in such artificial languages as "Grubleen," which is  exactly like English except for substitution of the concepts grue and bleen for green and blue, respectively. On the other  hand, other natural languages are as relevant as English to the distinction between concepts that occupies this paper. It is  likely that natural languages in general substantially agree about the concepts given streamlined expression, but ithis is  not true we may consider only those languages similar to English in the relevant respect.  Concepts that are easily expressed in English and similar natural languages are here called "natural," the remainder,  "unnatural." Other pretheoretical characterizations.  1 Goodman's use of these concepts raises such formidable philosophical problems that a different example may be helpful.  Savin's (1973) concept of being either a man who has never married or else a nonreturnable bottle (or, presumably, both) is  also unnatural in the desired sense.  Copyright Q 1977 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. ISSN 0022-2496  2 DAN OSHERSON  yield other senses of natural. For example, we could have begun with the "projectibility" of concepts in Goodman's (1965)  sense (i.e., their ability to figure in law-like inductive generalizations), or with the relative weight enjoyed by concepts  in assessing the similarity of two things at a given moment in time or the same thing at two moments; related senses of  naturalness arise from analysis of metaphor and simile. Again, we could have begun with the relative learnability of concepts  by children first acquiring a natural language, or with the relative facility with which people can perform deductions  pivoting on those concepts. These different senses of "natural concept" are not coextensive; consider, for example, the role  played by spatial-temporal continuity in intuitions of identity through time compared to its role in metaphor. However, it is  evident that there is substantial overlap, sufficient for us to risk, especially at this early stage of investigation,  confounding these diverse criteria by referring to the naturalness of concepts simpliciter. It is also useful to further  idealize the situation by ignoring the obviously graded quality of conceptual naturalness, proceeding instead as if the  distinction were dichotomous. These policies result in many unclear cases. But enough palpably natural concepts and palpably  unnatural concepts remain to render challenging (to say the least) the problem of stating a nonquestion-begging difference  between the clear cases.  Despite the simplicity gained from the two policies just discussed, it would be overly optimistic to hope for a unitary  account of concepts that would predict all clear cases of naturalness. Concepts differ importantly at least with regard to the  nature of the things to which they apply. There is no a priori reason to expect, for example, the natural predicates like  "tall" to exhibit the same formal similarities as the natural propositional modifiers like "certainly." Consequently, we  should characterize a manageable class of concepts and seek to distinguish natural from unnatural within that class. Success  with several such projects would then allow potentially revealing comparisons across types of concepts.  From here on we focus on propositional modifiers of one or more places, that is, operators like "implies" that combine a  certain number of propositions into a new proposition. For short, propositional modifiers are called connectives .2 We seek a  property of connectives that predicts their naturalness, or its lack.  1.2. Formalizability under Restrictive Conditions as One Approach to the Problem of Natural Connectives  Delimiting the class of natural languages is a problem with obvious analogs to the delimitation of the natural connectives; in  one sense, the latter is a subproblem of the former. Chomsky (1964) has invented an approach to the characterization of  natural languages that relies on laws of the following form: A given language is natural only if it can be adequately  formalized by a grammar with formal properties P. Among other  2 The term "connective" is intended to have only its grammatical connotations (with its usage generalized to apply to any  finite number of propositions). We sidestep the logical question of the kinds of objects to which operators like ". . .  implies . . ." apply, viz., propositions versus names of propositions. For convenience, we assume that connectives apply to  propositions directly; more respect for the use-mention distinction would require only minor adjustments in what follows.  NATURAL CONNECTIVES  things, a grammar adequate for a language, L, predicts which strings on the vocabulary of L are grammatical sentences of L.  Within this approach, choice of a set, P, of properties of grammars amounts to proposing a necessary condition for the  naturalness of a language. To be interesting, P must be truly restrictive; as few unnatural languages as possible should be  formalizable by a grammar meeting P. In a finished theory, formalizability within P is both necessary and sufficient for the  naturalness of a languagee3  In this paper, Chomsky's methodology is trained on the problem of characterizing the natural connectives. Laws of the  following form are entertained: A connective is natural only if it can be adequately formalized by a logic with formal  properties Q. A logic adequate for a connective, M, is understood to be a device that (a) recognizes every valid argument that  turns on occurrences of M, including arguments with no premises, and (b) does not recognize any invalid argument .4  As a special case of adequacy, it is sometimes reasonable to consider a connective to be adequately formalized by a logic, G,  if it can be defined from connectives that are already considered to be adequately formalized by G. To see what is at stake  here, suppose that connectives Ml ,..., M.., were represented by primitive symbols in a logic, G, that meets a certain set of  formal properties, Q. Even on the assumption that a new connective, 1V1, can be defined from Ml ,..., Mp so as to meet  conditions (a) and (b) above, there is no guarantee of the existence of a logic, G', adequate for M and in which M is  primitive, that also meets properties Q (or that we could find G' if it does exist). Fewer logics need be considered in  testing a proposed theory if definitions are allowed to impart derivative adequacy to a logic that is already adequate for the  defined expressions. We might attempt to take account of such derivative adequacy with the following convention: if  connectives Ml ,..., Mp can be adequately formalized by a logic G, and connective M can be defined from Mi ,..., M,, so as to  meet conditions (a) and (b) above, then M is also considered to be adequately formalized by G. However, such a liberal policy  can result in the misclassification of many unnatural connectives. For example, whereas the natural connectives "not," "either  .. . or . ..," "necessarily . . ," and "possibly . . ." mar be adequately formalized by some logic manifesting the formal  properties of a theory of the kind envisioned here, it is easy to define unnatural connectives from them, e.g., the connective  "Z" defined this way: A proposition p is Z if and only if p is either necessarily possible or not possibly necessary; such an  unnatural concept would then count as  s Note that the claim of a Chomsky-type law is not that a natural language can only be formalized within P, but rather that  all natural languages can be so formalized. For discussion of a variety of issues that pertain to the use of Chomsky's  methodology to investigate conceptual naturalness (including the role of "simplicity metrics" to represent gradations of  naturalness) see Osherson (1976) and Wasow (1977). The kind of theory presented here differs in important respects from the  one offered in Osherson (1976) (cf., the preface to the earlier work). Osherson and Wasow (1976) discuss the relationship  between Chomsky's methodology and the approaches to language provided by psychology and neurophysiology.  Whether an argument turns on M can be determined by substitution tests; if consistent replacement of M by another connective  can convert a valid argument into an invalid one, then AL governs the validity of the original argument.  4 DAN OSHERSON  adequately formalized by the logic for the defining concepts and hence not be labeled as unnatural.  Restrictions are therefore needed on these kinds of definitions if they are to impart naturalness to a connective. It is clear  that the choice of such restrictions is as much an empirical component of a theory of naturalness as the set Q of properties  of logics for natural concepts. The hypothesis we adopt takes the form of the following convention:  Convention on Definitions of Connectives. Suppose that Ml ,..., Mp can be adequately formalized by a logic G, and that the n  place connective M can be defined from Ml ,..., MP so as to meet conditions (a) and (b) above. Then M is also considered to be  adequately formalized by G provided that  (1) none of Ml,..., M,, is of more than n places;  (2) at most one of Ml ,..., Mp is a nontruth-functional connective; and  (3) the nontruth-functional connective, if any, in Ml ,..., M,, occurs only once in  the defining expression.5  The definition of Z, above, fails to meet the conditions of the convention, so Z is not considered to be adequately formalized  by the logic in question, at least by this route. Henceforth, a connective M is considered to be adequately formalized by a  logic G if and only if (i) G meets conditions (a) and (b), above, with respect to M, or (ii) M can be defined from connectives  Mt ,..., M., that are adequately formalized by G and meet conditions (1)-(3) of the convention on definitions.  To summarize, our goal is to characterize a class of logics such that every natural connective is adequately formalized by at  least one logic in the class. The characterization is to be achieved by stating a set of properties of logics, the properties  being necessary and sufficient for membership in the class. A proposed set of properties is an empirical theory within  psychology; the truth of the theory depends upon which connectives humans find natural, in the pretheoretical sense of  "natural" discussed earlier. To prove such a theory false requires the exhibition of a natutal connective such that no logic  of the hypothesized kind is adequate for its formalization. To prove such a theory interesting requires the exhibition of  classes of unnatural connectives that similarly escape formalization by any logic of the hypothesized kind.  The class of logics to be offered in this paper is motivated by the conjecture that all natural concepts give rise to natural  reasoning. The notion of natural reasoning is made precise in the context of a set of logics inspired by the work of Fitch  (1952, 1966). The next section presents the theory in detail. Section 3 presents logics of the required sort for a variety of  natural connectives. Section 4 introduces an unnatural connective in the service of a proof that the theory is nonvacuous.  Some defects and potential difficulties connected with the theory are discussed in Section 5.  c An n place connective, *, is truth functional just in case the truth value of *(p. ,..., pri) is determined by the truth  values of pl ,..., p. "Necessarily . . " "possibly . . " and "it would be desirable that . . ." are examples of connectives  that are not truth functional.  NATURAL CONNECTIVES S  2. THE THEORY  Our theory is that every natural connective can be adequately formalized by at least one minimal Fitch logic. This section  explains the underlined concepts. Illustrations are drawn from the formalization of standard propositional logic; this is  convenient because the logic of truth functions is part of the logic of every natural connective, or so we assume.  The material in Section 2.1 is based on ideas due to Fitch (1952, 1966); Section 2.2 extends these ideas. Some readers may  find useful a more leisurely account of Fitch's style of "natural deduction" than can be offered here; Thomason (1970) and  Leblanc and Wisdom (1972) are excellent texts for this purpose.  2.1. Fitch Logics  We presuppose the notion of a (formal) language whose basic grammatical categories are identified, and whose syntax is fully  specified. By a subformula of a formula f of a language L is meant a consecutive sequence of symbols in f that is itself a  formula of L.  DEFINITION. A reiteration function for a given language L is a function from L to L, not necessarily defined on all of L, that  maps each formula f in its domain into some subformula of f.  To illustrate, the language, say Lp, of propositional logic may be defined this way: we are given an infinite set of sentence  parameters, p, q, r, s, t,..., and two connectives - and -. Each sentence parameter is a formula of Lp, -A is a formula of Lp  if A is, and (A -> B) is a formula of Lp if A and B are. The other truth functional connectives-&, v, and the like-may be  defined from - and --* in well-known ways. The only reiteration function needed for propositional logic is the (total)  identity function, mapping each formula into itself (by the definition of subformula, any formula is a subformula of itself);  it is designated r,  Intuitively, reiteration functions play the following role in a Fitch logic. Once a given formula, f, has been entered into a  proof, the reiteration functions of the logic help determine what subformulas of f, if any, can be transferred to later stages  of the proof.  In all subsequent definitions a given formal language is presupposed by reference to formulas and reiteration functions. The  next two definitions introduce the key concepts of "column," "premise," and "item."  DEFINITION. A formula column is an ordered triple /r, c, p>, where r is a reiteration function, c is a nonnull, finite  sequence of formulas fi ,..., fx , fix+I ,..., f, (q > k > 0), and p is the possibly null, initial sequence of c, viz., fi  ,..., f,.. The formulas of p are designated the premises of the formula column.  That is, a formula column is a reiteration function paired with a finite, possibly null sequence of formulas, called the  "premises" of the formula column, followed by a nonnull, finite sequence of formulas that are not premises. The following  simultaneous induction generalizes the concepts of "formula column" and "premise of a formula column" by introducing the  concept "item."  E) DAN OSHERSON  DEFINITION. Every formula column is a column. Every formula and every column are items.  The ordered triple <r, c, p>, where r is a reiteration function, c is a nonnull, finite sequence of items, il ,..., ik , ik+l  ,..., is (q > k > 0), and p is the possibly null sequence of items il ,..., ik , is a column provided that il ,..., ik, and ip  are formulas. The formulas of p are designated the premises of the column.  Suppose that fir, c, p> is a column, where c is iI ,..., i,, . We say that iI ,..., iq are items of <r, c, p>.  To aid in visualizing columns, they may be represented as vertical arrays of items flanked on the left by a vertical line; the  premises of a column (if any) are set off with a short horizontal line beneath them. The name of the reiteration function of a  column is appended to the upper left-hand side of the vertical line. In propositional logic, (2-i) and (2-ii) represent  columns, (2-i) being the special case of a formula column. The items of column (2-ii) are p, (q --~ -s), column (2-i), and  ((-r --> t) --* -(s --* -s)). Column (2-ii) has no premises.  So far we have left implicit the distinction between a formula and a formula occurrence, a column and a column occurrence, and  so forth. Henceforth, this "type-token" distinction is crucial, even if occasionally left for the context to bring out.  DEFINITION. Every item occurrence of a column is said to be directly subordinate to the column. The notion of subordination is  the ancestral of direct subordination: if item occurrence i is directly subordinate to item occurrence j, then i is  subordinate to j; if i is subordinate to j, and j to k, then i is subordinate to k.  Thus, -r in its occurrence in (2-i) is directly subordinate to (2-i), whereas its occurrence in (2-ii) is not directly  subordinate to (2-ii) although it is subordinate to (2-ii). The occurrence of column (2-i) in (2-ii) is directly subordinate  rp  rp  p  (q -' -s)  rp I (q - t) t  r  -(-p --q)  t) -~. -(s -* _S))  Note that the only item occurrences directly subordinate to a column are the item occurrences of the column. We say that the  item occurrences subordinate to a given column are item occurrences in the column.  The following inductive definition partially orders the item occurrences in a given column.  DEFINITION. The items directly subordinate to a given column are ordered by their  NATURAL CONNECTIVES  sequence numbers (i.e., left to right, or top to bottom in a diagram). If item i is ordered before item j, then item i and all  the items (if any) subordinate to item i are ordered before item j and all the items (if any) subordinate to item j.  Every pair of item occurrences in a column such that neither is subordinate to the other is ordered by this definition. In  particular, all formula occurrences are so ordered. The order of formula occurrences in a column may be read directly from the  column's diagram: proceed from top to bottom ignoring the left to right position.  We turn now to the characterization of deductive inference within a given language L. For this purpose, the notion of an  intelim rule for L is central; such rules rationalize inferences from earlier to later formulas of a proof. An intelim rule  for L may be thought of as an abstract description of a subset of the columns that can be constructed from L. This description  is cast in a metalanguage that reflects the grammar of L. The vocabulary of the metalanguage consists of an infinite set of  formula variables, A, B, C, D, etc. ranging over formulas of L, and, for each connective in L, a corresponding metalanguage  connective (for convenience, each such connective is designated by the same symbol in both L and its metalanguage). In  addition, the metalanguage contains infinite sets of term variables, predicate variables, and so forth, as needed to mirror  the remaining basic grammatical categories of L. Finally, any notation used in the definition of "formula of L" may appear in  the metalanguage of L.  The syntax of the metalanguage is to parallel the syntax of L. The definition of formula of L can serve as the definition of  the formula of the metalanguage of L by replacing sentence parameters with formula variables, connectives with metalanguage  connectives, and so forth. Henceforth, formulas of a metalanguage are referred to as metaformulas. Metaformulas for  propositional logic include A, -B, and (A -> -B). The definition of submetaformula is parallel to that of subformula. In  subsequent definitions, a given language L and the metalanguage for L are presupposed by reference to metaformulas and related  notions.  DEFINITION. A metaformula column is an ordered triple fir, C, P>, where r is a reiteration function, C is a nonnull, finite  sequence of metaformulasF. ,..., Fs , and P is either Fl or else the empty sequence. If P is Fl , then Fl is designated the  premise of the metaformula column (otherwise, the metaformula column has no premises).  Metaformula columns are analogous to formula columns in all but one respect: whereas a formula column may have any finite  number of premises, a metaformula column may have one premise at most. Metaformula columns are diagramed analogously to  formula columns. A metaformula column for the propositional language Lp is shown in (2-iii).  We do not require the notion "metacolumn," parallel to that of column. The simpler concept of metaformula column is sufficient  for defining "intelim rule," "derivation," and the like.  DEFINITION. A metaformula F describes a formula f if and only if f has (at least) the logical form of F.  Thus, the metaformulas A, -.4, -(A -* B), and -(A -> A) all describe the propositional logic formula -(p --> p).  S DAN OSHERSON  DEFINITION. Let <r, C, P> be a metaformula column, where C is Fl ,..., FS , and let <r', c, p> be a column, where c is il  ,..., iQ . fir, C, P> describes fir', c, p> in case:  (2) P has the same length as p, i.e., <r, C, Pj has the same number of premises as <r', c, p>, namely, zero or one.  (3) Each F; (1 < j < s) in C can be assigned some formula, say f (F;), that occurs as an item of <r', c, p> so that:  (a) F; describes f (F;),  (b) all occurrences of a given formula variable in C stand for the same formula (in determining logical form for (a)),  (c) F; is a premise of <r, C, P) if and only if f (F;) is a premise of <r', c, p>.  Thus, in the case of the propositional language, Lp, (2-iii) describes (2-iv) (with A as p, and B as -q). The last definition  does not rule out the possibility that f (F;) occurs before f (Fk) in fir', c, p> even though F; occurs after Fk in (r, C, P>.  Note also that, according to the last two definitions, metaformulas only describe formulas, and metaformula columns only  describe columns.  rp  (A -} B) rp (p - -q)  -A  -t  (B , -A)  -p  (2-iii)  rs   (s - -p)  q  -s  -(r --> r) (2-iv)  DEFINITION. An intelim rule is an ordered pair <S, F>, where S is a nonempty, finite set of metaformulas and metaformula  columns, and F is a metaformula.  DEFINITION. Let <r, c, p> be a column, where c is il ,..., ik_1 , ik,..., 2,' (1 < k < n), and let <S, F> be an intelim rule.  <S, F> justfies ik in case:  irk is not a premise;  (2) F describes ik (hence, ix is a formula);  (3) every member of S describes at least one of the items il ,..., ik_1 ; and  (4) all occurrences of a given formula variable in (S, F> stand for the same formula (with regard to (2) and (3)).  NATURAL CONNECTIVES 9  Thus, the intelim rule S = {A, rF = -B justifies -s in (2-iv) (with A as  _p).  DEFINITION. AFitch Logic is a pair <L, I> where L is a formal language, and I is a set of intelim rules constructed from the  metalanguage for L.  DEFINITION. Let <r, c, p> be a column occurrence based on the language L, and let <I,, I".. be a Fitch logic. Then <r, c, p>  is a derivation in <L, I in case each item occurrence, i, of !r, c, p;; satisfies at least one of the following conditions:  (l ) i is the same formula (although not necessarily the same formula occurrence) as a premise of <r, c, p>;  (2) i = r(j), where j is an item of a column \/r', c', p' ,\~ to which <r, c, p> is directly subordinate, and j is ordered  before i in <r', c', p'> (that is, the occurrence of j in <r', c', p", is ordered before the occurrence of <r, c, p> in <r',  c', p'>);  (3) i is justfied by an intelim rule of I;  (4) i itself is a derivation.  If i satisfies one of the first three clauses in the last definition, then i must be a formula; if i satisfies clause (4),  then it is a column. Clause (2), concerning the reiteration function, allows some manifestation of a formula that was  previously proved or assumed, to figure in a later stage of the derivation.  The "cash value" of a Fitch logic is its set of nonsubordinate derivations-that is, the derivations not subordinate to any  other column occurrence. Each may be construed as a deductive inference from its premises, if any, to its last item; it thus  represents an argument legitimated by the Fitch logic in question. Note that the reiteration function r of a nonsubordinate  column <r, c, p) plays no role in determining whether <r, c, p> is a derivation of a given Fitch logic; this is because no  formula of a nonsubordinate column can be justified by clause (2) of the definition of a derivation (only subordinate columns  are affected by that clause).  Propositional logic can be adequately formalized as a Fitch logic <Lp, Ip> by taking Lp to be the language defined earlier for  propositional logic, r,, to be the reiteration function r.,(A) -- .4 for all formulas A of Lp, and Ip to be the following set  of intelim rules <S, F>:  - introduction:  S=  A   B F=-A  -B   A}, F = A  A}   B~~ F = (A ~ B)    - elimination: S = {- -(rq introduction: S = I  elimination: S = {(A, B), A;, F == B -  10 DAN OSHERSON  Derivations within (Lp, Ip> include (2-v) and (2-vi); justifications for each formula occurrence are given at the left of the  column.  The following fact testifies to the adequacy of <Lp, Ip> for the logic of truth functions.  PROPOSITION 1. <Lp, Ip> provides derivations for all and only the arguments (including zero premise arguments) that are  validated by the method of truth tables.  The proof of Proposition I may be found in Thomason (1970, Chapts. V-VII).  rp  (p --~' q) 1   (-r -~ -q) 2 (same formula as a)  -  premise  rp l p 3   (p - q) 4 reiteration (1)  q 5 -> elimination (3, 4)  (-r --> -q) 6 reiteration (2)  rp -r 7 premise  (-r -> -q) 8 reiteration (6)  -q 9 -- elimination (7, 8)  q 10 reiteration (5)  - -r 11 - introduction (7, 9, 10)  r 12 - elimination (I1)  (p - r) 13 -* introduction (3, 12)  (2-v)  2 3  (same formula as a) premise  introduction (1, 2)  (2-vi)  2.2. Minimal Fitch Logics  Some members of the class of Fitch logics are distinguished by a certain kind of simplicity and nondegeneracy in their intelim  rules. To characterize this subclass in an explicit way, we list six conditions on the set of intelim rules of a Fitch logic  (some useful definitions are mixed into the list). In what follows let <L, I> be a given Fitch logic, where L is a formal  language and I is a set of intelim rules. Let <S, F> be a given member of I.  DEFINITION. The metaformulas occurring in S are (a) every metaformula that is a member of S, and (b) every metaformula that is  an item of a metaformula column of S.  NATURAL CONNECTIVES 11  (That is, the metaformulas occurring in S are all those that appear in the statement of S, e.g., A, B, and -B in -  introduction, above.)  Condition 1. No intelim rule of 1 is such that F occurs in S.  Condition 2. In every intelim rule of I, the set S has one of two forms: either (a) a finite set of metaformulas (and no  metaformula columns), or (b) one metaformula column (and no metaformulas apart from those of the column). Thus, figuratively,  the metaformulas occurring in S are either displayed horizontally (in case (a)) or vertically (in case (b)), never in both  Condition 3. No more than one nontruth-functional connective may appear in a given intelim rule of 1.6 (Any connective may,  however, occur an arbitrary number of times in an intelim rule, and different nontruth-functional connectives may occur in  different intelim rules.)  DEFINITION. Let* be a given connective in L. An introduction rule for* is an intelim rule ~S, F of L such that a single  occurrence of * is the one and only occurrence of a connective in F (cf., the intelim rules -introduction and ->introduction,  above, for propositional logic).  Condition 4. For each connective of L there is at least one introduction rule in I.  DEFINITION. The complexity of a metaformula is the number of submetaformulas occurring in it. (Thus, (A - B), -A, - -A, and A  have complexities 3, 2, 3, and 1, respectively.)  Condition 5. Every introduction rule (S, F> of I is such that F provides an upper bound on the complexity of metaformulas  occurring in S; that is, no metaformula occurring in S is more complex than F.  The following definitions extend in a straightforward way the relations of implication and reiteration to metalanguage  formulas and columns. This allows the statement of our sixth and final condition on Fitch logics. Let 0 and Yf be metaformulas  of a language L.  DEFINITION. We say that 0 implies Yf in <L, I> if and only if for all pairs of formulas (0, 0) in L such that if (a) 0  describes 0, and IF describes 0, and (b) all occurrences of a given formula variable in 0 and Yf stand for the same formula,  there is a derivation of from 0 in ;L, II',.  Thus, in 'Lp, Ip>, - -B implies B.  DEFINITION. Suppose IF occurs in a metaformula column X. We say that Yf is a  reiterate of 0 in !L, I> with respect to X, if and only if for all pairs of formulas (0, 0) in  " Truth-functional and nontruth-functional connectives are identified by recourse to the semantics of the logic. We may assume  that this is always available, at least at an intuitive level. A Fitch logic without such a link to the meaning of its  connectives is an empty formalism that can neither support nor falsify a theory of the kind considered here.  12 DAN OSHERSON  L such that (a) 0 describes 0 and YJ describes 0, and (b) all occurrences of a given formula variable in 0 and W stand for the  same formula, 0 = f (~), where f is the reiteration function of X.  Thus, in <Lp, Ip;, -A is a reiterate of -A with respect to the metaformula column (2-iii).  DEFINITION. Let X be a premise-free metaformula column of L. We say that implies X in <L, I> if and only if every metaformula  of X is either implied by 0 in (L, I> or is a reiterate of 0 in <L, I> with respect to X.  Thus, in <Lp, Ip>, -(A --* B) implies rD CAB .  DEFINITION. Let X be a metaformula column of L with premise II. We say that 0 implies X in <L, I> if and only if every  metaformula of X is either implied by {0,17} in <L, I> or is a reiterate of 0 in <L, I) with respect to X.  Thus, (A -* B) implies r, I s in <Lp, Ip>.  Condition 6. Every introduction rule <S, F> in I is such that F implies in <L, I> every member of S.  The following definition places these six conditions at the heart of our theory of natural connectives.  DEFINITION. A Fitch logic (L, I> is said to be minimal if and only if:  (1) the vocabulary of L includes the propositional connectives - and ~, and the formulas of L include those of Lp;  (2) among the intelim rules of I are the four intelim rules of Ip, given above, with the domain of rq suitably extended, if  necessary, to include all of L;  (3) (L, I> meets the six conditions on intelim rules just stated.  Fitch logics meeting Condition 6 tend toward economy in their introduction rules: without the condition, nothing discourages  the presence in a logic of a multitude of introduction rules for a given connective, *, each rule specifying a logically  sufficient but exotic set of items for justifying formulas with * as main connective; with Condition 6, such sufficient sets  of items cannot be so exotic as to fail to be deducible from the formulas justified. The wholesome effects on Fitch logics of  the other five conditions are easier to discern. The minimal Fitch logics thus provide a relatively tranquil setting for  deductive inference, thereby giving one formal explication (admittedly partial) of the intuitive idea of natural reasoning;  natural reasoning, on this view, is reasoning that conforms to some minimal Fitch logic. We may thus begin to test in a  precise way our earlier conjecture that every natural connective gives rise to natural reasoning. In the present context, the  conjecture amounts to the theory stated in the introduction to this section, namely, that the class of minimal Fitch logics is  sufficient for the formalization of every natural connective.  NATURAL CONNECTIVES 13  It is easy to verify that <Lp, Ip> meets the six conditions on intelim rules; hence, <Lp, I p) is itself a minimal Fitch  logic. Consequently, since - and -> are natural connectives, and since they are adequately formalized by <Lp, Ip>, the theory  has made two true predictions.' Indeed, every n place truth function (n >, 2) can be defined from - and --> within the  convention on definitions; hence, they may all be considered to have adequate formalizations within the class of minimal Fitch  logics. As for the unary truth functions other than negation, (a) affirmation may be defined from negation within the  convention on definitions, (b) the contradiction connective, say c, uniformly assigning falsehood to every formula, can be  directly formalized by a minimal Fitch logic (simply add the inteIim rules S = {B, -B}, F = cA, and S = {cA}, F = B to 1p),  and (c) the tautology connective, say t, uniformly assigning truth to every formula, may be defined from c within the  convention on definitions. We therefore have  PROPOSITION 2. All n place truth functional connectives (n > 1) have adequate for  malizations within the class of minimal Fitch logics.  Only a proper subset of the truth functional connectives should be reckoned natural, no doubt (not every truth function of  eleven arguments, for example, is easily expressed in natural language). Proposition 2 simply assures us that all the natural  ones are covered by the class of minimal Fitch logics. (We are not committed to the converse claim that only natural  connectives fall within this class; see Section 1.2.) The next section provides evidence that the class of minimal Fitch  logics is sufficient for other natural connectives as well.  3. FIVE KINDS OF NATURAL CONNECTIVES  3.1. Alethic Modal Logic  The connective "it is necessary that . . ." can be formalized as a Fitch logic <Ln, Ink as follows. Ln is the languageLp of  propositional logic enriched by the additional symbol N ("necessarily . . ."), and the stipulation that NA is a formula of Ln  if A is a formula of Ln. To specify In we define r,, to be a reiteration function for Ln such that for all formulas of the  form NA, r,ti(NA) = A, and for all other formulas, B, rB) is undefined. The reiteration function r,, , defined earlier, is  extended to all of Ln: r,,(A) = A, for all formulas A of Ln. In includes all the inteIim rules, <S, F>, of Ip plus these two  (due to Fitch, 1966):  N introduction: S = {rn ( A}, F = N A  N elimination: S = {NA}, F = A.  It is easily verified that  ' To say that -> is a natural connective is not to say that it gives the meaning of conditional sentences in natural  languages. Rather, -> is natural because the connective "not both p and not q" is a reasonably succinct and comprehensible  English expression whose meaning is (p -> q).  14 DAN OSHERSON  PROPOSITION 4. <Ln, In> is a minimal Fitch logic.  Derivations in <Ln, In> include (3-i) and (3-ii). The former tells us that if p is necessarily true, then it is true; the  import of the latter is that if it is necessarily true that p (materially) implies q, then if p is necessarily true, so is q.  These claims accord with intuition. The more general issue of the adequacy of <Ln, In> as a formalization of "necessarily' is  clouded by occasionally unreliable intuitions about the truth of such formulas as (Np -> NNp), not derivable in the present  system. We consider the set of theorems derivable in the well known system "T" (see Hughes and Cresswell, 1968, chap. 2) to  best approximate the introspective data. The adequacy of <Ln, In> is then supported by:  PROPOSITION 5. <Ln, In> is equivalent to T.  Proposition 5 is proved in the appendix.  Propositions 4 and 5 suggest that the connective "necessarily . . ." is adequately formalized by at least one minimal Fitch  logic; our theory thus gains some support. The connectives "possibly . . .," "it is impossible that . . .," and ". . . implies  . . ." can be defined from "necessarily . . ." in the usual ways (-N - p for possibly p, N - p for it is impossible that p,  and N(p --~ q) for p implies q). Since their definitions conform to the convention on definitions in Section 1.2, these  connectives may also be considered to have adequate formalizations within the class of minimal Fitch logics. Various systems  of quantified modal logic can also be formalized as minimal Fitch logics, but the significance of this fact is clouded by the  difficulties that attend the interpretation of many formulas in these logics.  rq  rNp 1 Premise  p 2 N elimination (1)  (Np - p) 3 --* introduction (1, 2)  rD  rq N(p -> q) 1    Premise  rD Np 2   N(p --> q) 3 reiteration (1)  rn (p - q) 4 reiteration (3)  p 5 reiteration (2)  q 6 , elimination (4, 5)  Nq 7 N introduction (6)  (Np - Nq) 8 introduction (2, 7)  N(p --> q) -(Np --> Nq) 9 -~ introduction (1, 8)  NATURAL CONNECTIVES 15  3.2. Chronological Logic  Prior (1957) presents a logic for the connective "it is at all times true that . . .," or "always . .." and shows it to be  isomorphic to the modal logic system known as S5.s A Fitch logic, <Lt, It>, equivalent to Prior's system can be constructed as  follows. Lt is the language Lp enriched by the additional symbol T ("at all times. .."), and the stipulation that TA is a  formula of Lt if A is a formula of Lt. To specify It we define rt to be a reiteration function for Lt such that rt(TA) = TA,  rt(-TA) = -TA, and for all formulas B of form other than TA or -TA, rt(B) is undefined. The reiteration function rP is  extended as before. The set It includes all the intelim rules, <S, F>, of Ip plus these two (adapted from Fitch, 1966):  T introduction: S = {rt I A), F = TA,  T elimination: S = {TA}, F = A.  <Lt, It> is easily seen to be minimal.  Derivations in <Lt, It> include all columns isomorphic to derivations in <Ln, In>, plus such others as (3-iii) and (3-iv):  rD  rP Tp 1 Premise  rt I Tp 2 reiteration (1)  TTp 3 T introduction (2)  (Tp - TTp) 4 -> introduction (1, 3)  P  rP -Tp 1 Premise  rt I -Tp 2 reiteration (1)  T - Tp 3 T introduction (2)  (-Tp --> T - Tp) 4 -> introduction (1, 3)  (3-iv)   These characteristic S5 inferences are far more palatable for "always" than for "necessarily." Consequently, we find support  for the adequacy of <Lt, It) in Proposition 6.  PROPOSITION 6. <Lt, It> is equivalent to S5 (and hence equivalent to Prior's system).  For proof of Proposition 6, see the appendix.  These facts suggest that the connective "always" finds an adequate formalization within the class of minimal Fitch logics; so  also, then, do connectives like "never" and "Some  8 See also Rescher (1966) and Rescher and Urquhart (1971), who achieve similar results on the basis oa different analysis.  480li6/I-2  16 DAN OSHERSON  times" that are definable from "always" in accord with the convention of Section 1.2. It remains to be seen, however, whether  the minimal Fitch logics are sufficient for such chronological connectives as "it will be true n days from now that ... ;" see  Prior (1957, 1967) and Rescher (1966, 1968, Chap. XII) for analyses of this concept.  3.3. Deontic Logic  The connective "it ought to be that . . ." (or "one ought to see to it that . . .") can be formalized as a Fitch logic <Lo,  Io> as follows. Lo is the language Lp enriched by the additional symbol O, and the stipulation that OA is a formula of Lo if A  is a formula of Lo. We define ro to be a reiteration function for Lo such that for all formulas of the form OA, ro(OA) = A,  and for all other formulas, ro is undefined; rp is extended as usual. Io includes Ip plus these two intelim rules (due to  Fitch, 1966):  O introduction: S = frI A), F = OA,  O elimination: S = {OA}, F = -0-A.  It is easily verified that (Lo, Io> is minimal.  Derivations in <Lo, Io> legitimate such principles as (O(p & q) -O - p) (letting (p & q) stand for -(p --> -q)). The formula  (Op --; p) is not derivable, as it should not be. The most widely accepted system of deontic logic is known as DM (or "the  standard system" (Hanson, 1970)). The adequacy of <Lo, Io> is thus supported by the following proposition, whose proof is  given in the appendix.  PROPOSITION 7. <Lo, Io> is equivalent to DM.  These facts suggest that "it ought to be that. . ." is adequately formalized by a minimal Fitch logic. Consequently, the  related concepts "permitted" and "forbidden" are similarly formalizable since they may be defined from O within our convention  on definitions. However, deontic logicians seem to agree that the concept of moral committment (i.e., "seeing to it that p  commits one to seeing to it that q") is not definable from O and the connectives of propositional logic (see Follesdal and  Hilpinen, 1970, for a review). It is thus an open question whether the two place connective for committment can be formalized  as a minimal Fitch logic. (See von Wright, 1964, 1965, for an axiomatization of committment; see Osherson, 1976, for a proof  generator for a fragment of Von Wright's system.)  3.4. The Logic of Rational Belief  Rescher (1968, Chap. XIV) presents a variety of systems designed to formalize the logic of assertion, or, as faithfully,  rational belief. The connective at issue might be rendered "it is sensible to believe that . . .," here symbolized as S. One  of the simplest systems at which Rescher arrives is isomorphic to the standard system of deontic logic, DM. Hence, this system  is formalizable as a minimal Fitch logic isomorphic to (Lo, Io>, say <Ls, Is>.  NATURAL CONNECTIVES 17  Derivations in (Ls, Is) accord well with intuition about sensible belief, yielding such theorems as S(p v -p) and ((Sp v Sq) -  S(p v q)) (letting (A v B) stand for (-A , B)). Rescher examines systems stronger than (Ls, Is>, but these contain theorems  apparently applicable only to special situations; these theorems include: "What everyone finds sensible is true," and "What no  one finds sensible is false." The logic <Ls, Is; may well include all the palatable inferences involving the connective S. If  so, then this connective has an adequate formalization as a minimal Fitch logic, and similarly for the connectives that can be  defined from it within the convention on definitions; the latter include "it is sensible to doubt that . . ." (S - - - -) and  "it is silly to doubt that . . ." (-S - ---). On the other hand, it is unknown at present whether the class of minimal Fitch  logics allows the formalization of the mixed quantifier-belief connectives (e.g., "it is sensible for someone to believe that  . . .") also analyzed by Rescher; its sufficiency for the traditional epistemic modalities of knowledge and belief is even  less certain.  3.5. Predicate Logic  Standard predicate logic-the logic of the connective "every object, x, is such that . . ." -can be adequately formalized as a  Fitch logic, (L,, I,,> (Fitch, 1952; Thomason, 1970). Following Thomason, the vocabulary of Ld is as follows:  1. An infinite set V of individual variables;  2. An infinite set IP of individual parameters;  3. A set C of individual constants;  4. For each i 0, a set Pi of i-ary predicate parameters, , P;i,..., P..  By definition, the set T of terms is IP U C. The set F of formulas of L y is specified bV the following clauses:  1. If P c- P then P c F;  2. If P E P'n, where n > 0, and tl ,..., t,, e T, then Pt, ,..., tE F; 3. If A c -F, then -A c -F;  4. If A, B E F, then (A --* B) E F;  5. If :1 E F, x c- V, and u E IP, then (dx)Ax/u E F.  The symbol Axlu stands for the formula that results when x is substituted for every occurrence of u in A; in using the  notation (dx)Axlu we always assume that u is not in the scope of (`dx).9  The set of intelim rules for (Le, , Iv> includes Ip plus two others. To state the new rules we need metavariables for  variables, individual parameters, and terms; we use x, u, and t, respectively, for this purpose. The infinite class of  reiteration functions, r, , is defined this way: r,,(A) = A if u does not occur in A; if u does occur in A, then r,,(A) is  undefined. Thus, if v, w E IP and y E V, r(Piiv & (dy) Pay)) is undefined, and  s An occurrence of u is in the scope of (bx) if and only if it is in a subformula of the form (Hx)B.  18 DAN OSHERSON  r,,((Vy) P12yw) _ (yy) P12yw. The reiteration function rp is extended as usual. The new rules in I y are as follows:  `d introduction: S = {r I A}, F = (b'x) Ax/u,  d elimination: S = {(dx) Ax/u}, F = Atlu.  Strictly speaking, the d introduction rule is not an intelim rule at all, since ru is not a reiteration function but a  reiteration function schema, covering any choice of parameter, u. To accommodate languages like L., that include terms, we  hereby extend the notion of a reiteration function to allow the use of variables ranging over terms of the object language.  With b' introduction reinstated as a bona fide intelim rule, the minimality of {LY , I V,> is easily verified.  There is a derivation in <L, J,> y> of a formula, A, from a (possibly empty) set of formulas, I' if and only if T semantically  implies A in the standard, model theoretical sense of "semantically implies." Thomason (1970) gives the proof for a closely  related system that includes intelim rules for identity; his proof is easily modified for the present situation. This  completeness result supports the claim that <L,, , Ir,> is an adequate formalization of the quantifier V.  The connective "all objects, x, are such that . . ." thus has an adequate formalization as a minimal Fitch logic; the  quantifiers "some object, x, is such that. . ." and "no object, x, is such that . . ." may be defined from it in accordance  with the convention on definitions. On the other hand, the sufficiency of the minimal Fitch logics for connectives based on  quantifiers like "many objects, x, are such that" is an open question.  4. AN UNNATURAL CONNECTIVE  The following definition yields a palpably unnatural connective, W.  DEFINITION. Let be a given proposition of unknown truth value. Then WA if and only if A F--* O.  That is, WA if and only if A has the same truth value as a certain proposition whose truth value is unknown. The language of  W Lw, consists of Lp along with the additional symbol W and the stipulation that WA is a formula of Lw if A is a formula of  Lw. In this section we demonstrate Proposition 8.  PROPOSITION 8. There is no minimal Fitch logic adequate for the formalization of W.  Let <Lw, Iw) be a candidate Fitch logic for W. To prove Proposition 8, we show that if (Lw, Iw> is minimal, then it yields  invalid derivations involving W, and hence is not adequate for W.  By Condition 4 on minimal Fitch logics, Iw must include at least one introduction rule for W. Let <S, F> be such a rule. By  the definition of an introduction rule, F must be WA (or WB, etc. ; no generality is lost by selecting a particular formula  variable for definite-  NATURAL CONNECTIVES 19  ness). By Condition 2, S must be of one of two forms: either (1) a finite set of metaformulas (no metaformula columns), or (2)  one metaformula column (no metaformulas apart from those of the column). We examine these two possibilities in turn.  Case 1. What metaformulas can be in S ? By Condition 5, all metaformulas with more than a single, one place connective are  ruled out of S. By Condition 3, no nontruthfunctional connective other than W may appear in S.iThus, the connectives that  may show up are restricted to W, -, c, and t. The latter two connectives, contradiction and tautology, map every formula  indifferently into the false and the true, respectively; we may therefore represent all metaformulas of the form cA, cB, etc  by F (for falsity), and all metaformulas of the form tA, tB, etc. by T (for truth)." Since Condition 1 rules WA out of S, the  only remaining metaformulas that conform to Conditions 3 and 5 are these:  T, F, A, -A, B, -B, WB, C, -C, WC, etc.  (Condition 5 rules out metaformulas of any greater complexity than WA.) We now run afoul of Condition 6, which requires that  whatever metaformulas we place in S, WA must imply each of them in <Lw, Iw>. Consultation of the definition of W, above,  reveals that WA does not entail any of F, A, -A, B, -B, WB, C, -C, WC, etc.; to build such implications into <Lw, Iw>,  therefore, would render it inadequate as a formalization of W.. The only member of (*) that is entailed by WA is T. However,  the introduction rule S = {T}, F = WA would again render <Lw, Iw) inadequate since it yields a premise-free derivation of Wp,  which is not sanctioned by the meaning of W. Hence, no W introduction rule of form 1 can both meet the conditions on minimal  Fitch logics and figure in an adequate formalization of W.  Case 2. If S consists of a metaformula column, say X, then by the definition of metaformula column in Section 2.1 X may have  either one premise or no premises; it cannot have more than one premise. Suppose first that X has no premises. What  metaformulas can appear as items of X? As before, Conditions 1, 3, and 5 restrict the choice to the metaformulas listed in  (*). By Condition 6, every metaformula in X must either be implied by WA or be a reiterate of WA. As before, the only  metaformula in (*) that can be safely implied by WA is T; any other implication would render <Lw, Iw> unfaithful to the  meaning of W specified by its definition. What metaformulas in (*) could be reiterates of WA ? The only possibility is A,  since it is the only subformula of WA in (*). That is, regardless of the reiteration function, r , of X, r,,(WA) is either  undefined, or equal to WA itself, or equal to A (by the definition of a reiteration function, given in  'W is not truth functional because the truth value of Wp is not determined by the truth value of p (cf., footnote 5). It is  interesting that the inference from {Wp, (p f--> q)} to Wq is valid nonetheless.  u F may be thought of as the formula -(p -> p), and T as the formula (p -p). It is helpful_ to keep in mind that (p --p)  (i.e., T) can be derived at any stage of a proof within any minimal Fitch logic, as in (2-vi); no premises need be added to  the nonsubordinate column of the proof for this purpose. This follows from the presence of Ip in every minimal Fitch logic  (cf., the definition of minimal Fitch logic given in Section 2.2).  20 DAN OSHERSON  Section 2.1,12 there are no other possibilities); and WA is ruled out of (*) by Condition 1. Consequently, only T and A can be  items of X. But any such metaformula column renders <Lw, Iw> an inadequate formalization of W. For, if just T appears in X  then a premise free derivation of Wp is available, and if just A, or both A and T appear in X, then a premise free derivation  of W(p -, p) is available, as shown in (4-i); both arguments are invalid in view of the meaning of W.  S = {r- I Al, F = WA,  rro  rw  rv  p  (p I P) W(P - p)  Suppose now that X has one premise. Again, Conditions 1, 3, and 5 require that the items of X, premise and nonpremise, be  drawn from (*). Suppose that the premise were WC. Condition 6 requires that each nonpremise of X be a reiterate of WA or be  implied by {WA, WC}. Again, regardless of the reiteration function of X, A is the only possible reiterate of WA in (*). And  only T and WC are safely implied by {WA, WC} in (Lw, Iw>. Hence, only A, T, and WC can figure as nonpremises of X. However,  any such metaformula column renders <Lw, Iw> an inadequate formalization of W; for example, the rule  S=  F =WA  legitimates a premise free derivation of W(p -p), contrary to the meaning of W. Deleting one or more of the nonpremises in  this rule obviously fails to help. Consequently, WC can not be the premise of X. Completely parallel reasoning shows that  neither can any other metaformula in (*) serve as premise of X. Hence, no W introduction rule of form 2 can both meet the  conditions on minimal Fitch logics and figure in an adequate formalization of W.  To finish the proof of Proposition 8 we must also consider the possibility that, although W figures directly in no adequate,  minimal Fitch logic, it is definable from connectives  12 The slight extension of the notion of the reiteration function, given in Section 3.5, is irrelevant in the present context  because the vocabulary of Lw does not involve terms; and even if it did, WA would still have only WA and A as subformulas and  hence as possible reiterations.  NATURAL CONNECTIVES 21  Ml ,..., M,, that share an adequate formalization by a minimal Fitch logic; if the definition meets conditions (1)-(3) of the  convention of Section 1.2, then Proposition 8 would be false. Since W is a one place connective, the convention on definitions  limits the set of defining connectives to the truth functions -, c, and t, and a single, one place, nontruthfunctional  connective, say Y; in addition, Y may occur at most once in the definition. Obviously, the three truth functions are not  sufficient to define W. Moreover, any use of c or t yields an inadequate definition of W (since they obliterate all  distinctions among formulas). Thus, collapsing across equivalent expressions differing only in the number of double negations  (e.g., -YA versus - - -YA), only four possible definitions of W from Y remain, viz.,  WA = def YA, (1)  WA = def -YA, (2)  WA = def Y - A, (3)  WA =def-Y-A. (4)  Definitions (1)-(4) entail that YA is logically equivalent to WA, -WA, W - A, and -W - A, respectively. Thus, the first and  fourth cases result in the following meaning for Y: YA = def (A *--+ 0), where 0 is a proposition of unknown truth value; the  second and third cases amount to this: YA = def (A E--r -(9), where is a proposition of unknown truth value. Obviously, each  meaning for Y yields a proof parallel to that for W that the logic of Y cannot be directly formalized as a minimal Fitch  logic. Any attempt to define Y on the basis of negation and yet another connective, say X, within the convention on  definitions collapses into the case for Y; for example, the definition YA = def - X - A converts definition (3) above into WA  = def - X - -A, which entails the equivalence of WA and -XA, already considered as definition (2). So, W does not find  adequare formalization in a minimal Fitch logic by the definitional route either. This completes the proof of Proposition 8.  Although W is not formalizable as a minimal Fitch logic, it can be formalized as an ordinary Fitch logic. Scott Weinstein  (personal communication) has proved that any set of axioms for propositional logic along with schema of the form ((A +-+ B)  <-.> (WA H WB)) provides a sound and complete axiomatization of W. Consequently, an adequate Fitch logic for W consists of the  intelim rules Ip for propositional logic, plus these two (letting (~ H 0) abbreviate -((0 --> 0) ->. -(0 --* 0))):  S = {(A .4a B)), F = (WA +4 WB),  S = {(WA +-), WB)}, F = (A +--> B).  Call a connective that can be adequately formalized as a Fitch logic a Fitch connective, and a connective with a minimal Fitch  logic formalization a minimal Fitch connective. We have:  22 DAN OSHERSON  PROPOSITION 9. The set of minmal Fitch connectives is properly included in the set of Fitch connectives.  We conclude this section by noting the existence of an infinite class of unnatural connectives that may be generated by  progressive "enrichment" of the definition of W as follows:  UA = def N(A *->  VA = def O(A (-4e) ZA = def ON(A " 0),  etc., where s a given proposition of unknown truth value. By the same argument as before, the logic of each of these  unnatural connectives may be shown to lie outside the class of minimal Fitch logics. Other means of enriching the definition  of W yield other classes of unnatural connectives similarly outside the purview of the minimal Fitch logics.  S. CONCLUSIONS  The theory developed in this paper is that the class of minimal Fitch logics is sufficient for the adequate formalization of  every natural connective. In support of the truth of the theory, minimal Fitch logics were presented for a variety of natural  connectives. In support of the interest of the theory, or at least its nonvacuity, a class of unnatural connectives was  defined whose logic eludes the minimal Fitch logics. Three potentially troublesome aspects of the theory remain to be  highlighted.  1. As stressed earlier, formalizability within the minimal Fitch logics is at best a necessary condition for the naturalness  of a connective; it is not sufficient because of the availability of such logics for a host of unnatural connectives.  Consider, for example, the connective ON, where ONp if and only if it is one's duty to see to it that p is a logical truth.  The logic of this unnatural connective appears to be formalized by at least one minimal Fitch logic (we omit the details). It  should, in fact, be obvious that virtually all of the work lies ahead in constructing a truly restrictive set of conditions  within which the natural connectives (or natural concepts of any kind, for that matter) may be formalized. Examination of the  logics presented in Sections 2 and 3 reveals that they share more formal characteristics than captured in Conditions (1)-(6)  of Section 2.2. For example, each connective in a given logic is associated with exactly one introduction rule and exactly one  rule of a different nature, labeled an elimination rule; moreover, these elimination rules <S, F) are such that either F is a  formula variable, or the rule can be replaced by an equipollent rule in which F is a formula variable. These conditions as  well as a variety of others have not been included in the present theory because it is not known whether they are truly  restrictive; that is, we cannot at present exhibit an unnatural connective whose unformalizability within the stronger theory  seems to be demonstrable only with the aid of the additional conditions.  NATURAL CONNECTIVES 23  The excessive liberality of the present theory does not eliminate the possibility that it is also too conservative in some  ways. Condition (3) may be the worst offender in this regard. Naturally, the same kinds of considerations apply to the  convention on definitions in Section 1.2.  2. The adequacy of the minimal Fitch logics for each of the connectives examined in Section 3 is open to question. Consider  <Lo, Io>, the logic of obligation. According to <Lo, Io>, and hence according to the "standard" system of denotic logic, it is  one's duty to see to it that (p v -p). Many deontic logicians (see Follesdal and Hilpinen, 1970) find this principle  compatible with a coherent sense of duty. But there might well be other senses of duty in which O(p v -p) is denied (see,  e.g., Von Wright, 1951). We are entitled to ask whether this other sense is the more natural one, and if so, whether the  minimal Fitch logics encompass it.  Another potential ground for distress about <Lo, Io> is its incapability of representing such "cross modal" connections as:  (Op --* -N - p), i.e., whatever is obligatory is possible." If one believes this latter principle (there is room for doubt),  it might be required of the logics for 0 and N to include derivations of it. On the other hand, even if we accept (Op -> -N -  p) we might attempt to avoid responsibility for deriving it by insulating certain classes of connectives from each other on  some intuitive basis regarding the kinds of meanings encoded; the alethic modal operators might thus be separated from the  deontic modal operators, and logics constructed, as in Section 3, only for the conceptual connections within each class, not  between classes. All that is certain at present is that the problem requires further study, and therefore that the adequacy of  <Lo, Io> and <Ln, In> is open to doubt on these kinds of grounds as well.  3. In Section 1.2 our theory was motivated by the conjecture that natural concepts are those that allow natural reasoning to  be performed with them (see also Section 2.2). The class of derivations supplied by the minimal Fitch logics is our  reconstruction of the intuitive notion of natural reasoning. But there are grounds to doubt that the minimal Fitch logics do  justice to this notion. One difficulty is that derivations within Fitch logics allow manipulation of entire formulas only.  Thus, the equivalence of p and --p does not allow (--p & q) to be inferred immediately from (p & q); instead, p must be  detached from q, converted to --p, and finally reattached to q. It is doubtful that human reasoning proceeds in quite this way.  One reaction to this observation might be to search for classes of logics more faithful to the stepwise processes of ordinary  reasoning. This is the approach of earlier work (Osherson, 1975, 1976). However, in following through on this approach it is  easy to become mired in methodological problems of little intrinsic interest, as the earlier work illustrates. A more  satisfactory course is to repudiate the claim that logics within a favored theory exactly miror real-time events of ordinary  reasoning, and search instead for aspects of natural reasoning, possibly abstract, that can be fruitfully represented in  13 See Anderson (1958) for a systematic attempt to reduce deontic logic to alethic modal logic.  24 DAN OSHERSON  such a theory.14 Of course, one can also abandon the suggestion that natural reasoning is the key to natural concepts. The  present theory, for example, can be evaluated without pondering the fidelity of its reconstruction of natural reasoning.  We conclude on an optimistic note. It has proven difficult to express the meaning of logical connectives without recourse to  the inference schemata in which they participate. According to one view, formulate by Prior (1967, p. 129): ". . . the meaning  of the word `and' . . . is said to be completely given by saying that (i) from any pair of statements P and Q we can infer the  statement formed by joining P to Q by `and' . . . (ii) from any conjunctive statement P- and -Q we can infer P, and (iii) from  P- and -Q we can always infer Q." An argument due to Prior, however, shows that not every set of inference rules constitutes a  possible meaning of a connective. Otherwise, the rules A/A-tonk-B, and A-tonk-BIB would provide the meaning of "tonk," with  the consequence that every proposition implies every other proposition: by virtue of the meaning of "tonk," p implies  p-tonk-q, and p-tonk-q implies q, hence, by transitivity of implication, p implies q. A successful empirical theory of the  kind envisioned in this paper might provide a principled distinction between the inference rules for "and" and those for  "tonk," thereby defending the use of such "syncategorematic" definitions against anomalies like tonk.15  APPENDIX: PROOFS OF PROPOSITIONS 5, 6, AND 7  Assertions approximating Propositions 5 and 6 may be found in Hughes and Cresswell (1968, Appendix 1), but only very  incomplete proofs are offered. We fill in the missing steps here since complete proofs do not seem to be available in the  literature.  PROPOSITION 5. <Ln, In> is equivalent to T.  Our proof of this proposition relies upon the following axiomatization of T (drawn, with inessential modifications, from  Hughes and Cresswell, 1968, Chap. 2).  Language. The primitive vocabulary consists of an infinite set of parameters, p, q, r,..., and the connectives -, ->, and N.  The formulas are specified by the stipulation that any  14 In particular, it is possible to reformulate the definition of minimal Fitch logic given in Section 2.2 so as to explicate  further certain aspects of the intuitive idea of natural reasoning. Each of the logics presented earlier for specific  connectives can be modified (if necessary) so as to fall within the new definition; and this can be achieved without altering  the set of theorems available in those logics. Similarly, all of the propositions proved in this paper remain true under the  new definition. In addition, however, it is possible to prove various "normal form theorems" about derivations available  within any minimal Fitch logic, as newly defined. One of these theorems is analogous to a result of Prawitz (1965, Theorem 2,  p. 40) for a Gentzen type system of natural deduction. In a paper now in preparation, I discuss the "psychological reality" of  this and other normal form results for Fitch logics.  is See also Belnap's (1967) interesting reply to Prior. Belnap's ground for excluding tonk are analogous to the kind of  grounds envisioned here. Incidentally, tonk is, unfortunately, formalizable as a minimal Fitch logic.  NATURAL CONNECTIVES 25  parameter is a formula, and -A and NA are formulas if A is, and (A , B) is a formula if A and B are.  Axioms.  Al (p --~ (q -> p)).  A2 ((p (q - r)) - ((p - q) - (p -' r))) A3 ((-p - -q) - (q - p)). A4 (Np -. p).  A5 (N(p -> q) - (Np - Nq)).  Inference rules. Uniform substitution. The result ouniformly replacing any parameter in a theorem by any formula is itself a  theorem.  Modus Ponens. If (A ~ B) and A are theorems, then so is B.  Necessitation. If A is a theorem, then so is NA.  To show that <Ln, In> yields at least T it is sufficient to show that (a) Al-A5 are derivable without premises in <Ln, In>,  and (b) if f' is a formula of T that results from applying one of T's inference rules to one or two formulas fi and fz of T  (two in the case of Modus Ponens), then if fl and fs have premise-free derivations in <Ln, In>, then so does f'. Regarding  (a), the fourth and fifth axioms are derived in (3-i) and (3-ii), and the derivation of Al-A3 is straightforward. As for the  inference rules, it is obvious that if D is a derivation in <Ln, In>, then replacing any parameter occurring in D with a  formula results in another derivation in <Ln, In>, since such substitutions cannot cause a formula to lose a logical form that  it exhibited before; thus, uniform substitution yields no theorems of T that are without derivations in <Ln, In j. The same is  true of Modus Ponens since it corresponds to the elimination rule for , in <Ln, In>. Regarding Necessitation, suppose that  (A-i) is a (premise-free) derivation of A in <Ln, In>; then (A-ii) is a premise-free derivation of NA in <Ln, In>.  rn  NA (A-ii)  No strictures on reiteration are violated in the transition from (A-i) to (A-ii) since the reiteration function associated  with (A-i) is irrelevant (as noted in Section 2.1) and no reiteration into the inner column of (A-ii) is needed.  To prove that <Ln, In> yields no more than T it is sufficient to provide a procedure that converts any derivation in <Ln, In>  into a proof in T that has the same premises and conclusion. Thomason (1970) shows how to convert any derivation in <Lp, Ip)  into a proof within an axiomatization of propositional logic that is included in T. We simply show how to supplement  Thomason's procedure so as to deal with uses of N introduction and N elimination, the remaining intelim rules of <Ln, In>.  26 DAN OSHERSON  Every use of N elimination, as in (A-iii), is to be replaced with a column of the form (A-iv). We now consider uses of N  introduction, depicted in (A-v), in which the inner (right-most) subordinate derivation has itself no uses of N introduction;  it is sufficient to consider only these rightmost applications of N introduction because Thomason's procedure operates on a  derivation "from the inside out," gradually reducing the depth of the derivation until it is a single column.  Since any use in <Ln, In> of N elimination in a derivation can be replaced by use of -> elimination and the addition of a new  premise of the form (NA -> A), we are assured that B is derivable in <Lp, Ip> from Al ,..., An , (NA, (NA,, -> An)-that is,  derivable using only the intelim rules for -> and -.  NA A  NA  (NA -* A)  A  (A-iv)  NA, NA,,  rn  NB  Al An B  (A-v)  Hence, by successive uses of -~ introduction, (A, -> (A, -* (... (An --> B)) ...) is therefore derivable from (NA, -* A,),...,  (NA. --,- An). Applying Thomason's procedure to this latter derivation yields a proof in the propositional logic part of T, as  depicted in (A vi). Replacing the appropriate part of (A-v) with (A-vi) leaves us with (A-vii). All that remains is to justify  the transition from (A, -> (AZ -)- ( ... (An -* B)) ... ) to NB. For this purpose, the material in (A-viii) is inserted  between (A, -- (A, -~ (... (An --> B)) ...) and NB; justifications in T are given to the right; "syll" refers to the derived  inference rule in propositional logic whereby (A --> C) is a theorem if (A --> B) and (B -* C) are theorems. This proves  Proposition 5.  NATURAL CONNECTIVES 27  (NA, --> Al)  (NA,, , A,j  (Al (A2 (... (A. - B)) ...) (A-vi)  NA, NA,  (NA, --> Al)  (Al - (A2 ~. (... (A. - B)) ...)  NB  N(Al --> (A2 --> --- (A- B)) ...) Necessitation  (NA1 - NA --> - - - (A.n --> B)) ... ) A6 and Modus Ponens  (NA1-(NA2 -; (NA. - NB)) ...) A6, Modus Ponens and Syll  (NA2 -~ ... (NA--, NB)) ...)  Modus Ponens  (NA, NB)  Modus Ponens  (A-viii)  PROPOSITION 6. (Lt, It> is equivalent to S5.  The proof of Proposition 6 relies on the axiomatization of S5 (due to Hughes and Cresswell, 1968) that simply adds the axioms  (NP -+ NNp) and (-Np --> N - Np) to the axioms of T (hence all proofs in T are proofs in S5). Our proof of Proposition 5 can  be used for Proposition 6 if it is modified as follows.  First, it must be noted that the two additional S5 axioms are derivable in (Lt, It>, as shown by (3-iii) and (3-iv).  28 DAN OSHERSON  Second, the method of handling N introduction-or rather, in the present case, T introduction-for the purposes of supplementing  Thomason's conversion procedure must be altered. Faced with an innermost use of T introduction, as in (A-ix), insert the  material in (A-x) between -TBm and the subordinate derivation; all reiterations into the subordinate derivation of (A-ix) now  "look like" reiterations within <Ln, In>, shown above to be equivalent to T (and hence part of S5). We now proceed as before  with the conversion procedure. The resulting conversion of T introduction results in a proof within axiomatic T placed  underneath (A-x) and the formulas TA. ,..., TA, , -TBI ,..., -TBm . The material in (A-x) is legitimate within the  axiomatization of S5 provided by Hughes and Cresswell since it consists only of S5 axioms and the results of Modus Ponens. We  are thus left with a proof in S5. Use of T elimination in a derivation is handled just like use of N elimination.  TA, TA- TBI  TA, --* TTAI TTA,  TA,,, --~ TTATTA -TB1 --* T - TB, T - TB,  re I C -TBm --* T - TB T - TB,,,  TC  PROPOSITION 7. <Lo, Io> is equivalent to DM.  One standard axiomatization of DM is the same as that given above for T except that it has (Op --- -O - p) as an axiom instead  of (Op --~ p). Derivation (A-xi) shows that the former formula is part of <Lo, Io>. The only other modification needed in the  proof of Proposition 5 to make it serve as a proof that <Lo, Io> is equivalent to DM is to use (A-xii) rather than (A-iv) to  replace uses of O elimination, and to make corresponding changes in (A-vi) and (A-vii).  -O-p (Op - -O - p)  OA  (OA , -O - A) -O-A  NATURAL CONNECTIVES 29  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  It is a pleasure to acknowledge the helpful comments of Noam Chomsky, Thomas Wasow, Scott Weinstein, and Kenneth Wexler on  earlier versions of this paper. The responsibility for remaining confusions and mistakes rests with the author. Much of the  research reported herein was facilitated by a grant from the National Science Foundation.  REFERENCES  ANDERSON, A. R. A reduction of Deontic logic to Alethic modal logic. Mind, 1958, 67, 100-113. BELNAP, N. D. "Tonk, plonk, and  plink." In P. F. Strawson (Ed.), Philosophical logic. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 1967.  CHOMSKY, N. Current issues in linguistic theory. The Hague: Mouton, 1964. FITCH, F. B. Symbolic logic. New York: Ronald Press,  1952.  FITCH, F. B. Natural deduction rules for obligation. American Philosophical Quarterly, 1966 (January), 3, No. 1, 27-38.  FOLLESDAL, D., & HILPINEN, R. Deontic logic: An introduction. In R. Hilpinen (Ed.), Deontic Logic: introductory and systematic  readings. Dordrecht: Reidel, 1970. Pp. 1-35.  GOODMAN, N. Fact, fiction, and forecast. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1965. HANSSON, B. An analysis of some deontic logics.  Nous, 1970, 4, 373-398. HUGHES, G. E., & CRESSWELL, M. J. An introduction to modal logic. London: Methuen, 1968. LEBLANC, H.,  & WISDOM, W. Deductive logic. Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 1976.  OsHERsoN, D. Reasoning and concepts. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1976. OSHERSON, D. Reasoning in Adolescence.  Hillsdale: Lawrence. Arlbaum Associates, 1975. OSHERSON, D., & WAsow, T. Task-specificity and species-specificity in the study  of language:  a methodological note. Cognition, 1976 (June), 4, No. 2, 203-214.  PRAWITZ, D. Natural deduction: a proof-theoretical study. Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell, 1965. PRIOR, A. Time and modality.  Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 1957.  PRIOR, A. Past, present, and future. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 1967.  PRIOR, A. The runabout inference-ticket. In P. F. Strawson (Ed.), Philosophical Logic. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 1967.  REsCHER, N. On the logic of chronological propositions. Mind, 1966, 75, 75-96. RESCHER, N. Topics in philosophical logic.  Dordrecht: Reidel, 1968.  RPscHER, N., & URQUHART, A. Temporal logic. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1971.  SAVIN, H. B. Meanings and concepts: A review of Jerrold J. Katz' Semantic Theory. Cognition, 1973, 2, No. 2, 213-238.  SKYRMs, B. Choice and chance. Belmont: Dickensen, 1966. THOMASON, R. H. Symbolic logic. Toronto: Macmillan, 1970. VON WRIGHT,  G. H. Deontic logic. Mind, 1951, 60, 1-15.  VON WRIGHT, G. H. Anew system of Deontic logic. Danish Yearbook of Philosophy, 1964,1,173-182. VON WRIGHT, G. H. A correction  to a new system of Deontic logic, Danish Yearbook of Philosophy, 1965, 2, 103-107.  WASOW, T. On constraining the class of transformational languages, manuscript, April 1977.  RECEIVED: December 14, 1976