10.1016/0022-2496(77)90043-8
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 15, 102-108 (1977)  Estimation of Parameters for the Grice Theory of Simple Reaction Time'  CHARLES C. SPIKER  Department of Psychology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242  The variable-criterion theory of simple reaction times proposed by G. R. Grice is briefly summarized. Grice's method of  parameter estimation is described, and it is shown how these procedures can be converted to a least-squares estimation.  Finally, the likelihood function is derived from the theory, thereby permitting use of the method of maximum likelihood for  estimating the Grice parameters in experiments of simple reaction times.  One of the promising theories of simple reaction time in the human subject is the variable-criterion theory proposed by Grice  (1972b). With this theory, and the estimation of appropriate parameters from the data, Grice has achieved considerable success  in reconstituting data from simple reaction time experiments. Since the theory also holds considerable promise for complex  reaction time (Grice, Hunt, Kushner, & Morrow, 1974), it merits detailed attention at this time.  One of the difficulties of the theory concerns the practical problem of extracting parameter estimates. Grice (1968, 1971,  1972a, 1972b) has resorted to an ingenious combination of Thurstonian scaling techniques (Thurstone, 1925, 1928) and empirical  curve fitting. Despite the ingenuity, the procedures are tedious both to apply and to describe. The rationale for Grice's  procedures seems to depend rather crucially upon graphical representation, thereby discouraging the use of high-speed  computers to aid in parameter estimation.  It would seem, therefore, that the theory could be more widely exploited if more conventional procedures for parameter  estimation could be developed for it. The purpose of the present paper is to demonstrate that such procedures can indeed be  provided. The first section of the paper presents a brief summary of the main tenets of the theory of simple reaction time.  The second section describes Grice's methods  t Preparation of this report was supported, in part, by Grant BMS75-04334 from the National Science Foundation. The writer is  deeply indebted to Joan H. Cantor for assistance in computer programming and for numerous helpful suggestions in the  preparation of the manuscript. A debt of gratitude is owed to G. Robert Grice for a rather lengthy series of correspondence  that greatly facilitated the writer's understanding of the variable-criterion theory.  102  Copyright ~c 1977 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. ISSN 0022-2496  THE GRICE THEORY OF SIMPLE REACTION TIME 103  of estimating parameters, and the third section develops from these methods the likelihood function which permits estimation  of parameters by the method of maximum likelihood.  GRICE's THEORY OF SIMPLE REACTION TIME  The variable-criterion theory of simple reaction time was developed from a combination of assumptions taken from the theory of  Hull (1943) and Spence (1956) and from signal detection theories (e.g., Green & Swets, 1966). It postulates that, after the  onset of the reaction-time signal, there is an exponential growth over time of sensory information (V) during the trial. On  any given trial, the subject's criterion (threshold) is a fixed value. As soon as the value of V exceeds that of the threshold  (T), the subject responds. Thus, given the function describing the growth of V over time and the value of T on a given trial,  the reaction time could be predicted. From trial to trial, however, the value of T is assumed to vary randomly according to  the normal distribution function, thereby generating a distribution of reaction times for the several trials. Given the  function describing the growth of V over time and the values of the parameters describing the normal distribution function,  the distribution of reaction times could be predicted.  The time :required to process and respond to the information signal, then, is jointly determined by the rate of growth in V  and by the randomly occurring values of T. In addition to individual-difference variables, the primary variable influencing  the parameters that describe the growth of V is the intensity of the reaction-time signal. The standard deviation and mean are  the parameters that specify the criterion distribution. It is presumed that variables affecting these parameters include those  that have been found, in experimental tests of signal detection theory, to affect the criterion, e.g., set, instructions,  attention, incentives, and motivation.  It should be explicitly noted that the variable-criterion theory differs from signal detection theory in that the former  associates the random variability with the threshold rather than with the recruitment of information. In this respect, Grice's  theory also differs from the formulations of Hull (1943) and Spence (1956), both of which specify a constant threshold with a  randomly varying momentary excitatory potential. Despite the fact that under certain conditions, the mathematical implications  of the two alternatives are quite similar, empirical considerations may ultimately lead to an unequivocal choice between them.  If the class of variables (e.g., set, incentives, etc.) that affect the value of the criterion mean are also found  consistently to affect the value of the standard deviation, support would be provided for the assumption that random  variability is associated with the threshold. Conversely, if the value of the standard deviation is found to be influenced by  the class of variables that affect the rate of growth of V, evidence would be provided for the assumption that random  variability is  104 CHARLES C. SPIKER  associated with the recruitment process. The procedures for estimating parameters, described below, are sufficiently general  as to be appropriate in either case, provided only that the experimental design is adequate to prevent the confounding of the  parameters.  Consider a cumulative distribution of reaction times obtained by presenting a given subject with the reaction-time signal for  a large number of trials. It is apparent that the cumulative proportion corresponding to a given time is an estimate of the  theoretical probability that the value of V exceeded the value of T by that time. Accordingly, conversion of that proportion  to the corresponding unit normal deviate provides a way to estimate the distance, in units of the standard deviation of the  criterion distribution, between the value of V at that time and the value of the mean of the criterion distribution. These  considerations lead directly to Grice's procedures for estimating the parameters.  GRICE'S METHOD OF PARAMETER ESTIMATION  The Grice procedures can be most simply illustrated by considering just two cumulative distributions of reaction times. The  first distribution might have been obtained from a single subject through the repeated presentation of a given signal with,  say, a set of instructions designed to produce a lenient (mean) criterion, T1 . The second distribution might have been  obtained from the same subject, with the same signal, but with a set of instructions intended to produce a severe (mean)  criterion, T2 . Now consider a single point on the abscissa, t, for which there is a nonzero proportion entered for both  cumulative distributions. Let pit be that proportion for the first distribution and p,,, that for the second distribution. Let  0 represent the cumulative unit normal distribution function and 0-1 be the inverse of that function. Then,  zit = 0-1(pit) and z2t = 'P-1(p201  where zlt is the estimated difference between the value of V at time t (Vt) and the value of Tl in units of a1 , and z,t is  the corresponding estimate of the difference between Vt and T2 in units of a,. On an absolute common scale,  aizit = Vt - T1 and  a2z2t=Vt-T2  Vt can be eliminated from both equations by subtraction, yielding  a,-,It - a2z2t = T2 - Ti .  Solving for zlt.  zlt = (a21a1) z2t + (llal)(T2 - T1)'  THE GRICE THEORY OF SIMPLE REACTION TIME 105  If the origin of the scale is arbitrarily set at Tl , then  z1t - (a2/al) Z2t + T2/a1  Equation (1) expresses a linear relation between pairs of z-values from the two distributions, that is, between z-values that  are paired because they correspond with respect to time (on the abscissa of the cumulative frequency distributions of reaction  times). If the corresponding z-values are plotted and fitted with a linear regression line, the slope of the fitted line is an  estimate of v2/al and the intercept is an estimate of the criterion mean of the second distribution, expressed in units of al  . Indeed, linearity or curvilinearity of the regression provides immediate evidence for or against the theoretical assumption  that the underlying distributions are normal and differ at most with respect to the values of mean and standard deviation.  Equation (1) permits the conversion of the distribution of z,t to the al scale simply by multiplying each z,t by the estimate  of a2/al and adding the estimated value of T,/al. Conversion of the zlt to the a2 scale, if desired, may be accomplished by an  analogous computation. If still a third distribution had been obtained from the same subject with the same signal, but with a  different threshold manipulation, the distribution zlt could be plotted against the zit in order to obtain estimates of a3/al  and T3/al . If the overlap with respect to time were greater in the distributions of zit and z2t than in those for zit and zlt  , then z,t could be plotted against zit and the resultant slope and intercept converted to the al scale by simple algebra.  This procedure can be extended to any number of distributions, provided only that it is reasonable to assume that each  distribution was generated from the same V-function.  After the z-values are converted to a common scale, they may be used to estimate the parameters in the exponential function  that is presumed to describe the recruitment of V that is common to all distributions. This assumption may be represented as  (at/al) z,t + (Tj/al) = m - be-ate (2)  where j = 1, 2,..., n, the number of distributions. If the rescaled z-values from all distributions are plotted against time  within trials, the plot should reflect the theoretical growth of V across time within trials. A weighted least-squares fit to  the rescaled z-values provides the necessary estimates of m, b, and a. If the experiment involves more than one subject, or if  different signals are given the same subject, the three parameters in the V-function may be estimated separately for each  subject and/or for each signal.  The equation required for an attempt to reconstitute the data with the parameter estimates can be obtained with the aid of Eq.  (2). For brevity, let s; be a;/al and L; be T1 f al . Equation (2) may then be written  s;z;t + L; = m - be-at  106 CHARLES C. SPIKER  and after solving for zit ,  z,t = (l !s,)(m - beat - L,).  Insertion of the corresponding parameter estimates into Eq. (3) permits the calculation of each z;t . Analysis of Eq. (3)  reveals that, as t varies between zero and infinity, z;t varies between (lls;)(m - b -L;) and (lls;)(m -L;). Between these two  pairs of limits, there is one-to-one correspondence of z and t. The theoretically predicted probability, at time t, in the  cumulative distribution of reaction times is then given by  fz(x)  Pr(t < x) = pit = J (2,r)-1/2 exp(-zz2) dz, (4) Z(0)  where z(x) is computed from Eq. (3) with the parameter estimates.  The parameters of the theory could be estimated with a least-squares method by utilizing Eqs. (3) and (4) in a direct fit of  the theory to the cumulative distributions of reaction times. Thir strategy, like that of the maximum-likelihood method to be  described in the next section, requires the use of a numerical method, such as the Newton-Raphson, to solve the system of  nonlinear equations produced by taking the first derivatives of the least-squares function with respect to each parameter. The  present writer has successfully programmed a high-speed computer to obtain unweighted least-squares estimates of the Grice  parameters for samples of reaction-time data.'  MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATES OF THE GRICE PARAMETERS  In order to obtain parameter estimates from the reaction times by the method of maximum likelihood, it is essential that the  theory be capable of providing the probability density function of the reaction times. The starting point for such a  development is provided by Eqs. (3) and (4). Given that z and t are in one-to-one correspondence, the probability density  function for z, f(z), can be transformed into that for t according to the following rule (e.g., Hogg & Craig, 1965, pp. 115  ff.):  f(t) = i dzldt I f(z).  From Eq. (4), we see that  f(z) _ (2-)-' exp(-zz2), (1ls,)(m - b -L,) < z < (lls;)(m -L,).  2 A program to estimate parameters by the unweighted least-squares method and one to provide maximum-likelihood estimates were  written in FORTRAN IV for the IBM System 360165. Copies of these programs are available from the author on request.  THE GRICE THEORY OF SIMPLE REACTION TIME 107  The derivative of Eq. (3), with respect to t, is  dzfdt = (1Is;) abe at.  Hence,  f(t) = (IIsj) ab(2-)-l exp{-'j[(IIs,)(m - beat -L;)l2 - at}, 0 < t < +oo. (5)  The method of maximum likelihood requires the selection of the parameters so that the probability of obtaining the data set is  maximized. Equation (5) gives the probability of occurrence of any given reaction time, ti . Thus, if the reaction times are  independent:,  L(6; tl , t2 ,...) In) = Pr(tl , t2 ,., tn) = AO; t1) A e; t2) ... AO; fn)  b  1~2 In exp ~~ (-z((IIsj)(m - be al, -Lj)]2 - ati)j, (6)  where B is the set of parameters to be estimated and L is the likelihood function. Since L and In L will be maximal for the  same parameter values, and since it is simpler to work with the logarithmic function,  \ n )  1n L = n In ( sj(2 ~112 (f(lIsj)(m - beat` -Lj)]2 + ati)}. (7)  Estimation of the parameters by the method of maximum likelihood requires taking the first partial derivatives of Eq. (7) with  respect to each of the parameters and setting these derivatives equal to zero. Solution of the resultant system of equations  yields parameter estimates that maximize In L.  Because the system of equations is nonlinear in the parameters, numerical methods are required. One of the most powerful of  current methods is a modification of the generalized Newton method described by Fiacco and McCormick (1968, pp. 167 l., The  writer has successfully programmed a high-speed computer to solve for the Grice parameters with this method.  Given the maximum-likelihood estimates of the parameters, the goodness of fit may be tested with a Pearson chi-square.  Equation (5) becomes the theoretically predicted probability density function for reaction times. It may be numerically  integrated for each distribution over intervals of, say, 10 msec. Alternatively, the parameters may be used to compute  z-values from Eq. (3), the z-values then converted to expected proportions of the cumulative distribution with Eq. (4), and  the density function calculated from the cumulative distribution by successive subtractions. Either way., the probabilities  thus computed may be multiplied by the number of reaction times in the empirical distribution in order to obtain the expected  frequencies within each interval. After the intervals have been combined as necessary to assure  108 CHARLES C. SPIKER  expected frequencies greater than 10, the obtained frequencies may be compared with the expected frequencies by calculating a  chi-square statistic with degrees of freedom equal to the number of categories less the number of parameters estimated.  DISCUSSION  Although the cumulative frequency distributions of reaction times can be fit directly, using Eqs. (3) and (4) with either a  weighted or unweighted least-squares method, the maximum-likelihood procedures outlined in the preceding section seem  preferable. The latter method constitutes a direct fit to the density distribution, rather than to the cumulative  distribution, thereby avoiding any question concerning dependent observations that necessarily arises in fitting cumulative  distributions. The amount of computer time required for estimation is, if anything, less for the maximumlikelihood method than  for the least-squares procedure in comparable applications.  Because the variable-criterion theory is still under development (Grice, et al., 1974), it is not possible at present to  determine whether the estimation procedures developed here for simple reaction times will also be applicable to experiments on  complex reaction times.  REFERENCES  FIACCO, A. V., & MCCORMICK, G. P. Nonlinear programming: Sequential unconstrained minimization techniques. New York: Wiley,  1968.  GREEN, D. M., & SwETs, J. A. Signal detection theory and psychophysics. New York: Wiley, 1966. GRICE, G. R. Stimulus intensity  and response evocation. Psychological Review, 1968, 75, 359-373. GRICE, G. R. A threshold model for drive. In H. H. Kendler &  J. T. Spence (Eds.), Essays in neobehaviorism: A memorial volume to Kenneth W. Spence. New York: Appleton-CenturyCrofts, 1971.  Pp. 285-310.  GRICE, G. R. Conditioning and a decision theory of response evocation. In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and  motivation. Vol. 5. New York: Academic Press, 1972 (a). Pp. 1-65. GRICE, G. R. Application of a variable criterion model to  auditory reaction time as a function of the type of catch trial. Perception and Psychophysics, 1972 (b), 12, 103-107.  GRICE, G. R., HUNT, R. L., KUSHNER, B. A., & MORROW, C. Stimulus intensity, catch trial effects, and the speed-accuracy  tradeoff in reaction time; A variable criterion theory interpretation. Memory and Cognition, 1974, 2, 758-770.  HOGG, R. V., & CRAIG, A. T. Introduction to mathematical statistics. New York: Macmillan, 1965. HULL, C. L. Principles of  behavior. New York: Appleton, 1943.  SPENCE, K. W. Behavior theory and conditioning. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1956. THURSToNE, L. L. A method of scaling  psychological and educational tests. Journal of Educational Psychology, 1925, 16, 433-451.  THURSTONE, L. L. Scale construction with weighted observations. Journal of Educational Psychology, 1928, 19, 441-453.  RECEIVED: January 6, 1976  Printed in Belgium