10.1016/0022-2496(77)90055-4
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 16, 254-260 (1977)  Supplementary Report: Braids, Side Segments, and Impossible Figures'  THADDEUS M. COWAN  Department of Psychology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas 66506  Impossible figures and their braid analyses are reconsidered from the point of view of their side segments rather than their  corners.  In a previous paper (Cowan, 1974; hereafter referred to as TBAIF), a model of possible and impossible figures was suggested  based on the topological theory of braids. Strips parallel to the center holes of cornered torus figures were identified with  "strings" in a braid. The algebraic braid group (Artin, 1947) was then used in an abstract treatment  TERMINUS   TERMINUS      bi obt i   b 0 bt i    t `1 AV  t   t  .   I' toib  =M abti   ' =Z    T\  ORIGIN   ORIGIN  TERMINUS   TERMINUS  t Z   t  ~b-i ,   /~  o-~:"to i b  \ I~ o toi b    ~ / i  -~ ~ I l b    TM  b t i   t o i b  1     = Z o b t i   = N t o i b    ~  ORIGIN   ORIGIN  FIG. 1. Comer elements M, Z-', N, and Z and their braid representations. The arrows from quadrant to quadrant indicate the  direction of composition for possible figures.  t Supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant GBS/74-14014.  254  Copyright 1977 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. ISSN 0022-2496  IMPOSSIBLE FIGURES 255  of these figures. An algorithm resulted which could generate all classes of impossible and possible cornered torus figures.  Furthermore, the algorithm was sufficiently general to generate figures of n sides. This algorithm is summarized in Fig. 1.  The combination ocorners (terminus to origin in a clockwise manner) which follows the arrows will result in a possible  figure. If at any point the selection of a corner runs counter to an arrow then an impossible figure is produced.  Corners M, Z-1, N, and Z have multiple braid equivalents, and a composable subset of these is shown in Fig. 1. It was  demonstrated in TBAIF that, in generating possible figures, the combination of corners follows the same algebraic rules which  describe the combination of braids. In creating impossible figures, however, the side segments between the corners must be  represented in order to produce a composable arrangement of braids for the figure being created. Four kinds of "sides" were  identified in TBAIF, and it was found that each could be uniquely represented by one of the braid sets belonging to the four  corners, viz., braids M, Z-1, N, and Z. It should be noted that side elements were never described in TBAIF except in terms of  the kinds of corners that bounded them. This is not very satisfactory; it creates a dependency of the sides on the corners,  and this detracts from their status as independent geometric elements.  A  B  FiG. 2. (A) Torus Z~Z-.1N~NBN~N.N~Ne(Z,,) and successive stages of segmentation. (B) The commutativity of angular flush  abutment.  256 THADDEUS M. COWAN  SIDE SEGMENTS  An alternative way of describing the torus figures has been discovered in which the unit of construction is the side element  rather than the corner. Here the corners are not inferred from the sides, as the sides were from the corners in TBAIF but  rather the corners are constructed from the sides. In Fig. 2A an impossible figure Z,Ze 1N,NQN,NsNcN6(Ze) has been cut into  four side segments. The cuts seen at each corner can be regarded as perpendicular to the edges. It matters not how the cut is  made. As Fig. 2B indicates, the abutment of two segments enjoys a kind of commutativity, and the corner formed is the same in  either case. The two lateral segments in Fig. 2A are both identified as N sides in the braid equation for this figure, but  their appearances are quite different. It will be necessary to label these sides (and all others) in such a way that their  visual similarities or differences are well represented by the label. At the same time we do not want to lose sight of the  braid group that generated these figures, so the new labeling must be compatible with the old.  The concatenation of segments occupies two descriptive levels. The first is a perceptual or geometric description in which two  segments are conjoined only if there is a flush abutment of the two segments. The second is a symbolic description where the  concatenation of the corners follows a set of rules which applies to the braid representations. What follows is a description  of (1) how the segments are braid labeled, (2) the braid  Linear Comp.  I-z,  zI m I \,-" \0  W F -  ORIGIN z vi zi VJ  leg  01  01  Angular Comp.  ORIGIN  m V io`   Vrn  z_ n i   i  W    1 z      rlKS1  FIG. 3. (A) Table of composition for linear abutment. (B) Table of composition for angular abutment. Each segment in one  quadrant abuts with at least one but not all segments in another quadrant connected by an arrow.  IMPOSSIBLE FIGURES 257  combination rules that determine the concatenation of the side segments, and (3) the rule which describes the transformation  of the side element description given here to the corner-side element description given in TBAIF. This transformation,  incidently, is shown to be both simple and intuitive.  SEGMENT NOTATION  The four origin and four terminus ends of the segments are given in the margins of the tables in Fig. 3 and labeled by  lowercase letters. The open side of any terminus can be attached to the open side of any origin, thus creating sixteen side  segments, each represented by a pair of symbols. For example, the segment in the lower-left-hand corner of Fig. 3A with origin  z and terminus zi is represented by (z zi). The two braids in the pair are not necessarily braid composable; that is, they do  not necessarily follow the arrows in Fig. 1. The braid representation of any segment is actually a triplet. It is represented  here as a couplet for two reasons: First, it will make the transformation from the segment representation given here to the  corner-side representation discussed in TBAIF more intuitive. Second, the segment composition rules are a bit clearer in these  terms.  LINEAR COMPOSITION  Two segments can be joined in a linear (end to end) string only if the terminus of the first segment makes a flush abutment  against the origin of the second segment. In terms of the braid representation the following two properties satisfy the  restriction of linear flush abutment. Thus they define a linear composition rule.  (1) The terminus of one segment and the origin of the next must be braid composable.  (2) The terminus and origin end symbols must be from different braid sets, viz., X (II7 and N) and Z (Z and Z-1).  Segments (zi z) and (m m) can be concatenated according to the linear composition rule since z and m are composable and come  from different sets. It is easy to check Table A in Fig. 3 and see that at the perceptual level of description the abutment of  these two segments is appropriate. To be sure, these segments are mutually composable, both perceptually and notationally, and  produce one of the "normally appearing" segments on the diagonal of the table of linear composition. What is more, these  segments are inverses since the diagonal segments are clearly identity segments. The direction of composition in this table  bears a resemblance to that in Fig. 1. The fact that the product of two linear segments results in a linear segment gives this  table interesting group properties. This is not surprising since the combination of braids, according to the linear  composition rules, is in keeping with the algebraic rules of braid composition, and therefore conforms to the group properties  of the braid groupoid. However, the linear combination of segments does not lead to a torus figure, although these segments  can be as paradoxical as some of the impossible torus figures. Segment (m zi) is a case in point,  258 THADDEUS M. COWAN  and a particularly interesting artistic rendition of this segment and its impossibility can be seen on p. 71 of the September  1975 issue of the "Saturday Evening Post" (Kansas City edition).  ANGULAR COMPOSITION  The segments can combine angularly in two ways as show Fig. 2B. The resulting corner is the same in either case. Two segments  are angularly composable only if the end-to-side (or side-to-end) abutment is flush. The symbolic rule which dictates angular,  flush abutment composition is as follows:  (1) The terminus and origin end symbols must be the same.  Segments (m z) and (z m) are angularly composable (see Table B, Fig. 3). In fact they are mutually composable, and one might  venture a guess that such pairs are inverses. Unfortunately, the angular composition of linear side segments produces a corner  and not another linear segment. Thus, from the standpoint of perceptual composition, the product of elements creates elements  which are outside the set, and a fundamental property of a group is violated. And yet note that from the standpoint of the  symbolic rule for the concatenation of angular abutment the algebraic rules governing braid composition can also be violated  and the braid group properties ignored. That is, according to the rule for angular composition, (m z) and (z m) can be joined,  but braid z is not braid composable with itself in Artin's braid groupoid. The value of the angular composition rule is  brought into question here, but this problem can be resolved as follows: First, the angular composition rule as stated allows  a description of torus composition in terms of segments which is consistent with the linear composition of segments. Second,  the rule is elegantly simple. Finally it can be shown to be a very simple and intuitive translation of the original braid  description found in TBAIF, which in turn preserves all of the appropriate algebraic properties of the braid groupoid.  SEGMENT TO CORNER-SIDE REPRESENTATION  The equation for the torus in Fig. 2 is Z~Ze 1NcNBN~NgN~N,,(Z,). The segment notation for the same figure is (zi n)(n n)(n  n)(n zi)[(zi n)]. It was stated earlier that the letter pair for each segment represents the ends of the segment, and that the  true braid representation of the segment was a triplet. This implies that the two ends which describe a segment bound an  element which is not yet represented by a braid. We might also say that the two ends between two segments (i.e., the terminus  of one segment and the origin of the next) also bound an unlabeled element. The unlabeled element within a segment is clearly  the midsection of that segment, and the unlabeled element between two segments is obviously the corner. In other words the  rules above for segment concatenation (linear and angular) are stated in terms of end braids only, and the braid  representations of the segment midsections and the corners have been ignored. If we  IMPOSSIBLE FIGURES 259  wish to label the corners and midsections then this restriction must be met: The label must be braid composable with the ends.  Fortunately the braid that mediates any two braids making a composable triplet is unique. Returning to the segment notation  for Fig. 2A, the complete segment equation is z(zinn)n(nnn)n(nnn)n(nzzi)[z(zinn)]. The segment triplet within each parentheses  is now reducible producing  ~o(zis)ne(ns)ne(ns)ne(n$)[ze(zis)] = ZcZS 1NcN,,NcNsNoNs(Ze)  and this is the corner-side braid equation for Fig. 2A. It is now apparent how and why this particular end notation was  chosen; it was selected by working backward from the corner-side braid notation to ensure this translation from segment to  corner-side representation.  DISCUSSION  There are two advantages the side segment notation offers. First, note that three perceptual or geometric elements have been  identified here: corners, ends, and segment midsections. The ends were clearly described as belonging to the segments. They  could just as easily have been described as belonging to the corners. That is, each corner could have been described as an  endcomer-end triplet. However, there could not be all pairwise combinations of ends producing sixteen forms of each corner  since some pairwise combinations are not composable with some corners. The end-corner-end combination (mmzi) is braid  composable, but the combination (zimzi) is not. In order to make this composable, the triplet (zimzi) must be expanded into a  quadruple (zizmzi), and this reduces to (mmzi).  A second reason for preferring the segment notation involves equivalence classes. Each triplet is reducible to a single braid  m, n, zi, or z, and four equivalence classes can be established based on this reduction. Far example the triplets (mmm),  (mziz), (zinz), and (zizm) are elements of the same equivalence class. They are all reducible to an m braid, and this  reduction exhibits the equivalence characteristics of reflexivity, symmetry, and transitivity. We might ask to which geometric  features, if any, do these equivalence classes correspond ?  The most salient geometric feature of any corner is the characteristic pattern at the right-angle turn which is labeled N Z-1,  N and Z in TBAIF (see Fig. 1). Unfortunately all of these types of corners are represented in each corner triplet equivalence  class. That is there is no one-to-one mapping between corner types and end-corner-end braid equivalence classes.  Since there are four kinds of corners based on their most salient feature, are there four such kinds of side segments? The  most salient feature of these segments appears to be their midsections, and indeed like the corners, there seem to be four  kinds. These four groups are exemplified by segments (mmm), (mziz), (mmzi), and (mzin) or merely (m m), (m z), (m zi), and (m  n). Each of these four groups is represented in any column in Table B of Fig. 3. The first two kinds, (m m) and (m z), for  example, are untwisted  260 THADDEUS M. COWAN  (possible) segments, and the remaining two are twisted (impossible) segments. The two twisted groups have opposite parity.  Each of the four segments in each group can be seen as a rotation of the three remaining ones around a vertical axis.  Unlike the corners, each of the four equivalence classes of the side braid triplets do not contain all four kinds of side  segments, but rather two. The two equivalence classes that are reducible to m and n contain the two kinds of untwisted side  segments, and the z and zi equivalence classes contain the right and left twisted segments. In other words the I-set  equivalence classes contain the possible side segments and the Z-set equivalence classes contain the impossible segments.  Thus, there may be some advantage in describing possible and impossible torus figures in terms of side segments rather than  corners.  REFERENCES  ARTIN, E. The theory of braids. Annals of Mathematics, 1947, 48, 643-649.  CowAN, T. M. The theory of braids and the analysis of impossible figures. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1974, 11,  190-212.  RECEIVED: May 17, 1976