10.1016/0022-2496(78)90049-4
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 18, 73-99 (1978)  Laterally Induced Impedance Effects in Vision*  SIMEON M. BERMAN AND ALAN L. STEWART  New York University, New York, New York 10003  A linear integral equation for a system of mutually impeding points is developed and solved explicitly. Particular solutions  are shown to be subharmonic functions for a large class of stimuli. Specialized forms of the general equation presented in  this paper occur within a number of mathematical models of Mach bands. In addition to these known spatial properties, our  results also show that the time course of this basic equation may be useful in developing models of transient neural activity  as well as of temporal psychophysical phenomena, such as the Broca-Sulzer effect. Further, a spatial transfer function much  like the low-frequency cutoff of empirically derived modulation transfer functions follows directly from our basic integral  equation if the additional assumption of spatial homogeneity is imposed.  Each stimulated point on the retinal surface can be associated with a corresponding point of visual activity occurring within  a space. The anatomical interpretation placed on such a space is, for our purposes, unimportant-it could be the plexiform  layers of the retina itself, or some other part of the visual system, such as the striate cortex. Yet, to simplify our written  presentation, we use the term retinal activity to refer loosely to any visual activity associated with a particular point of  stimulation, and conceptualize this stimulation as falling on the retinal plane.  Whatever the underlying anatomy may prove to be, much of the research on vision is concerned with how activity associated with  one retinal point suppresses the activity associated with adjacent points of stimulation. The occurrence of Mach bands is one  example of such a problem, in that Mach bands are products of the distribution of light across the retina, not the  distribution of light on independent, localized segments of the retina (Ratliff, 1965). Devising an orderly framework for  applying a modulation transfer function to the analysis of visual phenomena presents a still more general problem in vision  research. Such a function, applied to photometric data, specifies how an optical array is transformed by the cornea, lens, and  neuroanatomy of the visual system in combination. Simulation of a number of visual phenomena, including Mach bands, has  already resulted from the use of a transfer function which was empirically derived (Davidson, 1966; Cornsweet, 1970; for  additional references, see Ratliff, 1965). Because  * This paper represents results obtained at the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, under the  sponsorship of the National Science Foundation Grant NSFMCS 76-06738. Additional support was provided by a grant from the  Rehabilitation Services Administration to the Deafness Research & Training Center, New York University. Reprint requests  should be sent to Alan L. Stewart, Deafness Research & Training Center, New York University, 80 Washington Square East, New  York, N.Y. 10003.  73  0022-2496/78/0181-0073$02.00/0 Copyright Q 1978 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  74 BERMAN AND STEWART  linear analysis has enjoyed success in unifying the study of ostensibly different phenomena, such as Mach bands and the  perceived contrast of sinusoidally varying acuity targets, it has become widely used in vision research. Yet, no systematic  study has been made of a latent mathematical structure which would provide a rigorous foundation for the application of linear  analysis to problems in vision research.  The present paper addresses itself to the development of such a foundation, in that it incorporates, as a special case, each  of the most widely used linear models of recurrent lateral inhibition. In discussions of recurrent forms of lateral  inhibition, for example, several investigators have suggested that an integral equation of the form  r(x) = s(x) - f r(x - y) g(y) dy  may be an appropriate continuous representation of the discrete processes occurring within inhibitory sensory networks; here,  the stimulus patterns is a function of distance, g is the distribution function of inhibition, and r the corresponding  response pattern (Bliss & Macurdy, 1961; Ratliff, Knight, & Graham, 1969; Motokawa, 1970). Similar equations have also  occurred within a number of mathematical models of Mach bands (Ratliff, 1965) and have served as a logical connection between  visual and electrical analogs (Hiwatashi & Nagata, 1966). However, none of the previous investigations has offered an explicit  solution of this equation. A more general form of this equation is derived and solved as part of our analysis of laterally  induced impedance effects.  Our basic equation, presented in the following section, is significantly more general than the Hartline-Ratliff equation in  two particular ways. It covers retinal activity occurring over the whole plane as well as activity restricted to an arbitrary  subset of the plane. Because psychophysical experiments, such as visual masking studies, usually restrict the illumination to  a bounded subset of the points making up the retinal plane, our formulation more appropriately lends itself to the analysis of  psychophysical phenomena than does the Hartline-Ratliff equation. Second, our formulation enlarges the class of inhibitory  interactions that can be analyzed without resorting to a nonlinear form of the Hartline-Ratliff equation.  We analyze the interdependence of adjacent, mutually suppressive points of stimulation. A number of distinct equations have  been proposed as a mathematical foundation for models of lateral inhibition (Ratliff, 1965). Take the case of inhibitory  models for flicker fusion. These models often assume that the excitatory function satisfies the heat equation with a specified  boundary function (Kelly, 1969), and the solution is numerically approximated by standard methods. Just as with the eye of  Limulus, each model is treated in a piecemeal fashion by restricting the mathematical analysis to a particular set of  equations. Since attention has been focused on individual models, explicit mathematical solutions have been limited to a few  special cases (Kelly, 1969; Peskin, 1976). The solution of our fundamental equation does not depend crucially on the form of  the excitatory function. Consequently, our results apply to models of inhibition as diverse as those of the vertebrate and  invertebrate eye.  While implications for the neurophysiology of the retina can be drawn from our mathematical statements, our present concern is  with the formal analysis of laterally  LATERALLY INDUCED IMPEDANCE 75  induced impedance effects. Whether impedance finds its physiological expression in lateral inhibition, in polarization of  receptor and horizontal cells, or in some other mechanism, is an empirical matter; moreover, it cannot be decided by  psychophysical methods alone. As a result we prefer the term impedance rather than inhibition, and in turn define impedance  within the context of our analysis of spatial interaction.  Our explanation of impedance effects can loosely be said to be an examination of how a physical stimulus, the stimulus array,  can be represented as a distribution of visual activity. As one example of a stimulus array, consider a pattern of light whose  intensity varies sinusoidally across the retina in one or both dimensions. A visual representation is, for our purposes, the  visual activity corresponding to this pattern. For some time after the onset of a stimulus array, and for the first few  hundred milliseconds that the stimulus is physically present, the spatial distribution of visual activity becomes more sharply  defined as time increases. This sharpening of the spatial distribution is attributed, in our formulation, to impedance effects.  We hypothesize that as time increases after the onset of a stimulus array, it is the buildup of impedance which differentially  modulates the amount of visual activity at each point in the distribution of activity. Laterally induced impedance, in  particular, is responsible for the visual enhancement of abrupt changes in any gradient of illumination placed across the  retina, causing associated areas of lesser activity to fall into sharp relief relative to associated areas of greater  activity. It is these laterally induced impedance effects which are dealt with in this paper.  These ideas concerning the way in which the visual system defines and sharpens changes within a spatial distribution of  illumination can all be found in the literature on vision. They are the basic material for our analysis of spatial  interaction. By providing a more abstract statement of these ideas, however, we are able to place them within the theory of  integral equations. The consequences of this mathematical generalization are both theoretical and practical. The theoretical  similarities and differences among various models of laterally induced impedance can be most clearly articulated when each  model is conceptualized as a special case of a more general class of models. Of practical importance, our placement of  laterally induced impedance effects within a well-developed mathematical theory, such as the theory of integral equations, can  ultimately provide a way to calculate numerical results for a large and varied range of stimulus conditions. This is, of  course, a principal motive for developing any mathematical model. With both theoretical and practical ends in mind, we present  a mathematical expression for the visual activity associated with any point of stimulation (x, y), as impedance modulates this  activity as a function of time. In subsequent sections, we study some of the properties of this expression.  1. THE INTEGRAL EQUATION  In this section we define the fundamental mathematical quantities in our analysis. As the first quantity, let E(x, y; t) dx dy  dt be the total output of a small rectangle of area dx dy, in the time interval from t to t + dt, where the activity is due  only to light falling  76 BERMAN AND STEWART  within the rectangular area. The function E represents the activity at (x, y) before it has been impeded by activity at  adjacent points, and for this reason is referred to as the gross output. Its value for all points (x, y) and all times t is  stipulated.  A unit of measurement would ordinarily be attached to this quantity, as well as to the other quantities of our analysis.  Visual research is still undergoing significant changes in the treatment of its basic perceptual elements, however. As one  example, there is no general agreement as to how brightness judgments are generated by human observers. It is premature, then,  to anticipate what units of psychophysics or neurophysiology are relevant to an observer's brightness judgments. Indeed, until  more is known about vision in general, it seems preferable to leave as an open question the unit of measurement of the present  quantities. This tactic presents no serious problems at our present level of discussion since we are interested only in  specifying the relative activity associated with any given spatial coordinates, as the discussion in the following sections  will make clear.  Let N(x, y; t) dx dy dt be the output of the same rectangle associated with the same point (x, y) in the same time interval as  E. The function N differs from E in that N is the activity once E has been impeded by activity at other points. The function N  is referred to as the net output. The purpose of this and the following section,is to articulate how N(x, y; t) varies when  E(x, y; t) is given.  Fic. 1. A local analysis of the illuminated region of the retina.  We are concerned with the illumination of region D of the x, y plane. Imagine that D is subdivided into small rectangles, as  schematically represented in Fig. 1. The illumination of D begins at time t = 0. At time t > 0, the impedance at (x, y) due to  activity at any other point (x', y') is postulated to depend on the following elements:  (i) The coordinates (x, y) and (x', y');  (ii) The net activity at (x', y') at all times s, 0 < s < t; and  (iii) The differences between times t and s.  Let f (x, x'; y, y') be a nonnegative function defined for all pairs (x, y) and (x', y') in the region D. Let g(t) be a  nonnegative function defined for all t > 0. For simplicity, g is normalized to be a probability density function, so that  fcc g(t) dt = 1. 0  LATERALLY INDUCED IMPEDANCE  For a given rectangle with the corner point (x, y) and with sides of lengths dx and dy, in the time interval from t to t + dt,  we assume that the impedance due to activity in a similar rectangle of corner (x', y') in the time from s to s + ds is  directly proportional to the product of  (i) f (x, x'; y, y'), a function of the pairs of points;  (ii) N(x', y'; s) ds dx' dy', the net activity in the second rectangle;  (iii) g(t - s), a function of the time difference; and,  (iv) dx dy dt, the area of the first rectangle and the length of the time interval.  Let the constant of proportionality be a positive number A. The impedance is then equal to  Af (x, x'; y, y') N(x', y'; s) g(t - s) ds dx' dy' dt dx dy.  The total impedance in the first rectangle due to all other rectangles is the sum of the contributions from the rectangles and  over all time intervals up to time t. Thus we integrate over x', y', and s to give  s  dx dy dt - A ff f (x, x'; y, y') N(x', y'; s) g(t - s) ds dx' dy'. D 0  Applying the simple principle that  Gross Activity = Net Activity + Impedance, we obtain the fundamental integral equation  E(x, y; t) = N(x, y; t) -f- A f f f (x, x'; y, y') f s N(x', y'; s) g(t - s) ds dx' dy'. (1.1)  D 0  This equation holds only for all x, y and t such that E(x, y; t) > 0. This restriction is equivalent to saying that E holds  only in the illuminated region D. If E = 0, then N = 0 and (1.1) does not necessarily hold.  As we mentioned in the introduction, Eq. (1.1) is significantly more general than the Hartline-Ratliff equation, in which D is  the whole plane. Indeed, we can describe N of Eq. (1.1) as the solution to a nonlinear equation defined over the plane. To see  how this follows, let A(u) be the function defined as  A(u) = u, u '> 0; A(u) = 0, u < 0;  and suppose that  E(x, y; t) > 0, for (x, y) in D,  = 0, for (x, y) outside D,  78 BERMAN AND STEWART  for all t > 0. Consider the nonlinear equation defined over the entire plane,  x .0  t  E(x, y; t) = N(x, y; t) -{- A (A f f (x, x'; y, y') f N(x', y'; s) g(t - s) ds dx' dy'). 0  If N is a nonnegative solution of (1.2), then it satisfies (1. I) for (x, y) in D and is equal to 0 for (x, y) outside D.  To verify this fact, note that (1.2) and the nonnegativity oA imply  E(x, y; t) > N(x, y; t) for all (x, y).  Therefore, N = 0 outside D, and the domain of integration for (x', y') in (1.2) reduces to D. Since the multiple integral is  nonnegative if (x, y) belongs to D, the A-symbol may be removed; (1.2) is then identical to (1.1).  This fact, in turn, calls for an additional comment. With the Hartline-Ratliff equation, D is taken as the whole plane, and  the impedance is always assumed to be spatially homogeneous. Under these assumptions the solution of the equation is  facilitated by the fact that the plane is a group in the algebraic sense, so that Fourier methods can be used appropriately.  (See Example 3.1, and the whole of Section 5, for discussions of spatial homogeneity.) However, when D is an arbitrary subset  of the plane, or when the impedance is not assumed to be spatially homogeneous, more general methods are required for the  equation's solution. By developing Eq. (1.1), therefore, we have also indirectly illustrated that, despite their diversity,  the exclusive use of Fourier analytic methods will place unnecessary limits on the systematic investigation of recurrent  lateral inhibitory systems. (The constraints which Fourier analytic methods impose on the experimental investigation of visual  contrast sensitivity are discussed from a complementary point of view by Kelly, 1977, pp. 117 ff.)  2. SOLUTION OF THE INTEGRAL EQUATION  An equation of the form (1.1) is a linear integral equation of the second kind (Smithies, 1958). Its formal solution results  from an application of the method of Fredholm, which we will now outline.  The kernel of (1.1) is a function of six variables,  K(x, x', y, y', s, t) = f (x, x'; y, y') At - s),  where (x, y) and (x', y') are points in the region D, and 0 S s < t < co. Two classical results on the existence and  properties of the solution of (1.1) can be expressed in terms of this kernel. First, if f and g are continuous on their  respective domains, and D is bounded, then (1.1) has a unique continuous solution N for each A such that  (Diameter of D) max l f l - max l g [ - JAI < 1.  LATERALLY INDUCED IMPEDANCE 79  Second, if  f f (f 12 dx dy dx' dy' < oo and f ' g2 dt < oo,  D D 0  then (1.1) has a unique solution N, such that  for each A such that  t  f f f I N(x, y; t')J2 dx dy dt' < co 0 D  IAI. ff ff ffl2dxdydx'dy'. f'g2dt<l. D D 0  When the kernel K satisfies the conditions for a unique solution, the solution of (1.1) is written as a Neumann series. In  order to express this series, the iterates off and g are defined as follows:  fi(x, x'; y, .Y') = f (x, x'; y, y,),  f2(x, X'; y, A = ff f (x, u; y, v) f (u, x'; v, y') du dv, D  fn(x' X'; y, y') = ff fu-1(x, u; y, v)f (u, x ; v, y') dL dv; D  gi(t) = g(t),  g2(t) = f o4 g(t - s) g(s) ds,  gn(t) = f of g.-I(t - s) g(s) ds.  The function gn is then the n-fold convolution of g(t). Define the resolvent kernel R and its Neumann series as  R(x, x'; y, y'; t - s; A) (-A)n fn+I(x, x'; y, Y) gn+I(t - s)(2.1) n=0  Then the solution of the equation is formally  e  N(x, y; t) = E(x, y; t) - A f f f E(x', y'; s) R(x, x'; y, y'; t - s; A) ds dx dy'. (2.2) D 0  These are standard methods and results from the theory of integral equations. The classical results concerning the existence  of the solution of (1.1) and its properties are proved in the particular case of one variable in Smithies (1958, Chap. III).  These can be easily extended to the case of several variables considered here.  48o/z8/x-6  80 BERMAN AND STEWART  3. SPATIALLY UNIFORM ILLUMINATION  We are now in a position to study the temporal variation of N in greater detail. When Eq. (1.1) is applied to physiological  systems, temporal variations typically represent the transient and sustained activity of retinal elements. Both the Limulus  eye and the vertebrate retina display such activity. In a different context, the mathematical results of this section may also  prove useful in constructing psychophysical models of visual phenomena, such as the Broca-Sulzer, where increasing flash  duration results in suppression of the target's brightness. To provide a mathematical framework for such diverse applications,  we first describe some general properties of N. To this end, we consider the important example of a gross output function E  which is constant as a function of (x, y) over the region D, and varies only with the time variable t. The specific function is  E(x, y; t) = G(t), for (x, y) in D and t > 0,  = 0 elsewhere.  This represents the case where the unimpeded activity throughout the region D is uniform. The integral equation (1.1) now  assumes the form  G(t) = N(x, y; t) + A ff f (x, x'; y, y') f ' N(x', y'; s) g(t - s) ds dx' dy'. (3.1)  D 0  Solution (2.2) becomes  N = G(t) - A t f G(s) f f R(x, x'; y, y'; t - s; A) dx' dy' ds. (3.2) 0 D  Before the properties of N can be further discussed in terms of (3.2), however, technical assumptions about the functions f  and g must be made. We will take D to be a bounded domain, and assume that f is a continuous function of (x, x'; y, y') for  (x, y) and (x', y') in D. We will also assume that g and G are continuous for t > 0. Then according to the existence theorem  cited in Section 2, there is a unique continuous solution N of Eq. (3.1) for all appropriate values of A. The assumptions on f  and g will also assure the validity of the formal mathematical operations to be used in what follows. These operations involve  an interchange of the order of certain limiting operations such as integration, differentiation, and infinite summation.  Some elementary facts about N can be obtained directly from Eq. (3.1) and the formal expression (3.2) for solution of (3.1).  LEMMA 3.1. N and G have the same initial value:  limo I G(t) - N(x, y; t)l = 0, for (x, y) in D. Any nonnegative solution N of (3.1) satisfies  N(x, y; t) <- G(t), t > 0.  LATERALLY INDUCED IMPEDANCE 81  Proof. These follow directly from (3.1).  LEMMA 3.2. If G(t) has a limit for t -> oo, and lim G(t) = K, then N also has a limit, which is equal to  K-(1-Af' ff R(x,x';y,y';s;A)dx'dy'ds). (3.3) 0 D  Proof. Formula (3.3) above follows directly from (3.2) by taking the limit for t --+ oo  on the right-hand side, and using the fact that, for t --* oo,  f t G(s) r(t - s) ds --* K f r(s) ds  0 0  for any integrable function t.  EXAMPLE 3.1. An interesting fact now follows for those models of impedance which are based on Eq. (1.1) and which assume that  the retinal plane is translation invariant. Specifically, assume that D is the whole plane and that f is a function of the  differences x - x' and y - y', so that  .f (x, x'; .Y, .Y) = .f (x - x', y - y').  Under these assumptions, we say that the impedance is spatially homogeneous. For convenience, in the present example, we also  assume that f is a bivariate probability density function, so that  f~ f~f(x,y)dxdy=1.  Then, for each n, the iteratefn is also a bivariate density; indeed, it is the n-fold convolution of f. It follows that the  integral of the resolvent kernel over D is simply  (-~)n gn+1(t - S),  n=0  so that solution (3.2) assumes the form  N(t) = G(t) - A (-A)n f y G(t - s) g.+1(s) ds. (3.4) n=0 0  82 BERMAN AND STEWART  Under the hypothesis of Lemma 3.2, if I A I G I and if g satisfies certain general conditions, then N(t) converges, for t -  oo, to the limit  K  This result is independent of the particular functional forms of G, g, and f.  EXAMPLE 3.2. An explicit expression for N(t) can be developed for some standard functions. Suppose that the temporal impedance  g is the density function  g(s) = se-3, s > 0,  = 0, s < 0;  then, as is known,  g4s) - r(2n) stn-le  ,  s > 0,  =0, s<0.  Solution (3.4) can then be written explicitly for any G.  More detailed characteristics of N are obtained from the equations derived from (3.1) and (3.2) by differentiation with  respect to t. In deriving the following lemma we apply Leibniz' rule for differentiation under the sign of integration.  LEMMA 3.3. If G and g have continuous derivatives for t > 0, then N also has a  continuous derivative as a function of t, and  G'(t) = a + A9(0) f fDf(x, x'; y, y') N(x', y'; t) dx' dy,  t  + A ff f (x, x'; y, y') N(x', y'; s) g'(t - s) dx' dy' ds; 0 D  (3.5)  and  8N _ s  8t - G'(t) - A f G'(t - s) f f R(x' x'; j,, y'; s; A) dx' dy' ds  0 D  - AG(o) ff. R(x, x'; y, y'; t; A) dx' dy'. (3.6)  With these results in mind, we are now in a position to further analyze the behavior of N as a function of time for various  gross output functions G.  EXAMPLE 3.3. Consider the constant function G(t) = 1 for all t > 0. Lemma 3.1 implies  lim N(x, y; t) = 1, and N(x, y; t) < 1, for t > 0. r'0  LATERALLY INDUCED IMPEDANCE 83  Lemma 3.2 implies that N converges for t -* oo, to limit (3.3) with K = 1. Letting t tend to 0 in (3.5), we obtain  0 = as + Ag(0) f f f (x, x ; y, y') dx' dy'. t=0 D  This expression, in turn, implies that the initial rate of change of N is negative if g(0) > 0, and equal to 0 if g(0) = 0.  If there is a positive number d such that g'(t) > 0 for 0 < t < d, then Eq. (3.5) implies that if N is nonnegative, it  necessarily is nonincreasing for 0 < t < d. The features of such a function N are displayed as a graph in Fig. 2. We observe  also that N is decreasing in t whenever the double integral  f f R(x, x'; y, y'; t; A) dx' dy' D  is positive. This follows as a consequence of (3.6) and the fact that G' = 0 if G is constant.  Tends to limit  FIC. 2. Net output N for constant gross output G when g' is positive up to d.  EXAMPLE 3.4. Suppose that there are numbers b and c, 0 < b < c, such that G is increasing on the interval from 0 to b, has a  maximum at b, and is decreasing on the interval from b to c. Suppose also that G(0) = G(c) = 0. In addition, we assume that  g'(t) > 0 for 0 < t < c. Lemma 3.1 implies that N = 0 for t = 0 and for t = c. Both Eqs. (3.5) and (3.6) imply that  eN I = G,(0). at t=o  Hence N starts with a positive change if G does. The function G'(t) is negative for b < t < c, and therefore Eq. (3.5) implies  that N is decreasing for such t, as Fig. 3 illustrates.  84 BERMAN AND STEWART  TIME  FIG. 3. Net output N for increasing and then decreasing G, and for increasing g.  EXAMPLE 3.5. Suppose that there is a positive number c such that G(s) increases for 0 < s < c, and  G(s) = G(c), that is, G is constant for s > c.  Further suppose, as before, that there exists d > c such that g'(t) > 0 for 0 < t < d.  Equation (3.5) and Lemma 3.1 then imply  uo F - G'(0) -'g(0) G(0) f f f (x' x'' y' .y') dx' dy . D  Since G increases, we have G'(0) -> 0. Thus ONlat is nonnegative at 0 if either g(0) = 0 or G(0) = 0. The interpretation is  clear. Both g(t) and N(t) are equal at t = 0. The function N also increases for some values of time, but never as rapidly as G  increases.  Since G is constant for t > c and g' is positive for t < d, Eq. (3.5) implies that 8Nlat is negative for c < t < d. Thus N(t)  is decreasing for some time after G becomes constant. Lemma 3.2 implies that N has limit (3.3), for t -~ oo, with K = G(c).  This, and the two characteristics proved by reference to the other lemmas are illustrated in Fig. 4.  We remark that in each of the examples above it was assumed that g(t) > 0 for all t  FIG. 4. Net output N for monotone and eventually constant gross output G.  LATERALLY INDUCED IMPEDANCE 85  near zero. This assumption was used in deducing the properties of N under an illustrative set of conditions on G and g. The  assumption, however, is not necessary for the validity of the general model. In many well known applications, there are delays  in the onset of impedance so that g(t) is taken to be 0 in a time interval starting at t = 0.  From these examples, it is apparent that the temporal characteristics of N established in the three lemmas of this section  underlie the particular lateral inhibitory models used in quantifying the temporal activity of the eye of Limulus. The results  of both this section and the previous one provide a broadened insight into why certain models of retinal function have met  with such success. Work on the quantitative analysis of ganglion cells offers an instructive example (Rodieck, 1965). In  Rodieck's formulation, the analytic expressions representing the stimulus input and the distance function for lateral  inhibition are not critical to modeling the effects of stimuli of long duration; that is, any expressions having approximately  the same forms would serve as well. This is because the equation basic to Rodieck's model convolves the stimulus and  inhibitory functions, with the result that they jointly tend to approximate a Gaussian form. Although Rodieck's formulation  was empirical rather than mathematical, his simulation studies of stimuli of long duration, and his heuristic arguments, are  consistent with our analytical results. Specifically, an inspection of the resolvent kernel (2.1) shows that the Neumann  series is composed of terms which, under the assumption of spatial homogeneity, are also convolutions of the stimulus and  impedance terms when substituted into (2.2), just as in Rodieck's model. Furthermore, when D is taken as the entire plane,  Rodieck's model emerges as a special case of Eq. (1.1). These observations thus lead to a more direct development of the  essential features of his model than was previously available. And the effect of placing Rodieck's approach within the theory  of integral equations is to notably enlarge the selection of methods by which the retina can be quantitatively studied.  Models of lateral inhibition have found applications within sensory physiology, like those of Rodieck, for several years. The  connections between our results and experimental findings in this area already are well established. Our results can also be  applied within psychophysics, but their application is less obvious than in sensory physiology. We will turn, therefore, to  the development of a model, based on Eq. (1.1), for the Broca-Sulzer effect. We do not mean to suggest that the model which we  offer is notably better than any other model which might incorporate a form of the basic equation (1.1). Our development of  this particular model is intended to serve only as an extended illustration of how the results of this and of the preceding  sections of this paper might be applied to a psychophysical problem which, like the Broca-Sulzer effect, involves time as a  variable.  In addition to our mathematical results, models of two other visual mechanisms are critical to linking our basic equation with  the Broca-Sulzer effect. We must specify, first, how a light signal is transduced, over time, by the photoreceptors; second,  how a brightness value is attached to a signal that varies with time.  In effect, the first problem is to construct a plausible driving function G for a system represented by (3.1). Such a function  G can be developed with the following reasoning. It is known that, for a pulse whose spatial extent is fixed, the transduction  of a light signal is a function of its luminance L and of time t. In the case of the Broca-Sulzer effect, the luminance is  also fixed. The driving function can then be represented as  $( BERMAN AND STEWART  G(L, t), where L is regarded as a parameter. The function G then varies only as a function of time for a given value L.  A reasonable characterization of G would be as follows. For a fixed luminance, G is an increasing function of t for each  increase of target duration, up to some critical duration determined by L. Once the critical duration for a given luminance  level is reached, G will rapidly approach an asymptotic value (Marks, 1974, pp. 101 ff). Even if this asymptotic value of G is  proportional to the logarithm of the luminance, all three essential features of Example 3.3 are retained. Specifically, the  net output N first increases as a function of time, then decreases, and finally reaches some constant value in the limit, as  in Fig. 4.  Under these assumptions, however, N varies with time, and not with pulse duration. Yet, with the Broca-Sulzer effect, a single  brightness value B is attached to each pulse. It is not that a pulse of long duration is seen first to grow bright and then to  dim. Rather, the Broca-Sulzer effect occurs when a pulse of some intermediate duration is treated by the observer as if it  were brighter than other pulses presented at both lesser and greater durations. In addition to the requirement that a driving  function be specified for the system, before a model of the Broca-Sulzer effect can be regarded as complete, a further  assumption must be made as to how a single value B is assigned to the net output of the system.  We digress for a moment to make some comments about the psychophysical interpretation of the net output N. If the function N  is to be related to Mach bands, as well as to other visual phenomena like the Broca-Sulzer effect, it must play some part in  the perception of brightness, although brightness cannot simply be the net output represented by (3.2). In addition to N,  brightness depends upon many factors, among them the perceived depth plane of a target object and the illumination of any  other objects within the visual field, even when they are remote from the target (Gilchrist, 1977). Brightness judgments also  depend upon memory, semantic categories, and other cognitive processes which are not well understood. The function N,  therefore, cannot be expected to behave exactly as the brightness function.  Nonetheless, with these qualifications in mind, the brightness function of the BrocaSulzer effect can be formally linked to  our net output function N for a large class of models. Consider the following. For a fixed luminance level, let B(t) be the  brightness of a pulse of duration t, where t > 0. Let us assume that B(t) depends on the values of N(s) for 0 < s < t; here we  have suppressed the spatial coordinates (x, y), which are fixed but arbitrary. We also assume that B(t) is some weighted  average of N(s), so that B may be expressed as an integral  B(t) = f s N(s) w(t, s) ds, (3.7) 0  where w(t, s) ds represents the weight attached to N(s) in forming B(t). It can be shown that, for a large class of weight  functions w, the characteristic shape of N, as it is described in Fig. 4, is inherited by the function B.  LATERALLY INDUCED IMPEDANCE 87  EXAMPLE 3.5. Suppose that w is a constant, and that B is the simple average of N,  so that   t (3.8)  B(t) = t f0 N(s) ds;   thus, B(0) = N(0). Then, by differentiation with respect to t, we obtain   t (3.9)  B'(t) = t ~tN(t) - f N(s) ds}.   0   If N increases on an interval starting at the origin, then B'(t) is positive on this interval,  and so B(t) also increases. B'(t) remains positive as long as  tN(t) > f t N(s) ds; 0  that is, as long as the area of the rectangle of height N(t) and width t exceeds the area under the graph of N. If the graph  of N falls sufficiently rapidly after its maximum, then B'(t) will become negative, and so B will decrease. Since N(t)  converges to a limit as t -. oo, so does B(t); indeed, this follows directly from (3.8).  A more general class of weight functions w can be constructed from convolutions of N, so that  B(t) = f o N(s) w(t - s) ds f w(s) ds (3.10) 0  where w = w(s) is a nonnegative function of a single variable. Here the function w in (3.7) is of the form  w(t, s) = w(t - s)  ft w(u) du . 0  Under very general conditions on the function w it can be shown that B(t) in (3.10) converges to the same limit as N(t) for t  --* oc.  A clear implication for its informal description results when the Broca-Sulzer effect is related to the time course of N. In  our model, the Broca-Sulzer effect is a measure of the difference between the limiting value which G would approach if no  laterally induced impedance were present and, as t -> oo, the limit of N. This limiting value of N reflects, in turn, the  extent to which G is suppressed by the impedance term of (1.1). It is then inappropriate to label the Broca-Sulzer effect an  example of brightness enhancement. Brightness suppression would seem to be a better description of such a process, a position  substantially in agreement with that of Boynton (1961).  Although alternative explanations have been put forward for the Broca-Sulzer effect, our formulation is especially interesting  in one particular respect. The mathematical formulation for a system of mutually impeding elements which has been suggested in  Section 1 is similar in form to the mathematical models which account for Mach bands,  88 BERMAN AND STEWART  as we have already pointed out. What we have demonstrated, however, is that in addition to its spatial properties, as  expressed by the net output N, a model based on Eq. (1.1) also has a necessary time course for N whose form closely  approximates that of the BrocaSulzer effect. Our formulation thus ties Mach bands and the Broca-Sulzer effect to the same  underlying impedance system. The concept of reciprocal impedance within the visual system thus seems to offer a plausible,  simple explanation for both phenomena.  There is both physiological and psychophysical evidence to further support the interpretation we have placed on the functions  G and N. The late receptor potential, recorded from the fovea of the cynomolgus macaque, has been shown to increase as a  logarithmic function of illumination over a moderate range of intensities. The increment threshold curve for the late receptor  component is similar to the psychophysical luminance threshold curve when both are plotted against the intensity of the  adapting illumination (Boynton & Whitten, 1970; Rodieck, 1973, Chap. XXII). In turn, the incremental threshold curves for  human beings and the cynomolgus macaque are similar. Thus, for vertebrates, the existence of a mechanism which generates a  function much like the hypothetical G function of Example 3.3 is likely. This mechanism may operate quite early in the  processing of brightness information, perhaps even residing in the rods and cones.  Our mathematical explanation of the Broca-Sulzer effect has been based on the assumption of a spatially uniform flash. It has  been found that the Broca-Sulzer effect does not hold under certain types of nonuniform illumination; for example, when the  illumination is high in the core of the region and low at the edge (Arend, 1970, 1973). We have been studying the mathematical  properties of the brightness function for such types of illumination, and our results will appear in a forthcoming publication.  4. THE SPATIAL VARIATION OF THE NET ACTIVITY  The magnitude of the Broca-Sulzer effect increases as the area of the test flash increases (Katz, 1964; K. E. Higgins, 1978,  personal communication). There is also a spatial effect similar to the Broca-Sulzer effect (Higgins and Rinalducci, 1975).  Discshaped targets, presented for a constant duration of I sec, and subtending between 0.02 and 0.05 degrees, are seen as  brighter than larger targets of the same luminance. In so far as brightness is controlled by a laterally induced impedance,  this effect, like the BrocaSulzer effect, is consistent with Eq. (1.1). Just as impedance increases with time, impedance also  increases with the size of a stimulus, since in (1.1) the impedance term f is itself a function of the spatial coordinates of  the stimulus.  In Section 3 we examined the behavior of N as a function of the time variable t, with the space variable (x, y) fixed. Now we  fix the former variable, and consider N as a function of (x, y) over D. While the relevance of the present analysis to the  spatial counterpart of the Broca-Sulzer effect is obvious, our results are of more general interest. We show that the  solutions of (1.1) are subharmonic functions for a large class of stimuli and, as a result, that these stimuli can be studied  further through the application of potential theory.  LATERALLY INDUCED IMPEDANCE 89  It is natural to assume that the spatial impedance function f (x, x'; y, y') has the property that if (x, y) is close to (x',  y') then f is relatively large, but if (x, y) is far from (x', y') then f is relatively small. This is a mathematical  expression of the hypothesis that points on the retina which are close to each other have associated activity of high mutual  impedance.  Thus, if a region D is uniformly illuminated, we intuitively expect that the points in the core will bear the most impedance.  On the other hand, because there is no activity in the dark region outside D, the associated points on the boundary bear the  least impedance, as diagrammed in Fig. 5.  FIG. 5. Variation of the net output N over a uniformly illuminated region.  Another statement of this same hypothesis is that we expect the surface which corresponds to the function z = N(x, y; t) to be  cup-shaped when t is fixed; that is, the greatest amount of visual activity will occur on the boundary and the least amount of  activity in the core. To clearly describe such a class of functions, however, we must first refer to some concepts in  classical function theory.  A function z = h(x, y) is harmonic in D if its value at any point P in the interior of D is equal to the average value of h on  any circle in D centered at P. More generally, a function h is subharmonic in D if its value at any P is no greater than the  average over the circle (Rado, 1937). The subharmonic property can be characterized in terms of the Laplacian operator,  L(h) = a2h + a2h (4.1) axe 02y  .  If h has continuous second-order partial derivatives, then it is subharmonic if and only if L(h) > 0 in D.  Our main result here is that if the spatial impedance function f has the property that f, as a function of (x, y), is  subharmonic, then the solution N of Eq. (1.1) is subharmonic. We now state this fact in the form of a theorem.  THEOREM 4.1. For each t, let the function E(x, y; t) be harmonic for (x, y) in D, or even let E be subharmonic. For each (x',  y') in D, if -f (x, x'; y, y') is subharmonic as a function of (x, y) in D, then any nonnegative solution N of (1.1) is  subharmonic as a function of (x, y)  90 BERMAN AND STEWART  Proof. Let (x, y) be a fixed point in D, and form the average of both sides of (1.1) over a circle in D centered at (x, y).  Since E is subharmonic, the averaging process cannot decrease the value of E. Similarly, the integral on the right-hand side  cannot increase as a result of the averaging because f is subharmonic, and the value of the integral is a positive weighted  average of values of f. Since the equation is preserved under the averaging process, it follows that the averaging process  cannot decrease the value of N, so that it is subharmonic. (We remark that every constant function is harmonic, so that the  hypothesis on E is valid for uniform illumination of D.)  EXAMPLE 4.1. Consider the function  h(x, y) = exp(-2x2 - 2y2)  Application of the Laplacian operator (4.1) yields  L(h) = (x2 + Y2 - 2) exp(-2x2 - Iy2)~  and so L(h) < 0 in the disc of the radius 21/2 about the origin; hence, -h is subharmonic in this disc. Define  f (x, x'; Y, Y') = h(x - x" Y - Y').  If D is any region contained in the disc of radius 212/2 centered at the origin, then the above impedance function f satisfies  the conditions of Theorem 4.1.  A subclass of the class of subharmonic functions of two variables is the class of convex functions of two variables. A  function h(x, y) is convex (Eggleston, 1958) if for any pair of points (x1, y1) and (x2 , y2) and any c, 0 < c <, 1,  h(cx1 + (1 - c)x2 , CY1 + (1 - c)Y2) <_ ch(x1, Y1) + (1 - c) h(x2 , Y2) This means that the value of h at a point P on the segment joining a pair of points Q1 and Q2 is at most equal to the weighted  average of the values of h at Q1 and Q2 , where the weights are proportional to the distances I P - Q2 I and I P - Q1 1. If a  function h has continuous second-order partial derivatives, then h is convex if and only if the linear differential operator,  L(h) = A2 a2h + 2AB a2h + B2 a2h  8x2 8x 8y 8y2  (4.2)  satisfies L(h) > 0 for all real constants A and B. Every convex function is subharmonic, although the converse is not true.  Theorem 4.1 remains true if the term subharmonic is replaced by convex, and harmonic by linear.  EXAMPLE 4.2. Consider the function h of Example 4.1. Application of the differential operator (4.2) yields  L(h) _ -exp(- x2 - 2Y2) ' [A2(1 - x2) - 2ABxy + B2 (1 -Y2)l.  LATERALLY INDUCED IMPEDANCE 91  Therefore, -h is convex in the region where  A2(1 - x2) - 2ABxy + B2(1 - y2) > 0  for all A and B; or, equivalently,  I Ax + By I < (A2 + B2)1/2.  Elementary geometric considerations show that this is the set of points (x, y) forming the disc of radius 1 about the origin.  Let f be the spatial impedance function defined in Example 4.1; then f is convex in the disc of radius I , and so the solution  N of (1.1) satisfies the convex version of Theorem 4.1.  ExAMPLE 4.3. Suppose that the region D of illumination is a disc of finite radius, and that, in addition to the hypothesis of  Theorem 4.1, we also assume, as in the previous examples, that the impedance function f depends only on the distance from (x,  y) to (x', y'). Then it can be shown that N is constant over circles about the center of the disc, and is a nondecreasing  function of the distance from the center.  Further study of Eq. (1.1) should reveal other important properties of laterally induced impedance. In Examples 4.1 and 4.2  above, for fixed (x', y'), the impedance function f is positive as a function of (x, y) throughout the region D, and so the  subharmonic (or convex) property holds in D. Such is the case where the illumination is high relative to the size of the  region, so that there is interaction among all subregions. It is also of interest to study the case where the function f is  equal to 0 over some subregion of the illuminated region. This may occur when the illumination is low relative to the size of  the region, so that there is no interaction among subregions which are far away from each other. Our preliminary analysis  shows that in such a case the function N is relatively constant in the central part of the region away from the boundary, and  climbs to its largest values on the boundary. This result will be considered in more detail in a forthcoming publication.  The examples of this section illustrate impedance functions which result in subharmonic solutions of (1.1). Subharmonic  functions, in turn, are a subject treated within potential theory. Our discussion of the spatial properties of (1.1) thus  leads to the application of an extensive body of mathematical results to some of the most widely studied problems in vision  research.  5. MODULATION OF PERIODIC FUNCTIONS  As we mentioned in the introduction, a spatial transfer function can be derived from the integral equation (1.1). In obtaining  empirical transfer functions for the visual system, the assumption is made that the visual system itself is spatially  homogeneous (Menzel, 1959; Davidson, 1968). If an equivalent mathematical assumption is made, a transfer function similar to  the empirical function follows from (1.1). To show how this occurs we now consider the case in which region D is the whole  plane, the impedance  48oli8jl-7  92 BERMAN AND STEWART  is independent of time, and the kernel f depends only upon the differences x - x' and y - y'. The integral equation can then  be explicitly solved by Fourier analytic methods. These methods are not new in the area of psychophysical models; indeed, such  methods were used as early as 1961 (Bliss and Macurdy, 1961). The two purposes of this section are to show that our equation  includes, as a special case, the spatially homogeneous system, and also to provide, for the first time, the mathematical  argument for the form of the empirically obtained transfer functions of Davidson (1968, 1970).  Under the conditions of spatial homogeneity and of D including the entire plane, the integral equation (1.1) takes the form  E(x, y) = N(x, y) + A f . f ~ f (x - x', y - y') N(x, y') dx' dy'. (5.1)  If E and f are square integrable over the plane, then the equation has a unique solution which is square integrable. The  Fourier transforms of E, f and N exist, and we denote these by P, f, and N, respectively. For example, when i is the imaginary  unit,  Au, v) = f . f ~ ei(ux+vv)E(x, y) dx dy.  Apply the Fourier transform operator to both sides of (5.1). Since f is a difference kernel, the double integral in (5.1) is a  convolution, and Parseval's theorem implies that (5.1) is transformed into  so that  (5.2)  Therefore, N can be obtained by inversion of the transform in (5.2), a result similar to that of Ratliff et al. (1969).  An example of current interest is where the gross output function E depends only on one variable x, and is a periodic function  of x. The formal expression (2.2) for the solution of such an equation indicates that N depends only on x; hence, in place of  (5.1) we consider the integral equation for a function of a single variable  E(x) = N(x) -}- A f f (x - x') N(x') dx'. (5.3)  Suppose that E is a linear combination of complex exponential functions of the form  E(x) _ b;ei`jx, where cf and b; are real numbers. Although E is not square integrable, it is the Fourier  LATERALLY INDUCED IMPEDANCE 93  transform of a linear combination of Dirac functions (Schwartz, 1950). The solution of (5.3) is obtained formally from (5.2) as  We can specialize the above result to the important case in which E is a simple cosine wave,  E(x) = K -{- L cos mx.  K and L are fixed constants representing the mean and amplitude, and m is the frequency divided by 27r. Suppose that f is an  even function; then f is real valued. By the method above, the function N(x) is equal to  _ K L cos mx  N(x) 1 + ,A + 1 + of (m)  (5.4)  Thus, we see that the mean is reduced from K to K/(1 + A), the frequency is unchanged, and the amplitude reduced by a factor  1 -I- of (m) .  In the case where E(x) has an harmonic decomposition,  (5.5)  E(x) = J eiuxe(u) du, W  and e(u) is square integrable, N(x) has the related decomposition,  aau e(u)  N(x) - m e 1 + Af(u)  du,  provided e(u)/(1 + Af (u)) is square integrable. Thus, if density of E, then e(u)/(1 + of (u)) is the corresponding the N and  E densities is 1/(] + Af (u)).  we consider e(u) as the spectral density for N, and the ratio of  EXAMPLE 5.1. Consider the triangular function  .f (x) = 1 + x, = 1 -x, =0  -1<x<0, 0<x<1, elsewhere.  Then f (u) = ((sin u)/u)2, and the amplitude factor (5.5) is  1 -}- A((sin u)/u)2  94 BERMAN AND STEWART  AMPLITUDE FUNCTION  I UNOBSERVED PORTION I  I I EMPIRICALLY I OBSERVED I PORTION I I  I  FIG. 6. The triangular distance function f and the amplitude factor contining f(u).  This function, with an additive constant, is graphed in Fig. 6 and, suitably scaled, would provide a good fit for the data  presented by Davidson (1968). There are, of course, a number of likely candidates for the distance function f whose transform  f appears in (5.5). Among them, the triangular and the rectangular functions are of some interest in that their Fourier  transforms both contain (sin u)lu. In addition, (sin u)/u accomodates itself well to the fundamental equation (1.1). When f is  a function of the difference of its spatial coordinates, solution (2.2) contains a series of k-fold convolutions off with  itself. On consideration, it is clear that the k-fold convolutions of the triangular and rectangular functions with themselves  closely approximate a Gaussian form. In particular, the amplitude function for the k-fold convolved triangular function becomes  1 + A((sin u)/u)2k  This amplitude function has the same general features as before, except that it more rapidly and its oscillation after the  first maximum is smaller.  The amplitude function derived from (5.5), and whose graph appears in Fig. 6, agrees with empirical results for relatively  small values of the independent variable (low frequencies) but certainly not for large values (high frequencies). This should  not surprise the reader. Resolution of high frequency patterns is restricted by the anatomy of the retina (Westheimer, 1959,  1960; Arnulf & Dupuy, 1960; Campbell & Green, 1965), and so our mathematical model cannot be expected to remain valid above  certain frequency values. Modeling the upper limits of spatial and temporal resolution is a separate mathematical problem  (Snyder & Miller, 1977; French, Snyder, & Stavenga, 1977).  One of the main points that we have stressed in this work is the generality of our approach, and particularly the fact that we  have been able to relax the assumption of spatial homogeneity. The reader may therefore be disappointed that we have reverted  rises  LATERALLY INDUCED IMPEDANCE 95  to this same assumption in obtaining a mathematical foundation for the empirical transfer function of Davidson (1968). The  underlying mathematical theory can be executed without the assumption of spatial homogeneity, however. The major change is  that more general eigenfunctions are required in the place of the complex exponentials. Suppose that we replace Eq. (5.3) with  one whose kernel is a more general function f (x, x') of the space variables, so that we have  E(x) = N(x) + A f D f (x, x') N(x') dx'. (5.6)  This is a one-variable, time independent version of (1.1), where D is a subset of the real line. Under general conditions (for  example, that f is symmetric or even Hermitian), f has an eigenfunction expansion  .f (x, x') = I I'-j-107(X) OAx ),  where {0n} is a complete orthonormal set of eigenfunctions, and {pn} is the sequence of corresponding eigenvalues (see  Smithies, 1958, Chap. VII). Let (E, ~;) be the coefficient of O; in the expansion of E with respect to the system {0n}. If N  is a solution of (5.6), then it can be shown that N has a similar expansion but with the coefficient sequence  {(E, 0n)/(I + w l)}  Therefore, the ratio of the coefficients is (1 + pnl)-1, which is analogous to ratio (5.5) with Af replaced by 11p,, . Thus we  see that classical Fourier analysis is only a special case of a more general spectral theory that can be used to analyze the  spatial sensitivity of the visual system.  We digress for a moment on the question of the inversion of the transform above. If I Af(0)l < 1, then (5.2) may be expanded as  N=_p '(I-Af+A2.f2-_..).  Since (f )n is the transform of the convolution fn , the expression may be inverted term bv term to obtain N, so that  N=E-AE *f+A2E*f2- .. .,  where * represents the convolution operator. A similar method of determining N was recently introduced on the basis of  empirical evidence, without mathematical justification, by Macleod and Rosenfeld (1974) in the particular case of a Gaussian  impedance function in one dimension. Here the convolutions fn are themselves Gaussian and the successive terms have  alternating signs, just as in Macleod and Rosenfeld's construction.  This observation causes us to make one further comment. A number of investigators have distinguished recently between single  channel and multiple channel models of pattern vision (Graham & Nachmias, 1971). It has even become a common practice to think  of the transfer function (5.2) as the envelope of a set of underlying functions, each  96 BERMAN AND STEWART  function describing an independent visual channel. While a distinction between single and multiple channel models seems  plausible when it is first encountered, closer inspection, in light of our results, indicates that the two concepts may be  similar. After all, the hypothetical construction of Macleod and Rosenfeld, held to be a multiple channel. model, is an  approximation of the explicit solution for the Hartline-Ratliff equation, which is held to be a single channel model. Thus,  Macleod and Rosenfeld's results and our formulation for laterally induced impedance are equivalent to each other under some  conditions. At the very least, when translation invariance is assumed, the distinction between a multiple channel and a single  channel model proves to be elusive.  6. CONCLUSION  The concepts presented in this paper introduce more general methods for the mathematical analysis of visual phenomena, and  remove some of the restrictive mathematical assumptions which underlie many well-known psychophysical models. We apply the  theory of integral equations to model the Broca-Sulzer effect and the perception of spatial contrast. Experiments on the  perceived contrast of sinusoidal luminance patterns further illustrate the relationship between integral equations and  spectral methods employed in visual psychophysics. The concept of an eigenfunction is central to this relationship. The  eigenfunctions of an integral equation's kernel play a prominent role in the theory of integral equations. Experiments  employing sinusoidal contrast patterns as part of a frequency analysis often treat these patterns as if their mathematical  representations were eigenfunctions. To obtain the transfer function of the visual system, for example, investigators present  stimulus patterns differing individually in spatial frequency, and adjust the amplitude of the patterns until their contrast  is detected. Adjusting the amplitude of a sinusoidal luminance pattern is mathematically equivalent to multiplying a sine  function by a scalar; by definition, the transformation of an eigenfunction is also equivalent to multiplication by a scalar  quantity. The use of these experimental procedures therefore assumes that the visual system transforms only the amplitude of a  sinusoidal stimulus pattern, regardless of its frequency, and so implies an analogy between the stimulus patterns and the  eigenfunctions of the mathematical transformation used to model the response of the visual system.  One may question the unrestricted analogy between eigenfunctions and sinusoidal stimulus patterns. Yet, the wide use of  periodic stimulus patterns implies the experimenter's belief that the transformation of sinusoidal patterns by the visual  system expresses a basic property of the system, and that this property underlies the perception of more complex luminance  patterns. There are similar situations in physics, for example, where eigenfunctions exhibit important physical properties  whose interpretations are readily visualized. A familiar case is that of a vibrating string with stationary endpoints. Any  waveform generated by the vibrating string can be decomposed into a linear combination of sinusoids. The free modes of the  string's vibration are standing sinusoidal waves, whose nodes are the eigenvalues of the integral equation which models the  physical properties of the string. The standing waves are the physical counterpart of the integral  LATERALLY INDUCED IMPEDANCE 97  equation's eigenfunctions, and all complex waveforms observed can be decomposed with respect to these eigenfunctions. In  vision research, the use of sinusoidal contrast patterns may reflect an experimenter's feeling that stimulus patterns based on  sinusoidal functions may similarly correspond to the eigenfunctions of the equation which best models the visual system.  There are, of course, other reasons for selecting simple sinusoidal patterns as stimuli. Any stimulus pattern can, in  principle, be decomposed into a unique linear combination of sinusoids. But this reason alone does not compel the use of  stimulus patterns that are sinusoids. Unique decompositions can also be made with respect to orthogonal series other than the  trigonometric, such as Legendre and Hermite polynomials.  In order to demonstrate the relationship between our results and methods which are better known in vision research, we have  shown how one form of the spatial sensitivity function follows from our basic integral equation when the assumption of spatial  homogeneity is imposed on (1.1). Under such an assumption, (1.1) becomes a further idealized representation (5.4) of a system  of mutually impeding points of visual activity. It is a property of the visual system that spatially varying stimuli are not  all equally effective, since spatially periodic stimuli with a frequency of about 4 cycles per degree are more effective than  those of lower or higher frequency. The spatial sensitivity function (5.4) then can reasonably be considered the mathematical  representation of a high-pass filter whose form reflects, more or less accurately, the spatial impedance due to lateral  inhibition. This is not to suggest that a transfer function such as (5.4) is a basic element in a theory of visual processing,  although it remains a useful simplification of a more general underlying structure. Such a function often serves as a valuable  computational aid and, conceived of as a filter, has considerable heuristic value. But the status of such a specialized form  clearly depends on its derivation from a more general mathematical statement, such as (1.1).  If we drop the assumption of spatial homogeneity, solution (2.2) provides a direct test of how well a spatially homogeneous  filter approximates the spatial impedance of the visual system. Moreover, solution (2.2) may provide some insight into a  problem of current interest. The form of the spatial sensitivity function is known to change as test stimuli of different  duration are used (Arend, 1976), but the reason for such a change is not established. These changes are, however, in general  agreement with predictions which follow from (2.2). Equation (2.2) is a function of time, so that impedance grows with the  duration of a stimulus pattern. For very short durations of a test stimulus, the spatial impedance of (2.2) is approximately  uniform. Under these conditions, then, (2.2) could be represented by an idealized spatial filter with a flat low-frequency  response. Only as time increases should the low-frequency cutoff become pronounced due to the buildup of laterally induced  impedance. Both of these features, a flat low-frequency response for stimuli of short duration, and pronounced low-frequency  attenuation for stimuli of long duration, are in general agreement with what is known about the spatial sensitivity of the  visual system for briefly presented grating patterns.  Moreover, temporal effects, like the Broca-Sulzer phenomenon, can be shown to be independent of the assumption of spatial  homogeneity, as can be seen in Section 3. It is also true that specialized forms of (1.1) have already been used in various  models of  98 BERMAN AND STEWART  sensory interaction, such as those suggested to account for Mach bands. Equation (1.1) would seem, then, to be a simple and  interesting expression for modeling spatial and temporal interactions within the visual system. Perhaps its most attractive  feature in this regard is that, under very general conditions, its solution is a subharmonic function, and that (1.1),  therefore, can be further studied through the application of potential theory.  REFERENCES  AREND, L. E., JR. Contour factors in the Broca-Sulxer phenomenon. Doctoral dissertation, Duke University, 1970. Dissertation  Abstracts International, 32/02, p. 1232; University Microfilms, No. 71-21,533.  AREND, L. E., JR. Spatial factors in the Broca-Sulzer phenomenon. Journal of the Optical Society of America, 1973, 63, 879-883.  AREND, L. E., JR. Response of the human eye to spatially sinusoidal gratings at various exposure durations. Vision Research,  1976, 16, 1311-1315.  ARNULF, A. & Dupuy, O. La transmission des contrastes par le system optique de 1'ceil et lea seuils de contrastes retiniens.  Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des Stances de 1'Academie des Sciences, Paris, 1960, 250, 2757-2759.  BLISS, J. C. & MACURDY, W. B. Linear models for contrast phenomena. Journal of the Optical Society of America, 1961, 51,  1373-1379.  BOYNTON, R. M. Some temporal factors in vision. In W. A. Rosenblith (Ed.), Sensory communication. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1961.  BOYNTON, R. M. & WHITTEN, D. N. Visual adaptation in monkey cones: Recordings of the late receptor potentials. Science, 1970,  170, 1423-1426.  CAMPBELL, F. W. & GREEN, D. G. Optical and retinal factors affecting visual resolution. Journal of Physiology (London), 1965,  181, 576-593.  CORNSwEET, T. N. Visual perception. New York: Academic Press, 1970.  DAVIDSON, M. L. A perturbation analysis of spatial brightness interaction in flashed visual fields. Doctoral dissertation,  University of California, Berkeley, 1966. Dissertation Abstracts International, 27/08-B, p. 2888; University Microfilms, No.  66-15379.  DAVIDSON, M. L. Perturbation approach to spatial brightness interaction in human vision. Journal of the Optical Society of  America, 1968, 58, 1300-1308.  EGGLESTON, H. G. Convexity. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1958.  FRENCH, A. S., SNYDER, A. W., & STAVENGA, D. G. Image degradation by an irregular retinal mosaic. Biological Cybernetics,  1977, 27, 229-233.  GILCHRIST, A. L. Perceived lightness depends on perceived spatial arrangement. Science, 1977, 195, 185-187.  GRAHAM, N., & NACHMIAS, J. Detection of grating patterns containing two spatial frequencies: A comparison of single-channel  and multiple-channels models. Vision Research, 1971, 11, 251-259. HIGGINS, K. E., & RINALDUCCI, E. J. Suprathreshold  intensity-area relationships: A spatial BrocaSulzer effect. Vision Research, 1975, 15, 129-143.  HIWATASHI, K., & NAGATA, S. Neuron and neural network models with electronic circuits and simulation of visual phenomena.  Nippon Hoso Kyokai, Technical Journal, 1966, 18, 117-141. KATZ, M. S. Brief flash brightness. Vision Research, 1964, 4,  361-373.  KELLY, D. H. Diffusion model of linear flicker responses. Journal of the Optical Society of America, 1969,59,1665-1670.  KELLY, D. H. Visual contrast sensitivity. Optica Acta, 1977, 24, 107-129.  MACLEOD, I. D. G., & ROSENFELD, A. The visibility of gratings: Spatial frequency channels or bar-detecting units ? Vision  Research, 1974, 14, 909-915.  LATERALLY INDUCED IMPEDANCE 99  MARKS, L. E. Sensory processes: The new psychophysics. New York: Academic Press, 1974. MENZEL, E. Der gersichtssin als  linearer iibertragungskanal and die Machschen streifen. Die Naturwissenschaften, 1959, 46, 316-317.  MOTOKAWA, K. Physiology of color and pattern vision. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1970. PESKIN, C. S. Partial differential  equations in biology. New York: Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, 1976.  RADO, T. Subharmonic functions. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1937.  RATLIFF, F. Mach bands: Quantitative studies on neural networks in the retina. New York: Holden-Day, 1965.  RATLIFF, F., KNIGHT, B. W., & GRAHAM, N. On tuning and amplification by lateral inhibition. Proceedings of the National  Academy of Sciences, 1969, 62, 733-740.  RODIECK, R. W. Quantitative analysis of cat retinal ganglion cell response to visual stimuli. Vision Research, 1965, 5,  583-601.  RODIEcK, R. W. The vertebrate retina: Principles of structure and function. San Francisco: Freeman, 1973.  SCHWARTZ, L. Thiorie des distributions, Vol. 1. Paris: Hermann, 1950. SMITHIES, F. Integral equations. Cambridge: Cambridge  Univ. Press, 1958. SNYDER, A. W., & MILLER, W. H. Photoreceptor diameter and spacing for highest resolving power. Journal of  the Optical Society of America, 1977, 67, 696-698.  WESTHEIMER, G. A new method of measuring visual resolution at the retina. Journal of the Optical Society of America, 1959, 49,  504.  WESTHEIMER, G. Modulation thresholds for sinusoidal light distributions on the retina. Journal of Physiology (London), 1960,  152, 67-74.  RECEIVED: October 25, 1977