10.1016/0022-2496(78)90027-5
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 17, 138-151 (1978)  Restricted Multidimensional Scaling Models'  P. M. BENTLER AND DAVID G. WEEKS  Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90024  A class of multidimensional scaling models are developed wherein certain parameters may be fixed as known constants, or  proportional to one another. Traditional multidimensional scaling can be obtained as a special case by fixing only the  orientation and origin of a configuration. Methods of obtaining least-square estimates of the parameters via nonlinear  programming are discussed, and an effective computer program is developed to implement application of the models to data.  Several well-known data sets are reanalyzed under various restricted models, and the results demonstrate the possibility of  achieving insights not attainable under the traditional approach. The potential distortion arising from inadequate model  specification is discussed, and the importance of substantive theory to multidimensional scaling research is emphasized.  In any multidimensional scaling study, external information is of vital importance. External information may be defined as any  knowledge about the stimuli, the expected spatial configuration, the psychological processes involved, etc., which is known  independent of the given data. At a minimum, external information is required for an interpretation of the resulting  configuration (Shepard, 1974). In the absence of a plausible interpretation, the results are suspect at best. One type of  interpretation of results would involve the assignment of plausible labels to dimensions of the rationally rotated  configuration, while more sophisticated analyses relate the results to other variables of known importance (see Shepard, 1972,  for examples). Such relations are of potential significance for theories of the psychological operations on the stimuli.  Current models and methods of multidimensional scaling have great difficulty utilizing external information for purposes of  refinement of a potential scaling solution. About the only technique generally available for modifying a scaling solution lies  in the selection of a given number of dimensions, selection of a particular distance metric, and selection of a fit criterion.  In this paper we shall explore several types of external information to generate a scaling solution. For simplicity, we limit  ourselves to the Euclidean metric using an orthogonal linear model with a least squares fit function, although these  restrictions are not intrinsic to our methods. The orthogonal linear, Euclidean multidimensional scaling model may be written  as  112  hii = b [Z (aik - aik)21 + c + ei7  ' This investigation was supported in part by a Research Scientist Development Award (K02DA00017) and a research grant (DA  01070) from the U.S. Public Health Service. We wish to thank Eric Holman, S. Y. Lee, and several anonymous reviewers for their  helpful suggestions.  138  0022-2496/78/0172-0138$02.00/0  Copyright C 1978 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  MULTIDIMENSIONAL SCALING 139  where aik is the projection of stimulus i on dimension k; hi; is the observed dissimilarity measure (there are p = m(m - 1)/2  such measures); ei; is the error associated with that observation; and b and c are scalars, the slope and intercept of a  linear equation. The parameters of the model are b, c, and aik(i = 1,..., m; k = 1,..., t). All parameters of the model have  traditionally been considered to be free, able to take on any real values. A variety of restricted multidimensional scaling  models arise immediately with the recognition that some of the parameters of the general model may be restricted to take on  only certain values, or a range of values. Then (1) describes a general class of models, with an infinity of special cases. In  this paper, we will consider the set of multidimensional scaling models that result when certain parameters are fixed or  known, and thus need not be estimated.  In general, not much attention has been paid to the concept of multidimensional scaling as a method of parameterizing data by  a given model. In any mathematical model, there is bound to be a tradeoff between the accuracy of modeling the data and the  number of parameters. When all parameters are free, as they are in the traditional conceptualization of multidimensional  scaling, one can only obtain a very rough-grain conception of the accuracy of a model viewed against the number of parameters.  This is because parameters must be added in sets (by number of dimensions), independent of any specific form that a given  model might take. When all parameters are free, there is only one way to achieve a better fit of model to data: it consists of  adding another dimension with its full complement of parameters. Yet, in given data situations, there may well exist models  that can mirror the data with greater or almost equal accuracy, but with far fewer parameters than required by the traditional  method. One hypothetical example might be a situation in which data on 50 stimuli are generated by a process involving, say,  six dimensions, but only by three free parameters within each dimension. Then 18 parameter estimates for the projection matrix  would suffice to exactly reproduce the data; however, even a single traditional dimension would require 50 parameters in the  projection matrix (minus one to fix the origin). It would also be possible to have more dimensions than stimuli, while at the  same time having far fewer parameters than data points. Obviously, it is in principle possible to achieve a better fit with  fewer parameters with a restricted model that accurately identifies the unknown parameters and their location in the  projection matrix, than might be possible with an unrestricted model. Naturally, accurate prior information is essential to  determining the nature of the restrictions. Otherwise, there is no real alternative to exploring the data by traditional  methods, since very poor representations of data would be achieved by a model with few parameters incorrectly specified.  RESTRICTED DISTANCE MODELS  The general restricted distance model we shall discuss is formally identical to (1), but subject to the condition that for  some elements of A there may be restrictions ail = K, or aik = walk. That is, a given parameter may be either fixed to a known  constant value K, or to a known constant proportion w of some free parameter. While an infinity  140 BENTLER AND WEEKS  of specific models are derivable from these restrictions, a few general types are worthy of special note.  The traditional model is obviously the special case where all the parameters are free up to identification constraints.  Equivalently, the upper triangle of A[=ai&], may be fixed to have known constant values. The orientation is fixed by t(t -  1)J2 of these restrictions (typically, zeros), and the origin is fixed by t constants (one per column, typically any non-zero  value such as unity). Prior analyses, theory, or other considerations may suggest that the projection of certain stimuli on  given dimensions should be set at certain specific values. For example, it may be hypothesized that some subset of stimuli  will not be evaluated on some dimension(s); those coordinates may then be fixed as known zeros. The fit of the model to data,  particularly when considered in relation to alternative models, can determine whether prior theory or information would be  correctly applied to the problem under consideration. A bad fit would verify that the hypothesized model was inappropriate to  the data at hand.  A particularly appealing model may be generated with the proportional constraints. Suppose there is some scale S on which the  stimuli have been independently scaled. It is hypothesized that this scale is important in the psychological processes which  produce a set of data. A dimension, k, may be added to the analysis, subject to the restriction that aik = w,Si, where Si is  known and wk needs to be estimated. This restriction adds only one parameter (wk) for the entire set of m projections on the  kth dimension. Dimension k is thus required to be proportional to the scale S. The magnitude of wk determines the size of that  dimension relative to the other dimensions in the analysis. The weight of the scale S in the psychological process can thus be  determined, and it provides evidence on the value of the hypothesis. Of course alternative restricted or unrestricted models  can be evaluated relative to the data.  In some cases, certain stimuli are liable to have unique aspects which differentiate them from all others in the set. This  differentiation is distinct from the differences among all stimuli in the common dimensions of the space. The use of constant  restrictions can generate a new model able to represent such unique aspects. Define A as before, and let U be an m by m  diagonal matrix, where uii is the projection of stimulus i on its own unique dimension. The complete coordinate projection  matrix is then [A I U]. The restriction on U, of course, is that via = 0, i ,~ j. While m additional dimensions are added to  the traditional model by including U in the model, these dimensions add only m more parameters. If only a few of the stimuli  are particularly unique, the other uiis may be fixed at zero. This could be a particularly good way to improve fit with few  parameters. In some applications, the relative sizes of the uniqueness values would be of theoretical relevance. The label  "uniqueness" is used to parallel the label that exists in factor analysis.  ESTIMATION OF PARAMETERS  In estimating the parameters of the models described above, we have relied primarily on the classic Gauss-Newton algorithm  (e.g., Jennrich & Sampson, 1968) to implement a least-squares fitting criterion. The procedure has the advantage of fairly  rapid con-  MULTIDIMENSIONAL SCALING 141  vergence, without requiring second derivative information. The theory of the method can be omitted, but the mechanics are as  follows: Let y = f (0) -{- e represent the relation of the model, f (0), to the data y, with e representing the residual error  whose sum of squares is to be minimized. Then y, f (0), and e are column vectors of length p. Let n be the number of  parameters 0. Let F = of (0)I a0, an n by p matrix of the partial derivatives of the model with respect to the parameters. At  each iteration (l), the parameters are updated by 01+i = Bi -{- oidl , where dl = (FIFI')-l Fl[ y - f (Bl)], and 0 > a ~>_ 1  is a stepsize parameter.  Derivatives. Application of the Gauss-Newton algorithm requires the partial derivatives of the model with respect to the  parameters. These derivatives are defined most simply by considering an alternative matrix representation of model (1) as  P=bD+c(11'-I)  (IJ2)  D = ~Y (akl' - lak')(2)~ , k  with the corresponding least squares error function  0 = tr(H - P)2.  Obviously, H = P + E, where P represents the model and E is residual error. The model matrix P is further decomposable into  the m by m model matrices D and c(11' - I) in (2), where ak is the kth column of A, 1 is a column vector of ones, and the  exponent in parentheses represents an elementwise operation (i.e., X(T) - x'j). The parameters of model (2) can be collected  into a single vector 0 = [b, c, al', a2',..., a,']. Then the parameters of the model with respect to the data are given by the  nonredundant elements of OPIa0 = a[bD -}- c(11' - I)]IaO, it being observed that only the derivatives of the lower triangle of  the model with respect to the parameters are essential. These derivatives can be obtained in a routine way by scalar or vector  calculus. The required components are  bPlab = [Vec(D)]' oplac = [Vec(11' -I)]'  (4)  bPlaak = b[(I O 1') - (1, O I)] Mat[(akl' - la,')* D(-I)].  The Vec notation refers to the column vector formed by taking the rows of the Subsequent matrix sequentially; Mat(X) refers to  a diagonal matrix such that [Mat(X)]l = Vec(X); >x refers to the right Kronecker product xi;Y of two matrices X and Y and  refers to the elementwise product xE; ytif of two conforming matrices X and Y.  The matrix F required for the Gauss-Newton algorithm consists othe suitably reduced elements of (4). If a parameter is fixed  or known in a given model, the corresponding parameter is eliminated from the vector 0. Elimination. of a parameter from  consideration in the estimation process requires eliminating the corresponding row of (4). Thus F contains only those rows  that correspond to free parameters. Setting a group  142 BENTLER AND WEEKS  of parameters proportional to one another is equivalent to replacing all of them in the model by a single new parameter,  multiplied by the appropriate constant weight. The rows in F corresponding to those parameters are then replaced by a single  row for the new parameter. This row is simply a linear combination of the rows in the original F, the weights being the same  as those relating the new parameter to the old ones.  A computer program. We have written a FORTRAN IV computer program which estimates the parameters of any of the restricted  models discussed so far. The program in its present form is not designed for general distribution. While it is probably  somewhat inefficient, it is serviceable and reasonably well documented. Given data H and a 1th iteration set 01 of parameter  estimates, a step begins by calculating the model matrix Pt and the least squares error function (Eq. 3). The next steps  involve calculating the matrix F1, adjusting it for any restrictions which have been specified, obtaining (FIF,')-1, and dt =  (FiFI')-1 Ft(H - Pt). As a stepsize, = 1 is attempted as the first substep of an iteration. If the function decreases, no  line searches are undertaken. If the function does not decrease, other values of a are searched, most easily by cutting a by a  fixed proportion. When a stepsize estimate is found for which the error is less than that at the preceding iteration, the  parameter estimates are updated. The process terminates when either the error function or the sum of squares of dt drop below  some critical value, when the maximum number of iterations are completed, or when a stepsize cannot be found to reduce the  error. On occasion, the matrix (FIF,') is singular or near singular, in which case the regular gradient of the least squares  error function is calculated and a steepest descent step is taken.  EXAMPLES  It was first necessary to demonstrate that the algorithm was capable of accurately recovering solutions to the traditional  model. The results of runs on solutions in one, two, and three dimensions on error-free data are presented in Table 1. Initial  estimates for unknown parameters were randomly set 20 % off their true values. These data illustrate two very nice properties  of the Gauss-Newton algorithm. First, convergence is very rapid near the solution, unlike steepest descent. Second, the costly  line search for the step size is often unnecessary, unlike many other iterative optimization methods. As a second test, we  used data on nine colors, given by Torgerson (1958, p. 286). These data were analyzed by Cooper (1972), using his iterative  least-squares linear scaling method. Since our model in the unrestricted case is equivalent to Cooper's, very similar results  should be obtained. Indeed they were, as Table 2 makes apparent.  The efficacy of the method of imposing an external dimension in the analysis can be illustrated by data from Ekman (1954). He  obtained similarity ratings among pairs of 14 spectral hues. Shepard (1962) analyzed these data with his nonmetric scaling  method, and obtained a configuration in two dimensions describing the color circle. Our own analysis with the standard linear  model in two dimensions obtained essentially the same result. In the resulting color circle, red and violet are fairly close  together, even though they are at opposite ends of the visible spectrum. We reasoned that all perceptual effects  MULTIDIMENSIONAL SCALING  143  TABLE 1 Results of Runs with Artificial Data (Unrestricted Model)  Model  Iteration Results Substeps Points Dimensions Parameters number rms(e)with a mA 1  5 1 5 1 2.000 l  2 1.617 0  3 0.806 0  4 7 x 10-1 -  7 2 12 1 2.215 0  2 0.702 0  3 0.460 0  4 0.425 0  5 0.009 0  6 4 x 10-1 -  10 3 25 1 1.559 0  2 1.458 4  3 1.423 0  4 0.238 0  5 0.025 0  6 3 x 10-4 0  7 1 x 10-6 -  a rms(e) = (ss errorln)1/2.  TABLE 2  Solutions for Torgerson's (1958) 9 Munsell Colors Data  Cooper's resultsCurrent results  2.11 2.19 2.11*" 2.19*  1.08 1.44 1.08 1.44*  2.51 -0.80 2.50 -0.81  -0.59 1.58 -0.60 1.58  0.19 -0.84 0.18 -0.84  0.94 -2.78 0.93 -2.79  -1.65 0.17 -1.66 0.17  -1.38 -2.02 -1.40 -2.03  -3.21 1.06 -3.23 1.07  Cooper, 1972, Table 2.  Numbers with asterisks indicate values held constant.  144 BENTLER AND WEEKS  of wavelength might not be captured in the two-dimensional solution. Subjects might simultaneously recognize that red and  violet were psychologically similar, and that they were physically distant. To test this hypothesis, we added a third  dimension, with parameters constrained to be proportional to wavelength proportions. Only a single free parameter was thus  needed for this dimension. The result was preservation of the circle in the two unrestricted dimensions; the wavelength  dimension was clearly smaller than the other two, but as can be seen in Figure 1, it modified the spatial configuration of  points. The configuration described a spiral in three dimensions. This is shown in Figure 1.  FIG. 1. Three-dimensional restricted solution to Ekman 14 colors data. Wavelength (the vertical dimension) ranges from 465 nm.  to 674 nm.  Another example comes from the color data of Torgerson (1958) mentioned earlier. The stimuli were nine Munsell colors of the  same red hue but differing in brightness and saturation. Both Torgerson (1958) and Cooper (1972) found a two-dimensional  solution to be adequate, with those two dimensions closely related to brightness and saturation. We reasoned that with so much  known about the physical properties of the stimuli, it might be possible to achieve a good representation of the data with  very few parameters. We analyzed these data under three separate models. The first was the unrestricted model in two  dimensions, which was mentioned previously. The second model consisted of two dimensions, each constrained to correspond to  the Munsell values for brightness and saturation. For example, stimulus 1 had a saturation rating of 4, and stimulus 5 had a  rating of 8. Dimension 2 was to correspond to saturation, so this particular constraint was a,, = .5ag2 . The third model was  the same as the second, except that a third, unrestricted dimension was added. Results of these analyses are presented in  Table 3.  MULTIDIMENSIONAL SCALING 145  It is obvious that a three-parameter model fits these data reasonably well. It can be seen in Figure 2 that the constrained  two-dimensional solution is very similar to the unrestricted solution. When a third (unrestricted) dimension was added, that  dimension became nearly equivalent to the Brightness dimension in the unrestricted solution. The constrained Brightness  dimension then shrank to virtually zero, while the constrained Saturation dimension maintained the size it held in the  constrained solution. Whether the difference between the restricted and unrestricted solutions represents error or some stable  perceptual process is not clear. Use of the restricted model on data from a replication of this study would make determination  of such questions relatively easy to answer.  Given that some sets of stimuli would contain unique elements, we desired to know the effects of such uniquenesses on  solutions obtained by the traditional model. We  TABLE 3  Fit oVarious Models to 9 Munsell Colors Data  Model Parameters 1 - R2     Two dimensions, unrestricted 15 .0195  Two dimensions, constrained to be 3 .1108  proportional to Munsell values    Three dimensions; first two as in 11 .0498  the second model, third unrestricted    a 1 - R2 is the proportion of data variance not accounted for by the model.  Ls;  6 Xe  e  x .e  1.2  .a  xa  A;  is 5 5  - 8 -1.4 -I -.8 -.4 0 .4 .8 1.2 1.6 Yo, -41 .2  x2  X   4  Fic. 2. Restricted (dot) and unrestricted (x) solutions to 9 Munsell colors data.  146 BENTLER AND WEEKS  created an artificial configuration of 15 points in two dimensions. To these points we added uniqueness values, a few of which  were substantial. The A matrix, and the diagonal elements of U, are given in Table 4. This configuration was used to generate  a distance  TABLE 4  True Configuration for Uniqueness Example  A  U (diagonal)  -5.2 4.6 0.0  -4.2 3.4 0.2  -3.4 4.4 6.0  -2.4 2.6 4.0  -2.6 2.6 5.0  -1.8 5.4 0.3  0.6 1.8 0.1  0.6 1.2 0.5  0.8 3.8 0.1  2.2 2.2 4.0  2.6 0.6 0.0  3.8 5.8 7.0  3.4 2.2 0.4  4.8 1.4 0.2  4.8 3.2 0.3  matrix, to which was added random error from an approximately normal distribution (p, = 0, a2 = 1). The two data sets (with  and without error) were analyzed under the traditional MDS model in from one to five dimensions. The analysis with the  restricted model specified two common, unrestricted dimensions, and one unique dimension per point. For each analysis the  proportion of variance in the error-free distances accounted for by the recovered distances was calculated. These values are  plotted against number of free parameters in Figure 3. As would be expected, the correct model gave uniformly superior  results. An important point is that the traditional model overestimated the number of common dimensions in an apparent attempt  to incorporate uniquenesses into the common space. Distortion in the location of points in the common space was also apparent  in these solutions, with the distortions being largest for points with high uniquenesses.  A further example of the usefulness of the restricted model was provided by data from Fillenbaum and Rapoport (1971). Data  were paired comparisons of 15 color names, ranked by similarity or by dissimilarity. Since there was no reason to expect  systematic differences attributable to the similarity-dissimilarity distinction, the two sets of data were treated as  replications. The slope b of (1) was set at 1.0 for the dissimilarity data, and -1.0 for the similarity data. We hypothesized  that subjects would have organized the color names according to a very simple schema: the six primary and secondary pigment  colors would lie evenly spaced on the perimeter of a circle; brownish colors only  MULTIDIMENSIONAL SCALING  0  o .76 ti  0  .94  V U  a .92 w  v  a .90 w .88  z .86  0  o .84 a  0  a .82  ~~ IS 28 4043 51 61 (I) (2) (3) (2+U) (4) (5) NUMBER OF PARAMETERS (DIMENSIONS)  .98  FIG. 3.  Fit of uniqueness model and traditional model to uniqueness data.  TABLE 5 Hypothesized Structure for 15 Color Names  Name  A   Blue -0.866*, -0.500* 0.*  Bronze - -  Brown - - -  Crimson - - 0.  Green 0.000* -1.000* 0.  Khaki - - -  Olive - - -  Orange 0.866* 0.500* 0.*  Purple -0.866* 0.500* 0.  Red 0.000* 1.000* 0.  Scarlet - - 0.*  Tan - - -  Turquoise - - 0.  Violet - - 0.  Yellow 0.866* -0.500* 0.  Starred numbers were fixed to the given values. Omitted entries correspond to free parameters.  148 BENTLER AND WEEKS  would project on a third dimension. The hypotheses are represented in Table 5 in terms of free and fixed parameters.  Solutions for the unrestricted model in two dimensions and for the restricted model in Table 5 were obtained for the  similarity data. The unrestricted solution was virtually identical to that of Fillenbaum and Rapoport (1971). The restricted  model fit the data   II   SCARLET   ' .RED   CRIMSON   ORANGE  W PURPLE   _U VIOLET    BROWN  F  -T      BLUE BRONZE  W  '   TAN  D:    TURQUOISE KHAKIYELLOW   OLIVE   GREEN   SCARLET   REDI CRIMSON  PURPLE ORANGE  VIOLET    BROWN   '   I  W    F-  BRONZE-TAN  U BLUE    *YELLOW  f- TURQUOISE KHAKI  (/)    W  OLIVE   GREEN  BRONZE  TAN  .KHAKI  OLIVE  FIG. 4. Restricted and unrestricted solutions to 15 color names (similarity) data.  TABLE 6  Fitof Restricted and Unrestricted Models to 16 Color Names DataOriginal and Cross-Validation  Original Cross-validation  Unrestricted 0.0566 0.1728  Restricted 0.0474 0.1445  "1-R2.  MULTIDIMENSIONAL SCALING 149  better than did the unrestricted model (Table 6). Note that although the restricted model had one more dimension than the  unrestricted model, it had fewer parameters (24 to 28). To determine if one solution captures the true situation better than  another, or is merely capitalizing on chance, cross-validation is required. To do this, we measured the fit of the two  solutions to the dissimilarity data. Both solutions provided reasonably good fit to the data, and the restricted solution was  again superior (Table 6). More importantly, the restricted solution suffered less on cross-validation than did the  unrestricted solution. The configurations are presented in Figure 4. While we cannot claim that the configuration derived  under the restricted model is the best representation of color names, we can assert that it is a bit more accurate and  parsimonious than the representation obtained by traditional multidimensional scaling.  DISCUSSION  Although there exist many methods of nonlinear programming that would be able to implement the restricted multidimensional  scaling models described in this paper, we have found the Gauss-Newton method to be satisfactory to illustrate the models. As  mentioned earlier, the computer program we have used cannot be considered optimal, but it clearly works and in some cases is  exceptionally fast. Of course, as in all optimization methods, the speed of convergence depends on the nearness of the  starting values to minimum values. In very large problems, or when computer storage is limited, one might consider a gradient  method of computation.  While the restricted models have been discussed in this paper as linear or metric models, this is not an inherent feature. One  could just as well fit the data to the recovered distances at each step with a monotone regression algorithm (e.g., Kruskal,  1964). The restrictions we have discussed involve the parameters of the model, while the metricnonmetric distinction involves  further decisions regarding the type of information to be extracted from the data. Thus these two issues are conceptually and  computationally distinct, and our approach applies equally to metric and nonmetric multidimensional scaling.  By setting as known constants certain elements of the projection matrix tl in the unrestricted case, the free parameters are  identified and the origin and rotation of the configuration is fixed. This procedure is also a computational requirement since  most methods of nonlinear optimization will not work well when required to estimate redundant parameters. In some cases it has  a side benefit, as when a particular orientation is desired. For example, in our analysis of Torgerson's(1958) color data, we  desired the configuration to have the same orientation and origin as Cooper's (1972) solution. By setting the parameters all ,  a12 , and a22 constant and equal to those in Cooper's solution we achieved this aim. The slight differences between our  solution and Cooper's were probably due to the fact that those three parameters were rounded to two decimal places, so that  greater accuracy could not be expected.  In some cases, the Schonemann-Carroll (1970) matrix fitting algorithm could be used on an unrestricted solution to yield a  solution that is somewhat similar to those obtain-  150 BENTLER AND WEEKS  able under the restricted distance model. However, this procedure would probably not suffice when only certain elements of the  target matrix can be specified, or in many special cases of restricted models. For example, in some uses more dimensions than  points may be specified in restricted models (as with the uniqueness model), and there will exist no reasonable unrestricted  initial solution which could be transformed to approximate the desired final form. It is doubtful that any transformation  procedure could be used with unrestricted solutions to get the same pattern of loadings possible under various restricted  models.  Our development of restricted multidimensional scaling models has been limited to the standard orthogonal model (1), which can  be equivalently written as hit = b[(ai - a;) (ai - a;)']112 + c -}- ei; , using vector terminology; the row vector ai of  length t, contains elements aik . It is obvious that for any nonsingular square matrix T this model can be equivalently  written as hi; = b[(ai - a;) TT-1T-1'T'(ai - a;)']112 -}- c -}- ei; , so that hi; = b[(xi - x;) G(xi - x;)']112 -}- c -E- ei;,  where xi = aiT and G = T-1T-l'. Consequently, it would be possible to develop restricted models based on this oblique  representation. In fact, we have implemented the oblique model in a computer program, but have as yet found no examples for  which oblique axes provide significantly better fit; consequently, we do not report these results here. Of course, the oblique  models needs further study since it may well provide a fit better than the traditional orthogonal model in certain restricted  cases, and because it can so simply be generalized to the individual differences case by using hi;,, GQ , and ei;4 in the  defining model for the qth subject.  Ultimately, various restricted models have to be evaluated relative to each other to determine which is most appropriate to a  given set of data, and ideally a statistical test would be available to test the adequacy of fit of a given model as well as  to compare alternative models. While we are working on such statistical developments, cruder methods to compare models must  currently be recommended. The procedure of crossvalidation described previously is particularly appropriate in view of its  simplicity. Fitting a given model to data must then be considered only a preliminary step in multidimensional scaling  research, and an evaluation of the model with the obtained parameter estimates in a new data situation would provide evidence  of accuracy of fit versus overfitting. In some situations unrestricted models would be expected to cross-validate poorly,  particularly when too many parameters are estimated from the data. In other situations, restricted models would be expected to  cross-validate poorly, for example when the theory involved in determining restrictions is inadequate, or when the restricted  model is determined from the data in relatively arbitrary ways. The combination of theoretical application and comparative  model evaluation should allow multidimensional scaling to expand into new areas of research, and hopefully, the introduction  of the restricted models introduced in this paper will stimulate the development of new theoretical models for psychological  processes that generate data in various situations.  REFERENCES  COOPER, L. G. A new solution to the additive constant problem in metric multidimensional scaling. Psychometrika, 1972, 37,  311-322.  MULTIDIMENSIONAL SCALING 151  EKMAN, G. Dimensions of color vision. Journal of Psychology, 1954, 38, 467-474.  FILLENBAUM, S., & RAPAPORT, A. Structure in the subjective lexicon. New York: Academic Press, 1971. JENNRICH, R. I., &  SAMPSON, P. F. Application of stepwise regression to nonlinear estimation. Technometrics, 1968, 10, 63-72.  KRUSKAL, J. B. Nonmetric multidimensional scaling: A numerical method. Psychometrika, 1964, 29, 115-129.  SCH6NEMANN, P. H., & CARROLL, R. M. Fitting one matrix to another under choice of a central dilation and a rigid motion.  Psychometrika, 1970, 35, 245-255.  SHEPARD, R. N. The analysis of proximities: Multidimensional scaling with an unknown distance function. II. Psychometrika,  1962, 27, 219-246.  SHEPARD, R. N. A taxonomy of some principal types of data and of multidimensional methods for their analysis. In R. N.  Shepard, A. K. Romney, & S. B. Nerlove (Eds.), Multidimensional scaling: Theory and applications in the behavioral sciences.  New York: Seminar Press, 1972. Vol. 1.  SHEPARD, R. N. Representation of structure in similarity data: Problems and prospects. Psychometrika, 1974, 39, 373-421.  TORGERSON, W. S. Theory and method of scaling. New York: Wiley, 1958.  RECEIVED: April 8, 1977  48o/17/2_5