10.1016/0022-2496(78)90047-0
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 18, 39-51 (1978)  Completely Nonmetric Multidimensional Scaling'  ERIC W. HOLMAN  Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90024  Most of the distance models underlying multidimensional scaling assume that if a stimulus y is between the stimuli x and z on  each dimension, then x and z should be the farthest apart of the three stimuli. An iterative algorithm is described that uses  only this betweenness prediction to infer the ordering of a set of stimuli on each of one or two dimensions. Applied to  previously published semantic similarity data, this algorithm produced two-dimensional configurations that were similar in  appearance to Euclidean configurations but generally involved fewer violations of the betweenness prediction.  INTRODUCTION  The hypothetical models underlying multidimensional scaling can be conveniently summarized using Anderson's (1970) outline of  functional measurement. Let X be a finite set of stimuli, with elements x, y, z, etc. To represent these stimuli in m  dimensions, a psychophysical function assigns to each stimulus x a position ci(x) on each of m coordinates, for i = 1,..., m.  Next, a distance function integrates these positions into distances d(xy) between each pair of stimuli. Finally, a response  function transforms these distances into data s(xy), such as the mean rating given by subjects asked to estimate the  difference between x and y, or the probability with which subjects confuse x and y. Since distances are symmetric, models of  this type are direcly applicable only to data that are also symmetric in the sense that s(xy) = s(yx). Only the stimuli and  responses are actually observed by the experimenter; the intervening functions characterize the behavior of the subjects and  are inferred by the experimenter.  One apparent historical trend in this field has been a reduction in the number and strength of prior assumptions made about  the functions in the models. Assumptions about pseychophysical functions have always been controversial and are now rare. More  recently, Shepard (1962a, b) introduced nonmetric multidimensional scaling, which replaces the assumption of a linear response  function with the weaker assumption of monotonicity. Shepard's program uses the Euclidean distance function,  d(xy) = [ CA) - ca(y)~2]1 2> 2_I  I This work was supported by Grants GB-42218 from the National Science Foundation and 1 R03 MH 29174-O1 from the National  Institute of Mental Health, and by computer time from the UCLA Campus Computing Network. I would like to thank Phipps Arabie,  Samuel Fillenbaum, Nancy M. Henley, Amnon Rapoport, and Daniel L. Rourke for sending me data and permission to use them; and  Fran;ois G. Christen, Joseph B. Kruskal, James R. Miller, Roger N. Shepard, and Thomas D. Wickens for helpful suggestions and  39  0022-2496/78/0181-0039$02.000  Copyright Q 1978 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  and estimates an arbitrary psychophysical function and a monotonic response function for a given set of data. Later programs,  such as those of Kruskal (1964a, b), Lingoes (1972), and Young and Torgerson (1967), allow the exponents 2 and z in (1) to be  replaced by k and Ilk, respectively, for any k > 1 specified in advance. Finally, Cunningham and Shepard (1974) have described  a scaling procedure that does not assume any specific distance function. Instead of a dimensional representation, they assume  that the distances satisfy the triangle inequality,  d(xz) < d(xy) -f- d(yz),  and also that the variance of the distances is as large as possible consistent with a monotonic response function. Under these  assumptions, their program estimates the response function for a given set of data, but makes no inferences about the  psychophysical function or the distance function.  The present paper describes another scaling procedure that requires only weak assumptions about the distance function, and is  in a sense complementary to the work of Cunningham and Shepard (1974). The program to be described estimates the  psychophysical function for a given set of data, but makes no inferences about the distance function or the response function.  The underlying model retains a multidimensional representation, and assumes only that if a stimulus y is between the stimuli x  and z on all m dimensions, then x and z should be the farthest apart of the three stimuli. More specifically:  If for all 1 < i < m, ci(x) < ci(y) < ci(z) or ci(x) > ci(y) > ci(z),  then d(xz) > d(xy) and d(xz) > d(yz).  The distance function is thus assumed to be monotonic on each dimension. As usual, the response function is assumed to be  monotonic on distance. If this function is nondecreasing, then s can be substituted for d in (2); if it is nonincreasing, then  this substitution would reverse the inequalities in the conclusion of (2). For convenience, it will be assumed henceforth that  the response function is nondecreasing. The psychophysical function is unrestricted. The model therefore makes no assumptions  stronger than monotonicity at any stage between stimulus and response.  Two investigations of conditions similar to (2) have already been published. First, Coombs (1964, Chap. 21) describes methods  for inferring m coordinates ci that have the following property:  d(xz) > d(xy) and d(xz) > d(yz) imply ci(x) < ci(y) < ci(z)  or ci(x) > c;(y) > ci(z) for some 1 < i G m.  For m = 1, (3) is the converse of (2), and the conditions are actually equivalent except in the case of ties. With additional  dimensions, however, (2) and (3) diverge; in fact, (3)  is not necessarily satisfied even by Euclidean distances. To show this fact, suppose that in a Euclidean plane, the points u,  v, w, x, and y are the vertices of a pentagon (not necessarily regular), and the point z is in the middle of the figure, such  that d(uw), d(vx), d(wy), d(xu), and d(yv) all exceed d(uv), d(vw), d(wx), d(xy), and d(yu), which in turn exceed d(uz),  d(vz), d(wz), d(xz), and d(yz). In this case, the conclusion of (3) cannot hold for the same i for any two adjacent triangles  such as (w, x, z) and (x, y, z); thus, since there are five such triangles, m must be at least 3, although the Euclidean  configuration is twodimensional.  The other precedent is Sibson's (1971) work on seriation. Sibson describes a computer program that minimizes the number of  violations of (2) for m = 1. His algorithm is similar in general to the one presented below; but it differs in detail, and  does not seem to have been extended to more than one dimension.  PROPERTIES OF THE MODEL  The most prominent alternative to multidimensional representations is the hierarchical clustering model introduced into the  psychological literature by Johnson (1967). Holman (1972) has described a sense in which the Euclidean model is complementary  to the hierarchical model. There is also a sense in which the present monotonic model is complementary to the hierarchical  model: the ultrametric inequality, which characterizes the hierarchical model, does not allow strict betweenness relations.  The ultrametric inequality requires that  d(xz) < max[d(xy), d(yz)], (4)  and thus excludes the possibility that y is strictly between x and z, which requires that  d(xz) > d(xy) and d(xz) > d(yz).  Even with random errors in the distances, the hierarchical model would imply that (4) holds with probability at least 1/2, and  therefore that  P[d(xz) < d(xy)] + P[d(xz) < d(yz)] > 1/2;  in other words, the expected number of violations per inequality in (5) is at least 1/4. Consequently, if predictions of  strict betweenness from an independent set of data generate inequalities that are violated in fewer than 1/4 of the cases,  then the hierarchical model can be rejected.  For any three given stimuli, (2) predicts which one will be between the other two if and only if the same stimulus is in the  middle on all m dimensions. As m increases, therefore, (2) will generally make fewer predictions and be more easily satisfied.  In particular, just as the Euclidean model of (1) can trivially fit any m + 1 stimuli in m dimensions, so the monotonic model  of (2) can trivially fit any 3 - 2"'-1 stimuli in m dimensions. To prove this  fact, let X contain 3 - 2m-1 elements. These elements can be partitioned into 2m-1 subsets of three elements each, and the  ordered so that within each subset, the two elements that are farthest apart in the data are on either side of the third  element. Thus, if the stimuli are labeled x; according to this ordering, and K is any nonnegative integer less than 2-1, then  s(XSK+1x3K+3) % S(x3K+1x3K+2), S(x3K+2x3K+3)- Now, let c1(x;) = j. For 2 < i < m, let Li = 3 - 2i-2; let ci(xi) = j - Li if  2LjK -}- Li + 1 < j <_ 2LjK + 2Li . T o show that this representation satisfies (2), let x; , x, , and x, be given with j < k  < 1. If these elements are all in the same subset with j = 3K + 1, k = 3K + 2, and l = 3K + 3 for some K, then by definition,  x,. is between x; and x, on all coordinates and also in the data, as required by (2). If x; , x, , and x, are not all in the  same subset, then let i be the largest integer with 2 < i < m such that for some K, either LiK + 1 < j < k < LiK + Li < l or j  < LiK + 1 < k < l < LiK -{- Li; then ci(x,) < ci(x;) < ci(xk) in the first of these cases and ci(xx) < ci(x,) < ci(x;) in the  second, but c1(x;) < c1(xk) < c1(x,) in both cases, so (2) makes no prediction and is consistent with any data.  For two or more dimensions, the number of predictions made by (2) depends upon the configuration of the stimuli. Relatively  few predictions are made when the stimuli are arranged as described in the last paragraph in 2m-1 subsets such that a  prediction is made if and only if all three stimuli are in the same subset: if x contains k - 2m-1 elements for relatively  large k, then (2) makes predictions in approximately k3 - 2'm-1/6 cases out of a possible (k - 2111-1)3/6, in other words,  with probability about 1/4m-1. More typically, if the stimuli are ordered independently on each dimension, then for any three  stimuli, the probability is 1/3 that the same stimulus will be in the middle on any two dimensions, and thus (2) will make  predictions with probability 1/3112-1. Finally, if the stimuli are arranged in the same or opposite order on all dimensions,  then (2) makes predictions for every set of three stimuli, although this configuration is only trivially multidimensional.  The uniqueness of configurations determined by (2) is not the same as for Euclidean configurations. Since (2) depends only  upon the order of stimuli on each dimension, it allows any change that preserves this order. Like (1), (2) also allows  reflections along any coordinate and interchanges of coordinates. Although (1) allows any rotations of the configuration,  other distance functions satisfying (2) allow only rotations in multiples of 90around each coordinate. Unfortunately,  configurations inferred according to (2) may not actually live up to their theoretical uniqueness, because the number of  predictions available for such inferences usually becomes relatively small with increasing dimensionality. The development of  the scaling program described below provided an opportunity to ascertain uniqueness empirically by comparing the final  configurations that resulted when the iterative algorithm was applied to different starting configurations. In three or more  dimensions, the various final configurations were practically unrelated to each other, even though the relatively few  predictions made by (2) from these configurations were nearly all consistent with the data. In one and two dimensions,  however, the final configurations were approximately the same except for the theoretically admissible transformations.  Evidently, therefore, (2) imposes enough constraints to determine ordinally unique configurations in one or two dimensions,  but not in three or more dimensions. The final versions of the scaling program are consequently restricted to one and two  dimensions.  THE SCALING PROGRAM  The program estimates the ci by iteratively converging to a configuration that at least locally minimizes the proportion of  the predictions made by (2) that are violated by the data. This proportion will hencforth be called Q; it is equivalent to the  error function minimized by Sibson's (1971) seriation program, and is analogous to stress in Kruskal's (1964a, b) scaling  The program offers two options for starting configurations. First, a starting configuration can be read in from another  source, such as the output from another scaling program. Otherwise, the program generates a series of starting configurations  that are usually better than random configurations and thus save a few iterations. For this purpose, a function b(xy) is  defined on X x X by counting the number of elements z that are between x and y in the sense that s(xy) > s(xz) ands(xy) >,  s(yz). Next, the x and y with the largest b(xy) are labeled x, and x,, . For each successive positive integer k <_ n/2, x,,,  and x,_k are chosen, from among the elements not already ordered, to maximize b(xk+lx,.) - b(xlxk+,) and b(xlx._k) -  b(xkx, respectively; ties are broken arbitrarily. The first starting configuration in one dimension is defined by setting  c,(xi) = i; the next is defined in the same way except that the end points have the next largest value of b(xy); and so on.  The first starting configuration in two dimensions is defined by the first two orders having the additional property that if x  and y are any two end points of the different orders, then b(xy) > 1; the next is defined by the next two orders with this  property; and so on.  Each iteration involves two main parts. In the first, the computer searches through all three-element subsets of X. During  this search, it counts the numbers of correct and incorrect predictions made by (2) with the existing configuration. For a  one-dimensional configuration, it constructs a function e,(x, i) that gives the change in number of incorrect predictions that  would occur if c,(x) were changed from i - z to i + I while the other c,(y) remained constant. For a two-dimensional  configuration, it also constructs a function e2(x, i) giving changes in incorrect predictions for changes on the other  coordinate, and analogous functions pl(x, i) and p2(x, i) giving changes in correct predictions for changes on each  coordinate, since numbers of predictions depend upon the configuration for more than one dimension. Suppose for example that  c,(x) = 2, c2(x) = 3, c,(y) = 4, c2(y) = 5, c,(z) = 6, and c2(z) = 7; and suppose that s(xy) > s(xz) > s(yz). In this  situation, (2) predicts that s(xz) > s(xy) and s(xz) > s(yz); thus the totals for correct and incorrect predictions are each  increased by l. Also, any reversal in the order of the elements on either coordinate would cause (2) to make no predictions;  thus, e,(x, 4), p,(x, 4), e2(x, 5), p2(x, 5), e,(y, 6), pl(y, 6), e2(y, 7), and p2(y, 7) are each decreased by 1, while ei(y,  2), p,(y, 2), e2(y, 3), P2(y, 3), e,(z, 4), p,(z, 4), e2(z, 5), and P2(z, 5) are each increased by 1.  In the next part of the iteration, the computer chooses which changes to make in the configuration. The total numbers of  correct and incorrect predictions, and the functions ei(x, j) and pi(x,j), are used to calculate for each x the change in g  that would be produced by moving x to each of the other ordinal positions on each dimension. Several methods were explored for  choosing which moves actually to make; and two versions of the  program were prepared using the two most successful methods. The first method is analogous to the method of steepest descent  used by Kruskal (1964a, b) for the Euclidean and power metrics. For each possible move, the computer divides the decrease in Q  by the number of ordinal positions that the element is moved; it then chooses the moves for which this ratio is largest, until  the total number of positions moved exceeds a predetermined limit, called the step size. The other method is similar to the  method used by Lin and Kernighan (1973) for the traveling salesman problem. The computer chooses the move with the greatest  decrease in Q, whatever the number of positions moved; then if x is the element moved, the values of ei(y, ci(x)) and pi(y,  ci(x)) are set equal to 0 in order to remove the direct influence of the element already moved upon further moves; successive  moves are made in the same way until the total number of positions moved exceeds the step size. In either method, if more than  one element is moved to the same new position, the tie is broken in favor of the previous configuration.  Each iteration thus replaces the current values of the ci with new ones, also integers, chosen to reduce Q. Although each  individual move that is chosen will reduce Q in the absence of any other moves, it is possible that two or more moves will be  chosen that counteract each other and result in an increase in Q. Therefore, whenever two successive iterations fail to reduce  Q, the step size is cut in half, in order to eliminate possible counteracting moves. The computer also stores the current best  values of the ci , which are replaced only when an iteration actually does reduce Q. Iterations continue until one of three  criteria is met. First, no moves are found that reduce Q. Second, a predetermined number of iterations is reached. Third, the  step size is reduced below 1/4. In practice, the program usually converges according to the first criterion in fewer than 30  iterations.  By far the slowest part of the algorithm is the search through three-element subsets that occurs as the first part of each  iteration. Since there are approximately n3/6 such subsets in a set of n stimuli, the time taken by the program is  approximately proportional to n3 multiplied by the number of iterations. When compiled in Fortran H and run on the IBM 360-91  computer at UCLA, the program takes about n3 . 10-4 seconds per run for one dimension and about twice as long for two  dimensions. Computer memory is used mainly to store the original data matrix and the functions ei(x, j) and pi(x, j), whose  size is proportional to n2. As written, the program handles up to 50 stimuli and uses 150 K of core; but it could be easily  revised for different-sized data sets and computers.  APPLICATION To DATA  The present monotonic model was tested and compared to the hierarchical and Euclidean models using data from previously  published semantic judgment experiments. These experiments were chosen because different groups of subjects judged the  similarity or dissimilarity in meaning of the same sets of words under slightly different conditions. Thus, the models could  be cross-validated by using the configurations inferred from the judgments of one group of subjects to predict the judgments  Fillenbaum and Rapoport (1971, Chap. 3) used 15 color names as stimuli. Two groups of subjects (abbreviated FR CCS and FR CCD,  respectively) ranked all pairs of words  according to similarity and dissimilarity respectively. Fillenbaum and Rapoport (1971, Chap. 5) also used 15 emotion names;  Groups FR ECS and FR ECD ranked all pairs with respect to similarity and dissimilarity respectively, while Group FR ER gave  numerical ratings of similarity for all pairs. Henley (1969) and Arabie and Rips (described byArabie and Shepard,1973)used  30names of mammals; Henley's subjects (abbreviated H) rated dissimilarity, while Arabie and Rips' (AR) rated similarity.  Rourke's (1971) four groups of subjects all rated similarity. His Group R H48 was given 48 names of animals and plants, while  Group R H2O was given a 20-item subset of these names; in the present analysis, only these 20 words were considered for both  groups. Rourke's Group R M48 was given the 48 concrete and abstract nouns previously used by Miller (1969), while Group R M20  was given 20 of these nouns; only these 20 words were considered here. All the experiments presented English words to American  subjects, except that Fillenbaum and Rapoport's emotion names were presented in Hebrew to Israelis. The data analyzed here  were the mean rank or rating given by the group of subjects to each pair of words.  For each group's data, the monotonic model was fit using the present program, and the Euclidean model was fit using KYST, the  most recent descendant of the programs of Kruskal (1964a, b) and Young and Torgerson (1967). Euclidean configurations were  obtained in one and two dimensions with the standard parameter values for KYST; both standard starting configurations were  used, namely the projection of the rotated solution obtained with one more dimension, and the configuration obtained assuming  a linear response function. The stress values for the better solutions were usually the same as (to three significant figures)  and occasionally lower than the stress values reported by the original experimenters. Thus, prevailing community standards for  the avoidance of local minima seem to have been met.  A larger number of monotonic configurations was obtained in order to investigate the susceptibility of the program to local  minima and to compare different versions, step sizes, and starting configurations. In one dimension, between 4 and 14  solutions were obtained for each of the 11 experimental groups. For every group, the steepest-descent version of the program  with standard step size was used to obtain one solution starting with the best Euclidean configuration, and three other  solutions starting with programgenerated configurations. Additional solutions were obtained using the alternative version of  the algorithm, or half the standard step size, or both.  The first column of Table 1 gives the values of Q for the best one-dimensional solutions. For five of the groups, all the  configurations were the same (except for reflections); for four groups, the best solution occurred in more than half the runs;  and for the other two groups, the best solution occurred at least as frequently as any other. It therefore seems likely that  the best solutions were global rather than local minima. The frequency of best solutions did not seem to depend greatly upon  the algorithm version, step size, or starting configuration; speed of convergence was usually greater with the standard than  with the smaller step size, but did not depend greatly upon the algorithm version or starting configuration.  In two dimensions, between 18 and 30 solutions were obtained for each group. Six program-generated starting configurations  were used with each group, as well as three  TABLE 1 Proportions of Betweenness Predictions Violated by Experimental Data  Predictions from same group  Predictions from other group(s)  1 dim 2 dim Data: 1 dim 2 dim  Group Mono Mono Strict Euc Mono Euc Mono    Betweenness    FR CCS .229 .012 .127 .293 .285 .115 .088  FR CCD .231 .008 .119 .273 .267 .112 .070  FR ECS .200 .042 .136,.149 .248,.226 .223,.222 .162,.098 .115,.080  FR ECD .175 .010 .133,.114 .193,.200 .197,.198 .100,.109 .112,.092  FR ER .180 .022 .152,.112 .201,.229 .190,.189 .127,.136 .104,.095  H .211 .044 .138 .240 .264 .074 .086  AR .178 .030 .139 .219 .223 .074 .055  R H20 .144 .057 .193 .206 .168 .142 .117  R H48 .170 .053 .201 .211 .205 .127 .128  R M20 .281 .103 .207 .307 .309 .193 .163  R M48 .272 .112 .188 .307 .338 .216 .215  different rotated versions of the best Euclidean configuration, since rotations are arbitrary in the Euclidean but not in the  monotonic model. The rotations were: the original KYST solution, which KYST had automatically rotated to principal components;  the KYST solution rotated 45 and the KYST solution rotated by the program of Sch6nemann and Carroll (1970) to conform as  well as possible to the best monotonic solution hitherto obtained, in which successive stimuli were placed at equal intervals  along the axes because spacing in arbitrary in the monotonic model. The steepest-descent version of the program with the  standard step size was used with each starting configuration. Additional solutions were obtained with the starting  configurations that seemed most promising, using the alternative version of the algorithm, or half the standard step size, or  both.  The second column of Table 1 gives the values of Q for the best two-dimensional solutions. Practically none of the  configurations for a given group were exactly the same (even with admissible transformations), but the better ones were quite  similar; the median difference in Q between the best and second-best solutions was 0.003, with a range from less than 0.001 to  0.009. It therefore seems likely that the best solutions were local minima but quite close to global ones. The best starting  configurations were Euclidean: of the 11 best solutions, 7 started from Euclidean configurations, of which 2, 3, and 2 were  the original, 45 and Sch6nemann-Carroll rotations, respectively. The frequency of best solutions or speed of convergence did  not seem to depend greatly upon the algorithm version or step size. As expected, the two-dimensional configurations did not  yield  predictions of betweenness for most sets of three stimuli; the proportions or predictions actually made ranged from 0.275 to  0.393 in the 11 best solutions. Since predictions are expected with probability 1/3 if the stimuli are ordered independently  on the two dimensions, the solutions obtained do not seem to reflect any strong tendency of the program to minimize or  maximize predictions.  The right-hand part of Table 1 gives the cross-validation results, namely, the proportions of violations of the betweenness  inequalities that were predicted from the results of the other experimental groups given the same stimuli. The cells for the  emotion data contain two entries each, because three groups of subjects judged these stimuli, and the data for each group were  predicted from the data for each of the other groups.  As a test of the hierarchical model, the third column of the table refers to predictions of strict betweenness made directly  from the data: if the inequalities of (5) held for one group, they were predicted for the other group. For every group, fewer  than 1/4 of these predictions were violated. Thus, the data contained more information about betweenness than can be  encompassed in hierarchies of clusters.  The rest of the table refers to predictions of weak betweenness made using (2) from the best configurations previously  obtained in one and two dimensions for the Euclidean and monotonic models. Of the three rotations previously described for the  two-dimensional Euclidean configurations, the one that made the most accurate betweenness predictions for the data from which  it was derived was also used for cross-validation. The onedimensional predictions were quite poor, about equally so for both  models, while the two-dimensional predictions were much better for both models. In 11 of the 14 comparisons in two dimensions,  the monotonic predictions were better than the Euclidean predictions; the exceptions were FR ECD predicted by FR ECS, H  predicted by AR, and R H48 predicted by R H20. The superiority of the monotonic predictions was substantial for the color  data, less so for the emotion data, and marginal for the other data.  It remains possible that this evaluation procedure was biased against the Euclidean model, perhaps because more solutions were  obtained for the monotonic model, or because the monotonic program explicitly minimized Q while KYST did not. To test this  possibility, some artificial two-dimensional Euclidean data were constructed to be as similar as possible to the real daya  from the first three sets of stimuli. For each set of stimuli, the two-dimensional Euclidean configuration with the lowest  stress was chosen; these configurations were from FR CCD, FR ER, and AR. For each pair of stimuli in the set, the coordinates  in the configuration were modified by adding independent samples from a bivariate normal error distribution, and then a  distance was calculated according to (1). Two sets of distances were produced in this manner from each configuration; the  standard deviations of the error distributions were adjusted in order to match (approximately) the corresponding sets of real  data in rank correlation (Kendall's tau) between groups and in proportion of violations of betweenness predictions from the  data of one group to the other. Finally, the distances were transformed by a response function that approximately matched the  transformation inferred by KYST from the corresponding real data; this function was linear for FR CCS and FR ER, and square  root for AR.  These data were analyzed in the same way as the real data; Table 2 gives the results. The artificial data were in fact fairly  well matched to the real data in accuracy of cross  TABLE 2 Proportions of Betweenness Predictions Violated by Artificial Data  Predictions from Predictions from other group same group  1 dim 2 dim Data: 1 dim 2 dim  Group Mono Mono Strict Euc Mono Euc Mono    betweenness      FR CCS 1 .218 .017 .126 .262 .240 .051 .059  FR CCS 2 .236 .010 .127 .276 .246 .046 .056  FR ER 1 .160 .006 .123 .176 .173 .027 .037  FR ER 2 .170 .003 .121 .197 .188 .049 .038  AR 1 .198 .030 .157 .210 .213 .045 .052  AR 2 .199 .028 .156 .209 .210 .049 .052  validation prediction made directly from the data; the artificial and real data were also quite similar in the values of Q for  the best monotonic solutions and also in the accuracy of the one-dimensional cross-validation predictions. In the  two-dimensional crossvalidation, however, the artificial data differed from the real data in two important respects. First,  the Euclidean model was generally more accurate than the monotonic model, being superior in five of the six comparisons,  perhaps because the Euclidean solutions used additional information about the data besides betweenness. Thus, the  cross-validation test is not biased against the Euclidean model when that model is appropriate. Second, both models were much  more accurate for the artificial data than for the real data, although the real data were just as reliable as the artificial  data. Thus, certain reliable aspects of the real data may not have been described by either model.  As examples of the results of the monotonic program, Figures 1 and 2 give the twodimensional monotonic configurations with the  lowest values of Q for the color and emotion stimuli, since the cross-validation results for these stimuli were most favorable  to the monotonic model. Successive stimuli are arbitrarily placed at equal intervals along the axes; but the orientation of  the axes is not arbitrary. In Fig. 1, the names of the saturated colors form the usual color circle, surrounding the names of  the less starated colors; the Euclidean configuration of Fillenbaum and Rapoport (1971) is similar except that the less  saturated colors are closer to the edge of the circle. In Fig. 2, the horizontal and vertical dimensions both seem to reflect  a good-bad or pleasant-unpleasant continuum that was also the only dimension interpreted by Fillenbaum and Rapoport in their  Euclidean configuration.  As a more quantitative measure of the similarity between the two-dimensional Euclidean and monotonic configurations, Kendall's  tau was calculated between the rank orders of the stimuli in the two configurations on each dimension. The calculation was  performed for each of the three rotations of the Euclidean configuration described earlier. Table 3  MULTIDIMENSIONAL SCALING 49  YELLOW  ORANGE  TAN BRONZE  RED  KHAKI  OLIVE  BROWN  CRIMSON  GREEN  TURQUOISE SCARLET  BLUE PURPLE  VIOLET  FIG. 1. Monotonic configuration for Group FR CCD.  SURPRISE  JOY  LOVE  FEAR ANTICIPATION  WORRY SADNESS  GRIEF  ENVY  GUILT  ANGER  HUMILIATION  CONTEMPT  ISGUST  PRIDE  FIG. 2. Monotonic configuration for Group FR ECD.  presents the results for the rotation that had the highest mean correlation over the two dimensions, for each set of real  data. The corresponding correlations for the artificial data ranged from 0.77 to 0.98, with a median of 0.88 and only slight  differences among the three sets of data. The correlations would presumably have been even higher for both real and artificial  data if a technique were available for specifically rotating Euclidean configurations to maximize rank correlations along the  dimensions.  Even the underestimated correlations in Table 3 were quite high, with one exception. The low correlation on the first  dimension for R H2O can be attributed to the fact that the Euclidean configuration for this group consisted of five tight  clusters whose internal structure was probably not very well determined. In general, the correlations did not show any clear  relationship to the cross-validation results; nor did they depend upon whether the monotonic solution originated from a  Euclidean starting configuration. For instance,  TABLE 3 Rank Correlations between Positions of Stimuli in Monotonic and Euclidean Configurations  Group 1 Dimensions   2  FR CCS .81 .85  FR CCD .92 .77  FR ECS .73 .70  FR ECD .73 .75  FR ER .90 .60  H .85 .85  AR .86 .88  R H2O .01 .78  R H48 .70 .85  R M20 .77 .81  R M48 .71 .49  the color stimuli showed the greatest superiority for the monotonic model in crossvalidation, and the monotonic solutions for  both these groups started from non-Euclidean configurations; yet the correlations between the final monotonic and Euclidean  configurations were higher for these groups than for most of the others. In contrast, the other two groups whose monotonic  solutions started from non-Euclidean configurations were R H2O and R M48, whose correlations between final configurations were  the lowest of all; but the cross-validation results for these stimuli showed little difference between the models. The  correlations did agree with the cross-validations, however, in suggesting that the real data were less Euclidean than the  artificial data.  In conclusion, the monotonic configurations were quite similar to the Euclidean configurations, even when the cross-validation  tests suggested that the distance function was not Euclidean. This result is analogous to the common finding within the  Euclidean model, that configurations obtained by nonmetric and metric procedures are quite similar to each other, even when  the response function is found to be nonlinear. Estimates of a multidimensional psychophysical function seem to be rather  insensitive to both the distance function and the response function.  REFERENCES  ANDERSON, N. H. Functional measurement and psychophysical judgment. Psychological Review, 1970, 77, 153-170.  ARABIE, P., SS SHEPARD, R. N. Representation of similarities as additive combinations of discrete, overlapping properties.  Montreal: Paper given at Mathematical Psychology Meetings, 1973.  MULTIDIMENSIONAL SCALING  51  Coomas, C. H. A theory of data. New York: Wiley, 1964.  CUNNINGHAM, J. P., & SHEPARD, R. N. Monotone mapping of similarities into a general metric space. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 1974, 11, 335-363.  FILLENBAUM, S., & RAPOPORT, A. Structures in the subjective lexicon. New York: Academic Press, 1971.  HENLEY, N. M. A psychological study of the semantics of animal terms. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1969, 8,  176-184.  HOLMAN, E. W. The relation between hierarchical and Euclidean models for psychological distances. Psychometrika, 1972, 37,  417-423.  JOHNSON, S. C. Hierarchical clustering schemes. Psychometrika, 1967, 32, 241-254.  KRUSKAL, J. B. Multidimensional scaling by optimizing goodness-of-fit to a nonmetric hypothesis. Psychometrika, 1964, 29,  1-28. (a)  KRUSKAL, J. B. Nonmetric multidimensional scaling: a numerical method. Psychometrika, 1964, 29, 115-120. (b)  LIN, S., & KERNIGHAN, B. W. An effective heuristic algorithm for the travelling-salesman problem. Operations Research, 1973,  21, 498-516.  LINGOES, J. C. A general survey of the Guttman-Lingoes nonmetric program series. In R. N. Shepard, A. K. Romney, & S. B.  Nerlove (Eds.), Multidimensional scaling, Vol. 1. New York: Seminar Press, 1972.  MILLER, G. A. A psychological method to investigate verbal concepts. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1969, 6, 169-191.  ROURKE, D. L. Hierarchical organization in free recall. Doctoral Dissertation, UCLA, 1971. SCHONEMANN, P. H., & CARROLL, R. M.  Fitting one matrix to another under choice of a central dilation and a rigid motion. Psychometrika, 1970, 35, 245-255.  SHEPARD, R. N. Analysis of proximities. I. Multidimensional scaling with an unknown distance function. Psychometrika, 1962,  27, 125-140. (a)  SHEPARD, R. N. Analysis of proximities. II. Multidimensional scaling with an unknown distance function. Psychometrika, 1962,  27, 219-246. (b)  SIBSON, R. Some thoughts on sequencing methods. In F. R. Hodson, D. G. Kendall, & P. Tautu (Eds.), Mathematics in the  archaeological and historical sciences. Edinburgh: Edinburgh Univ. Press, 1971. Pp. 263-266.  YOUNG, F. W., & TORGERSON, W. S. TORSCA: A Fortran IV program for Shepard-Kruskal multidimensional scaling analysis.  Behavioral Science, 1967, 12, 498.