10.1016/0022-2496(78)90016-0
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 17, 199-219 (1978)  Behavioral Contrast in Short Term Memory: Serial Binary Memory Models or Parallel Continuous Memory Models?  STEPHEN GROSSBERGI  Department of Mathematics, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215  This paper develops a model wherein STM primacy as well as recency effects can occur. The STM primacy effects can be used to  generate correct immediate recall of short lists that have not been coded in LTM. The properties of the model are interpreted  in terms of explicit neural mechanisms. The STM primacy effect is a behavioral contrast effect that is analogous to the  behavioral contrast that can occur during discrimination learning. The adaptational mechanism that accounts for these effects  is also implicated in data on reaction time, retinal adaptation, ratio scales in choice behavior, and von Restorfftype  effects. Its ubiquitous appearance is due to the fact that it solves a universal problem concerning the parallel processing of  patterned data by noisy cells with finitely many excitable sites. It is argued that the STM primacy effect is not measured in  interference experiments because it is masked by competitive STM interactions. These competitive interactions do not prevent  the LTM primacy effect from influencing performance. The paper criticizes recent models of STM that, use computer analogies to  justify binary codes, serial STM buffers, and serial scanning procedures. Several deficiencies of serial models in dealing  with psychological and neural processing are overcome by a model in which continuous STM activities and parallel real-time  operations play an important role.  1. INTRODUCTION: SERIAL AND BINARY MEMORY PROCESSES OR PARALLEL AND  CONTINUOUS MEMORY PROCESSES?  A great deal of experimental and theoretical work (e.g., Melton & Martin, 1972 Restle, et al., 1975; Tulving & Donaldson,  1972) has been done on problems; relating to how learning subjects store data in short-term memory (STM) before it is  transcribed into long-term memory (LTM) or otherwise transformed. lWany experimental findings have been interpreted, either  explicitly or implicitly, in terms of computer-like constructs, such as binary codes (Anderson & Bower, 1974; Atkinson &  Shiffrin, 1968), serial buffers (Atkinson & Shiffrin, 1968), and serial scanning procedures (Sternberg, 1966). This paper  suggests that the computer analogy has led to several basic difficulties. It also suggests an alternative theory to explain  how order information in STM evolves in real time. This theory predicts a new experimental phenomenon, behavioral contrast in  time, analogous to the phenomenon of behavioral contrast in space that occurs during discrimination learning (Bloomfield,  1969), and explains both phenomena using collective properties of well-known neural mechanisms. The theory is  I Supported in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF MCS 77-02958).  199  0022-2496/78/0173-0199$02.00/0 Copyright Cc 1978 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  ZOO STEPHEN GROSSBERG  illustrated by examples concerning free recall, discrimination learning, reaction time, perceptual adaptation, and von  Restorff-type effects.  Discrete and serial memory models have an immediate appeal in situations where behavioral responses are counted as they occur  one at a time. However, discrete and serial behavioral properties do not imply that the processes which control them are also  discrete and serial. Townsend (1974) has, for example, noted that the reaction times found in the Sternberg paradigm do not  imply a serial process by describing statistical parallel processing completion times that are indistinguishable from their  serial processing counterparts. It can furthermore be argued that accepting a discrete serial model precludes the study of  some basic processes of learning and perception. Even in simple behavioral tasks, both continuous and discrete elements are  evident. Many perceptions seem to be continuous; for example, colors or sounds seem to vary continuously in intensity and  quality. Yet the language with which we describe them seems to be much more discrete; for example, letters such as A or B  seem, in daily speech and listening, to be indecomposable units of behavior, and all of our language utterances seem to be  built up from finitely many such units. To understand the process of seeing a color and describing it by language, we must  face the problem of how seemingly continuous representations can interact, or be transformed, into seemingly discrete  representations. We must be able to discuss the "degree of continuity" at all levels of this transformation.  The relationship between seemingly continuous and seemingly discrete events is a deep one especially because the same behavior  can seem to have either type of representation depending on how familiar it is to us. The process of learning to walk or to  talk is illustrative. Before we can walk, attention is paid almost continuously to the complex coordinations that are  required. Yet after we know how to walk, much of this coordination is automatic, so that we can simply start to walk, pay  attention to other things, and then decide to stop walking. The control of walking eventually approximates a binary on-off  switch, except for some steering and object avoidance. Thus the process of learning can alter the control of walking from a  relatively continuous representation to a relatively discrete one. A similar process occurs in many learning tasks wherein  some form of "abstraction" occurs. Yet it would be wrong to believe that, after such a task is learned, its representation is  "really" discrete rather than "seemingly" or "relatively" discrete,since the brain waves that occur during familiar speech or  walking fluctuate continuously through time across billions of cells (Donchin & Lindsley, 1969). Moreover the sound  spectrogram of familiar speech is an almost continuous flow of sound despite our impression that it is a series of discrete  words (Lenneberg, 1967). In fact, an unfamiliar foreign language does sound like an almost continuous flow of sound. The  process of learning makes the sounds seem to be discrete by perceptually grouping them into learned units. Thus if one accepts  a binary representation of familiar events by fiat, then one must in principle miss vital ingredients of the learning process.  In effects, the consensual impression of the event then blinds us to its functional representation.  Similar considerations make it clear that even in tasks that appear serial, such as serial learning, important underlying  control processes are parallel processes. For example, the code that controls performance after a serial list is repetitively  practiced are not just the individual list items. As Young (1959, 1961, 1963, 1968) noted, if they were, prior  MEMORY MODELS 201  serial practice of a list A-B-C-D-... should yield marked positive transfer for later learning of the paired associates A-B,  C-D,..., but it does not. Horowitz and Izawa (1963) suggested that more than one item can be the functional stimulus for a  given response in a serial list, in particular that several items preceding the response serve as its functional stimulus.  This viewpoint illustrates the familiar idea that a series of items can be chunked together (Miller, 1956) to form a new code  whereby a series of behaviors can be more efficiently performed. Such a chunking process is based on the simultaneous  availability of all the individual units, and is thus a parallel process.  2. BOWED SERIAL POSITION CURVE IN FREE RECALL  A basic datum about STM is the bowed serial position curve that is found in free recall experiments (Fig. 1). When a subject  repeats a sufficiently long standard list of items in any order after hearing it once, the items near the beginning and end of  the list are performed earliest and with the highest probability (Atkinson & Shiffrin, 1971). The advantage of items near the  list beginning is called a primacy effect, that of items near the list end is called a recency effect. A computer analogy to  explain these effects can be developed as follows; cf. Atkinson and Shiffrin (1968). Let a list r, , r2 ,..., r,,, of  behaviorally matched items be presented to a subject. It is supposed that each item is either in an STM buffer, or is not in  the buffer, at a given time. That is, assume that a binary code exists such that 1 is assigned to ri if ri is in the buffer,  and 0 is assigned to ri if ri is not in the buffer. If k > 1 items are in the buffer at time t, one cannot determine the order  in which they entered the buffer by looking at their 0's and l's, since all k items that are in the buffer have the value 1.  Thus a binary code carries no order information. If there did not exist any internal trace of the order in which items  occurred, there would be no way to encode this information in LTM. Given a binary code, some mechanism other than an item's  activity (0 or 1) is needed to code order information. A serial STM buffer is therefore assumed to exist. Suppose that this  buffer contains m serially organized slots sI , s2 ,..., sm . The first item rl enters sl . When r2 occurs, it enters sl and  displaces rl from sl to S2. Then r3 displaces r2 from sI to s,, and rl from s2 to s3 .  r_ J J Q  C1 U Q w [0  O  u  a O  LIST POSITION  J J  Q w U o w  O  w O  FIG. 1. Probability and order of recall in free recall experiment.  202 STEPHEN GROSSBERG  One can then tell which items occurred first by testing their relative positions in the buffer. The above process continues  until m items are presented. Item r+1 knocks rl out of the buffer from slot sm , and each successive item eliminates the  earliest remaining item from the buffer at slot sm . In all, at any time there will be a block of successive items in the  buffer, each with activity 1. Thus, given a binary code, a serially organized STM buffer is needed to store order information.  The binary buffer concept does not, however, explain the data in Fig. 1. If the buffer worked in a deterministic fashion, then  each item could be perfectly performed, and each item would be performed in its correct order. The two bowed curves in Fig. 1  would be replaced by a horizontal line and an increasing straight line, respectively. Consequently, the buffer cannot work in  a deterministic fashion. It must work probabilistically, if it exists at all. Introducing probabilities brings continuous  variables back into the model, and creates a hybrid mixture of computer and probabilistic ideas. To explain the recency  effect, this hybrid model makes two more related assumptions, both of which say that the buffer works badly in a prescribed  way. First, one says that the buffer is leaky in the sense that an item can fall out of the buffer even before it reaches s,"  . Since the probability of falling out increases as a function of how long an item is in the buffer, this makes it most  probable that the most recent items are still in the buffer (Fig. 2). A recency effect for the probability of being in the  buffer is achieved by averaging across subjects. In each subject, however, items that remain in the buffer all still have  activity 1. Probabilistic models of STM usually stop at this point. They fail to ask a crucial question whose answer casts  doubt on the binary code assumption. How is the probability distribution of being in the STM buffer translated into the  real-time performance of individual items?  J J Q U W 5 W O f CI G K a  LIST POSITION  FIG. 2. Recency effect is ascribed to lesser probability of remaining in a serial STM buffer as a function of duration in the  buffer.  Given the above framework, it follows that any item ri can be performed from any buffer position s; in order to derive a  recency effect from subject performance. Otherwise there would be 0 probability of performance of ri from any si from which ri  could not be elicited.  This latter assumption implies that the motor code for performing any item can be read out from any buffer position. This  imposes extraordinary demands on system design, and makes a definite statement about neural dynamics. It says that the motor  codes for eliciting an item, although not initially learned at all positions s; , can be per-  MEMORY MODELS 203  formed at all positions si . The code is shift-invariant. An even more demanding implication is that all codes that are  hierarchically built up from the STM buffer must also be shiftinvariant. To predict the recency effect from a binary code  model, one is hereby led to conclude that the buffer is so poorly designed that it leaks, but is so exquisitely designed that  its entire hierarchy of codes is shift-invariant. Usually this implication is ignored, possibly because it is so disturbing,  and possibly because probabilistic modelers often overlook real-time constraints on performing individual items when they  construct their models.  Given the considerable machinery that is needed to produce the recency effect using a binary code, we ask whether it is  necessary? In particular, the enormous amount of neural data on continuously fluctuating potentials, spiking frequencies, and  the like, leads one to question the binary assumption itself. If the binary code is abandoned, then all of the above  difficulties evaporate. Items ri can then have fixed internal representations vi that are innate or built up by learning;  their codes need not move around in a buffer. Thus there need be no shift-invariant code. Moreover, the vi need not be leaky,  and each subject cdn possess a recency gradient, rather than assuming the recency gradient is a statistical property of a pool  of subjects, as in a binary theory.  In a continuous theory, a recency gradient exists if the most recent items have the greatest STM activity in their  representations vi, say because their STM activity has had less opportunity to decay, either spontaneously or due to  interference. If greater STM activities translate into faster reaction times of item performance, then a recency effect in  performance can be achieved without the need to move items around in a serially organized buffer. In other words, if  continuous STM activities exist, then they already carry order information. Below we suggest some STM interactions that can  occur at a single level oinput processing. Section 7 discusses how LTM feedback from a higher network level can modify these  properties. The paper Grossberg (1977a) develops a more complete theory in which several levels of STM and LTM processing are  needed to self-organize complex behavioral codes, maps, and plans.  How does a continuous mechanism work? Suppose for definiteness that each item rE has an internal representation vi with STM  activity xi . If the most recently presented items have the largest STM traces, and if ri is the last item to have occurred,  then x,, < x2, < x3 < ... < xi . The storage of these STM activities must be distinguished from their overt rehearsal. How  does rehearsal translate differential STM activity into a prescribed order of performance, in particular the order ri , ri_1 ,  ri_2 ,..., r, , in the case when x, < x2 < x3 < ... < xi ? In many neural examples, a nonspecific rehearsal, or arousal, wave  can accomplish this. Such a mechanism simultaneously amplifies all STM activities so that they can exceed an output threshold,  or alternatively lowers the output threshold until it is exceeded by the STM activities (Fig. 3). The largest STM activity xi  exceeds the output threshold first, and thereby elicits the fastest output signal. This output signal controls performance of  item ri . If this signal was not self-terminating, then perseverative performance of item ri would occur. Under normal  circumstances, the output signal generates feedback inhibition that self-inhibits, or resets, its STM activity. Then the state  vi-, is most active, so that its output signal can elicit performance of item ri_1 . This process of STM arousal and reset  continues until all of the items are  204  STEPHEN GROSSBERG  NONSPECIFIC REHEARSAL WAVE  FIG. 3. Readout of STM by a nonspecific rehearsal wave, and reset of STM by feedback inhibition.  performed in the order ri , ri_I ,..., r,. The role of nonspecific arousal and reset as rehearsal mechanisms are further  discussed in Grossberg (1977a). This paper also describes how a list can be grouped into parts which can all be performed in  their correct order.  In the above example, the nonspecific rehearsal mechanism is a parallel operation that simultaneously influences all  representations vi, despite the fact that item performance is serial. Serial properties do not imply serial mechanisms.  3. PRIMACY EFFECT  The binary model also implies questionable conclusions to explain the primacy effect of Fig. 1. The binary model assumes that  a further operation is activated by items while they are in the STM buffer. This operation is described as coding the item in  LTM. Although the binary model does not describe the LTM coding mechanism, clearly more coding can occur the longer an item is  in the buffer, other things equal. Consequently the earliest items can be coded in LTM better than more recent items. This LTM  process is claimed to produce the primacy effect. Thus early items produce a primacy effect via LTM, whereas late items  produce a recency effect via STM.  Several types of evidence are compatible with this view. For example, if STM storage is inhibited by an interfering task, then  the primacy effect remains but the recency effect is obliterated (Atkinson & Shiffrin, 1971). The similarity of primacy  effects with or without interference is a main source of the belief that STM does not contribute to primacy. This is only  indirect evidence, however, and it is argued in Section 7 that competitive interactions acting in parallel across internal  representations can effectively mask any STM primacy effects that might exist, leaving the impression that only LTM influences  performance. Other experiments are based on the premise that rehearsal should strengthen  MEMORY MODELS 205  LTM, so that a good correlation between the number of rehearsals at different list positions and the size of the LTM  contribution to recall at these positions should argue for LTM as a basis for the primacy effect (Rundus, 1971). This argument  does not help if STM primacy effects are masked. Moreover, it has been shown that the size of the LTM effect can depend on the  type of rehearsal (maintenance vs elaborative), and on whether performance is measured by recognition or recall (Craik &  Watkins, 1973; Woodward, Bjork, & Jongeward, 1973). In Grossberg (1977a, Sects. 31 and 47) a coding mechanism is described  wherein mere repetition of items, improved recognition, and improved recall are distinguished. Improved recognition can result  from new code formation and sustained STM activity of these new codes even when individual itemcodes are rapidly reset in STM.  Improved recall can result from the formation of new motor associations using the new codes as sampling sources. Because the  sampling sources must be synthesized before the motor associations can be learned, recognition often improves before recall  does.  Using the LTM primacy hypothesis, the binary model can fit some of the interference and rehearsal data, but is also forced  into the counterintuitive idea that items near the beginning of the list can only be performed in their correct order by being  read out of LTM. This idea overlooks the fact that a telephone number can be perfectly repeated immediately after hearing it,  yet it could have been obliterated from memory by a distracting event before performance occurred, so presumably was not  stored in LTM. Indeed, amnesic patients with Korsakoff syndrome have no LTM capability, but exhibit essentially normal digit  span performance (Baddeley & Warrington, 1970; Milner, 1956). These examples question whether LTM is necessary to produce a  primacy effect. The data used to support the LTM contribution to the primacy effect do not disprove that STM also contributes  to primacy, and sometimes without a large LTM contribution.  4. STM PRIMACY EFFECT  How can performance of a telephone number due to STM but not LTM be achieved? This is easy in the continuous model if the  earliest items have the largest STM activities, since these items will be performed first when the STM field is amplified by a  nonspecific rehearsal wave. However, if the earliest items have the largest STM strengths in a short list, then how can the  most recent items also have large STM strengths in longer lists to produce a bowed STM pattern across list representations,  and thus the bowed order of recall in Fig. 1 ? We will illustrate below how an STM primacy effect can be generated in short  lists, but becomes an STM bow in longer lists, such that the STM recency effect becomes progressively stronger as list length  increases. The list length at which the bow appears is called the transient memory span (TMS). The TMS can depend on such  factors as a subject's attentional and motivational state, but it can be proved that the TMS is no longer than the more  familiar immediate memory span (Miller, 1956) under rather general circumstances (Grossberg, 1977a, Sect. 32).  Perhaps the belief that the STM activities of earlier items should always be weaker supported the idea that only LTM can ever  generate a primacy effect, despite its unfortunate implications for the immediate recall of short lists. To counter this  belief, ,we  206 STEPHEN GROSSBERG  note that an STM primacy effect has already been found in some free recall data. Baddeley and Warrington (1970) study amnesic  Korsakoff patients whose STM is intact, but whose LTM is nonfunctional. In free recall taks, these patients produce a bowed  probability of recall curve that is due to STM alone. Hogan and Hogan (1975) theoretically disentangle STM and LTM  contributions in their free recall data for normal subjects, and find an STM primacy effect which they mention without  mechanistic interpretation. Furthermore, we will suggest that STM primacy is a temporal analog of a phenomenon which is more  familiar experimentally, but which until recently was theoretically paradoxical; namely, behavioral contrast in discrimination  learning experiments (Bloomfield, 1969).  5. BEHAVIORAL CONTRAST IN SPACE  A typical example of behavioral contrast is this. If a pigeon is rewarded on errorless discrimination trials for pecking on a  key illuminated by a light of wavelength A, then during extinction trials, when the pigeon is allowed to peck in responses to  keys illuminated by various wavelengths, a generalization gradient of pecks centered at A is generated (Fig. 4a). By contrast,  if the pigeon is rewarded for pecking a key illuminated at wavelength A, , and punished for pecking at a nearby wavelength A2  < A,, then during extinction, the pigeon pecks most vigorously at wavelength As > A, (i.e., a peak shift occurs). Remarkably,  the pigeon pecks A3 more vigorously than it would have pecked Al if AZ had not occurred (Fig. 4b); that is, behavioral  contrast occurs. Behavioral contrast is  r ~~ I 1  I l I 1  I S  1  FIG. 4. (a) Generalization gradient on extinction trials if wavelength A is rewarded; (b) peak shift and behavioral contrast;  (c) net gradient produces shift but no contrast; (d) normalized net gradient produces contrast.  MEMORY MODELS  207  paradoxical because the punishing A2 causes the pigeon to peck at the unrewarded A3 more than it would have pecked at the  rewarded Ai in the absence of A2. The difficulty in explaining behavioral contrast is this: Suppose that reward at Al  generates a positive generalization gradient centered at Al , and punishment at A2 generates a negative generalization  gradient centered at A2 . If performance at A3 is due to the net gradient, then a peak shift will occur, but pecking at A3  should be less vigorous than pecking at A2 (Fig. 4c). What then causes behavioral contrast?  Grossberg (1975) suggests that behavioral contrast follows from a property of cell populations that undergo mass action  interactions in recurrent on-center off-surround anatomies (Fig. 5). Grossberg (1973) derives networks of this type as a  Ftc. 5. Recurrent on-center off surround anatomy can suppress noise, contrast enhance suprathreshold patterns, and store them  in STM without saturation.  universal problem concerning how patterned information can be processed by noisy cells with finitely many excitable sites;  cf., Levine and Grossberg (1976) or Grossberg (1977b) for a review. In the present context, the populations are sensitive to  different hues. The on-center (excitatory feedback) defines an excitatory generalization gradient to nearby hues, and makes  possible STM storage after external inputs cease. The off surround (inhibitory feedback) maintains network sensitivity to  relative input sizes even in response to large inputs; otherwise expressed, automatic gain control, driven by the  off-surround, prevents cell saturation by adapting network responses to different background activity levels. The mass action  laws reduce to the familiar equations (Hodgkin, 1964; Katz, 1966)  aV  Cat =(V+-V)g++(V--V)g-+(V,-V)g,  for a cellular potential V(t) influenced by a capacitance C and by three conductances g+ , g-, and g, which change V(t)  insofar as it deviates from the three saturation potentials V+, h_, and V, The notation "+" designates the excitatory channel  (usually the Na+ channel); "-" designates the inhibitory channel (usually K+), and "p"  208 STEPHEN GROSSBERG  designates a passive channel. The convention is also accepted that depolarization makes V(t) more positive.  It has beenproved that such networks tend to conserve the total potential of all cellsinthe network. This property is called  normalization, and is a form of network adaptation due to automatic gain control by its off-surround. In Fig. 4c, the net  gradient is narrower than the gradient in Fig. 4a. The total potential, or area under the curve in Fig. 4a, is approximately  conserved when the excitatory gradient is replaced by the narrower net gradient. Normalization therefore amplifies the net  gradient to produce the higher and steeper normalized net gradient of Fig. 4d. Thus behavioral contrast can be explained as  the result of a net gradient normalized by a network that is capable of storing cues in STM without saturation.  The simplest example of this phenomenon occurs in feedforward networks (Fig. 6).  FiG. 6. Nonrecurrent on-center off-surround anatomy.  Let n cells (or cell populations) vi , i = 1, 2,..., n, be given, and let xi(t) be the potential of vi . In (1), replace V(t)  by xi(t) and choose the constant parameters C = 1, V+ = B > 0, V_ = Vq = 0, and gv = A > 0 for simplicity. The conductance g+  is influenced by an on-center input g+ = Ii and the conductance g_ is influenced by an off-surround input g_ = 1:xoi Ik . Then  at the cell vi , (1) becomes  d dt  - -Axi + (B - xi) Ii - xi Ilk. k#i  If the inputs remain constant for awhile, then the system approaches equilibrium. At equilibrium (d/dt) xi = 0 so that the  equilibrium potential of vi is  xi = BIil(A + I),  where I = ~n 1Ik . Letting Bi = IiI-i be the relative input to vi , (3) can be written as  xi = gi BI((A -{- I), (4)  which shows that each vi retains its sensitivity to Bi even as I is parametrically increased. The dependence of xi on the  ratio 8i is a form of adaptation to changing background  MEMORY MODELS 209  activity levels. Without such adaptation, each xi would rapidly saturate at B as Ii increased. Ratio theories have often been  suggested by perceptual or learning data. For example, Zeiler (1963) developed an adaptation-level theory in which the  subject's perception of a stimulus depends on its ratio with respect to an internal norm, or adaptation level. Luce (1959)  developed a theory in which choice behavior depends on the ratio of two reaction tendencies. Color theories are often based on  ratios that represent the reflectances of external objects (Cornsweet, 1970). I suggest that ratios appear in such a great  variety of situations to deal with the ubiquitous saturation problem. Even in the simplest case of Eq. (4), however, the ratio  influence is modified by a term BI(A -}- I)-1 which is of Weber-Fechner form (Cornsweet, 1970, p. 249). In other examples of  on-center offsurround networks, only ratios above an adaptation level can cause positive xi values (Grossberg, 1977c), or  there can be complicated hysteresis, normative, decision, and related types of behavior (Grossberg, 1977a, b).  Wherever ratios appear in individual activities xi , the total activity x = Ek-i xk obeys a normalization rule. In (4), x =  Ek=i xk = BI(A + I)-' is always less than B. It thus has an upper bound that is independent of the number n of cells and the  total input I. This is normalization in a feedforward network. In a recurrent, or feedback, network the normalization property  is strengthened. The normalized inequality x G B is replaced by normalized equalities.  The law (4) has another important property; namely, xi , plotted as a function of the logarithm of its on-center K = In Ii and  its off-surround L = Y-k#i Ik obeys  xi(K, L) = BeKI (A -I- eK -f- L).  Thus, if the off-surround input is shifted from L = Ll to L = L2, the whole curve (5) is shifted by an amount S = In[(A --}-  L,)(A -}- Lz)-1), since  xi(K -f- S, LI) = xi(K, L2) for all K > 0. (6)  A similar shift occurs, for example, in bipolar cell responses in the mudpuppy retina (Werblin, 1971; Grossberg, 1977b, c).  The shift relocates where xi is most sensitive. The above properties are summarized herein to emphasize three points. First,  in the laws (1) and (2), inputs exercise their effects by multiplying potentials. Hence these laws are called shunting laws.  Additive models cannot generate these effects. Second, in (2), all cells vk , k =A i, inhibit vi with equal strength. If this  is not true, say because inhibitory interactions become weaker as the distance between populations increases, then the  normalization effect becomes partial, and the total potential can grow to a finite asymptote as more populations are excited;  that is, the adaptation effect is only partial, and saturation starts to set in as the background input becomes large. Third,  the normalization rule helps to clarify from a neurophysiological perspective why probability axioms often model behavioral  data so well. The normalization rule plays the role of summing all the probabilities to 1, and the shunting laws play the role  of multiplying the probabilities of independent events. However, even in Eq. (4), ratios do not appear alone, and the  normalization rule can often hold only partially, as we will see below.  210 STEPHEN GROSSBERG  6. BEHAVIORAL CONTRAST IN TIME  Bowing in STM will now be explained as a behavioral contrast effect that evolves as items are presented in time, rather than  across space. Before developing the ideas in general, consider the simplest example as an illustration. Suppose that total  activity is normalized. Set it equal to 1, for definiteness, when some item is active in STM. Also suppose that when a new  item occurs, the old item's STM activity is reduced by a multiplicative factor w due to shunting inhibition. When item rl  occurs, its activity xl equals 1. When item r2 occurs, xl is changed to w. By normalization, xl = w and x2 = 1 - w. If w > 1,  then xl > x2 ; that is, an STM primacy effect occurs. A large value of w means that the reverberating STM activity xl of vl  can substantially inhibit v2 when v2 is receiving an input due to presentation of r,. When r3 occurs, the old STM activities  are again multiplied by iv, so that xl = w2 and x2 = w(1 - w). By normalization, x3 = 1 - w. Note that xl > x2 and x3 > x2 . A  bow has occurred at v2 . As new items ri are presented, i > 3, the bow remains at position v,, but a pronounced recency effect  develops due to normalization. In particular, given any list of length k > 1, the last item to enter STM always has STM  activity 1 - w. Below we will show that a bow can arise at any list position if network parameters are properly chosen.  The behavioral contrast mechanism can be derived from three concepts. The first concept is operationally described by saying  that new items change the STM activities of old items by a multiplicative factor. This mechanism is the simplest rule for  making rigorous the idea that shunting interactions join the network populations together. There exists a deeper justification  for using the multiplicative rule. Grossberg (1977a) develops a theory of neural coding, in which it is shown (Sect. 25) that  the multiplicative rule leaves invariant the codes of old items as new items occur and activate new codes. This concept is  needed to prevent each new item from destabilizing the internal representations of all the old items. It says that new items  do not deny the fact that old items occurred, even if they alter their importance, or even totally inhibit them. The rule is  therefore called a Principle of Code Invariance. The theory hereby establishes a conceptual bridge between statements about  STM interactions-via laws describing cellular potentials and signals-and statements about LTM interactions-via laws describing  cellular learning. This bridge shows in a precise formal way how each type of law is adapted to the needs othe other.  The multiplicative operations of the Invariance Principle have the following effect. Let item ri enter the network with STM  activity ui. Let the ith item multiplicatively modify the STM activity of all previous items rl , r2 ,..., ri_1 by a factor wi  . Suppose rI enters with weight xl = ul . After r2 occurs, xl = w2u1 and x2 = u2 . After r3 occurs, xl = WSw2n1 , x2 = w.u2,  and x3 = ua . And so on. The total STM strength Si after ri occurs is thus  Si = wrum . m=1 r=m-~-1  The second hypothesis is the Normalization Rule. This says that total STM strength grows in a negatively accelerated way from  a minimum of u,, when only rl occurs, to  MEMORY MODELS 211  some finite maximum M. The case ul = M characterizes complete normalization. An analogous experimental phenomenon is that  pupil diameter increases in a negatively accelerated way as a function of the number of items presented to a subject (Kahneman  & Beatty, 1966), and one might try to use this paradigm to estimate ul and M in particular cases. Mathematically, the  Normalization Rule says that  Si - u10i-1 -f- M(1 - Bi-1), (8)  where M > ul > 0 and 0 < 0 < 1. The parameters u1, M, and 0 can depend on the geometry of the network as well as on  attentional and motivational factors that can retune network interactions (Grossberg, 1976a, b). Our goal is to solve for the  weights W,, k > 2, in terms of the parameters 0, M, and ui , i = 1, 2,.... That this can be done is summarized in the next  statement.  (I) Suppose that the Invariance Principle and the Normalization Rule both hold; that is, let both (7) and (8) hold. Then the  shunting parameters can be explicitly determined. They are  u10k-1 -I- M(1 - ek-1) - uk wk = u1 0k-2 -f- M(1 .- 0k-2) ,  k>1.  Since the STM activity of vi after item r; occurs is, by the Invariance Principle,  = ui fl wk , t < 1, (10) k=i+1  the STM code can be completely solved by specifying the STM weight ui of the most recent item ri, i = 1, 2,.... We assume that  ui estimates how much attention is paid to item ri as it is presented. Then (9) and (10) show that, once u, , M, and 0  estimate the code geometry, and (presumably constant) performance variables, it suffices to specify how much attention is paid  to each item as it is presented.  The following result also holds if each ui depends only on ri and possibly events rl , r2 ,..., ri_1 that have preceded it.  (II) Suppose that the Invariance Principle holds. If an STM bow occurs at position J in a list of length K, then it also  occurs at position J given a list of any length k > K. This strong property notes that the factors wk in (10) change the  relative sizes of past STM strengths, but not where local maxima or minima occur in the STM pattern across old items. It is  this property that allows us to define a TMS for lists composed of matched items presented under fixed performance conditions.  To derive further information about the code, we now impose some natural constraints on the ui . These constraints do not hold  if attentional conditions vary in an arbirary fashion as new items are presented. They summarize in mathematical terms various  stable attentional conditions. Intuition suggests that if we pay equal attention to each item as it is presented, then ul >,  u2 >, u3 > - - - (equality might be destroyed by negative feedback acting on later items) and that the ui equilibrate at some  positive value u. as longer lists are used. This idea simply says that the STM strength of the last item should  212 STEPHEN GROSSBERG  always be positive, if one always pays attention to the most recent item, and can only get weaker as i increases due to  greater total inhibition from the larger numbers of items that are already in STM. Fpr example, if all ui = u > 0, then a  fixed amount of STM strength is always given to the last item. In this case, if M > u, it can be proved that the bow in STM  occurs at item r,,, where j is the maximal index j such that  (u-1M - 1)(1 - 0)0j-1 > 1, (11)  Thus a bow can occur at any list position if u, M, and 0 are suitably chosen.  Another plausible rule for the ui sequence is: set u1 = u and uk = u~, , k >, 2, where u. < u. In other words, if r1 occurs  alone, then no inhibition occurs since no others items are reverberating in STM to supply it. Once more than one item occurs,  the most recent item always has a fixed amount of STM strength due to a balancing out of excitation and inhibition across all  items. This occurs in the special case where u1 = M and all wi = w < 1. Both of these rules are a special case of the rule that  ui = u10a-1 -f u-(1 - 0a_1), (12)  i > 1, with ul > u. > 0 and 0 < ~ < 1. In other words, ui is negatively accelerated function of i. Choosing ~ = 1 yields the  rule ui = u, , i > 1; choosing ~ = 0 yields the rule u1 > uk = u. , k > 2. The analysis can be generalized further by letting  a twicedifferentiable function u(t), t > 1, interpolate the sequence u1 , u2 ,...,; that is, let u(k) =uk , k >f 1, and by  placing hypotheses on u(t). A natural generalization of (12) is  s  d u(t) < 0, z In u(t) > 0, t > 1, (13)  or that u(t) is a nonincreasing logarithmically convex function. Using these constraints on the ui , we can prove the  following general statements. The existence of a limiting u., is sufficient to prove that a recency effect always occurs in  sufficiently long lists:  (III) If the Invariance Principle and Normalization Rule both hold, and u., exists, then in all sufficiently long lists, a  recency effect develops. This follows from (9) and (10). By (10), a recency effect develops if the function  G(j) = w;ui_1- u, (14)  becomes negative as j becomes sufficiently large. To prove this using (9) and (10), one shows that G(j) < 0 is equivalent to  B; - B;_1 < 1 -I- u, li , (15)  where Bj = u;1Sf . Since limy. B; = u.1M exists, the left-hand side of (15) approaches 0 as j -o- oo while the right-hand side  exceeds 1.  Properties (II) and (III) indicate the tendency for the STM primacy effect, if it exists, to become weaker as list length  increases. This is because more and more of the normalized total STM activity Si (<M) gets devoted to the recency effect as i  -->. oo.  MEMORY MODELS 213  Special hypotheses on u(t) are needed only to. show that no more than one bow occurs in the STM patterns (xl , xs ,..., xL) no  matter how long the list length L is chosen. These hypotheses constrain the differential amounts of attention that can be paid  to items without creating more than one how. Without such constraints, a unimodal STM bow is not guaranteed, and this fact is  experimentally important, as will be illustrated in Section 8. A sufficient condition that an STM bow is unimodal, if it  occurs, is given by the hypotheses (13):  (IV) If the Invariance Principle and Normalization Rule both hold, and u(t) satisfies (13), then all the STM patterns (xi , x2  ,..., XL) are either increasing, decreasing, or possess a unimodal bow. To prove that the bow is unimodal, function G(j) is  extended to a function G(t) of a continuous variable t > 1. It is then verified using (7), (8), and (13) that if G(T) = 0 then  (d/dt) G(T) G 0; that is, once the primacy effect becomes a recency effect, it can never flip back to a primacy effect.  To assert that a unimodal bow occurs if (7), (8), and (13) hold, it therefore suffices to guarantee that a primacy effect  exists. By (10), this is true if and only if  G(2) = w,u1 - u2 > 0. (16)  If (9) and (12) hold, (16) is true if and only if  u16 + M(1 - 0) > 2[ul~ -}- u,(1 - ], (17)  If (16) holds, the bow occurs at that index j = j where G(j) = w;uf_1 - u; changes sign from positive to negative.  7. MASKING OF STM PRIMACY BY NORMALIZATION  The above sections note a behavioral rationale, a physiological mechanism, and some data in which an STM primacy effect is  implicated. Why then is there so little evidence of STM primacy in interference experiments, wherein the primacy effect is  little changed before or after interference with STM, yet the recency effect is almost entirely obliterated ? One factor is  that the STM primacy effect becomes smaller as the list length increases. I suggest, however, that even when a large STM  primacy effect exists, it can be masked due to normalization.  To understand how this can happen, a brief review of how LTM is encoded in the present framework is needed. A  psychophysiological theory of LTM encoding in response to a list of times is successively developed in Grossberg (1969),  Grossberg and Pepe (1971), Grossberg (1974), and Grossberg (1977a). Many of these results were applied to the study of serial  learning and paired associate learning, but they are readily adapted to the free recallparadigm. To fix ideas, suppose thattwo  fields.5FM and . F($) of populations v;l) and v;s>, respectively, are given. Suppose that the populations J"M can send signals  to  48011713-2  214 STEPHEN GROSSBERG  the populations F(2) over directed pathways, or axons. Let an LTM trace zi; be computed at the end of the pathway from v=1) to  v,2). Assume that zij obeys the equation  (d/dt)zij _ -CiTzi1 '+ Sii(xil))xj2)'  (18)  where Cif is the LTM decay rate, Si1(xal)) is the sampling signal from v(') to VJ(2), X1  the STM trace of vi'), and xj(2) is the STM trace of v;2) (Fig. 7). If x,4l) is sufficiently large to make Si;(xi1)) > 0, then  zij can sample the STM trace x,(2). Thus LTM in the model depends on a nonlinear mechanism that time-averages (via the term  -Ci;zif) the products of sampling signals and STM traces (via the term Si;(xs1))xj12)). Each v{1) controls all the LTM traces  zil, zit, zi3,... via its sampling signals Silk") ), Si2(xil)), Si3(x(l)),.... We therefore say that vnl) controls the LTM  pattern zi = (zi), , zit , zi3 ,...). All of the LTM patterns zi can be different. These patterns are generated, via the  products Si;(xil)) xf2), by the distributions of STM activity that evolve across.F(l) and.F(2) through time. The experimental  paradigms of serial learning, paired associate learning, and free recall can all produce different STM patterns, and hence  different LTM patterns.  Xiil S)i(x't)) z x 2)  10,19  FIG. 7. The signal Sii(xil)) from v(l) is gated by zij on its way to vjzi.  How is the LTM pattern zi read out to influence performance at some population v1(2) ? This can only happen if vi') is  activated enough to elicit a sampling signal Sj?(xi1)). This activation can, for example, be due to a probe stimulus that  excites the STM trace x=1) of vi"), or to a lingering STM activity x,(l) that is due to prior stimuli. Different experimental  paradigms can generate different sequences of probes and hence different performance characteristics.  Readout from the LTM trace zij occurs when the sampling signal Si;(xi')) from vi") is gated by zij on its way to v?). The net  signal to v;2) is Si;(xj(1))zi9 . This gating mechanism is also a nonlinear process. Every active population in M can  produce such a gated signal to v;2). The total effect of _5F(I) on vas) is given by the sum of these gated signals; namely, by  (19)  Thus LTM can affect 5F12) only if it is activated by STM-driven signals from (I). The signal T; in (19) influences v;2) by  activating its STM trace x,(2). Such a signal is received by every v;2), and hereby generates a pattern (TI , T2 , T3 ,...) of  inputs across ,F(2). Competitive interactions within ,r)2) transform this input pattern to produce the final STM pattern (x(),  x2 ), x,',') ,...) across .I'(2). Normalization of STM within F(2) is a particular consequence of these competitive  interactions. After the populations in 5F(2) compete for STM activity, the effects of this competition feed back into each LTM  MEMORY MODELS 215  pattern due to the STM term x21 in (18). The STM competition hereby tends to produce ratio scales in LTM as well as in STM;  cf., Eq. (4). This (approximate) LTM ratio scale helps to explain competitive retrieval rules in free recall experiments  (Rundus, 1973). Note also that the sampling signal Sj;(xi')) both controls performance, via (19), and strengthens learning,  via (18). This helps to physiologically explain how test trials can act as training trials (Lachman & Laughery, 1968; Tulving,  1967), since making S.i;(x%')) large enough to elicit performance also makes it large enough to strengthen the LTM trace zi;.  In more general physiological models, unbiased simultaneous sampling by many cues of the same event is impossible unless the  performance signal is large only if the learning signal is also large. This constraint is called the local flow condition  (Grossberg, 1972; 1974, Sect. VI).  What types of LTM patterns can evolve ? Suppose for simplicity that each vi'~ sends the same sampling signal Si(xi(") to all  cells in Also suppose that the STM patterns across F (l) and F(2) exhibit either an STM recency gradient or an STM bow due to  pre.-Pntation of the list rl , r2 , r3 ,..., rL . Then the pattern zl learns an LTM primacy gradient; namely, zll > z12 > 'z13  > * * * (The proof is in Grossberg (1977a, Sect. 32)). If a probe stimulus excites v(1) on performance trials, then the  signals from vi'~ to .~P2) satisfy Sl(xi')) z,l > SI(xi')) z12 > S&1)) 'z13 > . These signals elicit an STM primacy effect  across -(2). Thus, even if v(1) samples an STM recency gradient across c2~ on learning trials, it can perform an STM primacy  gradient across F (2) on performance trials. This is due to the nonlinear nature of Eqs. (18) and (19). The other populations  vg'), i :/- 1, usually do not learn an LTM primacy gradient. For example, if vi') and vie) are simultaneously excited, i = 1,  2,..., L, and both experience STM recency gradients, then the maximum LTM trace in pattern zi is zi4 , and the other traces  zi; decrease as a function of I i - j I to produce a generalization gradient that is centered at v?2). Moreover, if the STM  recency gradients are inhibited by interfering activities right after the last list item is presented, then z1l > z22 > z33 >  -". Most LTM storage is therefore concentrated at the populations that are excited by the beginning of the list, especially in  the LTM primacy gradient controlled by vi2). (This is not true in serial learning, where a bow in the LTM pattern of correct  associations can occur.)  Given the above summary, we can now see how an STM primacy gradient can be masked by normalization. To fix ideas, suppose that  there exist three fields .V (1), and.Ft3) of populations. Let.F(1) consist of acoustically coded populations, y Pet consist of  semantically coded populations, and.F(3) consist of motor control populations (Baddeley & Warrington, 1970; Bartlett &  Tulving, 1974; Craik, 1970; Craik & Lockhart, 1972; Jacoby & Bartz, 1972; Maskorinec & Brown, 1974). Suppose that both ~Vl)  and .~F(2) can send signals to c~(3), from which performance is controlled by a nonspecific source of motor arousal. Also let  LTM traces zi; occur in the pathways from 121 to i~"(", with zl coding a primacy gradient and the other zi, i ,= 1, coding the  type of gradients summarized above. Suppose moreover that prior presentation of a list rl , r2 ,..., rL establishes either an  STM recency gradient or an STM, bow across 3V(1), and either an STM primacy gradient or an STM bow across V(2) (Fig. 8a). By  (19), the STM primacy gradient across ,97-(2) magnifies the LTM primacy gradient that it reads out of LTM into ST M at ~F '3).  This magnified STM primacy gradient at h(s) has to compete, however, with the STM  216 STEPHEN GROSSBERG  LTM GATES SIGNALS  NET INPUT PATTERN  AFTER NORMALIZATION  LTM GATES SIGNALS  NET INPUT PATTERN  FIG. 8. Normalization can mask an STM primacy gradient by competition with an STM recency gradient.  recency gradient that ~F(I) reads into -5F(3). After normalization takes place across oF(3), the magnified STM primacy  gradient is reduced due to competition by the STM recency gradient.  By contrast, consider what happens if an interfering event inhibits all STM in ,F(l), ~(2), and F(3). Correct performance is  then impossible unless .F(2) is activated, since only the pathways from jF(2) to _~F(s) contain LTM traces. Suppose that .F(2)  is activated either randomly, or uniformly using a nonspecific sampling signal. In either case, the LTM primacy gradient will  be read into an STM primacy gradient across ,~F(3) (Fig. 8b). This LTM primacy gradient is not reinforced by an STM primacy  gradient across -~F(2), so the net effect on,1;7(3) is smaller than before. However, the STM primacygradient across.F(3) does  not have to compete with an STM recency gradient. Hence normalization will amplify this STM primacy gradient, just as it  amplifies the net gradient in Fig. 4. In all, normalization can mask an STM primacy gradient by differentially suppressing its  effect when an STM recency gradient exists.  8. OTHER BINARY CODE DIFFICULTIES  The serial binary code assumption leads to several other beliefs that might be stated too strongly. For example, if STM  storage is thought of as a binary event, then one can readily conclude that the number of rehearsals is the crucial parameter  that determines whether an item remains or is reinstated in the STM buffer. For example, Bower writes "if the person is told  during study of an item that its later recall will be worth a lot of  MEMORY MODELS 217  money, he will concentrate harder (rehearse more, maintain that item in STM for a longer time) and remember it better"  (Hilgard & Bower, 1975, p. 580). However "concentrating harder," "rehearsing more," and "maintaining that item in STM for a  longer time" can all be achieved by distinct mechanisms. Concentrating harder can, for example, generate an unusually large  arousal level that supplements the item's usual input to STM (Grossberg, 1975). The two input sources acting together can  create an unusually large STM strength that, other things equal (which they usually are not), increases the probability of  saying the item, and of saying it out of order; in particular, saying it at an earlier recall position, than would otherwise  occur. These effects can be generated without rehearsing this item any more than any other item.  A boost in STM strength of one item can depress the STM strengths of related items that are simultaneously in STM; cf., Ellis  et al., 1971. This von Restorff type of depression can sometimes be due to the Normalization Rule, rather than to less  rehearsal.  The fact that reaction time increases with the number of items in STM does not imply that recognition memory is realized by a  serial scanning process (Sternberg, 1966). In a normalized STM field, each item in the field---except possibly the last-has a  smaller STM trace if a longer list perturbs the field. If reaction time increases as STM activity decreases, then reaction  time will depend on how many items are stored in STM, even though the rehearsal operation is a parallel operation that  simultaneously influences all populations in the STM field.  9. CONCLUDING REMARKS  During the last decade, experimental and theoretical studies of STM and LTM have been remarkably vigorous and productive. The  use of theoretical analogies from other disciplines, such as the computer analogy, indicates a healthy desire to conceptually  organize the vast array of experimental findings. However, the binary and serial nature of computer concepts leads to  conceptual difficulties in the many situations where continuous and parallel brain processes are operative. Computer modelers  often claim that details like whether a code is binary or continuous are unimportant, because the same global strategies, or  wiring diagrams, will occur despite differences in the individual components. Similarly, Townsend's (1974) result showing the  equivalence of serial and parallel reaction time models has sometimes been interpreted as saying that it does not matter which  type of model is used when memory processes are studied. The above examples are a few of the growing number that show binary  serial models and continuous parallel models to be fundamentally different in design and properties.  REFERENCES  ANDERSON, J. R., & BOwER, G. H. Human associative memory. Washington, D. C.: Hemisphere, 1974. ATKINSON, R. C., & SxmmiN, R.  M. Human memory: a proposed system and its control processes. In K. W. Spence & J. T. Spence (Eds.), Advances in the  psychology of learning and motivation, research and theory, Vol. II. New York: Academic Press, 1968.  218  STEPHEN GROSSBERG  ATKINSON, R. C., & SHIFFRIN, R. M. The control of short term memory. Scientific American, August, 1971, 82.  BADDELEY, A. D., & WARRINGTON, E. K. Amnesia and the distinction between long- and short-term memory. Journal of Verbal  Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1970, 9, 176-189.  BARTLETT, J. C., & TULVING, E. Effect of temporal and semantic encoding in immediate recall upon subsequent retrieval. Journal  of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1974, 13, 297-309. BLOOMFIELD, T. M. Behavioral contrast and the peak shift. In R. M.  Gilbert & N. S. Sutherland (Eds.), Animal discrimination learning. New York: Academic Press, 1969. Pp. 215-241. CORNSWEET, T.  N. Visual perception. New York: Academic, 1970.  CRAIK, F. 1. M. The fate of primary memory items in free recall. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1970, 9,  143-148.  CRAIK, F. I. M., & LOCKHART, R. S. Levels of processing: A framework for memory research. Journal of Verbal Learning and  Verbal Behavior, 1972, 11, 671-684.  CRAIK, F. I. M., & WATKINS, M. J. The role of rehearsal in short-term memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,  1973, 12, 599-607.  DONCHIN, E., & LINDSLEY, D. B. Average evoked potentials: Methods, results, and evaluations. Washington, D. C.: NASA, 1969.  ELLIS, N. R., DETTERMAN, D. K., RUNCIE, D., MCCARVER, R. B., & CRAIG, E. M. Amnesic effects in short-term memory. Journal of  Experimental Psychology, 1971, 89, 357-361.  GROSSBERG, S. On the serial learning of lists. Mathematical Biosciences, 1969, 4, 201-253. GROSSBERG, S. Pattern learning by  functional-differential neural networks with arbitrary path weights. In K. Schmitt (Ed.), Delay and functional differential  equations and their applications. New York: Academic Press, 1972. Pp. 121-160.  GROSSBERG, S. Contour enhancement, short term memory, and constancies in reverberating neural networks. Studies in Applied  Mathematics, 1973, 52, 213-257.  GROSSBERG, S. Classical and instrumental learning by neural networks. In R. Rosen & F. Snell (Eds.), Progress in theoretical  biology. New York: Academic Press, 1974. Pp. 51-141.  GROSSBERG, S. A neural model of attention, reinforcement, and discrimination learning. In C. Pfeiffer (Ed.), International  Review of Neurobiology, 1975, 18, 263-327.  GROSSBERG, S. Adaptive pattern classification and universal recoding. I. Parallel development and coding of neural feature  detectors. Biological Cybernetics, 1976a, 23, 121-134.  GROSSBERG, S. Adaptive pattern classification and universal recoding. Il. Feedback, expectation, olfaction, illusions.  Biological Cybernetics, 1976b, 23, 187-202.  GROSSBERG, S. A theory of human memory: Self-organization and performance of sensory-motor codes, maps, and plans. In R. Rosen  & F. Snell (Eds.), Progress in theoretical biology. New York: Academic Press, 1977a.  GROSSBERG, S. Pattern formation by the global limits of a nonlinear competitive interaction in n dimensions. Journal of  Mathematical Biology, 1977b, 4, 237-256.  GROSSBERG, S. A theory of visual coding, memory and development. In E. Leeuwenberg & H. Buffart (Eds.). Formal theories of  visual perception. New York: Wiley, 1977c.  GROSSBERG, S. Communication, memory, and development. In R. Rosen & F. Snell (Eds.), Progress in theoretical biology. New  York: Academic Press, 1977d.  GROSSBERG, S., & LEVINE, D. S. Some developmental and attentional biases in the contrast enhancement and short term memory of  recurrent neural networks. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 1975, 53, 263-327.  GROSSBERG, S., & PEPE, J. Spiking threshold and over-arousal effects in serial learning. Journal of Statistical Physics, 1971,  3, 95-125.  HILGARD, E. R., & BOWER, G. H. Theories of Learning, 4th ed. Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall, 1975.  HODGKIN, A. L. The conduction of the nervous impulse. Springfield, Ill.: C. C Thomas, 1964. HOGAN, R. M., & HOGAN, M. M.  Structural and transient components of memory. Memory and Cognition, 1975, 3, 210-215.  MEMORY MODELS  219  HOROWITZ, L. W., & IzAwA, C. Comparison of serial and paired-associate learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1963, 65,  352-361.  JACOBY, L. L., & BARTZ, W. H. Rehearsal and transfer to long term memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,  1972, 11, 561-565.  KAHNEMAN, D., & BEATTY, J. Pupil diameter and load on memory. Science, 1966, 154, 1583-1585. KATZ, B. Nerve, muscle, and  synapse. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1966.  LACHMAN, R., & LAUGHERY, K. R. Is a test trial a training trial in free recall learning? Journal of Experimental Psychology,  1968, 76, 40-50.  LENNEBERG, E. Biological foundations of language. New York: Wiley, 1967.  LEvINE, D. S., & GRossBERG, S. Visual illusions in neural networks: Line neutralization, tilt after effect, and angle  expansion. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 1976, 61, 477-504.  LUCE, R. D. Individual choice behavior. New York: Wiley, 1959.  MASKORINEC, A. S., & BROWN, S. C. Positive and negative recency effects in free recall learning. Journal of Verbal Learning  and Verbal Behavior, 1974, 16, 328-334.  MELTON, A. W., & MARTIN, E. (Eds.). Coding processes in human memory. Washington, D. C.: Winston, 1972.  MILLER, G. A. The magic number seven, plus or minus two. Psychological Review, 1956, 63, 81-97. MILLER, B. Amnesia following  operation on the temporal lobes. In C. W. M. Whitty & O. L. Zangwill (Eds.), Amnesia. London: Butterworths, 1956.  RESTLE, F., SHIFFRIN, R. M., COSTELLAN, N. J., LINDMAN, H. R., & PISONI, D. B. (Eds.), Cognitive theory, Vol. 1. Hillsdale, N.  J.: Erlbaum, 1975.  RuNDus, D. J. Analysis of rehearsal processes in free recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1971, 89, 63-77.  RUNDUs, D. Negative effects of using list items as recall cues. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1973, 12,  43-50.  STERNBERG, S. High-speed scanning in human memory. Science, 1966, 153, 652-657.  TOWNSEND, J. T. Issues and models concerning the processing of a finite number of inputs. In Kantowitz, B. H. (Ed.), Human  information processing: Tutorials in performance and cognition. Potomac, Md.: Erlbaum, 1974. P. 133.  TULVING, E. The effects of presentation and recall of material in free-recall learning. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal  Behavior, 1967, 6, 175-184.  TULVING, E., & DONALDSON, W. (Eds.). Organization of memory. New York: Academic Press, 1972. WERBLIN, F. S. Adaptation in a  vertebrate retina: Intracellular recording in Necturus. Journal of Neurophysiology, 1971, 34, 228-241.  WOODWARD, A. E., B1oRK, R. A., & JONGEWARD, R. H., JR. Recall and recognition as a function of primary rehearsal. Journal of  Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1973, 12, 608-617. YOUNG, R. K. A comparison of two methods of learning serial  associations. American Journal of Psychology, 1959, 72, 554-559.  YOUNG, R. K. The stimulus in serial learning. American Journal of Psychology, 1961, 74, 517-528. YOUNG, R. K. Tests of three  hypotheses about the effective stimulus in serial learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1963, 63, 307-313.  YOUNG, R. K. Serial learning. In T. R. Dixon & D. L. Horton (Eds.), Verbal Learning and General Behavior Theory. Englewood  Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall, 1968. Pp. 122-148.  ZEILER, M. D. The ratio theory of intermediate size discrimination. Psychological Review, 1963, 70, 516-533.  RECEIVED: July 15, 1977