10.1016/0022-2496(78)90030-5
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 17, 189-198 (1978)  Equilibrium Behavior and Repeated Play of the Prisoner's Dilemma  ALvIN E. ROTH AND J. KEITH MURNIGHAN  Department of Business Administration, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois 61801  This paper examines a model of the prisoner's dilemma in which the nature of the Nash equilibria of the game can be varied.  Two equilibrium indices are derived and are compared with two cooperation indices proposed by Rapoport and Chammah (1965).  Preliminary experimental results indicate that the nature of the equilibria of a game affect the amount of cooperation.  Prisoner's dilemma games are models of societal and organizational conflict situations. The intriguing nature of the dilemmas  and the potential importance of the situations they model has led to the study of prisoner's dilemma "problems" in several  disciplines. Economists (e.g., Shubik, 1955), for instance, have used prisoner's dilemma games as a model of oligopolistic  price setting. Political scientists have studied them as models of the free rider problem associated with public goods (e.g.,  Hardin, 1971). Psychologists have studied behavior in different forms of the prisoner's dilemma game (e.g., Rapoport and  Chammah, 1965) and have often used them as a vehicle for studying personality differences (e.g., Terhune, 1968). This intense  scrutiny has recently focused on techniques for increasing the amount of cooperation in prisoner's dilemma games (e.g., Dawes,  McTavish, and Shaklee, 1977).  In this paper we examine a model in which the nature of the equilibria of the game (Nash, 1950) can be varied, and indicate  that the amount of cooperation displayed in the game depends, in part, on the nature of these equilibria.  A game between two players consists of a set of strategies for each player and a real valued payoff function P, where the  payoff for each player is determined by the strategy choices of both players. That is, if we let R denote the set of real  numbers, and Gi denote the strategy set of player i, then P = (PI , P2) where Pi: GI X G2 -* R, for i = l, 2. If r and s  denote two strategies available to player i, we say that s dominates r if player i gets a higher payoff from playing s than  from playing r no matter what strategy his opponent chooses. For example, if r, s E GI , then s dominates r if P,(s, t) >  PI(r, t) for every t E GZ . Thus, if r is a dominated strategy, it should never be played by a rational player interested in  maximizing his payoff.  A strategy s for player 1 and t for player 2 are said to be an equilibrium pair of strategies if strategy s is player 1's best  response when player 2 plays strategy t, and if t is player 2's best response when player 1 plays s. That is, the pair (s, t)  is an equilibrium if P,(s, t) PI(r, t) for every r E GI , and P,(s, t) > P,(s, v) for every v E G2 . This notion of  equilibrium is fundamental to the study of non-cooperative games (cf., Luce and Raiffa, 1957).  189  0022-2496/78/0172-0189$02.00/0  Copyright (0 1978 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  190 ROTH AND MURNIGHAN  The classical form of the prisoner's dilemma can be represented by the payoff matrices, Al = (n '), and AZ = (a '), where a,  b, c, and d are numbers such that b > a > c > d. Player 1 may choose a row of the matrices, while player 2 may choose a  column. The payoff to player 1 is the element of A1 thus specified, and the payoff to player 2 is the specified element of A2  . That is, the strategy sets Gl and G2 are both equal to the set of choices C = {l, 2}, and Pi(j, k) is the element in row j  and column k of the matrix Ai.  Each player's first choice is dominated by his second, and the unique equilibrium of this game is the strategy pair (2, 2),  which yields the payoff P(2, 2) _ (c, c). The `dilemma' is that if both players were to play their dominated strategies, each  would receive a payoff higher than the equilibrium payoff. (Each player's first choice is sometimes referred to as  `cooperative', while the second choice is called `individualistic'.)  A different form of the prisoner's dilemma is an n-period game in which the classical prisoner's dilemma is repeated at each  period. In this game, a strategy is a set of rules which tells a player what choice to make at each period, based on the  choices made by the players in previous periods. The payoff to a player is the sum of his payoffs in each period.  It will be convenient in what follows to consider some representative strategies for repeated games. Let sl denote the  strategy which tells a player to make his cooperative choice at every period, regardless of his opponent's choices. Similarly  let s2 denote the strategy which tells a player to make his individualistic choice at every period. Let u (for `unforgiving')  denote the strategy which tells a player to make his cooperative choice at every period until his opponent plays his  individualistic choice, and to play his individualistic choice at every subsequent period. Let m (for `matching') denote the  strategy which tells a player to play his cooperative choice in the first period, and in every other period to play the same  choice that his opponent made in the previous period.  A sequence of choices will be denoted (xl , yl),..., (xn , yn) where xi and vi denote the choices of players 1 and 2 in period  i. A pair of strategies determines the sequence of choices which will be observed when the game is played. For instance, the  strategy pair (sl, s2) determines the choice sequence (xx , yk) where xx = 1 and yk = 2 for each period k. Different strategy  pairs may determine the same choice sequence: e.g., the strategy pairs (sl, sl), (u, u) and (m, m) all generate the choices xk  = yk = 1 for every period k.  In the n-period game, there is, in general, no single strategy which dominates all others. However, it is easily shown by  induction (Luce and Raiffa, 1957) that any pair of equilibrium strategies in the n-period game must generate the choice  sequence xk = yk = 2 for every period k.  It is instructive to consider a game repeated for infinitely many periods, in which the payoff is defined as the limit' as n  goes to infinity of the average payoff per period. In this game there are equilibria (e.g., (s2, s2)) which generate the  choice sequence xk = yk = 2 for every period k, but there are also equilibria (e.g., (u, u)) which generate the choices xk =  yk = 1 for every period k. Thus, in the infinite case, some equilibria generate cooperative choices, and some generate  individualistic choices. Although it is impossible to experimentally study infinite games, the n-period game has received  intense scrutiny.  1 When the limit does not exist, the lim inf is used.  EQUILIBRIUM BEHAVIOR AND REPEATED PLAY OF THE PRISONER'S DILEMMA 191  Indeed, most of the research on prisoner's dilemma games (cf., Guyer and Perkel, 1972) has studied the n-period game. The  results of these studies are not readily comparable, due to different payoff matrices and experimental manipulations. However,  the data generally indicate that cooperation rates drop shortly after the start of play, and, after some delay where  cooperation is not prevalent, the players move toward more cooperative choices (Rapoport, 1973).  Although several authors (e.g., Rapoport, 1971; Wolfe and Shubik, 1974) have argued for the study of one-period games,  experimental data are very scarce. Morehous (1966), however, reports a study comparing one-, two-, five-, ten-, and 300-period  plays of a single prisoner's dilemma game. Although there were no significant differences reported, the data suggest that  cooperation rates in the first trial of the one- and two-period games were somewhat lower than the first trial of the five-,  ten-, and 300-period games. The findings also indicated that the last play of an n-period game may result in a reduction in  cooperative choices.  It is often contended in the literature that if subjects are not informed of the number of periods to be played, the resulting  game yields the same equilibria as the infinite game, since no period is known to be the last. However, this is a considerable  oversimplification. Since it is apparent that the game must eventually terminate, subjects must form subjective probabilities  greater than zero that a given period might be the last. Although such probabilities have neither been observed nor controlled  by experimenters, we shall see that they play a critical role in determining the nature of equilibrium outcomes.  Two Equilibrium Conditions  A paradigm which permits the nature of the equilibrium outcomes to be controlled can be obtained by considering repeated  play(s) of the classical prisoner's dilemma with a fixed probability of continuing after each period. That is, after each  period a random number can be generated independently of the play of the game to determine with probability p whether the game  will be played again. Thus, each period has probability q = (1 - p) of being the last. We adopt the convention that play  begins in period 0, so pk is the probability that the game does not terminate until after period k. If s and t are a pair of  strategies which generate choices (xk , Yk) then the (expected) payoff function 0 for this game is given by Qi(s, t) = F k u  pkpf(xk , y,~), where Pi is the payoff function for player i in the classical game.  The nature of the equilibrium outcomes in this game depends on the value of p and the values of the payoff matrix. (Note that  if p = 0, we have the classical game; and if p --- 1, the game never terminates.)z  The strategy pair (s2, s2), which generates the choice sequence xx = Yk = 2 for every period k, is an equilibrium for any  probability p. However, there may or may not be an equilibrium pair which generates the choices xk = Yk = 1.  Since the unforgiving strategy u minimizes the gains an opponent can derive from ever making an individualistic choice, the  choice sequence xk = Yk = 1 can be generated by  2 See the related discussion on page 102 of Luce and Raiffa.  192  ROTH AND MURNIGHAN  an equilibrium pair of strategies if and only if (u, u) is an equilibrium. It is shown below that this occurs if and only if  the following condition holds.  Condition 1: p > (b - a)l(b - c)  That is, when the probability of continuing is at least (b - a)l(b - c), there are equilibria which may generate cooperative  choices by both players at every period. When the probability of continuing is less than (b - a)l(b - c), no such equilibria  exist. Formally, we have the following proposition.  PROPOSITION 1. (a) The strategy pair (u, u) is an equilibrium if and only if condition 1 is met. (b) Furthermore, if condition  1 is not met, there is no equilibrium which yields only cooperative choices.  Proof. To prove part (a) we must show that if one of the players (say player 2) adopts the strategy u, then a best response of  the other player is also to play u. That is, we must show that QI(u, u) > QI(t, u) for any strategy t.  Let (xk , yk) be the choice sequence generated by (t, u), and let n be the first period in which player 1 makes his  individualistic choice (i.e., xn = 2). Let t' be the strategy which tells player 1 to play strategy t up to period n, and to  play his individualistic choice at every subsequent period.  Then  n-1  QI(t, u) < QI(t" u) _ apk + pn lb + p  1 c p ).  But  m n-1  QI(ur u) _ apk = apk +pn a  k=0 k=0 1 - p  So QI(u, u) > QI(t', u) if and only if al(1 - p) > b -}- cpl(1 - p), which occurs if and only if condition 1 is satisfied.  This completes the proof of part (a).  If condition 1 is not met, then (u, u) is not an equilibrium: i.e., there is a strategy t such that QI(t, u) > QI(u, u). But,  since c > d, for any strategy t we have QI(t', u) QI(t, u), where t' is defined as in the proof of part (a). So without loss  of generality we may take t = t'. Now suppose that (r, s) is a strategy pair which yields the choice sequence xk = yx = 1 for  every period k. Then QI(r, s) = QI(u, u) = al(1 - p). But QI(t', u) G QI(t', s), since b > c. So QI(t', s) > QI(t', u) > QI(u,  u) = QI(r, s); and,  thus, (r, s) cannot be an equilibrium if condition 1 is not met. This completes the proof of part (b).  Of course, when condition 1 is satisfied, other strategy pairs which generate cooperative choices may also be in equilibrium.  For instance, it can be shown that the pair (m, m) is an equilibrium if and only if both condition 1 and the following  condition are satisfied.3  $ Since p c 1, Condition 2 implies b -f- d C 2a. This is sometimes taken to be part of the definition of the Prisoner's  Dilemma.  EQUILIBRIUM BEHAVIOR AND REPEATED PLAY OF THE PRISONER'S DILEMMA 193  Condition. 2. p > (b - a)l(a - d)  That is, we have  PROPOSITION 2. The strategy pair (m, m) is an equilibrium if and only if both condition 1 and condition 2 are satisfied.  Proof. If condition 1 is not met, then by proposition 1 (u, u) is not an equilibrium, so there exists a strategy t such that  Ql(t, u) > Qj(u, u) = Q,(m, m). But for any strategy t, Q,(t, m) > Qj(t, u) (since a and b are greater than d and c), so Q,(t,  m) > Q,(t, u) > Q,(m, m), and (m, m) is not an equilibrium pair.  If condition 2 is not met, then consider the strategy t, which tells player 1 to play his individualistic choice exactly once,  say in period n. Then Q,(t,, m) - Q,(m, m) = p''I(b - a) - - pn41(d - a) which is greater than zero if and only if condition 2  is not met, so in this case (m, m) is not an equilibrium pair.  V6 'e must now show that if conditions 1 and 2 are both met, then (m, m) is an equilibrium: i.e. that Q,(t, m) < Q,(m, m) for  any strategy t. Let t be a strategy such that (t, m) yields a sequence of choices (xrk , yk) which are not all cooperative,  and let n be the first period in which x,, = 2.  Let t' be the strategy defined in the proof of proposition 1. Since condition 1 is met, Q,(m, m) = Q,(u, u) > Ql(t', u) =  Ql(t', m). Consequently we can confine our attention to strategies t which do not generate the individualistic choice at every  period after n.  Let t, and t,+, be strategies such that the strategy pairs (t, , m) and (tr+, , m) generate choice sequences (XI , _vk) and  (xk, yk') where xn = xn+, = --- _= xr-i = 2 while xr = = xr+, --= 1. Suppose also that x,,' = 2, but that for k =A r, xk' = xk  . Thus the strategy t, generates a sequence of precisely r individualistic choices, and t,+, generates one more. Then Qj(tr ,  m) - Ql(tr+, , m) = pr+1(d - c) + pr+2(a - d) _-_ pr+i(d - c -}- p(a - d)). So the sign of Ql(t., , m) - Ql(tr+l , m) is  independent of r, and either  or  (1) Q1(ti , m) < Q1(ta , m) < ... < Qi(tk , m) < ...  (ii) Ql(ti , m) > Qi(t2 , m) > ... > Qi(t" m) > ...  Observe that t' is the limit of tk as k goes to infinity, so that in case (i), Ql(t', m) QI(tk, m) for any k. Since condition  1 holds, Q,(m, m) > Q,(t', m) > Ql(tk, m) in this case.  When case (ii) holds, we have already shown (in the second paragraph of this proof) that Q,(m, m) > Ql(t, , m) when condition  2 is met. This now suffices to show that Q,(m, m) > Q,(tk , m) for any k.  Since the strategies tk are arbitrary, except for the specification of a sequence of precisely k individualistic choices4, the  fact that Nm, m) > Ql(tk , m) for any k is sufficient to show that Q,(m, m) > Q,(t, m) for any t. By symmetry, Q,(m, m) ~--  Q2(m, t) for any t, so (m, m) is an equilibrium pair. This completes the proof.  '' Actually, we also specified that x,+, = 1. This was done merely for the sake of definiteness in computing the difference  Ql(t,, m) - Ql(t,+, , m). The class of strategies for which x,+, = 2 is treated in a precisely similar manner.  194 ROTH AND MURNIGHAN  We conducted an experiment to test the predictive value of this model. We chose a game with the property that Condition 1 is  satisfied if and only if Condition 2 is satisfied. Thus, the critical value of p is identical for either the unforgiving or  the matching strategy. That is, we chose the game in which b = 40, a = 30, c = 10, and d = 0. For either strategy then, if p >  1/3 both strategies result in equilibria. For p < 113, no equilibrium yields cooperative choices.  Method. One hundred and twenty-one undergraduate students participated in each of three sessions where p equalled .105, .50,  and .895. Both male and female subjects played the games, and the order of the three sessions was counter-balanced. Each  session began with introductory instructions about prisoner's dilemma games. In order to control for differences in subjects'  behavior due to differences in their opponents, each subject played against an artificial opponent who used the matching  strategy. The players were told that they played a programmed opponent, but were not told what strategy he would be using.  Players were also told that "the best player" in the experiment would receive a $10 prize.  Subjects were told that a roulette wheel would be spun after each period to determine if the game would be continued. Half of  the subjects played the condition p = .105 first. They were told that the game would continue only if the ball fell in numbers  33 through 36 (which occurs with probability .105). Several practice games were played to familiarize the players with the  game. The subjects were then told that they would play a final game, the results of which would contribute to the  determination of the winner of the $10 prize. This procedure was then repeated for p = .50 and p = .895; in each case practice  games were played before a final game which contributed to the determination of the prize winner(s). The other half of the  subjects played the conditions in the reverse order: p = .895 first and p = .105 last. The experimenter was seated behind an  opaque partition throughout each session; he recorded the responses of each of the players after each practice and final  trial. He also played the role of the programmed opponent and gave the players feedback concerning their payoffs and their  opponent's payoffs after each trial.5  Results. A 2 (sex) by 3 (probability of continuing) by 2 (order of the probabilities: decreasing or increasing) analysis of  variance of the frequency of cooperative responses for the first periods, with probability of continuing a within factor,  resulted in one significant effect, for probability of continuing: F (2, 234) = 9.01, P < .0002. In the (p = .895) condition,  44 of 121 responses were cooperative; in the (p = .50) condition, 36 of 121  s Note that the existence of cooperative equilibria for the game described depends on the fact that for any n, there is a  positive probability that the game will continue for n trials. (Although for large n, this probability becomes very small).  Under experimental conditions, it would of course be impossible to continue the game for, say, a million trials. But since  this is such a lowprobability event, the experimental design provides a good approximation of the probabilistically terminated  game. In fact, no play of the game ever had to be terminated artificially.  s The analysis was conducted only on the first period because in many of the games, especially in the (p = .105) condition,  only one period completed the series. Cooperative responses on subsequent trials yielded similar results: 246 of 607 (41 %) in  the (p = .895) condition; 40 of 127 (31 %) in the (p = .50) condition; and 1 of 2 in the (p = .105) condition.  EQUILIBRIUM BEHAVIOR AND REPEATED PLAY OF THE PRISONER'S DILEMMA 195  responses were cooperative; and in the (p = .105) condition, 23 of 121 responses were cooperative. Post hoc tests using the  Seheffe procedure resulted in significant differences at the .05 level between the (p = .105) condition and each of the other  conditions. Only the latter two conditions have cooperative equilibria. The difference between the (p =-- .895) and (p = .50)  conditions was not significant. Thus, players made the cooperative choice more frequently when it resulted from an equilibrium  strategy.  In order to attribute these results to the nature of the equilibria in the games, we must account for the potential effects of  the associated variation in the expected duration of each game. The expected durations of the games in our three conditions  (rounded to the nearest integer) are 1, 2, and 10 periods. Morehous's (1966) results for a game with a fixed duration of 1, 2,  5, or 10 periods are an important comparison. He reports no significant difference in the amount of cooperation evidenced in  these games, although the results were in the same direction as our results. (Recall that in n-period games the cooperative  choice never results from an equilibrium strategy.) Thus, the present results support the conclusion that the behavior of  experimental subjects in a game is congruent with the nature of the equilibrium strategies.  Comparison with Previous Treatments  If the payoffs in a game are defined only up to an interval scale (e.g., in terms of an expected utility function) then  meaningful statements about the game must be invariant under positive linear transformations. Propositions 1 and 2 satisfy  this requirement since they are stated in terms of ratios of differences between the payoffs associated with different  outcomes.  Rapoport and Chammah (1965) consider the class of such ratios, focusing on two representatives which have some desirable  qualitative properties. In particular, they define the quantities r, and r2 by r, = (a - c)f(b - d), and r2 = (a - d)f(b - d).  Rapoport and Chammah note that arllaa > 0, ar,1ac < 0, arlf ab < 0 and ar,/ad > 0. Consequently rl can be interpreted as an  index of the 'cooperativeness' of a game, since it increases when the reward for simultaneous cooperation (a) increases, and  it decreases when the reward for simultaneous individualism (c) increases. Also, ri decreases as the reward for unilateral  defection from a cooperative agreement (b) increases, and ri increases as the penalty for being a victim of such a defection  is ameliorated (i.e., as d increases).  The qualitative behavior of r2 is similar, since Or, 10a > 0, ar,l ac = 0, ar,f ab < 0 and are/ad < 0. Thus the partial  derivatives of r, and r2 agree in sign except with respect to the variable d.  Only a few experimental studies have systematically studied the validity of r, and r2 as predictors of cooperative behavior.  The data that have been collected, however, strongly support the predictability of r, . Rapoport and Chammah's (1965) results  on the games depicted in Table 1 indicated that increasing values of r, were associated with increasing amounts of  cooperation. Steele and Tedeschi (1967) present a more pointed analysis of the results of several payoff matrices. They also  found that increases in the value of rl were associated with increased amounts of cooperation. In addition, they noted a  linear relationship between amounts of cooperation and the log of r, . These results were replicated by Jones, Steele,  Gahagan, and Tedeschi (1968).  196 ROTH AND MURNIGHAN  TABLE 1  Entries from the Payoff Matrices and Values for the Cooperation and Equilibrium Indices for Seven Games Used by Rapoport and  Chammah (1965)  Game a b c d rl r2 el e2  1 9 10 -1 -10 .50 .95 .09 .05  2 1 10 -9 -10 .50 .55 .47 .82  3 1 10 -1 -10 .10 .55 .82 .82  4 1 2 -1 -2 .50 .75 .33 .33  5 1 50 -1 -50 .02 .51 .96 .96  6 5 10 -1 -10 .30 .75 .45 .33  7 1 10 - 5 -10 .30 .55 .60 .82  Propositions 1 and 2 suggest alternate indices as appropriate measures of the "cooperativeness' of a game. In particular, let  the equilibrium indices el and e2 be defined by  b-a b-a el _ b-c'  and e2 =  a -d  Then, el and e2 may be interpreted as indices measuring the difficulty of achieving a cooperative equilibrium. Proposition 1  says that, as el increases, the range of probabilities which make a cooperative equilibrium feasible diminishes in size. As el  increases, so does the critical value of the probability p, below which no equilibria result in cooperation. The quantity e2  has a similar interpretation in the more limited context of equilibria involving the matching strategy.  Although the indices el and e2 were derived for games with a random termination point, they share with the indices rl and r2  the qualitative properties that make them interesting for games with a fixed termination point. In particular, aellaa < 0,  aellac > 0, and aell ab > 0.  Thus the partial derivatives of el have the opposite sign from the partial derivatives of ri . This is consistent with the  interpretation of el as a measure which increases as the difficulty of achieving cooperative outcomes increases, and the  interpretation of rl as a measure which decreases as the difficulty of achieving cooperative outcomes increases. Similarly,  ae,l as < 0, ae,l ab > 0, and aezl ad > 0: the derivatives of e2 and r2 also have opposite sign.  Note that el = (1 - r&(1 + rl - r2), and e2 = (1 - r2)lrz . So, as expected, the quantities aell arl , dell are , and aezl are  are all negative. Similarly, the quantities aril ael and ar,l ae2 are negative, but the quantity aril ae2 is positive.'  Thus, when more than one parameter is varied, the indices e2 and r2 respond together (i.e., they yield the same ordering of  games). However, it is not difficult to verify that el  The quantity arllae2 = (1 - ele2lel(1 + e2)2) is positive if and only if ele2 < 1, since el and e2 are both positive.  Furthermore, el < 1, and the condition b + d < 2a implies that e2 < 1 (see footnote 3). Here we regard this condition as part  of the definition of the prisoner's dilemma, and so ele2 < 1.  EQUILIBRIUM BEHAVIOR AND REPEATED PLAY OF THE PRISONER'S DILEMMA 197  and rI yield different orderings, in general. To see this, see Table 1, which includes all four indices for seven games  studied by Rapoport and Chammah (1965).  Both sets of indices have received some experimental support.' The entries in Table 1, however, suggest several critical  theoretical tests. For instance, a study utilizing games 1 and 2 in the table might manipulate p in each game. The rI index,  which has received the most experimental support, would lead to a prediction ono differences in cooperation between games  for any value of p. The eI or e2 indices, however, would lead to differential predictions for cooperativeness, depending on p.  Other games, with or without manipulations of p, could also test differences in the indices. The present formulation, then,  indicates that such studies are worth investigation.  ACKNOWLEDGMENT  The authors are happy to acknowledge the helpful comments of two anonymous referees.  REFERENCES  DAWES, R. M., McTAvisH, J., & SHAxLEE, H. Behavior, communication, and assumptions about other people's behavior in a commons  dilemma situation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1977, 35, 1-11.  GOEHRING, D. J., & KAHAN, J. P. The uniform n-person prisoner's dilemma game. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 1976, 20,  111-128.  GUYER, M. & PERKEL, B. Communication No. 293, Mental Health Research Institute, Univ. of Michigan, 1972.  HARDIN, R. Collective action as an agreeable n-prisoners' dilemma. Behavioral Science, 1971, 16, 436-441.  JONES, B., STEELE, M., GAHAGAN, J., & TEDEscHI, J. Matrix values and cooperative behavior in the prisoner's dilemma game.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1968, 8, pp. 148-153. KOMORITA, S. S. A model of the n-person dilemma-type game.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 1976, 12, pp. 357-373.  LucE, R. D. & RAIFFA, H. Games and decisions. New York: Wiley, 1957.  MOREHOUS, L. G. One-play, two-play, five-play, and ten-play runs of prisoner's dilemma. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 1966,  10, pp. 354-361.  NASH, J. F. Equilibrium points in n-person games. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A., 1950, 36, pp.  48--49.  RAPOPORT, A. Editorial note. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 1971, 15, pp. 79-80.  RAPOPORT, A. Experimental games and their uses in psychology. Morristown, N. J.: General Learning Press, 1973.  RAPOPORT, A. & CHAMMAH, A. M. Prisoner's dilemma. Ann Arbor: Univ. of Michigan Press, 1965. SHUBIK, M. Strategy and market  structure. New York: Wiley, 1955.  I Recently, Goehring and Kahan (1976) presented an index of competitiveness, R, for 71-person prisoner's dilemma games, which,  when restricted to 2 person games is identical to the second equilibrium index, ea , that we have derived. They also conducted  several n-person games, finding that cooperativeness decreased as R increased. These results, then, also support the present  model. In addition, the extension of the present indices to n-person prisoner's dilemma games, similar to Komorita's (1976)  extension of Rapoport and Chammah's (1965) r,, is straightforward.  198  ROTH AND MIIRNIGHAN  S7'EELE, M. W., & TEDESCHI, J. T. Matrix indices and strategy choices in mixed-motive games. Journal of Conflict Resolution,  1967, 11, 198-205.  TERHuNr,, K. W. Motives, situations, and interpersonal conflict within prisoner's dilemma. Journal of Personality and Social  Psychology Monograph Supplement, 1968, 8, pp. 1-24.  WoLFE, G., & SHuBm, M. Solution concepts and psychological motivation in prisoner's dilemma games. Decision Sciences, 1974, 5,  pp. 153-163.  RECEIVED: June 7, 1977  Printed in Belgium