10.1016/0022-2496(78)90029-9
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 17, 165-188 (1978)  Free Trees and Bidirectional Trees as Representations of Psychological Distance'  JAMES P. CUNNINGHAM  Department of Psychology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853  Two types of graph-theoretic representations of psychological distances or dissimilarities are proposed: weighted free trees  and weighted bidirectional trees. A weighted free tree is a generalization of the sort of graph representation used in  hierarchical clustering. A weighted bidirectional tree is a further generalization which allows for asymmetric  dissimilarities. The properties of these structures are discussed and numerical methods are presented that can be used to  derive a representation for any given set of dissimilarities. The applicability of these structures is illustrated by using  them to represent the data from experiments on the similarities among animal terms and on memory for sentences. An analysis  based upon free trees is compared and contrasted with analyses using hierarchical clustering and multidimensional scaling,  Choosing the best way to represent or model a set of psychological distance measurements is a problem common to many areas of  psychology. The term "psychological distance" refers to any kind of data that can be interpreted as measuring how far apart  stimuli are in some psychological sense. The stimulus objects could range from colors to people to line segments, and the  measurements of psychological distance could range from dissimilarity ratings to correlations to reaction times. The purpose  of analyzing a set of psychological distances is to find some interpretable regularities in the distances. A common way of  discussing or summarizing those regularities is to find some sort of underlying geometric structure that can account for the  data. Such a geometric structure contains entities corresponding to the stimulus objects and the information necessary to  compute the distances between stimulus objects. Finding a structure with these properties is called finding a representation  for the data.  When representing the psychological distances among stimulus objects, it is important to consider the properties of the  objects and the desireable or probable properties of the representation of the distances among those objects. Some sorts of  stimuli, such as colors or tones, seem continuous in nature and the relationships among these stimuli can often  ' This work is based upon a portion of a doctoral dissertation submitted to the University of California, San Diego, and was  supported in part by National Science Foundation Grant GB-3197X to Roger N. Shepard, National Science Foundation Grant  GB-32235X, and a USPHS Predoctoral Traineeship. Lynn A. Cooper, David E. Rumelhart, and Roger N. Shepard provided  encouragement, advice, and/or comments on earlier versions of the manuscript. Requests for reprints should be sent to the  author at the Department of Psychology, Uris Hail, Corneal University, Ithaca, New York 14853.  165  0022-2496/78/0172-0165$02.00/0 Copyright 1978 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  166 JAMES P. CUNNINGHAM  be represented by a set of continuously varying underlying factors or dimensions (e.g., Indow & Kanazawa, 1960; Miller &  Carterette, 1975). Some kind of multidimensional scaling (e.g., Torgerson, 1958; Shepard, 1962; Kruskal, 1964; Guttman, 1968)  can be used to find the best representation of that kind. On the other hand, some sorts of stimuli, such as words or meanings,  seem more discrete in nature. Perhaps the relationships among stimuli of this sort could be better represented by a more  discrete geometric structure.  One such discrete structure, called a graph or network, consists of a set of objects called nodes and a set of links between  nodes. Stimuli can be represented by nodes or sets of nodes and the relationships among the stimuli can be represented by the  way in which the links interconnect the nodes. Many researchers have proposed graph-theoretic structures as models of the way  in which information is stored in memory (e.g., Collins & Quillian, 1969; Anderson & Bower, 1973; Collins & Loftus, 1975;  Norman & Rumelhart, 1975). Yet, very few graph-theoretic representations of psychological distance have been well developed.  This paper takes a step toward alleviating this problem. Two kinds of graph-theoretic structures are proposed as  representations of psychological distance: weighted free trees and weighted bidirectional trees. The properties of these  structures are discussed and numerical methods that can be used to derive a representation for any given set of psychological  distances are presented. The applicability of these structures is illustrated by using them to represent the data from  experiments on the relative similarities among animal terms and on the memory for sentences.  Previous Graph-Theoretic Representations  Hierarchical clustering (Johnson, 1967; Hartigan, 1967) is the only type of analysis of psychological distances based upon a  graph-theoretic structure that is well developed and widely used. The result of a hierarchical clustering analysis can be  described by a structure called a rooted tree (with some additional restrictions). A tree consists of a 'set of nodes and a  set of links between nodes in which there is a unique sequence of links connecting any given pair of nodes. In addition, a  rooted tree contains a distinguished node called the root, which represents the "top" (or "bottom") of the tree. The links in  the tree can have varying lengths, and the distance between two nodes is the sum of the lengths of the links in the path  connecting the two nodes. Hierarchical clustering uses a rooted tree of this type as a representation of the psychological  distances among stimuli by putting stimuli at terminal nodes of the tree (nodes with only one link attached) and arranging the  tree such that the internode distances are systematically related to the interstimulus distances. In addition, hierarchical  clustering has the restriction that the distances from any nonterminal node to all of the terminal nodes below it must be  equal to each other. (Where "below" means that the path from the root to the terminal nodes passes through the nonterminal  node.)  While the use of hierarchical clustering is an excellent approach if one wants to generate a hierarchically organized set of  clusters of stimuli, it is too restrictive to serve as a generally useful discrete representation of psychological distance.  It cannot be used as a representation in situations requiring the placement of stimuli at the non-terminal nodes  TREE REPRESENTATIONS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISTANCES 167  of the tree. Hierarchical clustering is inappropriate in any situation in which a stimulus j is between two stimuli i and k.  That is, the distance from i to k is (approximately) equal to the sum of the distance from i to j and the distance from j to  k. The reason that hierchical clustering is so restrictive is that it requires every triangle to be isosceles with the two  longest sides equal to each other (i.e., the ultrametric inequality must hold; Johnson, 1967). This is a very severe  restriction that is surely violated in many sets of psychological distances.  The limitations of hierarchical clustering have been recognized by several psychologists. A different approach involving the  use of overlapping rather than hierarchical clusters has been advocated by Arabie and Shepard (1973). Carroll and Chang (1973)  discuss several alternative types of hierarchical trees. Carroll and Pruzansky (1975) and Carroll (1976) present ways to use  "mixtures" of several different hierarchical trees to represent a single set of psychological distances. And in work close to  the spirit of the work presented here, Sattath and Tversky (1977) discuss the use of the more general "additive" tree as a  representation of psychological distances.  This paper proposes the use of weighted free trees and weighted bidirectional trees as representations of psychological  distance. A weighted free tree is a generalization of the sort of tree used in hierarchical clustering and is not subject to  restrictions as severe as those imposed by hierarchical clustering (a precise definition is given in the next section). A  weighted free tree can be further generalized to allow for asymmetric psychological distances, and this generalization is  called a weighted bidirectional tree. Thus, bidirectional trees can be used as representations in situations where the  psychological distance between two stimuli depends upon the direction in which it is measured.  WEIGHTED FREE TREES  Definitions and Overview  A free tree is simply a set of nodes and a set of links between nodes in which every pair of nodes is connected by a unique  sequence of links. Such a tree does not have a root and is not hierarchical or ordered in any way. A weighted free tree is a  free tree which has a numerical weight or length associated with each link. The distance between two nodes is the sum of the  lengths of the links in the path connecting the two nodes. (Other names for this sort of tree include path length tree,  Carroll, 1976; and additive tree, Sattath & Tversky, 1977.)  A weighted free tree can be used as a representation of the dissimilarities among a set of stimuli. The stimulus objects are  labeled with the integers 1, 2,..., n and for each unordered pair of objects, i and j there is a measure of the interobject  dissimilarity or psychological distance Si; . Each stimulus object is represented as a node in the tree, and those nodes can  be either terminal (i.e., attached to only one link), or nonterminal. Nodes which represent stimulus objects are called  visible nodes. There can also be nodes in the tree which do not represent stimulus objects. These nodes are called invisible  nodes because there is no immediate way of knowing how many of them there are or where they  480117/2_6  168 JAMES P. CUNNINGHAM  are located with respect to the visible nodes. The tree represents the interobject dissimilarities by the corresponding  internode distances. The more agreement between the interobject dissimilarities and the internode distances, the better the  representation. An exact weighted free tree representation of a set of dissimilarities is a weighted free tree in which all of  the stimulus objects are represented as nodes of the tree, and the internode distances are exactly equal to the corresponding  interobject dissimilarities.  Hierarchical clustering is a special case of the use of weighted free trees. In addition to the properties of a weighted free  tree, hierarchical clustering imposes the previously mentioned restrictions that stimuli can only be represented by terminal  nodes and that the distances from any nonterminal node to all of the terminal nodes below it must be equal to each other.  Thus, if the type of tree imposed by hierarchical clustering is the appropriate representation for a particular set of data, a  weighted free tree is also appropriate, and the particular weighted free tree will (at least approximately) have the  properties required by hierarchical clustering.  Given a set of dissimilarities, the problem is to determine the particular weighted free tree that best represents those data.  The dissimilarity measures will seldom come exactly from a free tree, because of either random error in the data or minor  violations of assumptions. So it will rarely be possible to obtain an exact weighted free tree representation. Rather, the  free tree representation whose internode distances most closely correspond to the interstimulus dissimilarity measures must be  found. The approach that will be used in solving this problem is to first specify the conditions that are necessary and  sufficient for a set of interstimulus dissimilarities to be exactly represented by a weighted free tree. Then the distances  that satsify those conditions and are closest (in some specified sense) to the original dissimilarity measures can be found.  The underlying free tree can then be reconstructed from this new set of derived distances.  The first step is to state the required necessary and sufficient conditions. If any four visible nodes are picked from any  weighted free tree, then the six distances among those four nodes must satisfy a particular condition, called the four point  condition. The following theorem states the four point condition and shows that it is the one required for the present  purposes.  THEOREM 1. A necessary and sufficient condition for the existence of an exact weighted free tree representation with  non-negative weights of an n X n (n > 4) matrix of distances [dir] is that for all distinct i, j, k, and l, the two largest of  (di; -}- dka), (dik + dg), and (dia + d k) must be equal.  Proof. Similar theorems have been proved by Buneman (1971), Dobson (1974), and Patrinos and Hakimi (1972). Therefore, only a  brief discussion will be given. In order to prove necessity, assume that the matrix of distances can be exactly represented by  a weighted free tree. Pick any four visible nodes from the underlying free tree and consider the subtree connecting those four  nodes. For some permutation of the four nodes, say a, b, c, d, this subtree must correspond to the tree illustrated in Figure  1. Thus we have  dbd -f- dae = dbx -I- ddx + ddv + dev + 2dx, = dad -f- dbs  TREE REPRESENTATIONS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISTANCES 169  Since dxy > 0, and dab -}- did = da. -}- db. -{- d~,, + day , we also have dba -}- da, dab + d1d . Sufficiency can be proved  by induction on the number of visible nodes and previous proofs of this theorem contain those details.  Fir. 1. The subtree connecting any four nodes (a, b, c, and d) from an arbitrary weighted free tree.  The four point condition yields a set of linear equality constraints (if the inequality portion of the condition is ignored),  one for each set of four stimulus objects. By using mathematical programming techniques, the distances that satisfy those  constraints and are closest, in the least squares sense, to the original dissimilarities can be found. Since this set of  derived distances can be exactly represented by a weighted free tree, that tree can be reconstructed in a relatively  straightforward way. The details of the entire algorithm for going from empirical data to weighted free tree are given in the  next section. (The algorithm presented here has been computerized and is an improved version of the algorithm reported by  Cunningham, 1974.)  The Algorithm  The problem of recovering the best weighted free tree representation of a given set of dissimilarity measures can be solved in  three basic steps: 1) determine what linear equality constraints are implied by the four point condition; 2) find a set of  distances that satisfy those constraints and are closest in the least-squares sense to the original data; 3) reconstruct the  weighted free tree which generates the set of distances.  The four point condition can be represented as a set of linear equality constraints, if the inequality portion of the theorem  is ignored. If we let sl = bi; + 8ka , s2 = 8ik -+- 8;t , and s3 ---- 8ii -}- 8;k , then for each unordered set of four  objects i, j, k, and l, we must choose one of the three possible constraints, sl = s2 , sl =--- s, , and s2 = s3 . Since there  will tend to be some error in the measured dissimilarities, none of the three possible constraints will, in general, be  exactly satisfied. The problem of choosing the appropriate constraint can be restated in the following way. We have three  sample values, sl , s.: and s3 , and we know that two of them are samples from a distribution with mean t-4L and one is a  sample from a distribution with mean Fps . We also know that ltt > ti, . The problem is to choose which two of the samples  come from the distribution with mean Fir.. When the problem is stated in this way, it is clear that the only reasonable choice  is to say that the two largest of sl , s,, and s3 must be samples from the same distribution and should  170 JAMES P. CUNNINGHAM  therefore be constrained to be equal to each other. Using this rule, we obtain one linear equality constraint for each  unordered set of four stimulus objects.  Representing the four point condition as a set of linear equality constraints seems to ignore the inequality portion of that  condition. However, the inequality portion is enforced indirectly by its inclusion in the rule for choosing constraints. We  constrain the two largest of sl , s2 , and s3 to be equal to each other, and since the derived distances are supposed to be as  close as possible to the dissimilarity measures, the appropriate sums sums of the derived distances will tend to have the  larger values. For example, suppose sl > s2 > s3 , then the constraint imposed on the derived distances will be di; -f- dka =  dik -}- dil . But di; -f- dk, will tend to be close in value to Si; + Ski and dik -}- dj, will be close to Sik -{- S;i , since  we minimize the sum of the squared differences between the derived distances and the dissimilarity measures. Since sl > s3 and  s2 > s3 this will usually cause di; -{- dkl > di, + d k and dik + dj, >, di, + d k , which is the desired inequality  condition. (Any set of distances which satisfy the equality conditions of Theorem 1 but not all of the inequality conditions,  will still be exactly representable by a free tree, but some of the link lengths will have negative values.)  Applying the rule described above to all sets of four stimulus objects yields a set of (4) linear equality constraints. Many  of these constraints will not be linearly independent from each other, since there are only (a) distances which are being  constrained. Therefore, this set of constraints is reduced to the set of r linearly independent constraints which are  contained within the set. In the present algorithm, this reduction is accomplished by an iterative procedure which starts with  a single constraint, and at each step adds k more constraints (where 1 < k < (a) for convenience) and eliminates any dependent  constraints. The procedure continues until all (4) constraints have been considered.  Once the set of constraints has been chosen, the problem can be put into a mathematical programming framework and the  distances that satisfy those constraints and are closest in the least squares sense to the original data can be found. Define  the function 0: 12 --> I to be an isomorphism from the m = (a) unordered pairs of the integers 1 thru n to the integers 1 thru  m. Thus if 0(i, j) = k, then  dmtij) = dm(j,i) = dk = di; .  We can think of the m dissimilarity measures as being arranged in a column vector S = (S, , 8 . ,..., Sm)' and the distances  to be recovered in the vector d = (dl , d2 ,..., d")'. Let the r linear equality constraints resulting from the four point  condition be in some arbitrary simple order, and let the ith constraint be  dw + dx = dv -{- d7.  This set of constraints can be represented by an r X m matrix C = [ci;], where if the ith constraint is given by (1) then  1, if j=worx, ci; _ -1, if j =y or z, 0, otherwise.  TREE REPRESENTATIONS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISTANCES 171  The entire set of constraints is then satisfied only if Cd = 0, where 0 is the column vector of zeroes.  We measure the difference between d and S by  m  IIS-dll= (8;-d;)2=(S-d)' (8-d),  that is, the sum of the squared differences between individual elements. This measure of difference is used for mathematical  convenience and because it is a traditional measure of the discrepancy between interval scale measurements. The problem of  finding the set of distances that satisfy the four point condition and are closest in the least squares sense to the original  data can then be formulated as finding that d* which satisfies  118-011 = min{II S - d Il I Cd = 0}. (2)  The d* which satisfies Equation (2) is given by  d* = S - C'(CC')-1 CS.  That this is true can be demonstrated by using the method of Lagrange multipliers. Define the function-r(d, b) = 11 8 - d II  -}- b'Cd, where b = (bl , b2 ,..., b,.)' is a vector of scalar multipliers. It has been shown elsewhere (e.g., Golstein, 1972)  that the d corresponding to the unconstrained minimum Of T is the d* which satisfies Equation (2). Since 'r is convex,  necessary and sufficient conditions for a minimum Of T are the m -}- r linear equations  aT for j = 1, 2,..., m,  8d; - 0   aT for j = 1, 2,..., r.  ab; - 0   Thus the solution of this set of linear equations will be the desired result. The vector b  can be found to be  b = 2((CC')-1 CS), and the d; can be found by solving  2d-2s+C'b=0 for d and then substituting the b which has already been obtained. This yields Equation  At this point we have a set of derived distances which come exactly from a weighted free tree, and the remaining problem is to  reconstruct the free tree which generates those distances. The procedure used for the reconstruction has two general phases.  In the first phase, the relative locations of all invisible nodes are inferred thus making all nodes visible. This yields an  enlarged set of distances between all pairs of nodes. Once this has been accomplished, the second phase of the procedure  reconstructs the underlying  172 JAMES P. CUNNINGHAM  weighted free tree by essentially eliminating all internode distances that are equal to the sum of two constituent distances,  leaving only the distances between nodes which are adjacent in the tree. This second phase is equivalent to finding the  minimum spanning tree of the enlarged set of internode distances.  In order to state the details of the procedure used to reconstruct the underlying tree from the derived distances, the  following definitions and results are needed. A path pi; from node i to node j is defined as an ordered set of nodes which  begins with i and ends with j and in which any intermediate node is adjacent in the tree to the nodes immediately preceding it  and following it in the path. Any three nodes i, j, and k define a triangle with vertices i, j, and k, and sides of length di;  , d;k , and di, . The center of a triangle with vertices i, j, and k is that node c, such that, di, -{-- 4 = dii , di, + dk, =  dik, and d, -}- dk, = dik . An equivalent definition of a center of a triangle with vertices i, j, and k is the intersection  of the paths pi; , Pik, and Pik . The degree of a node is the number of links which contain it.  THEOREM 2. Given a triangle with vertices i, j, and k, and center c, if for some node 1, di, = di, and d;,, = d;t , then c and  l are the same node.  Proof. Let pi; represent the path from i to j. We know c e pi; , and if Z e pi; , then c and Z are clearly the same node. If 1  0 pig , then the triangle with vertices i, j, and 1 has a center c' e pi; . If 10 pi; , then di,> 0, and since di, = die,  -}- dg,, = di, and d;i = dj~, + d,= d;~ , we know that di,, < di, and d;,< d;, . But, since c and c' e pi; , we must have  di, -}- d;, = di; = dia+ d;,, which is impossible. Therefore, l e pi; .  COROLLARY. There is a unique center for each triangle in a tree.  Proof. Follows directly from Theorem 2.  THEOREM 3. In an exact weighted free tree representation without invisible nodes of degree less than three, for every  invisible node x, the set of nodes which are vertices of triangles with center x includes all other nodes in the tree.  Proof. Follows directly from Simoes-Pereira (Theorem 1, 1967).  Note that Theorem 3 refers to a tree "without invisible nodes of degree less than three". This means that there could be any  number of invisible nodes of degree two or one, and they could not be detected. They could not be detected because their  existence in no way affects the distances between visible nodes.  THEOREM 4. If a matrix of distances has an exact weighted free tree representation with no invisible nodes, then the minimum  spanning tree of the distance matrix is the desired tree representation.  Proof. Follows from Hakimi and Yau (Theorem 6, 1964).  The following procedure can be used to reconstruct the weighted free tree which will generate the matrix of derived distances.  For each set of three nodes i, j, and k:  TREE REPRESENTATIONS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISTANCES 173  (i) Find the distances from each vertex to the unique (by the Corollary) center c of the triangle defined by i, j, and k by  dio = (dik + di; - dik)J2, d;, = (dik + dii - dik)12, and d, = (dik + dik - dij)12.  (ii) If one of the three distances die , d;, , dx, is equal to zero, then c is one of i, j, or k, and nothing further needs to  be done.  (iii) Otherwise, compare die, d;,, and d, with dil, d;,, and dka for all other nodes l, and either  (a) if at most one of the elements of pairs of corresponding distances are equal for each l, then add node c to the distance  matrix, including the three known distances; or  (b) If for some l two of the pairs are equal, then node c and node I are the same node (by Theorem 2), add the third distance,  if that distance is missing.  After performing (i)-(iii) for each set of three nodes, the resulting matrix of distances is an expanded version of the  original matrix. All (by Theorem 3) of the invisible nodes have been made visible. The minimum spanning tree of this expanded  matrix is the desired weighted free tree representation (by Theorem 4).  Optimality and Uniqueness  The algorithm of the previous section is a simple, non-iterative method for finding a weighted free tree representation for a  set of dissimilarities. But, in what sense is the representation optimal and unique ? Once the set of constraints has been  chosen, the optimality of the derived internode distances is guaranteed by Equations (2) and (3). But, that phase of the  algorithm is basically computing link lengths for a tree of a predetermined structure. The structure of a tree consists of  those properties of the tree which remain unchanged, regardless of the lengths of particular links. That is, two trees have  the same structure if they have the same topological properties. The structure of the recovered free tree is determined by the  choice of constraints. Thus, the degree to which the structure is optimal is determined by the degree to which the choice of  constraints is optimal. The rule used to choose the best constraint on the distances within each individual four-tuple is  clearly optimal. However, it would be much more difficult to show whether or not the entire set of constraints is the optimal  set.  There is a procedure which will often improve the choice of constraints and guarantee that a certain sense of optimality is  achieved. The set of r independent constraints which are selected during the algorithm is often larger than is necessary to  ensure that the matrix of derived distances satisfies the four point condition. Any reduction in the number of constraints  imposed on the distances will increase the correspondence between the distances and the dissimilarities. Therefore, we would  like to have the smallest set of constraints which is feasible. This can be accomplished in the following way. The set of r  constraints can be ordered according to the magnitude of their violations within the dissimilarities. If the ith constraint is  given by (1), then the magnitude of the violation of that constraint is 1 5,,, + 8~, - S& - 8, 1. First a tree is recovered  using the entire set of r constraints. Then each of the constraints is "tested", starting with the constraint with the largest  violation and ending with the constraint with the smallest violation. The  174 JAMES P. CUNNINGHAM  "testing" of a constraint consists of eliminating that constraint and seeing if the remaining set of constraints is sufficient  to ensure the satisfaction of the four point condition. If the remaining set is not sufficient, then that constraint is  restored. This testing is continued until the total number of nodes in the recovered tree is 2n - 2 (the maximum number  possible), or until all constraints have been tested. The resulting set of constraints is the smallest set which is large  enough to ensure the recovery of a tree and is the set of that type which has violations of the smallest magnitudes. In this  sense, the optimal set of constraints is found, and this results in the recovery of the tree with the optimal structure.2  The question concerning the uniqueness of the recovered representation remains, and is answered by the next theorem.  THEOREM 5. If an n X n (n > 3) distance matrix D. can be exactly represented by a weighted free tree then that tree is the  only exact weighted free tree representation of D.  Proof. Suppose n = 3. Then by the Corollary to Theorem 2 and the definition of "center", there is only one exact weighted free  tree representation of D3 . Suppose there is a unique exact weighted free tree representation of the (n - 1) X (n - 1) matrix  D1 , and the n X n matrix D,, is formed by adding dim for i = 1, 2,..., n - 1. If Dis exactly representable by a weighted  free tree, then node n must be attached by a link to the tree representation of D,,_i , since the constraints inferred from  D1 will also apply to D,, . If there is not a unique exact tree representation of D, then n could attach in one of at  least two places. Call two of the places node cl and node c2 . Pick two visible nodes, i and j, such that both cl and c2 are  on the path connecting i and j. In a given representation node n is only adjacent to one node, ck , k = 1 or 2. Since ck is on  the path from n to any other node and on the path connecting i and j, ck is the center of the triangle with vertices i, j, and  n. But there is a unique center to that triangle, so cl and c2 must be the same node. Therefore there is a unique exact  weighted free tree representation of D" , and by induction, the theorem has been proved.  Not only is the weighted free tree representation of a given distance matrix unique, but any linear transformation of a  distance matrix will yield a free tree representation with the same structure. The structure of the tree is determined by the  particular constraints that are imposed by Theorem 1. Since those constraints are simple linear equality and inequality  constraints, a linear transformation of a set of distances which satsify the constraints will not affect that satisfaction. In  particular, suppose that D is the distance matrix of a weighted free tree, and consider the matrix D* _ [d ] where d*i; = di;  -}- c for all i and j. The path between any two visible nodes, i and j, in the tree representation of D can be broken down  into three parts, i to x, x to y, and y to j, where x is the invisible node between i and j which is closest to i (if one  exists) and y is the invisible node between in and j which is closest to j (if one exists). It can be shown that d*tix = dim  -}- (cl2), d*;y = d;y -}- (c/2), and d*xv = dxy . That is, the lengths of links between invisible nodes  x Carroll (1976) noted that the original algorithm specified by Cunningham (1974) tended to produce degenerate "star" graphs  when a set of psychological distances contained a moderate amount of random error. This was caused by the inclusion of too  many constraints. The feature of the present algorithm that was just described overcomes this problem.  TREE REPRESENTATIONS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISTANCES 175  are not affected by adding a constant to each value in the tree's distance matrix. It is clear, then, that the "additive  constant" problem encountered in metric multidimensional scaling (Torgerson, 1958) does not occur in this case.  BIDIRECTIONAL TREES  Representation of Asymmetric Dissimilarities  There are some situations in which the direction of the dissimilarity measurement may make a difference. That is, the  psychological distance from stimulus i to stimulus j need not be the same as the psychological distance from j to i. In those  situations, the dissimilarities are called asymmetric. As an example, consider the case of people judging the similarity of  two stimuli which differ markedly in their prominence or number of known traits. Tversky (1977) performed an experiment in  which he asked people questions about the similarity of nations. Tversky found that people gave a consistently higher rating  when asked questions like "how similar is North Korea to Red China" than when asked questions like "how similar is Red China  to North Korea". That is, the less prominent stimulus is more similar to the prominent stimulus than the prominent stimulus is  to the less prominent one.  A generalization of weighted free trees, called weighted bidirectional trees, can represent asymmetric dissimilarities. A  weighted bidirectional tree is a weighted free tree in which each link has been replaced by a pair of links directed in  opposite directions. The lengths of the links in a pair may be different. A path from node i to node j cannot contain a given  link more than once. There is a unique path from any node i to any node j, but the distance from i to j, di; , need not be  equal to the distance from j to i, d;i .  The bidirectional tree which best represents a given set of dissimilarities can be found by using an approach similar to the  one used for free trees. First, conditions are specified which are necessary and sufficient for a set of inter-object  distances to be exactly represented by a bidirectional tree. Then, distances are found which satisfy those conditions and are  closest in the least-squares sense to the original data. The bidirectional tree can then be reconstructed from the set of  derived distances.  The following theorem states the required conditions.  THEOREM 6. Necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of an exact weighted bidirectional tree representation with  all nonnegative weights of an n X n (n >, 4) matrix of distances, D = [di;], are (i) D -{- D' can be exactly represented by a  weighted free tree, and (ii) for all distinct i, j, and k, di; + d;k -}- dki = dii + dki -}- dik . Furthermore, the structure  of the weighted bidirectional tree representation of D is the same as the structure of the weighted free tree representation  of D -{- D'.  Proof. Patrinos and Hakimi (1972) proved the necessity and sufficiency of conditions (i) and (ii) for the situation in which  there are no restrictions upon the sign of the weights. A proof for the case in which only non-negative weights are allowed is  essentially the same, so only a brief discussion will be given of those conditions. In order to prove  176) JAMES P. CUNNINGHAM  necessity, assume that the matrix of distances can be exactly represented by a weighted bidirectional tree. Pick any four  visible nodes from the underlying bidirectional tree and consider only the subtree connecting those four nodes. For some  permutation of the four nodes, say a, b, c, d, this subtree must correspond to the tree illustrated in Figure 2(a). Thus we  have  daa + dbd = dax + db. + dva + dvd + 2dx,,, = dad + dbc  and  dca + ddb = dxa + dzb + dcv + ddv + 2dyx = dd. + dab Adding these two equations together, we get  (daa + daa) + (dbd + ddb) = (dad + dd.) + (dbc + deb)  Since dx>, 0 and d,., > 0, and  dab + db. + dad + dda = dax + dxa + db. + dab + dcv + dl-; + ddv + dvd we also have  (daa + dc.) + (dba + ddb) = (dad + dd.) + (dbc + dab) >1 (dab + dba) + (dad + dde)>  which is the condition specified by Theorem 1, but on the matrix D -{- D'. This proves the necessity of the first condition.  Now, pick any three visible nodes, a, b, c, from the underlying bidirectional tree and consider the subtree connecting those  three nodes. This subtree must correspond to the tree illustrated in Figure 2(b). It is clear that dab + dbc + dca = dax + dxa  + db. + dxb + dax + dxa = db. + dab + daa , which proves the necessity of the second condition. Sufficiency can be proved by  induction on the number of visible nodes.  Next we must prove that the two tree representations have the same structure. Consider the weighted free tree which is  constructed by replacing each pair of links between adjacent nodes in the weighted bidirectional tree representation of D by a  single link whose weight is the sum of the weights of the two links being replaced. This weighted free tree  FIG. 2. (a) The subtree connecting any four nodes (a, b, c, and d) from an arbitrary weighted bidirectional tree. (b) The  subtree connecting any three nodes (a, b, and c) from an arbitrary weighted bidirectional tree.  TREE REPRESENTATIONS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISTANCES 177  has the same structure as the weighted bidirectional tree representation of D. For any two visible nodes i and j, the distance  between them in the weighted free tree is ds; + d;i , because of the way in which the free tree was constructed. Thus the  matrix of distances between visible nodes in the weighted free tree is D -E- D'. But D + D' can have only one exact weighted  free tree representation (Theorem 5). Therefore, the structure of the weighted free tree representation of D + D' is the same  as the structure of the weighted bidirectional tree representation of D, and the theorem has been proved.  The Algorithm  The method used to recover the best weighted bidirectional tree representation for a given matrix of dissimilarities, D, has  two major steps: (1) determine the structure of the tree by first finding the best weighted free tree representation of D -}-  D'; (2) determine the link lengths by standard numerical procedures.  Since the weighted free tree representation of D -}- D' has the same structure as the bidirectional tree representation of D,  the first step of the algorithm is to find the best weighted free tree representation for D -{- D'. Once the structure of the  bidirectional tree has been determined in this way, the link lengths can be fit by standard multiple regression techniques.  Define the function 0, : T2 ~ I to be an isomorphism from the n(n - 1) ordered pairs of the integers 1 thru n to the integers  1 thru n(n - 1). The dissimilarity- values can then be thought of as the vector 8 = (81 , 82 ,..., 8. Let the links in the  bidirectional tree be in some arbitrary simple order and let each link be associated with an integer between 1 and l, where l  is the number of links. The link lengths can be represented by a vector w = (w1 , w2 ,..., wt)'. The structure of the  bidirectional tree can then be represented by the n(n - 1) x l matrix I, _ [l;;], where  l2; _  1, if i = 0e(x, y) and link j is on the path from x to y, 0, otherwise.  The relationship between the structure of the tree, the link lengths, and the internode distances of the tree (the vector d =  (d1 , d2 ,..., d%is given by Lw = d. The best fitting (in the least-squares sense) link lengths can be found by substituting 8  for d and solving for w. The solution is found by multiplying both sides of the equation by the left pseudo-inverse of L,  obtaining w = (LL')-1 L'8. The best fitting weighted bidirectional tree is thus fully specified.  Uniqueness  The structure of the best bidirectional tree representation of a matrix of dissimilarities, D, is unique, since its structure  is the same as the free tree representation of D + D'. However, the link lengths can only be uniquely determined under certain  circumstances. In order to demonstrate the non-uniqueness of the link lengths, consider a bidirectional tree with an invisible  node x. If a, b, and c are visible nodes adjacent to x in the tree, then the subtree connecting these four nodes is given in  Figure 2(b). For some specification of the six link lengths, the three given distances can be expressed as dab = dax + dxb ,  dac = dax + dxe , and dba = dbx + dxo . Now suppose we have the different specification  178 JAMES P. CUNNINGHAM  of the link lengths given by d'ix = dix -}- k and d', = dxi - k, for i = a, b, c. It is clear that dab = d'ax + d'xb, dac =  d'ax + d'xc , and dbc = d'bx + d'xc , that is, the given (observable) distances remain unchanged while the link lengths  change. This sort of non-uniqueness will occur for any bidirectional tree representation which has at least one invisible node.  In practice, there are several ways to circumvent this problem of non-uniqueness. One way is to insist that no invisible nodes  be permitted. This can be implemented by including this as a constraint at the point when a free tree is recovered from D +  D'. A second way to cope with the problem is to add the constraint that links between visible and invisible nodes must be  symmetric. That is, if x is invisible, b is visible, and b and x are adjacent, then we add the constraint that dbx = dxb . A  third way is to consider only situations in which the primary interest is in the structure of the bidirectional tree rather  than the specific link lengths. Since the structure is uniquely determined, the link length problem can be ignored.  Unfortunately, these three ways of handling the non-uniqueness problem involve throwing away some of the possible information  contained within a bidirectional tree representation. A fourth method involves adding additional information so that link  lengths can be uniquely determined. In some experimental situations, there will be ways to obtain independent empirical  estimates of some of the link lengths between visible and invisible nodes. Once some of these link lengths are estimated, the  rest can be uniquely determined. Examples of both the third and fourth approaches will be given in a later section when data  from a sentence memory experiment are considered.  NONMETRIC RECOVERY OF TREES  In the preceding sections it was assumed that the interstimulus dissimilarity measures were approximately linearly related to  the corresponding inter-node distances in the underlying tree structure. There are two ways that this assumption can be  relaxed and replaced by the assumption that the dissimilarities and the distances are related by an isotonic (i.e., order  preserving) function. This permits the nonmetric recovery of the underlying tree.  One way of relaxing the assumption is to use the maximum variance nondimensional scaling (MVNDS) described by Cunningham and  Shepard (1974) as the first step of the algorithm for recovering trees. MVNDS transforms the dissimilarities into distances  that satisfy the metric axioms, that are approximately isotonically related to the dissimilarities, and that have the maximum  variance possible under the preceding two conditions. Cunningham and Shepard (1974) have shown that MVNDS can be used to  determine the true inter-node distances of a tree from a set of dissimilarities isotonically related to the true distances.  Thus, after applying MVNDS to the dissimilarities, the assumption of a linear relationship between the output of MVNDS and the  inter-node distances in the underlying tree would be warranted. The procedures described earlier could then be used to recover  the appropriate tree representation.  Another way of achieving the nonmetric recovery of a tree is to use a method for choosing the appropriate linear equality  constraints that is invariant under isotonic  TREE REPRESENTATIONS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISTANCES 179  transformations of the dissimilarities. Consider the case of weighted free trees first. The main obstacle to the use of a  nonmetric procedure is the choice of constraints specified by Theorem 1. When choosing the set of relevant constraints, we  examine each set of four stimulus objects, i, j, k, and l, and compute sl = 8ii + 8kt , s2 - 8ik + Bit , and $s = Bit -4- 8ik  . The largest two of sl , s2 , and s3 are then constrained to be equal to each other. Note that this procedure involves the  sums of dissimilarities, but these sums are meaningless if only the ordering of the dissimilarities has meaning. However, this  problem can be overcome in many situations. We can think in terms of sl = f (8ii) + f (8kt), s2 = f (8ik) + f (Sit), and s3 =  f(bit) + f (8ik), where f is the isotonic function which transforms dissimilarities into distances. The important fact for  constraint choice is the ordering of sl , s2 , and s3 . Once the smallest of the three has been found, the problem is solved,  since the other two can be set equal to one another. The question becomes, what orderings of the six dissimilarities uniquely  determine the smallest si , regardless of the particular form of f. The following theorem answers this question.  THEOREM 7. Given the ordering a > b > c > d >. e > f and some partitioning of these six quantities into three distinct pairs,  the pair with the smallest sum is known if it is one of, (i) e + f; (ii) d -}- f; or (iii) c + f when d + e is not a pair.  Proof. (1) Obvious. (ii) Let x = a, b, or c. We know x > d and e >, f so x + e  > d-f. =(iii) Let x = a or b and y = d or e. Once again, x > candy ~ f, sox + y c + f which concludes the proof.  So, for each set of four stimulus objects, we can either determine which constraint should be satisfied or decide that we  cannot tell anything from that particular set. There are fifteen possible ways of forming three distinct pairs from six  quantities. Eight of those fifteen ways satisfy the condition of Theorem 7. Since (a) is much larger than the number of  independent constraints, after considering all sets of four stimulus objects there will usually be a large enough set of  constraints to ensure the recovery of a tree.  Once the set of constraints has been chosen, the distance matrix can be found by putting the problem into a mathematical  programming framework. We define C, 8, and d as before. A measure of discrepancy between d and 8 which is invariant under  isotonic transformations of either d or 8 is  11 d - 8 ~'jso ----- min{ll d - d II I d and 8 are isotonically related}. d  The d' which is called for can be found by the Miles-Kruskal algorithm (Kruskal, 1964).  The problem can then be stated as finding that d* which satisfies  11 d* - 8 Also = min{II d - 811tso 1 Cd -_ 0}.  This is a standard problem of constrained optimization and can be solved by any one of several iterative optimization  algorithms. Once d* is found, the underlying tree can be reconstructed in the same way as before.  A similar approach can be used for the nonmetric recovery of weighted bidirectional trees. A theorem similar to Theorem 7 can  be stated for orderings of twelve quantities  180 JAMES P. CUNNINGHAM  and sums within three distinct four-tuples. The procedure becomes fairly tedious, but the extension is straightforward.  EXAMPLE APPLICATIONS AND COMPARISONS WITH OTHER STRUCTURES  Free trees and bidirectional trees can be used as representations of psychological distance in a wide variety of stimulus  domains. This section will illustrate the general utility of these representations by analyzing data from experiments  involving the relative similarities among animal terms and the memory for sentences. In addition, the analysis of one of the  data sets using free trees will be compared and contrasted with the analysis of that set by multidimensional scaling and  hierarchical clustering.  Similarities Among Animal Terms  In order to illustrate the differences between the use of various sorts of geometric structures as representations of  psychological distance, measures of the dissimilarities among various animal terms were collected and analyzed with several  different procedures. In order to collect the data, subjects were presented with all pairs of ten animal terms and asked to  rate the dissimilarity of the meanings of the terms on a scale from one to ten. The ratings were then averaged over subjects,  yielding a matrix of the estimated distances among the animal terms. As an example of a spatial representation, nonmetric  multidimensional scaling (the computer program KYST) was used to find the two-dimensional Euclidean space which best  represents the data. This space is shown in Figure 3. In order to illustrate hierarchical clustering, that tree which  satisfies the restrictions of hierarchical clustering (i.e., the ultrametric inequality) and whose distances were closest in  the leastsquares sense to the data was found. That hierarchical representation is shown in Figure 4.  SALMON  ROBIN  FISH TROUT  HAWK  BIRD  DOG CAT  DEER  BEAR  FIG. 3. The two-dimensional Euclidean representation of the animal term dissimilarities  recovered with nonmetric multidimensional scaling.  TREE REPRESENTATIONS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISTANCES 181  DOG  FIG. 4. The hierarchical clustering solution for the animal dissimilarities data.  HAWK  FIG. 5. The weighted free tree representation for the animal dissimilarities data.  These two representations can be compared with the best weighted free tree representation (found using the metric procedure  described earlier) which is shown in Figure 5. First, the adequacy of these representations can be compared quantitatively.  The weighted free tree representation accounts for 97.4% of the variance in the mean dissimilarity ratings, and has 15  parameters. The hierarchical clustering representation accounts for 86.6% of the variance with 7 parameters, while the  multidimensional scaling representation uses 20 parameters to account for 88.4% of the variance. While it is not clear how to  rigorously compare the goodness of fit of these various representations, there is an approach which provides a reasonable  index. The fitting of parameters in all of these methods can be likened to the estimating of coefficients in multiple linear  regression. The F for regression measures the extent to which a significant amount of the variance in the data is accounted  for by the regression equation. A similar F can be computed for each of the representations. If k is the number of parameters,  and n is the number of  182 JAMES P. CUNNINGHAM  stimuli, then the F for a given representation has k and (n(n - 1)/2) - k degrees of freedom. For a given representation, the  probability, p, that its F could be exceeded by chance is a measure of how badly that representation fits the data. This  approach takes into account both the variance accounted for and the number of parameter values estimated (and was used by  Carroll and Chang, 1973). For the free tree, this yields F(15, 30) = 92.21, p ~_- 10-21; for hierarchical clustering, F(7, 38)  = 35.08, p - 10-14; and for multidimensional scaling, F(20, 25) = 5.72, p r_- 10-1. Clearly, all three representations account  for a significant proportion of the variance in the mean dissimilarity ratings. However, the value of p for the free tree is  by far the smallest of the three, suggesting that the free tree makes the most efficient use of its estimated parameter values.  The qualitative comparisons among the three representations are at least as important as the quantitative ones. The most  relevant comparison is between the two discrete representations, that is, between hierarchical clustering and the weighted  free tree. Both representations divide the stimuli into a fish group, bird group, forest animal group, and house pet group. In  addition, the house pet group and the forest animal group seem to form a larger group of all mammals. One of the major  differences between the representations is that in the free tree bird is at a non-terminal node above robin and hawk, and fish  seems to belong at a nonterminal node above salmon and trout. (While fish is not located precisely at that nonterminal node,  the length of the link attaching it to that node (0.27) is very small, and is the only link length that is less than the  root-mean-squareddifference between the dissimilarities and the recovered distances (0.34). Therefore, it is reasonable to  assume that the link's existence is caused by error in the data.) Our a priori knowledge concerning the relationships among  animal terms indicates that bird and fish are "higher-order" concepts. The free tree representation reflects this knowledge,  while the hierarchical clustering cannot. Another interesting feature of the free tree representation is that bird is closer  to robin than to hawk. While this difference is small, it is consistent with the finding of Rosch (1973) that a robin is a  very "typical" bird. It is also consistent with the finding of Rips, Shoben, and Smith (1973) that people take less time to  agree with the statement "a robin is a bird" than the statment "a hawk is a bird". The ability to handle these sorts of  effects indicates that weighted free trees may be useful tools in the study of semantic memory. In fact, Collins and Loftus  (1975) propose more general weighted graph structures as a model of semantic memory, and trees can describe certain parts of  those structures.  It is interesting to compare the free tree representation with the spatial representation produced by multidimensional  scaling. One of the reasons for using a coordinate space as a representation is so that the axes of the space can be given  psychologically meaningful interpretations. Examination of the space shown in Figure 3 reveals that there may be a "size"  dimension that could be represented by a straight line passing from bear to hawk and perhaps a "human-like" dimension  represented by a line from cat to salmon. However, the exact ordering and spacing of stimuli along these dimensions only  roughly corresponds with our intuitive notions of the proper ordering and spacing. The information that is most obviously  conveyed by the space is the division of stimuli into "mammal" and and "non-mammal" and the further subdivision into forest  animals, house pets, fish, and birds. But this is the information that is clearly represented by both the free tree  TREE REPRESENTATIONS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISTANCES 183  and the hierarchical tree. If the free tree in Figure 5 is compared with the space in Figure 3, it appears that  multidimensional scaling is trying to account for the internode distances of a tree by approximating all paths in the tree  with straight lines in the space. That is why the terminal nodes of the tree are arranged in an approximate circle in the  space, with the higher-order nodes closer to the center of the circle.  Sentence Memory  In this section, weighted bidirectional trees will be used as a theory of the way in which certain types of sentences are  stored in memory. Behavioral measurements from a sentence memory experiment will be transformed into distance estimates by way  of a processoriented theory of what is going on in that experiment. Bidirectional trees will then be recovered from those  distance estimates.  The data which will be considered are from a sentence memory experiment reported by Anderson and Bower (1973, section 10.3).  In the experiment, subjects were required to memorize a list of sentences. Each sentence had the same basic structure:  The subject transitive verbed the object who intransitive verbed in the location.  For instance, one of the sentences could have been:  The hippie touched the debutante who sang in the park.  Each sentence had different words in the five key locations (S, T, O, I, and L). After the subjects had studied the list of  sentences, memory for the sentences was tested using a cued recall procedure. That is, for each sentence, the subject was  presented with the basic sentence frame with one of the five key words filled in, and was asked to fill in the other four key  words. For instance, one of the test cues could have been:  The touched the who in the  The data from this sort of experiment consist of the probabilities of the various recall patterns for each type of cue.  These probabilities should reveal something about the way in which the sentences are stored in memory. If word B is recalled  with a higher probability than word C when word .A is used as a cue, then A and B must be in some sense "closer together" in  the memory representation than are A and C. Since cued recall probabilities are inherently asymmetric, a weighted  bidirectional tree is a likely candidate for the underlying memory representation. In order to discover the bidirectional tree  which best represents the data from this experiment, the following four assumptions are made: (1) When a subject encodes a  sentence, it is encoded in the form of a bidirectional tree with the words of the sentence at some of the nodes of the tree.  (2) The links of the tree are encoded independently and forgotten independently. (3) The probability of recalling one word  when cued with another is the probability of the existence of an intact path from the cue word to the remembered word at the  time of recall, that is,  P{recall word j I word i as cue} = p,; = P{path from i to j}.  48o/17/a-7  184 JAMES P. CUNNINGHAM  (4) The representation for a particular sentence depends only upon the type of sentence and not upon the particular words used  in the sentence. These assumptions are very similar to those made by Anderson and Bower in their own model.  The weights on the links of the bidirectional tree can be thought of as the probabilities of those links existing at the time  of recall. If there is an intermediate node, x, on the path from i to j, then pi; = pix pxi , because of the second  assumption. Previously, weights on links have always been thought of as lengths, and if there is a node x between i and j,  then dir = dix + dxf . But there is a natural translation from the domain of multiplicative probabilities to the domain of  additive distances. The probabilities can be transformed into distance estimates by Si; = -In pii . Then the numerical  procedures described earlier can be used to construct the best weighted bidirectional tree representation of the distance  estimates. The distances in the tree, the di; , can be transformed back into probabilities by pi; = exp(-di;).  .842 .912  FIG. 6. The weighted bidirectional tree representation of Anderson and Bower's (1973, p. 309) sentence memory data. The  numbers on the links are the probabilities of those links being intact at the time of recall.  If this procedure is applied to the data from Anderson and Bower's experiment, the bidirectional tree shown in Figure 6 is  recovered. However, if only the pairwise probabilities are considered, then only the structure of the tree is determined  uniquely, the link weights are not. (This is a problem common to all bidirectional trees and was discussed earlier.) If the  data from this experiment are examined in a little more detail, then additional information can be added which permits the  unique determination of link weights. Subjects in this experiment would often recall some but not all of the words in a  sentence. This fact can be exploited in order to obtain independent estimates of the weights (probabilities) on the links  leading from nonterminal nodes to terminal nodes. The estimates are  AS pir Al p3L p8o  P{recall S I T as a cue & 0, I, or L were recalled), P{recall T I S as a cue & 0, I, or L were recalled}, P{recall I I L as a  cue & 0, S, or T were recalled}, P{recall L I I as a cue & 0, S, or T were recalled}, P{recall 0 1 (S or T as a cue & I or L  recalled) or (I or L as a cue & S or T recalled)}.  TREE REPRESENTATIONS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISTANCES 185  These probabilities can be transformed into distance estimates and included in the vector 8, and the matrix L can be enlarged  accordingly. The uniquely determined link weights which were recovered using this procedure appear in Figure 6.  This bidirectional tree provides an excellent account of the data (XZS = 6.12, p > .70). The structure of the tree is the same  as the structure proposed by Anderson and Bower (1973) on theoretical grounds, but it is comforting to see their proposal  confirmed by an automatic procedure. The memory structures proposed by Anderson and Bower have the restriction that all links  between nonterminal nodes must be identical, and thus must have the same probability of existing at the time of recall. There  are four such probabilities in this bidirectional tree, and they have the values .842, .884, .888, .912, indicating that  Anderson and Bower's restriction is approximately correct.  The probabilities on the links leading from the words to non-terminal nodes are all relatively small (.283, .350, .428, .428,  and .444). One interpretation of this result is that these measures reflect the probability of the cue word "making contact"  with the correct place in memory. The reason that these probabilities are low is that subjects often recall nothing when  presented with a cue.  FIG. 7. The bidirectional tree predicted by the hypothesis that sentences are remembered as simple lists of words.  Notice that words which are physically close together in the sentence are also close together in the tree. If subjects were  just learning the sentences as lists of words, then a likely bidirectional tree representation of the memory structure would  be that given in Figure 7. But if that was the true structure, nodes 4 and 5 would not be detected by the present procedure  because each of them is only adjacent to two other nodes. Thus, the recovered structure would be identical to the one  recovered for Anderson and Bower's experiment. But, according to Anderson and Bower's theory, the placement of words in the  tree is determined by the roles played by the words in the sentence, not by their physical location. In order to remove this  confounding, Anderson and Bower did an additional experiment. This experiment had the same procedure as the previous one, but  the sentences were of the form:  In the location the object during the time was transitive verbed by the subject. L O T V S  For example, one of the sentences could have been:  In the park the debutante during the night was touched by the hippie.  186 JAMES P. CUNNINGHAM  The representation proposed by Anderson and Bower for this type of sentence differs from the representation predicted by'  physical contiguity only in that the object and the time have switched places.  FIG. 8. The bidirectional tree representation of the data from Anderson and Bower's (1973, p. 319) sentence memory experiment.  The bidirectional tree which best represents the data from this experiment is shown in Figure 8. The link weights are omitted  since the data in Anderson and Bower (1973) are not reported in sufficient detail to permit their unique determination. The  structure of the tree is uniquely determined and is of the form predicted by physical contiguity rather than that predicted by  Anderson and Bower. This tree fits the data very well (X25 = 1.06, p > .95). On the other hand, a, bidirectional tree with the  same structure as the representation predicted by Anderson and Bower does not fit as well (X25 = 2.50). It appears that  physical contiguity plays an important 'role when a subject commits a list of unrelated sentences to memory by rote. Since  subjects do not have to understand the meanings of the sentences, it is possible that they are paying attention only to the  surface structure of the sentences, and not even processing the deeper structure. Anderson and Bower did not discover this,  however, because they only fit their particular model to the data. If they had been able to use this objective method for  finding the best form of the representation, they would not have made this apparent mistake.  CONCLUSION  Although graph-theoretic structures have often been proposed as models of the way in which information is stored in memory,  there are few methods for recovering graphtheoretic representations from psychological distances. The lack of such methods has  constrained theoretical developments and their empirical test. Researchers have been forced into one of two approaches. One  approach has been to attempt to accept or reject an entire class of structures on the basis of some set of empirical results.  One unsatisfying aspect of this approach is that no specific structure from a class can be shown to be a good representation  for a specific stimulus or set of stimuli. The other approach has been to propose a specific structure for a specific  situation and then to subject that structure to empirical test. If the structure fails the test, a new structure can be  proposed and tested. This is the traditional model building approach and its use is exemplified by the work of Anderson and  Bower (1973) that was discussed previously. An unsatisfying aspect of  TREE REPRESENTATIONS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISTANCES 187  this approach is that theoretical development is limited by the researcher's intuitions about the particular structure best  suited for a particular situation.  The results reported here enable researchers to take a different approach. Objective methods were presented for finding  graph-theoretic representations of two kinds: weighted free trees and weighted bidirectional trees. Theories can now be made  about processes acting upon a class of structures, and these methods can be used to choose the particular instance of the  class that is most appropriate for a given situation. The adequacy of that particular structure can then be assessed. This  approach has the advantage that theorization can take place at the level of classes of structures, but evaluation of theories  can be done at the level of specific structures for specific situations.  REFERENCES  ANDERSON, J. R., & BOWER, G. H. Human associative memory. Washington, D.C.: V. H. Winston, 1973.  ARAEIE, P., & SHEPARD, R. N. Representation of similarities as additive combinations of discrete overlapping properties. Paper  presented at the Mathematical Psychology Meetings, Montreal, August 1973.  BUNEMAN, P. The recovery of trees from measures of dissimilarity. In F. R. Hodson, D. G. Kendall, and P. Tautu (Eds.),  Mathematics in the archaeological and historical sciences. Edinburgh: Edinburgh, University Press, 1971.  CARROLL, J. D. Spatial, non-spatial and hybrid models for scaling. Psychometrika, 1976, 41, 439-463. CARROLL, J. D., & CHANG,  J. J. A method for fitting a class of hierarchical tree structure models to dissimilarities data, and its application to some  "body parts" data of Miller's. In Proceedings of the 81st Annual Convention of the American Psychological Association, 1973.  Vol. 8, pp. 1097-1098. CARROLL, J. D., & PRUZANSKY, S. Fitting of hierarchical tree structure (HTS) models, mixtures of HTS  models, and hybrid models, via mathematical programming and alternating least squares. Presented at the U.S.-Japan Seminar on  Theory, Methods, and Applications of Multidimensional Scaling and Related Techniques, San Diego, August 1975.  COLLINS, A. M., & LOFTUS, E. F. A spreading-activation theory of semantic processing. Psychological Review, 1975, 82, 407-428.  COLLINS, A. M., & QUILLIAN, M. R. Retrieval time from semantic memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1969,  8, 240-248.  CUNNINGHAM, J. P. Finding the optimal tree-realization of a proximity matrix. Paper presented at the Mathematical Psychology  Meetings, Ann Arbor, August 1974.  CUNNINGHAM, J. P., & SHEPARD, R. N. Montone mapping of similarities into a general metric space. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 1974, 11, 335-363.  DoBsoN, A. J. Unrooted trees for numerical taxonomy. Journal of Applied Probability, 1974, 11, 32-42.  GOLSTEIN, E. G. Theory of convex programming. Providence, R. I.: Amer. Math. Soc. 1972. GUTTMAN, L. A general nonmetric  technique for finding the smallest coordinate space for a configuration of points. Psychometrika, 1968, 33, 469-506.  HAKIMI, S. L., & YAu, S. S. Distance matrix of a graph and its realizability. Quarterly of Applied Mathematics, 1964, 22,  305-317.  HARTIGAN, J. A. Representation of similarity matrices by trees. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 1967, 62,  1140-1158.  INDOW, T., & KANAZAWA, K. Multidimensional mapping of Munsell colors varying in hue, chroma, and value. Journal of  Experimental Psychology, 1960, 59, 330-336.  JOHNSON, S. C. Hierarchical clustering schemes. Psychometrika, 1967, 32, 241-254.  188  JAMES P. CUNNINGHAM  KRUSKAL, J. B. Nonmetric multidimensional scaling: a numerical method. Psychometrika, 1964, 29, 115-129.  MILLER, J. R., & CARTERETTE, E. C. Perceptual space for musical structures. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,  1975, 58, 711-720.  NORMAN, D. A., & RUMELHART, D. E. Explorations in cognition. San Francisco: Freeman, 1975. PATRINOS, A. N., & HAKIMI, S. L.  The distance matrix of a graph and its tree realization. Quarterly of Applied Mathematics, 1972, 30, 255-269.  RIPS, L. J., SHOBEN, E. J., & SMITH, E. E. Semantic distance and the verification of semantic relations. Journal of Verbal  Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1973, 12, 1-20.  ROSCH, E. On the internal structure of perceptual and semantic categories. In T. E. Moore (Ed.), Cognitive development and  acquisition of language. New York: Academic Press, 1973.  SATTATH, S., & TVERSKY, A. Additive similarity trees. Psychometrika, 1977, 42, 319-346. SIMOFs-PEREIRA, J. Some results on the  tree realization of a distance matrix. In P. Rosenthiehl (Ed.), Theory of graphs, international symposium. New York: Gordon  and Breach, 1967.  SHEPARD, R. N. The analysis of proximities: Multidimensional scaling with an unknown distance function. I & II. Psychometrika,  1962, 27, 125-140 & 219-246.  TORGERSON, W. S. Theory and methods of scaling. New York: Wiley, 1958. TVERSKY, A. Features of similarity. Psychological  Review, 1977, 84, 327-352.  RECEIVED: May 10, 1977