10.1016/0022-2496(79)90020-8
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 20, 91-163 (1979)  Levels of Sensorimotor Representation`  ELLIOT SALTZMAN  Department of Kinesiology, Child Development and Mental Retardation Center, University of Washington  Problems of planning coordinated sensorimotor actions are examined within a cohesive framework based on seven levels of  movement representation (conceptual, environmental spatial, effector, body spatial, joint motion, joint torque, and muscle)  and the relationships existing among these levels. Emphasis is placed on discussions of the spatial motion, joint motion, and  joint torque levels in the context of mathematical treatments of the degrees of freedom problem in motor control and the  incorporation of environmentally supplied forces into movement planning procedures. Implications of this approach for  understanding the nature of skilled actions are discussed, and applications of the mathematical treatments for simulation and  experimental studies of coordinated movement are suggested.  CONTENTS  I. Introduction  A. Seven Levels of Representation: An Overview 1. The Action Plan  II. The Levels  A. Conceptual Level  B. Environmental Space Motion, Effector Levels 1. Effector-nonspecific Environmental Space 2. Effector System Selection  3. Effector-Specific Environmental Space  C. Body Space, Joint Motion Levels  1. Body Segment Space (Segment Space) a. The direct kinematic transform  b. Body spatial trajectory planning  c. Body space-work/task-space mapping  d. Body space-global invariant coordination: Postural control  1 An earlier version of this paper was submitted to the University of Minnesota in partial fulfillment of the requirements of  the Ph.D. degree, December, 1977. Portions of this paper were presented at the 1st Joint Meeting of the Psychometric Society  and the Society for Mathematical Psychology, Hamilton, Ontario, August 1978.  The preparation of this manuscript was partially supported by a grant (HDO-2274) from the National Institute of Child Health  and Human Development awarded to the Child Development and Mental Retardation Center, University of Washington. I would like  to express my appreciation to the following colleagues for their helpful comments on an earlier draft of this paper and for  valuable discussions concerning several of the topics therein: Louise Carter-Saltzman, Roger Enoka, Dedre Gentner, Berthold  Horn, Earl Hunt, Robert Hutton, Beth Kerr, Colin MacLeod, Michael Maratsos, Doris Miller, Herbert Pick, Jr., John Rieser, and  Michael Turvey.  91  0022-2496/79/050091-73$02.00/0 Copyright Q 1979 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  92 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  2. Sensorimotor Coordination: The Degrees of Freedom Problem a. Degrees of freedom; generalized coordinates  b. The inverse kinematic transform c. Matrix inversions: Singularities d. Redundant degrees of freedom  e. Sensorimotor coordination: Kinematics f. The functional synergy matrix  g. Representation of skills: I. Kinematics; coordinative structures h. Sensorimotor timing  D. Joint Torque Level  1. Lagrangian Overview; Linkage Kinetics a. Lagrangian analysis  b. Linkage-mechanical effects (kinetic energy terms) 2. Interaction with Environmental Forces  a. Gravity effects (potential energy terms; generalized forces) b. Contact effects: Normal reaction force  c. Contact effects: Tangential reaction force (friction)  3. Three-Dimensional Motion; Computational Complexity a. Sensorimotor state/configuration space  b. Representation of skills: II. Kinematics and kinetics E. Muscle Level  1. Muscle Forces  a. Anatomy matrix; muscle synergy matrix  b. Representation of skills: III. Muscle, torque, and motion c. Skill acquisition  2. Muscle Innervation  III. Summary and Conclusions A. Concluding Remarks Appendixes  A. Direct Kinematic Transform B. Orientation Angles  C. The Velocity Matrix D. The Jacobian Matrix E. Linkage-Mechanical Effects: Kinetic Energy Terms F. Kinetics: Gravity Effects  G. Kinetics: Normal Contact Effects  H. Kinetics: Tangential Contact Effects-Friction  INTRODUCTION  In at least one important sense, the problems encountered in dealing with the human sensorimotor system are similar to those  encountered in studying any highly complex, goal-oriented, adaptive system. In each case, one is confronted with a  multiplicity of observable variables and with the attendant difficulties of interpretation once observations are made. Thus,  for example, one can code the act of picking up and drinking from a container of liquid as: (a) a set of electromyographic  signals; (b) a set of skeletal joint rotations; (c) a set of spatial trajectories for each involved body segment; (d) a member  of a symbolically classified group of lifting, carrying, and ingesting actions; or (e) a  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 93  member of a more abstract category based on the action's relevance to the actor (e.g., nutrition, intoxication, or poisoning).  Clearly, a given action can be represented in many ways, and the choice of a particular type of description will depend on the  observer's chosen level of analysis. Although quite general, this multilevel perspective offers profound insights into the  nature of human sensorimotor coordination (cf. Bernstein, 1967; Gelfand, Gurfinkel, Fomin, & Tsetlin, 1971; Greene, 1972;  Turvey, 1977; Turvey, Shaw, & Mace, 1978; Greene, Note 1, Note 2), and can be used to guide the formulation of questions that  are appropriate to the examination of a given set of sensorimotor problems, e.g., infant reaching, the nature of motor  "programs," and adaptation to prolonged sensory distortion. The following sections elaborate on some of the possible levels of  representation for a given action and on the relations that exist among these levels. Problems of coordinated movement are  analyzed within a cohesive framework which combines the mathematical rigor of approaches taken in the robotics, biomechanics,  and prosthetics literature with the behavioral relevance of psychological and physiological approaches. In addition, a set of  descriptive and mathematical terms are recommended which, hopefully, may serve as the basis for a common language in future  discussions and analysis of sensorimotor issues. Finally, it should be noted that several issues considered in this paper are  meant to apply equally as well to the actions of both complex biological and man-made systems. These include the use of a  levels of representation approach, the use of synergies, descriptions of the physical constraints relevant to sensorimotor  activity, and trade-offs between storage space and computation time in action planning procedures. The particular mathematical  formalisms and storage/retrieval techniques used to deal with these issues may or may not be those used by biological  organisms. However, these formalisms and techniques have been and should continue to be useful in planning movements for  man-made devices and for simulation studies of biological movement.  Seven Levels of Representation: An Overview  In discussing the control of a particular type of movement (e.g., writing the letter Z), one must distinguish between the  representation of the movement in long-term memory and the "working" representation used to control the movement in the  situation at hand (Bartlett, 1932; Bernstein, 1967; Pew, 1974; Schmidt, 1975; Turvey, 1977). This working representation, or  action plan (Turvey, 1977),2 is quite specific and is closely related to task demands as well as to the current state of the  environment and musculoskeletal system. The long-term memorial representation appears to be more abstract. This is suggested  by two considerations: limitations on memory storage capacity and the pro  2 Turvey (1977) was actually ambivalent in his use of the term "action plan" which at different times referred to a "statement  of consequences" (p. 215), a description of the "contours and timing of the movement" (p. 218) or a multileveled structure  representing an action at different levels of abstraction, i.e., as a structure that undergoes "phases of change, phases that  constitute a tailoring of the plan to the current kinematics and environmental contingencies" (p. 215). The term "action plan"  is used in the present paper in the last sense described.  94 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  duction of novel movements. For instance, the phenomenon of motor equivalence (Hebb, 1949; Lashley, 1930) can be used to  demonstrate that one can write the recognizably same Z with a wide range of effector systems, e.g., with either hand or foot,  or even with a pencil clamped between one's teeth. Additionally, even within the same effector system the same spatiotemporal  pattern of muscle contractions is rarely used from one performance to the next; the particular sets of muscles activated will  depend on task demands (e.g., writing on a small piece of paper or across a large blackboard), the physical state of the  peripheral musculoskeletal apparatus (e.g., the initial position and velocity of the limbs) and the environment (e.g., the  writing surface's location and orientation relative to the writer). Thus, it would be extremely inefficient for the nervous  system to store all the possible variations for every movement type in the actor's behavioral repertoire. This leads to the  second consideration, which is that such an inelegant system would fail to capture a central property of motor behavior: An  actor has the ability to generate novel instances of a particular movement type with which he has had only limited experience.  In most situations, therefore, it appears that the actual performance of an action involves the generation and use of an  action plan. This action plan incorporates both abstract information from long-term memory and specific information about  current task demands, the physical state of the environment, and the physical state of the peripheral motor apparatus.  The above considerations are not meant to imply that long-term memory representations have nothing to do with the concrete  details of a given action (effector systems, spatial and force requirements, etc.). The existence of skills implies that an  actor has some sort of stored knowledge, specific to certain task requirements and effector systems, that is used to guide  very familiar actions. Thus, writing is an upper limb-specific skill while walking is a lower limb-specific skill. It is  important to realize that this statement refers to skills, not capabilities. One can write with one's feet or walk on one's  hands, but these will generally be less-skilled actions. The topic of long-term representation of skilled actions will be  discussed further below, where suggestions will be made concerning the possible content of such representations.  The present analysis focuses on the nature of action plans for movements in particular situations, and begins at the stage  when decisions have been made to execute these actions with respect to specific objects, surfaces, and events in the actor's  immediately perceivable environment. Neither the motives behind such actions nor the processes used to control ongoing  movements (e.g., open-loop vs closed-loop processes) will be discussed. For the sake of brevity, discussion will be limited to  tasks of lifting, transporting, and manipulating. Examples of such tasks include situations in which an actor already has  decided to transport some peas on a fork from dinner plate to mouth or write a series of letters on a blackboard. Furthermore,  analysis will be limited to those movements during which the actor maintains a constant base of environmental support (e.g.,  by keeping his feet planted firmly on the ground), and acts within the immediately surrounding interaction space. Thus,  discussions will not include actions that involve imparting or absorbing forces during brief periods of impact, as in batting  or catching a ball; nor will they include actions which involve planned shifts in the actor's base of support, as in walking  through a larger-scale locomotion space, or as in simple jumping.  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 95  However, the principles outlined in the analyses below may be modified and extended to these other types of movements without  significant distortion.  The Action Plan  The action plan is viewed as a complex structure with seven major levels. In an order of generally decreasing abstractness,  these are labeled: conceptual, environmental-space motion, effector, body-space motion, joint motion, joint torque, and  muscle. For illustration, a brief and intentionally oversimplified example will be presented. Consider an experimental  situation where a subject is standing in front of a table on which there are two blocks of identical size and weight. One  block is red and rests at locus A, a second block is green and rests at locus B, and the subject's right hand rests on the  table at locus C. The subject has received instructions to stack the red block on top of the green block as quickly and  accurately as possible when he hears a tone. This stacking action might be represented at each of the above levels in the  following way:  (1) Conceptual-The act is defined in terms of symbolically coded and interrelated component actions, e.g., "reach" for the red  block, "lift" and "transport" it above the green block such that it can be "lowered into place" on top of the green block.  Movement representations of this type are similar to what Turvey (1977) called action concepts.  (2) Environmental-space motion-The blocks are located and oriented relative to a spatial reference system defined with respect  to the table surface, and the spatiotemporal trajectory of the red block's motion is outlined in these table-surface-centered  coordi nates. For the sake of simplicity, this spatial reference system is assumed to be defined in Cartesian coordinates.  (3) Efector-The acting member of the body, the body segments that link it to the trunk, and the set of muscles or muscle  groups associated with the control of this effector system are specified. To move the red block, the right hand-forearm-upper  arm-shoulder girdle system is selected along with the relevant set of muscles or muscle groups.  (4) Body-space motion-Assume that the actor's spatial relationship to the table is known. The locations, orientations, and  outlined trajectories of the block and the acting hand then may be specified with respect to a reference system defined, for  example, relative to the frontal, longitudinal, and sagittal planes of the actor's trunk. At this point, the action may be  represented as a specification of the right-hand's spatial trajectory relative to the trunk as a function of time.  (5) Joint motion-In order to enable the hand to follow a particular body-spatial path at a particular speed, the changes of  the joint angles, O; , in the joints between the hand and the trunk (i.e., wrist, radioulnar, elbow, shoulder, shoulder  girdle) must be specified as functions of time. Thus, at this level the movement is represented as a set of joint angles  (~;(t)), angular velocities (~; = (dldt) ~;(t)), and angular accelerations (~j = (dzldt2) ~j(t)).  96 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  (6) joint torque-Given the desired set of y'i , ~i , and ~i in the hand system, the resultant torques (T,(t)) which must be  actively produced at each joint are computed. The weights of the red block and the dynamics of the arm enter into these  calculations.  (7) Muscle-There are two sublevels within this category. The first deals with the calculation of the muscle forces needed to  produce a desired torque at a given joint. The second deals with the computation of the amount of muscle innervation (neural  input) required to produce the desired muscle forces.  Two important points should be mentioned here. The first is that there is no necessarily fixed, one-to-one relationship  between representations of the same movement in different levels of the action plan. Thus, one can write the letter Z  (conceptual level) with either the right or left hand (effector level), and one can use the right hand (effector level) to  write the letter Z or to scratch one's back (conceptual level). The second point is that each level is posited to receive  general instructions from other levels and to then operate relatively autonomously within its own set of computational  procedures and domains of information (Greene, 1972; Turvey, 1977; Greene, Note 1, Note 2). For instance, in the above example  of block stacking, the operations performed at the conceptual level would be concerned with the presence and identity of  "graspable" and "transportable" objects in the environment but would be relatively uninterested in the particular effector  used to accomplish the intended action. Operations performed at the spatial level, on the other hand, would be concerned with  an object's size and location, but would not be especially interested in whether it was a red block or a cube-shaped cookie  jar.  The next section examines in greater detail both the nature of the individual levels and the many-to-one relationships  existing among them. As a general working principle, I have kept discussions of the higher, more abstract levels as  uncluttered as possible with the lower-level details of a given movement. Such movement specifics have been added to the  evolving action plan at the lowest possible level of movement planning. Additionally, in the interest of simplicity, I have  considered only those indeterminacies introduced as more abstract representations are transformed into more concrete  representations; that is, I will consider only those indeterminacies involved in a "top-down" sequence of transformations.  Emphasis will be placed on characterizing the nature of the computational procedures used to transform movement  representations from body-spatial to joint-motion levels and from joint-motion to joint-torque levels of the action plan. In  the final section, the general approach presented in this paper will be reviewed, and applications relevant to studies of  human sensorimotor control and development will be briefly discussed.  THE LEVELS  Bernstein (1967) has defined sensorimotor coordination as "the process of mastering redundant degrees of freedom of the moving  organ, in other words its conversion to a controllable system" (p. 127). Indeed, the highest stage of a coordinated skill  "corresponds to a degree of coordination at which the organism is not only unafraid of reactive phenomena in a  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 97  system with many degrees of freedom, but is able to structure its movements so as to utilize entirely the reactive phenomena  which arise" (p. 109). The remainder of this essay is devoted to an unpacking, elaboration, and extension of these extremely  reasonable ideas.  Central to the present approach are the concepts of "redundancy," "degrees of freedom," and "reactive phenomena." The first  two terms become more understandable when viewed in conjunction with the body-spatial and joint-motion levels of the action  plan. These levels of representation are discussed in the framework of a kinematic analysis of movement, which is the study of  rectilinear and angular motion (and their derivatives with respect to time) without reference to the forces and torques  producing motion (Meriam, 1966). The term "reactive phenomena" will be interpreted according to its role in the computation of  actively produced resultant torques at the joints. These calculations take place at the joint-torque level of the action plan  and are discussed in the context of a kinetic movement analysis: the study of changes in motion related to the action of  forces and torques (Meriam, 1966). In accordance with these views, this paper will present a detailed examination of the  spatial-motion, joint-motion and joint-torque levels of movement representation. In contrast, the conceptual, effector, and  muscle levels will be discussed in a relatively brief way, although it is not my intention to slight the importance of these  latter types of representation in the production of human movement. Certainly, they warrant separate essays devoted to  problems specific to their individual domains of information and computational procedures.  In the text that follows, the levels of representation in the action plan will be discussed in the order of their original  presentation: conceptual, environmental-space motion, effector, body-space motion, joint motion, joint torque, and muscle.  Conceptual Level  The problems of representing an action at the conceptual level have much in common with efforts to specify the semantic  structure of actions or action verbs in the fields of psychology (e.g., Abrahamson, 1975; Gentner, 1978; Miller &  Johnson-Laird, 1976), linguistics (e.g., Talmy, 1975), and artificial intelligence (e.g., Schank, 1973; Winograd, 1973). Such  representations appear to involve highly abstract symbolic components integrated within a logical or propositional framework.  This suggested analogy between action concepts and semantic representation of verbs can be illustrated with reference to Fig.  1, a tentative representation of the verb "stir" developed by Gentner and Greeno (presented in Gentner, 1978) in accordance  with the general approach presented by Norman and Rumelhart (1975). For a particular situation (e.g., where "Elliot is  stirring some spaghetti sauce with a wooden spoon"), the diagram in Fig. 1 represents the action at its highest node by "Agent  (X = Elliot) stirs Object (Y = sauce) with Implement (Z = spoon)." The node "stir" includes three semantic subpredicate nodes,  each of which stands for a distinct relational concept. An arrow originating from a given node terminates on an entity that is  linked through the relation expressed at the arrow's node of origin. Thus, the two predicates "Move" and Motion" are the  arguments for the predicate "Cause," and the labels "event" and "result" indicate the roles that "Move"  98 ELLIOT SALTZIVIAN  CONTAINED !N  bowl  FIG. 1. Semantic representation of the verb "stir" (adapted from "On relational meaning: the acquisition of verb meaning" by  D. Gentner, Child Development, 1978, 49, 988-998. Copyright C 1978 by the Society for Research in Child Development. Used with  permission.).  and "Motion" play, respectively, in relation to "Cause." What this represents is that Agent X's (Elliot's) hand movement is an  event that causes Implement Z (spoon) to move with respect to Object Y (sauce) in a certain spatiotemporal manner.  Additionally, the hand and spoon are related as implement and object, respectively, through the "Grasp" node; and the sauce is  located (L) with respect to a bowl through the "Contained In" node.  In terms of the present analysis, only one modification of this representation is suggested, and that is to replace the  anatomically defined effector "hand" variable with a goal directed function, or effectivity (Turvey, et al., 1978),  "grippedtransporter" variable. This would leave the selection of the effector system to the discretion of the actor, operating  under the constraints imposed by the task environment. For example, one could choose (for some unspecified reason) to grasp  the spoon with one's toes or teeth. Such a decision would not be made until the effector level of the action plan.  Having rendered the action concept effector-nonspecific, the representation becomes an abstract specification of a goal in  terms of desired relationships between objects and surfaces in the environment. Such relationships are expressed functionally,  spatially, and temporally with respect to the action situation. Specifically, the concepts of "figure" and "ground" are used  in Talmy's (1975) sense to describe situations where one object (figure) is moving or is located with respect to another  object (ground); and the spatial and temporal aspects of motion are expressed only in an abstract qualitative sense rather  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 99  than metrically or quantitatively (Bernstein, 1967; Turvey, 1977). Thus, in our example, the rotary motion of a spoon is  specified relative to some sauce inside a bowl; however, the precise trajectory of the spoon, the shapes of the spoon and  bowl, and the exact environmental location and orientation of the bowl-spoon complex remain indefinite. What is important is  that the representations at this level involve only those spatial characteristics that allow identification of objects and  actions as well as action-relevant properties of objects and surfaces. These latter properties include "graspability,"  "transportability," "stand-on-ability," etc., and fall under the concepts of both affordances (Gibson, 1977) and manipulanda  (Tolman, 1932).3 In a similar way, the temporal parameters of a movement are not defined precisely at this level, but are  stated in rather qualitative terms, e.g., the "medium-slow" motion of the spoon. It is interesting to note that the spatial  and temporal aspects othe motion have been represented independently at the conceptual level. I will return to this point  later in discussing the spatial-motion levels of the action plan.  Environmental Space Motion, Efector Levels  The environmental space and effector levels will be treated as a unit since it seems reasonable to posit that the specific  environmental trajectory of a transported object will depend on the effector system used in a given task situation. Three  substages will therefore be discussed in this section: (a) effector-nonspecific environmental space, (b) effector system  selection, and (c) effector-specific environmental space.  Efector-Nonspecific Environmental Space  At this level of the action plan, the shapes, sizes, locations, and orientations of objects and surfaces in the environment  (interaction space) are specified relative to one another in quantitative metric terms as opposed to the more qualitative  topological descriptions used at the conceptual level. These "geographic" (Pick, Yonas, & Rieser, 1978) spatial  representations are defined, therefore, independently of the actor. Thus, the bowl in the action concept of "stir" discussed  above would be elaborated into a representation involving a container of a specific shape, height, and diameter which is  located in a particular position relative to a supporting surface (e.g., a table top). In addition, the support surface (and  hence the bowl) would be specified as being oriented parallel to  I The definitions of affordance and manipulandum overlap to an impressive degree. The affordance of an object or surface is "a  specific combination of the properties of its substance and its surfaces taken with reference to an animal" (Gibson, 1977, p.  67). These properties, although defined physically, are also defined by their relations to the action systems of a given  animal. Thus, the affordance of "walk-on-ability" is perceived in relation to the capacities of the animal's locomotor system.  Similarly, manipulanda are those properties of objects and surfaces which support sensorimotor action. They "derive in  character from the independent physical character of the environmental object and from the response organ make-up of the given  organism... [and are defined]... in terms of the range and refinements of manipulations which they will support in the given  organism. They are stand -on-able-nesses, pick-up-able-nesses, sit-in -able -nesses, etc., etc." (Tolman, 1932, p. 448).  100 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  the floor and perpendicular to the line of gravity (assuming that rational architects and contractors were involved in  construction of the room in which we would like to stir). Thus, two types of coordinate systems are implied in this analysis.  The first type of reference frame is a task/work space based on object- or surfacecentered coordinate systems (Agin & Binford,  1973; Nevatia & Binford, 1973; Paul, 1972; Mart, Note 3; Marr & Nishihara, Note 4) established for each of the objects and  surfaces relevant to the action situation. For the sake of simplicity it is assumed that such systems are Cartesian, that the  origins of these reference frames lie at the geometric center of the objects and surfaces of interest, and that the orthogonal  coordinate axes are oriented parallel to any existing axes of symmetry whenever possible. The spatial relations between any  two objects or surfaces can then be specified by a vector from one frame's origin to that of the next frame together with a  description of the orientations of one frame's axes relative to those of the next frame. Additionally, one object may be  related to a second which is related to a third, allowing the first object to be related to the third in a transitive manner.  Referring again to our example of stirring, separate coordinate systems would be defined for the table surface, bowl, and  spoon, and spatial interrelationships would be described with reference to the relationships existing between their respective  reference frames. The question of which object's or surface's coordinate system will serve as the primary reference frame for  the task is specified by the "figureground" structure supplied in the conceptual level of the action plan. For example, the  stirring action concept defines the spoon and sauce as figure and ground, respectively. Thus, the stirring action of the spoon  is defined relative to the coordinates of the sauce which are essentially determined with respect to the bowl's coordinate  system. Another example is the situation described earlier that involved stacking a red cube (figure) on top of a green cube  (ground). Here the red cube's motion would be defined relative to the green cube's coordinate axes.  The second type of reference system involved in this analysis is based on the global invariants of the environment, i.e., the  direction of gravity, the slant of the ground plane, and, if visible, the terrestrial horizon (Shaw & Mcintyre, 1974; Turvey,  et al., 1978). The reference frame defined in this case would have its z-axis parallel to gravity and its x- and y-axes  defined in a plane perpendicular to the line of grvity. There is no a priori basis, however, for locating the system's origin  at any particular point along the z-axis, or for that matter, for specifying the z-axis' point of intersection in the xy  plane; these axes will therefore be useful for defining only the relative orientations of other objector surface-centered axes  to these global axes, but not for defining direction or distance relationships. For example, the task of transporting a full  glass of water from one location to another on a table would involve, at this level of representation, a specification to  maintain the open rim of the glass parallel to the global xy plane, as well as a surfacecentered description of the initial  and final locations of the glass in table coordinates. Thus, the "ground" coordinate system in the object- or surface-centered  description of a given task is ultimately oriented as a "figure" relative to the global system's axes.  The amount of trajectory detail generated at this level will depend on the nature of the task and the constraints imposed by  the global invariants as well as on the layout of environmental surfaces and objects. Moving a cube from one location to  another on  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 101  an uncluttered table top will involve only the definition of the initial and goal locations and orientations of the cube's  coordinate system relative to table space. The exact route taken and the movement's precise speed will most likely depend on  the strength and dexterity of the particular effector system used to grasp and transport the cube (e.g., hands versus feet  versus teeth). A similar situation exists for moving a glass of water except that the orientation of the glass relative to  gravity is additionally specified throughout the trajectory. If the table is cluttered, the locations of any obstacles will be  described as locations to be avoided. An example of the most constrained type of spatial trajectory would be one that involved  an object that could only be moved along a fixed track. An example of the most constrained type of temporal trajectory would  be one which involved a movement whose timing was inflexibly regulated by metronome.  Efector System Selection  On the basis of current task demands (e.g., instructions, environmental constraints) and previous experience in similar  situations, a given effector system will be selected to to accomplish a particular task. In addition, the coordinate axes of  objects to be manipulated ("figures"; Talmy 1975) will be labeled in an actor-relevant manner determined by the specific task  and the effector system being used. Thus, for the action of grasping a cylindrical container of liquid, the "approach and  grasp" direction when the hand is used would most likely be any radially directed line toward the container's longitudinal  axis of symmetry. However, if the teeth are used, the approach and grasp would be initiated from above the cup and would  proceed parallel to the sides of the container toward any point on the lip of the container. Similarly, as an example of  different tasks involving common effector systems, consider playing a piano versus pushing it to a new location in a room.  Here each task entails different actor-relevant labels of the piano's coordinate axes even though the hands are used in both  cases to exert forces on the object itself.  Efector-Specific Environmental Space  At this level of the action plan, an overall time frame is defined for the motion of the objects and surfaces specified as  "figures" in the task space; also, the general spatial relationship of the actor to the work space is described. The former is  specified with reference to both task constraints and knowledge of the strength, speed, and dexterity of the chosen effector  system. For example, a given object may be carried faster if grasped with the hand than with the teeth. Similarly, if  conservation of effort is a goal, a heavy object may be carried more slowly than a light object (Greene, Note 5) since less  force is needed to initiate and decelerate the motion if the path is traversed slowly.  Specifying the actor's spatial relationship to the work space involves defining the location and shape (area) of the actor's  base of support in task space coordinates. The base of support is that area of the supporting surface whose limits are defined  by the areas of contact with given parts of the body (or artificial extensions of the body) and which includes all intervening  areas (Wells, 1971). Thus, the base of support increases when the feet are spread apart, and this area can be further  increased by the use of a cane or  102 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  walking staff. Unless an actor can maintain his line of grvaity (i.e., the vertical projection of his center of gravity)  within the base of support (or within a given region near its boundaries) he will lose his balance and totally disrupt any  ongoing task-oriented activity. This problem of postural control with respect to the global invariant of gravity will be  discussed further under the body-spatial motion section below; for now, it is sufficient to note that a wise choice of a  support base is essential for successful completion of a given task.  The location and shape of the base of support are specified with respect to the height of the task space from the ground  surface, the anatomical range of motion of the effector chosen for the planned action, and the masses of the body segments  included in this effector system. For instance, consider the task of moving an object from one place to another on a table top  which is located at waist height in front of a standing actor. If the support base is located close to the table, if the  object is light, and if the effector system involves only the hands and arms, the action will cause only a slight displacement  of the line of gravity relative to the base of support and balance will be easily preserved. However if the support base is  located farther from the table such that the actor must lean considerably forward with his trunk to reach the object and/or  the object is much heavier, the trunk-plus-arm action will cause a rather large displacement of the line of gravity. If the  line of gravity passes too far out of the support base, balance will be lost. These examples illustrates the factors that  enter into the computation of the relative distance of the support base from the work space. The following examples deal with  the specification of the shape of the support base for the same task, but in a situation where the work space is located on  the floor. If the hands are the effectors and the feet are planted sufficiently close to the object, the action can be  accomplished from a squatting position; that is, the shape of the base of support is defined by the boundary of the floor's  contact with the balls of the feet and any intervening area. However, if the grasping and transporting actions are to be done  with the teeth, the hands and knees will most likely be used to maintain balance. The shape of the support base will  consequently be outlined by the contact areas of the feet, knees, and hands with the floor. Essentially, then, the  specification of the shape and distance of the actor's base of support in work-space coordinates involves a knowledge of the  outer limits of the posturally "safe" movements for the selected effector system, given the general constraints of the  task-space trajectory and a crude estimate of the weights of objects to be manipulated.  As was noted earlier, the spatial and temporal aspects of the motion are represented independently at the conceptual level.  This separation has also been maintained throughout the treatment of environmental-space motion. However, although it is still  rather abstract, the description of an intended action may now be considered more "meaningful" in the sense that "motion has  meaning only when measured relative to a system of reference, which requires a well-defined system of coordinates and a  timemeasuring device" (Meirovitch, 1970, p. 2). Both requirements are present in the representation of an action at this stage  of the environmental-space level, either explicitly (i.e., the Cartesian reference system defined for the work space) or  implicitly (i.e., the timing device necessary to specify the time frame of the action).  Before proceeding to the next levels, it should be noted that the spatial and temporal  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 103  aspects of the motion will eventually be functionally related. This most probably occurs at some point between the  body-spatial/joint-motion levels and the joint-torque level of the action plan because, as was mentioned earlier, the input to  the joint-torque level is a set of "n" angular accelerations (n = the number of joints involved in the action) expressed as  functions of time. At this point, several convenient ways to relate the spatial and temporal aspects of a given type of  movement will be examined. Consider, for example, a circular motion with radius, L, in the task-space xy plane. The spatial  aspect of this trajectory is defined by the set of points in the plane that satisfy the function f (x, y) = x2 -f- y2 - L2 =0.  This curve can be related to time using any one of several possible parameters, each of which has a unique value at every  point in the curve. The most obvious choice of parameters is the parameter of time, t. Thus, x and y could be expressed as x =  x(t), y = y(t), and the position vector, r, defined by r = r(t) = x(t)i -}- y(t)j.4 Another equally plausible choice of  parameters would be A, a measure of the distance along the curve from a given starting point. In this case x and y could be  expressed as x = x(A), y = y(A), and the position vector defined by r = r(A) = x(A)i -}- y(A)l; x's and y's dependence on time  could then be specified indirectly by defining A as a function of time, i.e., A = A(t). We are now ready to proceed to the  body-space and joint-motion levels of the action plan.  Body-Space, Joint-Motion Levels  In discussing the nature of movement representations in the conceptual, environmental, and effector levels of the action plan,  it was evident that a great deal of potential indeterminacy existed among them. Thus, the conceptual level specified neither  effector nor environmental trajectory (path and/or time frame), a given spatial location could be reached by several  effectors, the same effector could reach a number of spatial locations at a variety of speeds, and so on. This  representational indeterminacy appears to be one of the main sources of the action system's flexibility. This flexibility can  be seen in the phenomenon of motor equivalence, i.e., "a variability of specific muscular responses, with circumstance, in  such a way as to produce a single result" (Hebb, 1949, pp. 153-154). The indeterminacy existing between the body-space and  joint levels of the action plan is yet a further source of such variability. Consider this relatively standard example-the  same effector (the hand) can draw the letter Z on a piece of paper either with finger and wrist motion or by holding the arm  relatively stiff and moving the hand via trunk and shoulder activity. There are also less obvious instances of spatial joint  motor equivalence. Golani (1976) has studied certain of these types of actions, referred to as "fixations," in the movement  sequences of the golden jackal (Canis aureus). During fixations, a "joint" is formed either physically or abstractly between  the animal's body part and either another portion of its body or an environmental target (i.e., an object, another animal, or  an abstractly defined spatial position). Thus, an animal may be seen as "keeping its  4 In this expression and in the rest of the text, the following notation will be used in vector expressions: (a) Any boldface  small or capital letter denotes a vector; and (b) i, j, i denote the unit vectors corresponding to the x, y, z axes,  respectively, of a Cartesian coordinate system.  104 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  own head in contact with a particular point on its own hindquarters, and then steadily maintaining this contact by  simultaneous `twisting' of the head, neck, and the torso" (p. 92). A more abstract example would be seen when "as a result of  raising the neck in relation to the torso, and of lowering the head in relation to the neck for the same amount of movement,  the head may be `fixated' ..., i.e., it will steadily maintain its initial angle to the ground" (p. 92). A similar type of  activity has been examined in human subjects during the task of aiming a pistol at a target, when the goal is to achieve and  maintain a stable positional relationship between the sights of the gun and the target (Arutyunyan, Gurfinkel, & Mirskii,  1968, 1969).  The following sections deal with the types of computational procedures that may be involved in this sort of motor equivalence.  I will attempt to characterize the nature of the transformations between body-spatial and joint-motion representations. In  doing so, I will discuss also the interaction of postural and task-related movements, and the central role of redundant  degrees of freedom in executing a coordinated action. These problems are examined in the context of actions that involve  reaching for objects and transporting them through space. Such actions correspond to both Whitney's (1969) rearrangement tasks  and Smith and Smith's (1962) transport tasks.  Body Segment Space (Segment Space)  Once an effector system has been selected and the shape and location of the support base has been specified in work-space  coordinates, the task of transforming the environmental spatiotemporal action trajectory into body-relevant terms begins. In  order to separate the reaching problem from that of maintaining postural stability, I will temporarily adopt the simplifying  assumption that the shoulder girdle is spatially fixed relative to the trunk which is itself fixed relative to the base of  support. This is a highly artificial situation. For a standing actor this might correspond to a case in which the feet were  glued to the ground, a body cast prevented any motion in the joints between the feet and shoulder, and external bracing  prevented the massive edifice from toppling during object reaching and manipulation. However, this assumption does allow the  environmental-spatial action representation, defined for the objects and surface in the work space, to be specified  unambiguously with respect to a trunk segment- (or shoulder girdle-) centered spatial coordinate system. To reach for and  successfully grasp or manipulate any of these objects and surfaces, the hand must also be located and oriented in shoulder  space. Once known, the spatial relationship between hand and environmental target may be computed and used in planning an  appropriate set of spatial reaching commands which, in turn, must be transformed into joint-motion commands before the action  can begin.  To perceive the hand's location, orientation, linear velocity, and angular velocity relative to the shoulder girdle (or any  body segment) by a means other than vision, one must be able to translate proprioceptively specified joint information into a  spatially meaningful form. The "perceptual" transformation from joint information to body space is a direct kinematic  transform, while the "motor" transformation from body space to joint commands is an inverse kinematic transform (Wylie, 1975).  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 105  The direct kinematic transform. The discussion of spatial and joint-motion relations begins by considering a direct  transformation method which is widely used to describe the kinematics of robot manipulator arms (Kahn, 1969; Kahn & Roth,  1971; Lewis, 1974; Paul, 1972; Whitney, 1969, 1972; Waters, Note 6) and which is equally applicable to human or prosthetic arm  motion. This method is based on a notation developed by Denavit and Hartenberg (1955) to represent the spatial relationships  among the different segments of kinematic chains' (see Fig. 2). fn dealing with the problem of locating the  FIG. 2. Three-dimensional linkage system labeled with Denavit-Hartenberg parameters (adapted from "Modelling, trajectory  calculation and servoing of a computer controlled arm" by R. Paul, AIM-177, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Stanford  University, 1972. Copyright 1972 by The Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Stanford University. Used with permission.).  hand in shoulder girdle spatial coordinates as a function of arm joint variables, the arm is viewed as an n -}- 1 segment (j =  0, 1,..., n) chain in which the hand and shoulder girdle are the nth (most distal) and 0th (most proximal) segments,  respectively. Additionally, each joint; (located between segment;-1 and segment;) is assumed to be frictionless and to contain  either one revolute (i.e., a hinge joint allowing relative rotation of two segments about a rotation axis) or one prismatic  (i.e., a sliding joint allowing relative translation, but no rotation, between two segments along a translation axis) degree  of freedoms Since I am treating the shoulder girdle as fixed relative to the stationary base  I A kinematic chain consists of a series of links (i.e., rigid bodies, body segments, etc.) joined together to transmit motion  or force. Limbs (robot, prosthetic, or human) are therefore prime examples.  " A human arm contains joints with two (wrist) and three (shoulder) approximately orthogonal rotation axes. For simplification  I am considering a model system in which each joint contains only one degree of freedom. However, the approach presented can  be extended to joints containing two or three degrees of freedom with relative ease (Denavit & Hartenberg, 1955; Sheth &  Uicker, 1971).  Human arms do not contain prismatic joints. The reason for introducing this type of joint is that robot manipulator arms will  be discussed which may contain prism joints in addition to revolute joints (e.g., the "Scheinman arm," Dobrotin & Scheinman,  1973).  48o/20/2-2  106 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  of support, the shoulder girdle provides a stable reference frame for the motion of segments 1 through n.  In this direct kinematic transformation system, each segment; has its own orthogonal spatial coordinate system xyz; fixed  relative to itself: z; is given by the axis of rotation of joint;,, ; x; is the extension of the common perpendicular  constructed from z;_, to z; ; y; completes the right-handed coordinate system; and O; is the origin of system;. The spatial  relationships between the coordinate systems of two successive segments (i.e., xyz;_1 and xyz;) are completely specified by  the following four parameters:  a; = the distance from z;_1 to z; measured along x; ;  O; = the angle from x;_1 to x; measured in a right-handed sense about z;_, ;  s; - the distance along z;_, from x;-, to x; ;  a; = the angle from z;_, to z; measured in a right-handed sense about x; .  Figure 2 illustrates the way these parameters can be used to relate one segment spatially to an adjacent segment in a  three-dimensional kinematic chain with revolute joints. A simplified two-dimensional example of a chain with three revolute  joints can be seen in Fig. 3A. Here the a;'s = 0 since all z-axes are perpendicular to the plane of the paper  FIG. 3. Two-dimensional linkage system with 4 segments (bodies) labeled with DenavitHartenberg parameters: (A) parameters for  segments 0 through 2; (B) parameters for terminal segment.  and hence parallel to each other. Similarly, the s;'s = 0 since the xf's each intersect the z;'s at the same z-coordinate,  i.e., at the intersection of the zs's with the plane of the paper. All a;'s are in the plane of the paper and measure the  distance between z;_, and zf.  One can readily use the Denavit-Hartenberg notation to express in xyz;_, coordinates  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 107  the location of points fixed relative to body; and given in xyz; coordinates (see Fig. 2). These spatial relationships can be  written in matrix form' as:  '-1R = (j-'Aj) ' 'R,  where i-1R = [x;_, , y;_, , z;_1 , 1]'', a 4 X l column vector expressing points in frame;_, coordinates;  'R = [x; , y; , z; , 1]T, a 4 X 1 column vector expressing points in segment; in frame; coordinates;  cos ~; -cos  sin ~; sin a; sin O; a; cos ";  sin O; cos a; cos O; -sin a; cos o; a; sin 0,  O sin aej COS ay sj '  O O O 1  a 4 X 4 matrix associated with joint; which transforms system; coordinates to system;_t coordinates. In fact, the upper three  elements in the right-most column of this matrix can be viewed as a 3 X 1 column vector locating the origin of system; in  terms of system;_, coordinates. Similarly, the upper-left 3 X 3 submatrix represents the rotation of frame; relative to frame  ;_, . Thus, the first (i.e., left-most), second, and third columns can be viewed as 3 X 1 column vectors expressing the  directions of x; , y; , and z, , respectively, relative to frame;_, . A more detailed derivation of the elements in this  matrix is presented in Appendix A.  Equation (1) expresses the spatial relationships between the coordinate systems of any two adjacent segments in a kinematic  chain. However, since arms have more than two segments, it is particularly important to find a means of expressing the  location and orientation of the most distal link (i.e., the hand) in terms of the most proximal link's coordinate system(i.e.,  the shoulder or "base" reference frame). Describing the method for relating hand and shoulder coordinates requires, in turn, a  preliminary discussion of the nature of the hand coordinate system, as it is usually defined in terms that are a bit different  from other links' coordinate systems.  The main difference between the hand-oriented coordinate system xyzl, and more proximal frames is that there is no associated  joint 0h+, . Consequently, the hand's z-axis, zh , can be specified according to what one considers the hand's "natural" func  ' Readers unfamiliar with matrix representations of spatial transformations among coordinate systems are advised to consult  any of several mechanical engineering texts (e.g., Groesberg, 1968; Meriam, 1966, Tuma, 1974) for overviews of these  techniques.  Additionally, regarding the direct kinematic equation (Eq. 1), it should be noted that: (a) In the interest of notational  compactness, the 4 X 1 column vectors have been expressed as the equivalent 1 x 4 row vector transposes. The transpose  operation is denoted by the superscript "T," and will be used in other vector expressions presented later in the text; and (b)  the "0001" in the last row of the 4 x 4 transform matrix and the "1"'s in the last rows of the 4 X 1 column vectors are not  essential components of the underlying 3 x 4 rotation/translation matrix and the 3 x 1 spatial vectors. These fourth rows have  been added in order to facilitate finding the inverse spatial matrix transformation (see Eq. 5). Matrix inversion methods are  described in Wylie (1975) or in any matrix algebra text.  108 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  tional axes. Once zh is defined, however, the common perpendicular from zh_1 to zh can be found and xh , yh , ah , Oh , sh ,  and ah can be measured in the manner discussed above. As a result one can define the matrix transform associated with jointh ,  h_1Ah , which maps hand coordinates into the adjacent proximal segmenth_I's coordinates. Figure 4 illustrates the manner in  which hand-oriented coordinates have been defined for a robot manipulator capable of general motion in three-dimensional space  (Lewis, 1974; Whitney, 1969, 1972; Waters, Note 6). Here one can see that the yh (reach, R; or approach) axis points in the  direction of approach of the hand, and a rotation about R is called a twist; the xh (sweep, S; or sliding) axis points in the  direction of finger (i.e., robot jaws or pincers) motion as the hand opens and closes, and a rotation about S is called a  tilt; the zh (lift, L; or normal) axis points orthogonally to the plane of finger motion, and a rotation about L is called a  turn; and the origin Oh, of the hand-oriented frame is located in the plane of finger motion between the hand's grasping  surfaces. A two-dimensional example of a hand-oriented system may be seen in Fig. 3B.  Fic. 4. Hand-oriented coordinate system for a three-dimensional manipulator: xyzo = base frame, xyz,, = hand frame, O = base  frame origin, H = hand frame origin, W = wrist frame origin, PH = hand position vector, P = wrist position vector, VH =  linear velocity vector, OH _ angular velocity vector, SH = orientation angle (adapted from "Mechanical arm control" by R. C.  Waters, Vision Flash 42, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1973. Copyright (0 1973 by  The Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Used with permission.).  We are now in a position to discuss a method for expressing the hand's location and orientation in shoulder or base-frame  coordinates. This reduces to finding the location of Oh in shoulder coordinates and the relative orientation of the xyzh hand  axes with respect to the xyzo shoulder axes. This same method will be equally useful for locating a point relative to hand  coordinates that had initially been defined as fixed with respect to shoulder coordinates, and vice versa. These spatial  relationships are relatively easy to specify and the matrix transform relating any two nonadjacent segmental coordinate  systems can be obtained by multiplying the matrix transforms associated with all inter-  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 109  mediate joints. Thus, in an arm with segments 0 through n and joints 1 through n, in which the nth segment is the hand, the  position and orientation of system; (j = 1, 2,..., n) in system, (base or shoulder frame) coordinates can be found by  computing the product, B; , of j 4 X 4 matrices:  B; = OA, . IAz ... ;-'Aj j = 1, 2,..., n. (2)  For j = n we have Bn , a 4 X 4 matrix transform relating hand to shoulder coordinates. The upper three elements in the  right-most column of the matrix can be viewed as a 3 X 1 vector locating the hand frame's origin in shoulder coordinates. This  vector corresponds to the vector PH in Fig. 4. The relative orientation of the hand axes with respect to the shoulder frame is  given by the upper-left 3 X 3 submatrix. Thus, the first (or left-most), second, and third columns of this submatrix can be  viewed as 3 X 1 column vectors expressing the directions Of xh (S, or sweep axis), yh (R, or reach axis), and zh (L, or lift  axis), respectively, relative to the shoulder frame. For example, if io, j, , ko and ih , jh , kh are the xyz unit vectors of  the base and hand frames, respectively, then the first column in the rotation submatrix will consist of the xyz, components of  the ih vector. Thus, the topmost element in this 3 X 1 column vector will be the x, component, the middle element in this  vector will be the y, component, and the bottom element will be the z, component of the ih vector, i.e., ih = (ih)xo io -{--  (ih),uo to + (ih)ZU ko - It is useful to express the relative orientation of the hand and shoulder coordinate systems in terms  of the set of orientation angles, NH (Waters, Note 6), seen in Fig. 4, where: (NH)xp is the angle between the y, and yh axes  measured about x, ; (Mvo is the angle between the z, and zh axes measured about yo ; and (NH)z,, is the angle between the x,  and xh axes measured about z, . These angles may be expressed as trigonometric functions of the base frame components of the  hand frame's unit vectors:  (NH)xo = tan-' ((jh)zo1(jh)vo), (NH)v, = tan-' ((kh)xol(kh)=o), (3) (NH)z,, = tan1((Zh)vp'(Zh)xp)  As was mentioned above, these components are obtainable from the rotation submatrix. Details othese derivations are  presented in Appendix B.  In addition to expressing the hand's origin and unit vectors in base frame coordinates, one can locate in base coordinates a  point in the hand that had been initially specified relative to the hand by  OR = Bn . nR, (4)  where  and nR are defined as in Eq. (1). Conversely, one can locate a point in hand coordinates that had been initially  specified as fixed relative to base coordinates bv  nR = H,.OR,  where H, _ (Bn)-1.  110 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  The present discussion of hand-oriented coordinates and the earlier treatment of object-centered coordinates suggest that the  manipulation of objects may be described as an interaction between these two types of reference systems. Specifically, it  seems plausible that when one learns to use a tool (Whitney, 1972) or sports implement in a skillful manner, one constructs a  "new" effector system centered in the coordinate system of the object being used. Thus, given an object with known dimensions  and "functional" axes, and given a known grip type (e.g., Napier's (1956) power versus precision grip) and grip angle (e.g.,  forehand versus backhand tennis grip), one can locate and orient the object's functional axes in base frame (and thereby  task-space) coordinates. In effect, the object becomes a new effector, an extension of one's self. To quote Polanyi (1964):  When we use a hammer to drive in a nail, we attend to both nail and hammer, but in a different way. We watch the effect of our  strokes on the nail and try to wield the hammer so as to hit the nail most effectively. When we bring down the hammer we do  not feel its handle has struck our palm but that its head has struck the nail. (p. 55)  Our subsidiary awareness of tools and probes can be regarded now as the act of making them form a part of our own body. The  way we use a hammer or a blind man uses his stick, shows in fact that in both cases we shift outward the points at which we  make contact with the things that we observe as objects outside ourselves. (p. 59)  Of course, skilled tool use involves more than the ability to use the above type of kinematic object knowledge. It also  requires a knowledge of the kinetic (or inertial) properties of the objects, the ways in which these objects respond to  applied forces and torques. Such kinetic information, however, becomes interpretable only within a kinematic context.  Let us return now to a discussion of the significance of the Bn matrix. Since matrix Bn is the result of the multiplication of  matrices OA, -'A2 ... n-'A, each element of Bwill be some function of the Denavit-Hartenberg (1955) parameters a9 , s; ,  a; , and O; (j = 1, 2,..., n). For an arm with only revolute joints, a; , s; , and  will be constant and ~; will vary as the  limb configuration changes; for an arm that includes prismatic joints as well, a; , a; , and O; will be constant for such  joints while s; will vary. In general, the joint variables in a given chain, whether Oi or s; , are labeled q; . Human limbs  can be treated as having revolute joints only and consequently the joint angles, O; , will be the only variable elements, q; ,  in the B,n matrix for a given limb. Thus, one could keep track of the position and orientation of the hand in base frame  coordinates as limb configuration changed over time by monitoring the B,n matrix, whose component handorigin vector and  hand-axis orientation submatrix would be updated continuously according to current joint angle information.  Following Kahn (1969) and Waters (Note 6), the base frame velocity of a point fixed in body;'s coordinate system can be  obtained by differentiating with respect to time the expression  OR = Bi . iR (j = 1, 2,..., n), (6)  which is the general form of Eq. (4). The result of this differentiation is the expression OR = Yj . jR, (7)  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION Ill  where  k = d ,  and  V; = a 4 X 4 "velocity matrix" = d B;  Details of this derivation are provided in Appendix C. However, the interpretation of the V; matrix follows a by now familiar  pattern. In the matrix V, the velocity matrix expressing hand parameters in terms of base frame coordinates: (a) the  rightmost column contains a 3 X 1 vector expressing the velocity of the hand frame's origin relative to the base frame; (b)  the first (or leftmost), second, and third columns of the upper-left 3 X 3 submatrix can be viewed as 3 X 1 column vectors  expressing the directional changes over time of the hand's unit vectors relative to the base frame; and (c) the angular  velocity components (~H)xo , (NH)va and (NH)xa may be expressed as trigonometric functions of the base frame components of the  hand frame's unit vector time derivatives.  An alternative means of expressing the hand's linear and angular velocity relative to the base frame as a function of the  joint variables is to use the Jacobian of the direct kinematic transform (Lang, 1973; Wylie, 1975; Whitney, 1969, 1972). Since  the Jacobian is crucial to later discussions of the inverse kinematic transform, let us now examine some of its main features.  To begin, one needs six parameters in order to specify the spatial location and orientation of a rigid body in a given  Cartesian reference system: three to locate a point fixed in the body relative to the base frame's xyzo axes, and three  orientation angles to express the body's relative rotation about the xyzo axes. Treating the hand as a rigid body with its own  coordinate system fixed within itself, the hand's location and orientation relative to a base frame may be expressed by the  location of the hand system's origin plus three orientation angles. In the above discussion, it was shown that these values  could be obtained from the Bn matrix as separate functions of the joint variables, fi(o;), where i = 1, 2,..., m, and j = 1,  2,..., n. Referring once again to Fig. 4, these spatial values are labeled PH (with components (PH)x,, (PH)y(,, (PH)xa) and PH  (with components (PH)xo, (NH)vo , (#H),,). These six variables may be combined into an m X 1 column vector, S, where m = 6. In  a similar fashion, the joint variables may be grouped together to form an n X 1 column vector, 0, where n equals the number of  revolute joints in the (humanoid) arm under consideration. It can then be shown (see Appendix D for details) that  differentiating S with respect to time yields  acs-S-J(O)- , (8)  where  9 = [(VH)xo , (VH)vo , (VH)xo, ($H).", (NH)YO , (P H)JT,  112 ELLIOT SALTZMAN abbreviated as  L I OHjT;  A T.  and  J(O) = the Jacobian of the direct transformation with respect to 0;  afi  an m X n matrix of partial derivatives, where Jia = afilao; is the element ' in the ith row and jth column (i = 1, 2,..., m; j  = 1, 2,..., n), and represents the ith component of S per unit ~; when all other 4 = 0 for j :7~- k. In later discussions in  the text, these elements are also represented by the symbol SiA , and refer to the changes in the spatial variable S resulting from a unit change in the joint variable ~; .  Using this method, one could monitor the linear and angular velocity of a given point in a given segment relative to the base  frame by: (a) using the appropriate B-matrix to define a set of 6f's; (b) computing the Jacobian matrix; (c) feeding current  joint angle and angular velocity information into J(O) and ~, respectively; and (d) computing the components of ~ via Eq. (8).  In anticipation of discussions below concerning the inverse kinematic transform, it is sufficient to note at this point that  the utility of the Jacobian method lies in the possibility of computing the Jacobian inverse, J-i(-0). If this can be found,  one can calculate readily the set of joint velocities,  required to bring about a desired body-spatial motion, 9, of a given  effector.  Body spatial trajectory planning. Let us now return to the earlier, simplified example of reaching. Here, the problem of  postural stability was "solved" by arbitrarily specifying that the shoulder girdle be spatially fixed relative to the base of  support and hence also relative to the environmental task space. As a result, the intended reaching action did not require any  additional postural activity to maintain the actor's balance. In this situation the environmental-spatial movement  representation was specified relative to the base or shoulder reference frame. Having discussed the direct kinematic  transform, one can see how the spatial position, orientation, linear velocity, and angular velocity of the hand may also be  perceived (nonvisually) in shoulder space. Since the shoulder girdle is fixed relative to the task space, these values are  readily expressed in work-space coordinates. Once the spatial relationships between the effector and the task space are  determined in shoulder frame and hence task-space coordinates, a relatively precise spatial path for the hand (and, therefore,  the objects and surfaces labeled as "figures" in the environment; Talmy, 1975) may be specified in the work space via the  shoulder frame. This procedure is usually referred to as trajectory planning (Arbib, 1975; Lewis & Bejczy, 1973; Paul, 1972;  Waters, Note 6). Such planning must deal with the problem of selecting or generating a single spatiotemporal path from among  the infinite number of paths that could possibly be taken. This could be done by attempting to minimize, for example, the  variable of distance between the initial and goal locations while avoiding any intermediate obstacles: Additionally, an  attempt could be made to minimize the effort expended  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 113  during the motion. Greene (Note 5) points out that a heavy object may be carried closer to the body than a light object  because less active torque is required at the shoulder joint to support a closely held object against gravity. This is due to  the fact that, when held close to the body, an object's moment arm is relatively short. The movement path ultimately chosen  will most likely involve a compromise among several such minimization criteria and, once the planning is complete, a single  path is defined for the effector in shoulder space (and hence, task frame) coordinates over a given interval of time. The  trajectory may also involve a path for intermediate portions of the arm (e.g., the elbow) such that they avoid any obstacles  in the environment during this same time period.  Body space-work/task-space mapping. In the above example, reaching was described relative to a set of spatial coordinates  fixed in the shoulder girdle, which was in turn assumed to be spatially fixed relative to the base of support, which was  itself fixed relative to the work space. There are several ways to locate and orient the shoulder frame with respect to the  object- and surface-centered coordinate systems in the work space (excluding tactile-haptic exploration which presupposes the  reaching activity we are attempting to explain). First, since the location and orientation of the support base was initially  specified in task-space coordinates, the spatial relation of the shoulder to either foot segment via matrix transforms could  supply the required work space-shoulder space information. Alternatively (or additionally), the location and orientation of  the task space relative to the head segment may be provided visually or auditorily, and matrix transforms could again be used  to compute the desired values. Unless the head were stationary relative to the trunk, however, the task description in  head-centered coordinates would vary with head-trunk angle. This variability would ultimately be compensated for by the  changing terms in the shoulder-head matrix, reflecting the shoulder's objective fixed relationship to the task space.  Body-segment space is thus defined relative to each individual body segment (e.g., trunk, foot, head, etc.). The spatial  relationships between any given segment and another are at least potentially available via the type of direct kinematic  transformations discussed above. Segment space is thus "egocentric" in that spatial information is coded relative to  coordinate systems that remain fixed in the body segments despite changing relationships between the body (or individual  segments) and the environment. Such relationships between body-centered and environmental coordinate systems have been  investigated and reviewed by many authors, notable among whom are Attneave and his colleagues (e.g., Attneave & Benson, 1969;  Attneave & Olson, 1968; Attneave & Reid, 1967), Howard and Templeton (1966), Pick and his colleagues (e.g., Pick, Yonas, &  Reiser, 1978; Rieser & Pick, 1976; Pick, Note 7), and Rock (1973).  Body space-global invariant coordination: Postural control. Earlier discussions of reaching in a standing posture involved the  simplifying assumption that the shoulder girdle was artificially immobilized relative to the task space. Parts A and B of Fig.  5 illustrate (for this artificially immobilized state) the problem of reaching in a situation in which the actor wishes to  place his hand at a height zI from the ground and at a frontal distance xl from his heels. If balance were artificially  maintained, he could do this via inverse kinematic procedures involving arm joint motion only. However, his line of  114 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  A B C B  i I' 1 11 1-i  FIG. 5. Interaction of instrumental and postural control during a reaching task, where G = line of gravity: (A) stationary  standing actor; (B) arm raised to xlzl , shoulder stabilized, G is displaced; (C) arm joint angles are the same as in (B),  ankle and hip rotation compensate for displacement of G; (D) final solution of reaching problem with ankle and hip joint  angles as in (C), but with new arm joint angle.  gravity, G, will be shifted by this redistribution of body mass to a region outside his base of support. (In Fig. 5B, the  displacement of the line of gravity has been exaggerated for illustrative purposes.) If he were not artificially supported, he  would fall over.  It is clear, therefore, that a reaching or transporting action involves the displacement of the arm segment masses relative to  the trunk, and entails a potentially destabilizing motion of the center of gravity relative to the stationary support base.  For a freely standing actor, these movements of the body mass center are automatically compensated for by the actions of a  "postural fixation" (Martin, 1967) or "pedate" (Fomin & Shtilkind, 1972, 1973; Turvey, et al., 1978) control system. The  resultant postural corrections that are involved in raising one's arms forward to the horizontal position while standing may  be seen in Fig. 6A, B. In these illustrations, it is evident that the forward motion of the gravity center which would have  resulted from arm movement has been cancelled  FIG. 6. Compensatory postural control: (A) normal standing position viewed relative to an environmentally fixed vertical  reference line; (B) arms raised to horizontal position, body has moved radially backwards; (C) 32 lb. book held horizontally  at arm's length, body has moved further backward radially than in (B) (adapted from The basal ganglia and posture by J. P.  Martin. Copyright (D 1967 by Pitman Medical Publishing Company. Used with permission.).  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 115  by backward rotation of the body as a whole. This compensation is even more pronounced when the actor holds a 3 z pound book  in his hands (see Fig. 6C). Such compensatory postural control is an extremely useful property of the sensorimotor system and  serves to maintain the actor's spatial orientation to the global invariant of gravity. However, this type of control does  introduce some problems with respect to calculating the joint motions required to move the hand through its desired  task-spatial trajectory (i.e., the inverse kinematic procedures discussed above).  If one assumes that the actor in Fig. 5A is standing freely, the task of moving his hand to xlzl becomes more complex and  involves inverse kinematics defined over the ankle and hip joints as well as the arm joints (Fig. 5C, D). Figure 5C  illustrates postural compensation at the ankle and hip joints while keeping the arm joints at the same values as in Fig. 5B.  The hand is then at x2,z2 , and additional arm motion must be used to move the hand to the desired xlzl location. Figure 5D  shows one joint angle configuration which satisfies the dual constraints of postural stability and desired hand position.  Voluntary movement, therefore, appears to reflect both postural and task demands. Hess (1954; cf. also Jung & Hassler, 1960)  emphasized this point and functionally distinguished two mechanisms involved in voluntary movement: (a) a "teleokinetic"  (teleos = an end) mechanism involved in the voluntary, task-related aspects of the movement; and (b) an "ereismatic" (ereisma  = support) mechanism involved in providing postural stability during the movement. These different aspects of movement may be  referred to more simply as instrumental and postural, respectively.  It is evident that the type of postural activity illustrated in Figs. 5 and 6 involves compensatory motion of the leg and  trunk segments to offset the displacement of the center of gravity that accompanies the instrumental motion of the arm  segments. In addition, however, several investigators (Belen'kii, Gurfinkel, & Pal'tsev, 1967; El'ner, 1973; Pal'tsev &  El'ner, 1967) have demonstrated task-specific patterns of anticipatory postural activity which precede various types of  instrumental activity. Such anticipatory activity indicates that the postural consequences of instrumental movements are taken  into account during the planning stages of a given action.  Sensorimotor Coordination: The Degrees of Freedom Problem  Let us consider the example of a freely standing actor whose support base is specified in the task space and who wishes to  reach for a nearby object. The only body segments that can be relied upon to remain stationary relative to the task space  (barring loss of balance) are the supporting segments in contact with the ground plane. Consequently, the inverse kinematic  transform is defined over the highly complex kinematic chain which has the feet as its base frame segments and the hand as its  terminal segment. The reaching task thus requires simultaneous control over the angular motion of all the joints lying between  the feet and the hand segments (i.e., the joint motions must be coordinated with one another). As mentioned in the  Introduction, Bernstein (1967) characterized coordinated movement as involving the mastery of a kinematic chain's redundant  degrees of freedom. The following sections outline several means of achieving such coordination in the context of inverse  kinematics.  116 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  Degrees of freedom; generalized coordinates. The degrees of freedom for a given system are the least number of independent  coordinates required to specify the positions of the system elements without violating any geometric constraints (Groesberg,  1968; Timoshenko & Young, 1948). For example, if we describe the positions of the particles A and B in Fig. 7A in terms of  Cartesian coordinates, we need four independent coordinates: xl , yl and x2 , y2 . Since these are independent (i.e., changing  one will not affect any of the others), there are four degrees of freedom in this system. Figure 713 illustrates a  0  B 122321  B 112421  B1x2.r2,  A B C  Fce. 7. Degrees of freedom in two-dimensional systems with increasing degrees of constraint: (A) no constraint; (B) one  constraint; (C) two constraints (adapted from Advanced dynamics by S. Timoshenko & D. H. Young. Copyright 1948 by  McGraw-Hill Book Company. Used with permission.).  simple hypothetical rigid body consisting of the particles A and B connected by a rigid, weightless rod of length L. In this  case, the Cartesian coordinates are not independent since they must satisfy the following equation of constraint:  (x2 - x112 + (y2 - yl)2 = L2.  Thus, if three of the xy coordinates are specified, the selection of the fourth is constrained by the geometry of the system  according to Eq. (9), and the system has three degrees of freedom. In Fig. 7C the same bar is attached at particle A to the  fixed point 0 by another bar of length M. In this case, there are two equations of constraint, Eq. (9) and  -{-- y12 -  (10)  and the system has two degrees of freedom.  These examples involve systems defined in two-dimensional Cartesian space. In general, the number of degrees of freedom of  such systems is 2N - c, where N = the number of particles in the system and c = the number of equations of constraint. For  systems defined in three-dimensional Cartesian space (i.e., each particle has its own xyz coordinates), the number of degrees  of freedom is in general 3N - c.8  a Note that a hinge joint introduces two constraints. When dealing with two-dimensional motion, one of these constraints is  implicit since segmental motion is restricted by definition to a constant z-axis value. The other is explicit, and deals with  constant interjoint or particle-joint distances (e.g., Eqs. (9), (10) in the text). When dealing with three-dimensional  motion, one must supply both types of equations of constraint if hinge joints are used (Horn, B.K.P., Note 15).  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 117  One can choose a set of independent generalized coordinates to specify any system's configuration. The number of generalized  coordinates will equal the number of degrees of freedom in the system. Thus, the system in Fig. 7A may be described by the set  of generalized coordinates xl , yl , xz , .ys ; the system in Fig. 7B by the x and y coordinates of any point on the bar  (including particles A and B) plus an orientation angle between the bar and either the x or y axis; and the system in Fig. 7C  by the two orientation angles between each bar and either the x or y axes. Figure 7C shows a system similar to the kinematic  chain seen in Fig. 3. The segments' orientation angles with respect to the base frame's x-axis are related to the joint angles  (0;) in a manner illustrated in Fig. 8. In this diagram, segment 1's orientation angle is 0, , while segment 2's orientation  angle is (0i -}- 0z). One can consider the generalized coordinates of any such open kinematic chain (i.e., only a single  segment is fixed to the base frame) to consist of the set of joint variables associated with that chain.  r  joint I  z  FIG. 8. Two-dimensional linkage system with two segments and two joints; although not illustrated, each segment; has mass (m),  length (l), center of mass (comp), and a moment of inertia about its center of mass (hom, = 112 m,1;2).  In all previous sections, we have been considering joints with only a single axis of either rotation (a hinge joint) or of  translation (a prismatic joint). Such joints have one degree of freedom each, and therefore the total number of degrees of  freedom in such systems is simply equal to the number of joints. In human arms, some joints are biaxial (e.g., the wrist  joint) or triaxial (e.g., the ball and socket joint of the shoulder). Such joints have two and three degrees of freedom,  respectively. In general, then, the number of degrees of freedom in a given open kinematic chain is equal to the sum of the  degrees of freedom in each of the joints.  The inverse kinematic transform. In the earlier example of a standing and reaching actor, the inverse kinematic problem  consisted of finding the set of joint angle changes necessary to move the hand segment along a given task-spatial trajectory.  The position and orientation of the hand segment in space is uniquely described by six spatial coordinates (three define the  location of the segment's origin; three define the orientation  118 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  of the segment's axes to the base frame). After trajectory planning is complete, these six coordinates are specified as known  functions of time or path distance (cf. the discussion at the end of the effector-specific environmental space section). From  the direct kinematic transform matrix for the hand frame in base frame coordinates, a set of six equations may be derived  expressing these spatial variables as separate functions of the n joint variables (cf. the discussion of the Jacobian matrix  in the direct kinematic transform section). Essentially, the inverse problem reduces to solving a system of m equations (m =  the number of spatial variables controlled during an action) for n unknowns (n = the number of joint variables, or more  strictly speaking, the number of degrees of freedom in the kinematic chain). As long as m = n, it is generally possible to  solve for the joint variables. However, if the number of degrees of freedom in the kinematic chain (n) is greater than the  number of specified spatial variables (m), there are an infinite number of possible solutions, and further constraints must be  imposed to select a unique solution for a given action. In such cases, the system is indeterminate and the kinematic chain is  said to contain redundant degrees of freedom. Since there is a maximum of six spatial variables for describing the kinematics  of the hand segment, it is clear that any open kinematic chain with more than six degrees of freedom is redundant by  definition.  Most robot manipulators are designed with six degrees of freedom and are hence nonredundant. In these types of arms there are  a finite number of joint angle configurations, typically a very small number, that will be associated with each point along a  desired spatial (position and orientation) hand trajectory. For example, there will only be two sets of joint angles for most  positions and orientations of the hand in the rightor left-handed Scheinman robot-manipulator arm (Lewis, 1974). This does not  provide much flexibility for avoiding obstacles that may be cluttering up the task space; e.g., the hand may be able to reach  the target, but the elbow may be obstructed due to the lack of a sufficient number of alternative arm configurations.  Redundant arms, however, are highly flexible since there are an infinite number of joint angle configurations associated with  each point along most spatial hand trajectories. Thus, during both target acquisition and maintenance, a redundant arm should  be able to avoid successfully most obstacles in the task space. Clearly, then, redundancy is extremely valuable in a practical  sense.  Human arms (to say nothing of the kinematic chain from the support base to the hand segment) are highly redundant, with the  degrees of freedom distributed in the following way: wrist motion (2), forearm pronation-supination (1), elbow  flexion-extension (1), shoulder joint motion (3), and shoulder girdle motion (3). Thus, the human arm has a total of 10  degrees of freedom if one includes the limited motion of the shoulder girdle. How might one solve for the set of joint angles  required to move the hand along a given spatial trajectory for the relatively "simple" kinematic chain consisting of arm  segments only? To answer this question, consider again the earlier discussion of Whitney's (1969, 1972) work and the Jacobian  matrix.  Equation (8) used the Jacobian matrix to express the direct kinematic transformation from known (sensed) joint velocities to a  set of spatial linear and angular velocities for the hand segment. If one is given instead the desired spatial variables as  known quantities (i.e., as after spatial trajectory planning), and the number of unknown joint variables is  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 119  equal to the number of spatial variables (i.e., n = m), the system of equations may be solved by inverting the Jacobian matrix  (Wylie, 1975), and using the following equation:  where and S are defined as in Eq. 8; and (11)  J-1(Y') = the inverse of the Jacobian matrix,  an n x m matrix, where J,-i1 = ~;I Si is the element in the jth row and ith  c.  ` column (j = 1, 2,..., n; i = 1, 2,..., m) and represents the jth component of per unit Si, when all Sk equal zero for i =A  k. In other words, ~;/Si is a symbolic representation of the change in the joint variable; resulting from a unit change in the  spatial variable Si . Alternatively, ~;/Si may also be interpreted as the change required in the joint variable ~; to produce,  in combination with changes in the other joint variables, a unit change in the spatial variable Si .  Thus, there are two major aspects to the inverse kinematic transform: (a) inverting the matrix, and (b) solving the redundancy  problem.  Matrix inversions: Singularities. For the case where the number of joint variables equals the number of spatial variables,  J( will be invertible and Eq. (11) will provide the required joint velocity vector only if the J( matrix in nonsingular,  i.e., if the Jacobian determinant is different from zero at all points, or nearly all points (Symon, 1971). In general, the  matrix will be nonsingular. However, the Jacobian is a function of 0, and it is possible that the arm will assume a joint  angle configuration such that the determinant will equal zero and the matrix will have no inverse. Such singularities  correspond to configurations in which, for any combination of the components of ~, at least one type of motion in S is either  totally unobtainable (Whitney, 1972) or obtainable only in combination with other types of motion in S. Mathematically, this  corresponds to cases in which either all the elements of at least one row of the Jacobian equal zero or in which at least one  row of the Jacobian is a linear combination of the other rows. These types of matrices are singular by definition (Wylie,  1975). For example, such singularities will occur at the boundaries of the arm's reaching space, i.e., when the arm is  outstretched, further reaching is impossible and the only bi-directional, independently obtainable spatial hand motion is a  twist about its reach axis. There is no way to overcome this type of singularity. Other types may be circumvented (Whitney,  1972) by: (a) reducing the size of the Jacobian to eliminate the "blocked" spatial commands and inessential joint variables;  or (b) by recruiting an extra degree of freedom (if the arm is redundant) in the region of the singularity.  Finally, one should remember that since the Jacobian is a function of 0, new values must be found for the elements of both  J(O) and J -11(o) at each stage of the trajectory according to the current joint angle configuration.  Redundant degrees of freedom. If the number of joint variables (unknowns) is greater than the number of spatial variables  (equations) in the inverse problem, one cannot  120 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  directly solve for  One can overcome this difficulty by "freezing" a number of joints (i.e., reducing the number of  unknowns), adding hand or "elbow" coordinates to ~ (i.e., increasing the number of equations), or by additionally specifying  optimality criteria to be satisfied during the movement (Whitney, 1969). One can also reduce the number of unknowns by  specifying functional relationships between the joint velocities, e.g., by expressing one joint velocity as a ratio or as a  more complex function of another joint velocity over a given spatial or temporal interval during the hand's trajectory. Let us  consider the methods of freezing and ratio specification in further detail.  For a seven degree-of-freedom arm, if one wishes to freeze a given joint, the remaining joint velocities may be calculated by:  (a) computing the corresponding 6 X 7 Jacobian matrix, (b) striking out the column corresponding to the frozen joint, and (c)  computing the inverse matrix for solving the remaining six joint velocities. If one instead wishes to constrain a given  joint's velocity, ~, (where c denotes constraint), as a ratio of another joint's velocity, ~d (where d denotes the "driving"  joint), one again starts by computing the 6 X 7 Jacobian. However, the Jid elements of the column corresponding to Y'd do not  simply depend on motion at Y'd . Since Y'd motion drives joint 0, , the ith component of ~ per unit wd will depend not only on  y'd but also on e . Thus, each element 9ify'd will be expressed as  Jid = ~+ K ,~i~-, ~d y'c  (12)  where K = the proportionality constant of the velocity ratio, y'olY'd , and represents the change in ~ accompanying a unit  change in ~d .  In other words, the column vector corresponding to 0, is multiplied by the scalar K and added to the column vector  corresponding to Od . The "old" ~, column is then struck out, and the inverse matrix is computed to solve for the six free  variables. Once calculated, the entire set of free and constrained variables may be recovered in a fashion similar to that  used by Jacobsen and Mann (Note 8) via  free  = C ' ~Pree  constrained  (13)  where the term on the left of the equation is an n X 1 vector containing the free and constrained joint velocities; C is an n  X (n - c) matrix containing the functional relationship between the free and constrained variables, where c equals the number  of functional constraints; and the right-most term is an (n - c) x 1 vector containing the free joint variables. As an overly  simplified example, consider a set of three joint velocities where ~I and ~a are free, and ~a is constrained to equal 2~, .  Then, if the free variables were calculated, we would have  i 1 0  - 12 01 , ~0J .  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 121  In the case where the third joint is frozen, this expression becomes  I i r1 01 0 1 - 10 0 1~21 .  Sensorimotor coordination: Kinematics. Let us now consider Bernstein's (1967) definition of coordination as "the process of  mastering redundant degrees of freedom of the moving organ, in other words its conversion to a controllable system" (p. 127).  Having defined degrees of freedom and redundancy, and having discussed some of the ways redundancy might be incorporated into  an inverse kinematic transformation, we are now in a better position to understand this statement. The major methods examined  for dealing with the issue of redundancy were joint fixation and the specification of joint velocity velocity ratios. These  techniques were emphasized intentionally since they appear to be reflected in human sensorimotor behavior.  Several types of joint fixation can be distinguished. One types seems to be structural in the sense that it deals with  consistent findings of fixation under certain anatomical conditions. For example, the degree of freedom corresponding to  upward tilt of the shoulder girdle is fixed unless there is hyperextension at the shoulder joint (Wells, 1971). Therefore, if  one were planning to move the arm, one would eliminate this degree of freedom from the inverse transform unless one planned to  hyperextend the shoulder. A second type may be referred to as a functional fixation, since it appears to be related more  closely to strategy and experience than to anatomy. This occurs during the early stages of skill acquisition in adults (e.g.,  Bernstein, 1967) and children (e.g., Bernstein, 1967; Wickstrom, 1977). Thus, in the early stages of a skill, the actor tends  to keep much of his body rigidly fixed and reduces the movement to a relatively simple kinematic form. For example, compare  the left-handed and right-handed throwing patterns of a righthanded actor. Contrasted to the right arm, the left arm's  performance will appear rather stilted and rigid.  There are also several types of constraints that relate motions corresponding to different kinematic degrees of freedom.  Again, one type might be described as structural in the same sense as was used for joint fixation above. As the shoulder  girdle fixation example shows, upward tilt of the shoulder girdle will accompany any planned shoulder hyperextension.  Additionally, sideward or forward elevation at the shoulder is always accompanied by shoulder girdle upward rotation (Wells,  1971). Waterland and Munson (1964) have discovered mutual dependencies between the motions of the head, shoulder girdle, and  humerus (upper arm). These latter motions, however, seem less clearly related to anatomical constraints than do the  immediately preceding examples. Such linkages seem to be instances of functional synergies (Kots, Krinskiy, Naydin, & Shik,  1971), in the sense that  corresponding to each characteristic form of motive activity is a subdivision of all joints participating in the movement into  a small number of connected groups of the sort that for the control of each of them one degree of freedom of the control  system is enough (functional synergies). (p. 373)  48o/20/2-3  122 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  It can be seen that functional synergies involve the specification of relationships between the motions in a given set of  joints and, as such, they effectively serve to reduce the number of degrees of freedom in a complex kinematic chain.  Kots and Syrovegin (1966) provided evidence for a type of functional synergy that was more abstractly defined (i.e., defined  in terms of actual joint velocity ratios) than that demonstrated by Waterland and Munson (1964). In their study, Kots and  Syrovegin (1966) asked subjects to perform simultaneous movements at the elbow and wrist joints. Each subject participated in  four conditions that involved all possible combinations of wrist and elbow flexion-extension, e.g., wrist flexion and elbow  flexion, wrist extension and elbow flexion, etc. During each of the tasks, angular motion at each of the joints was measured.  The major findings were that: (a) most movements included portions in which the joint velocity ratios were constant; (b) each  subject had a constant preferred set of 5 2 distinct ratios used across all tasks; (c) each subject tended to use different  but overlapping subsets of these ratios in each of the individual conditions; and (d) these ratios did not appear to be  dependent on anatomical coupling between the joints. Kots and Syrovegin (1966) interpreted these ratios as evidence of  functional synergies that serve to simplify the control problem associated with simultaneous coordination of the two joints  involved in the task. However, other interpretations of Kots and Syrovegin's data have been proposed by Bishop and Harrison  (1977), and the reader should consult this latter study for further details of this controversy.  The functional synergy matrix. One may hypothesize in the context of the previous discussion of inverse kinematics that  functional synergies are the source of the joint velocity ratios used to reduce the Jacobian to a square 6 X 6 (or smaller)  matrix. It then becomes convenient to replace the joint velocity variables with joint "motor" velocity variables, reflecting a  distinction suggested by Whitney (1972). In the case of the seven degree-of-freedom arm examined earlier in Eqs. (12) and  (13), we may begin again by computing the 6 X 7 Jacobian. Now, however, we will replace each ~; with a motor velocity  variable, lll; , such that there are separate motors controlling the angular velocities of each joint. We may then define a  set of elementary matrix transformations on the columns of this matrix to construct an equivalent 6 X 7 matrix (Wylie, 1975)  that includes the effects of the velocities of "functional synergy motors," MF , that cause simultaneous motions at several  joints. Specifically, we will apply the elementary transformation of adding a multiple of the elements of a given column to  the corresponding elements of another column. This is the same procedure illustrated in Eq. (12) with joint velocity variables  still being used in the Jacobian. For illustration, consider the following simplified example of a 3 X 4 Jacobian defined by  three spatial and four joint-motor velocities:  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 123  Here, the second column from the left represents the effects of joint-motor M2 on the three spatial variables. If we now  multiply the third column by K and the fourth column by P, and then add each of these columns to the second column, we get  S2  Now, the second column reflects the effects of functional synergy MF2 on the three spatial  variables. The matrix may be rewritten as  S1~ SI SI MF2 M3 M4 "S2 ^'2 "2 MF2 M3 M4 MF2 M2 M4  We may now strike out column one, three, or four. This results in the "freezing" of the corresponding motor, but not  necessarily the corresponding joint, since the synergy motor may cause motion at this joint. After inverting this 3 X 3  matrix, we may solve for the desired M and 1VIF values. Once computed, the entire set of 1V1 variables (and therefore ~  variables) may be recovered via a C-matrix similar to that used in Eq. (13).  The synergy matrix approach has several interesting features. First, it combines in a single construct the concept of  functional synergies with the mathematics of inverse kinematics. Thus, each functional synergy matrix (or variant) consists of  a distinct set of functional synergy and joint-motor variables which are represented in separate columns of the matrix. In the  inverted form of a given matrix, each functional synergy and jointmotor variable is represented in a separate row of the  matrix. These row elements take the form of M;/Si , and represent the change required in the functional synergy or joint motor  variable, 1VI; , to contribute to the production of a unit change in the spatial variable, i (see Eq. (11)). The relative  contribution of a particular motor variable to a given spatial variable is a function of the contributions of the other motor  variables associated with the inverted functional synergy matrix. Since different matrices consist of different sets of  functional synergy and tuning variables, the relative contribution of a particular motor variable to a given spatial variable  in one matrix is most probably different from the contribution of that same motor variable in a different matrix. Thus, for a  given desired spatial hand trajectory in a redundant arm, the joint angle motions (and hence configurations) associated with  each point along this trajectory will be different for each distinct functional synergy matrix used to plan the motion.  Consequently, the  124 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  joint angle configuration associated with the hand's final spatial target also will vary as a function of the functional  synergy matrix used in motion planning.  A second interesting feature of the synergy matrix approach is that it allows several functional synergies, operating on  distinct or overlapping sets of joints, to be represented in the MF; columns of a single matrix. Especially intriguing in this  regard is the possibility of describing the simultaneous operation of postural and instrumental synergies defined over a set  of partially overlapping joints. Finally, the organization and function of the synergy matrix appears to reflect many of the  properties that Greene (1971; 1972; 1973; Note 1; Note 2) has used to characterize the action "style" of the sensorimotor  system. Let us examine these properties in further detail.  Greene (Note 1) distinguished between main, tuning, and fixed joint variables on the basis of their respective roles in the  performance of a given action: Main variables tend to be parts of standardized "recipes" used to approximate desired movement  patterns, and are controlled by low-level "function generators;" tuning variables are used to improve the movement  approximation provided by the main variables; and fixed variables are those which are held constant. In the course of a  movement, any given joint variable might be reassigned according to its role in the ongoing movement. Referring to the synergy  matrix discussed above, it appears that main variables correspond to the synergy columns of the matrix, with the function  generators represented by the functional synergy "motors." The tuning variables for a given function generator correspond to  those matrix columns not associated with the output of that functional synergy. The fixed variables are those not represented  as columns in the matrix. Thus, given a set of main variables controlled by a single function generator, these variables will  be represented in a functional synergy motor column of the matrix. The tuning variables will be represented in the remaining  columns. Once inverted and applied to the spatial velocity vector, the matrix will output the set of motor variables  (functional synergy and single joint) which will produce the desired movement. Thus, given a functional synergy and an  appropriate set of additional joint variables, the movement approximation provided by the functional synergy will be  automatically tuned via operation of the inverted functional synergy matrix. It is significant to note that Greene (1973)  included joint velocity ratios as instances of low-level function generators, and also stated that tuning can act to modify  these ratios. This latter statement implies that a given joint variable can be both a tuning and a main variable; i.e., the  motion of a given joint may be simultaneously affected by the operation of a functional synergy motor and a joint motor, which  is in agreement with our earlier discussion of the properties of the functional synergy matrix.  In addition, the use of the functional synergy matrix allows one to maintain the notion of underlying resemblances between  actions sharing a common set of recipes or function generators. Thus, movements distinguished only by different tunings of the  same recipe may be described as "cousins" (Greene, 1973), and their computation is thought to be simplified upon the  recognition of this common structure. Some hypotheses concerning the nature of this recognition process will be discussed in  the following section.  Finally, Greene (1973) has also discussed the need for transition functions that help to smooth the transition when control  passes from the operation of one function generator  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 125  to the next in the course of a given movement. As with tuning, these smoothing procedures are posited to occur automatically.  In terms of the functional synergy matrix planning procedures described above, however, it seems unnecessary to distinguish  between tuning and smoothing functions. For example, consider a hypothetical desired spatial trajectory for the hand segment  involving the use of two different function generators along adjacent, nonoverlapping trajectory segments. The required joint  motion plan will be generated via two functional synergy matrices with different functional synergy motor columns and  (possibly) different joint-motor columns. These planned joint motions, if properly executed, will provide a smooth spatial  hand motion in the region of transition between function generators by virtue of the accompanying patterns of generated main  and tuning variables. Thus, transition functions per se would be unnecessary for movement planning procedures. However, as  suggested by Greene (1973), they are probably necessary components in sequentially controlling the relative offsets and onsets  of function generators operating adjacently in real-time.  Representation of skills: 1. Kinematics; coordinate structures. By considering the performance of a familiar action in the  context of levels of representation in the action plan, it becomes possible to arrive at some reasonable hypotheses concerning  the nature of sensorimotor skill. In the present section, we will consider those factors that seem to contribute to the  kinematic nature of skill, without discussing the kinetic "knowledge" that is also seen in a truly skilled act. This latter  aspect of skill will be explored under the joint torque sections below.  If one accepts the possibility that the inverse kinematic transform involves processes similar to Jacobian inversion, and if  one agrees that functional synergies might indeed be useful for mastering redundant degrees of freedom, then one is left with  (at least) two puzzling questions. First, what criteria are used to select a particular joint velocity ratio in constructing  the functional synergy Jacobian for a familiar type of action under given task conditions ? And second, how might the  selection process itself be characterized ? The following admittedly speculative scheme is proposed as one solution to the  former question:  (a) A given functional synergy is defined with respect to a set of simultaneous motions produced across a given set of joints.  Particular sets of functional synergies are associated with the performance of particular types of actions; e.g., functional  synergies producing cyclic lower-limb motion are involved in locomotion and bicycling, while arm and hand functional synergies  are involved in writing;  (b) each functional synergy is internally represented in an abstract model of the actor's body space and the actor's relation  to the task space. This is the beginning of the type of "complex data structure" that appears to be involved in organizing the  use of functional synergies in sensorimotor activity (Greene, Note l, Note 2);9  It should be mentioned at this point that the data structures discussed in this paper are rooted in the concept of different  levels of action representation and hence appear to be different from those discussed by Greene (Note 1, Note 2). In other  aspects, however, they are quite similar.  126 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  (c) each internal functional synergy representation is defined at several levels of the action plan by predictively modeling  the level-specific consequences of activating the functional synergy. Such activation would represent a given pattern of  joint-motor velocities in the abstract motors of the functional synergy model.lThe consequences of these hypothetical  activations for the various levels would be the joint motions corresponding to these motor velocities, the associated spatial  motion via direct velocity transforms of the effector being controlled (e.g., the hand in a reaching task), and possibly, the  conceptual relation between the controlled segment and the environmental goal (e.g., approach vs avoidance);  (d) each functional synergy model is associated with a set of motor velocities in which each element in the set is defined by  a distinct joint-velocity pattern across the joints involved, with each pattern thus being represented at the joint motion  level as a set of relatively fixed joint velocity ratios (cf. Kots & Syrovegin, 1966). Thus, each different ratio would be  represented by a different proportionality constant of the type seen in Eq. (12). At the spatial level, each element would be  interpreted as a vector specifying the direction and speed of effector motion which would result from the activation of the  functional synergy element; and  (e) at a given point in the effector's desired spatial trajectory, the particular joint velocity ratio used to construct the  functional synergy matrix is selected on the basis of the degree to which its associated spatial vector approximates the  desired spatial vector. For example, in a reaching task, the set of relevant synergies is specified at the effector level of  the action plan. Each of these functional synergies has at any point in time a set internally represented variants associated  with it, such that each variant is represented at the spatial level by a vector and at the joint motion level by a joint  velocity ratio. The spatial vector closest to the desired vector will be selected and the corresponding joint velocity ratio  will be used in the inverse transformation.  The above scheme describes the way functional synergy information may be organized in order to permit an appropriate choice of  joint velocity ratio for the functional synergy matrix. It does not deal, however, with the manner in which this choice is  made. We will return to this point after distinguishing among the related concepts of functional synergies, coordinate  structures, and muscle synergies. First, the joint-related notion of functional synergy is seen as distinct from the complex  data structure involved in abstractly representing and updating the modeled effects of a functional synergy's activation at  the different levels of the action plans. This active data structure will be labeled the coordinative structure associated  with a given functional synergy or one of its variants. And, second, the reader should note that the term coordinative  structure has been used in a different sense by several authors (Easton, 1972; Turvey, 1977; Turvey, et al., 1978)  to In examining the muscle level of the action plan below, I will discuss the possibility of another type of predictive  modeling that is based on force outputs in abstract models of muscle activity. Velocity outputs of the modeled functional  synergy motors will suffice for the present discussion, however.  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 127  to describe what we will refer to as muscle synergies (as distinct from functional synergies) in the section below dealing  with the muscle level of the action plan. The term "muscle synergy" will then be used to label a "group of muscles, often  spanning many joints, that is constrained to act as a unit" (Turvey, et al., 1978; this was the authors' definition of  coordinate structure). This labeling change was introduced to better capture the relative complexity and simplicity of  abstract data structures versus concrete muscle groupings, respectively.  Having distinguished among functional synergies, coordinative structures, and muscle synergies, let us turn to the issue of  how a given joint velocity ratio is selected for inclusion in the functional synergy matrix. There appear to be two distinct  possibilities. The first is that the desired spatial vector and the set of coordinative structure spatial vectors (i.e., those  vectors provided by the coordinative structures associated with the functional synergy variants) are related via the  stimulus-response mapping operations of a limitedcapacity central processor or "executive." As such, these operations should  demand attention or cognitive effort (Kahneman, 1973; Posner & Klein, 1973). Alternatively, it is also possible that this  mapping process is automatized, in the sense that "low level detectors" (Greene, 1971, 1972, 1973; Note 1, Note 2) associated  with each coordinative structure might signal when the desired spatial vector lies close to the output spatial vector of a  given functional synergy variant. In the case where more than one coordinative structure "decides" that its functional synergy  variant is appropriate for producing the desired output, there must be some interaction network defined among coordinative  structures such that a single functional synergy variant is ultimately activated with no higher-level executive intervention.  Presumably, the coordinative structures could become more sophisticated due to experience with certain types of actions in a  manner which would allow automatized functional synergy variant selection at even higher levels of the action plan. Thus, in a  reaching task, a coordinative structure might make its decision on the basis of the conceptual level appropriateness of the  output of its associated functional synergy variant (e.g., potential for successful approach or avoidance). One should note,  however, that even if the executive were responsible for spatial stimulusresponse mapping, it would still be ignorant of the  particular functional synergy jointvelocity ratio selected for inclusion in the functional synergy matrix. That is, the  executive could make its decision on the basis of information presented in purely spatial form, and would not necessarily have  to be aware of the lower-level joint-motion consequences of its decision in order to produce an appropriate action.  It is possible that the predicted consequences of activating a given functional synergy would be to match the desired spatial  output. In such a case, no tuning would be required; the functional synergy matrix step could be bypassed; and the functional  synergy velocity ratio could be directly employed. Such situations may be quite rare. However, there are other contexts in  which the construction of the functional synergy matrix might quite regularly be bypassed. For example, if the precision  requirements of a task were low enough such that a rather loosely defined movement would suffice, functional synergies could  be directly used. Another example would be in situations where time pressures might dictate a fast, crude, and approximate  action but might not allow a slower and more precise action.  128 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  Sensorimotor timing. We should briefly consider the manner in which temporal constraints may be integrated with the spatial  aspects of movement. In earlier discussions of the environmental space level of the action plan, we noted that a separation of  spatial and temporal motion parameters had been maintained throughout that level. It was possible to represent an effector's  planned Cartesian spatial coordinates as functions of the distance along the desired path (i.e., x(A), where A = path  distance). Path distance could be expressed independently as a function of time (i.e., A = A(t)) and the relation between  desired Cartesian coordinates and time would then be indirect (i.e., x = x(A(t))). It was also mentioned that the spatial and  temporal aspects of movement would be related at some point between the body-spatial/joint-motion levels and the joint-torque  level of the action plan.  Functional independence between spatial and temporal motion parameters in the evolving action plan may be maintained  throughout the inverse kinematic transform stage. If an effector's planned spatial trajectory is specified as a function of  distance along the desired path, the required joint angle trajectories also may be computed as functions of path distance (A)  by rewriting Eq. (11) as  where doldA and dS f dA are the derivatives with respect to A of 0 and S, respectively; and J-1(-0) is defined as in Eq. (11).  In the direct kinematic transform, currently monitored joint motion and effector spatial trajectory information may be  expressed with respect to desired path distance only after the inverse kinematics stage. Therefore, spatial effector and joint  motion information in the direct transform probably will be expressed directly with respect to time, but only indirectly with  respect to path distance.  Desired joint motions must eventually be expressed, however, as angular velocities and accelerations with respect to time,  which serve as the inputs to the joint torque level of the action plan. Such joint information must be expressed temporally  because, among other things, it will be used to represent the action in kinetic energy terms, and would thus be useless unless  expressed as a function of time.  Joint Torque Level  At the joint motion level of the action plan, a movement can be represented kinematically as a set of joint positions,  velocities, and accelerations expressed as desired functions of time across the set of joints involved in the motion. Although  such information appears to be necessary in order to execute an intended action skillfully, it is not sufficient. There are  two reasons for this. The first deals with reactive mechanical phenomena and the second deals with environmentally supplied  forces arising in the course of movement. Reactive mechanical phenomena are those torques induced at a given joint as passive  dynamic consequences of velocities and accelerations produced at remote joints. As mentioned in the Introduction, Bernstein  (1967) described the highest degree of skill as  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 129  the stage in which these reactive phenomena are actively predicted and incorporated into the action plan. Yet, even if these  reactive torques are utilized in a given action, the resulting description of movement will still be incomplete. Consider, for  example, a standing actor who moves his arm from a position at his side into a forward, horizontal position with respect to  his trunk. If this action is performed while standing upright, shoulder flexion torque must be exerted against the torque  supplied by gravity. On the other hand, if the action is performed while upside down, the gravity torque will assist the  motion; and if a controlled rate of arm motion is desired, shoulder extension torque must be exerted against the gravity  torque. Likewise, the pattern of joint torques required to maintain a given static arm-joint configuration will vary according  to the trunk segment's orientation to gravity. Thus, the same kinematic description of a movement or static posture will  realized as different patterns of exerted joint torques depending on the actor's relation to the environment. Finally, it  should be noted that physical contact between an effector and environmental objects (and surfaces) requires the environment to  "exert" reaction forces and torques on the effector that are equal and opposite to the forces and torques exerted by the  effector on the environment (Newton's third law). Thus, a given kinematically defined movement will have multiple kinetic  descriptions corresponding to the patterns of forces and torques exerted at the environment-effector interface. As Turvey and  Fowler (1978) have emphasized, a theory of movement based solely on kinematics is not a theory of action, but one of mime.  An adequate representation of a skilled action should therefore integrate both linkage and environmental kinetics with a  strictly kinematic description of the intended motion. One way such integration might occur will be discussed in this section  of the paper, which describes a unified mathematical treatment of linkage-mechanical, gravity, and contact effects arising in  the course of movement. Discussions will focus on the nature of skill representations, rather than on stages of development of  such representations occurring during skill acquisition. Thus, emphasis is placed on both the environmental and body-linkage  knowledge which a skilled actor brings to a given task situation, and on the way this knowledge might be used to plan a  particular skilled action.  The mathematical description of movement kinetics presented below relies on a Lagrangian approach to dynamics as opposed to a  Newtonian one. The reason for choosing the Lagrangian approach is that it is advantageous for dealing with systems having many  degrees of freedom, since it involves formulating movement equations directly in terms of generalized coordinates (Meriam,  1966). This clearly entails a considerable simplification of movement analysis, as the geometric constraints of the system are  implicitly incorporated into the statement of the problem (cf. the earlier discussion of degrees of freedom). For example, the  spatial locations and orientations of the segments and joints, the internal mechanical forces within the segments, and the  reaction forces and torques between segments may all be ignored since these constraints have already been considered in  formulating the problem in terms of generalized coordinates. A Newtonian approach must explicitly express these in the  analyses. In addition, the Lagrangian method involves only scalar functions of the generalized coordinates. The scalar  analysis is simpler mathematically, since it eliminates the complications of vector analyses (e.g., keeping track of the signs  of vector components or using the right-hand rule to label  130 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  correctly the sign of a cross-product term (Groesberg, 1968)). Finally, the Lagrangian approach is more compact mathematically  since all equations of motion are systematically derived from a single comprehensive scalar function called the Lagrangian  function or the kinetic potential. On the other hand, the Newtonian method derives equations of motion through separate  considerations of each segment in the system (Groesberg, 1968; Meriam, 1966). Let us now examine the Lagrangian approach  (Groesberg, 1968; Meriam, 1966; McCuskey, 1959; Symon, 1971; Wells, 1967; Horn, Note 9) in more detail, as applied to the  kinetic aspects of sensorimotor activity.  Lagrangian Overview; Linkage Kinetics  For the purpose of simplicity, discussion will be restricted to a simple two-dimensional linkage system in which there are two  rod segments of length h and 1, , and mass ml and M2, respectively; each segment's mass is uniformly distributed along its  length; and each joint is revolute, having one degree of freedom about an axis perpendicular to the xy plane (see Fig. 8). The  system, therefore, has two degrees of freedom, which allows the tip of segment 2 to be placed at any position in the reaching  space. Orientation, however, cannot simultaneously be freely controlled. Similarly, two degrees of freedom are sufficient to  allow the production of an arbitrarily chosen force (magnitude and direction) at the linkage tip, but not to allow comparably  arbitrary, simultaneous torque production. This system has been examined by Horn (Note 9) with a Lagrangian analysis of  linkagemechanical and gravity effects. The treatment of these topics in the present paper is essentially identical to Horn's  analyses, except for the omission of Horn's simplifying assumption that ml = m2 = m and h = 1, = l. In the discussions below,  this assumption is not made, since it appears desirable to distinguish the relative roles of each link in the derived  equations of motion. The Lagrangian analyses of environmental contact reaction forces, however, were derived explicitly for  this paper.  Before proceeding further, one should note that the Lagrangian method becomes much more complex computationally (although not  theoretically) when extended to threedimensional motion. Without additional modifications (e.g., such as those introduced by  Horn, Hirokawa, & Vazirani, Note 10), it appears that this method may be too unwieldly to provide a practical, real-time  solution to the control of sensorimotor behavior. I will return to this issue below, and will outline a promising approach to  this problem (Raibert, 1976, 1978; Horn & Raibert, Note 11; Raibert, Note 12, Note 13). For now, however, a straightforward  Lagrangian analysis of two-dimensional motion will suffice to describe the main principles of movement kinetics stated in  terms of generalized coordinates.  Lagrangian analysis. As mentioned above, the Lagrangian approach to describing the kinetics of a linkage system is based on  the concept of the Lagrangian function or kinetic potential (L), which is equal to the difference between the kinetic energy  function (K) and the potential energy function (P) of the entire system expressed in terms of generalized coordinates. Once L  is formulated, the equations of motion follow directly from the following expression:  d aL aL d~aq;~- aq,  M  j = 1, 2,..., n; (15)  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 131  where:  (a) There is one equation for each of the n degrees of freedom in the system;  (b) q; = the joint position variable at the jth joint = 0; ;  (c) 4; = the joint velocity variable at the Ith joint with respect to time  (d) 8L/8q; , 8L18q; = the partial derivatives of L with respect to 4; and q; , respect  ively;  (e) the terms on the left side of the equation represent the effects of the kinetic and potential energy of the system. All  conservative forces acting on the system (e.g., gravity, pure elastic forces, etc.) are included here; and  (f) the terms on the right represent the effects of all the nonconservative forces (f = 1, 2,..., M) acting on the system  (e.g., muscle force, friction, etc.). Y_ml Qf; are the generalized forces associated with each of the system's degrees of  freedom.  It should be noted at this point that for a linkage in which all degrees of freedom are revolute, Qf; will have the dimensions  of torque. Thus, the generalized force corresponding to muscle activity at a given joint is the resultant muscle torque, Tm; ,  at that joint. Similarly, the Qf; corresponding to the normal contact reaction force of an environmental surface onto the tip  of the linkage is TN; , the resultant torque that is induced at each of the joints by this component of the contact force. One  can also speak of the generalized tangential (e.g., frictional) contact reaction force, TT; , corresponding to the torques  induced as a result of the tangential components of contact forces encountered by the tip in moving across an environmental  surface. Finally, the torques induced by gravity, T,; , may also be treated as generalized forces on the right side of Eq.  (15), provided one does not include gravitational potential energy in the formulation of L on the left side of the equation.  We are now ready to analyze the motion of the system in Fig. 8 according to Lagrangian methods, and will start by deriving a  value of L for the system that includes only the kinetic energy terms. The aim is to begin with a treatment of strictly  linkage-mechanical effects, which may be derived exclusively from the kinetic energy terms, before attempting to deal with  environmentally produced kinetic effects. It should be noted that the treatment presented below is rather abbreviated, and  includes only the major steps of the derivation. A more detailed analysis is provided in Appendix E.  Linkage-mechanical effects (kinetic energy terms). In earlier sections, it was noted that motion at a given joint could be  influenced by reactive torques induced by motion at remote joints. For example, if one desired to flex the elbow and therefore  only exerted an elbow flexion torque, one would find that an undesired shoulder extension accompanied the elbow flexion.  Conversely, if one exerted only shoulder flexion torque, shoulder flexion would be accompanied by undesired elbow extension.  Such unplanned motions are the results of dynamic coupling between motions at each of the joints, and are functions of joint  acceleration and velocity. These linkage-mechanical effects can be shown to derive from the kinetic energy terms in the  Langrangian function. We will now examine these effects in the context of the linkage system in Fig. 8.  132 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  The kinetic energy of each segment may be expressed as the sum of two components (Horn, Note 9), each expressed with respect  to an inertial reference frame (e.g., the xy frame in Fig. 8). The first reflects the instantaneous linear translation of the  segment's center of mass. Since the segments in Fig. 8 are thin rod segments with uniform mass distributions, the center of  mass of each is located at the geometric center of the segment. This linear contribution is simply 2mv2. The second component  reflects the instantaneous angular motion of each segment about its center of mass, and equals 2IW2. In this expression, co is  the segment's angular velocity about its mass center, and I is the moment of inertia about the mass center, which equals i  ffm12 for the rod segments being considered. The angular velocities of links 1 and 2 are Y'1 and (Y'1 -{- 4), respectively.  The linear velocities of their respective centers of mass are 2117'1 and 11`71 + 212(1 +~J. The total kinetic energies for  links 1 and 2 are  Kl = 2(m131,2) ~12,  (16a)  and  K2 = 2(m2~12(112 + 1.122 + 1112 COS 02) + m4141122 + 1112 COS 02) + M422(3122)).  (16b)  The sum of K1 and K2 expresses the total kinetic energy of the system. In this example, then, L = Kl + K2 and one can express  LK as  LK = 2(Y'12(m2(112 + 3122 + 1112 COS Y'2) + m13112) + Y'lw2(m2(~122 + 1112 COS Y'2))  + Y'22(m2(3122))). (17)  Performing the operations on L specified in Eq. (15) with respect to the generalized coordinates (i.e., the joint variables  associated with joints 1 and 2: Y'2 , Y'1 one arrives at the following expressions:  d ( IL  7, (m21 (l 2 + 3 2 l 2 + 1112 COS 02) + 1 m 3112)~1 dt a` I Yl ~ - a~l - Ml -  A  + (m2(3122 + 21112 COS Y'2))4 - (3m21112 sin Y'2) ~22  .~~  - 2(m21112 sin 7'2)`717'2 , (18a) D  d aL aL d a~2 - a42  - TM2 = (m2(122 + TL 1112 COS T2)) T1  + m2 (3122) T2 + ($m21112 Sin `f'2) T12. (18b)  Using these equations, one may compute the resultant muscle torques required to produce a desired pattern of joint  accelerations. In doing so, one needs to specify the current joint position and velocity variables as well as the desired  joint accelerations.  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 133  One may segregate the terms in the above expressions to distinguish between dynamic coupling effects due to acceleration and  those due to velocity. The velocity effects are due to centripetal, centrifugal, and Coriolis forces in the multijoint system.  The acceleration effects may be described by constructing an acceleration sensitivity matrix (Horn, Note 9) which has several  interesting properties. This matrix may be expressed as:  all = A LQ21 = E  a12 = Bl a22 = FJ 1  (19)  where A, B, E, F are the joint acceleration coefficients in Eq. (18a, b). If one examines this matrix, one can determine that  each element ai; is expressed in units of moments of inertia (Ti/o;). The main diagonal terms represent the moments of inertia  for link 2's rotation about joint 2 (a22), and for the rotation of links 1 and 2 taken as a unit about joint 1 (all). The  off-diagonal terms represent the dynamic coupling between the joints due to joint acceleration, and are symmetrical across the  main diagonal; i.e., B = E in Eq. (18a, b). It should be noted that each off-diagonal term, ai; (i =,/- j), represents the  muscle torque required at joint i to compensate for the undesired torque at joint i induced per unit of acceleration at joint  j. Thus, if one ignores velocity product terms for the moment, one may write  LQ21 a221 L~21 - LTMJ  (20)  where and TM are expressed as column vectors, TM, = all~l + a142, and TM2 = a2A -{- a242 . Referring to the earlier example  of producing shoulder flexion without elbow extension, one can see that if joints 1 and 2 are labeled as the shoulder  (flexionextension degree of freedom only) and elbow, respectively, then this desired pattern corresponds to t = +X (positive  sign indicating flexion) and 2 = 0. From Eq. (20), this results in TMS = a11X, TM2 = a21X; i.e., the elbow-flexion torque  required to negate unwanted linkage-mechanical elbow extension is "automatically" provided via operation of the acceleration  Finally, referring to Eq. (18a, b), it becomes evident that each term in the acceleration sensitivity matrix depends on  angular position but not velocity variables. For the main diagonal terms (for the 2-link system being discussed, only all is  dependent on 0), this means that the moments of inertia for rotation at a given joint vary as a function of 0. Thus, all in  Eqs. (19), (20) will be largest when 02 = 0(cos 02 = +1) and smallest when 02 = 180(cos  = -1), corresponding to linkage  configurations for which the moment of inertia with respect to joint 1 is maximal and minimal, respectively. For the  off-diagonal terms, the dependence of the elements on 0 means that the extent of acceleration-related dynamic coupling varies  as a function of joint angle configuration.  Interaction with Environmental Forces  Gravity effects (potential energy terms; generalized forces). In earlier discussions of action planning, gravity information  was used at the environmental space level of the  134 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  action plan to specify certain constraints on the positions and motions of task-space objects (e.g., orientation of a full  glass of liquid), and was used at the body-space level to orient the actor posturally to the global environmental invariants  (i.e., the line of gravity, the plane normal to this line). It is possible that one can sense the direction of gravity  kinesthetically (Fitger, 1976). This could be accomplished by monitoring the relations between patterns of joint torques when  maintaining or changing limb configurations in a gravitational field. We shall soon discuss how this might be done. First,  however, we will discuss how gravity torque effects are incorporated into muscle torque computations when the direction of  gravity is known. Again, derivations will be brief as details are presented in Appendix F.  If one assumes that the line of gravity is parallel to the y-axis and directed toward the x-axis in Fig. 8, then one may  express the potential energy (P) of each segment as: (gravity force acting at the segment's center of mass) X (the  y-coordinate of the segment mass center). Thus, where g = the acceleration of gravity:  P1 = (mlg)(11i sin  P2 = (Ms9)(1, sin 01 + 212 sin(o1 + 02))  (21 a) (21 b)  The sum of Pl and P2 represents the total potential energy of the system. For the system under consideration, one may now  express the Lagrangian (L) with respect to both kinetic and potential energy:  L = LK - (mlg(211 sin Y'1) -I- m29(1. sin Y'1 -}- 212 sin(o1 + ~2)),  (22)  where LK is given in Eq. (17). Performing the operations specified in Eq. (15), one arrives at  TM, - A~1 + B~2 + C~2 + D~2  - 9(11 cos Y'1(Zm1 + ms) + 2m212 cos(01 + 02)), (23a)  TM2 = 41 + 2 + G~12 - 9(2m212 Co01 + Y'2)), (23b) T  where A through G are as in Eq. (18a, b). Tcl and Tc2 represent the torques induced by gravity at joints 1 and 2,  respectively, which must be taken into account in computing TMl and T,2 when movements are performed in a gravitational field.  As mentioned earlier, gravity torques may be treated as generalized forces on the right side of Eq. (15) rather than as  potential energy terms on the left side of this equation. The formula for a generalized force (Groesberg, 1968) associated  with degree-of-freedom j is  N ark Q - Y_ F  ka , k=1 4?  (24)  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 135  where Fk = the external force vector applied to the system; rk = the position vector of points at which F acts on the system;  k = the number of points at which F acts on the system; and the dot denotes the scalar product operation. If, as in the above  example, the direction ogravity is known to be parallel to the y-axis, the acceleration of gravity may be expressed as g =  (g., g,,), with g. = g and gx = 0. Since gravity forces act on the system at the mass center of each segment, N = 2 and rk  denotes the position vectors of the mass centers expressed in xy component vectors. Using these values, one may compute values  for QG1 (= T,,) and QG2 (= T,,) which are identical to those in Eq. (23a, b).  If, however, the direction of gravity is unknown relative to the xy axes, one may reformulate Eq. (24) as  N ark QG, = Y (Fx + F,,)k '  k=1 a4>  (25)  where Fx and Fy denote the unknown x and y component vectors of the gravity forces applied to each segment. From Eq. (25), one  arrives at the following:  TG1 = g.(-(mllll sin 01) - (m211 sin 01) - (m2212 sin(o1 + 02)))  X  + A((m1211 COS Y'1) + (m211 COS Y'1) + (m2212 COS(01 + Y'2))),  TG2 = gx(-m2212 sln(~1 + Y'2)) + gv(m2112 COS(cb1 + Y'2))  (26a) (26b)  These equations may be rewritten in matrix form as  [TG2, = [J KI [gv1'  (27)  where H, I, J, K are the coefficients of gx and g, in Eq. (26a, b). If this coefficient matrix can be inverted (i.e., if the  determinant =A0), one may proceed with the inversion and solve for the unknown gx and gv in terms of sensed joint torques using  [gx] = [ J H IT/HK - _[J. (28)  Contact effects: Normal reaction force. Consider the action of drawing a line on a blackboard. If one could measure the force  exerted at the point of contact from the tip of the chalk onto the surface of the board, one could resolve it into two  components, one normal or perpendicular to the surface and one tangential to the surface. These environmentally directed force  components may be labeled FEN and FEr , respectively. If one could then measure the reaction force exerted from the surface  onto the tip of chalk, one could again resolve this into normal and tangential components relative to the surface. These  linkage-directed reaction force components may be labeled Fxia  136 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  and FIT , respectively. Assuming the surface is rigid, one knows by Newton's third law that FIN = -FEN . Assuming the surface  is dry, it is more difficult, however, to specify FIT since FIT = FF , where FF is the frictional force and is given by  FF = IUdFIN  (29)  In this equation, pd is the dynamic coefficient for dry friction between two sliding surfaces, and depends on the nature of  both surfaces (e.g., surface "texture," the degree of roughness or smoothness). It should be noted that FF acts in a direction  opposite to that of the linkage tip velocity at the contact point, and is relatively independent of both the speed of motion  and the area of contact (Wells, 1967). In the present discussion of normal contact reaction effects, it will be assumed  temporarily for the sake of simplicity that Pd = 0 and, hence, that FIT = 0. The tangential contact effects of frictional  forces will be examined in a later section.  In this simplified version of "writing" with a frictionless blackboard and piece of chalk, the only existing contact reaction  force is FIN (note: Tracing is a more appropriate term now, since writing is impossible without friction). Consider an actor  who traces out a curve on the blackboard. If one then removes the blackboard, the actor may also trace out an identical curve  on an imaginary "blackboard" coincident with the original. Kinematically, these actions are identical, and the same joint  positions, velocities, and accelerations as functions of time may be used to describe each action. However, the actions will  be different kinetically in that when writing on the real blackboard, the actor may exert a range of FEN's which will be  matched by the FIN's supplied by the board. Thus, the FEN's are prevented from causing any undesired motion of the linkage tip  into the plane of the board by the constraint forces, FIN , provided by the board's surface. On the other hand, when tracing  the same trajectory on an imaginary surface, such constraint forces are no longer available and any FEN exerted at the tip  will produce undesired motion into the plane of the fictitious surface. It is evident, then, that the constraint forces ease  the problem of controlling the pattern of joint torques (at a given point in time) that result in producing FEN at the linkage  tip, by allowing the motion to be successfully accomplished with less-precise control of the magnitude of this joint torque  pattern.  During contact with the real blackboard (i.e., as long as FEN is exerted into the plane of the board), the linkage tip is no  longer free to move in three-dimensional space and the system no longer has three degrees of freedom. Rather, the linkage tip  is constrained to move on the two-dimensional surface provided by the blackboard and the system is thereby reduced from three  to two degrees of freedom. From the earlier discussion of generalized coordinates, it is known that one can represent this  loss of one degree of freedom during contact by introducing an equation of constraint into the description of the system that  relates the original coordinates via an equation representing the geometry of the board's surface (i.e., shape, location, and  orientation of the board in body space). Similarly, the motions of turning a crank or of moving an object along a mechanical  track have only one degree of freedom. There are thus two equations of constraint associated with each movement. For cranking,  the equations are those des-  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 137  cribing the geometry of the plane in which cranking takes place plus the circular path taken by the hand in this plane; for  motion along a track, the equations once again describe the geometry of the surface in which the motion occurs and also the  path taken on that surface.  In the same way that eliminating a degree of freedom in three dimensions is accomplished by restricting motion to a  two-dimensional surface, one can eliminate a degree of freedom in two dimensions by restricting motion to a one-dimensional  line. This situation is illustrated in Fig. 9 (note: A straight line was chosen for ease of illustration, but any curved line  would provide a similar constraint to one-dimensional motion).  FIG. 9. Two-dimensional linkage system with two segments, two joints, and with the linkage tip constrained to move along a  constraint line; FRN = normal reaction force, FEN = normally directed force exerted by linkage tip, F,, = tangentially  directed friction reaction force, V = velocity of linkage tip.  The reduction of the system's degrees of freedom can be represented by an equation of constraint describing the line in terms  of x and y coordinates. Examination of this figure shows that this loss of a spatial degree of freedom is accompanied by the  loss of a degree of freedom corresponding to one of the joint variables. Thus, as long as contact is maintained with the line,  the joint variables are no longer independent. If one angle is freely chosen, then the other is constrained to take on a value  which is a function of the first joint's angle and the constants associated with the new system (e.g., the lines y-intercept  and slope).  As discussed earlier, one property of a Lagrangian analysis is that the constraint forces do not explicitly appear in the  derived equations of motion. Since the number of derived equations of motion equals the total degrees of freedom in the  system, the constrained two-dimensional system will be described by only one equation of motion corresponding to the single  degree of freedom represented by the freely varying joint angle. This introduces a problem, because one is interested in  formulating two equations to solve for the muscle torques required at both joints, given torques induced by the normal  reaction force at the linkage tip. Fortunately, the Lagrangian method may be modified to include situations in which one is  interested in the constraint forces themselves (Groesberg, 1968; McCuskey, 1959). Essentially, a fictitious degree of freedom  corresponding  480120/2-4  138 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  to the direction of the constraint force's action is added to the system and the constraint force is included as that force  which is necessary to prevent the motion from violating the system constraints. Since the fictitious degree of freedom is  redundant with respect to the true number of generalized coordinates, an equation of constraint is required for the final  description of the system. In the constrained two-dimensional linkage example, this allows one to establish the desired two  equations of motion and to compute the generalized forces associated with the normal contact reaction force. These generalized  forces (QN; = TN;) may be expressed as (see Appendix G for details):  TNI = -FRN,(11 Sin Y'1 + 12 Sin(o1 + Y'2))  + FRNv(h COS 01 + 12 COS(01 + Y'2)), (30a)  TN2 = -FRNy(l2 sin(o1 + Y'2) + FRNy(l2 COS(01 + Y'2)), (30b)  where FRN. and FR,, denote the x and y component vectors of the normal contact reaction force (FR,) at the linkage tip. In Eq.  (15), one can see that these generalized forces are computed on the right side of the equation. Shifting them to the left  side, one may then write  TMl = A~1 + B~2 + C~22 + D42 - TC1 - TNl r (31a)  TM2 = '.y'1 + F~2 + G~12 - Tc2 - TN2 (31b)  where A through G, T,1 and TG2 are as in Eq. (23a, b). TN, and TN2 represent the torque induced at joints 1 and 2,  respectively, by FRN .  Since FR, = -FEN , one arrives at an interesting result: If one knows the x and-y components of the force one desires to  produce normal to an environmental surface at the contact point, one may insert the negative of these values into Eq. (30a,  b), and compute the TNl and TN, terms. Equation (31a, b) then provides the muscle torque required to produce a desired motion  with a desired normal environmental contact force under the influence of gravity. Being able to specify FEN (and hence FRN =  -FEN) requires that the actor know or perceive: (a) the spatial parameters of the constraint surface or line (location,  orientation, and shape)-these are used in order to compute the direction of the desired FEN at a given point in time; and (b)  the "material" qualities of the objects and surfaces that come into contact during the motion-these can be used to specify the  magnitude of the desired FEN in terms of its permissible upper and lower bounds (i.e., the strength of a blackboard or piece  of chalk will determine the maximum normal force that each can sustain before breaking). An intriguing point about the  possibility of controlling the force to be exerted on the environment (FEN) by the predicted consequences of the intended  action (FRN) is that this position is consistent with the principle of ideomotor action proposed by William James (1890) and  espoused by Greenwald (1970). According to this principle, "an anticipatory image of feedback from an action participates in  the selection and initiation of that action" (Greenwald, 1970, pp. 91). With respect to normal contact reaction force  planning, this statement describes the procedures discussed above quite well.  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 139  Contact effects: Tangential reaction force (friction). In the previous section, the simplifying assumption was made that  contact between linkage and environment was frictionless and that only normal forces were experienced during motion across  environmental surfaces. This assumption is highly unrealistic and will now be lifted. Equation (29) expresses the fact that  the component of contact reaction force tangential to an object's dry surface, F,,, is due to friction (FF). In turn, FF  depends on the magnitude of the normal contact reaction force (FR,) and on the nature of the contacting surfaces (via Id); is  directed opposite to the linkage tip velocity; and is relatively independent of the contact area and the speed of motion.  Returning to the two-dimensional linkage in Fig. 9, the existence of FF means that additional force must be exerted in the  direction of the tip's motion to counteract the opposing frictional force. These frictional forces at the linkage tip can be  represented as generalized forces (QF; = TF;) associated with dry sliding friction (see Appendix H for details):  TF1 = -(1dFRN(v2)-"201(112 + 122 + 21,12 COS Y'2) + 41112 COS Y'2 + 122)), (32a)  TF2 = -/,dFRN(v2)-1/2(2122 + 1(1112 COS Y'2 + 122)), (32b)  where v is the velocity of the linkage tip.  Since the TF;'s are calculated on the right side of Eq. (15), one may shift them to the left side and write  TM, = A~I + B~2 + C~22 + NA - T11 - TN1 - TFl , (33a)  TM2 = E~1 + F~2 + G.L12 - Tc2 - TN2 - TF2 , (33b)  where A through G, TG,, Tc2, T,,, TN2 are as in Eq. (31a, b). TFl and TF2 represent the the torques induced in joints 1 and 2,  respectively, by FF at the linkage tip.  These results can be interpreted in the context of the earlier example of blackboard writing. If an actor knows the amount of  friction required for the chalk to leave a trace on the board (FF), and he knows or can perceive the hardness/softness of the  chalk and the surface texture of the board (pd), he can then calculate the corresponding normal reaction force (FR,) via Eq.  (29). The values for ft, and FRN can be plugged into Eq. (32a, b) to provide TFl and T12, and FRN can be plugged into Eq.  (30a, b) to provide T,1 and TN2 . These terms may then be inserted into Eq. (33a, b) to compute the resultant muscle torques  needed to produce a desired motion under the influence of gravity with the required degree of friction between chalk and  board. This task involves the direct control of friction, with normal force being controlled in service of friction production  during the course of a movement. Other tasks involve the control of normal force for its own sake with secondary compensation  for frictional resistance (e.g., smoothing out a wrinkled piece of paper, ironing, etc.); still other tasks involve primary  control of both (e.g., wood carving, clay sculpting, etc.).  Three-Dimensional Motion; Computational Complexity  It was stated above that Lagrangian analyses become highly complex computationally when applied to three-dimensional kinetics.  As was noted by Raibert (1976), the Lagran-  140 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  gian equations for the three-dimensional motion of the three-link, three-joint arm analyzed by Kahn (1969) involve  approximately 1600 terms and 13,000 multiplications. One can get a better idea of the increase in complexity when one link,  one joint and one spatial motion dimension are added to the planar example in Fig. 8 by referring to earlier discussions of  the acceleration sensitivity matrix (see Eqs. (18)-(20)). Specifically, in Eq. (18a) the coefficient for e is quite simple.  However, the corresponding expression for the coefficient of 'i in Kahn's (1969) example fills approximately 14 text pages  with small computer print.  Sensorimotor state/configuration space. Raibert (1976, 1978; Note 12, Note 13) proposed an ingenious method of dealing with  the problem of computational complexity. Essentially, he capitalized on the fact that if one divides a motion trajectory into  very short temporal intervals ("time slices"), then the joint angle position and velocity of each joint in the limb may be  considered to be constant during a given time slice. Thus, the vector and matrix elements representing the coefficients of the  motion equations, which normally vary with the state of the system (i.e., the position and velocity at all the joints in the  limb), become constants within a given time slice. During a particular movement, the problem of finding the values of these  elements can become not a problem of lengthy computation, but one of retrieving a set of precomputed constants stored at an  address corresponding to a given limb state. Since the movement consists of a series of time slices, the joint torque  calculations thus involve retrieving and using the sets of constants corresponding to the states assumed by the system over  the entire range of time slices.  It is clear, however, that although this approach vastly simplifies the computation problem, it potentially introduces an even  worse storage and retrieval problem. That is, since each joint in the system can have infinitely many positions and  velocities, the number of states of the system is infinite. Therefore, it is impossible to store all the constants associated  with all the states in a finite capacity memory. Raibert (1976, 1978; Note 12, Note 13) deals with this problem by proposing a  discrete state space in which each dimension of the space (the position and velocity parameters of each joint) is divided into  M intervals. The state space thereby consists of 2N dimensions (position, velocity times the number of joints), and is  partitioned into MIN subregions or hypercubes. Thus, the retrieval problem is reduced to that of retrieving the constants  associated with the subregion of the state space which includes the state of the arm during a given time slice. Recently,  however, Horn and Raibert (Note 11) have proposed an alternative configuration space model which provides a more optimal  balance between problems of computation time and storage space. This method is similar to the state space approach, except  that motion constants are indexed in memory according to the configuration (joint angles only) of the linkage system. At the  cost of a little more computation, the advantage of configuration space lies in its economy of storage, i.e., it requires only  N dimensions and MN subregions or hypercubes of memory. (The interested reader is referred to Raibert's (1976, 1978; Note 12,  Note 13) papers for further details on the computation of the hypercube constants, and the way these constants may be  recalibrated according to the results of movements experience; cf. also the work of Albus (1975a, b) for an alternative method  of dealing with movement-related problems of storage and retrieval.)  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 141  The state space (Raibert, 1976, 1978; Note 12, Note 13) and configuration space (Horn & Raibert, Note 11) approaches may also  be used to eliminate the matrix inversion step in the inverse kinematic transform. Such elimination of an explicit kinematic  inverse was demonstrated experimentally by Raibert (Note 13) for a nonredundant arm. In the present context, the same method  might be used to eliminate the Jacobian matrix inversion step in the inverse kinematic transform. Since the elements in the  inverted matrix depend on the limb configuration, these elements can be stored in a given region of the state/configuration  space and retrieved when appropriate during computation of the joint velocities required for a particular movement. It should  be noted, however, that this technique only applies to the use of nonredundant arms and/or redundant arms for which a  functional synergy matrix has been constructed. Thus, with a redundant arm, an unreduced matrix relating known spatial  variables to unknown joint velocity variables will contain elements which are not constants for a given arm configuration.  Since redundant arms are indeterminate with respect to the inverse kinematic relationship, the elements of such a hypothetical  unreduced "inverse transform" matrix would have an infinite number of solutions, and would hence be unsuitable for storage in  a finitestate/configuration space memory.  Since most actions are performed by redundant arms, one is led to the conclusion that a state/configuration space approach to  inverse kinematics primarily involves the elimination of the functional synergy matrix inversion step. Recall, then, that each  inverted functional synergy (or variant) matrix is associated with a distinct set of functional synergy and tuning variables  which are represented in separate rows of the matrix (see the above functional synergy matrix section). For a given limb  state/configuration, the elements, Ayj/,~i , of such a matrix are constants. Recall also that the relative contribution of a  particular functional synergy or tuning motor variable to a unit change in a given spatial variable is a function of the other  motor variables associated with the inverted matrix. Since different matrices represent the effects of different sets of  functional synergy and tuning variables, a particular motor variable's relative contribution to a given spatial variable in  one matrix is most probably different from that same motor variable's contribution in a different matrix. For a given limb  state/configuration (i.e., for a given subregion of the state/configuration space), each distinct inverted functional synergy  matrix can be represented by a distinct set of constants associated with the corresponding set of functional synergy and  tuning variables. Thus, if it is reasonable to use a state/configuration space approach to describe sensorimotor behavior, it  is conceivable that a given subregion of the state/configuration space would be associated with constants representing: (a)  the terms in the matrices and vectors used to analyze motion kinetics, and (b) the terms in the inverted functional synergy  matrices corresponding to those sets of functional synergy and tuning variables which are frequently used near or within that  region of the state/configuration space.  Representation of skills: TI. Kinematics and kinetics. One can consider the above suggestions in the context of the special  nature of the representation of skilled acts. Thus, a well-practiced action will be associated with a given set of functional  synergies. In the construction of functional synergy matrices, certain functional synergy and tuning  142 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  variables may characteristically be associated with one another in given regions of the state/configuration space. The sets of  constants corresponding to the elements in the inverted functional synergy matrices for a given state/configuration space  subregion may be stored at this state/configuration space address. Thus, each region of the state/ configuration space may  have different sets of constants associated with it, corresponding to those combinations of functional synergy and tuning  variables that are characteristically used during inverse kinematic procedures within and near those regions."  For reasons described above, these inverse kinematic constants are defined only in the context of functional synergy matrices.  These matrices, in turn, are constructed in order to solve the degrees of freedom problem that exists for the inverse  kinematic transform. At the joint torque level of the action plan, however, there is no analogous degrees of freedom problem.  The number of equations (one equation for each desired angular acceleration at a given joint) is equal to the number of  unknowns (the joint torques required to produce these accelerations). Hence, there is no need at the joint torque level for a  construct similar to that of functional synergy, which would serve to functionally relate the torque produced at one joint to  the torque produced at another joint. In the section below on the muscle level of the action plan, it will be suggested that  joint-torque ratios may in fact exist. However, they only appear to be defined at the joint-torque level indirectly as the  result of the construction of muscle synergies at the muscle level. Therefore, those constants at a given state/configuration  space address, which are related to joint-torque computations, need only relate torque at a given joint to movement at the  same or another joint.  The process of converting a movement representation from spatial to torque form may be described in the following manner:  (a) If the linkage is redundant, a functional synergy matrix is constructed;  (b) if the action is an unfamiliar one (e.g., new functional synergies must be constructed; old functional synergies are used  in unfamiliar regions of the state/configuration space; etc.), the matrix must be inverted computationally; if the action is a  well practiced one, the constants for the inverted matrix may be retrieved directly from the current state/configuration space  address. This availability of kinematic constants for skilled actions may be one source of the superior performance of  familiar versus unfamiliar actions;  (c) once the set of functional synergy and tuning variable "motor" rates have been calculated, the corresponding individual  joint velocities are recovered (see the above redundant degrees of freedom section) and a set of individual joint  accelerations is derived;  (d) using this set of joint accelerations and the set of joint-torque level constants stored at the current  state/configuration space address, a set of individual joint torques is  "Conversely, it is also possible that each functional synergy/tuning variable combination is associated with its own smaller  state/configuration space. This smaller space would be defined by those subregions of the more global state/configuration  space in which it is characteristically used. Such synergy spaces might be included in a "multiple spaces model" (Raibert,  Note 12, Note 13) of sens, rimotor activity to reduce further the size of the state/configuration space memory involved in a  given performance of a particular action type.  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 143  derived. It should be noted, however, that the set of joints for which such constants are retrieved is not limited to those  joints at which motion is desired. Rather, constants are retrieved for both this "motion" set of joints and the "frozen"  joints left out of the functional synergy matrix. If the latter joints are to remain truly immobile, the reactive torques  induced in them by the moving joints must be counteracted.  According to the properties of the state space proposed by Raibert (1976, 1978; Note 12, Note 13) the constants associated  with "well-used" regions of the state space (and by implication the configuration space of Horn and Raibert (Note 11)) reflect  the true mechanical properties of the linkage more accurately than the constants associated with less-used regions. Therefore,  a second advantage of a skilled versus an unskilled action is that the former will be better adapted to the kinetic  requirements of a movement at the joint torque level.  Muscle Level  There are two sublevels within the muscle level of the action plan. The first deals with the relation between desired joint  torques and the muscle forces required to produce these torques, while the second deals with the amount of neural input  required to produce these muscle forces.  Muscle Forces  The resultant torque which is actively produced at a given joint is a function of the forces exerted by many muscles.  Therefore, the problem of calculating the muscle contractions required to produce a desired joint torque is an indeterminate  one; i.e., the joint torque to muscle force transformation involves solving a system of equations (related to the number of  joints at which torque is to be controlled) for a set of unknowns (equal to the number of muscles acting at the joints in  question) in which there are more unknowns than equations. This is analogous to the degrees of freedom problem involved in the  inverse kinematic transform, and the solution is similar. Thus, one can express the total muscularly produced torque (Tm?) at  joint j as a function of the forces exerted by a given subset of the muscles of the system (Fmk). It should be noted, however,  that the output of the joint torque level of the action plan is a set of resultant muscularly produced joint torques. Each  such resultant torque can be produced by an infinite number of flexion and extension torque-production combinations. It is  therefore proposed that, prior to the torque-force transformation, each resultant joint torque is resolved into a given  flexion (T, 3) and extension (TM;) torque combination.  Anatomy matrix; muscle synergy matrix. The relation between the force exerted by a muscle and the torque produced at a given  joint depends on the angle of the muscle's insertion with respect to the joint. This angle determines the size of the moment  arm in the Torque = (moment arm) X (force) equation, and depends in turn on the joint angle configuration of the linkage. One  may thus write the following series of equations, representing the direct transform from muscle force to joint torque:  144 ELLIOT SALTZMAN TMl = r11FM1 + r12FM2 ' .. + rl.FMp >  T Ml - r21FM1 + r22FM2 ' + r2,FM, I  TMn = r(2n-1)1FM1 + r(2.-1)2FM2 "' + r(2n-1)nFMV TMn - r(2n)1FM1 + r(2n)2FM2 '' + r(2n)nFMn,  where the TM-'s refer to flexion and extension muscle torques, the Fm's represent muscle forces, and the is designate the  moment arms of the muscle forces. More specifically, this system of 2n equations (i.e., one equation each for the flexion and  extension torques at joint j; j = 1, 2,..., n) can be represented in matrix form via an anatomy matrix (Jacobsen & Mann, Note  8, Note 14):  where  T+rt; = a 2n x 1 column vector representing the set of flexion (-{-) and extension (-) torques at each joint j (j = 1, 2,...,  n);  FMk = a p X 1 column vector representing the set of forces exerted by each muscle k (k = 1, 2,..., p); and  A(O) = [rck], the 2n x p anatomy matrix (g = 1, 2,..., 2n; k = 1, 2..... p) whose elements are function of the linkage  configuration; where rek is the flexion (if g = an odd integer) or extension (if g = an even integer) torque per unit force  produced by muscle k at joint (g -{- 1)/2 or g/2, respectively, when all other FMh = 0 for k 0 h. In order to provide linear  independence between the rows of the matrix that correspond to flexion and extension torques at a given joint, the rgk's in  rows corresponding to flexion (or extension) torques are assigned values of zero when associated with muscles exerting  extension (or flexion) torques at that joint.  The A( matrix may be reduced to a square matrix with the same methods that were used to construct the functional synergy  matrix by:  (a) defining a set of elementary matrix transformations on the columns of A( to construct an equivalent 2n x p matrix that  includes the effects of muscle synergies and tuning muscles. These synergies involve groups of muscles which often span many  joints and are constrained to act as units (to paraphrase Turvey, et al., 1978) exerting simultaneous forces across these  joints; and  (b) striking out excess columns to produce a 2n x 2n muscle synergy matrix.  If this resulting synergy matrix is invertible, one may compute the inverse and then solve for the flexion and extension,  synergy and tuning muscle forces required to produce a desired set of joint torques. Alternatively, since the elements in the  anatomy matrix are functions of limb configuration, it should also be possible to use a state/configuration  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 145  space approach to muscle force planning.12 In a manner analogous to inverse kinematic planning (see the above sensorimotor  state/configuration space section), a distinct set of muscle synergy and tuning variables would be represented by a distinct  muscle synergy matrix. For a given limb configuration, each inverted muscle synergy matrix should then, contain a set of  constant elements associated with the corresponding combination of muscle synergy and tuning variables. Thus, each region of  the state/configuration space would be associated with distinct sets of constants, corresponding to those sets of synergy and  tuning variables that are used characteristically within or near those regions. Conversely (see footnote 11), each distinct  inverted muscle synergy matrix may be associated with its own smaller state/configuration space, defined by the subregions of  the larger space in which the corresponding synergy and tuning muscle combination is characteristically used.  One should remember that the muscle synergy and tuning muscle variables are defined with respect to muscle forces, and are  distinct from functional synergy and joint tuning variables which are defined with respect to joint motions. However,  interesting relationships may exist between these muscle- and joint-centered concepts.  Representation of skills: III. Muscle, torque, and motion. In earlier discussions of functional synergies, it was proposed  that coordinative structures were associated with each functional synergy, and were responsible for abstractly representing  and updating the modeled effects of a given functional synergy's activation at several levels of the action plan. Such  abstract activation took the form of a set of joint-motor velocities defined in specific ratios across the joints included in  the representation of a given functional synergy or variant. These motor-velocity ratios were transformed by the coordinative  structures into movement representations for the spatial (and possibly conceptual) levels of the action plan to provide a  means of selecting the functional synergy appropriate to the task at hand. According to this formulation, the origins of the  joint-motor velocity ratios that defined the functional synergies were left unspecified. It is now proposed that these ratios  derive from the modeled consequences for the joint motion level of activating the muscle force outputs associated with a given  muscle synergy. These modeled effects are generated by a more complex type of coordinative structure which provides the  level-specific, predicted consequences of activating a given muscle synergy to the joint torque, joint motion, spatial motion,  and (possibly) conceptual levels of the action plan. As such, this new type of muscle synergy coordinative structure subsumes  the function of the earlier type defined strictly for functional synergies.  is It seems evident, therefore, that information concerning the state/configuration of the body's effector systems plays a  major role in providing an updated context for sensorimotor action planning procedures. Several investigators have posited  such a role for proprioceptive/kinesthetic afference in both limb movements (e.g., Polit & Bizzi, 1979) and speech production  (e.g., Lindblom, Lubker, & Gay, 1979). In the framework of the present paper, afferent information is used to provide the  state-/configuation- dependent elements in the matrices and vectors involved in transformations of movement representations  between levels of the action plan. This information is essential for both computational and state/configuration space  approaches to planning coordinated sensorimotor movement (e.g., as in the use of the functional synergy, acceleration  sensitivity, and muscle synergy matrices. described in the text).  146 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  The coordinative structure for a given synergy models the joint torque effects associated with a ratio of forces applied  across the set of muscles included in that synergy. The set of muscle synergy coordinative structures associated with a  particular skill provides a group of synergy-labeled torque representations, which can then be used in the selection of the  synergy(s) involved in constructing the muscle synergy matrix. In addition, these joint-torque representations can be  transformed into sets of joint accelerations if the corresponding kinetic equations of motion (see Eq. (33a, b)) are  invertible, or if the appropriate constants have been stored in the sensorimotor state/configuration space. From a joint  acceleration representation, the muscle synergy model's effects may be readily transformed into a set of joint velocities, and  a corresponding spatial vector and conceptual label may be derived as with the earlier functional synergy coordinative  structures.  A given muscle synergy is thus represented at the joint motion level by a joint velocity ratio which depends on the effects of  the modeled muscle force ratio associated with that synergy. The velocity ratios previously discussed in conjunction with  functional synergies remained constant despite variations in the state of the linkage. On the other hand, those velocity  ratios associated with muscle synergy force ratios should vary with the linkage state, since the modeled muscle forces will  have both different torque and acceleration effects depending on the link state and external loading conditions. However, if a  movement is performed under constant conditions, the joint velocity ratio associated with a given muscle synergy should be  relatively invariant from one trial to the next.  Since an action ultimately depends on the correct selection, sequential ordering, and timing of muscle contractions, it would  be advantageous to select the participating muscle groups as early as possible in the planning process. In earlier sections of  the paper, when coordinative structures were used to select among functional synergies only, the joint velocity ratio which  was finally chosen might not necessarily map directly onto a muscle-defined synergy. Now, however, since coordinative  structures are defined with respect to muscle synergies, the selection among velocity ratios (functional synergies) at the  joint motion level should more closely correspond to a selection among muscle synergies at the muscle level.  Finally, it is likely that muscle synergy coordinative structures, which represent such synergies from the muscle to  conceptual levels of the action plan, will increase the probability that different instances of the same action will maintain  an underlying resemblance to one another. Referring to the earlier discussion of functional synergies, one may say that  actions having common muscle synergies but different tuning muscles are "cousins."  Skill acquisition. Having introduced and discussed the concept of muscle synergies, it becomes appropriate to inquire briefly  into their origins. For most forms of sensorimotor behavior, the development of synergies apparently requires training  (Gelfand, Gurfinkel, Tsetlin, & Shik, 1971; Gurfinkel, Kots, Paltsev, & Feldman, 1971). Such synergies appear to be made  each time not on an empty place but on the framework of a small number of basic synergies  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 147  and inherent neurophysiological mechanisms which lower the number of independent parameters of the controlled system. (Gelfand  et al., 1971b, p. 332).  Several authors (e.g., Easton, 1972; Hayes & Marteniuk, 1976) have reviewed evidence suggesting that reflexes may be included  in the set of "basic synergies and inherent neurophysiological mechanisms" referred to by Gelfand, et al., (1971b). If one  accepts this hypothesis, then the coordinative structures associated with a set of reflexes seem to share many of the  properties attributed by Piaget (1952) to reflex schemes, i.e., abstract, relatively autonomous internal representations of  reflex actions. Thus, during movement training, an actor might use a body space joint motion strategy of combining joint  fixation and functional synergy selection to construct a functional synergy matrix. This matrix would then be used to compute  the set of joint velocities that kinematically approximate the desired action. The functional synergy velocity ratios involved  in this selection process would have been provided by the coordinative structures associated with the muscle synergies already  in the actor's behavioral repertoire. With practice (and through some unspecified pattern recognition process), the actor  would then discover or construct a new muscle synergy, internally represented by an associated coordinative structure which is  relatively autonomous in function.  Muscle Innervation  This section is relatively brief, and serves only to outline the major problems faced in calculating the neural input to the  appropriate motoneurons pools (i.e., the group of motoneurons controlling a given muscle's contraction) in order to produce  the desired pattern of muscle forces for those muscles selected in a given action.  Every muscle consists of a population of motor units, each of which may be defined as a set of muscle fibers controlled by a  single alpha motoneuron. A muscle's force output can be controlled either by increasing the number of contracting motor units  (recruitment) and/or by changing the firing rates of a given set of motor units (rate coding) (cf. Stein, 1974). The maximal  force produced by a given motor unit depends on the size of the muscle fibers in the unit. Additionally, the force output of a  muscle firing at a given rate is a function of both muscle length and the velocity of shortening or lengthening (e.g., Joyce &  Rack, 1969; Joyce, Rack & Westbury, 1969; Rack & Westbury, 1969). Furthermore, the force exerted by a muscle depends not only  on the neural input, but also on the parallel elastic and viscoelastic properties of the musculotendinous tissues. These  passive forces may assist or oppose the production of a desired muscle force, and are themselves dependent on the limb state  (e.g., Long, Thomas, & Crochetiere, 1966). Finally, once the required degree of muscle activation (i.e., level of alpha  motoneuron innervation) has been calculated, the actual neural input to a given motoneuron pool will depend on the amount of  background activity already present in the pool.  A promising approach for dealing with the physiological control of muscle force production has been developed recently. This  approach treats each muscle as a spring with a physiologically controllable equilibrium length (Asatryan & Feldman, 1965;  Bizzi, Dev, Morasso, & Polit, 1978; Bizzi, Polit, & Morasso, 1976; Crago, Houk, & Hasan, 1976; Feldman, 1966a, 1966b, 1974a,  1974b, 1976; Fowler, 1977; Houk, 1979; Kelso,  148 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  1977; Polit & Bizzi, 1979). For a given muscle length in an isometric situation, specifying a certain equilibrium length  results in producing a force that is proportional to the difference between the current length and the newly established  equilibrium length. If unhindered, the muscle will contract until it reaches this new equilibrium length. Control of angular  position at a particular joint involves controlling the forces of agonist and antagonist muscle groups to produce opposing  torques at the joint. A given set of specified equilibrium lengths for the agonist and antagonist muscle "springs" results in  the joint attaining a final angular position at which the agonist torque is balanced by the antagonist torque. Two highly  desirable features of this model are that, for a given set of agonist and antagonist equilibrium lengths, the joint will  achieve and maintain a desired final position regardless of both (1) the initial joint angle and (2) any perturbations imposed  during angular motion toward the target position.  It is sometimes tempting to hypothesize that motor commands to achieve and maintain a desired hand position in body space,  from any initial arm configuration, are based on the set of spring parameters associated in memory with the final limb  configuration. Stated this simply, however, the hypothesis is inadequate and/or incorrect for several reasons. First, for a  given limb configuration the required pattern of resultant, muscle-produced joint torques (and hence agonist-antagonist spring  parameters) will vary according to the body's orientation to gravity (e.g., Feldman, 1974a; see also the introduction to the  above joint torque level section). Second, for a given limb configuration the same set of resultant, muscle-produced joint  torques may be produced with different degrees of agonist-antagonist cocontraction (e.g., Asatryan & Feldman, 1965; Crago et  al., 1976; Polit & Bizzi, 1979; see also the above muscle forces section). Third, a given set of joint angle changes may occur  with different angular velocity trajectories (e.g., Feldman, 1966b, 1974a, 1974b; Polit & Bizzi, 1979). Fourth, for redundant  arms there are an infinite number of possible limb configurations (and hence spring parameters) associated with a given  spatial hand position (see the above inverse kinematic transform section). However, a distinct final limb configuration will  be associated with the corresponding set(s) of functional synergy and tuning variables used to attain the spatial hand target  (see the above functional synergy matrix section). Finally, and in a similar fashion, there are an infinite number of possible  muscle force patterns associated with a given set of resultant, muscle-produced joint torques. However, a distinct pattern of  muscle forces will be associated with the corresponding set(s) of muscle synergies and tuning variables used to attain the  desired torque pattern (see the above anatomy matrix; muscle synergy matrix section). An adequate model for the general  control of limb position and movement using the muscle-spring approach should therefore qualify the process of selecting  spring parameters from memory according to these relevant considerations.  Thus, the problems faced at the muscle innervation level of the action plan are complex ones. As such, they are no different  from those faced at other levels. There is, however, a major distinction to be drawn between problems faced here as compared  to those at other levels: The results of computations at the innervation level of the action plan provide physiologically  relevant information that may be directly related to the control of the peripheral musculoskeletal apparatus. It is sobering  to realize that, until the last few paragraphs, all discussions have been focussed on aspects of action planning presuma-  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 149  bly involved in transforming a symbolically represented movement into muscle-relevant form. It should be noted that even in  such "physiological" form, however, this information offers only a sketchy outline of a solution to the musculoskeletal  control problem, e.g., control of motor unit recruitment and firing rate, coordination of alpha and gamma motoneuron  activation, damping of undesired oscillatory behavior, etc. The investigation of such topics falls chiefly under the domains  of motor physiology and control system theory, and will not be pursued further in this paper.  SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS  The approach taken in this paper with respect to analyzing sensorimotor behavior has been to examine a series of relatively  simple actions (e.g., block stacking, reaching, transporting, writing on a blackboard, etc.) in terms of the ways such actions  are represented at different levels of the action plan. In addition, attention was focussed on the nature of the  transformations that were defined with respect to the different levels of representation of a given action. This perspective  appears to afford certain insights into the nature of movement that might have been overlooked had other approaches been  adopted. In the present section, several major features of sensorimotor activity that emerged from these analyses are  reviewed. Emphasis is placed on the roles of object geometry and gravity, on the degrees of freedom problem, and on the use of  certain mathematical techniques for describing and simulating human movement.  (1) Object Geometry. The geometry of environmental objects and surfaces was used: at the conceptual level to identify objects  and to detect their action-relevant properties (affordances); at the environmental space and effector levels, to define a set  of object coordinate axes labeled with respect to the type of action being performed; at the body-space and joint motion  levels, to enter into the calculation of the motion trajectory of the effector with respect to a given object or surface; and  at the joint-torque level, to incorporate adaptively normal and friction reaction forces into a movement involving contact  between the effector and a given object or surface.  (2) Gravity. At the environmental space level, gravity information was used to constrain the placement and movements of  certain objects in the task space, e.g., as in transporting peas on a fork from dinner plate to mouth. In the body-spatial and  joint motion levels, the pedate system maintained the actor's balance with respect to gravity. Finally, at the joint-torque  level, gravity information was used to plan movements of the actor in a gravitational field.  (3) Degrees of Freedom. The degrees of freedom problem was defined with respect to situations in which one was faced with  solving a system of m equations for n unknowns when n > m. Such situations appeared to occur both during the inverse kinematic  (spatial motion to joint motion) and the joint torque to muscle force transformation procedures. In each case, one solution to  the problem was based on the construction  150 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  of functional synergy (joint-velocity ratios) and muscle synergy(muscle force ratios) matrices at the joint motion and muscle  force levels, respectively. Additionally, it was proposed that these functional and muscle synergies were related via the  operations of coordinative structures. These coordinative structures were described as complex data structures used to  provide, for all levels of the action plan, the predictively modeled effects of activating the muscle synergies. Implications  of functional synergies, muscle synergies, and coordinative structures for the representation of skilled action were discussed  in the text. Finally, it was noted that the joint motion to joint torque transformation did not involve a degrees of freedom  problem.  (4) Denavit-Hartenberg Notation. The Denavit-Hartenberg (1955) notation has proved useful for the construction and control of  robot manipulators. It is also applicable to computer simulation studies of human movement. For example, in all discussions in  the text, the coordinate axes for the linkage segments were defined in a right-handed sense. If one wished to study bimanual  movements, one could define the right limb's coordinate axes in a right-handed sense and the left limb's axes in a left-handed  sense. It should be noted that such an arrangement would result in homologous (mirror image) responses of the right and left  limbs if the same set of joint velocity commands were applied to each limb given the same initial limb states; if both limb's  axes were define identically (both right- or both left-handed), however, the same set of joint velocity commands applied to  each limb would produce nonhomologous movements.  Additionally, the use of these representational techniques would facilitate simulation studies of the movements of redundant  arms for which different functional synergy matrices are defined across varying task and environmental situations. In a  complementary fashion, one could examine experimentally the joint-velocity ratios found under different initial postural,  loading, and task conditions (cf. Bishop & Harrison, 1977; Kots & Syrovegin, 1966) to see if one could tease apart the  contributions of functional synergy and tuning variables. Such an approach should prove quite valuable in studies of skill  acquisition, where new synergies are presumably constructed or discovered. Finally, these methods offer a novel and rigorous  approach to examining the developmental issue of what an infant is learning when it begins to reach for and grasp a nearby  object.  Concluding Remarks  A levels-of-representation approach to sensorimotor phenomena offers a clearly defined conceptual framework within which both  to analyze movement and to guide the formulation of experimental approaches to problems of movement regulation and  coordination. The framework, as outlined in the text, is accessible to researchers in psychology, physiology, biomechanics,  and artificial intelligence. Contributions from each discipline can be infused at appropriate levels. A true interdisciplinary  synthesis in the field of sensorimotor behavior and development will depend upon rigorous theoretical and empirical work in a  variety of fields. It is hoped that the present perspective will contribute to this synthesis.  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 151  APPENDIX A: DIRECT KINEMATIC TRANSFORM  In Eq. (1), '-'A; is a 4 X 4 matrix associated with joint; which transforms system; coordinates to system;_, coordinates (see  Fig. 2). This transformation is accomplished through the following operations on system;  1st = rotation by -a; about x; , aligning z; and z;_, ;  2nd = translation by a; along x; , bringing z; and z;_, into coincidence; 3rd = translation along z;_, by s; , bringing xy;  into the xy;_, plane; and 4th = rotation by -~; about z;_, , bringing the two frames into full coincidence.  These transformations can be written in matrix form as:   cos o; -sin  0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 a; -              1 0 0 0   sin O; cos O; 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 cos a; -sin a; 0  ;_,A = 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 s; 0 0 1 0 0 sin a; cos a; 0   0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1  2nd rotation 2nd 1st   translation translation  cos o; -cos a; sin 0; sin a; sin O; a; cos O;  sin O; cos a; cos O; -sin a; cos o; a; sin o;  0 sin a; Cos aj s;  1st rotation  APPENDIX B: ORIENTATION ANGLES  The set of orientation angles, NH (Waters, Note 6) of the hand frame relative to the base frame (xo , yo , zo) are  (xh , .Yh , zh)  (NH)xa = the angle between yo and yh measured about xo , (OH), 0 = the angle between zo and zh measured about yo , (fl,), o =  the angle between xo and xh measured about z,.  The angles may be examined by referring to Fig. 10. Thus, for:  (1) (NH)xo : Treat OP as jh , and project jh into the yozo plane. Then (NH)xo = the angle about xo in the yozo plane from yo  to this projection. Thererefore,  tan(PH)xo = (ih)aoI (ih)vo ,  and  (NH)xo = tan 1(1h),/(jh)vo .  152 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  Fia. 10. Three-dimensional coordinate system used to define orientation angles.  (2) (NH)vo : Treat OP as kh , and project kh into the zoxo plane. Then (PH)vo = the angle about yo in the zoxo plane from zo  to this projection. Therefore,  and  tan(NH)v, = (kh)xoI(kh)zo ,  OH)vo = tan-1(kh).o/(kh)=o .  (3) (PH)zu : Treat OP as ih , and project ih into the xoyo plane. Then (NH)zo = the angle about zo in the xoyo plane from xo  to this projection. Therefore,  and  tan(gH)zo = (ih)v,I (Zh)xo , (9H)z,, = tan-1(Zh)vohih)xo .  APPENDIX C: THE VELOCITY MATRIx13 Equation 6 in the text may be differentiated with respect to time:  at () = OR = at (Bj jR)  _~ Bj.jR+Bj.dtjR,  where (dldt) JR = 0, since jR is a constant expressing a fixed point relative to body j. Thus,  Oft = d B..jR.  13 Adapted from Kahn, 1969; Waters, Note 6.  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 153  Since B; is a function of the joint variables, qi , (i = 1, 2,..., n), one may define a "velocity matrix," V,, by  V' _-_ d  B  dt  " aB; d i=1 aqi dt  ' OBI n aB; .  _ Y aqi 4i + ~_~ 1 aqZ  where li is ~i , the angular velocity at joint i. In the above equation, aB;1agi = 0 for i > j, since B; only includes  matrices involving joint variables from ql to q; . Thus  One should note that it is relatively easy to calculate aB;lagi , since  OB; = OA, . 1182 ... ;-2Ai-1 . ai-1A aqi aqi  i+1 ... j-1Aj ,  where a j-1A;1agi = 0 for j -7~= i.  APPENDIX D: THE JACOBIAN MATRIx14  The direct kinematic transform defines a mapping from joint variables (0) to spatial variables (S) via a set of functions,  fi(o;), where i = 1, 2,..., m, and j = 1, 2,..., n. Assuming that the partial derivatives of each function, fi , exist, one  can form the matrix of partial derivatives, [afilao;]. This matrix is expressed in Eq. 8 in the text, and is called the  Jacobian matrix of the direct transform, J(.  One can differentiate S with respect to time in the following manner:  d S = dt [f1(07),f2(01),...,fm(07)JT  Finally, one knows by a theorem (Wylie, 1975, p. 713) that since the direct kinematic transform has the Jacobian, J(O), then  the Jacobian of the inverse kinematic transform is J-11. Thus, if J is invertible, one can find J-1 and, hence, solve the  inverse kinematic problem.  14 Lang, 1973; Wylie, 1975.  48012012-5  154 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  APPENDIX E: LINKAGE-MECHANICAL EFFECTS: KINETIC ENERGY TERMS" (1) Angular velocity about center of mass (com).  link, : Y'1 ,  link, : ~, + 2 .  (2) Linear velocity (magnitude) of center of mass.  link, : 11, 1 1,  link, : 11 1 + 11201 +  (3) Linear velocity squared: I v 12. Note that vector multiplication is defined by the  scalar product operation.  link, : v12 = 1 111.212 1 = 111212. link, : v22 = 111212 + (2)(1)11 - 14141 + `Y2) + 1122(Y'1 + ~2)2  = 1,212 + 1112 COS 04141 + 4 + 11220, + ~2)2  = 12(112 + J122 + 1112 COS 02) + 42(1112 COS 02 + 1122)  (4) Total kinetic energy, link 1.  Kl = 1(12m1112)(012) + 2(ml)(1112012)  vv~~  angularx linearK  - 1[1m1112] ~12.  (5) Total kinetic energy, link 2.  K2 = 1(12M2 122)(Y'1 + 4)2 + 1m2(v22) angularx 11nearK  - 1(12~2122)~12 + 121n2122~42 + 1(_A2_m2122)~22 + 1m2(v22)  - 1m2`Y12(11z + 1122 + 1112 COS Y'2) + 2m442(1122 + 11,12 COS Y'2) + 1m222(3122)  (6) Total K, link 1 -f- 2: L = K - P = K, since P = 0 in this example.  LK = W12(m2(112 + 1122 + 1112 COS Y'2) + m1311) + 42(m2(1122 + 1112 COS Y'2)) + 42 (m2 (1122))) is See Fig. 8.  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 155 Partial derivatives of L.  a4aoi = o,  aL/a02 = (2)(-sin 02)(mzlll412) + (f)(-sin 02)(m2111242) (2)(-sin 02) 01m21i1241 + 4  _ - I (sin M ~1m211.1241 +41  aL/a~l = (2)(2)(mz(3112 + 3122 + 1112 COS Y'z) m131i2) + ?(m2(3122 +  1112 COS 4'2)) Y'2 >  a4a~2 = (2)(m2(S122 + 1112 COS02)41 + 3(2)(m2(3122))4  d aL - (12)(2)(M2( l 2 j,122 l Z cos Y'2) + m13112) `Yl  dt 1 + 3 +\ 1 2 A  + 2(m2(3122 + 1112 COS 02))Y'2  + ((2)(2) m21112(-sin Y'2) Y'1} Y'2 + (2m21112(-sin `f'2) Y'2) `Y2  d aL ) = 2(m2(3122 + 1112 COS ~2))`f`1 + (2)(2)(m28122))Y'2  dt a 2 ~.E --~_--+ '2M2',',(- sin 02) ~42  (9) Finally:  _ d aL aL ~ ,~,~,  T tiri ( a,.~ ) a,~ = A~1 + B~2 + C~2  dt z + DY'lY~s , Y'1  TM2 _ d aL - aL  dt E 42 ) a02  = 41 + F~2 + (1m,1,12(- sin Y'2) 442) - (- 2m2h12(sin0z) Y'1(~'1 + 2)) = 41 + F~2 + 2m21112(sin 02) 4'12.  APPENDIX F: KINETICS: GRAVITY EFFECTSls  (1) Potential energy terms (P). Assuming that the direction of g is known to be parallel to the y axis, the total potential  energy of links I and 2 is  P = %gill sin 4'1 + m2g(li sin Y'1 + 212 sin(o1 + 4'2)) 16 See Fig. 8.  156 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  For a conservative force like gravity, one can write (Groesberg, 1968)  Thus,  ap  Qj=-av'  Qm, = TG1 = -aplaOi  -(+M1g21l COS Y'1 -}- M2911 COs Y'1 + m2g212 COS(01 + `Y2)) -g(11 COs 01(2m1 + m2) + 2m212 COS(01 + Y'2))'  Qm2 = TG2 = -ap/42  - -(+m2g212 COS(01 + Y'2)) = -g(2m212 COS(01 + Y'2))  (2) Generalized force terms. Assuming the direction of g is unknown, one may formulate the problem according to Eq. (25) in  the text:  N  QG1 = Y (F,, + Fv)k ' aq; >  where rk = the position vectors of coml and come (N = 2) in the base frame, expressed as  xy component vectors. Thus:  (a) link 1: rl = 211 cos Oli + 121, sin Oil,  link 2: r2 = (11 COs Y'1 -{- 2l2 cos(01 + 02))i + (11 sin 01 + 2l2 sin(o1 + M)1'  Qal = TG1  = mlg ' 41 + M29 ' a~ = (mlgxi + m,gv1) ' (-211 sin Oli + 21, cos 011) + (m,g,,i + m,gv1) ((-11 sin Y'1 - 21, sin(o1 + 02))1 +  (11 COs Y'1 + 212 cos(01 + 02))l)  _ ((mlgx)(-211 sin Y'1) + (mlgv)(211 COs Y'1)) + ((M29.10(- 11, sin 01 - 212 sin(o1 .+ ~2)) + (m2gv)(11 COs ~1 -f- 212 COS(01  + 02)))  = g.(-(m1211 sin Y'1) - (m21i sin 01) - (m2212 sin(o1 + ~2)))  + 911((m1211 COS Y'1) + (m211 COS Y'1) + (m2212 COS(01 + `i'2)))'  Q,,g = TG2  m1g ' arl + m2g ' - are =002 42  = (M19J + mlgvl)(0) + (m2gx1 -I- m2gv1)  ' (-212 sln(~1 + Y'2)1 + 212 COS(01 + 02)l)  = g.,,(-m2212 sln(o1 + Y'2)) + gv(m2212 COS(01 + `Y2))'  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 157 APPENDIX G: KINETICS: NORMAL CONTACT EFFECTS17  One may rewrite Eq. (24) in the text as:  N9 - - _, (FRNz + FRN)k k ~  k=1  where rk = the position vector of the linkage tip (N = 1) in the base frame, expressed as xy component vectors. Thus:  (1) r = rx + r,  _ (11 COS 01 + 12 Co01 + 02))i + (11 sin 01 -I- 12 sin(o1 + 02))j  (2) Qdl = TNl - (FRN) ' (a(ra + rv)al0Y'1) + (FRN) ' (a(rx + rv)vl a`Yl)  = -FRNx(11 sin 01 + 12 sln(ol + Y'2)) + FRN,(ll COSo1 -{- 12 COS(01 + Y'2)), 2 TN2 = (FRN) ' (a(rx + r'.)x/002) + (FRNy) '  (a(rx + rv)vl42)  = -FRNz(12 sln(ol + Y'2)) + FRNy(12 COS(01 + Y'2))'  APPENDIX H: KINETICS: TANGENTIAL CONTACT EFFECTS-FRICTION18  The frictional forces at the linkage tip can be represented as generalized forces (QF; _ T,;) associated with dry sliding  friction (Wells, 1967):  aPF  QFj _ - a4~  where PF is the "power function" associated with friction, and may be expressed as  N  PF = Y, akvk . k=1  In this expression, N = 1 since there is only one point of contact between the linkage and the environmental surface, a =  lj,FRN, and v = the velocity of the linkage tip.  v  12  -I h~1+1201+ 2)12  11212 + 21,12 COS Y'2(~1)(`Y1 + y'2) + 12201 + ~2)2  - 12(112 + 122 -I-- 21,12 COS Y'2) + 242(1112 COS 02 + 122) + 22122'  Once can then express v as (v2)1/2.  11 See Fig. 9. 18 See Fig. 9.  158 ELLIOT SALTZMAN  (2) PF = PdFRN(v2)1/2  (3) QF,,3 = TF1 aPF - - 41  _ -PdFRN()(v2)-1/2/2. 1(112 + 122 + 21,12 COS Y'2) + 241112 COS Y'2 + 122)) = N'dFRN(v2)-112(1l(II2 + 122 + 21,12 COS Y'2)  + 2(1112 COS Y'2 + 122)),  aPF  (4) QFm2 = T F2 = - aY'2  = -11 dFRN(v2)-1/2(2122 + 1(1112 COS 02 + 122))'  REFERENCES  ABRAHAMSON, A. A. Experimental analysis of the semantics of movement. In D. A. Norman & D. E. Rumelhart (Eds.), Explorations  in cognition. San Francisco: Freeman, 1975.  AGIN, G. J., & BiNFORD, T. O. Computer description of curved objects. In Third International Joint Conference on Artificial  Intelligence, Advance Papers of the Conference. Menlo Park, Calif.: Stanford Research Institute Publications Department, 1973.  ALBUS, J. S.A new approach to manipulator control: The cerebellar model articulation controller (CMAC). ASME Journal of  Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control, 1975a, 97, 220-227. ALBus, J. S. Data storage in the cerebellar model articulation  controller (CMAC). ASME Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control, 19756, 97, 228-233.  ARBIB, M. A. Artificial intelligence and brain theory: unities and diversities. Annals of Biomedical Engineering, 1975, 3,  228-274.  ARUTYUNYAN, G. A., GURFINKEL, V. S., & MIRSKII, M. L. Investigation of aiming at a target. Biophysics, 1968, 13, 642-645.  ARUTYUNYAN, G. A., GURFINKEL, V. S., & MIRSKII, M. L. Organization of movements on execution by man of an exact postural task.  Biophysics, 1969, 14, 1162-1167.  ASATRYAN, D. G., & FELDMAN, A. G. Functional tuning of nervous system with control of movement or maintenance of a steady  posture. I. Mechanographic analysis of the work of the joint on execution of a postural task. Biophysics, 1965, 10, 925-935.  ATTNEAvE, F., & BENSON, B. Spatial coding of tactual stimulation. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1969, 81, 216-222.  ATTNEAvE, F., & OLSON, R. K. Discrimination of stimuli varying in physical and retinal orientation. Journal of Experimental  Psychology, 1967, 74, 149-157.  ATTNEAVE, F., & REID, K. W. Voluntary control of frame of reference and slope equivalence under head rotation. Journal of  Experimental Psychology, 1968, 78, 153-159.  BARTLETT, F. C. Remembering. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1932.  BELEN'KII, V. YE., GuRFINKEL, V. S., & PAL'TSEV, YE. I. Elements of control of voluntary movements. Biophysics, 1967, 12,  154-161.  BERNSTEIN, N. The coordination and regulation of movements. New York: Pergamon, 1967. BISHOP, A., & HARRISON, A. Kots and  Syrovegin (1966)-a demonstration of modular units in motor programming? Journal of Human Movement Studies, 1977, 3, 99-109.  Btzzi, E., DEv, P., MORASSO, P., & POLIT, A. Effect of load disturbances during centrally initiated movements. Journal of  Neurophysiology, 1978, 41, 542-556.  Blzzi, E., POLIT, A., & MORASSO, P. Mechanisms underlying achievement of final head position. Journal of Neurophysiology,  1976, 39, 435-444.  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION  159  CRAGO, P. E., HOUK, J. C., & HAsAN, Z. Regulatory actions of human stretch reflex. Journal of Neurophysiology, 1976, 39,  925-935.  DENAVIT, J., & HARTENBERG, R. S. A kinematic notation for lower pair mechanisms based on matrices. ASME Journal of Applied  Mechanics, 1955, 77, 215-221.  DOBROTIN, B. M., & SCHEINMAN, V. D. Design of a computer controlled manipulator for robot research. In Third International  Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Advance papers of the conference. Menlo Park, California: Stanford Research  Institute Publications Department, 1973. EASTON, T. A. On the normal use of reflexes. American Scientist, 1972, 60, 591-599.  EL'NER, A. N. Possibilities of correcting the urgent voluntary movements and the associated postural activity of human  muscles. Biophysics, 1973, 18, 966-971.  FELDMAN, A. G. Functional tuning of the nervous system with control of movement or maintenance of a steady posture. II.  Controllable parameters of the muscles. Biophysics, 1966a, 11, 565-578. FELDMAN, A. G. Functional tuning of the nervous system  during control of movement or maintenance of a steady posture. III. Mechanographic analysis of the execution by man of the  simplest motor tasks. Biophysics, 1966b, 11, 766-775.  FELDMAN, A. G. Change in the length of the muscle as a consequence of a shift in equilibrium in the muscle-load system.  Biophysics, 1974a, 19, 544-548.  FELDMAN, A. G. Control of the length of the muscle. Biophysics, 1974b, 19, 766-771.  FELDMAN, A. G. Control of the postural length and strength of a muscle: advantages of the central co-activation of the a and  static y motoneurones. Biophysics, 1976, 21, 188-190.  FITGER, C. Tactile-kinesthetic space estimation: the influence of gravity. Psychological Research, 1976, 39, 113-135.  FomiN, S. V., & SHTIL'KIND, T. I. The concept of equilibrium of systems having legs. Biophysics, 1972, 17, 137-141.  FOMIN, S. V., & STILLKIND, T. I. On the dynamic equilibrium of the pedatar systems. In A. A. Gydikov, N. T. Tankov, & D. S.  Kosarov (Eds.), Motor control. New York: Plenum, 1973. FOWLER, C. A. Timing control in speech production. Bloomington,  Indiana: Indiana University Linguistics Club, 1977.  GELFAND, I. M., V. S. Gurfinkel, S. V. Fomin, & M. L. Tsetlin (Eds.), Models of the structuralfunctional organization of  certain biological systems. Cambridge, Mass.: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press, 1971a.  GELFAND, I. M., GURFINKEL, V. S., TSETLIN, M. L., & SHIK, M. L. Some problems in the analysis of movements. In I. M. Gelfand,  V. S. Gurfinkel, S. V., Fomin, & M. L. Tsetlin (Eds.), Models of the structural functional organization of certain biological  systems. Cambridge, Mass.: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press, 1971b.  GENTNER, D. On relational meaning: the acquisition of verb meaning. Child Development, 1978, 49, 988-998.  GIBSON, J. J. The theory of affordances. In R. Shaw & J. Bransford (Eds.), Perceiving, acting, and knowing. Hillsdale, N.J.:  Erlbaum, 1977.  GoLANI, I. Homeostatic motor processes in mammalian interactions: a choreography of display. In P. P. G. Bateson & P. H.  Klopfer (Eds.), Perspectives in ethology (Vol. 2). New York: Plenum, 1976.  GREENE, P. H. Introduction. In 1. M. Gelfand, V. S., Gurfinkel, S. V. Fomin, & M. L. Tsetlin (Eds.), Models of the structural  functional organization of certain biological systems. Cambridge, Mass.: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press, 1971.  GREENE, P. H. Problems of organization of motor systems. In R. Rosen & F. M. Snell (Eds.), Progress in theoretical biology  (Vol. 2). New York: Academic Press, 1972.  GREENE, P. H. Hierarchical hybrid control of manipulators, artificial intelligence in LSI. In E. Heer (Ed.), Remotely manned  systems: exploration and operation in space. Pasadena, Ca.: California Institute of Technology Press, 1973.  GREENWALD, A. G. Sensory feedback mechanisms in performance control: with special reference to the ideo-motor mechanism.  Psychological Review, 1970, 77, 73-99.  160  ELLIOT SALTZMAN  GROESBERG, S. W. Advanced mechanics. New York: Wiley, 1968.  GURFINKEL, V. S., KOTS, YA. M., PALTSEV, E. I., & FELDMAN, A. G. The compensation of respiratory disturbances of the erect  posture of man as an example of the organization of interarticular interaction. In I. M. Gelfand, V. S. Gurfinkel, S. V.  Fomin, & M. L. Tsetlin (Eds.), Models of the structural functional organization of certain biological systems. Cambridge,  Mass.: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press, 1971.  HAYES, K. C., & MARTENIUK, R. G. Dimensions of motor task complexity. In G. E. Stelmach (Ed.), Motor control: Issues & trends.  New York: Academic Press, 1976.  HEBB, D. O. The organization of behavior. New York: Wiley, 1949.  HESS, W. R. Diencephalon: autonomic and extrapyramidal functions. New York: Grune & Stratton, 1954.  HOUK, J. C. Regulation of stiffness by skeletomotor reflexes. Annual Review of Physiology, 1979, 41, 99-114.  HOWARD, I. P., & TEMPLETON, W. B. Human spatial orientation. New York: Wiley, 1966. JAMES, W. The principles of psychology  (Vol. 2). New York: Holt, 1890.  JOYCE, C. G., & RACK, P. M. H. Isotonic lengthening and shortening movements of cat soleus muscle. Journal of Physiology,  1969, 204, 475-491.  JOYCE, G. C., RACK, P. M. H., & WESTBURY, D. R. The mechanical properties of cat soleus muscle during controlled lengthening  and shortening movements. Journal of Physiology, 1969, 204, 461-474.  JUNG, R., & HASSLER, R. The extrapyramidal motor system. In J. Field, H. W. Magoun, & V. E. Hall (Eds.), Handbook of  physiology, Section I. Neurophysiology, Vol. H. Washington, D.C.: American Physiological Society, 1960.  KAHN, M. E. The near-minimum-time control of open-loop articulated kinematic chains (AIM-106). Artificial Intelligence  Project, Stanford University, 1969. (NTIS No. AD-708 076)  KAHN, M. E., & ROTH, B. The near-minimum-time control of open-loop articulated kinematic chains. ASME Journal of Dynamic  Systems, Measurement and Control, 1971, 93, 164-172. KAHNEMAN, D. Attention and effort. Englewood Cliffs, N. J.:  KELSO, J. A. S. Motor control mechanisms underlying human movement reproduction. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human  Perception and Performance, 1977, 3, 529-543.  KOTS, YA. M., KRINSKIY, V. I., NAYDIN, V. L., & SHIK, M. L. The control of movements of the joints and kinesthetic  afferentation. In I. M. Gelfand, V. S. Gurfinkel, S. V. Fomin, & M. L. Tsetlin (Eds.), Models of the structural functional  organization of certain biological systems. Cambridge, Mass.: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press, 1971.  KOTS, YA. M., & SYROVEGIN, A. V. Fixed set of variants of interaction of the muscles of two joints used in the execution of  simple voluntary movements. Biophysics, 1966, 11, 1212-1219.  LANG, S. Calculus of several variables. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1973.  LASHLEY, K. S. Basic neural mechanisms in behavior. Psychological Review, 1930, 37, 1-24.  LEWIS, R. A. Autonomous manipulation on a robot: summary of manipulator software functions (JPL-TM-33-679). Jet Propulsion  Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 1974. (NTIS No. N74-20023)  LEWIS, R. A., & BEICZY, A. K. Planning considerations for a roving robot with arm. In Third International Joint Conference on  Artificial Intelligence, Advance papers of the conference. Menlo Park, Ca.: Standard Research Institute Publications  Department, 1973.  LINDBLOM, B., LUBKER, J., & GAY, T. Formant frequencies of some fixed-mandible vowels and a model of speech motor programming  by predictive simulation. Journal of Phonetics, 1979, 7, 147-161.  LONG, C., THOMAS, D., & CROCHETIERE, W. J. Viscoelastic factors in hand control. Proceedings of IV International Congress of  Physical Medicine, Excerpta Medica international congress series no. 107. New York: Excepta Medica, 1966.  MARTIN, J. P. The basal ganglia and posture. London: Pitman, 1967.  MCCUSKEY, S. W. An introduction to advanced dynamics. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1959.  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION  MEIROVITCH, L. Methods of analytical dynamics. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1970. MERIAM, J. L. Dynamics. New York: Wiley, 1966.  MILLER, G. A., & JOHNSON-LAIRD, P. N. Language and perception. Cambridge, Mass.: The Belknap Press of Harvard Univ. Press,  1976.  NAPIER, J. R. The prehensile movements of the human hand. Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery, 1956, 38B, 902-913.  NEVATIA, R., & BINFORD, T. O. Structured descriptions of complex objects. In Third International Joint Conference on  Artificial Intelligence. Advance papers of the conference. Menlo Park, Ca.: Stanford Research Institute Publications  Department, 1973.  D. A. Norman & D. E. Rumelhart (Eds.), Explorations in cognition. San Francisco: Freeman, 1975.  PACTSEV, YE. I., & EL'NER, A. M. Preparatory and compensatory period during voluntary movement in patients with involvement of  the brain of different localization. Biophysics, 1967, 12, 161-168. PALL, R. C. Modelling, trajectory calculation and servoing  of a computer controlled arm. (AIM-177) Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (STAN-CS-72-311), Computer Science Department,  Stanford University, 1972. (NTIS No. AD-785 071)  PER', R. W. Human perceptual-motor performance. In B. H. Kantowitz (Ed.), Human information processing: Tutorials in  performance and cognition. Hillsdale, N. J. Erlbaum, 1974.  PIAGET, J. The origins of intelligence in children. New York: Intern. Univ. Press, 1952.  PICK, H. L., JR., YONAS, A., & RIESER, J. Spatial reference systems in perceptual development. In M. Bornstein & W. Kessen  (Eds.), Psychological development from infancy: image to intention. Hillsdale, N. J.: Erlbaum, 1978.  POLANYI, M. Personal knowledge. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1958.  POLIT, A., & Blzzi, E. Characteristics of motor programs underlying arm movements in monkeys. Journal of Neurophysiology,  1979, 42, 183-194.  POSNER, M. I., & KLEIN, R. On the functions of consciousness. In S. Kornblum (Ed.), Attention and performance (Vol. 4). New  York: Academic Press, 1973.  RACE, P. M. H., & WESTBURY, D. R. The effects of length and stimulus rate on tension in the isometric cat soleus muscle.  Journal of Physiology, 1969, 204, 443-460.  RAIBERT, M. A state space model for sensorimotor control and learning (AIM-351). Artificial Intelligence Laboratory,  Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1976. (NTIS No. AD-A026 960) RAIBERT, M. H. A model for sensorimotor control and  learning. Biological Cybernetics, 1978, 29, 29-36.  RIESER, J. J., & PICK, H. L., JR. Reference systems and the perception of tactual and haptic orientation. Perception and  Psychophysics, 1976, 19, 117-121.  ROCK, I. Orientation and form. New York: Academic Press, 1973.  SCHANK, R. C. Identification of conceptualizations underlying natural language. In R. C. Schank & K. XI. Colby (Eds.),  Computer models of thought and language. San Francisco: Freeman, 1973. SCHMIDT, R. A. A schema theory of discrete motor skill  learning. Psychological Review, 1975, 82, 225-260.  SHANV, R. E., & MCINTYRE, M. Algoristic foundations to cognitive psychology. In W. Weimer & D. Palermo (Eds.), Cognition and  the symbolic processes. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1974.  SHFTH, P. N., & UICKER, J. J., JR. A generalized symbolic notation for mechanisms. ASME Journal of Engineering for Industry,  1971, 93, 102-112.  SMITH, K. U., & SMITH, W. M. Perception and motion. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1962. STEIN, R. B. Peripheral control of movement.  Physiological Reviews, 1974, 54, 215-243. SYMON, K. R. Mechanics, third edition. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1971.  TALMY, L. Semantics and syntax of motion. In J. P. Kimball (Ed.), Syntax and semantics (Vol. 4). New York: Academic Press,  1975.  TIMOSHENKO, S., & YOUNG, D. H. Advanced dynamics. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1948. TOLMAN, E. C. Purposive behavior in animals and  men. New York: The Century Company, 1932. TUMA, J. J. Statics. New York: Quantum Publishers, 1974.  162  ELLIOT SALTZMAN  TURVEY, M. T. Preliminaries to a theory of action with reference to vision. In R. Shaw & J. Bransford (Eds.), Perceiving,  acting and knowing. Hillsdale, N. J.: Erlbaum, 1977.  TURVEY, M. T., & FOWLER, C. Skill acquisition: an event approach with special reference to searching for the optimum of a  function of many variables. In G. E. Stelmach (Ed.), Information processing in motor control and learning. New York: Academic  Press, 1978.  TURVEY, M. T., SHAW, R. E., & MACE, W. Issues in the theory of action: degrees of freedom, coordinative structures and  coalitions. In J. Requin (Ed.), Attention and performance VII. Hillsdale, N. J.: Erlbaum, 1978.  WATERLAND, J. C., & MUNSON, N. Reflex association of head and shoulder girdle in nonstressful movements of man. American  Journal Physical Medicine, 1964, 43, 98-108.  WELLS, D. A. Lagrangian dynamics. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967. WELLS, K. F. Kinesiology, fifth edition. Philadelphia:  Saunders, 1971. WHITNEY, D. E. Resolved motion rate control of manipulators and human prostheses. IEEE Transactions on  Man-Machine Systems, 1969, MMS-10, 47-53.  WHITNEY, D. E. The mathematics of coordinated control of prosthetic arms and manipulators. ASME Journal of Dynamic Systems,  Measurement and Control, 1972, 94, 303-309.  WICKSTROM, R. L. Fundamental motor patterns. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1977.  WINOGRAD, T. A procedural model of language understanding. In R. C. Shank & K. M. Colby (Eds.), Computer models of thought and  language. San Francisco: Freeman, 1973.  WYLIE, C. R. Advanced engineering mathematics, fourth edition. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1975.  REFERENCE NOTES  1. GREENE, P. H. Strategies for heterarchical control-an essay. I. A style of controlling complex systems. Department of  Computer Science, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, December, 1975.  2. GREENE, P. H. Strategies for heterarchical control-an essay. II. Theoretical exploration of a style of control. Department  of Computer Science, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, December, 1975.  3. MARR, D. Representing visual information. AIM-415, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of  Technology, 1977.  4. MARK, D., & NiSHIHARA, H. K. Representation and recognition of the spatial organization of three dimensional shapes.  AIM-416, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1977.  5. GREENE, P. H. Coordination of effectors and transfer of adaptation. Memo No. 15, Institute for Task Analysis, Chicago,  Illinois, 1973.  6. WATERS, R. C. Mechanical arm control. Vision Flash 42, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of  Technology, 1973.  7. PICK, H. L., JR. Visual coding of non-visual spatial information. Paper presented at S.S.R.C. Modes of perception workshop,  Minneapolis, Minnesota, June, 1974.  8. JACOBSEN, S. C., & MANN, R. W. A graphical representation of the functional musculo-skeletal anatomy of the shoulder and  arm. Paper presented at 27th Annual Conference on Engineering in Medicine and Biology, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, October,  1974.  9. HORN, B. K. P. Kinematics, statics, and dynamics of two-D manipulators. AI-WP-99, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory,  Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1975.  10. HORN, B. K. P., HIROKAWA, K., & VAZIRANI, V. V. Dynamics of a three degree of freedom kinematic chain. AT-WP-155,  Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1977.  11. HORN, B. K. P., & RAIBERT, M. H. Configuration space control. AIM-458, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts  Institute of Technology, 1978.  SENSORIMOTOR REPRESENTATION 163  12. RAIBERT, M. H. Control and learning by the state space model: Experimental findings. AIM-412, Artificial Intelligence  Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1977.  13. RAIBERT, M. H. Motor control and learning by the state space model. AI-TR-439, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory,  Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1977.  14. JACOBSEN, S. C., & MANN, R. W. Control systems for artificial arms. Paper presented at IEEE Conference on Systems, Man and  Cybernetics, Boston, Massachusetts, November, 1973. 15. HORN, B. K. P. Personal communication, 1978.  RECEIVED: February 4, 1979