10.1016/0022-2496(79)90026-9
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 20, 256-262 (1979)  A Simple Duality Principle in Test Theory  DONALD W. ZIMMERMAN  Department of Psychology, Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada KIS SB6  It is demonstrated that theorems in test theory have corresponding dual theorems which are obtained by exchanging true scores  and error scores, as well as reliability coefficients and their complements, in both the hypothesis and the conclusion. A  formula that does not conform to the principle cannot be an identity in the test-theory model, but must be based on additional  assumptions in the hypothesis that perhaps are not immediately apparent. The usefulness of this principle is indicated, and  its origin in the mathematical formalism underlying the theory is discussed.  The purpose of this note is to call attention to a simple duality principle, which has been overlooked in test theory, but  which can be extremely valuable in organizing and clarifying the meaning of many results. Essentially, this principle reveals  that the theorems in test theory, like the identities in Boolean algebra, or in the algebra of sets, have duals. More  picturesquely stated, a vast collection of well-known and not so wellknown formulas, some trivial and others non-trivial, can  be divided naturally into two "symmetrical" subsets which can be placed in one-to-one correspondence. The principle itself is  not a theorem, but a metatheorem. Its truth soon will become apparent, and it is a consequence of a more general mathematical  formalism of which the test-theory model is one realization.  In what follows, "test theory" means the modern version based on the expected-value concepts of true score and error score, as  developed by Novick (1966), Lord and Novick (1968), and others. The symbol pxx, will denote test reliability, which can be  defined as Var Tx/Var X, as 1 - (Var Ex/Var X), as p2(X, Tx), or in other ways, where X, Tx, and Ex are observed scores, true  scores, and error scores. For reasons that will be explained below, we do not adopt initially the assumption of experimental  independence, according to which p(Ex, Ey) = 0, for error scores on distinct tests.  To begin, we shall focus attention on the symbols T and E, irrespective of the particular random variables to which they are  attached. That is, while Tx, Ex, Ey, and so on, refer to various true score and error score random variables, we are going to  consider the abstract operators T and E. The meaning of this point of view will be discussed in more detail later.  The duality principle can be stated quite simply as follows. In any theorem in test theory, if T and E are exchanged and pxx,  is replaced by 1 - pxx, , the result is another theorem. By a "theorem" is meant an identity which can be derived from the  axioms, or a valid if-then statement, containing in the hypothesis and conclusion any variances or standard deviations of  observed scores, true scores, or error scores, any covariances or correlations  0022-2496/79/060256-07$02.00/0  Copyright Q 1979 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  256  TEST THEORY 257  among these score components, and any special symbols, like the reliability coefficient, Pxx' , that are defined in terms of  the above quantities. A theorem may be a simple identity, only one or two steps removed from the initial definitions in the  model, or it may be a sequence of sentences requiring half a page or more of print.  Provided a "theorem" is understood in this way, the duality principle is universally applicable in test theory and is sul,;ect  to no other restrictions or qualifications at all. Another way to express this idea is to say that theorems in the model  comprise two subsets which can be placed in one-to-one correspondence, the rule of correspondence being given by the above  prescription:  T1 H T1 y2- 'F2 W3 - y?  where the unprimed symbols on the left denote theorems and their primed counterparts on the right are duals.  There is a countable infinity of such pairs in the model. Sometimes the two members of a pair are identical; that is, the  above mentioned exchange of symbols carries a theorem into itself. If a theorem 1P is derivable from the axioms of test  theory, then its dual IF' also is derivable from the axioms. One might say that test theorists need to prove only half the  theorems of their discipline, the truth of the other half being guaranteed.  First, let us observe that this principle works for a few well-known identities. Consider the equations  Var Tx   Pxx' = (1)  Var X   Cov(Tx, Ey) = 0 (2)  Ax, TX) = (3)  Pxx'   0'Ex = 0'X(1 - PXX')1/2 (4)  Var X -- Var Tx + Var Ex (5)  P2(X, Tx) + P2(X, Ex) = 1 (6)  The duals of (1), (2), (3), and (4) are, respectively   Var Ex   1 _   - (1 ')  PxX'   Var X   Cov(Ty, Ex) = 0 (2')  PI(X, Ex) = 1 - (3)  Pxx'   0'Tx = 0'X(PXX')Il2 (4)  Since pxx' = Var Tx/Var X and 1 - pxx- = Var EX/Var X, the second requirement of the duality principle is really a consequence  of the first. However, the principle perhaps is more useful as redundantly stated above, because many test-theory formulas  contain the symbol for the reliability coefficient, pxx' .  All the identities listed above are immediate consequences of the definitions of true score and error score and are trivial if  considered as "theorems." More interesting results emerge if we examine some more elaborate if-then statements. It should be  emphasized that the exchanges referred to in the duality principle must be made in both the hypothesis and the conclusion of a  theorem in order to yield another theorem. To see the implications of this idea, consider the well-known result that  reliability is the correlation between parallel tests,  Var Tx _  Pxx' = Var X - P(X' , XZ)'  where Xl and X2 are scores on parallel tests. A weak definition of parallel test that is used widely requires that  Tx, = Tx2 Var Xl = Var X2  and  Cov(Exl, Ex.) = 0.  Applying the duality principle to the above equation expressing reliability as a correlation between parallel tests, yields  - Var Ex 1 - Pxx' Var X  = P(XI , X2),  which is not generally true. The trouble is that the principle has not been applied to the entire theorem. Let us make matters  more explicit, as follows.  THEOREM 7. If Xl and X2 are observed scores, such that Tx, = Tx2, Var Xl =  Var X2 , and Cov (Exl , Ex) = 0, then  Var Tx, -  Pxx' = Var Xl - p(Xi > X2).  Now, applying the duality principle to every symbol appearing in this theorem, we  obtain  THEOREM 7' (dual of theorem 7). If Xl and X2 are observed scores, such that Ex. = Ex., Var Xl = Var X2, and Cov (Tx,, T x2) =  0, then  Var Exl _  1 - Pxx' = Var X, - P(X1 ' X2).  The reader is invited to prove 7', which can be accomplished in much the same manner as the familiar proof of 7. Although  valid, theorem 7' is not part of current test theory, perhaps because the hypothesis has no immediately apparent practical  significance.  The above example, containing the term Cov (Ex., Ex 2), suggests why the assumption of experimental independence, which is  independent of the other axioms of test theory, has not been made initially. The duality principle exposes the status of this  assumption. Consider the identity  Cov (X, Y) = Cov (Tx, T y) -}- Cov (Ex, Ey),  which is obtained by expanding Cov (Tx + Ex, Ty+ Ey) and then using (2) and (2'). Equation 8 is its own dual. Note, however,  that the dual of Cov (Ex , Ey) = 0 is not an identity, or, in other words, the condition of experimental independence is not  derivable from axioms which yield the eight theorems listed above.  Assuming experimental independence, (8) reduces to Cov (X, Y) = Cov (Tx, T y), which is not its own dual. It must be borne in  mind, therefore, that a formula that is based on the assumption of experimental independence has a dual only if that  assumption is regarded as part of the hypothesis, and the duality principle is applied to the entire theorem consisting of  both hypothesis and conclusion. In the above case, the complete theorem and its dual are  THEOREM 9. If Cov (Ex, Ey) = 0, then Cov (X, Y) = Cov (Tx, T y), and  THEOREM 9' (dual of theorem 9). If Cov (Tx, Ty) = 0, then Cov (X, Y) - Cov (Ex, E,), which is valid.  It shoud be mentioned that general formulas that do not assume experimental independence and which actually contain the  correlation p(E, , Ey) also have duals. Conversely, sometimes the dual of a well-known result turns out to contain that  correlation. Since test theorists routinely allow p(E,, Ey) to vanish whenever it appears in equations, perhaps this is one  reason why the principle has not been recognized. Another point to keep in mind is that, if a symbol defined in terms of T,,  Ex, or both is introduced to simplify notation, an appropriate redefinition must be made when the dual is formulated. If one  were to define g = Var Tx/Var Ex (sometimes called the signal-to-noise ratio), then, to find the dual of any theorem  containing that symbol, (3 must be replaced everywhere by R-1. For example, the dual of g = pxx,I(1 - pxx') is 9-1 = (1 -  PXX,)IPxx, . The introduction of such additional definitions, which changes the algebraic form of equations, is perhaps  another reason why the principle has been obscured.  As one more example, which combines several of the points already mentioned and also shows that the principle applies to  matters of test validity, as well as test reliability, consider the Spearman correction for attenuation,  P(Tx, Tr) = P(V' I') (PXX,PYY,)112  THEOREM 10. If p(Ex, Ey) = 0, then  PIT,, TY) (PX(PYY') l2  and  THEOREM 10' (dual of theorem 10). If p(Tx, Ty) = 0, then  P(Ex, EY) = 1 - P(X, Y)  [( pXX')(1 - PYY')]1/2 '  which is valid. If the assumption p(Ex, Ey) = 0 is not made in the hypothesis, a different expression is obtained for p(T,,  Ty), and, furthermore, its dual is valid (see Zimmerman and Williams, 1977, equations IS and 17.)  It is tempting to believe that everything in test theory is governed by the duality principle. However, certain identities  involving expectations, including the familiar ones  and  ,O,[Tx] _ 6[X]  do not appear to conform to the principle. Actually, these equalities can be regarded as part of the definitions of true score  and error score (see footnote in the sequel). Note also that the if-then statement if 6' [Ex] = 0, then 9' [Tx] = 6' [X] has a  valid dual.  There exist interesting heretofore unknown duals of some substantial test-theory results. Whether or not any of these might  turn out to be useful in practice is a matter for future investigation. Another possible benefit of the principle is that it  can be used to rule out, or to revise, provisional results about which one might have some doubt. If it turns out that the  dual of a result is obviously false, then something is wrong with the derivation, or the assumptions have not been made fully  explicit. As an illustration, consider the coefficient-alpha formula,  PXX' _  n 1 - Y_z` 1 Var Xi  n --I Var X  The dual is  Ya 1 Var Xi Var X '  which cannot be an identity if the coefficient-alpha formula is an identity. This means that the coefficient-alpha formula is  not derivable from the axioms of test theory without additional assumptions. These have been made explicit by Novick and Lewis  (1967). If the duality principle is applied to the entire theorem, containing the required assumptions established by Novick  and Lewis in the hypothesis and the coefficient-alpha formula in the conclusion, then the dual is a valid theorem.  What is the origin of the duality principle ? One might suspect at first glance that it is related to the symmetrical role of  the terms Tx and Ex in the fundamental relation  X=Tx+EX.  This is not the complete explanation, because Tx and Ex have a different status, TX being constant for each individual in a  population and Ex variable. In fact, it is possible to define true scores and error scores independently of each other and  subsequently to derive the identity X = Tx + Ex, which is its own dual'. Although just a permutation of symbols, a theorem and  its dual, if not identical, are quite different assertions.  The principle originates in the linear vector space framework underlying the testtheory model (Zimmerman, 1975, Zimmerman and  Williams, 1977). Briefly, T and E can be regarded as linear operators acting on random variables. The collection of all  observed score random variables with finite variance defined on a given probability space is a linear vector space, and T and  E are orthogonal projections onto complementary subspaces. Duality reflects the symmetrical role of these complementary  subspaces in the formalism. Although true scores and error scores are different objects, the entire collection of true scores  and the entire collection of error scores are objects with common geometric properties.  A projection of a vector onto a subspace uniquely determines its projection onto the orthogonal complement of that subspace,  so that Tx and Ex not only have similar geometric properties, but also are "complementary" with respect to their angles with  the vector X. Under this interpretation, correlation coefficients correspond to cosines of angles between vectors (centered at  their expectations), and standard deviations correspond to norms, or lengths, of vectors. Since Tx and Ex are orthogonal, the  cosine of the angle between X and TX is the same as the sine of the angle between X and Ex, and, consequently, pxx, = Var  Tx/Var X = p2(X, TX), l - pxx= Var Ex/Var X = p 2(X, Ex), and equation (6) means that sine + COS2 = 1.  The duality principle, therefore, is related to the complementarity of the sine and cosine functions. These relationships can  be visualized by inspecting sketches of vector projections in two-dimensional and three-dimensional Euclidean spaces.  Can the duality principle be proved mathematically? An attempt to prove the principle from the usual elementary formulations  of test theory, in which definitions of true scores and error scores are somewhat ambiguous, leads nowhere. Accordingly,  another benefit of the principle is that it forces one to look more closely at the foundations of the theory.  To prove the duality principle formally, it is necessary to axiomatize test theory and to show that the dual of each axiom is  another axiom, from which it follows that, if a  ' A true score corresponding to an observed score X can be defined as any random variable TX that is constant for each  individual and such that off [Tx] _ off [X] in every subpopulation of individuals, and an error score corresponding to X as  any random variable Ex , such that G.X - EX] = e[X] in every subpopulation of individuals. From these definitions it can be  proved that TX and Ex are unique and that X = TX + Ex. Although equivalent to the expected-value approach of Novick (1966) and  Lord and Novick (1968), these definitions are particularly convenient for exposition of the ideas presently being discussed.  proposition is derivable from the axioms, its dual also is derivable from the axioms. This will not be attempted here; for a  more complete formulation which lends itself to such a program, see Zimmerman (1975) and Zimmerman and Williams (1977). It  should be emphasized that the principle is a metatheorem and cannot be proved as a theorem from a given set of axioms, but  only by establishing the property of a set of axioms just noted.  An advantage of the vector-space formalism mentioned above is that it reveals the underlying reason why axioms can be expected  to occur in dual pairs. If test theory initially is axiomatized using the vector-space concepts, proof of the principle  consists in observing that, when subspaces and their orthogonal complements are interchanged, each statement about an  orthogonal projection that serves as an axiom is transformed into another statement about an orthogonal projection that serves  as an axiom.  REFERENCES  LORD, F. M., & Novtcx, M. R. Statistical theories of mental test scores. Reading, Mass.: AddisonWesley, 1968.  Novlcx, M. R. The axioms and principal results of classical test theory. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1966, 3, 1-18.  Novicx, M. R., & LEwis, C. Coefficient alpha and the reliability of composite measurements. Psychometrika, 1967, 32, 1-13.  ZIMMERMAN, D. W. Probability spaces, Hilbert spaces, and the axioms of test theory. Psychometrika, 1975, 40, 395-412.  ZIMMERMAN, D. W., & WILLIAMS, R. H. The theory of test validity and correlated errors of measurement. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 1977, 16, 135-152.