10.1016/0022-2496(79)90016-6
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 19, 137-151 (1979)  State-Trace Analysis: A Method of Testing Simple Theories of Causation*  DONALD BAMBER  Research Service, Veterans Administration Medical Center, St. Cloud, Minnesota 56301  An independent variable measures some aspect of a treatment applied to a person; a dependent variable measures some aspect of  the treatment's effect upon the person. Two dependent variables will often covary with each other because they are affected by  a common independent variable. A state trace is a graph which plots the value of one dependent variable as a function of  another. (Thus, a state trace is a generalization of the yes-no receiver-operating-characteristic curve.) By appropriately  analyzing state traces, it is possible to test theories concerning (a) the mechanisms by which independent variables affect  dependent variables and (b) how these mechanisms differ from one population of persons to another. As an illustration, a study  of long-term memory in normal persons, schizophrenics, and persons with organic brain syndrome is presented. The effects of  number of word presentations and length of retention interval upon probability of word recall and recognition were  investigated. The results were analyzed by state-trace analysis.  This paper describes a method of data analysis called state-trace analysis. The paper is divided into two major sections plus  appendices. The two major sections present (a) the rationale for state-trace analysis and (b) an application of state-trace  analysis in an actual experiment.  RATIONALE  An observational structure is a summary of empirical observations. It expresses the functional relationships between  independent and dependent variables observed within persons belonging to different populations. A theoretical structure is a  model proposed to explain an observational structure.  The purpose of state-trace analysis is to test the validity of certain types of theoretical structures. This is accomplished  by, first, reducing the theoretical structure to a canonical form called the basic theoretical structure. Then, the validity  of the basic theoretical  * This work was supported by the Medical Research Service of the Veterans Administration. The author is indebted to Bennet B.  Murdock, Jr. for advice on experimental design; to Raymond O. Collier, Jr. for statistical advice; to Kate Tidd for collecting  data; to Teresa Kucala for typing the manuscript; and to Gail Bamber for preparing the figures. Other assistance was received  from Pat Galloway, Loretta Pogatchnik, and Bruce Watkins and from the Building Managment, Dietetic, Engineering, Nursing, and  Rehabilitation Medicine Services at the St. Cloud VA Medical Center.  137  0022-2496/79/020137-45$02.00/0 Copyright C 1979 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  138 DONALD BAMBER  structure is tested by analyzing curves called state traces. A state trace is a graph showing the covariation of two dependent  variables. It is a generalization of the yes-no receiveroperating-characteristic curve.  An Observational Structure  Definition of Independent and Dependent Variables  Suppose that an experimenter applies a treatment to a subject and then observes the effect of the treatment on the subject. An  independent variable measures some aspect of the treatment applied to the subject. A dependent variables measures some aspect  of the treatment's effect on the subject.  Consider, for instance, an experiment on verbal learning. A subject studies a list of words on a memory drum and then is given  a recall test followed by a recognition test. The number of times that the subject sees the list on the drum and the speed of  the drum are examples of independent variables. The number of list words recalled and the number of list words recognized are  examples of dependent variables.  Mathematical terminology. In this paper, an interval of real numbers is a set of real numbers such that, if a and b are  members of the set, so are all real numbers between a and b. Suppose that M is a set of real numbers and N is the smallest  interval containing M. A function f ( ) defined on M is said to be interpolatively continuous on M if there exists a  continuous function g( ) defined on N such that g(x) equals f (x) for all x in M.  The possible values of an independent variable may form any set of real numbers containing two or more numbers. When a  function of an independent variable is said to be interpolatively continuous, it is to be understood that the function is  interpolatively continuous on the set of all possible values of the independent variable.  Empirical Observations  Consider an experiment in which one person is intensively studied. The experiment is concerned with how two dependent  variables are affected by one independent variable. In addition to this independent variable, there may be other independent  variables which influence the two dependent variables. These other independent variables are held constant throughout the  experiment. The independent variable under investigation is repeatedly set at various values and the dependent variables are  measured. Let IV denote the value of the independent variable and let DVi and DV2 denote the values of the two dependent  variables. It is found that, rather than determining the exact values of DVl and D V2 , IV- determines probability  distributions for D Vi and D V2 . Let E(DV,) and E(DV2) denote the expectations of these distributions. There exist  interpolatively continuous functions tl( ) and t2( ) such that  E(DV,) = tl(IV), E(DV,,) = t2(IV). These functions may be called the throughput functions for E(DV1) and E(DV2).  STATE-TRACE ANALYSIS 139  Suppose now that random samples of people from a population A and a population B are run through the experiment described  above. It is found that different people generally have different throughput functions. Moreover, the two populations have  different probability distributions of throughput functions.  This situation is illustrated in Figure 1(a). The arrows running from It' to E(DVI) and E(DV2) represent throughput functions.  The dashed lines running from the notation A vs. B to the arrows indicate that populations A and B have different  distributions of throughput functions. Figure ](a) is called an observational structure because it summarizes empirical  observations.  (a) A vs. B  E(DV,)  IV ;  E(DV2)  Avs.B  E(DV,)  E(DV2)  FIG. 1. (a) An observational structure. (b) The basic theoretical structure proposed to explain the observational structure.  Comment. The expectation of a dependent variable may be a probability. For example, let G be an event. If G occurs, let DVl =  l; if G does not occur, let DVl = 0. Then, E(DV,) equals the probability of G's occurrence. If this probability is influenced  by the value of IV, then E(Dl,',) is a function of IV.  The Basic Theoretical Structure  Latent Variables  A latent variable is a hypothetical unobservable variable. The value of a latent variable will be denoted LV. For any latent  variable, the following standard assumption will be  140 DONALD BAMBER  made. It will be assumed that, for any person, the set of possible LV values forms an interval. This interval is called the LV  interval. Different persons may have different LV intervals. It is to be understood that any function of a person's LV is  defined everywhere on the person's LV interval.  Mathematical terminology. In the following, two functions will be said to be identical if and only if they have identical  domains of definition and have the same values everywhere in that domain.  A Model  A model will now be proposed to explain the observational structure in Figure 1(a). This model is called the basic theoretical  structure. It consists of a set of assumptions about people in general and a set of assumptions about differences between  populations A and B.  First, consider the assumptions about people in general. These are: (a) There exists a latent variable LV which satisfies the  standard latent-variable assumption. (b) The value of the latent variable is determined by the value of the independent  variable. For every person, there exists some interpolatively continuous function i( ) such that  LV = i(IV).  This function is called the person's input function. (c) The values of E(DV,) and E(DV2) are determined by the value ofLV. For  every person, there exist continuous functions ol( ) and o,( ) defined on the person's LV interval such that  E(DVI) = ol(LV),  E(DV2) = 02(L V).  These functions are called the person's output functions for E(DV,,) and E(DV2).  Next, consider the assumptions concerning differences between populations A and B. (d) Population affects the input function.  Thus, the two populations have different probability distributions of input functions. (e) Population does not affect output  functions. Thus, populations A and B have identical probability distributions of ordered pairs of output functions [ol( ), o2(  )]. This completes the description of the basic theoretical structure.  Figure 1(b) illustrates this structure. The arrow running from IV to LV represents the input function. The arrows running from  LV to E(DVj) and E(DV2) represent the output functions. The dashed line running from the notation A vs. B to be input-function  arrows indicates that population affects the input-function. The lack of any dashed lines running to the output-function  arrows indicates that population does not affect the output functions.  First comment. The basic theoretical structure in panel (b) of Figure 1 provides a parsimonious explanation for the  observational structure in panel (a). The observational  STATE-TRACE ANALYSIS 141  structure contains two population effects, namely, the effect of population on the two throughput functions. The basic  theoretical structure contains only one population effect, namely, the effect of population upon the input function. Thus, two  observed population effects are explained by a single underlying effect.  Second comment. A person's L V interval is the domain of his output functions. Recall that, if two functions do not have  identical domains, then they cannot be identical functions. Thus, the assumption (e) of identical output-function  distributions implies that populations A and B have identical distributions of output-function domains (i.e., L V intervals).  A person's L 1%' interval is not necessarily the range of his input function. This function maps the set of possible IV values  into the person's LV interval. The range of this function may be only a proper subset of the person's LV interval. The  assumption (d) of different input-function distributions allows populations A and B to have different distributions of  input-function ranges.  Third comment. In this paper, all arguments concerning probability distributions are formulated at an intuitive level.  Appendix A discusses what must be added to these arguments to make them rigorous.  Fourth comment. The basic theoretical structure is a testable model in that it makes a falsifiable prediction. The section  following the example examines this prediction.  An Example  Observational structure. The two populations under consideration are normals and persons afflicted with a particular type of  organic brain syndrome. The latter persons shall be referred to as organics.  The experimenter has on hand a number of word lists of equal difficulty. Each subject studies several different lists. The  study time allowed a subject varies from list to list. Immediately after studying a list, a subject is given either a recall  test or a forced-choice recognition test.  For each subject, the expected numbers of words recalled and recognized are increasing functions of study time. It is found  that, when normals and organics are given equal amounts of study time, the normals generally recall and recognize more words  than the organics. The observational structure in Figure 2(a) summarizes these findings.  Basic theoretical structure. This model posits the existence of a latent variable. Now, the name assigned to a latent variable  is arbitrary. In the present case, a convenient name is degree of learning. For each person, degree of learning is a function  of study time. The expected numbers of words recalled and recognized are, for each person, functions of degree of learning.  Degree of learning increases with study time faster among normals than among organics. However, the influence of degree of  learning upon expected numbers of words recalled and recognized is identical among normals and organics. Figure 2(b)  illustrates the theoretical structure described here.  142 DONALD BAMBER  FIG. 2. (a) Example of an observational structure. (b) The corresponding basic theoretical structure. (c) A state trace.  State Traces  An output state is an ordered pair [E(DV,), E(DV2)]. Let I denote the set of all possible IV values. A person's observable  output states are those that can be written in the form [tl(IV), t2(IV)] for some IV in l, where tI( ) and t2( ) are the  person's throughput functions.  Assume that the basic theoretical structure is correct. Let i(I) denote the range of a person's input function and let L  denote his LV interval. It follows that every one of a person's observable output states can be written in the form [0,(L V),  o2(LV)] for some LV in i(I), where ol( ) and 02( ) are the person's output functions. A person's potential output states are  those that can be written in the form [ol(LV), 02(L V)] for some LV in L. Now, the range i(I) of a person's input function is  a subset of his L V interval L. Thus, a person's observable output states will be a subset of his potential output states. If  the range of the input function is the entire LV interval, then the two sets of output states will be identical.  An output state [E(DVl), E(DV2)] may be represented by a graph point in a coordinate system having horizontal axis E(DVI) and  vertical axis E(DV2). Such a point may be called a state point. A state point may be said to be observable or potential  according to whether the represented output state is observable or potential.  A person's state trace may be defined as a graph of all his potential state points. Since his output functions oI( ) and 02( )  are continuous, a person's state trace is a continuous curve. Now all of a person's observable state points necessarily lie  somewhere on his  STATE-TRACE ANALYSIS 143  state trace. Thus, a person's state trace is a continuous curve containing all of his observable state points.  A Prediction  The basic theoretical structure predicts that populations A and B will have identical probability distributions of state  traces.  This prediction may be derived as follows. Suppose that two persons have identical output functions oi( ) and identical output  functions o2( ). This implies that the two persons have identical LV intervals. Now, a state trace consists of all points of  the type [ol(LV), 02(L V)] where LV is in the LV interval. Hence, the two persons must have identical state traces.  Note that the argument in the paragraph above mentions nothing about input functions. Suppose that two persons have different  input functions i( ) but identical ordered pairs [0i( ), 02( )]. Two such persons would generally have different throughout  functions tt( ) - of[i( )] and different throughput functions t2( ) = o2[i( )]. Nevertheless, the above argument shows that  two such persons would have identical state traces. Figure 3 illustrates such a situation. Let a, b, and c be three possible  values of IF. Because the two persons have different input functions, each of the I V values a, b, and c generate different  [E(DV,), E(DV2)] output states in the two persons. Nevertheless, because the two persons have the same output functions, they  have identical state traces.  W  Fic. 3. State traces of two persons with identical output functions but different input functions.  Now, assumption (e) of the basic theoretical structure states that populations A and B have identical distributions of ordered  pairs of output functions [ol( ), o:;( )]. Hence, these two populations must have identical distributions of state traces.  Thus, the basic theoretical structure implies that, to each person in either population A or B, a continuous curve may be  assigned such that (a) each person's curve contains all of his observable state points and (b) the two populations have  identical distributions of curves.  First comment. The purpose of state-trace analysis is to test the validity of the basic theoretical structure by testing the  accuracy of the above prediction.  Second comment. The observational structure in Figure l(a) may be particularized by specifying one distribution of ordered  pairs [tl( ), t2( )] for population A and another for population B. Similarly, the basic theoretical structure may be  particularized by  144 DONALD BAMBER  specifying two distributions of ordered triples [i(), ol(), oz( )]. Let these two particularized structures be called  specifications of the observational structure and of the basic theoretical structure, respectively. A specification of the  basic theoretical structure may be said to imply a specification of the observational structure if the latter is a logical  consequence of the former.  Under what conditions will a specification of the observational structure of Figure 1(a) be implied by at least one  specification of the basic theoretical structure ? A necessary condition is that populations A and B have identical  distributions of state traces. Appendix B shows that a sufficient condition is the conjunction of (a) the just-mentioned  necessary condition with (b) the condition that all state traces be function graphs.  Third comment. The basic theoretical structure is no exception to the rule that scientific theories can be disproven but not  proven. The basic theoretical structure can be disproven by showing that populations A and B have different distributions of  state traces. However, the basic theoretical structure cannot be proven valid. Suppose that one or more specifications of the  basic theoretical structure all imply a known-to-be-correct specification of the observational structure. Even then, there is  no guarantee that any of these specifications of the basic theoretical structure is a valid portrayal of reality.  Fourth comment. There is considerable value to a disconfirmation of the basic theoretical structure's prediction concerning  state traces. Disconfirmation of this prediction disproves all specifications of the basic theoretical structure. An entire  broad class of models is thereby rejected.  An Example Reconsidered  Consider once again the theoretical structure in Figure 2(b). For this theoretical structure, a person's state trace is a  graph plotting his expected number of words recalled vs. his expected number of words recognized. Figure 2(c) illustrates such  a state trace. This theoretical structure predicts that normals and organics should have identical distributions of these  state traces.  Reduction of Theoretical Structures  In this section, it is shown how various theoretical structures may be reduced to the canonical form of the basic theoretical  structure. Once reduced to canonical form, the validity of a theoretical structure may be tested by state-trace analysis.  Terminology. Suppose that a given specification of an observational structure is implied by at least one specification of a  theoretical structure. Then, it will be convenient to say that the theoretical structure accurately describes the  observational structure.  Reduction by Dependent-Variable. Splitting  Observational structure. Suppose that the expected value E(DV) of a dependent  STATE-TRACE ANALYSIS 145  variable is determined by the values IV, and IV, of two independent variables. For each person, there exists an  interpolatively continuous bivariate function t( , ) such that  E(DV) = t(IV,, IV2).  The two populations A and B have different distributions of the function t( , ).  This observational structure is illustrated in Figure 4(a). The double-tailed arrow running from IV, and IV2 to E(DV)  represents the function t( , ). The dashed line running from the notation A vs. B to the double-tailed arrow indicates that  population affects the function t( , ).  (a) A vs. B  IV,     -- -->E(DV)  IV2    (b) A vs. B   IV,  LV   E(DV)  IV2    (c) Avs.B ~E(DV)@(IV2=a)  IV, ~-b LV   yE(DV)@(IV2=4)  (d) normals vs.   stud y- organics degree of  -~   time  learning   E(reeogn ied)  retention    interval    Fic. 4. Reduction by dependent-variable splitting. (a) Observational structure. (b) Theoretical structure. (c) Reduced  theoretical structure. (d) An example.  Theoretical structure. A theoretical structure to explain the observational structure will now be proposed. Assume the  following. (a) There exists a latent variable LV which satisfies the standard latent-variable assumption. (b) For each person,  there exists an interpolatively continuous function i( ) such that  LV = i(IVI).  (c) For each person, there exists an interpolatively continuous bivariate function of , ) such that  E(DV) ~ o(LV, IV2). (2)  146 DONALD BAMBER  (d) Populations A and B have different distributions of the function i( ). (e) Populations A and B have identical  distributions of the function of , ).  This theoretical structure is illustrated in Figure 4(b). The single-tailed arrow running from IV, to LV represents the  function i( ). The double-tailed arrow running from LV and IV, to E(DV) represents the function of , ). The dashed line  running from the notation A vs. B to the single-tailed arrow indicates that population affects the function i( ). The lack of  any dashed line running to the double-tailed arrow indicates that population does not affect the function of , ).  Reduced structure. In Figure 4(b), E(DV) is assumed to be a function of LV and IV,. Let a be a possible value of IV,. Let  E(DV) @ (IV, = a) denote E(DV) under circumstances where IV, is held constant at a. (The symbol @ is read at.)' Then, E(DV) @  (IV, = a) is a function of LV only. Similarly, let b be another possible value of It', . Then, E(DV) @ (IV, = b) is also a  function of LV only. Thus, the independent variable IV, has been used to split the dependent variable in two.  By so splitting the dependent variable, the theoretical structure in panel (b) of Figure 4 is reduced to the basic theoretical  structure in panel (c). A state trace for panel (c) is a graph of E(DV) @ (IV, = a) plotted vs. E(DV) @ (IV, = b). Panel (c)  predicts that populations A and B should have identical distributions of these state traces.  Comment. In the unreduced theoretical structure of Figure 4(b), the independent variables IVl and IF, have asymmetric roles. A  permutation of this theoretical structure may be constructed by reversing the roles of IV, and IV, . In this permuted  theoretical structure, IV, would determine the value of a latent variable LV'. Then, LL" and IV, would determine the value of  E(DV ). Populations A and B would have different distributions of the function relating LV' to IV, but identical distributions  of the function relating E(DV) to LV' and IV, . This permuted theoretical structure may be reduced to the basic theoretical  structure by splitting E(DV) with IV, rather than with IV2 . For example, let c and d be two allowable values of IV,. Then,  E(DV) may be split into E(DV) @ (IV, = c) and E(DV) @ (IV, = d).  Figure 4(b) and its permutation make distinct predictions. Thus, the former predicts that populations A and B should have  identical distributions of [E(DV) @ (IV2 = a)] vs. [E(DV) @ (IV2 = b)] state traces. The latter predicts that the two  populations should have identical distributions of [E(DV) @ (IV, = c)] vs. [E(DV) @ (IV, = d)] state traces.  Generally, if one of these two theoretical structures accurately describes the observational structure in Figure 4(a), then  the other theoretical structure will not. However, there is at least one special type of observational structure that can be  accurately described by both of these theoretical structures. Appendix C describes this observational structure.  An example. A subject studies a list of words. Following a retention interval, the  1 This novel notation E(DV) @ (IV2 = a) is preferred to the conditional expectation E(DV I IV2 = a) because the latter is  undefined unless there is a probability distribution over IV,,. Since the values of IV, are chosen by the experimenter, it is  usually not meaningful to speak of a probability distribution over IV2 .  STATE-TRACE ANALYSIS 147  subject is given a forced-choice recognition test. Let IV, be the amount of study time allowed the subject. Let IV, be the  length of the retention interval. Let E(DV) be the expected number of words recognized. The populations under consideration  are normals and organics. When normals and organics are given equal amounts of study time and equal retention intervals, the  normals generally recognize more words than the organics.  The above observational structure might be explained by assuming that there exists a latent variable called degree of  learning. For each person, degree of learning is a function of study time. Normals and organics have different distributions  of this function. For each person, the expected number of words recognized is a bivariate function of degree of learning and  retention interval. Normals and organics have identical distributions of this function. This theoretical structure is  illustrated in Figure 4(d). Essentially what the theoretical structure says is that organics learn abnormally but forget  normally.  The above model may be tested by state trace analysis. The dependent variable may be split into the expected number of words  recognized after one day and the expected number of words recognized after one week. A graph of the former vs. the latter is a  state trace. The theoretical structure predicts that normals and organics should have identical distributions of these state  traces.  Reduction by Population Splitting  Observational structure. The present observational structure is not concerned with differences between populations. Instead it  is concerned with a single population A. Let IV, and IV., denote independent variables and let E(DV,) and E(DV2) denote the  expectations of dependent variables. For each person in population A, there exist two interpolatively continuous bivariate  functions tl( , ) and t2( , ) such that  E(DVI) = t,(IV1 , IV,),  E(DV2) = t2(IVl , IV2).  This observational structure is illustrated in Figure 5(a).  Theoretical structure. The observational structure might be explained by assuming the following. (a) There exists a latent  variable LV which satisfies the standard latentvariable assumption. (b) For each person, there exists an interpolatively  continuous bivariate function i( , ) such that  LV = i(IV, , IV,).  (c) For each person, there exist two continuous functions o,( ) and o2( ) such that  E(DV,) = oi(LV), E(DV2) = o2(LV).  This theoretical structure is illustrated in Figure 5(b).  148 DONALD BAMBER  Reduced structure. Figure 5(b) assumes that, for each person in population A, LV is a bivariate function of IV, and IV,. If  IV, were held constant, then LV would be a univariate function of IV, . Let c and d be two possible values of IVZ . Suppose  that population A were randomly divided into two subpopulations. One subpopulation would be tested with IV, held constant at c  and the other subpopulation tested with IV, held constant at d. These two subpopulations will typically have different  distributions of the univariate function relating LV to IV, .  Let the two subpopulations be denoted A @ (IV, = c) and A @ (IVZ = d). By splitting population A in this manner, the  theoretical structure in panel (b) of Figure 5  (a) E(DVI)  IV,   IVZ E(DV2)  (b) E(DVI)  IV,   LV   IVZ 'E(DV2)  (c)   AO(IIsV2)   E(DVt)  A @(IV2%d)   IV, b >LV   ~'i E(DV2)  (d)   P(signal) P( "  yes" "yes"signal) si gnal  payoff criterion ~'~P("yes"noise)  matrix     Fia. 5. Reduction by population splitting. (a) Observational structure. (b) Theoretical structure. (c) Reduced theoretical  structure. (d) An example.  is reduced to the basic theoretical structure in panel (c). A state trace for panel (c) is a graph of E(DV,) vs. E(DVZ). Panel  (c) predicts that the two subpopulations should have identical distributions of state traces.  First comment. The theoretical structure in Figure 5(b) could have been reduced to the basic theoretical structure by  splitting population A with IV, rather than with IV, .  Second comment. The invariance of state traces predicted from Figure 5(b) applies to individuals as well as to populations.  Suppose that an individual were tested and his state trace constructed under four conditions: (1) IV, held constant at a, (2)  IV, held constant at b, (3) IV, held constant at c, and (4) IV, held constant at d. The individual's state trace should be the  same under all four conditions.  STATE-TRACE ANALYSIS 149  Third comment. Suppose that the theoretical structure of Figure 5(b) were modified so as to have two latent variables. What  would be the consequences of this modification? In the modified theoretical structure, (IV, , IV,) ordered pairs would be  mapped into (LV,, LV2) ordered pairs and the latter ordered pairs would be mapped into [E(DVI), E(DV2)] ordered pairs.  It is evident that every mapping of (IV,, IV,) ordered pairs into [E(DVI), E(DV~)] ordered pairs may be decomposed into a pair  of mappings as described by the modified theoretical structure. Thus, no conceivable observation could ever be inconsistent  with the modified theoretical structure.  An example of a theoretical structure of the Figure 5(b) type. Consider the psychophysical task called yes-no detection. An  observer is presented with a signal on randomly selected trials and with noise on the remaining trials. On each trial, the  observer is asked to respond "yes", if he believes he has detected a signal, and "no" otherwise.  Let P("yes" I signal) and P("yes"' noise) denote the probability that the observer will respond "yes" on signal trials and on  noise trials, respectively. These two quantities are affected by P(signal), the probability that any given trial will be a  signal trial, and by the payoff matrix. (The latter is simply a tabulation of the rewards and penalties given the observer for  correct and wrong decisions on signal and noise trials.)  Signal detection theory proposes a model of how P(signal) and the payoff matrix affect P("yes" I signal) and P("yes" I noise).  In this model, there is a latent variable called the observer's criterion. The value of the criterion is determined by  P(signal) and by the payoff matrix. The values of P("yes" I signal) and P("yes" noise) are then determined by the criterion.  This theoretical structure is illustrated in Figure 5(d).  In signal detection theory, the observer's yes-no receiver-operating-characteristic (ROC) curve is a graph plotting P("yes" I  signal) vs. P("yes" I noise). This curve is a state trace. (In contradistinction to yes-no ROC curves, rating ROC curves are  not state traces. Instead, they are a type of ordinal dominance graph, Bamber, 1975.)  An observer's yes-no ROC curve may be generated either by varying P(signal) for the observer while holding the payoff matrix  constant or vice versa. The theoretical structure in Figure 5(d) predicts that these two methods of generating an ROC curve  should each yield the same curve. Green and Swets (1966, pp. 88-91) have presented evidence upholding this prediction.  Reduction by Dependent-Variable and Population Splitting  Observational structure. This observational structure is concerned with a single population A. Let IV,, IV2, and IV, denote  independent variables and let E(DV) denote the expectation of a dependent variable. For each person in population A, there  exists an interpolatively continuous trivariate function t( , , ) such that  E(DV) = t(IVI , IV2 , IV3).  This is illustrated in Figure 6(a).  ISO DONALD BAMBER  (a)   IV,   IV2 E(DV)  IV3   (b)   iV2~LV   E(DV)  IV3   (c) A@(IV2'c) wE(DV)@ (IVs=a)  A@(IV2=d)   I1/1-6 --10 LV   E(DV) @ (IV3=b)  (d) duration   luminance visibility  P(correct)  prior words   FIG. 6. Reduction by dependent-variable and population splitting. (a) Observational structure. (b) Theoretical structure. (c)  Reduced theoretical structure. (d) An example.  Theoretical structure. The observational structure might be explained by assuming the following. (a) There exists a latent  variable LV which satisfies the standard latentvariable assumption. (b) For each person, there exists an interpolatively  continuous bivariate function i( , ) such that  LV = i(IV, , IV,).  (c) For each person there exists an interpolatively continuous bivariate function o(, ) such that  E(DV) = o(LV, IV,). (4)  This theoretical structure is illustrated in Figure 6(b).  Reduced structure. Let a and b be two possible values of IV,. Then, E(DV) may be split into E(DV) @ (IV, = a) and E(DV) @ (IV,  = b). Let c and d be two possible values of IV,. Then, the population A may be split into the subpopulations A @ (IV, = c) and  A @ (IV, = d). By splitting both the dependent variable and the population, the theoretical structure in panel (b) of Figure 6  is reduced to the basic theoretical structure in panel (c). A state trace for panel (c) is a graph in which E(DV) @ (IV, = a)  is plotted vs. E(DV) @ (IV, = b). Panel (c) predicts that the two subpopulations should have identical distributions of these  state traces. Moreover, an individual who is tested once  STATE-TRACE ANALYSIS 151  with IV, held constant at c and again with IV, held constant at d should have the same state trace on both occasions.  Comment. In the unreduced theoretical structure of Figure 6(b), the independent variables IV,, IV,, and IV, have asymmetric  roles. Thus, the value of E(DV) is determined by IV, and the latent variable. The value of the latent variable is determined  by the remaining two independent variables.  Two different permutations of this theoretical structure may be constructed by having E(DV) be determined either by II'2 and  the latent variable or by IV, and the latent variable. (In each case, the value of the latent variable would be determined by  the remaining two independent variables.) The original and the two permuted theoretical structures make distinct predictions  about state traces.  Generally, if one of these three theoretical structures accurately describes the observational structure in Figure 6(a), then  the other two will not. However, Appendix C shows that, if this observational structure is accurately described by two of  these theoretical structures, then it will be accurately described by the third as well. This happens if and only if the  independent variables combine additively to determine E(DV ).  An example. The population under investigation is normals. The experimenter has at hand a pool of sentences. He reads aloud to  the subject a predetermined number of words at the end of a sentence but not the last word. The subject looks into a  tachistoscope, is briefly shown the last word, and attempts to identify it.  Let E(DV) be P(correct), the probability of correctly identifying the last word. Let I1', and IV. be the duration and  luminance of the tachistoscopic exposure of the last word. Let IVJ be the number of prior words read aloud to the subject. It  is found that E(DV) is a function of IV, , IV, , and IV.,  This finding might be explained by assuming that there exists a latent variable called the last word's visibility. This is a  function of the last word's duration and luminance. Moreover, P(correct) is a function of the last word's visibility and the  number of prior words read aloud. This theoretical structure is illustrated in Figure 6(d).  Sufficient Conditions  Predictions have now been derived from the theoretical structures in Figures 4(b), 5(b), and 6(b). Satisfaction of these  predictions constitute necessary conditions for these theoretical structures to (a) provide accurate descriptions of their  corresponding observational structures and to (b) be valid. Appendix D presents sufficient conditions for (a) but not for (b).  (Note that, because scientific theories can be disproven but not proven, it is possible to state necessary conditions but  impossible to state sufficient conditions for the validity of a theoretical structure.)  Subsumption of Theoretical Structures  Two or more theoretical structures can often be subsumed by a more complex theoretical structure. An example of this will now  be given.  48o/19/2-6  152 DONALD BAMBER  Suppose that it is known that four independent variables IVl, IV2, IV,, and IV, all affect E(DV). Now, suppose that an  experiment is performed with IV, held constant throughout. A state-trace analysis of the results supports the theoretical  structure shown in Figure 7(a). Next, an experiment is performed with IV, held constant throughout. This time, a state-trace  analysis of the results supports the theoretical structure shown in Figure 7(b).  (a) IVi  IV2~LV W I V3  ~`  a.E(DV)  E(DV)  E(DV)  FIG. 7. Panels (a) and (b) are subsumed by panel (c).  The theoretical structures in panels (a) and (b) of Figure 7 may be subsumed by the more complex theoretical structure in  panel (c). Note that panel (c) contains two latent variables LVl and L V2 . When IV4 is held constant, panel (c) is  predictively equivalent to panel (a); however, when IV, is held constant, panel (c) is predictively equivalent to panel (b).  Figure 7 is only one example of the subsumption of theoretical structures by a more complex theoretical structure. Many other  examples could be constructed.  Higher-Dimensional State Traces  Consider once more the basic theoretical structure in Figure l (b). A person's state trace was defined as the set of all  potential [E(DV,), E(DV2)] state points for that person. These points trace out a curve embedded in two-dimensional space.  As shown below, the notion of a state trace may be generalized to higher dimensions.  STATE-TRACE ANALYSIS  153  Curves in Three-Dimensional Space  Consider the theoretical structure shown in Figure 8(a). In this case, a person's state trace may be defined as the set of all  potential [E(DV,), E(DV2), E(DV,)] state points for that person. These points constitute a curve embedded in three-dimensional  space. The theoretical structure predicts that populations A and B should have identical distributions of state traces. The  validity of the theoretical structure may be tested by analyzing these three-dimensional curves.  It is possible, however, to test the theoretical structure in Figure 8(a) without becoming entangled in three-dimensional  curves. This theoretical structure implies both the theoretical structures in Figure 8(b). The latter theoretical structures  have state traces that are two-dimensional curves. Thus, the theoretical structure in panel (a) of Figure 8 may be indirectly  tested by testing both the theoretical structures in panel (b).  Avs. B IV 1 10 LV:::~ --10E(DV2) E(DV3)  E(DVI)  (b) Avs. B /r E(IDV1) IV--- -~LV-/ --~ E(DV2)  A vs. B  IV  * E(DV2) E(DV3)  Fte. 8. (a) A theoretical structure having three-dimensional curves for state traces. (b) Implied theoretical structures  having two-dimensional curves for state traces.  Surfaces in Three-Dimensional Space  Consider the theoretical structure shown in Figure 9. Once again, a person's state trace may be defined as the set of all  potential [E(DV,), E(DV2), E(Dl' )] state points for that person. For the type of theoretical structure shown in Figure 9,  these points will typically constitute a surface embedded in three-dimensional space. The theoretical structure predicts that  populations A and B should have identical distributions of these surfaces.  154 DONALD BAMBER  Fze. 9. A theoretical structure having state traces which are surfaces embedded in threedimensional space.  AN APPLICATION  In this section, an investigation of long-term memory in normals, schizophrenics, and persons with organic brain syndrome is  described. This investigation is presented as an example of a real-life application of state-trace analysis. This example  illustrates both the capabilities of state-trace analysis and the problems encountered in applying it.  Method  Subjects  Selection. The subjects were all male volunteers below the age of 60. They were either patients or employees at the St. Cloud  Veterans Administration Medical Center. There were three groups of subjects: patients having diagnoses of organic brain  syndrome, patients having diagnoses of schizophrenia, and employees. Persons in these three groups will be referred to as  organics, schizophrenics, and normals, respectively. The subjects received no compensation for participating in the study.  Employees were excused from their regular duties in order to participate.  The medical records of all patients were reviewed in an attempt to eliminate any whose diagnoses were equivocal or who might  be both organic and schizophrenic. In particular, schizophrenic patients who had ever been diagnosed alcoholic were not  admitted into the study. No patients who had been treated with electroconvulsive therapy in the previous 6 months were  admitted into the study.  Subject statistics. There were 42 organics, 28 schizophrenics, and 36 normals in the study. The mean ages of these three  groups were 49, 48, and 49 years. Their mean education was 10.4, 10.9, and 10.3 years. The lifetime neuropsychiatric  hospitalization of the organics and schizophrenics were 39 and 40 months. Using the table in Prien and Caffey (Note 1), the  antipsychotic medications received by each patient were converted to equivalent doses of chlorpromazine. The average dosage of  antipsychotic medications  STATE-TRACE ANALYSIS 155  was equivalent to approximately 150 mg/day of chlorpromazine for organics and approximately 450 mg/day of chlorpromazine for  schizophrenics.  Etiology of organic brain syndrome. All suitable and willing organic patients in the medical center were studied. The apparent  causes of organic brain syndrome in these patients were: alcoholism only (10 patients), alcoholism and trauma (l l patients),  alcoholism and cerebrovascular disturbance (4 patients), alcoholism and hypoglycemic coma (1 patient), alcoholism and abscess  (1 patient), cerebrovascular disturbance only (6 patients), trauma only (4 patients), hypoglycemic coma only (1 patient),  encephalitis only (1 patient), Huntington's chorea only (1 patient), Wilson's disease only (1 patient), presenile dementia  only (1 patient).  Memory Lists  A pool of 880 words was constructed. These were all adjectives which occurred 20 or more times in the Lorge magazine count of  approximately 4"1 million words (Thorndike & Lorge, 1944). Four separate word lists and a recognition test for each were  constructed from this pool.  The body of each list consisted of 50 words. Of these 50 words, 20 were presented once each, 10 twice each, 10 four times  each, and 10 eight times each. Multiple presentations of a word were not massed but were distributed evenly through the list.  An "extra" 5 words were also presented once each at the very beginning of the list and once each at the very end of the list.  Since primacy and recency effects would be strongest for these words, the subjects' memory for these "extra" words was not  scored.  The lists were presented to subjects on a memory drum at the rate of 4 seconds per presentation. After every fifth word, a  blank line was presented. The purpose of these blank lines was to relieve the strain on the subject of continuously attending  to such a long list.  Procedure  Each subject participated in two sessions, 24 hours apart. Each subject studied one list and was tested on it. Next, he  studied a second list and was tested on that. Memory for each list was evaluated with a free-recall test followed by a  four-alternative forced-choice recognition test. The two lists studied by a subject were randomly selected from the set of  four.  For each subject, one list was tested after a short retention interval, the other after a long retention interval. For the  short retention interval, subjects studied the list, solved written addition problems for 2 minutes, and then were immediately  tested on the list. For the long retention interval, subjects studied the list and then did addition problems for 2 minutes.  This ended session 1. At the beginning of session 2, the subjects were tested on the list. A randomly selected half of the  organics, schizophrenics, and normals were tested after a short retention interval on their first list and after a long  retention interval on their second list. The other subjects received the opposite order of retention intervals. Let these  subjects be referred to as SL and LS subjects, respectively.  156) DONALD BAMBER  Scoring of recall tests was lenient. Responses which bore an obvious resemblance to a correct word in terms of spelling,  sound, or meaning were scored as correct.  Interaction of Observations  Unfortunately, there was a list-order effect in the present investigation. Fewer words tended to be remembered from the list  presented second than from the list presented first. This is illustrated in Figure 10. (The stippled area in the right-hand  panel of Figure 10 represents recognition scores below the chance level of 12.5 words correct.)  Each of the three groups' recall scores and recognition scores were separately subjected to a 2 by 2 Latin-square analysis of  variance with main factors of short vs. long retention interval and first vs. second list. In the schizophrenic and organic  groups, the main effect of list order was significant for both recall and recognition, all four ps < .01. However, for the  normals, the main effect of list order was not significant for either recall or recognition, both ps > .05.  *normals oschizophrenics oorganics short interval -------long interval  0 0  1st 2nd 1st 2nd  list order list order  Fic. 10. Effect of list order on the mean number of list-body words recalled and recognized.  STATE-TRACE ANALYSIS 157  Because this list-order effect was found, it was decided to set aside all data from second lists and to employ first-list data  only in all further analyses. Unfortunately, this meant that some analyses which had been planned had to be abandoned.  Total Words Recalled and Recognized  Let the total number of list-body words recalled by a person after a short retention interval be termed the person's short  recall score. Let the terms short recognition score, long recall score, and long recognition score be defined analogously.  Once all second-list data had been set aside, short recall scores and short recognition scores were available only from SL  subjects, whereas long recall scores and long recognition scores were available only from LS subjects.  Examination of the first-list data in Figure 10 shows that organics scored lower than normals and schizophrenics on all four  of the above measures. In addition, schizophrenics scored lower than normals on all four measures. However, not all of these  differences were statistically significant. Two-tailed t-tests were used to determine which differences were significant at  the .05 level. All differences between the organics and the other two groups were significant. Among the differences between  schizophrenics and normals, only the difference on short recall scores was significant.  Organic subtypes. No significant nor even any noteworthy nonsignificant differences were found between organics having  different etiologies for their organic brain syndrome.  Antipsychotic medication. The schizophrenics were divided into those receiving more and those receiving less than the median  amount of antipsychotic medication. The highmedication schizophrenics performed nonsignificantly better than the  low-medication schizophrenics.  Analysis of Recognition-Recall State Traces  The first-list data will now be subjected to a state-trace analysis. Let P (recall) denote the probability of a word being  recalled; let P(recog) denote the probability of a word being correctly identified on a recognition test. The state traces  analyzed will be recognition-recall state traces. These are graphs of P(recall) vs. P(recog). The analysis will examine the  effects of the number of times that a word is presented to a subject and the length of the retention interval upon P(recall)  and P(recog) within the normal, schizophrenic, and organic populations.  Data-Summary Graphs  Figures 11, 12, and 13 summarize the data to be analyzed. Let p(recall) denote the proportion of list-body words recalled by a  group of subjects. Similarly, let p(recog) denote the proportion of list-body words correctly identified on a recognition test  by a group of subjects. Each of Figures 11, 12, and 13 is a graph plotting p(recall) on the vertical axis vs.  158 DONALD BAMBER  p(recog) on the horizontal axis. (Geiselman, 1975, has done a study using graphs of this type.)  Before examining the points plotted in these figures, the meaning of the stippled area and the diagonal line in each figure  should be explained. The square shown in each figure is called the unit square. The stippled area within the unit square  represents p(recog) values below the chance level of .25. After deleting the stippled area from the unit square, the remainder  of the square may be termed the above-chance rectangle. The diagonal line may be called the positive diagonal of the  above-chance rectangle. This diagonal line represents the prediction of the all-or-none theory of memory. According to this  theory, a word is either remembered or not remembered. It is recalled if and only if it is remembered. It is correctly  identified on a recognition test if either (a) it is remembered or (b) it is not remembered but the subject makes a correct  guess. If this theory were correct, which it is not, all the points plotted in Figures 11, 12, and 13 would lie on or near the  diagonal line.  In Figure 11, the independent variable retention interval is held constant at its short value. Only data from SL subjects is  presented in this figure. The normals, schizophrenics and organics are each represented by four points in Figure 11. These  four points correspond to the four different values of the independent variable number of presentations. The leftmost of a  group's four points in Figure 11 represents words presented once on the memory drum. Moving to the right, the successive  points encountered represent words presented twice, four times, and eight times.  Figure 12 is constructed in the same manner as Figure 11 except that the independent variable retention interval is held  constant at its long value. Only data from LS subjects is presented in Figure 12.  Figure 13 compares data for the short retention interval (first-list data from SL subjects) vs. data for the long retention  interval (first-list data from LS subjects).  .25 .50 .75 1.00 p(recog) (a3 short interval  FiG. 11. Graph of p(recall) vs. p(recog) for the short retention interval.  STATE-TRACE ANALYSIS  159  _i Ll  I I 1 .25 .50 .75 1.00 p(recog) C long interval  Fic. 12. Graph of p(recall) vs. p(recog) for the long retention interval.  p(recog)  Fic;. 13. Effect of short vs. long retention interval on the graph of p(recall) vs. p(recog).  Visual inspection of Figures 11, 12, and 13 shows that, except for one point in Figure 11, all plotted points lie within a  curving band of reasonably narrow width. Figures 11 and 12 suggest that the normals, schizophrenics and organics have the same  distribution of recognition-recall state traces. Figure 13 suggests that this distribution is unaffected by the length of the  retention interval.  A state-trace analysis will now be performed to check the accuracy of this visual interpretation.  160 DONALD BAMBER  General Plan of a State-Trace Analysis  The purpose of a state-trace analysis is to compare the state-trace distributions of different groups of subjects.  Ideally, one would like to precisely determine the state trace of each subject. In practice, however, one can only determine  the approximate form of a subject's state trace. This can be done as follows.  Given a family of state traces, it is possible to measure how well each state trace in the family fits a given subject's data.  Thus, within a given family, it is possible to determine (a) which state trace in the family best fits a subject's data and  (b) how well the best-fitting state trace fits that data. This process may be called fitting the family to the data.  Suppose that several different families are fit to the data of each of a number of subjects. One of these families will  contain generally better fitting state traces than the other families. Call this the superior family.  Each subject's best-fitting state trace from the superior family is then used as an approximation to his actual state trace.  Finally, the distribution of these approximate state traces is determined for each group of subjects and those distributions  are compared.  State-Trace Families  The first step in a state-trace analysis is to construct a collection of state-trace families. In the present investigation,  families of state traces on the above-chance rectangle were constructed by (a) generating families of state traces on the unit  square and (b) mapping the unit square onto the above-chance rectangle.  The negative diagonal of the unit square is the set of all points within the unit square having (x*, y) coordinates such that  x* -}- y = 1. Every point on the negative diagonal can be expressed in the form [(1 + S)/2, (1 - S)/2] with -1 < S < 1.  Suppose that every state trace in a family crosses the negative diagonal at a different point. Then, any state trace in that  family may be specified by giving the S value of the point where the state trace crosses the negative diagonal.  Several families of state traces on the unit square will now be described by giving the equation of a state trace with  arbitrary S > 0. (State traces with negative S values are excluded from these families.) For Family 1, the equation of a state  y= with x* values restricted to S < x* < 1. For Family 2, _ (1 - S`  For each of Families 3, 4, and 5, a state trace can be expressed in the form 0 (y) - 0 (x*) = 0 [(1 - S)/2] - 0 [(1 + S)/2].  STATE-TRACE ANALYSIS 161  For Familv 3  (y) = log(y4) - log(1 -  For Family 4,  0(y) = logy- log(1 - y).  For Family 5,  0 (y) = log[ 1- (1- y)4] - log[(, - y)4]A state trace of Family 6 can be expressed in the form  1 - 8 -}-8 y=maxR1-~19,999S) x*'1-(11-8)(1-:  Family 6 is a very close approximation to the family given by  y=max[0,1-t1+8)(1-x*)].  The y values in the last two equations differ by less than .0001. Family 6 is easier to fit to data than is the family which  it approximates.  Consider the transformations  P(recog) _ I -}- jx*,  P(recall) = y.  These transformations map each (x*, y) point of the unit square to a point [P(recog), P(recall)] of the above-chance  rectangle. Thus, these transformations can be used to transform a family of state traces on the unit square into a family of  state traces on the above-chance rectangle.  Figure 14 shows Families 1-6 after such transformation. Within each family, the state traces corresponding to 8 = .00, .25,  .50, and .75 are shown. In every family, the state trace corresponding to 8 = .00 is the positive diagonal of the above-chance  rectangle. Successively lower state trace have successively larger 8 values.  Remarks on Families 1 and 2. The all-or-none theory of memory predicts that  P(recall) = s[P(recog) - 4].  Let P(recog)* denote the right side of this equation. Suppose that an investigator theorizes that P(recall) is smaller than  predicted by the all-or-none theory because retrieval on recall trials is prone to failure. Thus, P(recog)* - P(recall) might  be proposed as a "natural" measure of retrieval failure. By this measure, the state traces of Family 1 are graphs of constant  retrieval failure. Similarly, P(recall)/P(recog)* might be proposed as  .00 .25 .50 .75 1.00.00 .25 .50 .75 1.00.00 .25 .50 .75 1.00 P(recog) P(recog) P(recog)  Fic. 14. The families of state traces that were fit to the data.  STATE-TRACE ANALYSIS 163  a "natural" measure of retrieval efficiency. By this measure, the state traces of Family 2 are graphs of constant retrieval  efficiency.  As will be seen below, neither Family 1 nor Family 2 fits the data collected in this investigation. Thus, neither of the above  measures is truly "natural"; instead, they are merely computationally simple. In the present study, if the normals,  schizophrenics, and organics had been compared on either of these measures, false conclusions would have been reached.  Remark on Family 6. The state traces in Family 6 have sharp corners. However, when the data of different persons is averaged  together as in Figures 11, 12, and 13, these sharp corners would be rounded off.  Fitting the State-Trace Families to the Data  Each of Families 1-6 was fit to the data of each subject using the minimum chi-square technique described below.  (Alternatively, the maximum-likelihood technique could have been employed instead. The author has experimented with both  techniques. The two techniques give essentially the same results, but the minimum chi-square technique is computationally  faster.)  For each subject, let ; denote the proportion of those words seen j times on the memorv drum that the subject correctly  identified on the recognition test. Similarly, let Y; denote the proportion of those words seen j times that the subject  recalled. Thus, each subject's data may be represented by four graph points having coordinates (X; , I';), j== 1,2,4,8.  Let x; and y; denote the corresponding probabilities. Thus, x; and y; respectively denote P(recog) and P(recall) for words  seen j times on the memory drum.  Each family was fit to each subject's data by finding those four probability points (.v; , y';), j :- -- 1, 2, 4, 8, which  came as close as possible to the subject's four data points (.Y; , Y J) while satisfying the constraint that all four  probability points lie on the same state trace. This state trace could be any member of the family.  The following chi-square statistic was used to measure the lack of fit between four probability points and a subject's four  data points:  2 N Y,iz (Ni - Y,)2 (1 - + ?ij)2  yi xJ - 1'f 1 - xs  where the summation is applied over j = 1, 2, 4, 8 and where N; denotes the total number of words seen j times. This is the  appropriate chi-square statistic given the assumption that a word which is recalled is always correctly identified on the  recognition test. Thus, a word seen j times would either (a) be both recalled and recognized with probability y; or (b) be  recognized but not recalled with probability x; - y; or (c) be neither recognized nor recalled with probability 1 - x; . (To  check the validity of the above assumption, the data from several randomly selected subjects was examined. Violations of the  assumption were rare.)  164 DONALD BAMBER  Because the four probability points (x; , yj) were constrained to lie on the same state trace, their location could be  expressed using only five parameters. One of these parameters, namely 8, specified the state trace on which the four points  lay. Each of the remaining parameters specified the location of one point on that state trace. Consequently, a subject's  chi-square statistic could be expressed as a function of those five parameters. For each subject, the parameter values that  minimized X2 were found. The obtained value of 8 specified the best-fitting state trace in the family and the minimum X2  measured how well that state trace fit the subject's data.  In this manner, each of the 6 families in Figure 14 was fit to the first-list data of each of the 106 subjects. This was done  using a programmable desk calculator (Bamber, 1974). The calculator read in from a magnetic-tape cassette the data of one  subject, spent a few minutes of calculation time fitting one family to that data, printed out the results, and the went on to  the next subject, etc. The calculator was left to run unattended overnight, with a different family being fit to the data each  night.  Table 1 shows the mean value of the minimum X2 for each family within various groups of subjects. Family 6 provides the best  fit to the short-retention-interval data. Families 5 and 6 are virtually tied for providing the best fit to the  long-retention-interval data.  TABLE 1  Mean Values of Minimum Xa  Group n 1 2 Family 5 6     3 4    Short retention interval         SL normals 18 4.13 6.82 4.66 3.34 3.00 3.16  SL schizophrenics 14 4.30 4.57 3.01 2.58 2.53 2.39  SL organics 21 3.90 3.94 3.45 3.00 2.78 2.39  All SL subjects 53 4.08 5.08 3.74 3.01 2.79 2.65  Long retention interval         LS normals 18 4.63 4.16 3.65 2.63 2.52 2.76  LS schizophrenics 14 4.66 3.15 2.93 2.60 2.47 2.38  LS organics 21 3.61 1.40 1.33 1.25 1.25 1.15  All LS subjects 53 4.23 2.80 2.54 2.07 2.01 2.02  Statistical comparison of families. For each subject, a minimum X2 was available for each of Families 1-6. Difference scores  were calculated for each subject by subtracting the subject's minimum X2 for Family 6 from his minimum X2 for each of Families  1-5. These difference scores were subjected to t-tests. Table 2 presents the values of the resulting t-statistics. Families 1,  2, and 3 can be rejected as providing significantly worse  STATE-TRACE ANALYSIS 165  TABLE 2 Values of the t-Statistic for Differences in Mean Minimum X'  Comparison Retention interval  Short Long  Family 1 vs. Family 6 4.19* 5.62*  Family 2 vs. Family 6 4.01 * 1.71  Family 3 vs. Family 6 2.29* 1.21  Family 4 vs. Family 6 1.17 .17  Family 5 vs. Family 6 .96 -.10  * p < .05, 52 df, two-tailed.  fits to the data than Family 6. However, there is no significant difference between the fits provided by Families 4, 5, and 6.  Chi-square rule of thumb. Suppose that each subject's true state trace were a member of Family 6. Then, according to a  well-known rule of thumb, a subject's Family-6 minimum X2 should be asymptotically chi-square distributed. Moreover, there  should be two degrees of freedom for each of a subject's four data points less one degree of freedom for each of the five  parameters estimated, yielding a total of three degrees of freedom. However, in Table 1, most of the mean minimum X2 values  for Family 6 are considerably less than the expected mean of 3.00. A plausible explanation for this peculiar result is that  the distribution of minimum X2 was nowhere near its asymptotic form. Had each subject been tested on a larger number of words,  this distribution would have come closer to its asymptotic form.  Additional families needed? Families 1-6 may be termed one-parameter families since only one parameter, namely 8, is needed to  specify a state trace within each family. After examining the data from individual subjects, it was concluded that there was  probably little to be gained by fitting additional one-parameter families to the data. Undoubtedly, better fits could be  obtained by fitting two-parameter families to the data. However, there appeared to be too much random variability in the data  of individual subjects to allow two parameters to be estimated with any precision.  Consequently, Family 6 was taken as the superior family. In selecting this family, it is not claimed that the subjects' true  state traces belong to Family 6. Instead, they merely have the approximate shape of Family-6 state traces. Thus, it would be  unwise to draw any theoretical conclusions based upon the precise form of Family 6.  Analysis of 8 Estimates  Each subject's best-fitting state trace from Family 6 will now be used as an approximation to his true state trace. Recall  that a subject's best-fitting state trace from Family 6  166 DONALD BAMBER  may be specified by his Family-6 8 estimate. Thus, a subject group's distribution of Family-6 8 estimates provides the same  information as their distribution of approximate state traces. Various groups' distributions of Family-6 8 estimates will now  be compared.  Originally, it had been planned to perform a 3 by 2 analysis of variance on the Family-6 8 estimates of all subjects. In this  analysis, the two factors were to be diagnosis (normal vs. schizophrenic vs. organic) and retention interval (short vs. long).  However, at this point, an unanticipated problem was encountered.  Subjects who recalled no words. The problem was that a number of subjects recalled no words on their first-list recall test.  The subjects who recalled no words were 1 LS normal, 1 LS schizophrenic, 2 SL organics, and 9 LS organics. The 8 estimates for  these subjects were the maximum possible value, namely, 1.00. It is likely that these estimates are gross overestimates. In  fact, the true 8 values of the zero-recall subjects are essentially indeterminate.  To see this, consider Figure 15. This is a graph of p(recall) vs. p(recog) for the 9 LS organics who recalled no words and for  the 12 LS organics who recalled at least one word. If a curve were drawn through the data points of the positive-recall  subjects, it would pass very close to the data points of the zero-recall subjects. Given such data, it is quite plausible that  either (a) the zero-recall subjects have the same distribution of recognitionrecall state traces as the positive-recall  subjects or (b) the true 8 values of the zero-recall subjects are all 1.00.  O  O  .25 .50 .75 1.00 p(recog)@a long interval  Fic. 15. Graph of p(recall) vs. p(recog) for the zero-recall and positive-recall LS organics.  Assume that the truth lies somewhere between the possibilities (a) and (b). Then the mean 8 for a group of subjects will be  overestimated, if 8 values of 1.00 are assigned to the zero-recall subjects, but underestimated if the data from the  zero-recall subjects is deleted.  STATE-TRACE ANALYSIS  167  High and low estimates of mean 8. For various groups, Table 3 gives the mean of the Family-6 8 estimates, first, for all  subjects in the group and, second, for the positiverecall subjects only. The former is a high estimate of the mean and the  latter is a low  TABLE 3  Mean Family-6 S Estimates  Retention interval Normals Schizophrenics Organics  All subjects     Short .43 .45 .37  Long .43 .43 .65  Positive-recall subjects only     Short .43 .45 .30  Long .40 .39 .38  estimate. For the normals and schizophrenics, there is little difference between the high and low estimates. For the SL  organics, the difference is somewhat larger and for the LS organics, the difference is very large. In view of this large  ambiguity regarding the true mean 8 for theLS organics, it was concluded that the original plan of a 3 by 2 analysis of  variance would have to be abandoned.  2 by 2 ANOVA. Instead, the Family-6 8 estimates of all normals and schizophrenics were submitted to a 2 by 2 analysis of  variance. The two factors in the analysis were diagnosis (normal vs. schizophrenic) and retention interval (short vs. long).  The F statistics for the effects of diagnosis, retention interval, and interaction were .05, .03, and .07 respectively. All Fs  had I and 60 degrees of freedom. None were significant.  Next, the analysis was repeated with data from the positive-recall subjects only. Because the number of subjects in each cell  of the experimental design did not satisfy the criterion of proportionality (Lindquist, 1953, p. 109), an unweighted-means  analysis of variance was performed (Winer, 1962, pp. 222-224, 241-244). The F statistics for the effects of diagnosis,  retention interval, and interaction were .02, 1.15, and .18 respectively. All Fs had 1 and 58 degrees of freedom. Again, none  were significant.  These results are what would be expected if (a) the normals and the schizophrenics have the same distribution of  recognition-recall state traces and (b) this distribution is unaffected by the length of the retention interval.  One-way ANOVA. Next, a one-way analysis of variance comparing the Family-6 8 estimates of all the SL normals, SL  schizophrenics, and SL organics was performed. The result was nonsignificant, F (2, 50) = .53. The analysis was repeated using  the 8 estimates from the positive-recall subjects only. This result was also nonsignificant F(2,48) = 2.45.  481912-7  168 DONALD BAMBER  These results are what would be expected if, for the short retention interval, the organics have the same distribution of  recognition-recall state traces as the normals and schizophrenics.  A pair of t tests. Next, a t test comparing the Family-6 8 estimates of all the SL organics and all the LS organics was  performed. The result was significant, t(40) = 2.62, p G .02. The t test was then repeated using only the data from the  positive-recall subjects. This time, the result was nonsignificant, t(29) _ .83.  Since the two t tests disagreed, no conclusions can be reached as to whether the distribution of recognition-recall state  traces for the organics is affected by the length of the retention interval.  Family-4 and Family-5 8 estimates. The above analyses were repeated using Family-4 and Family-5 8 estimates in place of the  Family-6 8 estimates. The results were essentially unchanged.  This is hardly surprising. Across all 106 subjects, the Pearson product-moment correlation between the Family-4 and Family-6 8  estimates was .94. Between the Family-5 and Family-6 8 estimates, r = .99. With the zero-recall subjects eliminated, these rs  shrank to .88 and .98 respectively.  A proposed model. The author proposes the model of long-term memory shown in Figure 16. This model predicts that (a) the  normals, schizophrenics, and organics should have the same distribution of recognition-recall state traces when tested after a  short retention interval and (b) this distribution should not be affected by changing from a short to a long retention  interval. The results of the state-trace analysis supported prediction (a). Prediction (b) was supported for the normals and  schizophrenics. However, it was ambiguous as to whether prediction (b) was also supported for the organics.  normals vs. schizophrenics vs. organics  degree of retention  P(recog)  FIG. 16. A model of long-term memory proposed to explain the results of the state-trace analysis.  Forgetting Graphs  Originally, it had been planned to do two additional state-trace analyses. The first analysis would have examined  recognition-forgetting state traces. These are graphs plotting P(recog) @ long interval vs. P(recog) @ short interval. The  second analysis would have examined recall-forgetting state traces. These are graphs plotting P(recall) @ long interval vs.  P(recall) @ short interval. The purpose of these analyses would have  STATE-TRACE ANALYSIS 169  been to compare the long-term forgetting of the normal, schizophrenic and organic populations.  In order to perform the planned state-trace analyses, it would have been necessary to use both first-list and second-list data  from each subject. Since a list-order effect was found in this investigation, it was decided to abandon all plans for analyses  involving second-list data.  It is possible, however, to construct relevant data-summary graphs using first-list data only. Consider the graph in Figure  17. This is a plot of p(recog) @ long interval vs. p(recog) @ short interval. The data on p(recog) @ long interval is taken  only from LS subjects, whereas the data on p(recog) @ short interval is taken only from .4L subjects. Thus, only first-list  data is used in constructing Figure 17. The normal, schizophrenic, and organic populations are each represented by four points  in Figure 17. These four points correspond to words presented once, twice, four times, and eight times on the memory drum. The  stippled portion of Figure 17 covers the region where either p(recog) @ long interval or p(recog) @ short interval is below  the chance level of .25. The diagonal line in Figure 17 is the set of points where p(recog) @ long interval and p(recog) @  short interval are equal. If a data-point falls below this line, then forgetting has occurred. Figure 18 is constructed  analogously to Figure 17. It is a plot of p(recall) (a, long interval vs. p(recall) @ short interval.  * normals  o schizophrenics *organics  .25 .50 .75 1.00 p(recog) @ short interval (SL subjects)  Fic. 17. Graph of p(recog) @ long interval vs. p(recog) @ short interval using first-list data only.  In both Figures 17 and 18, the data points for the normals and the schizophrenics all lie within a reasonably narrow curving  band. This suggests that the normals and schizophrenics have identical distributions of recognition-forgetting state traces  and identical distributions of recall-forgetting state traces.  170  DONALD BAMBER  1.00  i .75  m  c  N  Q1 V  O w.50  .00  * normals  o schizophrenics 9 organics  p(recall) @short interval (SL subjects)  FIG. 18. Graph of p(recall) @ long interval vs. p(recall) @ short interval using first-list data only.  What about the organics ? They appear to forget slower than the normals and schizophrenics in Figure 17, but faster in Figure  18. Are these differences real or due to chance? No statistical test is available to answer this question. It is the author's  opinion that probably these differences are not real and that the organics have the same distributions of  recognition-forgetting and recall-forgetting state traces as the normals and schizophrenics.  (a) normalsvs. schizophrenics vs. organics  P(recog)  (b) normals vs. schizophrenics vs. organics  numberof s degree of presentations learning  ioP(recall)  retention interval  FIG. 19. Proposed models of long-term forgetting for (a) recognition and (b) recall.  STATE-TRACE ANALYSIS 171  (The present investigation was hampered by the presence of a list-order effect. One way to avoid such interaction between  observations is to use split-half recognition tests, Bamber & Manifold, 1978.)  Two proposed models. The author proposes the two models of long-term forgetting shown in Figure 19. According to these models,  normals, schizophrenics and organics learn differently but their long-term forgetting is the same. These models predict that  the three populations should have identical distributions of recognition-forgetting and recall-forgetting state traces.  Implication for treatment. Figures 17 and 18 indicate that an organic patient's memory is not like a sieve. While these  patients learn only with difficulty, their long-term retention is as good or almost as good as that of normals. Thus, if an  organic patient is capable of learning, then it is worthwhile teaching him.  The Consolidated Model  So far, three models of long-term memory have been proposed: Figures 16, 19(a), and 19(b). A consolidated model which subsumes  these three previous models is shown in Figure 20. Note that the consolidated model contains two latent variables: degree of  learning and degree of retention. All predictions of the previous models are also predictions of the consolidated model.  normals vs. schizophrenics vs. organics  number of a degree of presentations --learning  retention interval  degree of retention  P(recog)  P(recall)  FIG. 20. The consolidated model of long-term memory. This model subsumes the models in Figures 16 and 19.  First comment. The evidence that the model is valid for organics is weak; the evidence that the model is valid for normals and  schizophrenics is stronger.  Second comment. Different types of organic brain syndrome have been found to have different effects on memory (e.g., Barbizet,  1970). The model proposed here applies to the population of organics on which it was tested (i.e., chronic patients in a  Veterans Administration Medical Center). There may be less diversity of memory disturbance among chronic organic patients than  among acute patients. Thus, the model is not necessarily valid for other populations of organics.  172 DONALD BAMBER  Third comment. According to the model, both organic brain syndrome and schizophrenia affect memory by disrupting learning.  Presumably, different defects are responsible for disrupting learning in the two syndromes. For example, an attentional defect  may disrupt learning in schizophrenia, whereas a storage defect may disrupt learning in organic brain syndrome.  Fourth comment. Besides number of presentations and retention interval, there are many other independent variables that affect  P(recall) and P(recog). In the consolidated model, it is assumed that these other independent variables are held constant.  When the only independent variables varied are number of presentations and retention interval, then the covariation between  P(recall) and P(recog) can be accounted for by the variation of a single latent variable, namely, degree of retention.  Suppose that the effects of varying additional independent variables were to be examined. It is quite likely that the  covariation between P(recall) and P(recog) could no longer be accounted for by the variation of a single latent variable.  Thus, if the consolidated model were to be extended so as to explain the effects of additional independent variables, it is  quite likely that additional latent variables affecting P(recall) and/or P(recog) would have to be added to the model.  APPENDIX A: COMMENTS ON PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTIONS  In this paper, all arguments concerning probability distributions are formulated at an intuitive level. This appendix  indicates what must be added to these intuitive arguments in order to make them rigorous.  When a population of persons is said to have a probability distribution on a set 92 of elements co, the following is to be  understood. Each person in the population may be characterized by an element w of the set S2. Moreover, there is a probability  space [S2, y, P( )] where y is a a-field of subsets of S2 and P( ) is a probability measure defined on y (Loeve, 1963, p.  150). Let C be any subset of y. Suppose that a person is randomly selected from the population. Then, the probability that  this person's a) will belong to the subset C is P(C).  When two populations of persons are said to have different probability distributions on a set S2, it is to be understood that  the a-field is the same for the two populations but that the probability measure is different.  Given a probability space [S2, y, P( )] and a function f ( ) mapping S2 into another set S2', a probability space on 52' may  be induced as follows. Choose a a-field y' of subsets of 0' such that, for every C' e y', f -1(C') e y. (There is always at  least one such a-field, namely, the trivial a-field {S2', ~).) Define the probability measure P'( ) on y' by setting P'(C')  equal to P[ f -1(C')] for all C' e y'. This yields an induced probability space [92" y% P'( )].  When a population of persons is said to have probability distributions on several different sets of elements, the following is  to be understood. Suppose that these sets are 521,..., S2k with elements wl ,..., cwk . In addition, there exists a set S2,  which may be called the inducing set, with elements w. Each person has a characteristic cu which deter-  STATE-TRACE ANALYSIS 173  mines his characteristic wl,..., wk . Specifically, there are functionsfi( ),..., fk( ) mapping 0 into S?i ,..., Dk such that,  for each person, Wi = fi(co) for i = 1,..., k. There is a probability space on the inducing set S2 which, together with the  functions fi( ),..., fi;(), induces probability spaces on Q1 ,..., Qk .  As an example, consider the basic theoretical structure. The inducing set is the set of ordered triples [i( ), ol( ), o2( )].  From the probability distribution on this set are induced the probability distributions on (a) the set of input functions i(  ), (b) the set of ordered pairs of output function [ol( ), oz( )], (c) the set of E(DVI) throughput functions tl( ), (d) the  set of E(DV2) throughput functions t2( ), (e) the set of state traces, etc.  APPENDIX B: SUFFICIENT CONDITIONS FOR THE BASIC THEORETICAL STRUCTURE  Suppose that a specification of the observational structure shown in Figure 1(a) is given. Suppose also that this  specification satisfies certain conditions stated below. Then it is guaranteed that this specification will be implied by some  specification of the basic theoretical structure. This appendix shows how to construct such a specification of the basic  theoretical structure.  Observational Structure: A Specification  Let I be the set of all possible IV values. For any person in either population A or B, let tl( ) and t2( ) denote that  person's throughput functions. Thus, tl( ) and t2( ) are interpolatively continuous functions on I such that, for that person,  E(DV,) = tl(IV),  E(I)V2) = t2(IV)1  for all IV in I. Let T be a set containing the ordered pairs of throughout functions [tl( ), t2( )] for all persons in  populations A and B. Suppose that two probability distributions on 7- are given: one for population A and one for population  B. Moreover, these distributions on r are such that the two populations have different distributions of tl( ) and different  distributions of t2( ).  Conditions  For simplicity of notation, let an element [tl( ), t2( )] of the set T be denoted t. Thus, any person may be characterized by  his t. Let T(t) be the set of observable state points for a person having characteristic t. Thus,  T(t) = ([ti(IV), t2(IV)] I IV E I}.  Let B( ) be a function mapping T into a set S of continuous curves in the real plane. Let B( ) have the property that, for  every t in T, every point in T(t) is a point on the curve 9(t). Thus B(t) is the state trace of a person with characteristic  t, Once for population A and again for population B, the population's probability distribution on T and the function  174 DONALD BAMBER  8( ) together induce a probability distribution on the set S of state traces. (Appendix A discusses such induction of  probability distributions.)  A continuous curve 0 in the real plane may be said to be a function graph if there exists an interval L,. of real numbers and  a function go( ) defined on Lo such that  0 = {[w, gq,(w)] I w EL,e}.  Suppose that a specification of the observational structure is given and that it satisfies the following conditions. (a)  Populations A and B have identical distributions on the set S of state traces. (b) All state traces in S are function graphs.  Basic Theoretical Structure: Constructing a Specification  Given a specification of the observational structure satisfying conditions (a) and (b), a specification of the basic  theoretical structure may be constructed as follows:  Recall that a person with characteristic t = [tl( ), t2( )] has state trace B(t). By condition (b), 8(t) is a function graph.  Thus, 8(t) is a graph of some function ge(t)( ) over some interval L,(t) . Since every point of T(t) is a point of B(t), it  follows that  [ti(I V ), t2(IV )] _ [ti(I V ), ge(t){ti(I V)}]  for all IV in I.  Let LV be a latent variable which, for a person with characteristic t = [tl( ), t2( )], can take on any value in the interval  Le(t) . For that person, let  LV = tl(IV),  E(DVj) = L V, (6) E(DV2) = ge(t)(LV ),  for all IV in I and all LV in Lo (t) . In Eqs. (6), a person's input function is determined by his characteristic t; his two  output functions are determined by his state trace B(t). Together with the distributions of t for populations A and B, Eqs.  (6) induce distributions of ordered triples consisting of an input function and two output functions.  Since the two populations have different distributions of tl( ), they must have different distributions of input functions. In  addition, condition (a) guarantees that the two populations will have identical distributions of ordered pairs of output  functions.  Thus, this construction is a specification of the basic theoretical structure. Moreover, since Eqs. (6) imply Eqs. (5), this  construction implies the given specification of the observational structure.  APPENDIX C: PERMUTATION OF THEORETICAL STRUCTURES  Permutation of Figure 6(b)  The theoretical structure illustrated in Figure 6(b) may be briefly summarized as follows. Equations (3) and (4) for this  structure imply that  E(DV) = o[i(IV, , IV2), IV3].  STATE-TRACE ANALYSIS 175  As mentioned previously, this theoretical structure may be permuted in two different ways. The first permutation may be  summarized:  E(DV) = n[h(IV2 , IV,), IV,].  The second permutation may be summarized:  E(DV) = m[9(I V1 , I Va), IV2].  Generally, if the observational structure of Figure 6(a) is accurately described by one of these theoretical structures, then  it will not be accurately described by either of the other two. However, there is one type of observational structure which is  accurately described by all three of these theoretical structures. Consider the following.  An additive model. Suppose that  E(DV) = T[a(IV,) + R(IV'2) + y(IV_)l, (7)  where the above functions are all continuous. Then, E(DV) may be expressed as either (a) a bivariate function of [a(IV,) +  9(IV2)] and IV; , or (b) a bivariate function of [O(IV2) -?y(IV,)] and IV,, or (c) a bivariate function of [a(IV,) -{- y(IV,)]  and IV,. Thus, if the observational structure of Figure 6(a) is given by (7), then it will be accurately described by the  theoretical structure of Figure 6(b) and both its permutations.  Now, suppose that the observational structure of Figure 6(a) is accurately described by two of these theoretical structures,  namely, Figure 6(b) and its first permutation. This implies that  E(DV) = o[i(IV, , IV,), IV3] = n[h(IV2 , IV:,), IV,].  Aczel (1966, pp. 327-330) has shown that, under reasonably general conditions involving invertibility of functions and  existence, continuity, and nonvanishing of partial derivatives, Eq. (8) implies that there exist continuous function a(),  (3(), y( ), and -r( ) such that (7) holds at least locally.  Thus, under the conditions of Aczel's theorem, the following statements are equivalent: (a) The observational structure of  Figure 6(a) is given by Eq. (7). (b) The theoretical structure in Figure 6(b) and both its permutations accurately describe  the observational structure of Figure 6(a). (c) Two of these three theoretical structures accurately describe the  observational structure. It follows from the equivalence of these statements that Eq. (7) may be tested by either a double or  triple application of state-trace analysis.  The additive model expressed by Eq. (7) is similar to the models considered in additive conjoint measurement (Krantz, Luce,  Suppes & Tversky, 1971, chap. 6) and in functional measurement (Anderson, 1977). In Aczel's theorem, Eq. (8) plays the role of  Krantz et al.'s (1971, p. 301) independence axiom.  176) DONALD BAMBER  Permutation of Figure 4(b)  The theoretical Structure illustrated in Figure 4(b) may be briefly summarized as follows. Equations (1) and (2) for this  structure imply that  E(DV) = o[i(IV,), IV2],  where populations A and B have identical distributions of the function o(,) but different distributions of the function i( ).  As mentioned previously, this theoretical structure may be permuted by interchanging the roles of IV, and IV2. This permuted  theoretical structure may be summarized:  E(DV) = n[h(IV2), IV,], (10)  where populations A and B have identical distributions of the function n(,) but different distributions of the function h( ).  Generally, if the observational structure of Figure 4(a) is accurately described by one of these theoretical structures, then  it will not be accurately described by the other structure. However, there is at least one type of observational structure  that is accurately described by both the theoretical structure of Figure 4(b) and its permutation. Consider the following.  An additive model. Suppose that each person in populations A and B may be characterized by three continuous functions -r( ),  a( ), /3( ), and a constant B such that  E(DV) = T[-(IV,) -F- P(IV2) + 9].  Populations A and B have identical distributions of the ordered pairs [-r( ), a( )] and identical distributions of the ordered  pairs [r( ), P( )], but different distributions of the ordered quadruples [T( ), a(), B]. This completes the description of  the additive model.  For each person in both populations, define the functions i( ), h( ), o(, ), and n(, ) by  i(IVI) = -(IV,) + B,  h(IV2) = 9(IV2) + 6, o(x, IV2) = T[x -I- #(IV2)]1 n(y, IV,) = T[y + -(IV,)].  Since populations A and B have identical distributions of [-r( ), a( )] and of [,r( ), P( )], then they will have identical  distributions of of , ) and of n( , ). However, they will typically have different distributions of the functions i( ) and h(  ). Moreover, both Eqs. (9) and (10) will be satisfied.  This shows that, when the observational structure of Figure 4(a) conforms to the  STATE-TRACE ANALYSIS 177  additive model, then typically it will be accurately described by both the theoretical structure of Figure 4(b) and its  permutation.  It will now be shown that, given certain assumptions, the converse is also true.  Sufficient conditions for the additive model. Consider a vector of parameters (qri ,..., qr,). Suppose that 1 < p < q < r < s.  Let P, Q, R, and S denote vectors of the respective types: (,.Ti ,..., ap), (np+-i ,..., .Tq), (7rq+i ,..., T r), and (7rr-,1  ,..., 7rs). These vectors may be concatenated. For example, PR denotes a vector of the type (7rl ,..., ;r, -,Tq+l ,...,'",.).  Assume that the observational structure of Figure 4(a) is correct and that it is accurately described by both the theoretical  structure of Figure 4(b) and its permutation. More specifically, assume the following. Suppose that each person in either  population A or B may be characterized by a parameter vector PQR S. Assume that a person's parameter vector determines  interpolatively continuous functions opo(, ), n,,( '10RS( ), and h,QRS( ) such that, for him,  E(DV) = 0PQ[iPQRS(IV1), I ['2] = nIR[hpoRs(I172), I L 1]'  Assume that populations A and B have identical distributions of parameters vectors PQ and of parameter vectors PR. This  implies that the two populations have identical distributions of opQ( , ) and of nPR( , ). In addition, assume that the two  populations have different distributions of iPQRS( ) and of hPQRS( ). Assume that this causes the two populations to also have  different distributions of throughput functions.  The assumptions made so far are not yet sufficient to guarantee that the observational structure of Figure 4(a) will conform  to the additive model. In addition, assume that i1QRS( ) is invariant under variation in Q and that h,QRS( ) is invariant  under variation in R.  Define the functions ip( , , ) and hp( , , ) by setting  ip(R, S, IV,) = iPQRS(I1' 1),  for any Q, and by setting  hp(Q, S, IV2) = hpoRS(I1'T2),  for any R. Similarly, define the functions op( , , ) and np( , , ) by setting  oP(Q, x, Y) = oPQ(x, y), np(R, .x, y) = npR(x, y).  Then,  E(DV) = op[Q, ip(R, S, IV,), IV,] = np[R, hp(Q, S, IV2), IV,].  178 DONALD BAMBER  Leontief (1947a, Theorem II; 1947b, Proposition IV) has generalized the previously cited theorem of Aczel's. Leontief's  theorem may be applied to Eq. (11) provided, first, that certain partial derivatives exist, are continuous, and do not vanish  and, second, that the parameter vector S = (7rr+l ,..., erg) has at least one component (i.e., s > r). Assume that these  conditions are met. Then, Leontief's theorem implies that there exist continuous functions TP( ), aP( , ), @( , ), and BP( )  such that  E(DV) = -rP["P(R, IV,) + RP(Q, IV2) -I- 6P(S)].  Let  -PR(IVI) = (R,IV,), 9PQ(IV2) = NP(Q> IV2), BPS = BP(S).  Then,  E(DV) = TP[R(IVI) + RPQ(IV2) + BPS]  Since  populations A and B are assumed to have identical distributions of parameter vectors PR and of parameter vectors PQ, they must  have identical distributions of [TP( ), -PR( )] and of [TP( ), ppo( )]. Moreover, populations A and B must have different  distributions of [r,( ), R( ), NPQ( ), BPS]. Otherwise, contrary to assumption, they would have identical distributions of  throughput functions.  Thus, the above assumptions guarantee that the observational structure of Figure 4(a) conforms to the additive model.  APPENDIX D: SUFFICIENT CONDITIONS FOR FIGURES 4(B), 5(B), AND 6(B)  In this appendix, conditions are stated which are sufficient to guarantee that the theoretical structures of Figures 4(b),  5(b), and 6(b) will each accurately describe its corresponding observational structure.  Figure 4(b)  Assume that the observational structure of Figure 4(a) is correct. Let b be a possible value of IV, . Assume that, for each  person and for each possible value a of IV, , there exists a continuous function g,,( ) such that  t(IVI , a) = ga[t(IV, , b)].  [Note that the person's E(DV) @ (IV, = a) vs. E(DV) @ (IV, = b) state trace is a graph of ga( ).] Assume that, for each  possible a, populations A and B have identical distributions of ga( ). Let a and c be any two possible values of IV,. Assume  that, when-  STATE-TRACE ANALYSIS 179  ever two persons have identical functions ga( ), then they also have identical functions g,( ). Consider some consequences of  the assumptions made above. For each person in either population A or B, define the functions i( ) and of , ) by  i(IV,) = t(IV, , b),  o(x, a) = ga(x)  Then,  o[i(IVI), IV2] = t(IV1 , IV2).  Since t( , ) is interpolatively continuous, i( ) must be also. From the assumptions made about the ga() functions, it follows  that populations A and B must have identical distributions of of , ).  The assumptions made above are not quite sufficient to guarantee that the observational structure of Figure 4(a) will be  accurately described by the theoretical structure of Figure 4(b). However, sufficiency is attained if two further assumptions  are added. Assume, first, that populations A and B have different distributions of the function i( ) and, second, that the  function of , ) is interpolatively continuous.  Figure 5(b)  Assume that the observational structure of Figure 5(a) is correct. Assume that, for each person, there exists a continuous  function g( ) such that  t2(IV~ , 'V2) = g[ti(IVi , IV2)]  for all possible values of IV, and IV2. [Note that an E(DV2) vs. E(DV,) state trace is a graph of g( ).]  These two assumptions are sufficient to guarantee that the Figure 5(b) theoretical structure will accurately describe the  observational structure of Figure 5(a). This can be readily demonstrated by defining the functions i( , ), ol( ), and o2( ) as  follows:  i(x, T) = tl(x, .y), ol(x) = x, o2(x) = g(x)'  Figure 6(b)  Assume that the observational structure of Figure 6(a) is correct. Let b be a possible value of IV, . Assume that, for each  person and for each possible value a of III; , there exists for that person a continuous function ga( ) such that  t(IV, , IV2 , a) = ga[t(IV, , IV, , b)]  180 DONALD BAMBER  for all possible IV, and IV,. [Note that a person's E(DV) @ (IV, = a) vs. E(DV) @ (IV, = b) state trace is a graph of ga( ).]  Consider some consequences of the above assumptions. Define the functions i(,) and o(,)by  i(IVI, IV.) = t(IVI, IV2, b),  o(x, a) - ga(x).  Then,  0[i(IVI , IV2), IV3] = t(IV. , IV2 , IN'  Since t( , , ) is interpolatively continuous, i( , ) must be also. However, of , ) need not be interpolatively continuous.  Thus, the above assumptions are not quite sufficient to guarantee that the observational structure of Figure 6(a) will be  accurately described by the Figure-6(b) theoretical structure. By adding the assumption that the function of , ) is  interpolatively continuous, sufficiency is attained.  REFERENCES  ACZ$L, J. Lectures on functional equations and their applications. New York: Academic Press, 1966. ANDERSON, N. H. Note on  functional measurement and data analysis. Perception and Psychophysics, 1977, 21, 201-215.  BAMBER, D. A method for finding the maximum of a function of several variables suitable for use on a programmable desk  calculator. Computers and Biomedical Research, 1974, 7, 183-187. BAMBER, D. The area above the ordinal dominance graph and the  area below the receiver operating characteristic graph. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1975, 12, 387-415.  BAMBER, D., & MANIFOLD, V. Evaluation of a method for studying forgetting: Is data from split-half recognition tests  contaminated by test interference ? Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 1978, 11, 126-128.  BARBIZET, J. Human memory and its pathology. San Francisco: Freeman, 1970.  GEISELMAN, R. E. Single-trial free recall from temporal search sets in long-term memory. Memory and Cognition, 1975, 3,  474-480.  GREEN, D. M., & SwETs, J. A. Signal detection theory and psychophysics. New York: Wiley, 1966. KRANTz, D. H., LucE, R. D.,  SUPPFB, P., & TVERSKY, A. Foundations of measurement. New York: Academic Press, 1971. Vol. 1.  LEONTIEF, W. A note on the interrelation of subsets of independent variables of a continuous function with continuous first  derivatives. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 1947a, 53, 343-350.  LEONTIEF, W. Introduction to a theory of the internal structure of functional relationships. Econometrics, 1947b, 15, 361-373.  LINDQUIST, E. F. Design and analysis of experiments in psychology and education. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1953.  LokvE, M. Probability theory. Princeton, N. J.: Van Nostrand, 1963. 3rd ed.  THORNDIKE, E. L., & LORGE, I. The teacher's word book of 30,000 words. New York: Teachers College Press, 1944.  WINER, B. J. Statistical principles in experimental design. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1962.  STATE,TRACE ANALYSIS 181  REFERENCE NOTE  1. Prien, R. F., & Caffey, E. M., Jr. Guidelines for antipsychotic drug use. Perry Point, Md: Central Neuropsychiatric  Research Laboratory, Veterans Administration Hospital, May 1974. Research Report No. 95.  RECEIVED: November 15, 1977.