10.1016/0022-2496(79)90002-6
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 19, 1-17 (1979)  Similar Threshold Functions from Contrasting Neural Signal Models'  STEVEN K. SHEVELL  Department of Behavioral Sciences, The University of Chicago, 5848 S. University Ave., Chicago, Illinois 60637  Three neural signal models of increment threshold detection are compared. All assume that the criterion for threshold is the  attainment of a critical, minimum neural signal (or difference between two neural signals), and that the signal due to a test  flash of intensity .1 in the absence of a background light is X1/(.1 + a) (where a is the semi-saturation constant). The  models differ in the manner in which a background light of intensity 0 is assumed to affect the signal. One model (due to  Alpem, Rushton, and Torii, 1970a, b, c) assumes that the test flash signal, X1/(.1 + o), is attenuated by the multiplicative  factor 6D/(0 + 0D) (where 0D is a constant interpreted as sensory noise); another model specifies that the test flash signal  is simply reduced (by subtraction) by the amount 0/(0 + K) (K a constant). One main result of this paper is that in the  absence of pigment bleaching, these two models imply indistinguishable increment threshold functions. Further, a necessary and  sufficient condition for each model guaranteeing the absence of saturation with steady backgrounds is found to be empirically  satisfied. A third model is considered where the background field is assumed both to contribute to the neural signal and  simultaneously to attenuate it (via a gain change). These assumptions are closely related to theoretical accounts of color  induction and color perception. Though this model needs further investigation, it appears to be in better accord with actual  increment threshold data than the others.  Detection of a briefly flashed visual stimulus can be greatly affected by the amount of background illumination falling on the  retina. In general, the minimum incremental light intensity that is detectable upon a background field rises with the  intensity of the background (i.e., adapting) light. The relationship between minimum detectable incremental intensity and  background light intensity is called the increment threshold function.  Quantitative modeling of visual adaptation (the changes in sensitivity and/or other aspects of the visual system caused by  adaptation to light) has been pursued for decades (von Kries, 1905). Renewed interest in this area has resulted from advances  in electrophysiology that have led to attempts to relate physiological responses (at various levels of the retina) to light  stimuli (Naka and Rushton, 1966; Naka, 1969; Boynton and Whitten, 1970; Dowling and Ripps, 1972). Specifically, mathematical  functions have been proposed that express the neural signal (N) as a function of the adapting light intensity (here denoted 0)  and the incremental (or test) light intensity (denoted A). Neural signal models  I Support for this investigation was provided by a National Science Foundation Graduate Fellowship to the author and by  National Eye Institute Grant EY07022-03 to The University of Michigan.  0022-2496/79/010001-17$02.00/0 Copyright C 1979 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  STEVEN K. SHEVELL  also have been explored psychophysically. Based on a number of clever contrast-flash experiments, Alpern, Rushton, and Torii  (1970a, b, c) claimed empirical support for a neural signal model that closely resembles the physiologically-based model  proposed by Naka and Rushton (though Wandell (1976) has shown that the conclusions of Alpern et al. depend critically upon an  untested assumption).  By introducing a hypothesis that relates the neural signal to perceptual threshold, an increment threshold function can be  derived from any neural signal model. The most common (but by no means only) threshold hypothesis is that the criterion for  threshold is attainment of some minimum, critical, neural signal intensity N,. Any combination of test and background lights  that results in a neural signal N, or larger is assumed to provide the subjective experience of detecting the test field. When  N, is not reached, the test field is not detected. Complex decision processes are not considered; a subject is assumed to  respond "Yes" if and only if the test light is detected. The increment threshold function is derived from the quantitative  model by setting N equal to N, and then rearranging terms to give the test light intensity A as a function of background  intensity 0 (and constant N,). One technique used to assess a neural signal model is a comparison between the theoretically  implied increment threshold function and the empirical observations, the notion being, of course, that the theoretical  framework is supported if the data are in accord with the values specified by the model.  There is a classical problem in this procedure in that data only can serve to reject a hypothesized model and not provide  grounds to accept it. This issue has received relatively little attention, probably because the models frequently imply rather  unusually shaped threshold functions. One main point of this paper is that three very different neural signal models all imply  nearly the same (unusually shaped) increment threshold function. In the first section, two models-one proposed by Alpern et  al. (1970b, c) and another based on quite different assumptions-will be shown to imply absolutely indistinguishable increment  threshold functions. In the second section, a third model will be presented that implies a very similar threshold function but  which fits the data of Alpern et al. (1970b, c) better than the neural signal model for which the data were published to  support.  INDISTINGUISHABLE THRESHOLD FUNCTIONS FROM TWO CONTRASTING MODELS  The first model to be considered is well known in the vision literature (Alpern et al., 1970a, b, c). It specifies that  N A 0, A -}- a O-{-OD  where N is the neural signal (0 < N < 1), and A and 0 are, respectively, the intensity of the test light and the intensity of  the background light (expressed in units of quantum catch). The quantities o and OD are constants, interpreted respectively as  the semisaturation constant (i.e., the intensity of light that, in the absence of a background field, drives the neural signal  to one-half its maximum) and receptor noise (eigengrau). Follow-  NEURAL SIGNAL MODELS  ing an abbreviation used by the original authors, this will be referred to as the A.R.T. model.  The second model assumes that the neural signal N is given by  .'V =  A B  B+K' A+Q B+K A B  Here, the variables N, A and 8 and the constant u have the same meaning as in the A.R.T. model. The quantity K is a constant  which may be interpreted as the background intensity which reduces to half its maximum the neural signal resulting from an  infinitely strong test light. Equation (2) will be referred to as the subtractive model. A block diagram of each model is  shown in Fig. l.  N 6p N_ _  +6- 6+6p a+ 'T E6+K  6+eo A + 6' I 6+ K  A.R.T.Model Subtractive Model  Fie. 1. Block diagrams of the A.R.T. model and the subtractive model.  The increment threshold function for each model will be shown (1) to follow Weber's law, at low background intensities, and  (2) to follow a simple reflection of the Weber's law portion of the curve, at higher intensities (the reflection being due to  an implicit symmetry in each model). These two features-in-common are the main components of the proof which demonstrates the  threshold functions are indistinguishable.  Unless otherwise noted, it is assumed that the background B bleaches no photopigment. Logarithms are base 10 unless otherwise  specified.  A.R. T. 1VIodel  The increment threshold function for the A.R.T. model was stated by Alpern et al. (1970b, c). Alpern (1974) provided a more  formal derivation and Shevell (1977) reviewed and extended (for the condition of bleached pigment) the implications of the  model for increment threshold detection. A brief description is given below (for a more complete discussion, see the above  references).  4 STEVEN K. SHEVELL  FIG. 2. The increment threshold curve in log-log coordinates. Data falling along this curve yield three directly observable  quantities: log .lo (the absolute threshold), log al (the y-coordinate of the point of intersection of segments (b) and (c)),  and log 01 (the x-coordinate of the point of intersection of segments (a) and (b)).  Figure 2 is a schematic representation of the increment threshold curve. The curve, plotted in logarithmic coordinates,  contains three linear segments: 1) the horizontal segment (a) at the level of the absolute threshold Ao , 2) the 45line (b),  and 3) the vertical segment (c) at the level of B (denoted 88) for which the increment threshold intensity is infinite. The  x-coordinate of the point of intersection of segments (a) and (b), denoted as log 81 in Fig. 2, can be shown to be log BD .  The y-coordinate of the point of intersection of segments (b) and (c), denoted as log A1 in Fig. 2, can be shown to be log a.  Thus under the A.R.T. model, the constants Bo and a are estimated easily.  The lower portion of the curve (when A < a) follows Weber's law, as can be seen by substituting Aa/a for N, and rearranging  Eq. (1). This gives  A A,, 0+0, Re 0"  which is equivalent to the more familiar form  AI  I ; C2 (4) -}- Cl  (Cl and C2 constants). The A.R.T. model also specifies that the curve in Fig. 2 is symmetric about the line of slope -1 which  passes through the point (log 0, , log A1). This is due to the model's implicit symmetry. Equation (1) may be rewritten as  N = [1 + l0_1oB(A/a)]-lLrl + 101080/Bp)1-1,  NEURAL SIGNAL MODELS 5  which reveals that interchanging the values of "-log(A/a)" and "log(8/BD)" does not alter the neural signal. In terms othe  logarithmic coordinates of Fig. 2, the symmetry implies that if the point (log 8; , log A;) is on the curve, then the point  (log 8; , log Aj) also must be on the curve, where  and  log B; = log BD -}- (log a - log Ai)  log A; = log a - (log 0, - log OZ,).  That is, log 8f is (log a - log AE) greater than log BD , and log Al is (log 8i - log BD) smaller than log a. This is  equivalent to symmetry about a line of slope -1 through the point (log OD, log a). Finally, note that the A.R.T. model  specifies that the test intensity A will equal a only when the background 8 is approximately 0.3 log units below the  saturating background intensity 88(88 > BD). Thus a will be much larger than the test intensity for background intensity BD ,  which implies that the -45line through (log BD , log a) will intersect the threshold function well to the right of log 8D .  The slope of the threshold curve at this point of intersection will be virtually 1.0, so segment (b) of Fig. 2 (which has  portions below and above the point of intersection) has approximately unit slope.  To summarize, the increment threshold curve for the A.R.T. model follows Weber's law in its lower half, and follows a  reflection (about a line of slope -1) of the Weber's law portion of the curve in its upper half. The lower part of the curve  depends only on constants Cl and C2 in Eq. (4) which are specified by Ao and 81; the upper portion depends additionally on the  location of the line of symmetry which is given by the point (log 81 , log Al). The increment threshold functions of the  A.R.T. model may be thought of as a family of curves dependent only on the three parameters Ao , Al , and 81. Figure 3 is a  plot of two sets of increment threshold data (each set is for a different size of test field). The solid curves are the  increment threshold function implied by the A.R.T. model. Clearly, the correspondence between theory and data is quite good.  Subtractive Model  In the absence of a background field 8, the A.R.T. model and the subtractive model (Eq. (2)) are identical. The difference  between the two models is the manner in which a background light is assumed to reduce the signal from the test. The A.R.T.  model proposes attenuation by the multiplicative factor 8D/(8 + 8D); the subtractive model specifies simple algebraic  reduction by the amount 8/(8 -{-- K) (note that here the same general transformation of the physical stimulus (x)-x/(x -f-  constant)-is used for both the test and background lights).  In the absence of a background field, the subtractive model specifies that N = A/(A -}- a). At absolute threshold, the test  intensity Ao is much less than a so N, ;z& A,,/a. Restricting attention to sufficiently small 8 such that 8 < K, the increment  threshold neural signal is given by  A, A B a A -+a K  6 STEVEN K. SHEVELL  0 Z 0 U W N O Z Q J O 0 J  H N Z W FZ FLU F  2  109 0  4  0 1 2 3 4 5 BACKGROUND INTENSITY (LOG TROLANDS )  FIG. 3. Increment threshold measurements for a 1 (squares, lower abscissa) and a 0.57(triangles, upper abscissa) red test  flash seen on a 4.1' white background (for details of the experiment, see Shevell (1977)).  Rearranging (5) gives  a since by assumption B < K and Ao < a (note that A < a is not required). Equation (6) is of the form of (4) with constants Cl  = AoK/a and C2 = of K. Thus, the subtractive model gives Weber's law when 8 << K. For small 8, the subtractive model and the  A.R.T. model differ only in their constants (compare Eqs. (3) and (6)).  The above argument assumed 8 < K. This condition cannot be expected to hold over the entire range of B. The remainder of the  increment threshold curve can be determined from the subtractive model's implicit symmetry. Rewriting the general form for the  subtractive model (N positive), it is seen that  N - [1 - 10009(01x)+(-109010))Nl + 10-iog(aio)]-i[I + 10109(81x)1-1.  NEURAL SIGNAL MODELS 7  It is clear from (7) that interchanging the values of "-log(A/o)" and "log(9/K)" leaves the value of N unchanged. This is the  same symmetry characteristic found in the A.R.T. model. For any point (log BZ , log ai) on the increment threshold curve,  there must be a related point (log 9; , log A;) such that  and  log Oj = log K + (log a - log a2)  log A; = log a - (log Oi - log K).  That is, log 8f is (log a - log Ai) larger than log K, and log of is (log B2 - log K) less than log a. Again, this implies  symmetry about a line of slope -1. For the subtractive model, the symmetry line passes through the point (log K, log a). A  graphical representation is shown in Fig. 4.  LOG  109 Q'  (bi,aj) (bz,a2)~,  (a4, b4)  (a2,b2).--------------(al b ----------------------  ~  (log 0- -log A increasing  -00' log K LOG a  FIG. 4. Symmetry about the line of slope -1 through the point (log K, log a). This symmetry is a property of the increment  threshold function of the subtractive model. Each pair of points (a; , b;) and (b; , a;) represents an identical neural signal  level N; (i = 1,..., 4). The coordinate values a; and b; are in terms of logarithmically transformed units with origin (log K,  log a) (i.e., x = log B - log K, y = log o - log A; note y increases downward).  It has now been shown that the initial portion of the increment threshold curve (where 0 < K) follows Weber's law, and that  the curve is symmetrical about a line of slope -1. It may be that the point where the line of symmetry intersects the  threshold curve is beyond the region where B << K can be assumed to hold. The Weber's law portion and its symmetrical  reflection are indicated by solid lines in Fig. 5. The central portion of the curve remains in question (the dashed and dotted  lines of Fig. 5 are possibilities).  8 STEVEN K. SHEVELL  In order to locate the point at which the increment threshold curve and the line of symmetry intersect, Eq. (2) can be written  (for N positive) as  N AK- By  (A + a)(0 + K)  If A is set equal to a and then 0 is adjusted so that the test field is at threshold, then the signal N, is given by (8) with  numerator a(K - 0). Since N, > 0, this numerator must be positive, implying 0 < K. Thus the increment threshold curve includes  a point (log 0, log a) which lies to the left of (log K, log a), implying the curve (on the assumption that it increases  monotonically) and the line of symmetry intersect at a point above and to the left of the point (log K, log a) (see Fig. 5).  LOG a  logo,  log To  Ftc. 5. The two solid curves are portions of the subtractive model's increment threshold function, based on Weber's law (for B  < K) and symmetry. Weber's law and symmetry do not completely specify the middle region of the curve. The dashed and dotted  lines are possibilities.  It can be shown that the increment threshold curve of the subtractive model follows (essentially) a straight 45run (as  indicated by the dotted line in Fig. 5) by the following argument. A line of slope 1 - 8 reflected about a line of slope -1  yields a (reflected) line of slope 1 -I- 8f(1 - 8). Thus, if the lower (Weber's law) portion of the increment threshold curve  reaches a slope near (but slightly less than) 1.0, then the beginning of the upper (reflected) portion will have a slope near  (but slightly greater than) 1.0. By showing (1) that the lower portion of the curve (where Weber's law holds) reaches a slope  of 1 - 8 (8 positive and small relative to 1.0), and (2) that the slope of the increment threshold curve (in log-log  coordinates) is non-decreasing with log 0, it can be inferred that the middle portion of the increment threshold curve has a  nearly constant slope very near 1.0. That is, the slope must be constantly increasing from one value slightly less than 1.0 to  another value slightly larger than 1.0 and thus the slope must always be very near unity.  NEURAL SIGNAL MODELS 9  Mathematically, this argument requires proof that (1) there exists some 0 < K such that d(log A)/d(log 0) 1.0, and (2) d2(log  A)/d(log 0)$ >, 0 for all log 0. The first condition is satisfied, since the value of the first derivative for 0 one log unit  less than K is  Since A, < a, the first term in Eq. (9) will be slightly less than 1.0 and the second term in (9) is near zero. It easily can  be shown that the slope is less than 1.0. Thus, there exists a point on the Weber's law portion of the increment threshold  curve with slope 1 - S (where S is positive and small relative to 1.0). Elementary calculus reveals that the second derivative  is never negative (the curve has strictly increasing slope for all 0 > 0).  Having shown that the increment threshold curve follows the 45line indicated by the dots in Fig. 5, the subtractive model  has been shown to imply an increment threshold curve indistinguishable in shape from that specified by the A.R.T. model. The  relationship between the observable quantities (A,, A,, and 01) and the subtractive model parameters (a and K) now will be  considered.  The above argument concerning the middle region of the curve for the subtractive model shows that increment thresholds for  moderate backgrounds are given by the asymptotic behavior of Weber's law. Thus the curve in its middle region must follow  log A = log 0 -}- log(a/K), (10)  which is simply a rearrangement of Eq. (6) when 0 >> (A,K/v). Since the 45line specified by Eq. (10) must include the point  (log 01 , log Ao) by definition of log 01 (see Fig. 2), it must be the case that  01 = AoK . (11)  a  The value of the saturating intensity, 03 , for the subtractive model can be found by solving  X03=K(-A- 1). 0  By definition, the value of log Al is given by Eq. (10) when 0 = 6,. Thus  (l2)  The estimate of the parameter a is found by rearranging (12), and the estimate of K is found from a and Eq. (11). These  parameter estimates are  a =  1/2  2 [1+(1+4 A ~) (13a)  1/2  K 2 [1 + (1 + 4 ao ) ] (136)  10 STEVEN K. SHEVELL  (discarding the negative root in solving Eq. (12)). These parameter estimates are quite different from the A.R.T. model. The  estimate of a can be roughly approximated (assuming A0~2 Ai~2) bY (AlAa)l/z. This approximation provides a simple way to  estimate a from typical increment threshold data: log a ,- 2(log Ao + log Al).  Why are the models so similar?  With parameter estimates for the two models in terms of the directly observable quantities Ao , Al and 01, one now can ask why  the two models which appear so different in Eqs. (1) and (2) give such similar increment threshold functions. It will be  demonstrated that a sufficient condition for indistinguishable threshold functions from the A.R.T. and subtractive models is  the quantitative relationship between the observable values Al and A,, , specifically that Al is so much larger than Ao that  it may be assumed B2 Ai~2. For the A.R.T. model, substituting "empirically" observable values A., Al and of for the model  parameters N, , a, and BD and rearranging Eq. (1) gives  _ AIAo(0 +_ 01) 0101-Ao)-BAO AIAo(0 + 01)  ti 01A1 - OAo ,  (14)  (14')  assuming AO < A,.  For the subtractive model, the analogous equation (formed by rearranging (2), replacing N, , a and K with expressions  containing only the observable quantities Ao , Al , 01 , and defining d - [1 -f- (1 + (4A1/Aa))1/2] for notational  convenience) reveals that  Ao0 \1 + dl + A1  A  81(1 -d}- T2  (15)  By assuming A0~2 << &2 (a condition somewhat stronger than AO < Al),  d 4A1 1/2 Al 1/2  ti 1 -~( A, ti AO  (since A,/AO > 1 and (Al/Ao)1/2 > 1). Substituting this approximation for d into (15) gives  A"0(1 + (AO/A,)1/2) + Ao01 ti AIAo(0 + 01)  A N 01(1 - (AoIAW/2) - 0k/A1 01A1 - OA, (15 )  Equations (14') and (15') are identical. Thus, the indistinguishable threshold functions from the A.R.T. and subtractive  models can be explained by the relationship between the observable quantities Al and AO: A0/2 << A1/2 (this, of course,  implies AO < A,). In the development of the A.R.T. and subtractive models, this relationship between Ao and Al is implicitly  contained in the assumption AO < a. This relationship is also empirically accurate; typical data (Shevell, 1977) indicate  NEURAL SIGNAL MODELS 11  Increment Thresholds When Backgrounds Bleach Pigment  It was recently proved that the A.R.T. model, when combined with the kinetic equation for cone pigments, implies that no  steady background allowed to reach bleaching equilibrium can saturate the photopic system (Shevell, 1977). The proof is  dependent on the empirically testable condition  where A* is the increment threshold for the steady background which bleaches 50% of the pigment at equilibrium (this  background is denoted 00). It is well known that steady backgrounds do not saturate the photopic system, so (16) is actually a  test of the A.R.T. model. Experiments showed that the inequality A* < 2o does hold, lending support to the A.R.T. model.  A similar condition, which guarantees the absence of saturation with steady backgrounds, can be derived for the subtractive  model as well. When fraction of pigment (1 - p) is bleached, A and 0 in Eq. (2) must be replaced by Ap and Bp respectively,  the quantities that reflect quantum catch.2 Making this substitution,  N AP _ Bp Ap+Q Op +K.  (17)  When the background intensity is 00 , the fraction of unbleached pigment, p, is (by definition of do) 1/2 and the test  intensity for threshold is A*. Substituting and rearranging (17) gives  N = A*K - 00a (18) 0 (A* + 20) ( 00 2 + K)  Since it is in fact true that an increment threshold quantity A* can be found for steady background 00 , saturation cannot  occur for any background intensity 0 if there always exists a value of A such that  - AK - 0o > A*K 0 0V 19  lA + p) (Op -{- K) (A* + 2o) (2 + K)  Equation (19), together with the kinetic equation for cone pigments (Alpern et al., 1970c), implies that  A * < 4a [ 1 -}- 90 -I- K ~; (20) 2K 00  2 The quantum catch due to a light acting on an unbleached retina (p = 1) is proportional to the light's intensity I  (expressed in trolands). The quantum catch resulting from the same light intensity falling on a retina with fraction p < 1 of  the pigment unbleached is not precisely proportional to Ip, but Ip does give an excellent approximation that is used in the  calculations that follow.  12 STEVEN K. SHEVELL  this is the inequality for the subtractive model analogous to (16) for the A.R.T. model. This inequality is a test of the  subtractive model. Using data shown in Fig. 3 (and the parameter estimates they imply) and a densitometrically measured  estimate of 0. = 4.4 log trolands, the right side of (20) is 2.72 log troland seconds. The empirically observed value of .1*  is 1.95 log troland seconds. Thus, the inequality given in (20) is satisfied, lending equal support to the subtractive model.  Discussion  The main result of this section is that the A.R.T. and subtractive models imply virtually identical increment threshold  functions. It also has been shown that both models (when combined with the equation for cone pigment kinetics) satisfy a  condition which is necessary and sufficient for the absence of saturation with steady (pigment bleaching) backgrounds. The  similarity between the predictions of the two models is surprising. The models are based on strikingly different theoretical  viewpoints. The A.R.T. model specifies that a background light attenuates the test flash signal by a simple multiplicative  factor which is inversely proportional to the background intensity (when 0 >> 0D). Thus the absolute amount of reduction in  signal depends both on the background intensity and the (unattenuated) test field signal. The subtractive model specifies that  the test flash signal is algebraically reduced by a fixed amount (the signal from the background ?) which depends only on the  background intensity; the amount of signal reduction is completely independent of the magnitude of the unattenuated test  signal (except that N cannot be negative). Despite these differences, increment threshold data cannot distinguish between the  two models.  While the A.R.T. and subtractive models are equally capable of accurately describing increment threshold data, certain  contrast-flash experiments support the A.R.T. model over the subtractive model (e.g., Fig. 5 in Alpern et al., 1970b).  However, a more careful examination of increment threshold data reveals that both models are at odds with experimental results.  SYMMETRY IN INCREMENT THRESHOLD FUNCTIONS  Both the A.R.T. and subtractive models possess an implicit symmetry with respect to 0/A and 0/constant (the constant being 0,  for the A.R.T. model and K for the subtractive model). In a log-log increment threshold plot, this symmetry implies reflection  about a line of slope -1.  In general, symmetry seems an unlikely property for psychophysical data because the observed slope of increment threshold  curves (in log-log coordinates, as in Fig. 2) is not universally 1.0. Assuming the curve is smooth at the point where it  intersects the line of symmetry, the curve's slope must be approaching 1.0 as the curve approaches (from above and below) this  point of intersection. Increment threshold slopes of 0.5 are found for test stimuli of small area and short duration, and  slopes can commonly vary between 0.5 and 1.0 (cf., Barlow, 1972). Aguilar and Stiles (1954) found rod saturation  NEURAL: SIGNAL MORELS 13  curves with linear portions of slope 0.95; this is close to 1.0 but probably not a random fluctuation from unity since JIII in  the linear portion was clearly decreasing for 2 of their 4 subjects.  An argument against symmetry can be made even from the paper in which the property was first recognized. Figure 6 of this  paper is taken from the work of Alpern et al. (1970b, Fig. 8). The details of the experiment are not important here; consider  only the fit of the data to the (A.R.T. model) curves. While the overall fit is fairly good, every set of data points  demonstrates a systematic violation of symmetry. Points below the line of symmetry are most frequently below their predicted  (symmetrical) values while points above the line of symmetry are almost invariably above their predicted values. While Fig. 6  is based on scotopic data, the same asymmetry is seen for cones. Data presented by Alpern et al. (1970c, Fig. 5) include a  curve with 23 points in the linear region, 14 of them below  log b' (scocoplc td)  log  FIG. 6. Solid lines are a family of curves based on the A.R.T. model of Eq. (1). Each curve represents a different value of  N,. The data show systematic violations of the symmetry property. The actual measurements are from a contrast-flash  experiment, but the difference in paradigm is inconsequential to the symmetry issue (from Alpern, Rushton, and Torii, 1970b;  notation in figure is according to their definitions).  the line of symmetry and 9 above it. Of the 14 points below the line of symmetry, 11 (79%) fall below the predicted curve,  while 6 (67%) of the 9 points above the symmetry line fall above the predicted curve. Other data (Shevell, 1977) confirm this  trend: systematic deviations from a symmetric increment threshold curve with threshold observations below the line of symmetry  falling below the predicted curve, and measurements above the line of symmetry falling above the predicted curve.  14 STEVEN K. SHEVELL  The overall deviations from the predicted curves are relatively small in almost every case, but the observed consistent,  systematic violations of symmetry provide a clue for judging quantitative models. On the one hand, it would seem unwise to  completely dismiss any model that implies symmetry since the observed asymmetry may be due to second order effects. On the  other hand, the empirical observations invite explanation in terms of a model that does not imply symmetry.  The Asymmetric Model  Recent empirical results from experiments investigating color perception under chromatic adaptation indicate the presence of  two mechanisms of adaptation (Shevell, 1978). The first mechanism of adaptation is a gain (or sensitivity) change, and the  second mechanism is an "additive effect." The attenuation term in the A.R.T. model, 01/(0 + OD), represents a gain change. The  additive effect-a direct incremental contribution to the neural signal from the background field-is in neither the A.R.T. nor  subtractive model. A number of different theoretical formulations, referred to by the general term "two-process theories," all  lead to the same empirical two-mechanism adaptation process for color perception (Shevell, 1978). While the empirical support  from color perception experiments is recent, the general notion of a two-process adaptation system has at least a twenty-year  history (Hurvich and Jameson, 1958).  A neural signal model qualitatively consistent with the two-process point of view is  N _r A + f (0) 1 BD -L A+f(e)+Q1~0+0D].  (21)  The contribution to the neural signal from the background is expressed by f (0) where f is assumed to be a monotonically  increasing function (and f (0) = 0); the attenuation of the signal by the background is expressed by 010 -}- OD), the same  attenuation process contained in the A.R.T. model (see Fig. 7). One interpretation of the function f (0) is that it converts  the background intensity 0 into units compatible with the briefly flashed incremental intensity A (though it is not intended  here that f (0) must be so interpreted).  If the criterion for detecting the flash is not a minimum level of signal N, but rather a critical difference in signal AN,  between the conditions when the test flash is present and when it is absent3, then the test flash will be detected if and only  if  +f(0) BD f (B) BD AN=~ A+f(B)+a O+OD~-~f(e)+Q 0+OD~  (22)  is greater than or equal to AN, . By rearranging terms, the difference in signal AN can be written as  ~1 ( 0D ( f (0) -a.  dN = A +f(0) + a )l0 -}- OD) t1 + a (23)  a The assumption that the criterion for perceptual threshold is dN, instead of N. (as in the A.R.T. and subtractive models) is  a notational difference only. For the A.R.T. and subtractive models, N is zero when .l = 0 so the critical signal N, is the  increase (that is, difference) in neural signal resulting from the test flash .1.  NEURAL SIGNAL MODELS 15  N + f (8) 6p X+f(8)+a- 8+8D  x+f(8)+o'  F1  6D OteD  8  FIG. 7. Block diagram of the asymmetric model.  Equation (23) shows that under this model the difference between the signal when A is present and when it is not can be  written as a product of three terms. When the value of f (8) is much smaller than a, the first and third terms in (23) reduce  to the first term in the A.R.T. model and unity, respectively. Thus, when f (8) < a, the A.R.T. model and Eq. (22) (called the  asymmetric model for reasons described below) are identical.  When the condition f (O) < a cannot be assumed to hold, the effect off (8) is to reduce dN since f (B) decreases both the  first and last terms in (23). Comparing the predicted values of A from the A.R.T. and asymmetric models, for any given values  of the constants a and BD and high background intensities (and therefore significant values of f (B)), the asymmetric model  will imply higher A levels than the A. R.T. model. Thus the asymmetric model implies an increment threshold function that is  identical to the A.R.T. model at low background levels, but that rises somewhat above the (symmetric) A.R.T. model's increment  threshold curve at high background levels. This is exactly what the empirical results require.  Saturation  Another aspect of the asymmetric model is that it explicitly contains two mechanisms for saturation. This can be seen most  clearly by letting A go to infinity, in which case (22) becomes  AN = 1 - f (B) eD  f (O) + a 110 + OD].  (24)  Saturation, here defined as the inability of the neural signal to be increased a detectable  48o! I9jI _2  16 STEVEN K. SHEVELL  (threshold) amount by additional light stimulation of arbitrarily large (i.e., infinite) intensity, can be due either to the  reduction in possible range of the change in neural signal (first term, Eq. (24)) or to attenuation (as expressed by 0,/(O +  OD)). Either process alone can result in saturation (when {I - f (0)l [f (O) + a]} < JN, or when ODI (O + OD) < dN,). Both  processes have been suggested as possible mechanisms of saturation (cf., Sakitt, 1976). Sakitt implicitly assumes that they  are mutually exclusive, but they need not be. In the asymmetric model, both mechanisms are assumed to act together implying a  lower saturating intensity than either process alone (O3 ,., [CODIAI][1 + f(OXU]-I). Regardless of the validity of Eq. (22),  the model makes clear that isolating one mechanism of saturation does not exclude the possibility of others nor does it  necessarily indicate that the mechanism of saturation isolated is the primary process operating in a normal retina exposed to  intense light.  CONCLUSIONS  The A.R.T. and subtractive models imply virtually identical families of increment threshold curves. The curves are of the  shape shown in Fig. 2, and depend only on the three observable quantities A,, AI , and OI . The A.R.T. model contains the  three parameters N,, , a, and OD; the subtractive model contains the three parameters N, , a, and K. For each model there is a  one-to-one correspondence between the observable quantities (A,,, AI , and OI) and the three parameters of the model. Further,  both models imply an experimentally testable condition that guarantees the absence of saturation with steady backgrounds.  Experimental measurements show the condition is satisfied for both models.  The symmetry property implicit in both models casts some doubt on them. Symmetry would be a powerful property for limiting the  domain of possible models, but unfortunately the data do not justify it. In fact, the data suggest symmetry as a criterion for  model rejection. While the observed asymmetry is quite systematic, the data are nearly symmetric suggesting the possibility  that the asymmetry reflects a second order effect (e.g., for increment threshold data, a neural transient response that  accelerates with increasing intensity). The general validity of the symmetry property cannot be evaluated here except to point  out that it is in doubt.  The asymmetric model specifies an increment threshold function similar to that of the other two models, but implies a slight  asymmetry that is in accord with experimental results. Though at present there is insufficient evidence to support this model  over the others, the theoretical viewpoint expressed in the assumptions of the asymmetric model is already known to be  consistent with visual adaptation studies from the areas of color induction (Jameson and Hurvich, 1959; 1961) and color  perception (Shevell, 1978).  REFERENCES  AGUILAR, M., & STILES, W. S. Saturation of the rod mechanism of the retina at high levels of stimulation. Optica Acta, 1954,  1, 59-65.  ALPERN, M. What is it that confines in a world without color? Investigative Ophthalmology, 1974, 13, 648-674.  NEURAL SIGNAL MODELS 17  ALPERN, M., RUSHTON, W. A. H., & TORN, S. The size of rod signals. Journal of Physiology, 1970x, 206,193-208.  ALPERN, M., RuSHTON, W. A. H., & TORII, S. The attenuation of rod signals by backgrounds. Journal of Physiology, 1970b, 206,  209-227.  ALPERN, M., RuSHTON, W. A. H., & TORII, S. Signals from cones. Journal of Physiology, 1970c, 207, 463-475.  BARLOW, H. B. Dark and light adaptation: Psychophysics. In D. Jameson and L. Hurvich (Eds.), Handbook of Sensory Physiology.  Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1972. Vol. VII/4, pp. 1-28. BOYNTON, R. M., & WRITTEN, D. N. Visual adaptation in monkey cones:  Recordings of late receptor potentials. Science, 1970, 170, 1423-1426.  DOWLING, J. E., & Ripps, H. Adaptation in skate photoreceptors. Journal of General Physiology, 1972, 60, 698-719.  HURVICH, L. M., & JAMESON, D. Further development of a quantified opponent-colors theory. In Visual Problems of Color. Her  Majesty's Stationery Office, 1958. Vol. II, pp. 691-723. JAMESON, D., & HURVIcH, L. M. Perceived color and its dependence on  focal, surrounding, and preceding stimulus variables. Journal of the Optical Society of America, 1959, 49, 890-898. JAMESON,  D., & HURVICH, L. M. Opponent chromatic induction: Experimental evaluation and theoretical account. Journal of the Optical  Society of America, 1961, 51, 46-53.  NAKA, K. Computer assisted analysis of S-potentials. Biophysical journal, 1969, 9, 845-859. NAKA, K., & RuSHTON, W. A. H.  S-potentials from luminosity units in the retina of fish (cyprinidae). Journal of Physiology, 1966, 185, 587-599.  SAKITT, B. Psychophysical correlates of photoreceptor activity. Vision Research, 1976, 16, 129-140. SHEVELL, S. K. Saturation  in human cones. Vision Research, 1977, 17, 427-434.  SHEVELL, S. K. The dual role of chromatic backgrounds in color perception. Vision Research, 1978, 18, 1649-1661.  VON KRIES, J. Die Gesichtsempfindungen. In W. Nagel (Ed.), Physiology der Menschen. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1905.  WANDELL, B. A. On the analysis of nerve signals deduced from metacontrast experiments with human observers. Journal of  Physiology, 1976, 263, 321-329.  RECEIVED: March 24, 1978