10.1016/0022-2496(80)90045-0
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 22, 24-47 (1980)  On a Class of "Impossible" Figures: A New Language for a New Analysis  ERIC TEROUANNE  U.E.R. Mathimatiques Appliquees aux Sciences Humaines, Universitd Paul Valiry, 34000 Montpellier, France  Multibar figures provide a class of illusions that have been used by psychologists as well as by artists like Escher. For  scientific purposes one needs as precise a definition and analysis as possible for these figures. A first attempt at this has  been made by Cowan (1974) with the theory of braids. The present work points out some semantic and technical problems not  dealt with by Cowan, and proposes a new language for the study of multibar figures. This language is shown to be incomplete,  and some further problems are reviewed.  INTRODUCTION  Multibar figures have appeared in a variety of places. They were first mentioned as a psychological curiosity by Penrose &  Penrose (1958), and they have been exploited in lithography by Escher (1971) and studied mathematically by Cowan (1974, 1977).  Subsequent works of Cowan & Pringle (1977, 1978) have dealt with applications of multibar figures in studies of human  perception. Closely related problems are dealt with by Huffman (1971, 1977), Mackworth (1976), and Draper (1978).  Figure 1 gives some examples of multibar figures. Some of them are known as "impossible figures," the most famous being  Penrose's tribar (Fig. If). Psychologists use these kinds of figures as stimuli in the study of perception, mathematicians try  to analyse and  0  7  e  V  FIG. 1. Examples of multibar figures. The first three are called "usual" figures in contrast with "unusual" ones as shown in  Figs d-f. Figure f is known as the Penrose tribar.  0022-2490/80/04002424$02.00/0 Copyright 1980 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  24  A NEW ANALYSIS OF "IMPOSSIBLE FIGURES" 25 classify them, and artists like Escher use them to build on canvas "worlds that  cannot exist" (Ernst 1976, Chap. 13).  The first mathematical work on multibar figures, possibly the only one, is that of Cowan (1974). He produced an encoding of  the figures using the theory of braids, derived some properties of those figures he called impossible, and provided a  systematic way to generate them. In the present article, the first elements of analysis (the four types of corner and the  grammar of plane figures) are borrowed from Cowan's work. Also the author would like to emphasize that the very idea of a  mathematical treatment of multibar figures is due to Cowan himself. However, his system will not be pursued any further here,  for his notion of impossibility is open to improvements; neither will his coding procedure be used in the following. Some new  concepts, useful for the description of multibar figures, and a new coding procedure are introduced and discussed below.  One of the aims of a mathematical analysis of these multibar figures might be to provide a more precise definition of  "impossibility." Indeed, it is an experimental fact that people confronted with the Penrose tribar, for example, are affected  in such a way as to claim it as being "impossible," "strange," "unusual," etc. (Cowan et al., 1977, 1978). However, it seems  to me that it is impossible to define an "objective impossibility" of a figure, since "impossibility" is merely a subjective  term. In order to make this clear, I first outline my own set of conventions in the first section, and then develop the  reasons why I prefer giving up the all too fuzzy notion of "impossibility." These conventions are not intended to exhaust all  the possible assumptions underlying the interpretation of multibar figures by the perceptual system. They have been chosen so  that they provide a definition of multibar figures which is as precise as possible and at the same time yield a classification  into what I call "usual" and "unusual" figures. Following this, a famous lithograph by M.C. Escher, "Belvedere," is examined  (Section 2). It is shown that, counter to the opinion of Cowan and Ernst, this "impossible world" can be analysed in terms of  multibar figures just as effectively as their analysis of Escher's "Waterfall." I also discuss its relations with two other  well-known figures, the Necker cube and Cochran's crate.  Then we reach the mathematical part of this paper. First, a new code for the corners of a multibar figure is defined, and some  operators upon the set of values of the code are then introduced (Section 3). In Sections 4 and 5 it is shown that this code  allows the transcription of some features of the figures into very simple formulae. This generalizes Cowan's work and extends  the study to the figures that lift out of the plane, like Figure I a. Finally the concept of change of viewpoint of an object  is formalized and the corresponding change of the multibar figure is represented by operators acting on the set of code values  (Sections 6 and 7).  It is shown that this new analysis reveals several new difficulties, the solutions of which are outside of reach of the  present theory (Section 8). In particular, usual figures cannot be characterized with this code. This problem requires further  studies of geometrical nature, and is under active consideration.  26 ERIC TEROUANNE  1. DEFINITIONS  In mathematics, the word "definition" has a precise meaning which is axiomatic in nature. Nevertheless, in this section, we  will not deal with mathematics, and what is called a definition here is merely based upon intuition and experimentation, that  is, some "self-evident" statement about commonly observed objects or drawings.  Let us call a multibar object any material object made of bars and corners, with the conventions that:  1. Each bar has four pairwise parallel plane faces and four parallel edges. The case where two faces are not distinct is  eliminated. The angles between the non-parallel faces of a bar are not necessarily right angles.  2. Each corner is formed by the junction of two bars in such a way that: (i) each face of one bar is related to one and only  one face of the other. (ii) two opposite junctions lie in parallel planes, they are referred to as plane junctions. (iii) the  two remaining junctions constitute a pair of parallel folded junctions. The angles between two joining bars are not  necessarily right angles.  3. A multibar object is a closed sequence of bars and corners.  Let us call a usual multibar figure any drawing of a multibar object from a given point of view, with the conventions that:  1. Each bar is represented by three parallel straight lines representing the three visible edges which define the two visible  faces. Thus two invisible faces and one invisible edge are assumed.  2. Each corner is represented by the visible edges of the two joining bars, and one additional edge representing the single  visible fold. One invisible fold is assumed. A part of some visible edge of one bar can be hidden by the other bar.  From now on, "bar," "corner," "edge"... are used for the elements of the figures as well as for the elements of the objects.  PROPOSITION. With these conventions there exist exactly four types, of corners with variations of distances or angles.  This result is due to Cowan (1974). In fact it does not constitute a mathematical statement, being of the same experimental  nature as our definitions, and hence it does not possess (and does not need possessing) any. mathematical proof. By drawing as  many  Fic. 2. The four types of corners (after Cowan, 1974). A given type is defined by the relations between its visible elements,  viz., faces, edges, and fold.  A NEW ANALYSIS OF "IMPOSSIBLE FIGURES" 27  FIC. 3. An example of a usual figure that a naive observer should most probably interpret as an unusual one. This beautiful  figure is due to my friend and colleague Prof. Y. Usari, who suggests that it might be the interbreeding of a snail and a  star-fish.  corners as one can imagine with our conventions, and checking that they can be classified into the four classes illustrated by  Fig. 2, one can convince oneself of the validity of the result.  At last we call a multibar figure any closed sequence of drawn bars and corners. If a multibar figure is not a usual figure we  shall call it an unusual multibar figure.  A mathematical characterization of "usualness" or "unusualness" of a multibar figure is one of the final aims of such kind of  work, although it is, unfortunately, not obtained in this paper. Yet such a characterization could be very useful since, given  a frontal view of a particular multibar figure, it may be difficult to decide whether it is "usual" or "unusual". For example,  using the above conventions, Fig. 3 is usual, but deciding it takes some time and hard thingking.  But why not use the customary classification of possible and impossible figures? There are at least two reasons for this.  First, the word "impossible" has been used to designate a classification that differs from the one above. With these  conventions Figs. 1a-c are usual; in Cowan's sense Figs. lb and c are possible while Fig. la is impossible. The second reason  is that the word "impossible" suggests some intrinsic infeasibility, whereas this "infeasibility" is nothing but a result of  the chosen conventions. To illustrate this point, one should note that if one removes any of our conventions, some unusual  figures become the image of a material object. This can be shown, for example, for the Penrose tribar. If one removes the  convention that the figure should represent a threedimensional non-flat object, then it actually represents itself or any  equivalent drawing, and is not a drawing a feasible object. If one removes the convention that the object should be closed,  then one can fit together three perpendicular bars and look at this object from a point of view such that the corresponding  figure is closed. Illustrations of this point are given by Gregory (1970) and Ernst (1976). Finally, if you just remove the  convention that the faces should be plane, you can build a closed three-dimensional object whose image from a given point of  view is exactly the Penrose tribar. This can be done; all the edges are straight but not parallel, and the faces are not  planes but smooth surfaces without singularities except the edges and folds of the figure.  28  ERIC TiROUANNE  FiG. 4. "Belvedere," by M. C. Escher (1958).  2. ESCHER'S UNUSUAL MULTIBAR FIGURES  In 1958, the same year as Penrose and Penrose published their tribar, the Dutch artist M.C. Escher drew a lithograph entitled  "Belvedere" (Fig. 4). "Belvedere" looks like a building with two floors, the second floor being sustained by columns built on  the first one. Each of the floors appears quite normal. But the architecture of the columns is so odd that Escher could draw a  ladder going up from inside the first floor to outside the second.  A NEW ANALYSIS OF "IMPOSSIBLE FIGURES" 29  FIG. 5. Decomposition of Escher's cuboid (a) into multibar figures. The "bottom" (b) is usual, while the right and left sides  (c) like the front and back sides (d) are unusual. The top is equivalent to the bottom as "viewed from the other side."  Escher himself gave a key for his "impossible world" with the "cuboid" which a pensive man holds in his hands in the left  bottom corner of the lithograph. This cuboid (Fig. 5a) appears more complex than our multibar figures because at each corner  there are three bars and not just two. But as shown in Fig. 5b-d any of the six faces of this pseudocube is a multibar figure.  It is not surprising that two usual figures are found at the top and the bottom, corresponding to the two normal floors. At  the sides are two pairs of equal unusual figures corresponding to the puzzling columns.  Escher was clever enough to look at his building from different points of view, and he proves to be the inventor of what in  Section 7 I formally define as the "view from the other side." As a matter of fact, the cuboid, as drawn in his lithograph, is  not the actual sketch of Belvedere as we see it, but rather the sketch of the same building viewed from the opposite point,  somewhere at the top of a hill in the background. The true sketch of Belvedere would be Fig. 6a. It has the same properties as  Fig. 5a and so do its faces (Figs. 6b-d).  The last point about "Belvedere" worth discussing is the drawing on the paper at the feet of the pensive man (Fig. 7a). It  represents a figure known since 1832 as the Necker cube. The crystallographer Louis Albert Necker remarked that the sketch of  the twelve edges of a cube could be interpreted in two alternative ways, according to the depth ordering assumed between the  crossing edges at the points circled by Escher. Once the depth ordering (crossing of edges) at one point is chosen, the one of  the other pair of crossing edges is fixed, as is shown in Figs. 7b and c. Then-at low cost-one can draw an "impossible cube"  by the choice of two mutually exclusive depth orderings as in Fig. 7d. An illustration of this has been given by Draper (1978)  with bars in place of  30  ERIC TEROUANNE  FIG. 6. The true sketch of "Belvedere." This cuboid (a) is that of Fig. 5a as viewed from the other side. Similarly, its  bottom (b) and sides (c, d) are the views from the other side of Figs. 5b-d.  Od,  FIG. 7. The Necker cube (a) as it appears in the drawing at the feet of the pensive man in Escher's Belvedere. Two "possible"  interpretations (b and c) and an "impossible" one (d) are given, where the interrupted lines mean that one given edge is  hidden by another. Cochran's "freemish crate" (f) is a multibar "impossible cube" associated with a "possible" interpretation  of the Necker cube (c).  A NEW ANALYSIS OF "IMPOSSIBLE FIGURES" 31  edges. Another way to generate "impossible cubes" has been exploited by Cochran (1966) with his "freemish crate" sketched on  Fig. 7e. Here the depth orderings of the two pairs of crossing bars are compatible (compare with Fig. 7c). However, both  orderings are in contradiction with the feeling of depth associated with the use of bars and corners. Ernst (1977) presents  Cochran's crate as a closely related model of the spatial realization of the Escher cuboid. In fact, there is a fundamental  difference between them, since if Fig. 7e is split into its six faces as is the cuboid of Fig. 5, the six resulting faces  constitute six usual figures. Hence the "unusualness" of the crate lies, and lies only in the crossing of the bars, while that  of the cuboid lies in their junctions (unusual figures), as well as in the depth ordering (compare with Fig. 7d).  Another well-known lithograph by Escher, "Waterfall" (1961) is built in a similar manner from a combination of Penrose  tribars. This is obvious in Escher's preliminary sketches (Escher, 1971), and Ernst (1976) reports that Escher knew of the  Penroses' work when he drew it.  3. A PARTIAL COVE  Let us now go back to multibar figures. From now on we are concerned with multibar figures only and not with cuboids.  Before coding a figure, one must choose an arbitrary bar as an origin, and an arbitrary direction around the figure, which we  call the running direction. Once this has been done the corners of the figure are numbered from the one at the end of the  reference bar to the one at its beginning. Since the n corners of a figure form a closed sequence, they will be labelled with  the elements of 7L/n = (0, 1, 2,..., n - 1), in which the addition is modulo n (for instance, the equality (n - 1) -}- 1 = 0  means that after the corner C1 there is the corner Co).  Each oriented corner possesses an anterior bar, a direction (right or left), and a posterior bar (see Fig. 8). The code of an  oriented corner is the triplet (a, s, p) E H = (-1, x-1)3, where  a = 1 iff the folded face visible on the anterior bar is outer, a = -1 iff the folded face visible on the anterior bar is  inner,  s = 1 iff the corner turns right. s = -1 iff the corner turns left,  p = 1 iff the folded face visible on the posterior bar is outer, p = -1 if the folded face visible on the posterior bar is  inner.  The code for an oriented figure is composed othe codes of its successive corners. As an example, let us code Figs. la and  If. Taking the first corner at the top of the figure and the running direction clockwise, their respective codes are:  Fig. la: (1, 1, -1), (-1, -1, -1), (-1, 1, 1), (1, 1, 1), (-1, 1, -1), (1, 1, 1), Fig. If: (-1, 1, 1), (-1, 1, 1), (-1, 1, 1).  48o/2z/I-3  32 ERIC T&OUANNE  1 1 1 1 1 -1 -1 1 1 -1 1 -1  1 -1 1 1 -1 -1 -1 -1 1 -1 -1 -1  FIG. 8. The eight possible oriented corners and their codes. The first index in the code is -I-1 or -1 according as the  visible folded face of the anterior bar is outer or inner. The second index is -I-1 or -1 according as the corner turns right  or left. The third index is defined with the posterior bar as the first index is with the anterior bar.  For compactness of notation we write the code of an n-cornered figure as a 3n component vector: if Co , Cl ,..., C,,_1 e H are  the codes of the corners of the figure, we write C = (CO , Cl ,..., C1) E H,, = {-1, 1}3n for the code of the figure. For  instance, Penrose tribar is denoted:  C =(-I 1 1, -1 1 1, -1 1 1).  Let us now examine how the change in origin or running direction affects the code of a figure. This change shall be given a  mathematical formulation by the introduction of some groups of operators acting on the sets Hof code values. An operator  acting on His any 3 X 3 matrix K such that C - K e H for any C e H, where the point denotes the ordinary matrix product. For  instance, the identity operator acting on H is the 3 X 3 identity matrix I:  0 0 1  and C - I = C for any C e H.  An operator acting on His any 3n X 3n matrix L such that C - L E Hfor any C e H. It can be considered as the  concatenation of n X n matrices, each of dimension 3 X 3. It will be denoted:  L = (Li;) (i, j e Z/n),  where any Lit is a 3 X 3 matrix (the first index is the row index and the second the column index). For instance, the identity  operator acting on His the 3n X 3n identity matrix In:  I= (Li1) (i, j e Z/n), where Li; = I p i = j and 0 elsewhere.  A NEW ANALYSIS OF "IMPOSSIBLE FIGURES" 33  Now consider the 3 X 3 matrix:  (0 0 1), J = 0 -1 0 ,  1 0 0  and let Jn be the operator acting on Hn defined by J,, = (LE;)(i, j E 7L/n), where L;; _ J p i + j = n - 1 and 0 elsewhere:  0 0 ... 0 J' 0 0 ... J 0  Jn -  (J 0 ... 0 0,  We have J2 = I and Jn2 = In.  PROPOSITION. If C E Hn is the code of a multibar figure with a given origin and running direction, the code of the same figure  with the same origin and opposite running direction is C-J".  The argument of the proof is as follows: when the orientation of a corner is reversed, the nature (inner or outer) of the  visible faces remain unchanged, but the status (anterior or posterior) of the bars are exchanged and the direction (right or  left) of the corner is reversed. This justifies the multiplication of each corner code by J. When the running direction of a  multibar figure is changed, the first corner becomes the last one, the second corner becomes the pentultimate,..., the last  corner becomes the first one, and the orientation of each corner is reversed. This justifies the multiplication by the  Consider the operator Kn upon Hn defined by Kn = (Li;)(i, j E 7Zf n), where L;; -= I iff i = j -}- 1, and 0 elsewhere:  0 0 ... 0 I I 0 ... 0 0 Kn = 0 I ... 0 0  0 0 ... I 0  For any integer p E Z/n, let Knv denote the pth power of Kn . We have Knn = (L;;) (i, j E 71/n), where L;; = I iff i = j -}-  p, and 0 elsewhere (with the convention that Kn= Knn = I. For instance,  0 0 ... 0 I 0 0 0 ... 0 0 I  Kn2 = I 0 ... 0 0 0 , and soon (0 0 ... 1 0 0  34 ERIC TAROUANNE  PROPOSITION. If C e H,n is the code of a multibar figure with given origin and running direction, the code of the same figure  with the same running direction and the origin bar shifted p corners farther, down the running direction, is C - KJ.  The product of operators Kand J,, is commutative. Thus the multiplicative group generated by Kand J,, is the commutative  group:  G ={J,,--Kn", me{0, 1},peZ1n}.  This group operates upon H., and from the above propositions it follows that:  PROPOSITION. If C is the code of a multibar figure with given origin and running direction, the set of all possible codes of  the same figure is  G(C) = {C -L, L e G).  The formalism of multiplicative operators introduced here will prove useful for various applications, more particularly in  Sections 6 and 7. For instance, it can be used to formalize a special transformation: the mirror image. Consider a multibar  figure whose origin and running direction are chosen and materialized on it. If it is observed in a mirror, another figure  with given origin and running direction is obtained. It is the mirror image of the original multibar figure, called its  inverse by Cowan (1974).  Consider the matrix:  1 0 0 M = 0 -10 , (0 0 1  and the operator Mupon Hdefined by M= (L,f) (i, j e 71/n), where L=; = M iff i = j, and 0 elsewhere.  PROPOSITION. If C e His the code of a multibar figure with given origin and running direction, then the code of the mirror  image of the initial figure is C - M.  4. THE BANDS, CYCLES AND TWISTS  Each bar belonging to a figure with the above conventions possesses two visible faces and two invisible ones. At each corner,  each face of a bar joins a face of another one. Let us call a band any closed sequence of joined faces of a multibar figure.  Let us start from an arbitrary face of a figure and follow the corresponding band (Fig. 9).  After one turn around the figure, either the original face is reached again or not. In the first case, as in Figs. 9a, b, and  e, we say that the band performs one cycle around the figure, and that the figure contains four different bands each of them  performing one  A NEW ANALYSIS OF "IMPOSSIBLE FIGURES" 35  FIG. 9. Some examples of bands, cycles, and twists. With each figure, the arrows indicate the successive faces of a band  during one cycle. Dotted lines mean hidden faces. The number of bands is 4 (a, b, e), 2 (f), or 1 (c, d) accordingly as the  arrow after one cycle is on the same, opposite, or adjacent face as the beginning one. Each band of Fig. (f) achieves a full  twist on itself, in the same sense as a Moebius band achieves a half-twist. Figures a and d are usual; the others are not.  cycle. In the second case, where the original face is not reached after one cycle, the band may perform two cycles as in Fig.  9f; then the figure contains two bands, each of them performing two cycles. If the original face is not attained after two  cycles, the figure contains one single band which performs four cycles, as in Figs. 9c and d. Furthermore a band may close  after a variable number of twists on itself: in Fig. 9a the bands do not twist, while in Fig. 9e each band performs a complete  twist before closing.  If a band is likened to a paper strip, then the number of twists is evaluated in the following way: a Moebius band is said to  perform a half-twist, and the number of twists of any band is an integer times a multiple of 1/2. If the number of twists is  not an integer, as is the case for a Moebius band, then the hidden part of the band at an arbitrary origin is the visible part  at the end of the band. This cannot happen in a multibar figure since the hidden part of a band is, and must remain, inside  the bar. Therefore, the number of twists of any band in a multibar figure is always an integer. For instance, this number is 1  in Figs. 9c-f, 0 in Figs. 9a and b, and 3 in Fig. If. It must be pointed out here that these features of bands have nothing to  do with the "usualness" and the "unusualness" character of a multibar figure. A usual figure can have any number of bands and  twists: Figs. 9a and d are usual; Figs. 9b, c, c, and f are unusual.  The numbers of bands, cycles and twists associated with a figure depend on its code. In order for this assertion to be  specified in an easier way, an additional coding procedure for the four faces of any oriented bar will temporarily be used:  They are coded with the elements of 7L/4 = {0, 1, 2, 3} in the following way (Fig. 10):  0 is the code of the hidden left face, 1 is the code of the visible left face, 2 is the code of the visible right face, 3 is  the code of the hidden right face.  36 ERIC TEROUANNE  Fic. 10. Codes of the faces of an oriented corner. The code allows the distinction between (a) those corners where the numbers  of two joining faces are equal and (b) those corners where these numbers differ. The twisting of a band is the cumulative  effect of corners of the second type.  It can be shown with the eight possible oriented corners (two examples are displayed in Fig. 10) that-for a specific  corner-the difference between the code numbers of any two joining faces is a constant. This difference is either 0, as in Fig.  10a, or + 1 or -1 as in Fig. 10b. Hence, twisting corners (those with a =A p in their code, e.g., Fig. 10b) and non-twisting  corners (those with a = p, e.g., Fig. 10a) can be distinguished. A twisting corner performs one fourth of a full twist. In a  given figure, several twisting corners have a cumulative effect; e.g., Fig. 9e involves four twisting corners, each of them  providing one fourth of a full positive twist so as to yield a complete twist; in Fig. 9b, the total twist of any band is zero  owing to the opposite signs of the twists. This is summarized by the function Z defined upon H:  Z(a, s, p) = 2s(p - a),  and the functions X and Z defined upon Hn (for any integer n):  and  n-1  X(C) _ Y_ Z(Ci), i=o  Z(C) = X(C) (mod 4).  Note that the summation in the definition of X is nothing but the summation in 71, while Z(C) is an element of 71/4, namely,  the remainder of the integer division of X(C) by 4. Finally, let Y be the function defined upon II,, by:  Y(C) = 1 iff Z(C) = 0  = 2 iff Z(C) = 2  = 4 iff Z(C) = 1 or 3.  PROPOSITION. The number of bands of the multibar figure coded C e Hn is 4/F(C), each band performing F(C) cycles around the  figure and F(C) - X(C)/4 twists on itself.  The proof of this proposition is based on the following remark: for any two sequentially joining faces at a corner C, the  difference between the code number of the posterior face and that of the anterior one is Z(C). Thence X(C) is the number of  quarter twists of a  A NEW ANALYSIS OF "IMPOSSIBLE FIGURES" 37  band after one cycle in the running direction. If this number is a multiple of 4 any band closes onto itself after one cycle.  If X(C) is not a multiple of 4, although being a multiple of 2, any band closes onto itself after two cycles. If Z(C) is  neither 0 nor 2, the band continues for four cycles. In any case, the number of twists of a band is one quarter of the number  of cycles times the number of one quarter twists per cycle.  S. PLANE FIGURES AND PLANE COMPONENTS  Two sequential corners are said to be coplanar if and only ithey possess a common visible face with two plane junctions. Let  Ci and Ci+l E H be the codes of these two corners, with Ck = (ak , sk , Pk); we define the function X by: X(Ci , Ci+l) _ 2(Si  pi - si+lai+l).  PROPOSITION. Ci and Ci+l are coplanar if and only if X(Ci , Cl+l) = 0.  This proposition can be veriefied with each of the 64 sequences of two elements of H. Also it is sufficient to verify that it  expresses an intuitive statement like: two corners are coplanar if and only if the position (inner or outer) of the visible  folded face on the anterior bar of the second corner and the position of the visible folded face of the posterior bar of the  first corner are in the same relation (equality or opposition) as the directions (right or left) of the corners.  A multibar figure C = (C) (i E 7L/n) E Hn is said to be plane if and only if X(C1 , Ci+l) 0 for any i E 7L/n.  It is easily verified that the vanishing of X is)invariant under the action of any operator of the group G (changes of code),  hence the definition is consistent.  An equivalent result has been obtained by Cowan (1974) with his own code, and what is here characterized as a plane figure is  what Cowan calls a possible figure. In Section 8 it is shown that some plane figures are not "usual" figures (Fig. 16c).  Figure la is an example of a usual non-plane figure. The essential content of the following sections deal with non-plane  figures: plane ones will just appear as a particular case. The notion of coplanar corners yields a decomposition of non-plane  figures into what will be called plane components.  Let C = (G) (i E 71/n) be the code)of a multibar non-plane figure. A plane component of C is a sequence [Ck , Ck+l ,..., C] of  corners belonging to the figure such that:  X(Ci , Ci+l) = 0 for all i E [k, k + 1,..., l - 1], X(Ck-l , Ck) 0,  X(Cl > Ca+l) 0.  As an example, the plane components of Fig. la (its corners are numbered from the top of the figure and clockwise) are [C5 ,  C], [Cl], [C2, C3], and [C]. With a similar numbering procedure, Fig. Id has just one plane component [C , C,, C2]. A plane  figure has no plane component.  38 ERIC TfROVANNE  The number of plane components of C is the number:  n-1  I X(Ci r Ci+1)I'  i=0  of couples of non-coplanar corners. Incidently, this number should not be confused with  n-1  X(C, I Ci+1)  i-0  as defined in Section 4.  (). MOVING THE POINT OF VIEW AROUND A CORNER  An oriented corner, considered as a three-dimensional object, defines three pairs of planes in space, or three biplanes: The  biplane A of the folded faces of the anterior bar, the biplane S of the plane junctions of the corner, and the biplane P of  the folded faces of the posterior bar (Fig. 11).  Any drawn corner represents a three dimensional corner as viewed from a given point in space. Two points of view are said to  be equivalent iff they give rise to the same figure; in other words, they are equivalent if the same faces and edges of the  corner are visible and if the same ones are invisible. The point of view is never located between the two planes of a biplane,  since every bar must have three visible edges according to our conventions. Hence any biplane can be considered as  partitioning space into two half-spaces; and the equivalence classes of points of view for a given corner are those areas of  space, defined by the intersection of three half spaces relative to A, S, and P, respectively. The three biplanes decompose  the space into exactly eight octants (this terminology is taken from Huffman, 1971).  Fir- 11. The three biplanes associated with an oriented corner in the three-dimensional space. Biplane A contains those faces  of the anterior bar which have folded junctions. Biplane S contains those faces of the two bars which have plane junctions,  and biplane P contains the folded faces of the posterior bar. The space is split into two half-spaces by each biplane. From  any point of a given half-space one face belonging to the biplane is visible and the other face is invisible. Moving the point  of view across one biplane exchanges the visible and invisible faces.  A NEW ANALYSIS OF "IMPOSSIBLE FIGURES" 39  FIG. 12. Moving the point of view around an oriented corner. On each corner of the figure, the visible faces are labelled as  the associated biplanes, A, S, or P. In the cartouches, the operators are labelled as the crossed biplanes. Each operator  changes the corresponding sign of the code.  Consider Fig. 12a as the coded form of the corner of Fig. 11. If the point of view is moved across the biplane A, the visible  folded face of the anterior bar is replaced by the opposite face, providing Fig. 12b.  Similarly Fig. 12b can be transformed into Fig. 12c by crossing the biplane S, etc. It is easy to verify that each crossing of  a biplane only changes the sign of the corresponding index in the code of the figure. Thus for a given corner there are three  elementary transformations, corresponding to the three biplane crossings. They will be called A, S, and P; they are  represented by matrices acting multiplicatively upon H:  -1 0 0 1 0 ( 0 1 0 0  A = ( 0 1 0 , S = 0 -1 0 , and P = 0 1 0  0 0 1 0 0 1 (0 0 -1 )  A, S, and P generate a commutative group of idempotent operators upon H; this group represents all the possible changes of  viewpoint. Its eight elements are all the diagonal matrices with  as their diagonal elements. As a particular case, consider  the operator A - S - P = -I; it provides the view from the other side, called observe by Cowan.  7. MOVING THE POINT OF VIEW AROUND A FIGURE  If the point of view is moved around a multibar object, the resulting usual figure will change at each crossing of a biplane  associated with one of its corners. In this section, the corresponding operations are listed and are represented by operators  upon the code sets H. Since these operations are given a formal definition depending only upon the  40 ERIC TEROUANNE  code, the change of viewpoint is formally extended to the whole class of multibar figures, although the notion of point of  view has no intuitive meaning for unusual figures. The effective existence in space of the formal operations described in this  section raises some problems discussed in Section 8.  Let C = (C) (i E7Lln) be the code of the figure of a multibar object from a given point of view, and let Ai , Si , and Pi  denote the biplanes associated with Ci (i E7Zln). Consider an arbitrary biplane associated with the object; also assume that  the point of view can be moved across this biplane without crossing any other biplane of the object. The resulting change in  the code of the figure affects all those corners in which some visible face belongs to that biplane, and only those corners.  The list of the corners involved in the crossing of a biplane, and the nature (A, S, or P) of the involved face in each of  these corners, characterize the change of code associated with that operation. The crossing of a biplane will be called an  elementary operation and will be represented by an operator upon Hn . Its name will be the list of the natures (specified by  Ai , Si , or Pi) of the biplane at each of the involved corners Ci.  There exists two families of elementary operators for a given figure: those associated with each of the plane components of  the figure (or with the entire figure whenever it is a plane figure), and those associated with each pair of sequential  coplanar corners. In fact, consider an arbitrary face of a multibar figure. It has either two folded junctions, or it  possesses at least one plane junction. In the first case, the associated biplane just concerns the two corners joined by the  face under consideration; these two corners must be coplanar since the same face contains the two folded junctions. This face  is simultaneously the folded face of the posterior bar of the first corner (Ci , say) and the folded face of the anterior bar  of the second one (Ci+l). Thus the biplane is simultaneously Pi and Ai+i,  b  FIG. 13. Moving the point of view around a multibar figure. The figure has four plane components: [Col, [Cl], [Cz , C,1, and  [C4]. For the plane component W2, C1 there is the elementary operator P,SZS3A4, which crosses the biplane of its plane  junctions. For the pair (C2, C3) of successive corners belonging to the same plane component there is the elementary operator  PA, which crosses the biplane of the folded junctions of their common bar.  A NEW ANALYSIS OF "IMPOSSIBLE FIGURES" 41  and the corresponding operator is denoted by PiAi+, . For instance in Fig. 13a, one biplane is simultaneously P2 and A3 ;  Crossing that biplane gives rise to Fig. 13b.  In the alternative case, when the face under consideration has at least one plane junction, it must belong to a sequence of at  least two faces with a mutual plane junction. All these faces belong to the same biplane. If the figure is non-planar, this  sequence begins and ends with folded junctions. Thus the biplane involves: (i) all those corners belonging to the plane  component, [C,,..., CJ, say, in which the face under consideration possesses one (or two) plane junction (s); and (ii) the two  corners (C,_, and Ci+,) immediately preceding and following this plane component (except in the case of a plane figure). The  corresponding operator's Pk_1SkSk+i ... St Aa+, (or, in the case of a plane figure, SoS, ... Sn_,). For instance, in Fig. 13a,  [C,, Ca] is a plane component and the same biplane is simultaneously P, , S2 , S,, and A4 ; crossing that biplane gives rise  to Fig. 13c.  The matrix representation of the elementary operator corresponding to the crossing of a biplane is  and  (Li;) (i, j E7Z/n), where Li; = 0 iff i /= j,  Lii = I iff Ci has no face in the biplane,  = A iff the biplane is A; ,  = S iff the biplane is Si ,  = P iff the biplane is Pi .  For instance, the crossings of biplanes P2A3 and P,S,S,A, in Fig. 13 are, respectively,  1 0 0 0 0   0 1 0 0 0   P2A3 = (0 0 0 P 0 0 ,  0 0 0 A 0   0 0 0 1   1 0 0 0 0   0 P 0 0 0   P,S,S,A, = (0 0 0 S 0 0   0 0 0 S 0   0 0 0 A   and their composition is the product     I 0 0 0 0  0 P 0 0 0  P2A3 - 0 P - S 0 0  P,S,S3A, = (0 0     0 0 0 A-S 0  0 0 0 .4  42 ERIC TAROUANNE  The codes of Figs. 13a, to d are, respectively,  Ca = (-1 1 1, -1 1 -1, 1 1 1, 1 1 -l, -1 -1 -1), Cd  The elementary operators of a given multibar figure generate a multiplicative group operating upon H. Any such operator is a  diagonal matrix whose diagonal elements are . Hence any such operator is idempotent (LI = I,,) and the product of two such  operators is commutative.  DEFINITION. Let C = (Ci) (i e7L/n) be an element of H,, . The elementary operators "change of viewpoint" for C are: (1) the  family of operators PiAi+1 extended to all those couples (Ci , Ci+1) of sequential coplanar corners of C; and (2) the family  of operators Pk-1SkSk+l - Si A a+1 extended to all the plane components [Ck,..., C] of C this family being reduced to the  single operator SoS1 ... S,,_i whenever the figure is plane.  PROPOSITION. Let C be an element of Hand let L be an arbitrary elementary operator of C. Then the set of elementary  operators for C - L is the set of elementary operators for C.  The proof of this proposition is based on the fact that C and C L have the sample plane components, a consequence of the  following lemma (its proof is quite simple):  LEMMA. If L is an elementary operator for C, if (Ci , Ci+1) are any two sequential elements of C and (Ci , Ci+1) the  corresponding elements of C -L, then  I X(Ci I Ci+l)l = I X(Ci I C1111) 1.  Let G be the commutative group of operators upon H, generated by the elementary operators of C. An immediate consequence of  the above proposition is the following: for any L e G, the group of operators generated by the elementary operators of C - L  is identical to G.  Now assume that C is the code of a usual figure representing a given multibar object with given origin and running direction.  The set G(C) = {C - L, L e G} contains the class of the codes of all those usual multibar figures representing the same object  with the same origin and running direction from all possible different points of view. In Section 8 it is shown that G(C) may  also contain some additional codes.  As a particular operator, consider the product of all the elementary operators for C; it is -Iand provides the view from the  other side. In other words, let C be the code of the figure of a given multibar object from a given point, and let the point  of view be moved along a straight line across all the biplanes associated with that object; then the code of the new figure is  -C. A related point worth remarking concerns the number of elementary operators (i.e., the number of biplanes) associated with  a non-plane figure. It is the sum  A NEW ANALYSIS OF "IMPOSSIBLE FIGURES" 43  of two numbers: (i) the number of plane components, equal to the number of pairs of non coplanar successive corners, and (ii)  the number of pairs of coplanar successive corners. These two numbers add to the number of pairs of successive corners, i.e.,  the number n of corners of the figure. In the case of a plane figure, there are n pairs of successive coplanar corners,  associated with n elementary operators, and one additional elementary operator associated with the single "Side" biplane.  8. FURTHER PROBLEMS  At its present stage, the above mathematical analysis has provided some new results, and has also raised some further  problems, which are briefly outlined below  The first problem deals with short words: While any figure possessing n corners is represented by an n-letter word, two-letter  words (for example) do not represent any figure. The following proposition characterizes all such words.  PROPOSITION. A code C e Hdoes not represent any multibar figure whenever: (i) n < 3, or (ii) n = 3 and the three direction  indices of C are unequal, or (iii) n = 4 and the four direction indices of C alternate signs.  Proof. Any oriented corner can be associated with a couple (V, V') of oriented segments lying on its central edges. Consider V  and V as two non-colinear vectors in the plane of the figure; define the sign of the vector product V A V as +1 iff V A V is  directed away from the observer and -1 if V A V' is directed towards the observer. It follows from the definition of the  vector product orientation by the direct triedra, that the sign of V A V' is the direction index of any oriented comer  associated with (V, V'). Then, a multibar figure is associated with a closed sequence of oriented segments (Vi) (i e 7L/n).  Hence a code C e Hcan be drawn as a multibar figure if and only if there exists a closed sequence (Vi) (i e 7Lln) of  non-colinear oriented segments such that for any i e 7L/n, the sign of Vi n Vi,, is si .  For n = 1 or n = 2 it is obvious that any closed sequence of n oriented segments is constituted by colinear or null ones.  For n = 3, a closed sequence (Vo , Vl , V2) verifies:  Vu+V1+V2=0  hence  Vi = -(Vi+l + Vi+2) for any i e 7L/3  and  Vi A Vi+x  = -(Vi+l + Vi+2) A Vi+1  _ - Vi+1 n Vi+l - Vi+2 A Vi+r = Vi+1 A Vi+2  so that all the direction indices must be equal.  44 ERIC TEROUANNE  aac aaaa aa-a-a aaa-a  A -'-'  00000 0000-a aaa-a-a as-aa-a  FIG. 14. Closed sequences of segments and associated sequences of direction indices. a is any element of {-I-1, -1) according  to the running direction. Here are all the possible closed sequences of five values, disregarding the origin and running  sense, and all those sequences of three and four values that can be represented by a sequence of segments. The sequences a,  aa, a-a, a a -a, a -a a -a cannot.  Similarly, for n = 4, one has:  Vo + VI + V2 + V3 = 01  hence  V3nvo=-(Vo+VI+V2)Avo  =-voAVo-VlAVo-V2Avo =voAVi+V2n(Vi+ 2+V3) =VoAV,-VIAV2+ 2/\ V3;  thence, if so = -sl = s2 then it follows that s3 = so .  For any other sequence (si) (i E7L/n) of values of the direction indices with n = 3, or 4, there exists a closed sequence of  oriented segments; Figure 14 provides a visual proof of it. All the possible sequences of five indices or more can be drawn  with oriented segments. We use a recursive argument: for n = 5, Fig. 14 gives a visual proof; now for n > 5, if two  consecutive values in (si) are equal, say s2_1 = so , the solution for (si) (i E 7Zln - 1) can be drawn. Then replace the  corner Co so as to provide two new consecutive corners with the same direction index. If there is not any pair of equal  sequential values, n is even and the sequence is (a, -a, a, -a,...) for some a = ~1. Then the drawing of a regular starlike  polyhedra with n/2 branches is a solution. Q.E.D.  The second problem is related to what we call the "empty classes" of points of view. When a multibar object having at least  four biplanes is considered, it is always possible to choose a family of four half-spaces, one for each biplane, whose  intersection is empty. Thus, if one starts from a given point of view, and if one goes through a suitable combination of  elementary operators, then the point of view obtained thereby would be shifted into an empty area. Yet the corresponding  operator belongs to the group defined in Section 7; it can also effectively operate upon some other points of view. Typically,  this is the case when our assumption at the beginning of Section 7 is wrong: we assumed that we could move the point of view  across a biplane without crossing any other biplane. For  A NEW ANALYSIS OF "IMPOSSIBLE FIGURES" 45  FIG. 15. "View from an empty area." Figure a is a usual figure, that of a plane tribar placed within a pyramid. PIAQ is one of  the elementary operators for that figure. The corresponding operation amounts to moving the point of view across the biplane  PjA2 without crossing any other biplane. This is physically impossible when one starts from the point of view of Fig. a. Thus  the resulting "view" (Fig. b) of the tribar is equivalent only illusively to Fig. a.  instance, consider Fig. 15a. It represents a plane tribar inscribed in a pyramid. There are four biplanes: SoS1S2, POA,,  Pj.A2, and PA,. The point of view is located (i) in the half-space "below the pyramid" (i.e., the half-space of SoS1S2 which  does not contain the pyramid); (ii) in the half-space of PA, which contains the pyramid; and (iii) in those half-spaces of  POAI and PzA0 which do not contain the pyramid. From such a point, it is physically impossible to cross the biplane PjA2  without having first crossed one of the three other biplanes. This is the reason why the operator PjA2 provides an illusory  equivalent figure in which the visible faces are the three exterior sides of the pyramid together with its base (Fig. 15b).  The third problem is related to the crossing of two bars: there is no possibility for our code to distinguish two figures  whose only difference lies in the crossing of two bars, one above the other, as in Figs. 16a and b. These figures have been  described by Cowan  FIG. 16. Lissajous' quadribar. Figure a is a usual figure, inscribable in a tetrahedron. Figure b has the same code but is  actually unusual because of the inversion of the depth ordering at the crossing of the bars. Figure c is what we call a plane  figure, but once again the crossing of the bars is responsible for the unusualness of the figure.  FIG. 17. Two non-equivalent figures with the same code.  6 ERIC TkROUANNE  (1977). Figure 16a is usual since it represents a quadribar inscribable into a tetrahedron; Fig. 16b is unusual; and yet they  are represented by the same code word. A related problem is that of "plane" figures with crossing bars as in Fig. 16c.  Finally, a single word of our code can be drawn in several non-equivalent ways, as shown in Fig. 17. This is due to the fact  that our code takes into account the direction to which a corner turns but neither the angle nor the extension of the bar.  CONCLUSION  It was intended in such a work to obtain a mathematical characterization of usual and unusual figures. This aim has  unfortunately not been completely reached here. The problems put forward in Section 8 suggest that the present analysis is not  rich enough, and that no procedure will prove valuable unless it takes into account the following points: (i) the relations  between areas defined in space by several planes, (ii) the relations between areas defined in the plane by several lines, and  (iii) the representation of the former by the later. Such a geometrical analysis is developed in a forthcoming paper, where it  is shown how problems of Section 8 can be solved with the help of the present system of encoding. Also a formal procedure will  be proposed to decide whether a given multibar figure is usual or unusual, following a suggestion of Stephen W. Draper  (personal communication).  ACKNOwLEDGMENTS  It is a pleasure to acknowledge the numerous comments, remarks and suggestions of the editor and of Professor T. M. Cowan.  They have greatly helped in the improvement of an earlier version of this paper. Figure 11 was suggested by T. M. Cowan. The  present analysis was developed while teaching students in psychology at Universit6 Paul Va16ry. I am indebted to them for the  many ideas and problems they raised, and to Professor J. P. Olivier and R. Hakim for constant and friendly help. Permission to  reproduce M. C. Escher's "Belvedere" was kindly given by the Escher Foundation, Haags Gemeentemuseum, The Hague.  RECEIVED: November 26, 1979  REFERENCES  COCHRAN, C. F. Letter to Scientific American, 1966, 214, 6, 8.  COWAN, T. M. The theory of braids and the analysis of impossible figures. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1974, 11,  190-212.  COWAN, T. M. Supplementary report: braids, side segments and impossible figures. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1977, 16,  254-260.  COWAN, T. M. Organizing the properties of impossible figures. Perception, 1977, 6, 41-56. COWAN, T. M., & PRINGLE, R. An  investigation of the cues responsible for figure impossibility. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human perception and  performance, 1978, 4, 1, 112-120. DRAPER, S. W. The Penrose triangle and a family of related figures. Perception, 1978, 7,  283-296. ERNST, B. The magic mirror of M. C. Escher. New York: Ballantine, 1976.  A NEW ANALYSIS OF "IMPOSSIBLE FIGURES"  47  ESCHER, M. C. The world of M. C. Escher. New York: Abrams, 1971. GREGORY, R. L. The intelligent eye. London: Weinfeld and  Nicholson, 1970. HUFFMAN, D. A. Impossible objects as nonsense sentences. In B. Meltzer & D. Michie (Eds.), Machine  intelligence. New York: Halsted, 1971. Vol. 6, pp. 295-323.  HUFFMAN, D. A. A duality concept for the analysis of polyhedral scenes. In E. W. Elcock & D. Michie (Eds.), Machine  intelligence. New York: Halsted, 1977. Vol. 8, pp. 475-492.  HUFFMAN, D. A. Realizable configurations of lines in pictures of polyhedra. In E. W. Elcock & D. Michie (Eds.), Machine  intelligence. New York: Halsted, 1977. Vol. 8, pp. 493-509. MACKWORTH, A. K. Model driven interpretation in intelligent vision  systems. Perception, 1976, 5, 349-370.  PENROSE, L. S., & PENROSE, R. Impossible objects: a special type of illusions. British Journal of Psychology, 1958, 49, 31-33.  PRINGLE, R., & CowAN, T. M. Mental rotation of possible and impossible four-cornered toruses. Perception and Psychophysics,  1978, 24, 1, 84-92.  4801"22/1-4