10.1016/0022-2496(81)90043-2
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 24, 183-223 (1981)  A Test of Parallel Versus Serial Processing Applied to Memory Retrieval  BRIAN H. ROSS  Stanford University  AND  JOHN R. ANDERSON  Carnegie-Mellon University  Townsend has identified necessary and sufficient conditions that reaction time distributions meet if they are produced by two  underlying processes that are parallel and within-stage independent. This paper describes an attempt to use one of these  conditions to assess the assumption of independent parallel memory retrieval in Anderson's ACT theory. In the experimental  test, subjects studied profession-location pairs, with each profession and location included in two pairs. One pair had a high  frequency of presentation and the other had low. When cued with a profession (or location), subjects responded with the first  of the two studied locations (or professions) that came to mind. The reaction times to these responses were used to test the  ACT assumption of independent parallel search. The problems encountered in trying to apply Townsend's abstract test to a  concrete situation included the need to consider mixtures and convolutions of distributions and empirical, rather than  theoretical, distributions. These difficulties are discussed at length and some formal analyses concerning their effect on the  test are given. Despite these problems, we were able to use Townsend's test and the results of the experiment support the  within-stage independent parallel assumption of ACT.  A decision about whether a group of operations occurs in parallel or serial has been thought to be essential to theorizing in  cognitive psychology. Evidence for the perceived importance of this distinction is the large number of studies, over a wide  range of tasks and research areas, that were conducted principally to decide this issue for a particular set of operations  (e.g., Atkinson, Holmgren & Juola, 1969; Donderi & Zelnicker, 1969; Egeth, 1966; Neisser, 1964). Despite this considerable  experimental literature examining the parallel-serial question, Townsend (1976b)  This research was supported by Grants BNS 76-00959 and BNS 78-17463 from NSF to John Anderson and was started when both  authors were at Yale University. We thank R. Evans, A. Marley, J. Townsend, an anonymous reviewer, and, especially, D. Vorberg  for comments. We also thank E. Thomas and B. Wandell for discussion of the convolution proofs. Both authors contributed  equally to this article; the order of authorship was determined by a coin toss. Requests for reprints should be sent to John  R. Anderson, Department of Psychology, Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pa. 15213.  183  0022-2496/81/060183-41502.00/0  Copyright t'' 1981 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  184 ROSS AND ANDERSON  points out that there have been only a handful of studies that adequately investigate some aspect of this issue. The  difficulty in deciding between parallel and serial processing is that the researcher cannot view directly the internal  processes of interest, so must infer whether they are parallel or serial from external data. Unfortunately, these data often  grossly underdetermine the model. The theoretical work that has been done, primarily by Townsend (see 1974, 1976a; and  Snodgrass & Townsend, 1980 for reviews), shows that there are often parallel and serial models that make the same predictions.  Of all the attempts to untangle the parallel-serial issue, we find most promising the ideas set forth in Townsend (1976b). In  that paper, Townsend gave a set of functional equations that must be satisfied for a restricted class of parallel-serial  equivalence. These equations can be used to develop a test for a type of parallel processing. The present paper describes our  attempt at an experimental realization of this test. The paper consists of the following sections. First, a general review of  the parallel-serial issue is provided in an attempt to place Townsend's test in perspective. Second, we will outline our  experimental paradigm and how we hope to apply Townsend's test to it. Third, we will discuss the formal problems encountered  in trying to apply the abstract test to a concrete situation and some possible solutions. Finally the actual experiment and  its results are presented.  REVIEW  We use the definitions of parallel and serial processing given by Townsend (1971, 1976a), which we feel capture the important  distinctions in the literature. In parallel processing, the processing of all elements begins simultaneously and continues  concurrently. Processing rates may depend on the elements being processed and the order of the elements that have finished,  but not on the future finishing order of the elements not yet completed.' In serial processing, the elements are processed one  at a time and the next element is started as soon as the one being processed is completed. Over trials, the elements may be  processed in more than one order and the processing rates may depend on the identity of the elements and the order.  One result to be noted from the theoretical analyses is that, with no further assumptions or restrictions, the classes of  parallel and serial models are totally equivalent. For any observed outputs, one may construct both parallel and serial models  that would generate this output. Anderson (1976, pp. 7-9) shows this for the case when there are two elements and all possible  output information is available. Vorberg (Note 2) proves the more general situation for an arbitrary number of elements.  Therefore, only by making additional assumptions about the nature of the parallel and serial processes can one hope to make a  decision between the two. Of course, by making these additional assumptions one gives up the opportunity to  ' Vorberg (Note 1) proposes that, for parallel models, future finishing orders be allowed to influence processing rates, and  claims that such models may still lead to independent total processing times.  PARALLEL VS SERIAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL 185  decide about parallelism versus seriality in general, but the equivalence results necessitate this reduced goal. The best one  can do to test parallel-serial processing is to test subclasses of each model type.  These general equivalence results should not be taken to mean that the parallelserial question is futile. The standard  interpretation (e.g., Popper, 1959) of how experimentation advances science is that it attempts to disprove particular  theories. Therefore, attempts to test specific parallel or serial models will result in contributions to our knowledge. We  will learn either that the specific model is correct in its predictions or that it is wrong in at least one respect. This  information may then be used to guide future research or further refine the model.  A number of analyses are now available that show how various sets of further assumptions allow discriminations to be made  between parallel and serial models. A helpful way of dichotomizing the assumptions is into those that involve specific  distributions and those that invoke processing or capacity assumptions (though the people making the first assumptions also  often make the second as well).  Much of the theoretical analysis has assumed that some aspect of the processing time may be characterized by a known density.  Once this assumption is made, it is often possible to employ mathematical statistics to discover differential predictions.  Some analyses indirectly relevant to the parallel-serial issue have employed this approach (Green & Luce, 1971; Luce & Green,  1970; McGill & Gibbon, 1965; Rumelhart, 1970). Townsend (1972, 1976a; Snodgrass & Townsend, 1980) has investigated the  testability of subclasses of parallel and serial models having exponential intercompletion times. There is an obvious  advantage in being able to work with known densities. For most of these specific density assumptions, however, psychological  justification is weak or nonexistent, while mathematical tractability seems to have an undue amount of influence. At any rate,  we view such assumptions as too strong in many applications.  There have been a few analyses that do not prescribe the processing time distributions, but employ other restrictions to  enable testability. Thomas (1969), in constructing a nonparametric test for the recognition of stimuli varying along  dimensions, assumes that in the parallel model the dimensions are processed independently. Shevell and Atkinson (1974) compare  the predictions of various serial and parallel list scanning models, though some of these parallel models are really  "timesharing" models (Townsend, Note 3). They considered four models within each class, distinguished by whether the search  was self-terminating or exhaustive on the features of the items and on the items in the list. Half of the serial models had  equivalent parallel models, so testability depended on the combination of search specifications. In addition, they assumed  that each item could be characterized by the same number of features and that all values of these features were equally  probable.  186 ROSS AND ANDERSON  TOWNSEND'S FUNCTIONAL EQUATIONS  Townsend (1976b) examines a set of functional equations that specify the conditions for equivalence of serial models and a  class of parallel models, withinstage independent (wsi) ones. Since we make use of his results for our test, a brief  exposition of the relevant aspects is necessary, though the Townsend paper should be read for proofs and examples. We have  made minor changes to allow the reader to more easily follow the developments in this paper.  As in Thomas (1969), the assumption made by Townsend to allow testing is that in the parallel model all elements are processed  simultaneously and independently of one another. Suppose there are two items2 to be processed, a and b, and the only  observable information on each trial is which element was finished first and how long it took. Consider the times when a  finishes first. To construct a serial model for a, one assumes that a is selected for processing with probability p and, if it  is selected, its density of completion times is fa(t). To get this model to mimic the observed results, one simply sets p to  the observed probability of a finishing first and fa(t) to the observed distribution of completion times for a. For item b,  one uses (1 - p) and similarly constructs, fb(t). To construct a parallel model, an item will be first and finish at time t  only if both it finishes at time t and the other item has not finished by time t. One needs go(t), the parallel density of  processing times for a, and Gb(t), the parallel survivor function of b, the probability that b has not been completed by time  t. For item b, one needs gb(t) and Ga(t). There will be equivalent wsi parallel and serial models when both  and  Pfa(t) = ga(t) Gb(t), (1)  (1 -P)fb(t)= 9b(t) G.(t) (2)  (Townsend's equations (7) and (8)). Townsend proves that if ga and gb (or, equivalently, Ga and GO are given, then it is  always possible to solve for the serial terms p, fa and fb. If the serial terms are given, however, it may not be possible to  derive satisfactory parallel terms. Though one could solve for G,, and Gb, the results may not be true survivor functions  (i.e., one of the survivor functions may have a limiting value greater than zero). His proofs show that serial models can  always mimic wsi parallel models, but that this class of parallel models cannot always mimic serial models. Townsend then  gives necessary and sufficient conditions on the serial  ' Townsend's results apply for a more general within-stage independence (involving more than two items), but this generality  is not needed for our work. Note that within-stage independence is not the same as stochastic independence of means.  "Within-stage independence implies and is implied by the property that the likelihood of any element's completion is  independent of the completion of any other during any single stage" (Townsend, 1976b, p. 220).  For readability, the "wsi" label is used sparingly, though most parallel processes mentioned in the rest of this paper are wsi  parallel. In cases where there is some ambiguity or the parallel processes are not wsi, it will be explicitly mentioned.  PARALLEL VS SERIAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL 187  terms to insure that the derived Ga and Gb are good survivor functions. These necessary and sufficient conditions are that  and  f ( Pfa(t I   ) (3)  dt' = oo   Jo PF.(t')+(1-P)Fb(t')   fJa r (1 -P)Mt') (4)  dt' = oo,   PFa(t')+(1-P)Fb(tl)   where F,, and Fb are the serial survivor functions. He then provides a sufficient condition 3 that will be pertinent:  lim L(t)IMO = C,  t-co  0<C<oo.  Townsend also proves that if the two serial distributions are identical, parallel mimicry is always possible.  From Townsend (1976b), then, there are two important findings concerning the testability of serial and wsi parallel models.  The first is that for any wsi parallel model, an equivalent serial model may be found. Therefore, it is not possible to prove  conclusively that a process is wsi parallel. The second finding is that if one has a serial model, there is not always an  equivalent wsi parallel model. Though we know of no way to get an a priori probability of truly serial processes having wsi  parallel mimics, by extending an example of Townsend's, it would appear to be unlikely. Two serial processes with generalized  gamma distributions (the sum of independent exponentials with different rates, see McGill & Gibbon, 1965) may be mimicked by a  wsi parallel model only if (a) the slowest rate parameters of both distributions are equal and (b) the number of stages having  these slowest rates are within one of each other. The generalized gamma distribution is often capable of characterizing  reaction time distributions. For exponentially-distributed serial processes, a special case of the gamma, it would mean that,  for wsi parallel mimicry to be possible, the items would need to have the same distribution.  Consider a researcher who believes that for a set of operations the processing of the items is wsi parallel. How might this  idea be tested if the data collected consisted of the responses made and the reaction times? One could first use the data to  construct serial densities (this can always be done), and check the conditions for wsi parallel mimicry using these densities.  If the conditions were not met, it would be good evidence against the hypothesized independent parallel process. If the  conditions were satisfied it would not prove that the process was wsi parallel, but it would, and  ' Townsend (1976b) provides two sufficient conditions, but only this one will be used in our test, due to its relative ease of  analysis and exposition.  188 ROSS AND ANDERSON  should, increase the confidence that it was wsi parallel.' The force of this latter finding would depend on the unknown a  priori probability of wsi parallel mimicry. If models of wsi parallel processes are to be tested, however, this would appear  to be the best logic available, and it is the approach we employed.  APPLICATION OF TOWNSEND'S TEST  In the ACT theory (Anderson, 1976), long-term memory is characterized as an associative network. A necessary condition for a  fact to be available at a particular time is that the configuration of nodes encoding that fact be active. Activation spreads  down paths from active nodes to inactive ones. A basic assumption of the model is that the activation process serves to search  memory in a parallel manner. This contrasts with an earlier model, HAM (Anderson & Bower, 1973), that involved a serial  search. The ACT theory also contains as a fundamental assumption that the parallel activation spreads independently.' What is  happening on one network branch as activation spreads down it is basically independent of what is happening on any other  branch. We would like to be able to apply Townsend's test to assess ACT's assumption about the wsi parallel spread of  activation.  To test ACT's independent, parallel assumption, we needed a paradigm in which the response times are observable. We chose a  cued recall task for professionlocation pairs (e.g., "LAWYER CHURCH"). That is, subjects committed such pairs to memory and  later had to recall the location to a cue of the profession or recall the  It is worthwhile to review the logic behind the claim that finding there is an equivalent wsi parallel model should increase  ones's confidence that the process is truly wsi parallel. For any model, let  W be the event that the process is wsi parallel.  P be the event that the process is parallel, but not wsi parallel. S be the event that the process is serial.  O be the event that the process is other than parallel or serial.  M be the event that mimicry may occur (i.e., a wsi parallel model may be found).  Then  Pr(O) + Pr(P) + Pr(W) + Pr(S) = 1.  Pr(W IM) = probability that the process of interest is wsi parallel, given that wsi parallel mimicry is found.  Then Pr(WI M) > Pr(W) since  Pr Pr(MI W) Pr(W)  Pr(WIM) = Pr(Ml W) Pr(W) + Pr(Ml S) Pr(S) + Pr(MIP) Pr(P) + Pr(MI O) Pr(O)  Pr(W)  Pr(W) + Pr(MI S) Pr(S) + Pr(MIP) Pr(P) + Pr(MJ O) Pr(O)  since Pr(MI W) = 1. Our claim is that Pr(MIS), Pr(MI P), and Pr(MI0) are all much less than 1. If so, the conditional  probability, Pr(WI M) should be considerably larger than the prior probability Pr(".  ' The predictions derived in Anderson (1976) were made by assuming an exponentially distributed search rate. As stated there  (p. 264), this was only a simplifying assumption to allow analytic tractability.  PARALLEL VS SERIAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL 189  TABLE I Design of Materials  High frequency pairs Low frequency pairs  PI Ll PI L8  P2 L2 P2 Ll  P3 L3 P3 L2  P4 L4 P4 L3  P5 L5 P5 L4  P6 L6 P6 L5  P7 L7 P7 L6  P8 L8 P8 L7  Note. P represents Profession, L represents location. Professions used: BAKER, BANKER, BUTCHER, CLIMBER, COBBLER, COWBOY,  DANCER, DENTIST, DIVER, DRUGGIST, GAMBLER, GOLFER, GUNNER, PAINTER. PILOT, PLUMBER, PRIVATE, TAILOR, TEACHER, TRADER.  Locations used: BACKYARD, BASEMENT, BATHTUB, BEDROOM, CANYON, CLINIC, DESERT, DOORWAY, DUGOUT, GARAGE, GARDEN, GUTTER, KENNEL,  KITCHEN, PARLOR, PASTURE, PRISON, TAVERN, TEMPLE, TOWER.  profession to the location cue. The structure of the material is illustrated in Table l. Each location occurred with two  professions and each profession was presented with two locations. The important manipulation was that half of the pairs (high)  were studied twice as frequently as the other half (low) and given frequency-maintaining recognition tests twice as often. The  material was constructed so that each profession and location occurred in one high frequency pair and in one low frequency  pair. After a substantial learning phase, the subjects were tested with a mixture of three trial types: recognition, naming,  and the critical cued recall. The recognition trials were used to maintain the asymmetries in frequency. The purpose of the  naming trials will be discussed later.  The cued recall trials are the ones of primary interest. Each recall prompt is a part of both a high and low frequency pair.  The data consist of the response (high or low frequency) and the reaction time. With these data, we can test for parallel  mimicry. We first reconstruct the densities of a serial model, fQ(t) and fb(t) for the high and low frequency responses. We  then may check the sufficient condition given by Townsend (1976b). This sufficient condition (Eq. (5)) states that an  equivalent wsi parallel model exists if the ratio of these densities' tails approaches a nonzero constant.  ACT's analysis of the cued recall task is that activation is spreading in parallel from the probe word node down the paths  encoding both propositions. The response is determined by whichever proposition is activated first. Thus, we have a race  between two wsi parallel activation processes. Because one proposition is strengthened more often than the other, it should  tend to be activated more rapidly and dominate recall. Thus, it is unlikely that the distributions for the two frequencies.  190  ROSS AND ANDERSON  f ,,(t) and fb(t), will be identical. This is important: The one circumstance where parallel mimicry of serial processes is  trivial is when the densities are identical.  So our basic plan of action is to apply Townsend's sufficient condition to the distributions of high and low frequency  responses in the cued recall task. Before discussing the problems we encountered in applying Townsend's test, it is useful to  have an informal understanding of why the test works.' Assume that there are two wsi parallel processes racing, ga(t) and  gb(t). Then the observed reaction time densities, f,(t) and fb(t), are the two minimum time densities and they are constrained  in an interesting way. The upper tails of these densities must disappear at approximately the same value of t, since iffa(t)  had trials with times much longer than the longest times of fb(t), b would have been found before a on those trials. The  sufficient condition is one specific means of insuring this constraint is met.  PROBLEMS OF APPLICATION  In exploring the potential of Townsend's analysis and designing the experiment, we encountered some major problems of  application that we had not foreseen in the abstract results. The principal obstacles we confronted were created because we  were dealing with mixtures and sums of processes, and because of the problems of relating results about theoretical densities  to empirical densities. When possible, these difficulties were investigated in terms of how they might affect the two types of  errors: First, if the processing is truly wsi parallel, our methods might fail to show that the data could be generated by a  wsi parallel model. Second, if the processing is truly serial, our methods might indicate wsi parallel mimicry was possible.  These problems will be examined in detail so that the reader may decide upon the seriousness of the unresolved difficulties  and the reasonableness of our proposed solutions. As will be seen, parts of the experimental design were strongly influenced  by our dealings with these problems. We also hope that our work on these problems will be useful to other researchers who want  to address the parallel-serial issue in their research domains.  Mixture Problem  One potential cause for concern is that there may not be a single density underlying recall for either the high or low  frequency propositions. Different items may have different distributions, and the distributions may well change with time. In  addition, it is likely that each subject will have a unique basic distribution that might be differentially affected by items  and practice. It is important, therefore, to consider how this method will function with mixtures of distributions. If the  reconstructed densities are mixtures of densities generated by either truly serial or parallel  ' We thank an anonymous reviewer for this formulation.  PARALLEL VS SERIAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL 191  processes, how will the tests Townsend proposes be affected? We investigated these two error types for the sufficient  condition and the necessary and sufficient conditions. A statement of the theorems is given here and the proofs may be found  in Appendix 1. An important concept in these proofs is that of a dominating density. Density fa(t) is said to dominate fb(t)  if the limit, as t approaches infinity, of (Ji(t)/fA(t)) is 0. For a mixture of densities, a dominating component is one that  dominates the other components in the mixture. The underlying component distributions refer to the distributions composing the  mixture. These are either the distributions of the serial processes or the minimum time distributions of the racing parallel  processes.  THEOREM 1.A. If the underlying component distributions satisfy the sufficient condition for parallel mimicry, their mixture  will.  THEOREM 1.B. If the underlying component distributions are from serial processes, their mixture will satisfy the sufficient  condition for parallel mimicry if and onlb' if the dominating components satisfy the sufficient condition.  Similar theorems may be stated for the necessary and sufficient condition, as follows (Theorem 1.C is due to D. Vorberg; Note  1, Note 4):  THEOREM I.C. If the underlying component distributions satisfy the necessary and sufficient conditions for parallel mimicry,  their mixture will.  THEOREM 1.D. If the underlying component distributions are from serial processes, their mixture will satisfy the necessary and  sufficient conditions for parallel mimicry if and only if the dominating components satisfy the necessary and sufcient  conditions.  These results suggest that mixing distributions should not increase the probability of spuriously concluding that there is wsi  parallel processing for the sufficient condition or the necessary and sufficient conditions.  Convolution Problem  The second major difficulty we encountered was that the response times do not reflect just activation of memory, but include  other processes as well, such as encoding and response generation. The notion that reaction time is composed of subprocesses  or stages has a long tradition in psychology (Donders, 1868/1969; Smith, 1968; Sternberg, 1969; Taylor, 1976) and is probably  accepted in some form by most researchers. If the response times include the durations of various processes, how are tests of  parallel-serial processing affected? One approach is to make the test at the level of means, allowing one to include a simple  residual latency parameter. Shevell and Atkinson (1974) employ an encoding-response parameter in this way when comparing  various list scanning models. Townsend (1976a) allows for a residual latency parameter in his specially designed paradigm  192 ROSS AND ANDERSON  processes with exponential intercompletion times. When tests are made on the means, the addition of this residual parameter  does not affect the tests, but problems may arise when tests are on the distributions and a residual latency distribution is  included.  We feel that it is necessary to consider the possibility that other processes will contribute their distributional properties  to those of the process of interest. To our knowledge, there has been no analysis of this in work concerned with  parallel-serial tests. In a related analysis, McGill and Gibbon (1965) examine a generalized gamma distribution resulting from  a sum of independent exponentially-distributed subprocesses. Green and Luce (1971), in their model of auditory detection, view  reaction time as a sum of two processes; a sensory-decision one that depends on receiving a certain number of pulses that are  Poisson distributed, and a bounded residual latency. They examine the distribution of response times and attempt an analytic  separation of these two processes by Fourier analysis. Ratcliff and Murdock (1976) attempt to fit data from a large number of  recognition memory experiments with a convolution of an exponential and several normal distributions. Thomas (1969), in  designing a test for parallel-serial processing involving distributional information, did not treat this problem. In his  concluding remarks, however, he noted the difficulty and suggested that his method would succeed only if the recognition time  of interest contributed a large portion of the total variance. Townsend (1976a) also states that if one is willing to make  distributional assumptions about the residual components, one could test the reaction time against the combined distributions  predictions. Though he believes such an approach might be fruitful, he avoids it because of the problems surrounding these  analyses, such as the question of independence of component processes. For those analyses of parallel-serial processing  investigating distributional properties, then, nothing has been shown without assuming the density of the residual process is  known. (A recent paper by Ashby and Townsend (1980) may be useful for future investigation of this issue. In their related  examination of inserting additional reaction time distributions, they provide some results that do not depend on assuming a  specific distribution.)  We would like'to make as few and as reasonable assumptions for the testing of parallel and serial processing as we can. For  this reason, we would like to eschew the simplifying assumptions of a single component distribution and a known density for  either the activation process or any residual process. We do assume that any residual processes are stochastically independent  from the activation process. The ACT model incorporates this assumption. Under most circumstances, pre-activation processes  will not interact with memory retrieval. It seems unreasonable to believe that the encoding process for a particular item will  differ depending on whether the response is from a high or low frequency proposition. Presumably, the distribution of times to  say a word once its node is activated does not depend on the strength of the link by which it was activated. (Each word is a  high frequency response for one stimulus and a low frequency response for another stimulus.) Thus, we have a convolution-a sum  of independent random variables, only one of which is hypothesized to involve a parallel operation. Townsend's (1976b) results  were developed assuming that the whole  PARALLEL VS SERIAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL 193  process was either parallel or serial, not a part of it. In earlier papers (1972, 1976a), he refers to such mixed models as  hybrids, but never gives them the systematic treatment given to parallel and serial models. We have been able to establish  that Townsend's test can still be used with hybrid models in a fairly wide variety of circumstances.  First, let us establish some notation for discussing the problem. Let c, and c,, denote the observed densities for the high  and low frequency items, respectively. This is a convolution of three components:  (1) There is the memory retrieval process of interest. To preserve the notation, fH and f, will refer to the densities of this  process under the serial model, and gH and g,_ will refer to the underlying densities for the parallel model. Under the serial  model, f,, is directly part of the convolution, c,whereas under the parallel model, a race between the two processes (with  densities gH and g j gives rise to densities of times when either process is fastest. These resulting densities, which are  identical to f j and f,, are what go into the convolutions under the parallel model.  (2) There are some processes common to both propositional frequencies. The number and order of these common processes do not  matter, and they can be summarized in a single density, hc.  (3) There may be some processes specific to either high or low frequency propositions that are not part of the memory  retrieval process. Again, the number and order of these do not matter. They can be summarized by two densities, h,i and h, .  The question of interest is in what circumstances can we make inferences from the nature of cH and c,, to the nature of fH and  f J and, then, about the possibility of underlying wsi parallel processes, with densities gH and g,,. At the start of our  investigation of convolutions, we hoped to derive general conditions under which the test would hold. As the following two  theorems show, we have achieved only partial success. Both theorems require some simplifying assumptions, and Theorem 2.A  requires a function whose general existence we are unable to prove, although it can be proven for all specific distributions  we have considered. (Note that these theorems do not consider the role of h,, but, for these theorems, this distribution may  be considered as part of hH and h,,.) To supplement these analyses, in Appendix 3 we have also examined the case when the  component distributions are all generalized gammas (and hence so are cH and c,.). Though these latter analyses assume a  specific distribution, a constraint we had hoped to avoid, the results complement the other analyses.  First, suppose that the memory processes do satisfy the sufficient condition. Should we expect the convolution to? For the  first theorem define a function k(t) such that:  (1) 0<k(t)<t,  (2) k(t) is an increasing, unbounded function of t,  J*'(" f(s) hH(t - s) ds  (3) tim. _"(n.fH(s)h,(t-s)ds -N  194 ROSS AND ANDERSON  and similarly for the low frequency densities, with NE, and NL nonnegative finite values.  THEOREM 2. A. If the memory processes (with densities fH and fL) dominate the non-memory processes (with densities hH and hL)  and if k(t) (defined above and discussed after the theorem) exists, then, for k(t) < s, < t (and s, increasing with t insured  by k(t)), and for the convolutions (with densities Cand cL)  lim CH(t) = N lim f"(s) , hH(t - s) 1-co CL(t) t"~ J Lls) _h, (t - S)  N a positive finite value. So, if the non-memory processes are identical, the convolutions satisfy the sufficient condition if  and only if the memory processes do.  As may be seen in Appendix 2.A, these conditions for k(t) are necessary for our proof. Clearly, the first two conditions can  be met by many functions, but the purpose of the crucial third condition is not obvious and a brief discussion of the  intuition behind our use of k(t) with the convolution may be helpful. Though the proof allows the ratios in condition 3 to be  any nonnegative finite value, for the intuitive argument, assume that NH = NL = 0. Ignoring subscripts, c(t) has been defined  as the convolution of f(t) and h(t). By the definition of a convolution  c(t) = J f(s) h(t - s) ds. 0  We expect the product of f(s) and h(t - s) to be very small over an early part of the 0 to t interval for the following  reasons. Since Theorem 2.A assumes that f(s) dominates h(s), if f and h are usual (for reaction-time data) densities, h will  have a substantial portion of its density early in the interval relative to f. Thus, for large t and small s (0 < s < t), the  product f(s) h(t - s) will tend to be small (relative to the values for larger t's). We use k(t) to formalize this expectation  that as t increases we may ignore an increasingly larger portion of the beginning interval. Though we have been unable to  prove that such a function always exists, it can be shown to exist for some common reaction-time distributions, such as the  generalized gamma distributions, e.g., k(t) = t/2 (see Note to Appendix 2.A). An alternative approach would be to identify  constraints on the f and h distributions that would insure k(t) exists (Wandell, Note 5). We have been yet unable to get any  general results with this latter approach.  A second theorem (due to D. Vorberg) using the necessary and sufficient condition will be presented, followed by a discussion  of the generalized gamma results, and the use of all of these results.  THEOREM 2.B. If the non-memory processes are identical for low and high frequency responses, the memory densities at 0 are not  equal to zero, and the hazard functions of the memory processes are monotonic (see Appendix 2.B), the convolutions  PARALLEL VS SERIAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL 195  satisfy the necessary and sufficient conditions for wsi parallel mimicry if and only if the memory processes do.  This theorem, in addition to requiring that h, = hL, requires some restrictions on the hazard functions. Though many of the  interesting distributions have monotonic hazard functions, some do not, such as the Cauchy (Thomas, 1971). This result may  also be derived with slightly different restrictions, as discussed in the Note to this theorem in Appendix 2. Note that this  is not to say that this result would not apply to distributions that do not meet these restrictions, only that the proof does  not guarantee that it will.  We also have results for a specific distribution that has been used to characterize reaction time distributions, the  generalized gamma. The statements of the theorems are given here, followed by a brief discussion, and the proofs are given in  Appendix 3. These three proofs assume thatfH, fr, hH, ht_, and h, are all generalized gammas (and hence so are cH and c j  THEOREM 3.A. If the tail-dominating parameters of the convolutions are from the memory processes, then the memory processes  satisfy the sufficient condition for parallel mimicry if and only if the convolutions do.  THEOREM 3.B. If the tail-dominating parameters of the convolutions are from the memory processes, then the memory processes  satisfy the necessary and sufficient conditions for parallel mimicry if and only if the convolutions do.  THEOREM 3.C. The memory processes (and, thus, the convolutions) satisfy the necessary and sufficient conditions for parallel  mimicry if and only if the taildominating parameters for the high and low frequency memory processes are equal.  These results for the generalized gamma distributions may be summarized as follows: Let r; refer to the rate parameters of the  various independent exponential components in thse generalized gammas. Suppose the tail-dominating parameter, rmaxH, for the  high frequency components and the tail-dominating parameter, rmax,., for the low frequency components, both come from the  memory processes, f, and f .' Then, the processes fH and f- will satisfy the necessary and sufficient conditions for parallel  mimicry if and only if the convolutions, cH and c,., do. Moreover, the memory and convolution densities will both satisfy the  necessary and sufficient condition if and only if rmaxH = rmaxL.  As a more general analysis, suppose rmaxH comes from some process xH (which can be fH, hH, or h,), and rmaxL comes from some  process xL (which can be f, h, , or h,). Then cH and CL satisfy the necessary and sufficient conditions for mimicry if and  ' If the tail-dominating parameter occurs in more than one component, the results that follow in the text are considerably  more complicated. The main difficulty arises when the frequency-specific. non memory processes are very different and contain  some of the tail-dominating components.  196 ROSS AND ANDERSON  only if xH and x,, do. Again, both will satisfy the conditions if and only if  rmaXH = rmaxL'  Though none of the above results are as general as we had hoped, they do, we believe, suggest that in many circumstances  applying Townsend's test to the obtained convolution will be a test of whether fH and f, are capable of wsi parallel mimicry  by gH and g,,. In particular, if the following relations hold it is possible to apply Townsend's test to make an inference  about the memory components:  lim hH(t) * hc(t) __ 0 ~ lim h,(t) * hc(t) _ 0  1-100 CH(t) 1-+00 C'(t)  (where * is the convolution operator). That is, if we can get an estimate of the distributions of times for a convolution  involving everything but the memory component, and if these distributions are not very different from one another and are  completely dominated in their tails by the convolution, then a test of the convolution serves as a test of the memory  component. Intuitively, this amounts to the assertion that if the memory component contributes the longest and most variable  times to the convolution, then a. test of the convolution is a test of the memory component, as Thomas (1969) claimed. It  should be noted that there are circumstances where the memory component does not dominate (i.e., the above relations are not  satisfied) and yet a test of the convolution will serve as a test of the memory process.  We think we can put this precondition to use on the naming trials mentioned earlier. In our situation, we think it is  reasonable to assume that the frequencyspecific, non-memory processes are nondominating and very likely non-existent. At any  rate, the ACT analysis of this task has no such processes. The naming trials are an attempt to tap the common processes, h,.  Naming certainly requires encoding and response generation, but no connected proposition needs to be activated. Both the  stimuli and the responses are identical to the ones in the cued recall, with just the stimulus-response mappings changed. Let  the naming distribution times density be h r, and assume hH and h,, do not exist (or are small). If h,, is equal to hc, we can  show that the convolution dominates the non-memory processes by showing that  1-00 CH(t) = 0 and 1-~ c Jt) = 0.  If the assumption that h,, = he was true, though, we could apply the Fourier techniques described by Green and Luce (1971) to  subtract out he from CH and CL to get estimates of fH and fL. This would allow us to check Townsend's conditions on the  activation processes even if they did not dominate the tails of the cued recall times. If, as is more probable, hr, contains  he plus some other processes not involved in the recall trials, the precondition is even more conservative.  There is also a possibility that there are some processes other than the memory retrieval process that are involved in cued  recall trials, but not in naming. If these  PARALLEL VS SERIAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL 197  processes dominate the cued recall, we would erroneously ascribe the domination to the memory retrieval process of interest.  In detailing an ACT model for these tasks, we found one such possible process, word-concept activation. In the ACT theory, the  probe on cued recall trials activates the word node. This activation spreads to the concept node and then out on all links  attached to the concept. Eventually, the concept of one of the pair members is activated, and then its word node is activated,  allowing a response. On naming trials, it is possible that subjects may respond without accessing the concept node. If so,  cued recall trials include not only an additional retrieval process, but also additional word-to-concept and concept-to-word  activations. There are two points to note about these word-concept processes. If they occur, they do not affect the cued  recall analysis differentially for high and low frequency items, since they will be included as part of the common process  density. All words are in both high and low frequency pairs, so word-concept activation could not be frequency-specific.  Second, though it is possible that these strong wordconcept connections are dominating cued recall, it does not seem likely.  If they are not dominating, their presence is not a problem.  Empirical Distributions  The final major problem that we considered in this experimental realization is that there may be difficulties in using  empirical distributions to check for conditions defined on theoretical distributions. Since we will have a finite number of  observations, the data must show some departure from the underlying distributions. One would not expect the conditions for  finding an equivalent wsi parallel model, then, to be satisfied exactly. This problem is heightened for those methods that  examine the tail behavior of distributions since there are relatively few observations in the tails. We tested the usefulness  of our technique with simulations to see whether it will correctly reject parallel models if some serial densities are used to  generate the data. The findings are included in the Results and Discussion section.  The general difficulty with empirical densities is compounded by the possibility of mixtures of distributions. In the proofs  on mixtures presented in Appendix l, the important component distribution is the one that theoretically dominates in the tail.  However, the theoretically dominating density may not dominate in the data, perhaps leading to a difficulty. It is possible  that the two theoretically dominating components would be fn, and f,;, but the dominating components in the data might be f,  and f ,, where j, k, or both j and k are not equal to i. That is, the empirically dominating distributions might come from  different components in the mixture. If we could minimize the number of component distributions, this would increase the  number of observations per distribution and make such problems less probable. We hope to do this by using well-trained  subjects for many sessions with only 16 profession-location pairs.  The choice of a method of data analysis is not an easy one due to the use of tails. and the problems with outliers and  mixtures. A short discussion of possibilities may be useful for understanding the method chosen. There will also be a problem  in  480;'24 3 2  198 ROSS AND ANDERSON  employing the tails, because reaction time studies typically find some extremely long times that are treated as deviant  trials, on which the subjects did not process the material in their usual manner. The difficulty is that we are examining tail  behavior in which there is a small proportion of the data, but, probably, a large proportion of the deviant points. To use the  Townsend conditions, it will be necessary to cut off the tails somewhere. If we were to use a chi-square to test the stability  of the ratio of the density tails, a possible solution might be to stop at the point where the number of observations is too  small for the statistic.  To avoid bad data (e.g., coughing, guessing) below this cutoff is another problem. Special techniques to deal with  distributions and outliers, such as Q-Q plots (Wilk & Gnanadesikan, 1968), are not appropriate, because we have neither a  known theoretical distribution to compare the data against nor another set of data that might be free of bad observations. If  we make an assumption, however, that the tails of the distributions should be monotonically decreasing, we may be able to  delete some bad points. The final possibility is to use resistant smooths, such as some adapted median techniques on a moving  window of data points, to lessen the effect of this difficulty. Smoothing was used for 10,000 data points in the Fourier  analysis of Green and Luce (1971). It also helps to minimize the effect of the highly probable abrupt changes to be found when  plotting discontinuous empirical histograms. It is not clear how the smoothing, which involves the loss of information, would  affect the possibility of deciding about parallel mimicry.  The possibility of mixtures presents another practical difficulty in analyzing the data. Reaction time experiments often show  substantial subject and session effects. If we simply lumped all the data together, the tails would probably be unduly  influenced by a few slow subjects' early sessions. One possible remedy is to subtract out session effects when analyzing a  subject's data and subtract out both session and subject effects when looking at all the data. This procedure seems adequate  as along as the subject and session effects are principally location shifts.  We considered many possible analyses, but chose one that is simple to apply and robust. Our choice of analysis is to divide  each session's data into specified percentile intervals, say, 40 intervals of 2.5 % each. Instead of examining the ratio of  the densities in the tails, one can now use the ratio of high to low frequency responses in each interval. This method allows  one to easily collapse the data over both subjects and sessions, and may be more robust against distribution changes among  subjects or sessions. If the session data can be generated by a parallel model, the combined data can be. Techniques for  analyzing properties of distributions are not well developed, and we can offer no proof for the correctness of this method.  The combination rule over subjects and sessions is based on a logic similar to Ratcliff's (1979) Vincentizing rule and its  extension by Thomas and Ross (1980).  PARALLEL VS SERIAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL 199  RECAPITULATION  Before considering the actual experiment, it might be useful to review briefly the potential pitfalls and strengths of this  approach. There are several possible obstacles we might encounter in applying this analysis, some of which we can surmount.  One problem is if a process other than the memory retrieval activation one dominates the cued recall task. We have a check  against a misapplication in this case by including the naming task. If the process dominating cued recall also is involved in  naming, we will know that the results of our tests on the cued recall data would be misleading. Two potential difficulties are  involved in the use of this naming task. If it does not include all of the non-activation processes of the cued recall task,  we might misapply the test. Though this is possible, our detailing of the ACT processes in each task points to no such process  besides the word-concept activation mentioned earlier. An additional process is only a problem if it is dominating, and we  find it unlikely that the word-concept activation or a process we have overlooked would dominate. A second possibility in the  naming task is that it might contain a dominating process not involved in cued recall. In this case, we would err on the  conservative side by deciding that the method was not applicable when it really was.  Since empirical distributions are based on a finite number of observations, it is always possible that they will not  accurately reflect the underlying distributions. Though we have no way to tell if this is the case (barring replications),  this problem is true of all experiments. As long as we collect an adequate number of points in the tails, we are under no  special handicap by this distributional analysis. Finally, there is the potential difficulty that the processes are truly  serial but are mimickable by wsi parallel processes. Such mimicry, though we have no estimate of the a priori probability,  does not seem likely from the examples given in Townsend (1976b).  We would like to summarize what we see as the strengths of this analysis. The amount of work focussing on parallel-serial  distinctions attests to the importance of this issue. In recent years, the theoretical analyses have questioned the  conclusiveness of much of this research. This approach may be one means, given some assumptions of the model to be tested, of  permitting a test. It may be used as an aid in the formulating and testing of processing assumptions of specific models. In  addition, we have attempted to show how an abstract analysis might be realized experimentally, the problems that might be  encountered, and some possible methods of solution. Finally, we have made use of distributional information (see Ratcliff,  1978, for the advantages of this) without having to specify the exact form of the distributions.  METHOD  Subjects  The subjects were 11 adults from the Yale University community. Each subject participated in five sessions and was paid $4.40  per session and an $8 bonus for completing all five sessions.  200 ROSS AND ANDERSON  Materials  The materials were 20 professions and 20 locations. Since vocal response times were taken, the materials were selected to  minimize articulation differences. All stimuli were two syllables, between five and eight letters, and began with a plosive  consonant (p, k, b, t, d, hard c, or hard g). Within these constraints, an effort was made to avoid obvious associations  within the materials. The stimulus list is given in the bottom of Table 1.  For each subject, eight professions and eight locations were randomly chosen from the material list. Sixteen  profession-location pairs were constructed, as shown in Table 1, with each profession and each location assigned to two pairs;  one designated as a high frequency (HF) pair and one as a low frequence (LF) pair. HF pairs were presented more often that LF  pairs in some of the trial types to be discussed.  Procedure  Stimuli were presented and responses collected and timed by a PDP 11/40 Unix system, YEPS (Proudfoot, 1978). Each subject sat  in a separate room equipped with a VT50 terminal. In each room, there was also a Gerbrands G1341 voice key with a Shure 5775  microphone connected to the computer.  After the subjects learned the 16 profession-location pairs, three kinds of trials were presented in this experiment:  recognition, cued recall, and naming. On recognition trials, subjects were shown a profession-location pair and had to decide  if this was one of the 16 pairs that had been studied. HF pairs were presented twice as often as LF pairs, to maintain  frequency differences. The subject said either yes or no as quickly as was consistent with high accuracy, and the RT of this  vocal response was collected. After responding, the subject pressed a button to indicate the response that had been made.  Feedback on the choice was given on each trial. If the correct response was made, the next trial began after the feedback. If  the subject was wrong, the stimulus was left on the screen for further study until the subject pressed a button to continue.  On half of the recognition trials, the profession-location pairs shown had not been studied. These foils were constructed by  re-pairing the eight professions and eight locations to make new profession-location pairs, using each profession and location  equally often.  On cued recall trials, either a profession or a location was presented with an asterisk (*) after the final letter (e.g.,  BAKER *). Subjects were required to say one of the two items paired with the stimulus. Thus, if P1 was shown, subjects said  either L l or L8, whichever they thought of first. After saying an answer, subjects then indicated the response they had made  by a method designed to further help maintain HF-LF differences. One of the answers to the cued recall trial probe was  presented and subjects indicated whether this was the response made. On two-thirds of the cued recall trials, this initial  answer queried was the HF answer and on one-third of the trials it was the LF answer. If this answer was the response made,  the next trial began. If it was not, the other correct answer was presented and subjects indicated whether this had been their  response. Since the subjects were told the correct answers were being presented, feedback was being given on the cued recall  trials.  PARALLEL VS SERIAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL 201  On naming trials, either a profession or location was shown with a plus sign (+) following the final letter (e.g., BAKER +).  On these trials, subjects pronounced the word displayed as quickly as they could. After their response was detected, subjects  were asked to indicate whether they had made the appropriate response. There were 2 sec between the erasing of any feedback  and the beginning of the next trial.  Procedures were employed to monitor the subjects' self-scoring and to insure that trials on which there were any subject or  apparatus problems were caught. All stimuli and responses were displayed on a terminal in another room from which the  experimenter could hear the vocal responses. This set-up allowed checking of the subjects' scoring, though this was only done  in the beginning to insure that the instructions were understood and being followed. Since the analyses concentrate on the  tails of the distributions, it is important that any outliers due to inalertness, tiredness, or mechanical failure be avoided.  This was stressed to the subjects by designating three other keys for various problem indicators. One key was to be used for  those trials on which the voice key failed to detect the subjects' first response. This miss was obvious since as soon as the  response was detected, the stimulus would be erased from the screen. A second key was to indicate any trial on which the  subjects' vocal response procedure was interrupted. This category included trials on which the subjects were coughing, looking  away from the screen, or distracted by noise outside the experimental room when the stimulus was presented. The third key  allowed the subjects to delay the next trial as long as desired. For all trial types, subjects were to respond as quickly as  they could while maintaining a high degree of accuracy.  The first session was used for familiarizing the subjects with the professionlocation pairs that had to be learned and for  collecting data. In an initial study phase, the 16 pairs were displayed on the screen, one at a time, for 10 sec each. There  were two passes through the material and, on each pass, LF pairs were presented once and HF pairs were presented twice. The  next part of the experiment, a training recognition phase, was to insure that the subjects had studied the profession-location  pairs. There were 192 recognition trials that included eight presentations of each HF pair, four presentations of each LF  pair, and 96 foils. There were 30-sec rest periods every 48 trials. Following this training recognition, subjects were given  96 practice trials of mixed recognition, cued recall, and naming trials. This consisted of 48 recognition trials (two of each  HF, one of each LF, and 24 foils), 32 cued recall trials (two presentations of each probe), and 16 naming trials (one  presentation of each word). There were 30-sec rests every 48 trials. After this practice phase, subjects were shown a mixture  of recognition, cued recall, and naming trials, 464 total, that began the data collection for this experiment. There were 144  recognition trials-6 presentations of each HF pair, 3 of each LF pair, and 72 foils. There were 240 cued recall trials, each  probe being shown 15 times. There were 80 naming trials, each of the 16 words being presented five times. These 464 trials  were displayed in a random order with the only constraint being that successive trials did not test the same  profession-location pair. One-minute rest periods were given every 58 trials. The first session lasted 1-2 hr. ;  For the other four sessions, subjects first reviewed the profession-location pairs  202 ROSS AND ANDERSON  learned in the first session. The review phase consisted of two passes through the material, with HF pairs presented twice  each pass. Each pair was shown for 5 sec on each trial. Following this review, there was a 96-trial mixed practice phase as in  Session 1. Finally, there was a 464-trial mixed data collection phase, again as in Session 1. All sessions had a different  randomization of the trials and a new random selection of recognition foils. These later sessions lasted about 1 hr.  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  The results will be discussed in two sections. First, the naming data are used to check whether the dominating component may  be the memory retrieval process of interest. Next, the cued recall data are assessed for parallel mimicry, and a small  simulation designed to test the validity of the main analysis is presented.  Though the reaction time means will not be used in the tests, they are included here for completeness, avera,ged over subjects  and sessions, with interquartile ranges (IQR).$ In cued recall, 61% of the responses were items from high frequency pairs with  a mean of 1373 msec (IQR = 535 msec) compared to 1388 msec (IQR = 542 msec) for low frequency responses.' In recognition, the  means were 1109 msec (IQR = 371 msec) for high frequency pairs (2% error rate) and 1157 msec (IQR = 400 msec) for low  frequency pairs (4.5 % error rate). In naming, the mean was 876 msec (IQR = 242 msec) with a 0.6% error rate.  Naming  The naming trials allow a test of whether the dominating component in cued recall trials also occurs on naming trials, as  discussed in the section on convolutions. Reaction times in both kinds of trials are considered to be convolutions of  component processes. According to the ACT analysis, the principal difference between the two convolutions is that the cued  recall trials contain the memory retrieval process of interest. If the cued recall convolution dominates the naming  convolution in the tails (as in Eq. (7)), we may have increased confidence that the memory retrieval process  a Because we are testing distributional properties of empirical distributions, it is not clear what simple summaries of the  data would allow the interested reader to conduct alternative analyses. There is too much data to include in an appendix, but  the data for each subject that were used in the naming, cued recall, and recognition analyses are available from the authors.  Interquartile ranges are being used instead of standard deviations because they are not sensitive to a few outliers. As a  rough approximation, an IQR is about 4/3 standard deviations.  v A 15-msec difference in mean RT seems small with about a 3:2 response ratio. Though surprising, this fact is not diagnostic  for our test, since it could be generated by some wsi parallel models (e.g., exponentials). Although the means are quite  similar, the reaction time distributions for high and low frequency responses differ. To give some indication that the  response ratio is not constant over the distribution, even for the overall data (which is more stable than the individual  distributions), the proportion of low frequency responses for every dectile is as follows: 0.369, 0.420, 0.420, 0.402, 0.392,  0.398, 0.401, 0.395, 0.402, and 0.439. The proportions for individual windows range from 0.342 to 0.459.  PARALLEL VS SERIAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL 203  TABLE 2 Percentage of Cued Recall Trials Longer than All or 99% of Naming Trials  Subject All of naming trials 99% of naming trials  1 4.3 28.1  2 10.4 55.7  3 1.7 8.3  4 8.0 20.0  5 0.0 26.8  6 0.0 1.8  7 4.6 26.2  8 0.1 10.6  9 26.0 52.9  10 0.0 4.7  11 6.6 10.0  Mean 5.6 22.3  Median 4.3 20.0  is the dominating component in cued recall. Obtaining this result would increase the validity of further tests on the cued  recall data.  For this test, the reaction times for cued recall and naming trials for each subject were divided into 250-msec intervals up  to 5 sec and another interval for all times greater than 5 sec. To cancel out mean practice effects, session means were  subtracted and a grand mean was added, again, separately for each subject. Each subject had about 1200 cued recall  observations and 400 naming observations. From this tabulation, it was clear that cued recall reaction times dominated naming  reaction times, and no formal analyses were thought necessary." In Table 2, the percentage of cued recall trials which were  longer than all (column 1) or 99% (column 2) of the naming trials is presented. The first column shows that only 3 of the I1  subjects failed to show cued recall dominating naming reaction times. Furthermore, even for these 3 subjects, the reason that  cued recall did not dominate naming was that these subjects had both cued recall and naming trials in the interval greater  than 5 sec. From scanning the data, this interval contained a very small number of observations, and they were substantially  longer than the next longest times, suggesting that these observations were outliers. Indirect support for this interpretation  of outliers is given in the second column. By excluding only 1 % of the naming trials, the cued recall trials clearly  dominate, with about 20% of the cued recall reaction times exceeding the longest naming time. Only Subject 6 failed to clearly  show this trend. If the trials excuded were actually part of the naming latency distribution, such a substantial increase (5.6  to 22.3%) in cued recall domination would not be generally expected.  'This near absence of naming observations in the tail prevented the use of chi-square tests like the ones mentioned later.  204 ROSS AND ANDERSON  One may conclude that the dominating component in cued recall is probably not included in the naming task, suggesting the  memory retrieval process as a likely candidate for the dominating component.  Cued Recall, Recognition, and Simulations  In this section, the results of primary interest are discussed-Do the cued recall densities allow parallel mimicry? We will be  using the sufficient condition in our tests (Eq. (5)).  All analyses were performed on the following form of the data, which was mentioned in the Introduction. For each subject's  five sessions (and separately for cued recall and recognition), the reaction times were ordered and divided into 40 equal  intervals, with 2.5 % of the data in each interval. Within each interval, the data consist of the number of high frequency  responses and the number of low frequency responses, yielding a 40 X 2 matrix. One may collapse over sessions by adding the  matrices, without worrying about practice effects or other changes over sessions that do not affect the probability of  parallel mimicry. Each of the 40 intervals contained about 30 observations for each subject in cued recall and 9 observations  in recognition. Instead of relying on arbitrary time windows with varying (and sometimes empty) window sizes, this method uses  only the ordinal information. Though the reliance on ordinal data obviously means a good deal of information has been lost,  this method has important advantages in combining data, robustness against outliers, the use of distributional information,  and simplicity. For analyses, instead of examining the ratio of the densities' tails, we now use the ratio of high to low  frequency responses in each interval. If the data allow parallel mimicry, this ratio should be stable in the tails, so  chi-square tests for independence should be small and nonsignificant.  The preliminary analysis examined the point at which the ratio of densities first showed significant discrepancy from a  constant, working down from the longest reaction-time window. If the cued recall data were generated by a wsi parallel  process, the ratios in the tail windows should not significantly differ from each other. Since the null hypothesis in this  analysis is parallel mimicry, nonsignificant findings are not strong support for a parallel model. However, this preliminary  analysis should indicate whether wsi parallel mimicry may be rejected. Starting at the window with the second longest reaction  times, window 39 (95-97.5 percentiles), chi-squares with 1 degree of freedom were calculated for each window by a 2 X 2 table  composed of (high versus low frequency) by (window n versus the sum of windows from n + 1 to 40). So the chi-square for window  39 versus window 40 tests the ratio stability down to window 39, the chi-square for 38 versus (39 + 40) tests if the ratio  changed by window 38, and so on. Table 3 shows the window at which the first significant chi-square was obtained for each  subject at three levels of significance. This method indicates the point at which the ratio of high to low frequency responses  significantly changes. As can be seen from Table 3, even for a 0.10 confidence level, only one subject shows a significant  departure from stability before the 87.5-90 percentile range, which is already a considerable distance from the tail.  PARALLEL VS SERIAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL 205  TABLE 3  Cued Recall: Number of Subjects Showing First Significant Departure from Independence at Each Window  Window 0.01 Confidence level 0.10   0.05   39 0 0 0  38 0 0 1  37 0 0 0  36 0 2 3  35 0 2 3  34 0 0 0  33 0 0 0  32 0 3 1  31 1 0 0  30 0 0 1  29 0 0 0  Less than     29 10 4 2  Note. Window 39 includes the 95-97.5 percentiles, Window 38 includes 92.5-95 percentiles, etc.  Table 3 provides some support for the wsi parallel model, since few significant departures occur in the tail, while many occur  thereafter, showing the method has some power. A more direct examination of the power may be made by considering the  recognition data, which should not necessarily show this ratio stability in the tails since it is not hypothesized to include  a parallel race process. The analysis described for the cued recall data was applied to the recognition data. Table 4 shows  that, for significance levels of 0.01 and 0.05, no departures from stability are found in the tails of the recognition data.  For the 0.10 level, however, 4 of the 11 subjects show significant departures from stability in the tails. Overall, Tables 3  and 4 do not give dramatically different patterns for the cued recall and recognition data, but there are some indications  consistent with a parallel model for cued recall.  These chi-square tests indicate that a parallel model cannot be rejected. However, it would be better not to base one's  decision simply on this test. One problem is that the chi-square's assumption of independent observations probably is not  satisfied. Evidence for the failure of this assumption can be gleaned by examining the four longest windows which contain 10%  of the data. We did a 4 X 2 chi-square test for independence for each subject to see if the ratio between high and low  frequency was constant across these four windows. Then we added the individual chi-squares. The total chi-square, which has 33  degrees of freedom, is 19.91 which is significantly (p < .05) less than expected. Thus, not only are the tail ratios stable,  they may be more stable than would be expected by simple notions of chance. This may be related to the fact that the same  words were used in the high and low frequency conditions  206 ROSS AND ANDERSON  TABLE 4  Recognition: Number of Subjects Showing First Significant Departure from Independence at Each Window  Window 0.01 Confidence level 0.10   0.05   39 0 0 0  38 0 0 3  37 0 0 1  36 0 0 0  35 0 2 3  34 0 1 1  33 0 0 0  32 0 2 2  31 1 0 0  30 0 0 0  29 0 0 0  Less than     29 10 6 1  Note. Window 39 includes the 95-97.5 percentiles, Window 38 includes the 92.5-95 percentiles, etc.  and may have been lending constant properties to the two distributions. Also, pairs were tested many times over the five  sessions, probably leading to nonindependence of the observations. In any case, this is evidence that the assumption of  independent sampling may be violated somewhere.  Therefore, it seemed important to bolster the simple chi-square test with a test that did not rely on the absolute value of  the chi-square, but rather compared the cued recall distribution tail ratio with data which should not necessarily show tail  ratio stability, the recognition distribution and the rest of the cued recall distribution. If it could be shown that the cued  recall densities' ratio was significantly more stable in the tails than elsewhere and if it could be shown that the ratio was  more stable than the corresponding ratio for the recognition data, this would reinforce our conclusion that the cued recall  densities arose from a race between two wsi parallel processes. To do this, the 40 intervals were grouped into 10 window sets,  with 10% of the data in each set. If the ratio of the densities in the tails is approaching a nonzero constant, the chi-square  of the last window set should be small. We are assuming that the last window set, the longest 10% of the data, is the tail of  the distribution. While this assumption is obviously arbitrary, it was made prior to the data analysis and some choice needed  to be made. Given this definition of tails, the remaining analyses explored the chi-squares for the window sets.  We assumed that the non-tail window sets of cued recall should be similar to the 10 window sets for recognition densities. All  mean chi-squares are given in the bottom half of Table 5. We decided to test the prediction in the following way. For  PARALLEL VS SERIAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL. 207  TABLE 5  Mean Rank of Chi-squares and Mean Chi-squares (3 df) for Each 1096 Window for Cued Recall and Recognition  Window sets  Task 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10  Mean Ranks  Cued recall 5.45 3.73 5.82 7.64 5.55 5.55 5.81 6.27 4.55 4.18  Recognition 5.19 5.81 6.73 4.82 4.64 4.73 6.18 4.55 4.81 5.55     Mean chi-square       Cued recall 2.90 1.95 2.91 4.50 2.92 3.16 2.66 3.82 2.40 1.81  Recognition 2.47 3.62 4.87 3.22 3.10 2.23 4.26 2.95 2.90 3.24  Note. Window set 1 includes 0-10 percentiles, window 2 includes 10-20, etc. For rank, 10 denotes the greatest chi-square value.  each subject, the average chi-square for the first 9 window sets in both cued recall and recognition were calculated. A  contrast was then formed for each subject pitting the chi-square of the cued recall tail window set against the average of the  chi-squares for the 9 other window sets in cued recall, the tail window set in recognition, and the 9 other window sets in  recognition. The corresponding mean chi-squares were 1.81 versus the average of 3.03, 3.24, and 3.29. A paired-t test on the  contrast showed a significant difference, t(10) = 3.13, p < 0.01, one tailed. The medians (of the 1 1 subjects' means) showed  a larger difference, with the corresponding medians 0.66 versus 3.33, 3.20, and 3.08. Thus, the chi-squares for the cued  recall tail are significantly less than the other chi-squares, showing less departure from a ratio stability, and giving  support to a wsi parallel model.  To insure that this result was not unduly influenced by a few subjects (though an examination of the medians showed this to be  unlikely), a simpler, but less powerful analysis was performed comparing the rank of the tail window set chi-square across the  two tasks. Separately for cued recall and recognition, each subject's 10-window set chi-squares were ranked (with the result  shown in the top half of Table 5) and a paired t-test was performed on the rank of the 10th (tail) window set for the two  tasks. The mean rank for cued recall, 4.18, was smaller than the mean rank for recognition, 5.55, as predicted, but the  difference was only marginally reliable, t(10) = 1.75, p < 0.10, one tailed. The median ranks, however, show a more  substantial difference, 3.0 to 6.0. Thus, even with a weak test of ranks of ordinal data, the cued recall tails show greater  stability than do the recognition tails, indicating a wsi parallel process for cued recall.  In conclusion, these findings support the ACT prediction that cued recall answers  208 ROSS AND ANDERSON  are produced by a wsi parallel process. The naming trials were used to show that the dominating component in cued recall  trials was probably the memory retrieval process. The recognition trials allowed a comparison with data which were  hypothesized not to be from a parallel race process.  With the results of the cued recall analyses now presented, some evidence concerning the validity of this approach should be  mentioned. The null hypothesis in these analyses is that the chi-squares are the same for the "parallel" cued recall  distribution and the "serial" recognition distribution. If the parallel model is to gain support, the analyses must show that  the chi-square in the tail of the cued recall distribution is significantly smaller than the other chi-squares. To assess the  likelihood of falsely concluding parallel mimicry, we performed some small scale Monte Carlo simulations using two serial  exponential densities which differed in their rates. According to Townsend (1976b), exponentials may be mimicked by wsi  parallel densities only if the rates are equal. By varying the rates of the exponentials, we hoped to get an indication of the  effect on the chi-squares of the window sets. Ideally, non-mimickable serial processes might not only give a tail chi-square  which is not smaller that the other window set chi-squares, but give a tail chi-square showing more departure from stability  than the other window sets.  Three pairs of rate parameters were used and each pair had two runs with 600 observations per density in each run (about the  number for each subject in the experiment). The rate pairs were (0.8 and 1.0), (1.0 and 2.0), and (1.0 and 5.0). Table 6  contains the mean rank of chi-square and mean chi-square for each window set for the first two exponential pairs. The third  pair, 1.0 and 5.0, yielded all empty cells for the low frequency distribution in the last four windows, compared to 30  observations for the high frequency distribution, so this pair clearly failed to meet the  TABLE 6  Simulation Results: Mean Chi-square (3 df) and Mean Rank of Chi-square for Serial Exponential Densities of Varying Rates      Window set      Rates 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10  Ivs2            Mean 2.41 3.50 1.22 1.89 2.74 1.45 1.31 2.80 4.53 5.19  Mean rank 4 7.5 3 5 5 3.5 4 7 7 9  0.8 vs 1            Mean 3.54 7.87 4.82 5.16 0.98 3.09 4.16 4.27 3.19 2.66  Mean rank 5.5 7.5 5.5 8.5 2 6 6 5.5 3.5 5  Note. Each run consisted of 600 observations from each of the two densities. Each mean is based on two runs.  (a) Window set 1 has the 4 windows consisting of the 0-10 percentiles, Window 2 has 10-20, etc.  (b) Rank of 10 indicates greatest chi-square value.  PARALLEL VS SERIAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL 209  sufficient condition for parallel mimicry, the ratio approaching a nonzero constant. Table 6 also indicates that a wsi  parallel model would not be accepted, for exponentials with rates in the ratio of 2 to 1. This method rejects parallel mimicry  for disparate densities, as the tail window set shows greater departure from stability than for the other window sets. For  exponentials with relatively close rates (0.8 and 1.0), though one could not reject parallel mimicry, the data would  definitely not lead one to falsely conclude that there was parallel mimicry. It seems likely that with a larger number of  observations, one might be able to reject parallel mimicry in this close case. Though these Monte Carlo simulations are  admittedly on a small scale, they suggest that non-mimickable serial processes are not likely to be labelled as allowing wsi  parallel mimicry.  GENERAL CONCLUSIONS  Overall, the analyses suggest that the cued recall data allow wsi parallel mimicry, as ACT predicts. The ratio of the  densities in the tails exhibits more stability than does a serial density which should not necessarily allow parallel mimicry.  Two points deserve particular emphasis. First, these results show that the process generating the cued recall data is either a  wsi parallel process or a serial process which may be mimicked by a wsi parallel process. As discussed in the Introduction,  though one cannot definitely conclude that there is an underlying wsi parallel process, these findings greatly increase the  confidence in the parallel model. A substantial increase in confidence appears warranted given the small likelihood of such a  finding from a truly serial process, as indicated by Townsend's (1976b) analyses and the Monte Carlo results presented here.  Second, we believe this method may be of use to other researchers in testing specific models incorporating within-stage  independent parallel processes. The method used the full distribution, though only ordinal information is necessary. Also, the  actual analyses are very simple. The Monte Carlo studies indicate that false acceptance of parallel mimicry is not likely, and  our findings suggest that for parallel processes, the test has a reasonable chance of rejecting the null hypothesis of no  mimicry.  APPENDIX 1: MIXTURES  Suppose the densities fa(t) and fn(t) are mixtures of n densities. For the ith component density in this mixture, let Pr be  the probability of a finishing first and let Wt be the weight (proportion) of the ith component in the mixture. Then  n  P=V P;W;, .=t  210 ROSS AND ANDERSON  fa(t)= ~, PiWtfa,(t) I 'P, t_1  fb(t) = (1 - Pt) wtfb;(t) J'(1 - P). 1-I  For Theorems 1.A, 1.B, and 1.D we need to assume that some components will dominate in the tails. That is, there are a,. and  bi. such that  lim fa,(t) = 0 and lim .fb"(t) = 0 for all k * i *and all n :*j *. t-oo fajt) t- fb,.(t)  An overview of the logical structure and the significance of the theorems in this section may be helpful. First, if the  underlying component distributions satisfy Townsend's sufficient condition (Eq. (5) of the text), then the mixture will (LA).  Second, the mixture satisfies the sufficient condition if and only if the dominating components do (1.B). Theorems 1.C and 1.D  provide the same results for the necessary and sufficient conditions (Eqs. (3) and (4) of the text). Also, note that  satisfying a sufficient condition implies satisfying a necessary and sufficient condition. The proofs on the sufficient  condition are given because this condition is used to test the experimental findings. The proofs on the necessary and  sufficient conditions, though not used in this paper, may be of more general interest in later parallel-serial investigations.  THEOREM 1.A. If the underlying component distributions satisfy the sufficient condition for parallel mimicry, their mixture  will.  Prove: If  lim 61(1 = at, 0 < at < oo for all i t-- fa,(t)  then  lim fb(t) _= a, t-- fa(t)  0<a<oo.  Proof.  lim fb(t) = lim IE!_' (1 -Pr) Wifb,(t)l1(1 - P) t-ao fa(t) t-oo C=1 Piwtfa,(t)11P  _ P (1 -P) w;fbt(t)  lim f l y n  One need only look at the term with fb,.(t) since if this goes to zero, all the terms will and if this goes to infinity, the  sum will. Dropping constants, and noting that fa,. (t)  PARALLEL VS SERIAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL 211  will dominate the denominator, the above expression will satisfy the sufficient condition only if the following expression  does:  lim fbr(t) t-- fart) .  For fat.(t) to dominate the other fa(t) components and for fb .(t) to dominate the fb(t) components in the tail,  lim f(t) = 0 and lim fbm(t) = 0 k * i * and m $ j *.  t-.- fa;Jt) t-0 fb;.(t)  One may then use a proof by contradiction to show that i* =j*. Suppose that i * * j*. Then, in the limit,  AI(t)  LJt) fb;.(t) '  and  but since the component densities satisfy the sufficient condition,  fbjt) -, a.. and A(t) , a.., 0 < ai,, aj. < oo.  faJt) f';-(t) '  If fb (t) does not dominatefa (t), then it cannot dominate f,, (t) (or, thus fb,.(t)).  Fence, there is a contradiction so i* must equal j*. In that case,  lim fb(t) K lim fa,.(t) =Kap, 0 < a;., K < oo.  THEOREM 1.B. If the underlying component distributions are from serial processes, their mixture will satisfy the sufficient  condition for parallel mimicry if and only if the dominating components satisfy the sufficient condition.  Prove:  lim fb(t) -_ a, t-.- L (t)  0<a<oo,  if and only if  wherefbr(t) andfojt) are the dominating components.  Proof. From the first few equations in the proof of Theorem LA  lim fb(t) =K lim fb,.(t) , t--- f(t) - LJt)  212 ROSS AND ANDERSON  for K, a positive finite value. So the sufficient condition will be satisfied if and only if the dominating components satisfy  it.  COROLLARY TO I.B. It is possible for the mixture to satisfy the sufcient condition, even if none of the underlying  distributions satisfy it.  For example, exponentials satisfy the sufficient condition only if their parameters are equal.  Let  fa,(t) = ce-c', f.'(t) = de -dt, fb,(t) = de -dt, fb,(t) = ce-".  c<d,  Let w, = wz = 1/2. Then  lim .fb'(t) = 0 and lim fbz(t) = co  t-.- LP) - LP)  but  lim .fb(t) __ lim W-,(t) + Wzfb2(t) = 1.  t-- fa(t) t-- W lfa,(t) + W Zfaz(t)  THEOREM I.C. If the underlying component distributions satisfy the necessary and sufficient conditions for parallel mimicry,  the mixture will.  For simplicity, this theorem is proved here for a mixture of only two distributions, but it can be generalized. This proof is  due to D. Vorberg, so the formulation is different from the other proofs and some specific background notation (including a  lemma and its proof) is necessary. (This notation will also be used in Appendix 2.B.)  For any parallel model with two possible responses, a and b, we may let g(Ta, Tb) denote the joint density of finishing times.  This density g is said to have a wsi representation if  g(t, Tb > t) = ga(t) Gb(t) (1.C.1)  and  g(TQ > t, t) =gb(t) G,(t) for all t > 0. (1.C.2)  (Where ga, gb, Go and Gb are as defined for Eqs. (1) and (2) in the text.)  Then, by a variant of a lemma of Vorberg's (Note 4), we may express some results using hazard functions. (A hazard function is  the density divided by the survivor function.)  PARALLEL VS SERIAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL 213 LEMMA (due to Vorberg). g has a wsi representation if and only if the functions ra(t)  = g(t, Tb > t)1P(Ta > t, Tb > t)  and  rb(t) = g(T- > t, t)IP(Ta > t, Tb > t)  are proper hazard functions, i.e., if (f o ra(s) ds) and (f o rb(s) ds) diverge as t , 00 (where P(TQ > t, Tb > t) is the  probability that neither finishes by t).  Proof of lemma. One may rewrite the relationship between a hazard function and survivor function as Gi(t) = exp(- f `o ri(s)  ds), so for Gi(t) to be a proper survivor function, (f o ri(s) ds) has to diverge. We now show that the distributions  generated by r,, and rb fulfill the wsi conditions of (1.C.1) and (1.C.2), by first showing the product that neither process  is finished is equal to the product of the two individual survivor functions, Ga and Gb.  G.(t) Gb(t) = exp ~- (t ra(s) ds) exp (- J rb(s) ds  -0 0  = exp (- f i (( g(s, Tb > s) + AT,  > s, s))/P(Ta > s, Tb > s)) dsl to  =exp ~-JtdlogP(T.>s,Tb>s) 0  = exp(log P(T. > t, Tb > t))  = P(Ta > t, Tb > 0  This equality and that gi(t) = r;(t) G;(t) lead to the wsi conditions, so the lemma is proved.  Let g be a mixture of g, and 92. Then g(Ta, Tb) = w, g,(Ta, TO + w2 g2(Ta, Tb). Theorem 1.C is true if the following is true:  Prove: g satisfies the necessary and sufficient conditions for a wsi representation if g, and 92 do.  Proof of Theorem 1.C. Let gi have hazard functions ri,, and rib, where ria(t) = gi(t, Tb > t)/Pi(T. > t, Tb > t) and similarly  for rib. To simplify the notation, let Pi = Pi(T,, > t, Tb > t). Then, one may rewrite ra(t),  ra(t) = (W1 91(t, Tb > t) + w2 g2(t, Tb > t)NW, P, + W'2P2) = (r,a(t) w,P, + r2a(t) WIP2)/(W,Pl + W2P2)  Define W(t) = WIPI/(w,P, + w2P2). Then,  ra(t) = w(t) r,a(t) + (1 - w(t)) r2a(t) = r2a(t) + w(t)(rla(t) - r2a(t)).  480/24/3-3  214 ROSS AND ANDERSON  Integrating both sides with respect to t,  fo ra(s) ds = fo r2.(S) ds + fo w(s)(r,a(s) - rza(s)) ds  = f o r2.(S) ds + w(s,) f 0 (r,Q(s) - r2.(s)) ds  by the generalized mean value theorem, where 0 < s, < t. Therefore, (f u ra(s) ds) is bounded by (f o r,a(s) ds) and (f u  rza(s) ds) for all t. So, if g, and gZ are wsi, r0 ,a(t) and r,,(t) (and by a similar argument r,b(t) and r1b(t)) are proper  hazard functions. Then ra(t) and rb(t) are proper hazard functions, so g is wsi. 1  THEOREM 1.D. If the underlying component distributions are from serial processes, their mixture will satisfy the necessary and  sufficient conditions for parallel mimicry, if and only if the dominating components satisfy the necessary and sujficient  conditions. That is, Eqs. (3) and (4) of the text will be true if and only if  ,  fPfar(t) dt= 0" (1 -P)fb,.(t) dt= co  o PFa,.(t) + (1 - P) Fbf.(t) fo PFa,(t) + (1 - P) Fbj.(t)  for dominating components fajt) andfbJ.(t). Proof. Without loss of generality, consider   P.fa(t) f)  o PF.(t) + (1 -p) Fb(t) dt.  Let T be a large value of t such that, for t > T, fajt) > ,,k(t) and fb,.(t) > fb.(t), k o i*, m * j*. (The f's are densities,  so are nonnegative.) Expression (1.D.1) integrates to infinity if and only if the following expression does: For fajt), the  dominating component,   Pt. wi*fa'(t) (1.D.2) f r PF.(t) + (1 - p) Fb(t) dt.  Expression (1.D.2) is greater than   Pr,wpfajt) dt (1.D.3) PF. jt) + (1 - P) Fb~(t) .D.3  since F,(t) < F,,,(t) and Fb(t) < Fb ,(t), for t > T.  From the mixture definitions in the beginning of Appendix 1, it is clear that pF.(t) > pi* w;.Far,(t) and (1 - p) Fb(t) > (1  -pj.) wj.Fb.,(t). Choose 0 < m < 1/2, such that  k = m(p;. w;. + (1 - pi.) wj>) < min(pj. wi., (1 - pj.) wj.).  PARALLEL VS SERIAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL 215  Then (1.D.2) is less than      Pi. wi-fajt) dt. (1.D.4)  Jr kpF.Jt) + (1 - P) kFb,(t)   Since Expressions (1.D.3) and (1.D.4) are related by a multiplicative constant, they are either both infinity or neither is.  Since Expression (1.D.2) is between them, it (and hence (1.D.1)) goes to infinity if and only if they do.  COROLLARY TO 1.D. Suppose in Theorem I.D thatfojt) > fb,,(t), for t > T.  If fal,(t) and fbl,(t) meet the necessary and sufficient conditions for parallel mimicry, then fo(t) and fb(t) will.  This corollary follows by substituting (p/p) FQ.,(t) + ((i - p)/p) F,.,(t) for the denominator of (I.D.3).  Also, if all the underlying distributions satisfy the necessary and sufficient conditions, so does their mixture.  Note to Theorem 1.D. Suppose the underlying distributions satisfy the necessary and sufficient conditions for parallel  mimicry. The mixture will also satisfy the necessary and sufficient conditions, but the dominating components need not have  the same subscript.  For example, let  f,, (t) = to -L gamma (2 stages, rate 1), f.2(t)e-L gamma (l, 1),  fb,(t)=e t gamma (1, 1),  fb,(t) = to -L gamma (2, 1).  APPENDIX 2: CONVOLUTIONS First, define a function k(t) such that  (1) 0<k(t)<t,  (2) k(t) is an increasing unbounded function of t,  (3 ) lim ft) fH(s) hH(t - S) dS _ N  t-- f 'k(,) fH(S) hH(t - S) dS H  and  lim L-CO  fo(L) fL(s) hL(t - S) ds _  f k(L) fL(S) hL(t - S) dS N,,  NH and NL nonnegative finite values.  216) ROSS AND ANDERSON  From the text, CH is the convolution off, and hH while cL is the convolution off, and hL (as text states, h, may be considered  as part of hH and hL).  THEOREM 2.A. If the memory processes (with densities fH and fL) dominate the non-memory processes (with densities hH and hL)  and if k(t) (defined above) exists, then for k(t) < st < t (st increasing with t) and for the convolutions (with densities cH  and c,),  lim CH(t) = lim fH(St) hH(t - St)  t-00 CL(t) N t-oo fL(St) hL(t - St)'  N a positive finite value.  So, if the non-memory processes are identical, the convolutions satisfy the sufficient condition for wsi parallel mimicry if  and only if the memory processes do.  Proof. Let  f *(t) = A(t) Mt)  and h*(t)= hH(t) hL(t) .  Also let N = (NH + 1)/(NL + 1), so N is a positive finite value.  By the definition of convolutions, cH(t) = f t ,,(s) hH(t - s) ds. So,  CH(t) __ f o fH(s) hH(t - s) ds CL(t) f 0 J L(S) hL(t - S) dS  f 0(t) fH(S) hH(t - S) dS + f k(t) fH(S) hH(t - S) dS - f o t) fL(s) hL(t - s) ds + f k( n J LlS) hL(t - s) ds  Multiply the numerator by (f k (n fH(s) hH(t - s) ds)/(f %(t) fH(s) hH(t - s) ds) and the denominator by the corresponding  identity for low frequency (L). Then, taking limits  hm CH(t) - (NH +_ 1 ) hm f k(t) fH(S) hH(t - S) dS  t-ooCL(t) NL+1 t-+co fk(t)fL(S)hL(t-S)ds  (The separating of the right hand side into two limits is allowed because (NH + 1)/  (NL + 1) is a positive finite value.) By the definitions of N, f * and h*, this last equation is  N lim f k'(,) f *(s) h *(t - s) fL(s) h L(t - s) as  =  t-ao f k(t) fL(S) hL(t - S) as  = N lim f *(st) h *(t - st), where k(t) < st < t,  t-00  by the generalized mean value theorem. So  lim CH (t) = N lim fH(st) . hH(t - st) '  t-00 CL(t) t~~ +L(St) hL(t - St) .  PARALLEL VS SERIAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL 217  Note to Theorem 2.A. As mentioned in the paper, for the generalized gamma distribution, the function tl2 satisfies the  conditions of k(t). It clearly meets the first two conditions and a proof of the third condition (for NH = NL = 0) is given  below. Since the proof is the same for the high and low frequency distributions, we may ignore subscripts. Let f(t) and h(t)  be generalized gamma densities, with f dominating h.  Prove:  lim f 2 f (s) h(t - s) ds = 0 f1/2 f(s) h(t - s) ds  Proof. If f(t) is a generalized gamma with rates a; and n, stages,  aae ~atlai)J  For each i, the denominator is a scalar, so we can let f(t) = Y_"_, bte-Qi` and, similarly, h(t) = Y12 ,cie-djt, if h(t) has  rates di and n2 stages.  Since h(t)lf (t) -4 0, min(a;) = a * < d * = min(di).  f0Zf(S)h(t-s)ds __ fo2(y,bte-a't)(y, _icie-d,(t-s))ds  fi/2f(S)h(t-S)ds ft/2 (y_j bte-Qit)(F _,icie-d;(t-s))ds  If we pull the summations outside of the integral and integrate, this becomes  Y_ Y_ [b,cil(di - at)](e_(u2)(d;+a;) _ e-d;t) y Y_ [bicil (di - at)I (e-ait - e-(t12)(di+a;)) .  (N2.A)  To show that this ratio goes to zero as t-+ oo, we need only consider the largest of the n, n2 summands in the numerator and  only the nonnegative term in that summand (since the sum is nonnegative). For large t, the nonnegative term will be largest  when ai and di are minimum, so at a* and d*, respectively. Thus, let this numerator term be m,e-ua*+d*)f2, where m, is a  nonnegative finite value.  Now consider the denominator. Note that all n, n2 summands are nonnegative (since if di < a;, then 1l(di-at) < 0, but also  e-ail < e-`(Qi+d;'i2. Consider the summand when a; = a* and di=d*, or m2(e-a,t - e-t(adv2) where m2 is a nonnegative  finite value. If the ratio of the largest term in the numerator to this summand from the denominator is zero as t- oc, then  the limit of Eq. (N2.A) is zero as well. So we have  m e-t(a'+d`)12 m ) 1  lim m2 e-a.t - e-t(adi2 = ti co m2 et(dan _ 1  which is zero, since a * < d *.  218 ROSS AND ANDERSON  Appendix 2.B  Theorem 2.B, due to D. Vorberg, is proved within the framework established in Theorem 1.C. If the process is wsi, the memory  processes race on each trial and, to the minimum, is added some time from the appropriate non-memory process distribution, ho  or hb. We have assumed in this paper that these additional times are conditionally independent of the memory process times. We  examine the effects of this convolution by deriving the corresponding hazard functions, raa and rbb. By a generalization of  Vorberg's lemma presented for Theorem I.C,  f u ha (t - s) g(s, Tb > s) ds  raa(t) = f 'O [ha(t - s) P(T. > TQ > s) + hb(t - s) P(TQ > Tb > s)] ds  and  f u hb(t - s) g(TQ > s, s) ds  rbb(t) - f o [h.(t - s) P(Tb > TQ > s) + hb(t - s) P(Ta > Tb > s)] ds'  THEOREM 2.B. If the non-memory processes are identical for low and high frequency responses (ha = hb = h), the memory process  densities are not zero at time zero, and the hazard functions of the memory processes are monotonic, then the convolutions  satisfy the necessary and sufficient conditions for wsi parallel mimicry if and only if the memory processes do.  Using notation, this theorem states that raa and rnb are proper hazard functions if g is wsi, ra and rb are monotonic, hQ = hb  = h, and both ra(0) and rb(0) > 0 (where ra and rb are the hazard functions for the memory processes as defined in Theorem  i.C).  Proof. Consider raQ  foh(t-s)g(s,T>s)ds  raa(t) = f o h(t - s) [P(Tb > Ta > s) + P(Ta > Tb > s) ] ds  _ f o ra(t) h(t - s) P(T. > s, Tb > s) ds ft h(t-s)P(TQ>s,Tb>s)ds  from the definition of rQ in Theorem I.C. Thus, if t > 0, raa(t) is a weighted average of ra(s), 0 < s < t, where the  weighting function is h(t - s) P(Ta > s, Tb > s). Since ra is assumed to be monotonic, consider two cases. If ra is  non-decreasing, raQ(t) > rQ(0) (which is greater than 0, since the density at time 0 is assumed to be greater than 0). If rQ  is non-increasing, raa(t) > ra(t). Thus, if the original system given by g is wsi, the convolution will be.  Notes to Theorem 2.B. (1) The assumption that the density is nonzero at time 0 was to insure that, in the non-decreasing case,  r,(0) > 0 and, hence, raa(0) > 0. An alternative assumption would be that if the density is 0 until time to, the weighting  function has some of its weight after to when ra(s) > 0 (to < s < t).  PARALLEL VS SERIAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL 219  (2) Along these same lines, it is possible to relax the monotonic condition by making other assumptions about the memory  processes and their hazard functions to insure that raQ(t) > 0.  APPENDIX 3: GENERALIZED GAMMA DISTRIBUTION RESULTS  Let fH, fL, h,, hL, and h, be generalized gamma densities with stages kk,, k3, k4, and k,, and rates ai, fli, yi, St, and  0,, respectively (i = 1, appropriate k.;). For simplicity, assume no two rates are equal.  Let  kH=k,+k3+k,  and  kL=kZ+k,+k,.  Let  cH = convolution (f,, hH, h,)  and  CL = convolution V L, hL, h,).  Then CH and CL are generalized gamma densities with stages kH and kL and rates jai, yi, Oil and {,Bj, ai, Oil respectively.  fH(t) = i~ a, e(1a,r ailai) J  Then the survivor function is  k, 1 - e -ail  1(t) 1 - ~ I Hi' 1.Imt (1 - ailai)  k, [ e -all  I'--` Hi'--1.i$1 (1 -ai1a;)~.  (The tail-dominating parameters will be designated by a "max" subscript to indicate that their distributions dominate in the  tails, but they are actually the smallest numbers).  THEOREM 3.A. If the tail-dominating parameters of the convolutions (c, and CL) are from the memory processes (fH and fL), then  the memory processes satisfy the sufficient condition for parallel mimicry if and only if the convolutions do.  220 ROSS AND ANDERSON  Proof. Substituting s, and u j for scalars, to simplify the notation,  CH (t) _ Yk-_Hl s,a/e-ail rkL '-l'jl c'(t) `j=1 ujaje i  where the a;s include all the rates from CH (a, y, and 0) and the /3;s include all the rates from CL (/3, S, and 0). Let the  tail-dominating parameters from the memory processes be amax and imax for fH and fL, respectively. Then in (3.A.1), the  denominator is greater than umaxflmax e-amaxt, but less than (E uj#i) e-amax`, so it can be set to a multiple of e-amax!, say,  re-i'maxl. We need only look at the largest summand in the numerator, so, for some finite value K,  CH(t) K e-amax! ci.(t) e-amaxl  By similar reasoning, since amax is from fH and ,am.,, is from fL, for some finite K'  A(t) K' e-amaxt A(t) e-amax!  So fH and fL satisfy the sufficient condition if and only if CH and CL do.  THEOREM 3.B. If the tail-dominating parameters of the convolutions are from the memory processes, then the memory processes  satisfy the necessary and sufficient conditions for parallel mimicry if and only if the convolutions do.  Proof. Consider one of the necessary and sufficient conditions (Eq. (3) of the text) for both the convolutions (c, and CL) and  the memory retrieval process (f, and fL )  ( 00 PCH(t)   =   Jo PCH(t) dt (3.B.1)  + (1 oo,   - P)CL(t)   f PfH(t)   dt = oo. (3.B.2)  Jo PF'H(t) + (1 - P) FL(t)   Let the tail-dominating parameters from f, and fL be amax and /amax, respectively. Consider Eq. (3.B.2) with the densities  substituted:  Jo P(1 -Y,i'--j (ailai)(1 - e-ai')) + (1 -P)(1 -~i? (bi~/~t)(1 -e -ad))  where  ai  a,= j*i ~(1-ailaj)J  j-i  and bi has a corresponding meaning. Only the limiting behavior of the integrand  PARALLEL VS SERIAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL 221  needs to be considered to examine divergence. Also, we only need to consider the largest summand in the numerator, since if  this diverges the sum will and if it does not the sum won't (since there are a finite number of summands.) The largest summand  will be the one with amax  Co -amaxt pamax e  a 2-t sie-att + z. u.e-art dt= oo,  (3.13.3)  where s; and ui have been substituted for scalars in the denominator to simplify the expression.  Let  rmax = mln(amax I #max)'  One may choose positive finite 6 and T such that for t > T,  `, s;e-att + '~7 uie-ait < be -rmaxt, t i  where a;, /3i * rmax so (3.13.3) will diverge only if, for positive finite m,  00 e-amaxt  m e-Pazt dt = oo.  r  (3.13.4)  Now consider the convolutions, cE, and c,.. Since amax is the tail-dominating parameter in cF, and #max is the tail-dominating  parameter in c,., one may use these same arguments to show Eq. (3.13.1) implies  _co e-amaxt  m, -rmazt dt = 0o. _r e  So Eq. (3:13.1) is true iff Eq. (3.B.2) is true.  THEOREM 3.C. The memory processes (and, thus, the convolutions) satisfy the necessary and sufficient conditions for parallel  mimicry if and only if the taildominating parameters for the high and low frequency memory processes are equal.  Proof. Equation (3.13.4) in the last proof shows that for fH and f, to satisfy the necessary and sufficient condition (Eq. (3)  of the text),  .oo e - ammat  m e-rmazt dt = 00  r  If the other necessary and sufficient condition (Eq. (4) of the text) is worked through the same steps, one gets  00 e-/imaxt  r ml e-.maxi dt= oo. (3.C.2)  222  ROSS AND ANDERSON  Since rmax = min(amax, t'ma,,), for both Eqs. (3.C.1) and (3.C.2) to be satisfied, amax must equal t'max (If that conclusion  is not immediately clear, consider (3.C.1) if #max < amax),  REFERENCES  ANDERSON, J. R. Language, memory and thought. Hillsdale, N. J.: Erlbaum, 1976.  ANDERSON, J. R., & BOWER, G. H. Human associative memory. Washington, D.C.: Winston, 1973. ASHBY, F. G., & TOWNSEND, J. T.  Decomposing the reaction time distribution: Pure insertion and selective influence revisited. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 1980, 21, 93-123.  ATKINSON, R. C., HOLMGREN, J. E., & JUOLA, J. F. Processing time as influenced by the number of elements in a visual display.  Perception & Psychophysics, 1969, 6, 321-326.  DONDERI, D., & ZELNICKER, D. Parallel processing in visual same-different decisions. Perception & Psychophysics, 1969, 5,  197-200.  DONDERs, F. C. [On the speed of mental processes]. In W. G. Koster (Ed. and trans.), Attention and performance 11. Amsterdam:  North-Holland, 1969.  EGETH, H. Parallel versus serial processes in multidimensional stimulus discrimination. Perception & Psychophysics, 1966, 1,  245-252.  GREEN, D. M., & LUCE, R. D. Detection of auditory signals presented at random times, III. Perception & Psychophysics, 1971, 9,  257-268.  LUCE, R. D. & GREEN, D. M. Detection of auditory signals presented at random intervals, II. Perception & Psychophysics, 1970,  7, 1-13.  MCGILL, W., & GIBBON, J. The general-gamma distribution and reaction times. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1965, 2, 1-18.  NEISSER, U. Visual search. Scientific American, 1964, 210, 94-102.  POPPER, K. R. The logic of scientific discovery. New York: Basic Books, 1959.  PROUDFOOT, R. G. YEPS: Running real-time experiments on a timesharing system. Behavior Research Methods & Instrumentation,  1978, 10, 291-296.  RATCLIFF, R. A theory of memory retrieval. Psychological Review, 1978, 85, 59-108.  RATCLIFF, R. Group reaction time distributions and an analysis of distribution statistics. Psychological Bulletin, 1979, 86,  446-461.  RATCLIFF, R., & MURDOCK, JR., B. B. Retrieval operations in recognition memory. Psychological Review, 1976, 83, 190-214.  RUMELHART, D. E. A multicomponent theory of the perception of briefly exposed visual displays. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 1970, 7, 191-218.  SHEVELL, S. K., & ATKINSON, R. C. A theoretical comparison of list scanning models. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1974,  11, 79-106.  SMITH, E. E. Choice reaction time: An analysis of the major theoretical positions. Psychological Bulletin, 1968, 69, 77-110.  SNODGRASS, J. G., & TOWNSEND, J. T. Comparing parallel and serial models: Theory and implementation. Journal of Experimental  Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 1980, 6, 330-354. STERNBERG, S. The discovery of processing stages: Extensions  of Donders' method. In W. G. Koster (Ed.) Attention and performance 11. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1969.  TAYLOR, D. A. Stage analysis of reaction time. Psychological Bulletin, 1976, 83, 161-191.  THOMAS, E. A. C. Alternative models for information processing: Constructing non-parametric tests. British Journal of  Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 1969, 22, 105-113.  THOMAS, E. A. C. Sufficient conditions for monotone hazard rate: An application to latency-probability curves. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 1971, 3, 303-332.  THOMAS, E. A. C., & Ross, B. H. On appropriate procedures for combining probability distributions within the same family.  Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1980, 21, 136-152.  PARALLEL VS SERIAL MEMORY RETRIEVAL 223  TOWNSEND, J. T. A note on the identifiability of parallel and serial processes. Perception & Psychophysics, 1971, 10, 161-163.  TOWNSEND, J. T. Some results concerning the identifiability of parallel and serial processes. British Journal of Mathematical  and Statistical Psychology, 1972, 25, 168-199.  TOWNSEND, J. T. Issues and models concerning the processing of a finite number of inputs. In B. H. Kantowitz (Ed.) Human  information processing: Tutorials in performance and cognition. Hillsdalle N. J.: Erlbaum, 1974.  TOWNSEND, J. T. A stochastic theory of matching processes. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1976. 14, 1-52 (a).  TOWNSEND, J. T. Serial and within-stage parallel model equivalence on the minimum completion time. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 1976, 14, 219-238 (b).  WILK, M. B., & GNANADESIKAN, R. Probability plotting methods for the analysis of data. Biometrika, 1968, 55, 1-17.  REFERENCE NOTES  1. VORBERG, D., personal communication, 1980.  2. VORBERG, D. On the equivalence of parallel and serial models of information processing. Tenth Mathematical Psychology  Meeting. Los Angeles, 1977.  3. TOWNSEND, J., personal communication, 1980.  4. VORBERG, D. AMS meeting on Mathematical Psychology and Psychophysiology. Philadelphia, 1980. 5. WANDELL, B., personal  communication, 1981.