10.1016/0022-2496(81)90050-x
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 23, 90-97 (1981)  Book Review  What is a language, that a child may learn it, and a child, that he may learn a language?  K. WEXLER AND P. CULICOVER. Formal Principles of Language Acquisition. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1980. Pp. xvii + 647.  $35.00.  Reviewed by STEVEN PINKER  The authors are associated with the Program in Cognitive Science of the School of Social Sciences, University of California,  Irvine. Kenneth Wexler received his Ph.D. in Psychology from Stanford University, then proceeded to the University of  California, Irvine. He has spent time as a Sloan Foundation Visiting Scientist at the Departments of Linguistics and of  Computer and Information Science, University of Massachusetts at Amherst. His major research interest is mathematical and  theoretical psycholinguistics. Peter W. Culicover obtained his Ph.D. in Linguistics at Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  and also then proceeded to the University of California, Irvine. He has written and edited several books in the area of his  major research involvement, which is theoretical linguistics.  The reviewer, Steven Pinker, is Assistant Professor of Psychology and Social Relations, Harvard University, the department  from which he received his Ph.D. Previous to his present position, he spent a year as a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Center for  Cognitive Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, still being associated with the latter as a Research Affiliate. His  primary research interests are language acquisition and the representation of visual space.  For as long as there have been theories of learning in psychology, there have been suspicions that these theories do not  explain what they aim to explain. It often seems that the explanatory power of a learning theory flows more from the  intuitions of the theorist and the cooperativeness of the audience than from the assertions of the theory itself. An antidote  to these suspicions has been to formalize learning theories as mathematical models or computer simulations, so that the powers  of the putative learning mechanisms can reveal themselves in the behavior of the model, free from the theorist acting as a  deus ex machina. However, the learning theorist interested in  With apologies to Warren McCulloch. I am grateful to Cynthia Carter, A. A. J. Marley, Samuel Jay Keyser, and Jane Grimshaw for  helpful comments on an earlier draft. Reprints may be obtained from the author at the Department of Psychology and Social  Relations, William James Hall, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass. 02138.  0022-2496/81/010090-08$02.00/0  Copyright ~c 1981 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  90  BOOK REVIEW 91  higher cognitive faculties has usually been faced with a dilemma. On the one hand, mathematically tractable stimulus-response  and associative learning models seriously underrepresent human learning abilities. On the other, it is difficult to model  complex natural forms of learning because there is rarely a precise characterization of the ability learned or of the  information used to learn it (e.g., in the recognition of familiar objects).  In the early 1960s, it became apparent that the child's acquisition of the syntax of his first language was very close to an  ideal test case for theories of learning. Here was a learned ability that was fantastically complex, but nonetheless attained  by every normal child. As Noam ChoTsky and George Miller showed, the ability acquired can be given formal characterizations  (grammars) with elegant mathematical properties. Furthermore, the input on which the learning is based can be characterized  simply: as a list of strings of symbols representing the sentences heard by the child during his first few years (possibly  augmented by contextual information.) Adding to the interest in language acquisition was Chomsky's bold conjecture that when a  successful model of language learning, a "language acquisition device," is formulated, it will necessarily have built in to it  knowledge of the universal formal properties of human grammars.  Thus the new field of language acquisition was born. Early on it seemed, through the work of Roger Brown and others, that  studies of the developing language of the child could be highly informative to the theorist intent on developing a language  acquisition model. Learning theories based on imitation and reinforcement, already suspected of being inadequate, were  dramatically disconfirmed by the creative nature of the child's earliest word combinations. Furthermore, the course of  syntactic development thereafter was found to be strikingly systematic and uniform. Those early studies even seemed to bear  out the intuition that language development would reflect the accretion of grammatical transformations by the "language  acquisition device," culminating in a full transformational grammar for the target language.  Eventually, the bubble burst. Counterexamples to many of the empirical generalizations soon surfaced, and when researchers  recalled that not just language, but memory, cognition, and social skills were developing in the child as well,  counterexplanations became available for the data originally thought to reflect the accumulation of transformations. This  disillusionment was accompanied by a growing sympathy for the Piagetian thesis that language acquisition and cognitive  development are inseparable, and with an increased interest in aspects of language development other than syntax (e.g., the  use of language in concrete social contexts). Together, these developments have taken language acquisition researchers so far  from the original issue of how languages are acquired that the field is often referred to by a new and less ambitious name:  child language.  An exciting exception to this trend is a research project initiated by Kenneth Wexler, Henry Hamburger, and Peter Culicover,  and reported in detail by Wexler and Culicover in Formal Principles of Language Acquisition. These investigators address  themselves not to the myriad data on the child's speech at various stages, but to a single, crucial datum: all children  succeed at acquiring a grammar for the  92 BOOK REVIEW  language of their community, based on the information available in the sentences addressed to them. Their project had two  goals. First was a theory of language defining a set of grammars that are learnable in principle from the sort of information  available to children, using a learning procedure that is at least a minimally plausible characterization of what children do.  Second was a set of empirical arguments that the theory of grammar used in the learnability proof correctly characterizes  human languages. The arguments try to show that sentences predicted to be grammatical or ungrammatical by their theory of  grammar are indeed judged to be so by speakers of English. While admitting that child language data are also potentially  relevant to evaluating their theory, they argue that one should try to account for the fact of language acquisition first.  Their first formal result was a negative, and somewhat surprising one: the class of "standard" transformational grammars, as  described by Chomsky in 1965 in Aspects of the Theory of Syntax, is unlearnable (i.e., one cannot induce an arbitrary target  grammar selected from the class based on a sample of sentences drawn from the target language). This is true even if one makes  the helpful (but false) assumption that the world's languages have identical deep structures, and differ only. in the  transformations they use to map deep structures onto surface structures. Given that children do learn something like a  transformational grammar, two responses are possible, and Wexler et al. make both: enrich the input to the learner, and  constrain further the class of target grammars (and hence, the class of hypotheses entertained by the learner).  One powerful way to enrich the input is to assume that information about ungrammatical word combinations is available to the  child, perhaps from parental correction or disapproval of the child's ill-formed utterances. Although earlier theorems by E.  M. Gold showed that such information makes language learnability easy to prove, Wexler et al. eschewed the assumption because  studies by Brown and others make it dubious that children have access to such information. Instead, they adopted the  assumption, commonplace in developmental psycholinguistics, that the child has simultaneous access to sentences and their  meanings, the latter inferred by the child from his perception of the physical and social context in which the sentence was  uttered. Sentence meanings, they propose, may be represented universally as deep structure trees with the left-to-right order  of branches left unspecified. If the child early on hears untransformed sentences, he can juxtapose them with the inferred  semantic structures to deduce the linear orders of constituents specified by the rules generating his language's deep  structures. When this simple procedure has been completed, the child's input may be idealized as deep structure:sentence  pairs, and his task is to induce the set of transformational rules used by his target language to map one onto the other. How  this task is accomplished is the central concern of the book.  Wexler et al. opted for an unequal division of labor between process and content in their model: simple hypothesis-testing  process, rich constraints on the hypotheses entertained. On each trial, the learner applies his current transformational rules  to the input deep structure. If the resulting surface sentence is identical to the one in the input, nothing is changed. If  the grammar makes an error (i.e., the generated and  BOOK REVIEW 93  input strings do not match), either an old transformation is discarded or a new one, capable of performing the desired  deep-surface mapping, is coined. (The exact action taken is chosen at random from a set of possibilities drawn up for that  input.) Since the learner can be made capable of hypothesizing any permissible transformation, all one has to do to prove that  the learner will guess the correct set of transformations in the limit is to show that any incorrectly hypothesized set of  transformations will make a detectable error when applied to some deep structure encountered within a bounded time. To do  that, one must show that these incorrect transformations will be exposed by an input structure of bounded complexity, where  the complexity or "degree" of a deep structure can be measured as the number of recursive embeddings of sentences within  sentences in the structure. This leads one to seek a universal definition of transformational grammar with the property of  "bounded degree of error detectability": if two sets of transformations map any deep structure onto distinct surface  sentences, they must also differ for a deep structure less complex than a certain bound. Better still, one would want to show  that this complexity bound is small, so that the learner can discriminate correct from incorrect grammars on the basis of  their behavior on simple input sentences. Wexler and Culicover, in fact, want to show that this complexity bound is  "degree-2": that any transformational grammar meeting certain conditions can be learned from input data no more complex than  sentences that contain sentences that contain sentences. Once learned, of course, the grammar can be used to generate  sentences of arbitrary complexity.  Showing that this property holds for standard transformational grammars turns out to be surprisingly difficult. For example,  if a target grammar is permitted to contain a transformation applying to constituents spanning no less than, say, four  embedded sentences in a deep structure, no structure less complex than that will offer the learner the opportunity to  hypothesize that transformation correctly. These possibilities must be ruled out by a universal constraint, the Binary  Principle, forbidding transformations to apply to constituents spanning more than two embedded sentences in deep structure.  Far worse are the possibilities that arise when transformations are permitted to "raise" constituents from an embedded  sentence to the next higher one. An incorrectly formulated transformation might make a hidden error on some deeply embedded  sentence, an error which is only exposed after several raising transformations are given the opportunity to translate the  hidden error into a detectable deviation in word order. Without seeing a structure sufficiently complex to allow these raising  transformations to reveal the error, the learner has no basis for discarding the bad transformation. Thus he cannot be shown  to succeed at learning on simple data. These cases call for additional constraints that rule out the possibility of some  transformations concealing the effects of others as they apply across chains of embedded sentences. For example, the Freezing  Principle forbids transformations to alter or examine the constituents beneath a given node in a tree if those constituents  could only have been placed in their current configuration by the earlier application of some transformation. The Raising  Principle similarly seals off constituents under any node raised from a lower to a higher sentence. A dozen constraints and  140 pages later, the proof of learnability of transformational  94 BOOK REVIEW  grammars from "degree-2" input data is complete. The theory takes its name, the "Degree-2 theory," from this result.  The next 120 pages are devoted to defending the empirical aptness of the principles. For example, evidence for the correctness  of the Binary Principle can be found in an array of facts of the following sort. A transformation can apply across the two  sentences contained in the deep structure underlying It is easy for John to talk to gnomes, yielding the sentence Gnomes are  easy for John to talk to. However, the same transformation, when applied across the three sentences contained in the deep  structure underlying It is easy for John to prove that he talks to gnomes, yields a string that English speakers judge to be  ungrammatical: Gnomes are easy for John to prove that he talks to. Generally the evidence is anything but straightforward.  Many of the arguments require that the reader accept somewhat questionable background assumptions, and counterexamples  frequently pop up, forcing Wexler and Culicover to complicate their theory in response. Even putting aside the psychologist's  usual reservations (unfounded, I believe) about using grammaticality judgments as data, the empirical support for most of the  principles can at best be called moderate. But this should not be allowed to count too heavily against their theory. That the  principles help account for the empirical fact that children learn to speak is one kind of prima facie evidence that they are  valid. That these principles, introduced solely to make the learnability proof go through, receive even modest empirical  support is quite impressive.  It is natural for a reader, after having been led through a long, complex, and unintuitive proof and a large set of convoluted  empirical arguments, to have very high expectations for the lasting worth of this enterprise. In my opinion the study meets  those expectations. In the first place, the work provides some of the most convincing arguments ever advanced for Chomsky's  innateness hypothesis. We are shown in quite vivid terms how the information available to the child, even under a very liberal  interpretation of how rich that information is, vastly underdetermines the sorts of conclusions the child must draw about the  target language if he is to succeed. Of course, Wexler and Culicover cannot argue for the necessity of their proposed innate  constraints, only for their sufficiency. Thus they concede that it is logically possible for these linguistic principles to be  deducible from properties of general multipurpose learning strategies, or for such strategies to obviate the need for the  principles altogether. However, the highly specific details of the adult grammar and the numerous opportunities for a learner  to make specious inferences from his input data in trying to acquire them make this possibility extremely remote. Certainly  there has been no principle based on studies of tasks like visual concept identification or the induction of numerical  sequences that would solve the learnability problems called to our attention by Wexler and Culicover.  The second contribution of the Degree-2 theory is its illustration of how linguistic universals can be explained. The search  for universals of language has a long history in linguistics, but until recently there have been few grounds for  distinguishing the theoretically significant generalizations from the epiphenomena and historical accidents. Wexler and  Culicover are in a unique position to argue that the  BOOK REVIEW 95  explanation for a given principle (e.g., the Binary Principle) being true of the world's languages is that if it weren't, no  child could learn them.  Finally, an explicit learning theory like the Degree-2 theory points the way toward clarifying the interpretation of data from  developmental psycholinguistics. The scientist trying to infer the child's grammar by observing the child's utterances is in a  position no better than that of the child trying to infer the adult grammar by observing the adult's utterances. In the 1960s,  in fact, careful psycholinguists discovered to their dismay that a grammar they might write for the odd-numbered utterances in  a corpus of child speech could bear scant resemblence to the grammar written for the even-numbered utterances. If the child  succeeds at his task by virtue of innate constraints on the hypotheses he entertains, so must the psycholinguist's hypotheses  be constrained, and a learning model proven to be capable of acquiring language may be the best place to find such  constraints. Wexler and Culicover devote a chapter and a half to considering a number of proposals about language development  put forth by developmental psycholinguists, for example, that the simplified parental speech addressed to children facilitates  language acquisition, or that the child's linguistic abilities force him to map semantic intentions directly onto word  sequences without using intermediate levels of grammatical representation. They are unsparing in their criticisms of these  proposals but I think the criticisms are largely on the mark. Without some inkling as to how language acquisition occurs, it  is difficult to make sound proposals about the course or causes of acquisition.  Unfortunately, most of their comments on the course of language acquisition do not stem from specific conclusions of their  research. Although earlier presentations included some speculations about how child language data might be interpreted using  their proposed learnability constraints, in Formal Principles this possibility is discussed, pessimistically, only in the  second-to-last paragraph of the book. Of course, the interpretation of language development is not the principal goal of the  research, but the remoteness of the Degree-2 theory from empirical considerations in the study of child language is cause for  worry. Let me elaborate.  The Degree-2 theory took the shape that it did largely because Wexler and his collaborators felt that certain "reasonableness  conditions" on the learning mechanisms, frequently violated in earlier mathematical treatments of language learnability, were  indispensable if their model was to be taken seriously as a theory of human language acquisition. The learner should process  only the input sentence at hand, instead of memorizing every sentence ever heard, and he should change one rule at a time,  instead of adopting and discarding grammars in one fell swoop. Most importantly, he should need only simple data to succeed.  Although the model meets those conditions, which presumably were motivated by the limited informationprocessing capacity of  the child, it violates a number of others. For example, although Wexler et al. do not provide effective procedures for their  learner to use in drawing up a set of permissible transformations from which a hypothesis is to be selected on a given trial,  it appears likely that such computations might make implausible demands on the learner's time and memory. Each potentially  hypothesizable transformation must be tested on the input datum to verify that it  96 BOOK REVIEW  maps the deep structure onto the sentence without violating any of the constraints. Some of these constraints might require  lengthy tests of their own, and the entire set of transformations capable of passing these tests must be assembled before the  hypothesis for that trial is selected. Furthermore, two striking features of human language development are that it is  astonishingly rapid and that it is marked by few errors, considering the possibilities available. In contrast, the Degree-2  learner, despite all its constraints, is still in large part a trial-and-error learner (in fact, the role of the constraints  is to ensure that the learner can recover from any error), and the learner is proved to succeed in the limit but not  necessarily in a reasonably short period of time.  The significance of these observations is as follows: Wexler and Culicover's reasonableness conditions, especially  learnability from simple data, led them to a theory radically different from what they might have obtained had they ignored  those conditions. One wonders if heeding some equally plausible reasonableness conditions, such as tractable computability,  rapid convergence, and infrequent errors, might lead one to a theory as different from the Degree-2 theory as the Degree-2  theory is from its predecessors in the mathematical literature. An ideal theory meeting these conditions might consist of a  procedure or set of procedures that coined correct rules, of a form determined by innate rule schemata, through a relatively  short chain of computations working on an internal representation of the input datum.  Interestingly, the evolution of theories of transformational grammar since the time of the Standard Theory seems to be leading  in just that direction. In many recent versions of transformational grammar, the transformational component has been gutted to  the point where only the transformation "move a constituent of category x" remains. Linguistic phenomena that used to be  explained by the operation of particular transformations are now ascribed to universal constraints (possibly incorporating  language-specific parameters) concerning which elements may be moved, where they may be moved to, which tree configurations  may be left in the aftermath of a transformation, and so on, or to rules and conditions in other grammatical components such  as phonology, semantics, or the lexicon. As a result, the learner has far fewer options available to him, especially in the  learning of transformations, and it would seem that explaining language acquisition no longer depends so strongly on the  imposition of constraints ensuring that a large set of possible hypothesization errors will be detectable by the learner-the  errorful guesses now would not have been permitted to begin with.  These changes in linguistic theory, and others such as the use of surface structures rather than deep structures as the  syntactic representations interfacing with semantics, are somewhat difficult to integrate into the Degree-2 theory. The  background assumptions about the general architecture of the grammar, and the specific principles imposed thereafter, all  interact so tightly that a small change in one assumption can have far-reaching effects on the formal results and on the  plausibility of the model as a whole. For example, if deep structures no longer map onto semantic interpretations, it is hard  to see how the child could construct deep structures based on his perception of the nonlinguistic context. The undeniable  advantages of devising a  BOOK REVIEW 97  proof to substantiate the learning powers of one's model may be offset by the possibility that the model will become obsolete  in a period of linguistics marked by rapid flux.  It would be unwise to make too much of these criticisms. Formal Principles is a carefully reasoned book throughout, and Wexler  and Culicover are under no illusions about the definitiveness of their results. Even putting aside its contributions toward  the innateness debate, the explanation of linguistic universals, and the evaluation of psycholinguistic proposals, Formal  Principles will stand as a pioneering work on a complex but rewarding subject, the study of which is still in its infancy, and  as one of the outstanding achievements in cognitive science in the past decade.