10.1016/0022-2496(81)90055-9
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 23, 153-183 (1981)  The Nature of Soviet Mathematical Psychology  VLADIMIR A. LEFEBVRE AND WILLIAM H. BATCHELDER  School of Social Sciences, University of California  Revision received February 26, 1981  This paper describes work done in the Soviet Union involving formal approaches to psychology. The work is taxonomized into  cybernetic models, information theory and psychology, decision making, automata theory and psychology, and perception and  psychophysics. Several projects are described in depth and many others are briefly mentioned. To facilitate the description of  Soviet work, the history and current setting of Soviet mathematical psychology as well as appropriate ties to related Western  work are described. Finally, some Soviet discussions of Western mathematical psychology are themselves discussed. On the  whole, Soviet mathematical psychology is a young but growing field of study. Its main impetus has been cybernetics, and it has  developed with little direct interaction with related Western work. While there are many similarities between Soviet and  Western mathematical psychology, there are some interesting functional differences.  INTRODUCTION  The purpose of this essay is to describe the area of mathematical psychology in the Soviet Union. By "mathematical psychology"  we mean efforts to develop and apply formalism in psychological areas of investigation.  In the Western world, the label "mathematical psychology" has not only the wide meaning conveyed above, but also a more narrow  connotation relating to the subset of formal and psychological work that one associates with a movement within American  psychology initiated in the early 1950s by such scientists as R. R. Bush, C. H. Coombs, W. K. Estes, R. D.Luce, F. Mosteller,  P. Suppes, among others. That movement, in its initial phase, centered on formal developments in learning theory, choice  behavior, and psychophysics. It founded the Journal of Mathematical Psychology in 1964 and started the Mathematical Psychology  Group in 1967, which in 1977 was incorporated into the Society for Mathematical Psychology.  The current Journal of Mathematical Psychology, the Society's Paper sessions, and state-of-the-art books like Contemporary  Developments in Mathematical Psychology, Vols. I, II (Krantz, Atkinson, Luce, & Suppes, 1974) reflect a much broader base for  formal work in psychology than originally conceived in the 1950s. Nevertheless, major areas of formal work in psychology done  in the Western world-much of  We would like to thank Dr. Victorina D. Lefebvre who assisted us in the translation of Russian papers into English and who  provided helpful psychological insights throughout the project.  153  0022-2496/81/020153-31502.00/0  Copyright (c 1981 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  154 LEFEBVRE AND BATCHELDER  neural modeling, psychometrics, mathematical linguistics, and facets of artificial intelligence-are not strongly represented  within the narrow sense of mathematical psychology.  In this essay, we will attempt to adopt the wide sense of the term "mathematical psychology." The primary emphasis will be on  the Soviet work; however, parallels with appropriate Western work will be drawn throughout.  The essay begins with a discussion of the History and Organization of Soviet Mathematical Psychology (Section I). Then the  work that we discuss is organized into Section 11: Cybernetic Models; Section III: Information Theory and Psychology; Section  IV: Decision Making; Section V: Automata Theory and Psychology; and Section VI: Perception and Psychophysics. In Section VII,  Soviet work reviewing Western mathematical psychology will be discussed. Finally, Section VIII will conclude with some  overview.  The source material for the essay is primarily from the library, personal contacts, and experience of the first author, who,  prior to his emigration to the United States in 1974, was an active member of the Soviet mathematical psychology community.  1. HISTORY AND ORGANIZATION OF SOVIET MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY  Soviet mathematical psychology has developed relatively recently starting after Stalin's death in 1953. In the Western world,  mathematical psychology had as one of its forerunners the area of psychometrics, which concerns such areas as test theory,  psychological statistics, scaling, factor analysis, etc. This area has been active in the Western world since the late 1800s  and the work of Binet and others on mental testing. There were parallel developments in Russian psychology in the early 1900s.  In Russia, the interest in psychometric methods arose in the large field known as "pedology." The area dealt with various  facets of child development and education and was historically connected to the writings of such people as J. M. Baldwin  (1861-1934), G. S. Hall (1844-1924), W. Preyer (1842-1897), and others. Pedology was popular in Russia even before the  Revolution of 1917. At that time, among its adherents were Bekhterev, Rosolimo, and Nechaev.  After the revolution, pedology continued to be developed in the 1920s and early 1930s by such people as A. B. Zalkind (1927),  P. P. Blonsky (1964), M. Ya. Basov (1931), S. S. Molozhavy (1924), and L. S. Vygotsky (1962). The area also played a major  applied role in teacher education.  One of the concerns in pedology came to be the assessment of intelligence and abilities. Psychometrics and psychological  statistics started to develop then. While psychometrics did not develop at that time into a separate field of study in Russia,  we can say that mathematical psychology viewed as a spirit of formal scientific investigation first appeared in Russian  Science in the early 1900s in the context of ability testing. Had this early spirit taken its natural course, one might guess  that the whole complex of psychometric methods and psychological statistics would have  SOVIET MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 155  been developed and taken a central place in Soviet psychology as it did in the Western world (Mandryka, 1931); however, this  did not happen because of several factors that influenced the development of Soviet psychology.  A political factor became dominant in Soviet science in the 1920s and 1930s (Petrovsky, 1964, p.29). This was based on Lenin's  work Materialism and Empiriocriticism (Lenin, 1909), where he extended the Marxist idea of class struggle between the  bourgeoisie and the proletariat to science. Behind the natural interaction of scientific conceptions, Lenin saw a collision of  conflicting political ideologies. Some Soviet scholars advocated and extended Lenin's point of view, and it was typical for a  scientific discussion in the 1920s and 1930s to turn into a polemic, where each side tried to support its own opinion by  "proletarian ideology" and to assign its opponent's position to "bourgeoise ideology" (Petrovsky, 1964, p. 47).  The broad application of various tests by pedologists led naturally to scientific discussion of their merit, and the criticism  of testing often assumed the language of political accusation rather than scientific polemic (Yaroshevsky, 1966, p. 542; also  see Bauer, 1962, p. 95).  On July 4, 1936, a government decree titled "Concerning Pedological Perversions in the System of Ministry of Education" was  published. Shortly thereafter pedology became a forbidden science and most of the psychological journals were terminated. In  fact, there were twenty psychological journals in the Soviet Union in 1930; whereas today there are only four. There is  evidence that some practitioners of pedology were sent to labor camps and some were even executed. Even as late as 1950, the  use of tests and psychometric methods was considered anti-Soviet activity. In fact the decree of 1936 was never officially  cancelled. The following is an excerpt from the Psychological Dictionary (Petrov & Platonov, 1974, p. 113): "Testing is the  fetishism of using tests embellished in statistics in the substitution of psychological phenomena by statistical phenomena."  An interesting Soviet discussion of the history of the psychological testing area in the Soviet Union is available in English  (Avanesov, 1979), and it and other accepted Soviet writings, such as Yaroshevsky's history of psychology text (cited earlier),  describe the character of the government influence over the development of pedology and testing methodology in the Stalin era.  In recent decades, the situation for psychometric methods has begun to change. Factor analysis has the longest history as  Doktorov (1969) indicates. The first works using factor analysis were Ignatiev (1957); Nebylitsyn (1960); and  Rozhdestvenskaya, Nebylitsyn, Borisov, and Ermolaeva-Tomina (1960). In addition, Doktorov notes an important role of Teplov's  (1967) paper in popularizing the methods of factor analysis in psychology.  In recent years other methods have also begun to be used. For example, statistical processing of data is a central topic in  the following books: Ananiev and Stepanova (1972, 1977)and Peisakhov (1977). Multivariate correlational analyses are discussed  by Meerson (1976). Multidimensional scaling has been employed by Sokolov (1977) and others (described in Section VI). Some  sensitivity to general problems of measurement and scaling is seen in Yarmitsky (1977); and a book devoted to  156 LEFEBVRE AND BATCHELDER  probability methods in psychology was published by Artemieva and Martynov (1975).  Another political factor that had an important influence on the development of Soviet psychology and, indirectly, mathematical  psychology was the status of Pavlov and his theories in psychological work.  In the 1930s and 1940s, the role of Pavlov and his followers quickly rose to a dominant position in Soviet psychology. They  widely used the political rhetoric due to Lenin in discussions with adherents of other theories, and by the middle 1940s  Pavlov's "theory" was officially proclaimed to be the only true doctrine of brain activity and human behavior (Rosental &  Yudin, 1954, p.437). At that time, the majority of psychologists left psychology for physiology, medicine, education, or  philosophy, and by the middle 1950s there were no more than fifty scholars who were officially called psychologists. They were  mostly elderly people, and they did not use any mathematical models or statistical procedures in their work-moreover, they  were afraid of them since any use of mathematical formulae might make their work look like the forbidden pedological work  discussed earlier.  It was cybernetics, rather than psychometrics, that was the forerunner of Soviet mathematical psychology. In 1956 cybernetics  was "allowed" in the Soviet Union. Before that the official definition of cybernetics was:  a reactionary false-science that appeared in the USA after world war II.... In its essence, cybernetics is directed against  Pavlov's contemporary scientific physiology and against Marxist scientific comprehension of social life. (Rosental & Yudin,  1954, pp. 236-237)  The main pressure to study cybernetics was due to the military officials and engineers who understood clearly that a barrier  against related Western ideas might have a retarding influence on modernizing Soviet military technology.  After its official sanction as an acceptable scientific area of study, many investigators joined together under the  cybernetics flag, but the characteristics of their work were somewhat different from those associated with cybernetics done in  the Western world. Not only control theory, but any applications of mathematics to biology, economics, medicine, psychology,  and sociology were and still are considered under the rubric cybernetics (also see Section 11).  Some evidence for the rapid rise of cybernetic ideas in Soviet psychology is provided by Fridman (1977), who tabulated the  frequency of occurrence of the terms "model" and "modeling" in all the articles that appeared in the journal Voprosy  Psychologii during the period 1960-1974. The terms have a cybernetic connotation in most Soviet usage (like "system" does in  the western world), and they first appeared in a paper by Leontiev (1960). Fridman's tabulation is reproduced in Table 1 which  gives frequency counts.  It is an interesting consequence of the history of Soviet psychology from 1930-1950 that scholars without a psychological  background began to work in mathematical psychology. Only in the 1970s have many newcomers to mathematical psychology had  strong psychological training. However, in contrast to the comparatively sparse psychological backgrounds of Soviet  researchers in mathematical  SOVIET MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 157  TABLE 1 Data Concerning the Frequencies of the Terms "Model" and "Modeling"in Voprosy Psychologii  Years "Model" "Modeling" Number of papers    directly about models  1960-1964 140 78 4  1965-1969 380 175 14  1970-1974 815 280 16  psychology, their mathematical backgrounds were and are generally quite advanced. In the Soviet Union, the standards of  general mathematical education in colleges and especially high schools, where there is an obligatory mathematical sequence  including calculus, tend to be superior to their Western counterparts. In particular, in the classical areas of calculus and  algebra, as well as in automata theory, the background of Soviet mathematical psychologists is not inferior to that of Western  researchers. Only in the areas of statistical methods and in applications of computer methods, could one make a reasonable  argument for a Western edge. Of course individual variation in mathematical background is great in both the Soviet Union and  the Western world.  In addition to the cybernetic impetus, the development of mathematical psychology was encouraged also by engineers working out  automatized control systems in military areas. In the early 1960s laboratories of engineering psychology were organized in  Leningrad and Moscow. This moment can be considered as the origin of modern Soviet mathematical psychology, because through it  psychology became a de-ideologized science, an ordinary science, connected with politics and Marxism no more nor less than  other sciences.  The Leningrad laboratory was in the Leningrad State University with Boris Lomov as the head. The Moscow laboratory was  included in the Institute of Automatic Equipment in the section of theoretical elaborations headed by Dmitry Yu. Panov. The  head of the laboratory was Vladimir P. Zinchenko.  One more laboratory of engineering psychology was organized in a secret military center in Kalinin, a city one hundred miles  from Moscow. Each of these three laboratories had contacts between itself and the others and also each obtained good funding  from the government. Thanks to their financial support and the increasing status of psychology in the 1950s, academic  departments of psychology appeared, first in Leningrad and then in the Moscow State Universities.  American mathematical psychology had an influence on the Soviet developments of that period only via American engineering  psychology (a subarea of the human factors area). That area used mathematical formulae familiar to Soviets with an engineering  or physical science background, and Soviet psychologists who studied human engineering could obtain funds for translating  American works considered to concern engineering psychology. Some of these translations were published (Panov & Zinchenko,  1964; Leontiev, 1967), and they contained a few references to studies in Western mathematical psychology.  158 LEFEBVRE AND BATCHELDER  Engineering psychology is not generally recognized as a major area of psychology in the Western world, and studies that might  be grouped under that label have not been closely connected with mathematical psychology; thus the groundwork for a productive  influence of Western thinking on Soviet formalism in psychology was not initially well established.  According to Soviet standards of thinking, every area has a leader. It was alien to the Soviet mind to contemplate the absence  of a clear leader in American engineering psychology. On Lomov's and Panov's initiative, Chapanis was proclaimed as such a  leader. In the middle 1960s, he was the most cited foreign author in Soviet engineering psychology. As a comparison, it is  interesting to note that R. D. Luce was perceived as a mathematician, and many scientists were surprised to discover that he  is a psychologist; and P. Suppes did not even have a stable spelling of his name in Russian, so he was not identified as one  person but was perceived as several different scholars.  To further convey the setting for contemporary Soviet mathematical psycholgy it is useful to briefly consider the structure of  science in the Soviet Union. The main scientific institution of the Soviet Union is the Academy of Sciences, USSR. There are  about 30,000 scientists and scholars working in this system. The Academy is headed by a "general convention" consisting of 237  members and 439 corresponding members (the data of 1973). The title of academician or member-correspondent has high prestige  in the Soviet Union; in addition, it provides a person with a life salary. In reality, the Academy is controlled by the  Presidium with the President of the Academy as a head. In 1973, this Center controlled work of 246 scientific institutes. The  heads of the largest ones were academicians.  A second, separate, institution includes scientific organizations that are subordinate to various ministries (Ministry of  Higher Education, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Radio Industry, etc.). The universities are in this  second major system. They do not play as important a role in Soviet Science as, for example, the American universities do in  American science. The exception is the Moscow State University, which has its own large research laboratories.  In the "General Convention" of the Academy, psychology is represented by one person, B. F. Lomov, who is a corresponding  member and in addition a director of the Institute of Psychology, Academy of Sciences, USSR. Lomov holds the Doctor of  Psychology degree from Leningrad State University and his early research interests were child psychology and engineering  psychology. He has spent some time in the United States and is familiar with much of Western psychology.  Many of the most highly qualified psychologists are connected with another Academy: the Academy of Pedagogical Science (the  Small Academy). The influence of this Academy is smaller, and it is a kind of auxiliary organ of the Ministry of Education.  There is one more Institute of Psychology which belongs to the Small Academy system. It is headed now by V. V. Davydov. This  Institute has existed for fifty years and has some traditions. There is also a psychological association in the Soviet Union.  Every person studying psychology can become a member of it. The President of this association is B. F. Lomov, also the Head  Psychologist in the Big Academy.  SOVIET MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 159  According to E. A. Faraponova in the journal Voprosy Psichologii (Problems of Psychology), on March 1, 1977, the Psychological  Association consisted of 2241 members. Perhaps the actual number of people working in Soviet psychology is higher because many  investigators from military and industrial institutes are not formal members of the Psychological Association.  The percentage distribution of psychologists among the various systems is as follows (recalculated from Faraponova, see above):  l. Academy of Sciences 6  2. Academy of Pedagogical Sciences 11  3. Ministry of Education 40  4. Ministry of Higher Education 25  5. Industrial Institutions 2  6. Medical Institutions 5  7. Others 11  Under "Others" probably are hidden the psychologists working in the Ministry of Defense and the KGB. Only 5 % of the  psychologists are working with medical institutions because, historically, psychology in the USSR has not been strongly  connected with medicine.  Mathematical psychology is being worked on most intensively in the Institute of Psychology at the Academy of Sciences (G. E.  Zhuravlev, V. Yu. Krylov, Yu. I. Zabrodin), Moscow State University (E. Yu. Artemieva, E. N. Sokolov), and also by engineering  psychologists from industry and from the Ministry of Defense. E. A. Faraponova points out that there is a special committee of  Mathematical Psychology in the Psychological Association of the USSR. Its head is V. I. Nikolaev. .  There are four psychological journals in the Soviet Union:  (1) Voprosy Psichologii (Problems of Psychology);  (2) Novoe v Psichologicheskikh Issledovaniakh (News in Psychological Investigations);  (3) Psichologia (Psychology); and  (4) Psichologichesky Zhurnal (Journal of Psychology), started January, 1980.  However, these journals publish only a small number of mathematical papers. Most work in mathematical psychology is published  either in cybernetics journals or in edited collections of papers.  11. CYBERNETIC MODELS  The cybernetic approach due originally to Wiener (1948) and others has had a major scientific impact on Western science,  mostly in the area of biology. While the cybernetic notions of feedback, control, etc., are exploited informally in clinical  psychology, personality theory, etc., they have not greatly penetrated into more substantive Western psychology (one exception  is Miller, Galanter, & Pribram, 1960). Much  160 LEFEBVRE AND BATCHELDER  formal work on neural mechanisms and their relationship to behavior does exist in theoretical biology (e.g., Ashby, 1960),  neuroscience, and in general systems; however, traditionally such work has been disjoint both substantively and sociologically  in almost every way from Western mathematical psychology. There were signs in the 1970s that this trend may be changing. For  example, Contemporary Developments in Mathematical Psychology included a chapter by Pribram, Newer, and Baron (1974) on  holography and the Journal of Mathematical Psychology has published work by Grossberg (1969, 1978), Scott (1977), Saltzman  (1979), and others, involving neurally motivated formalisms underlying behavior. Nevertheless, in the West formal work  involving cybernetic or biological underpinnings has been carried out primarily by scientists who do not identify with the  label "mathematical psychology."  In contrast, the cybernetic approach is very compatible with the major philosophical trend toward materialism in the Soviet  Union, and "cybernetic modeling" provides the most frequent outlet for mathematical ideas in Soviet psychology.  A sampling of this vast work would include that of Bernstein (1966)' concerning regulation of motion; that of Anokhin (1966),  who uses the feedback idea to represent brain activity; that of Amosov (1965) on creation of complex models of thinking, which  are sets of interacting functioning blocks; and that of Vekker (1964), who considers models that relate mental and  physiological processes. In other work, Pospelov and Pushkin (1972) conducted an experimental investigation of intuition. They  expressed skepticism about the adequacy of automata-theoretic ideas as models of human thought. Klykov (1970) worked out a  very effective formal language for modeling processes of decision making in situations of complex control. Napalkov (1969)  developed an heuristic approach in modeling rather similar to that of Reitman (1965).  A thermodynamic approach to thinking processes was developed by Kobozev (1971). His works were further developed by Chudakov  and Kononenko (1973). Bongard (1967) accomplished a major and original work on pattern recognition (available in English).  Vaisburg and Rosenstein (1968a, 1968b) worked on problems of modeling pathological states of the "psyche." They constructed a  qualitative model of the dynamics of epilepsy. Shreider (1976, 1977) used algebraic methods for investigating hierarchical  structures in groups.  Formal cybernetic work has even penetrated Soviet educational psychology. Landa (1976) and Shapiro (1973) used some ideas of  algorithm theory to construct educational programs. Landa's books (1974, 1976) are available in English. Itelson (1964) used  ideas from feedback-control theory in educational psychology. Zaripov (1971) developed some original models of the creative  activity of composers.  An example of one interesting project in the cybernetic area is that of Gorbov and Novikov who studied a group of three  subjects attempting to cooperatively control a  ' N. A. Bernstein (1896-1966) with P. K. Anokhin (1898-1974) was Russia's pioneering physiological cyberneticist. In 1935,  prior to the publication of Wiener's (1948) text on cybernetics, Bernstein was concerned with self-regulating systems and  feedback control (see Brozek, 1973).  SOVIET MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 161  device with three linear pointers (Gorbov, 1966). Each subject has a continuous response knob that controls his or her own  pointer reading. However, when a subject adjusts the knob, alterations of the pointer readings for all subjects occur. The  task of the group is to center each of their pointers on their zero point.  Underlying the task was a co-coupled system of linear equations relating the mutual effects of each knob setting to the  observed pointer readings. In effect, the group had to produce a set of knob settings, XX2, and X, that solved the system of  linear equations: 3  a,~ x; + bj = 0,  l,j = 1, 2, 3, and au and bj set by the experimenters.  Gorbov and Novikov investigated the tactics of solving this problem by a group as a unit and by separate members of the group.  As a result, they found stable characteristics that could differentiate "group leaders" from "group supporters." In  particular, the leader was more likely to depart from natural knob settings to countercontrol and "teach" the other members of  the team to control their knobs correctly. Based on a theory of the psychomotoric components of decision making, they  constructed a homeostatic, blackbox model for the task and the various roles of the team members. Until 1962, the work was  closely connected with the Soviet space program and was classified by the military.  In Western mathematical psychology, the dominant mode of psychological investigation involves miniature theories,  characterizing only a part of an organism, that are tied closely to empirical phenomena. Soviet psychology, on the other hand,  can be characterized as more concerned with holistic and multilevel theories even if they are not closely tied to the  empirical world. Thus, to Western scientists, much of the Soviet work in cybernetics might well have the flavor of creative  speculation without serious scientific grounding.  While the cybernetic work does introduce many original and often interesting formal ideas into psychology, little effort is  made to tie the cybernetic models to a data base, or even more importantly, to interesting sets of empirical phenomena. Here,  even the most liberal dictates of "behaviorism" are violated. Nevertheless, some portion of the Soviet work on cybernetic  models is both original and creative and some can (or at least has the potential to) pass the tests of empirical relevance.  Perhaps one of the reasons for the relative lack of work on empirical testing of the models reflects the fact earlier  established that psychometric and certain statistical procedures were taboo areas within psychology during the period from  1936 to the mid 1950s. The lack of a clearly developed area of psychological statistics meant that the training of many Soviet  psychologists was deficient for the task of statistical assessment of theories.  Perhaps a more important factor behind the Soviet bent for grand scale theories stems form the fact that Soviet society and  education is dominated by a single philosophical system based on the writings of Marx, Engels, and Lenin (see Brozek, 1973, p.  522). Western scientists tend to be pluralistic in philosophical outlook and generally look upon philosophical works with  suspicion when it comes to scientific  480/23/2-5  162 LEFEBVRE AND BATCHELDER  work. On the other hand, all Soviet scientists are schooled in Marxism and its varieties of theoretical syntheses such as  dialetical materialism and its socioeconomic theory of capitalism. Metatheory and global theorizing seem to come naturally to  Soviet scientists. Thus in Soviet science there is not a natural alienation between science and philosophy that is frequently  found in the Western world. The reader is urged to read Lomov's (1979, in English) essay entitled "Sixty Years of Soviet  Psychology," which nicely demonstrates the materialistic, Marxist philosophy that he sees as underlying the development of all  of Soviet psychology.  In this section, we have attempted to group papers that would seem "cybernetic" to Western readers. Since the term is often  applied to any formal work in psychology in the Soviet Union, it is difficult to provide a more complete evaluation of the  cybernetic work without first considering other categories of such work in Soviet psychology.  III. INFORMATION THEORY AND PSYCHOLOGY  Information theory was developed by Shannon (1948, 1951) largely from the pioneering work of the Russian, Markov (1913), and  Hartley (1928). There were many mathematical contributions to information theory in the 1950s, including much work by the  Soviet mathematician A. I. Khinchin (1957, in English). The area became popular in Western psychology through the writings of  Miller (1953) and later of Attneave (1959) and Garner (1962). The first important published work on information theory in  Soviet psychology is due to Zhinkin (1958), and it played much the same role in Soviet psychology as the work of Miller and  Attneave in Western psychology.  Much of the Soviet work has centered on the concept of "channel capacity," which refers to the rate at which information can  be transmitted or processed by a system (Glezer & Tsukerman, 1961; Lomov, 1966). Other studies, closely following Western  work, centered on Hick's (1952) law relating reaction time to information or uncertainty in the stimulus array (Leontiev &  Krinchik, 1964; Boiko, 1968).  Despite its initial promise to be a unifying theme in the study of human memory, most Western psychologists have concluded  that information theory failed to deliver on this promise. Miller's (1956) notion of a "chunk," unlike the "bit," is not tied  to a particular sample space and has proved more popular as the "unit of memory" in Western psychology. However, as late as  1967, the Soviet psychologist P. B. Nevelsky (1967) investigated the "capacity" of short-term and long-term memory, and he  concluded that the capacity of long-term memory is better represented in units of information than in number of signs. Other  applications of information theory to memory are found in the work of Repkina (1968) and Liaudis (1967).  On the more technical side, several Soviet scientists have introduced novel concepts of information (Kharkevich, 1960;  Shreider, 1965; Bongard, 1967). Bongard's book is available in English and concerns the concept of information within the area  of pattern recognition. His formal work in this area is interesting and highly cited in the Western world.  SOVIET MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 163  One example of an interesting project in information theory was that of Kogan (1969). Kogan doubted the universality of the  commonly accepted inverse relation between speed and accuracy in a reaction time task (see Yellott, 1971). Kogan's task  involved the subjects in visually comparing two objects for a match or mismatch. Typical objects used were a ring with a small  break, black disks, etc.  The subject made a same-different judgment for a pair of objects on N occasions (trials). Let Tbe the response time on the  nth trial, 1 < n < N. Suppose p is the proportion of correct responses and let T= ~n, Tbe the total response time. Then  Kogan defined a measure of information I to be  ,=(NIT) [1 + p 1092 p + (1 -P)1092(1 -P)]'  The speed-accuracy tradeoff notion would suggest that as the time per decision, TIN, increases, the accuracy, p, would also  increase; however, Kogan found that each subject had an optimal TIN such that increases or decreases in TIN were accompanied  by decreasing p. Kogan argued that an"oscillating sensory process" takes place for his visual stimuli of the sort found in the  perception of the Necker cube. While he did not verify his hypothesis, it is intriguing in that it entails a sort of optimal  period for sampling information not usually postulated for decision tasks.  Quite a large number of Soviet works involving information theory are connected with the planning of operator activity in  complex control systems. These works are mainly applied. An important role in popularizing information-theoretic concepts in  Soviet psychology was played by a fascinating and popular book by Yaglom and Yaglom (1973). Also important in the creation of  a productive mathematical climate for information-theoretic ideas in the 1960s and 1970s were the works of several highly  qualified mathematicians such as L. D. Meshalkin, A. L. Toom, and Yu. A. Shreider.  In assessing the Soviet work involving information theory, one is left with the clear impression that it has closely followed  major trends in related Western work. At least in the area of productive applications of information theory to psychology,  there do not appear to be major Soviet advances over the Western work. In the West the popularity of information-theoretic  formalisms in substantive psychology had declined in the last decade or so. While this trend is also evidenced in Soviet  psychology, information-theoretic ideas have retained somewhat more popularity than in the West. Perhaps this difference can  be traced to the compatibility of information theory and cybernetic ideas.  IV. DECISION MAKING  Decision making or choice theory is a topic that is relevant either directly or indirectly to most areas of Western  mathematical psychology. For example, Luce's (1959) influential book, Individual Choice Behavior, contained chapters applying  the same underlying choice-theoretic ideas to areas ranging from learning to psychophysics. More generally, many psychological  processes eventuate in a choice from  164 LEFEBVRE AND BATCHELDER  a well specified set of response alternatives. Many Western mathematical psychologists view decision making in this general  way; and, consequently, much work has been devoted to creating models of decision making that have minimal substantive  assumptions and hence a great range of substantive applicability.  "Decision making" is also one of the most popular terms in Soviet science. Military people, economists, sociologists-all of  them use this term. And in psychology there are a lot of works devoted to this problem. The term "decision" is used both at  the cognitive level and at the physiological level. Consider as an example the collection of papers in Decision Making (1976),  edited by P. K. Anokhin and V. F. Rubakhin. The book has three parts:  (1) psychological aspects of the problem of decision making (11 papers);  (2) neurophysiological aspects of the problem of decision making (11 papers); and  (3) cybernetical aspects of the problem of decision making (5 papers).  Some of the papers study topics and select approaches which are typical of Western work. For example, there is the paper by  Zabrodin (1976) that concerns processes of decision making on a sensory-perception level and the paper by Indlyn (1976a) about  a model for a trained observer in a detection situation.  Other papers employ formalisms to problems that do not have obvious counterparts in Western work. One example is the paper by  Baranov (1976) which concerns the problem of "reflexive control." By reflexive control is meant an effort to control an  opponent's actions by acting on the basis of a hypothesized internal representation of the opponent's cognitive structure. A  typical experiment might involve a person attempting to move a counter through a complex labyrinth by announcing a sequence of  proposed moves. The "opponent" is represented by a finite automaton, and at any stage, the actual movement of the counter is  the output of the automaton whose input is the proposed move. The automaton is designed to try and "outflank" the player by  anticipating his intentions and counter-controlling his action. Such structures have been called "automata-dribblings" from  the idea of dribbling in soccer, and they are described in detail in Lefebvre (1977, in English).  A related paper of Zhuravlev, Kimberg, Petrov, and Tsiskaradze (1976) investigates the differences between binary decision  making in a conflict situation and in ordinary statistical prediction. Subjects were given a random sequence of symbols to  anticipate from a binary set (like a probability learning experiment). In one case, they were told that the sequence was  generated from an opponent who was trying to foil them, and in the other case, they were told that the sequence was random.  The instructional orientation had an influence on the subject's tactics. In particular, adult subjects tended to shift their  guesses following "errors" much more when they thought they were playing an opponent than when they were under the random  instruction. The first person who pointed to this fact in the Soviet Union was Lepsky (1969). In the Zhuravlev et al. paper,  an automaton model of decision making in a hostile environment is created (see the work of Tsetlin, 1973, discussed in the  automata theory section).  SOVIET MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 165  FIG. 1. Example of a Trudoliubov color-graph game (adapted from Toom, 1973, p. 16).  In recent years a significant number of works on "probability prediction" appeared. The first to contribute was Feigenberg  (1963, 1972), who supposed that schizophrenia is connected with a disturbance in human prognostic activity. The latest results  in this area can be found in a book edited by Feigenberg and Zhuravlev (1977).  Experimental gaming has never been a particularly active area of Soviet research; however, Von Neumann and Morgenstern's work  (1953) and the material in Luce and Raiffa (1957) are well known to Soviet formalists. The Soviets have considered cognitive  processes in game-like situations.  In one interesting example, Trudoliubov invented an original class of multiperson game-like situations for investigating how  choice behavior might depend on how players represent the inner worlds of their opponents (Trudoliubov, 1972; Toom, 1973; Toom  & Trudoliubov, 1974; Baranov & Trudoliubov, 1977).2 The setting for the game is a directed graph such as in Fig. 1.  Each node belongs to a separate numbered player. All the players must simultaneously place one of three colored counters-red  (R), blue (B), or green (G}-on his node. The instructions may prohibit different players from using one or two colors by  indicating this on the node. For example, in the game of Fig. 1, player 2 is prohibited from using R, and player 4 from using  G. All players have access to this sort of information. The game is played without collaboration among players, and on a  signal each player simultaneously places a counter on his node. A player wins if and only if none of his neighbors (players  with arcs into his node) play the same color as he plays. To analyze such games with N players, let i - X mean player i plays  color X, 1 < i < N X E {R, G, B}.  In an interesting paper by Toom (1973), several strategies for playing such games are discussed. The strategies involve  algorithms formulated on various ways that a player might cognitively represent the points of view (inner worlds) of the other  players. The first strategy (strategy one) is a recursive procedure proposed by Trudoliubov (1972) that permits one to examine  the point of view of one player at a time. Basically this strategy starts by trying to discover players who have unique safe  plays, and on the assumption that they make these plays, the strategy recursively generates the plays of the other players. In  Fig. 1,1-R and 3-G are examples of such unique safe plays. They are discovered at the first stage of the algorithm by all  players. At the second stage, player 2 can deduce that 2-B is his only safe move per  2 Baranov and Trudoliubov were among Lefebvre's former graduate students.  166 LEFEBVRE AND BATCHELDER  mitted. From this chain, player 5 can deduce 5-G as his only move from which player 4 deduces 4-B. Thus we have a unique  prediction of the group solution (1-R, 2-B, 3G, 4-B, 5-G) with everyone winning. Notice that (1-R, 2-G, 3-B, 4-R, 5-B) also  produces a win for everyone; however, there is no way for the individual players to derive this solution recursively from  strategy one.  Toom (1973) showed that there exists a game with a unique winning strategy for all players which cannot be arrived at by  strategy one. An example is provided in Fig. 2. Notice that in this game players 1 and 3 are prohibited from R and player 4  from G. Further each player has two neighbors from the preceding two counterclockwise positions. The unique winning strategy  for all players is (I-B, 2-R, 3-G, 4B, 5-R, 6-G>-no other strategy works. Toom shows the inadequacy of strategy one formally;  however, informally we can see that no player has a guaranteed safe move so that there is no way to start the recursive  strategy.  Toom goes on to invent a generalization of strategy one to permit a player to look at the point of view of possible coalitions  of players. The strategy seeks subsets of players P which satisfy the following four conditions  (1) P has a combination of choices such that all of them win without concern for the other players' choices.  (2) Any other combination of choices does not satisfy (1) for P.  (3) If any player i E P changes his choice, he loses his guarantee of a win.  (4) Any other subset of players Q that satisfies (1), (2), and (3) has a null intersection with P.  Toom provides a recursive algorithm for generating partitions of players satisfying the above rules, and he shows that it is  sufficient to solve the game in Fig. 2 with P the set of all players.  The interesting thing about the work with the color-graph games is that it provides a formalism for studying reflexive thought  processes in a multiperson game. Much of the Western work on multiperson gaming has developed various formal definitions of  "optimal" solution sets but generally has stopped short of providing recursive reasoning models sufficient to compute these  solution sets.  In very recent years, Soviet professionals in economic modeling started to be interested in psychological models. This  development is paralleled in Western economics with the development of the area of experimental economics. In the  3  FIG. 2. Example of a Trudoliubov color-graph game with no strategy-one solution (adapted from Toom, 1973, p. 18).  SOVIET MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 167  summer of 1977 the Symposium on Imitational and Game Modeling of Human Behavior in Technological and Social-Economic Processes  took place in the Soviet Union. The program had about 30 lectures and presentations (Zhuravlev, 1977). The main task of this  Symposium was to facilitate contacts between psychologists and economists. Since the level of mathematical economics in the  Soviet Union is fairly high, we can expect a serious influence of it on the future development of Soviet mathematical  psychology.  In general, the area of decision making in the Soviet Union seems quite advanced. Original formal advances over Western work  on algebraic and probabilistic choice theory are not present in Soviet psychological work. On the other hand, the Soviets seem  to have devoted much emphasis on cognitive and computational models of decision making. For example, the work on automaton  models of choice (some of which is described in the next section) and Trudoliubov's and Toom's algorithms for reflexive  thought seem to us to be important ideas that break original ground in the choice theory area.  In the Spring of 1979, a joint U.S.-USSR Symposium entitled "Normative and descriptive models of decision making" was held in  Tbilisi. The conference was one in a series of joint U.S.-USSR symposia sponsored by the National Academies of Science of both  countries. The Program Committee was co-chaired by W. K. Estes and V. Ju. Krylov, and the symposium represented the first  large-scale interaction between mathematical psychologists from the Soviet and Western worlds. The fact that the topic of  interaction was decision making is further indication of the fact that this area is one of the most active areas within Soviet  mathematical psychology.  V. AUTOMATA THEORY AND PSYCHOLOGY  Automata Theory has been influential in Western science since the pioneering work of Turing, Post, Church, Kleene, and  McCulloch. The main thrusts of this work in mathematical psychology have been in the linguistics area (see Chomsky, 1963).  Unlike most modeling efforts where the payoff is in predicting data, mathematical machines have been used rather differently  in the language area-namely, to capture different levels of computational complexity (see Hopcroft & Ullman, 1969, 1978). The  use of automata, especially finite automata, for predictive models has not been a major development in Western mathematical  psychology. There have been exceptions, for example, Offir (1973) and Suppes (1977) have worked with automata models for  arithmetic problem solving. Also Suppes (1969) and Kieras (1976) have discussed the adequacy of S-R learning models in the  context of automata theory (see Batchelder & Wexler, 1979, for a discussion of this work.)  It is interesting that in the Soviet Union, rather than in the Western world, behaviorally oriented finite automata models  have appeared in considerable numbers. The pioneer in the work was M. L. Tsetlin (1969; English translation, 1973). In the  late 1950s, a group of young scientists oriented around Tsetlin's ideas in the form of a big team headed by the distinguished  mathematician, I. M. Gelfand.  168 LEFEBVRE AND BATCHELDER  The first of Tsetlin's steps was to consider a deterministic automaton, given by the canonical eauations:  (p(t + 1) = 0((P(t), s(t + 1)); At) = F((V(t)),  where t is discrete time (having only integer values); s(t) is an input variable, which can be either 0 (win) or I (loss);  j(t) is an output variable, which can have k values: f,; f...... fk called actions; and rp(t) may take n different values;  called automaton states (n is called the capacity of the automaton's memory).  It is assumed that the automaton is hooked to a formal environment and that the automaton's actions (outputs) cause the  environments reactions (inputs) according to rules. All possible reactions of the environment are perceived by the automaton  in terms of either a "win" or a "loss." One is interested in studying such systems where the automaton increases its  proportion of wins over time.  Next, Tsetlin generalized the system to a stochastic automaton. An actionAt) of a stochastic automaton at moment t is a  function of its current state (p(t) and input. State transitions are governed by stochastic matrices 11 aU{s)ll, i, j = 1,  2,..., n, and a~{s) is the probabilility of a transition from state (p(t) = 9, to state (p(t + 1) = (p, under the influence of  the input s(t + 1).  The simplest problem concerns the behavior of such an automaton in a "stationary probabilistic environment." The experimental  counterpart is much like that of probability learning extensively studied in the context of stimulus sampling theory (Estes,  1964). Tsetlin showed that the behavior of an automaton in such environments is described by a finite Markov chain. If the  chain is ergodic, it is possible to find the limiting mathematical expectation of the win probability independently of its  initial state. This quantity is defined as a measure of the efficiency of its behavior.  Next Tsetlin introduced the concept of a compound or changing environment. The simplest example of such an environment is  where there are only two action f or f2 (which may be thought of as constituting the predictions of corresponding events E, or  EZ). A stationary environment, S, consists of rules for determining whether to deliver s(t + 1) = 1 or s(t + 1) = 0 as a  function of the response f or f2 at moment t. An example of a compound (first-order Markov) environment would be a set of  stationary environments S= {SS2, ..., Se} and a stochastic transition matrix 11 bull, for i, j = 1,..., e and bu the  probability that the environment changes from Si at any moment to Sf at t + 1. In such an environment, the feedback rule  changes in a simple, probabilistic way over time.  In such a compound environment, the automaton has to re-learn all the time. Tsetlin considered a type of machine which he  called an automaton with "linear tactics." An automaton with linear tactics has 2n states and two values of the output  variable f(t): f and f2. The automaton has two classes of states. In the states 1, 2,..., n (i is short for (p;), the value of  the output variable is f, and in the states n + 1, n + 2,..., 2n it is f2. The diagram of such an automaton is presented in  Fig. 3.  In any given state, the automaton can "win" or "lose" (s = 1 or s = 0). If it wins in any state except states 1 or n + 1 it  proceeds to a state one step further from the  SOVIET MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 169  f1  f2  Fig. 3. Tsetlin's automaton with linear tactics.  separating line in Fig. 3. If it wins in states 1 or n + 1 it remains in those states. Opposite transitions occur upon losses.  Tsetlin investigated the behavior of an automaton with linear tactics in the previously described compound environment. For  example, he found that for each such environment there is an associated integer N such that an automaton with linear tactics  and 2N states maximizes the expectation of a win over all other automaton with linear tactics, i.e., there are no "Markov"  environments in which the expectation of a win continues to increase for arbitrarily large N.  Further, Tsetlin investigated the behavior of a variety of automata in 2 person games and obtained a number of game-theoretic  results of the sorts obtained by quite different formalisms in Western work with game theory. Details of this theory were (and  are being) developed by numerous students and followers of Tsetlin, who died in 1966, being only 42 years old. The most  essential contributions were made by Krylov (1963), Varshavsky and Vorontsova (1963), Krinsky (1964), Ponomarev (1964), Pittel  (1967).  In a more psychological context, the formalism of automata theory is used by Zhuravlev (1976), who considered automata  designed to incorporate "forgetting." The memory structure of such automata is a function of time. Zhuravlev generalized the  automaton with linear tactics to allow a geometric weighting of past events. In the automaton with linear tactics, only the  number of "wins" and "losses"-and not their order-determines the current state. The mathematical effect of Zhuravlev's  modification was to allow the transition probabilities to depend on the order of wins and losses and thus to vary over time as  a function of the fading influence of past events. Zhuravlev showed that his automata in a hostile environment are more  efficient than the automaton with linear tactics discussed earlier.  Another major thrust to the development of Soviet automata theory is due to Tsypkin (1973, in English). His work is directed  to constructing learning systems that learn through "probabilistic iterative algorithms." Tsypkin's influence in Western  science is mostly in the areas of engineering, however.  The Journal of Cybernetics and Information Science (Vol. 1, Number 2-4, 1977) devoted an entire issue to learning and automata  theory. There, the work of Tsetlin and Tsypkin, as well as many other Soviet and non Soviet scientists, is listed in a  bibliography on learning automata (Lakshmivarahan, 1977). A surprisingly large number of the references and much of the  discussion is devoted to Soviet work.  Some of this work has a promise to have much future impact on Western mathematical psychology by providing a useful framework  for formalizing the  170 LEFEBVRE AND BATCHELDER  dynamics of complex, discrete trial systems in such a way that computational procedures exist for deriving numerical  predictions of the system's behavior.  To give one example, most of the learning and memory models developed in mathematical learning theory can be viewed as models  within the framework of automata theory. Finite state Markov learning models (Greeno, 1974), to take one case, are examples of  stochastic sequential machines of the Moore-type with a single input (see Paz, 1971, p. 6). Many of the computational  procedures developed for Markov learning models have been developed for more general situations by automata theorists. In  particular, computational generalizations for the case of multiple inputs exist (Paz, 1971). Most of the applications of  Markov learning models have involved predictions of the performance dynamics on single items in a list learning experiment;  however, by letting the inputs to a probabilistic automaton be the various items in the list, more general list-level learning  models can be constructed naturally. Although the connection to automata theory was not explicitly recognized, Batchelder  (1970) provides a step in this direction by proposing a model for item interactions during learning.  In the 1970s, Western researchers became increasingly interested in cognitive psychology and its concern with complex systems  such as the structure of long-term memory, the basis of linguistic ability, and the representation of knowledge underlying  complex skills. This trend in psychology led to a shift in emphasis by formalists away from the dynamical properties of simple  systems to the structural characteristics of complex systems.  It seems natural to expect that formalists will seek, more and more, to study the dynamical behavior of complex systems. While  computer simulation is one way that dynamical properties of complex systems have been investigated, such an approach has not  always satisfied the formally minded who seek explicit mathematical statements of their theories. Automata theory is a natural  framework for formalizing complex, dynamical systems, and Paz (1971), for example, includes a number of applications of  automata theory to such areas as communication, learning, and pattern recognition. So far, this work has had little influence  on mathematical psychology in the Western world, and if (and when) it does, the Soviet mathematical psychologists will have  anticipated this direction.  VI. PERCEPTION AND PSYCHOPHYSICS  Mathematical methods in psychophysics have been developed intensively only in recent years in Soviet work. So far, the main  stimulation has been from Western work. Several books appeared in the 1970s: a collection of papers with B. F. Lomov as editor  (1974), a monograph by Bardin (1976), and a monograph by Zabrodin and Lebedev (1977), and Leonov (1977). In addition, it is  worth mentioning several papers by Indlyn (1975, 1976a, 1976b).  The state of psychophysics is reflected in part from the review by Matiushkin, Ravich-Shcherba, and Faraponova (1977) of the  Symposium on Psychophysics which  SOVIET MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 171  took place in the framework of 5th USSR Convention of Psychologists in June, 1977. There were eighty participants. Bardin gave  a general evaluation of the contemporary state of psychophysics. Zabrodin gave a paper about ties between psychophysics and  the systems-theoretic approach. The paper of M. B. Mikhalevskaya and Yu. A. Indlyn was devoted to the task of measuring the  sensitivity of the visual system. A. N. Lebedev reported on ties between psychophysiology and psychophysics. The reviewers  point out that this topic is very important, because for a long time psychophysiological methods dominated the psychophysical  ones. In E. K. Gusev's paper the problem of constant error was considered. Yu. 1. Mislavsky's paper concerned the influence of  a subject's task expectancy on the result of an experiment. N. L. Morina noted that contemporary psychophysics deviates from  traditional explanations about real mechanisms of detection and recognition.  T. A. Ratanova's paper concerned investigations of individual differences with the help of psychophysical scales. A. 1.  Bogoslavsky noted that after a long standstill in psychophysics the period of its rapid development has come now. M. B.  Mikhalevskaya considered that constant error is due to non-sensory processes. E. K. Gusev on the basis of his own  investigation did not agree with her. Yu. I. Mislavsky objected to the concept of "non-sensory factors," since he believed  they should be included in a system of sensory processes. Yu. M. Zabrodin pointed out that there is very little work on  psychophysical scaling in the Soviet Union.  One might conclude from this conference review that the psychophysical paradigm is quite new for Soviet psychologists relative  to, say, psychophysiological and cybernetical paradigms of thought.  An interesting approach to constructing models for psychophysical data has been developed by Sokolov and his co-workers. The  general approach is described in Sokolov (1980, in English) and a specialized model for the problem of color discrimination is  described in Sokolov (1977). The model is tested with data in Sokolov, Izmailov, Izmailova, and Zimachev (1979, in English).  Sokolov's general view is that external stimuli are analyzed by a number of selected detectors in the brain that jointly  characterize the stimulus by a vector whose components are the respective excitations in each detector.  The concepts of an external signal and an internal detector are introduced. Each detector has a selectivity, that is, a  particular signal may be coded by a "number" in the detector. Each detector is represented by a formal neuron with multiple  inputs and each input has a certain coefficient of connection. A signal stimulates each neuronal input with different powers.  The detector's excitation P is defined as a scalar product of a vector of its coefficients of connection and the vector of  excitations of inputs.  In the case of constant intensity stimuli, the whole set of possible vectors is represented by points on an n-dimensional  sphere, where n is the number of detectors. Sokolov points out the similarity between a set of detectors and a "receptive  surface." For example, in skin sensitivity, where a tactile stimulus is represented on the skin surface, the maximum  excitation moves from one receptor to another. In some cases, however, the "receptive surface" does not actually exist;  172 LEFEBVRE AND BATCHELDER  tion moves from one detector to another inside a hypothetical brain structure. The totality of the detectors forming such a  "brain screen" is called by Sokolov a "quasiperceptive surface."  Sokolov believes that from the spherical configuration, two important consequences follow. The first consequence is that  subjective distances between perceived stimuli of equal intensity are proportional to the distances of arcs of an appropriate  n-dimensional sphere. The second consequence is that neurophysiological data in a given situation should relate to the  properties of the spherical representation underlying the psychophysical data. These consequences, in Sokolov's opinion, let  him unite data and theory both in the areas of psychophysics and in the area of neurophysiology (Sokolov, 1980).  Sokolov (1977) discusses the problem of color discriminability in terms of his approach. The article does not have a single  formula or symbol, and there is no special notation, no pictures, nor any numbers; yet it describes in detail a mathematical  model for color perception along the lines just described.  In Sokolov et al. (1979, available in English), an experimental test of his theory is presented. Basically 10 spectral colors  of constant brightness and varying in color shade and saturation were studied. Two subjects rated each of the 45 pairs of  colors for similarity on a scale from 0 to 9 (replicated 10 times) for subjective differences. The resulting data were  analyzed using Torsca (a multidimensional scaling program described in Young and Torgerson, 1965). The similarity data were  fit retaining the first three axes, i.e., each stimulus s; is represented by three coordinates X r = 1, 2, 3, and euclidean  distances correlated highly with the difference ratings.  Next, the euclidean representation was processed to yield new coordinates Xr, r = 1, 2, 3, subject to two additional  constraints implied by Sokolov's model. The first constraint was that for each stimulus s;  X31 + X2i2 + X3 = 1,  and the second constraint was that the correlation of arc distances between stimuli pairs given by  3  DU = arc cos Y XrX r=1  and difference ratings should be as high as possible. The authors satisfied these constraints by seeking an optimal origin and  varying the length of each vector (X 1, XZ, X,3). Correlation of .97 and .96 for the two subjects were obtained using a  specially constructed computer search algorithm.  The payoff for Sokolov et al. (1979) was that both the polar coordinates and the euclidean coordinates of the configuration  could be interpreted and related to known properties of color perception. The magnitude of the horizontal angle of each point  was closely related to the color shade of the corresponding stimulus in the spectrum. The magnitude of the vertical angle was  unambiguously correlated with the saturation of the color stimuli. The three euclidean coordinates, X,r, 1 < r < 3, were  related by  SOVIET MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 173  Sokolov to characteristics of the opponent nature of color perception. In particular, X, operated like the chromatic opponent  system of red-green and Xz the system of blue-yellow, and 13 the achromatic white-black system. For example, the larger the  value of X, , the more red the stimulus had in it, whereas, the smaller the value, the more green. When the sequence of colors  was plotted with wave length on the abscissa and values of X111 and X3 on the ordinate, functions characterizing the  opponent systems are obtained which the authors argue to be closely related to those obtained by Hurvich and Jameson (1957).  The work of Sokolov and his colleagues on color perception makes impressive claims, and it is beyond our expertise to give it  a definitive critique. One obvious concern is that 10 points is not many to test a spherical configuration in three  dimensions. In this case, only 45 distances are accounted for by 21 parameters. Further, rotational invariance of arc lengths  (about the main axis) renders the selection of the opponent-color system rather arbitrary. Another concern with the Sokolov et  al. (1979) approach to testing the model is the indirect way that that spherical representation was obtained. From the  article, it appears that the difference ratings were both highly correlated with euclidean distances computed from the Torsca  coordinates X;, and with arc distances computed from the spherically normalized coordinates X;,. Such is possible only if the  euclidean distances correlate closely with the arc distances. It seems to us that for many stimulus sets this latter  correlation could fail to be high even if the Sokolov model itself were correct. The papers present the original data as well  as resulting configurations, and the papers make heavy use of standard Western references; so the task of deciding the  validity of Sokolov's interesting ideas should be straightforward for experts in color theory.  Overall, psychophysical modeling is currently a very active area within Soviet mathematical psychology. Most of the standard  Western work has received an airing in Soviet writing. For example, Leonov (1975) describes some of the models involving  sensory thresholds from Fechner to date in language very close to that used in Western mathematical psychology texts. Korzh  and Zabrodin (1975) provide an elementary but accurate introduction to the notions of signal detection theory. They go on to  discuss how the methodology might be applied to understand disturbances of sensory processes due to such states as  schizophrenia.  Very little of the Soviet work in psychophysics seems original and most of it seems to copy concepts, methods, and even  mathematical notation directly from Western work; however, a confident assessment of this issue is beyond the expertise of the  authors of this essay.  VII. SOVIET DISCUSSION OF WESTERN MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY  In modern times, Western mathematical psychology has had a big influence on Soviet researchers, especially the younger  generation. One of the initiators of mathematical education for psychology majors was Elena Artemieva. She could be  174 LEFEBVRE AND BATCHELDER  considered as the first professional Soviet mathematical psychologist, and she wrote the first Soviet textbook in mathematics  for psychologists (Artemieva, 1969).  It is of interest that Artemieva along with Martynov (1976) wrote a short review of the book Contemporary Developments in  Mathematical Psychology (Vols, 1 and 2, edited by Krantz et al., 1974). The authors of the review criticized the first volume  for what they felt was an overemphasis on behavioral prediction and an underemphasis on psychological structure. In the  critics' perception, the only criterion for a "correct" model presented in Vol. 1 appears to be a close correspondence between  its predictions and data. Systems of models are said to be arbitrary; they are not seriously connected with psychological  conceptions about the phenomena under investigation; thus there is a gap between model and psychological language. In this  conclusion, there is perhaps an echo of the early repression of the development of statistical and psychometric methods in the  Soviet Union discussed earlier. Lacking a sensitivity to the interplay of statistical tools and substantive ideas,  statistically based models are looked at with much suspicion.  The review authors highlight R. Falmagne's point of view, who says that the history of mathematical psychology should be  written as a history of competing theoretical camps. Authors of models are said to ignore the "psychological tradition." They  go on to suggest that the psychological reader should not take seriously the words "learning," "memory," and "thought" used in  volume one because they are words of a formal language. "Thought," for example, is taken to be "an algorithmic set of  processors." Models posit psychological processes without any connection to human peculiarities. The authors did, however,  note that the tools of formalization and statistical test were in many cases interesting.  Sampling from the reviewer's comments about Vol. 2, we find that those papers which do not claim to explain psychological  phenomena, such as Joreskog's analysis of variance-covariance matrices and Carroll and Wish's paper on multidimensional  scaling, receive praise. It is interesting that such psychometrically oriented papers appeal to the reviewers.  On the other hand, while J. C. Falmagne is said to have specified Fechner's problem and to construct a system of axioms to  solve the problem, he is seen as stuck on the problem of how to relate fallable measurement to algebraic axioms. It would be  of interest to see how the authors of the review would receive Falmagne's (e.g., Falmagne, 1976) more recent efforts to solve  just such problems.  The review authors remark that they are unsatisfied with Krantz's effort to use indirect techniques to construct a geometrical  space for a set of subjective stimuli because one does not know a priori the structure of the stimuli. They do not find  Levine's application of geometric concepts satisfying either. At the end of the review it is pointed out that K. Pribram's  model seems to be interesting, but its description in the book does not allow one to evaluate it.  It is of interest to draw parallels with a brief review of the same work by the second author of this paper (Batchelder,  1975). In that review, the material by Falmagne, Krantz, and Levine employing axiomatic formalism in measurement, choice, and  psychophysics was seen as marking clear progress. One is lead to  SOVIET MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 175  postulate that Artemieva and Martynov's (1976) basic distrust of axiomatic systems for spatial models rather than the more  direct but less formal psychometric approach indicates a fundamental misunderstanding of the aims of the axiomatic approach  which are to capture in potentially testable form those assumptions which are necessary to the sorts of representations of  data provided.  There is an interesting paper of Umriukhin (1976) that attempted to classify publications in the Journal of Mathematical  Psychology from 1964 to 1973. The author divided this period into three parts: 1964-1967, 1968-1970, 1971-1973; and defined  eight categories of articles. The data appear in Table 2 and seem to us to be fairly accurate. Umriukhin noted that the  learning and memory category decreased in 1971-1973, but at the same time the number of papers connected with signal detection  and social and group behavior increased.  As representative of Western work, three papers were discussed in some detail, though the criteria that led to their selection  are unstated. The first was Tversky's (1967) "Additive Utility and Subjective Probability." Umriukhin noted with interest  Tversky's remark that "the value of utility theory for psychology is defined not by the precision of its predictions but by  its value as a general theoretical scheme for studying individual behavior in a situation of choice."  The second paper selected for analysis was Calfee, and Atkinson's (1965) "PairedAssociate Models and the Effect of List  Length." It was noted that with the help of a mathematical model it is possible to answer a question of general psychological  interest: whether it is essential in an explanation of human memory to postulate an intermediate memory state.  The third paper was Wickelgren's (1972) "Trace Resistance and the Decay of LTM." This paper is seen in the review to  illustrate the way in which the relationship between a mathematical model and its described events is made.  Umriukhin optimistically looks at the future of mathematical psychology. He  TABLE 2  Percentage Breakdown of Publications in the Journal of Mathematical Psychology by Category for each of Three Yearsa  1964-1967 1968-1970 1971-1973  1 Learning and memory 50.3 49.0 33.6  2 Signal detection 15.4 13.3 21.0  3 Decision making 15.4 14.7 15.4  4 Measurement and scaling 5.6 11.9 10.4  5 Mathematical methods 2.8 3.5 4.2  6 Reaction time 4.9 1.4 4.9  7 Social and group behavior 1.4 5.6 9.1  8 Other 4.2 0.6 1.4  Total 100 100 100  a Data based on Umriukhin, 1976, Fig. 1.  176 LEFEBVRE AND BATCHELDER  supposes that in ten to twenty years mathematical psychologists may make fundamental discoveries comparable with those made by  modern physicists in the period of its revolution. Umriukhin's study is interesting because he has provided the Soviet  psychologists with the only Russian language analysis of the major Western journal devoted to mathematical psychology. The  objectivity and accuracy of the study reveal that the Soviet taxonomy of the area is in close correspondence to the one  recognized in Western science.  Beginning in 1977, several large reports reviewing Western work in selected areas of mathematical psychology appeared in  print. These reviews were written by S. V. Emelianov and E. L. Napelbaum working at the Institute of Systems Research. Of the  three reports that we are aware of, only the first one (Emelianov & Napelbaum, 1977) could be located. This review consists of  95 journal pages and contains quite detailed descriptions of Western work in measurement theory and in decision theory, and in  the decision theory area, work of both psychologists and economists is reviewed. On the whole the review seems very  comprehensive and professional and contains a bibliography of 511 titles that is nearly exhaustive of all relevant Western  publications that we are aware of. The overall scope of the project is such that some areas of Western mathematical psychology  may well have a magnified effect on Soviet work in the years following its publication.  VIII. CONCLUSION  In this review of Soviet mathematical psychology, we have seen that in the last fifteen years or so there has been a great  deal of work devoted to developing formal models and methods for psychology. Only a tiny fraction of the work has appeared in  English to date. However, in the work, there is clear evidence that the Soviets are working within a taxonomy of ideas that  bears much resemblance to that which governs Western work.  There are large differences in emphasis between the Soviet and Western traditions, however. The primary difference is that a  large part of the Soviet work can be seen as related to the cybernetic movement. In the Western world, there also has been  much cybernetic work; however, that work has not had a substantial impact on formal work within psychology.  The spirit of the cybernetic approach is to model a system as a whole rather than settle for a more detailed but piecemeal  analysis of its various components. The emphasis on behaviorism and its demands for explicit accounts for data have  contributed to the Western trend to study the detailed workings of simple settings, but behaviorism has not played a primary  role in the development of Soviet thinking.  Perhaps the Soviets are more comfortable with explanations of human behavior that appeal to notions in the biological and  engineering traditions. All Soviet scholars are steeped in a philosophical tradition of Marxism, and this tradition is most  compatible with a mechanical and wholistic conception of living organisms. Grand theoretical and untestable schemes for  large-scale phenomena abound in Marxism,  SOVIET MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 177  and early training in this method of thought may result in a bias for speculative theory in psychology.  Perhaps mentalism, phenomenology, and Gestalt notions will never be dominant forces in Soviet psychology; however, liberal  behaviorism that tolerates theoretical constructs if they are empirically testable would seem compatible with the Soviet mind.  As the methodology and logic of Western behaviorism increasingly penetrate Soviet literature, and as the Soviets forget their  suspicions of the psychometric and statistical approaches, we are bound to see much more serious empirical and scientific  applications of the cybernetic notions in the future.  A reasonable issue to raise in conclusion is the question of the extent to which the Soviet work is original. In the main,  does it merely follow dominant avenues of research seen in the Western work, be it cybernetic or otherwise, or does it break  new paths? Perhaps in the areas of information theory and perception and psychophysics one could argue that there is little  new. However, in the area of cybernetic models and automata theory, there is no question of the originality and, at least in  the latter case, the importance of some of the Soviet work.  In the future, we hope that the language barrier will increasingly dissolve between the Soviet and Western world and that  researchers can share the same central data bases and theoretical advances. Also as official barriers become dissolved to  permit direct contact between Soviet and Western researchers, we believe that mathematical psychology will take on more of the  character of an international science.  REFERENCES  Amosov, N. M. Modelirovanie myshlenia i psichiki. [Modeling thought and psyche.] Kiev, 1965. Ananiev, B. G., & STEPANOVA, E.  CH. Razvitive psichofsiologicheskikh funkcy vzroslykh ludey. [Development of psycho-physiological functions of adults.] Vol.  1, Moscow: Pedagogika, 1972; Vol. 2, Moscow: Pedagogika, 1977.  Anokhin, P. K. Kibernetika i integrativnaya deyatelnost mozga. [Cybernetics and integrative brain activity.] Voprosy  Psichologii, 1966, No. 3.  Anokhin, P. K., & RUBAKHIN, V. F. (Eds.), Problemy priniatia resheny. [Decision making.] Moscow: Nauka, 1976.  Artemieva, E. Yu. Sbornik zadach po teorii veroyatnostey i matematicheskoy statistike dlia psichologov. [A collection of  problems on probability theory and mathematical statistics for psychologists.] Moscow: Moscow State Univ. Press, 1969.  Artemieva, E. Yu., & MARTYNOV, E. M. Veroyatnostnye metody v psichologii. [Probability methods in psychology.] Moscow: Moscow  State Univ. Press, 1975.  Artemieva, E. Yu., & MARTYNOV, E. M. Sovremennaya matematicheskaya psichologia: bihevioristsky podkhod. [Contemporary  developments in mathematical psychology: behavioral approach.] Voprosy Psichologii, 1976, 4, 152-153.  Ashby, W. R. Design for a brain (2nd ed.). New York: Wiley, 1960.  Attneave, F. Applications of information theory to psychology. New York: Holt Dryden, 1959. Avanesov, V. S. Psychological  tests. Soviet Psychology, 1979, 17, 4, 97-107. [Translated from Voprosy Psichologii, 1978, 5, 97-107.]  Baranov, P. V. Refleksivnoe upravlenie i refleksivnaya structura resheny v igrakh dvukh lits so strogim  480/23/2-6  178 LEFEBVRE AND BATCHELDER  sopernichestvom. [Reflexive control and reflexive structure of decisions in two person games with strong rivalry.] In P. K.  Anokhin & V. F. Pubakhin (Eds.), Problemy priniatia resheny. Moscow: Nauka, 1976.  Baranov, P. V., & TRUDOLIUBov, A. F. Refleksivnye processy v igrakh na setiakh zavisimostey. [Reflexive processes in games on  graphs.] In I. M. Feigenberg & G. E. Zhuravlev (Eds.), Veroyatnostnoe prognozirovanie v deyatelnosti cheloveka. Moscow: Nauka,  1977. Pp. 293-305.  Bardin, K. V. Problemy porogov chuvstvitelnosti i psichofscheskie metody. [A problem of thresholds of sensitivity and  psychophysical methods.] Moscow, 1976.  Basov, M. Ya. Obshchie osnovy pedologii. [The general principles of pedology.] Moscow-Leningrad, 1931.  Batchelder, W. H. An all-or-none theory for learning on both the paired-associate and concept levels. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 1970, 7, 97-117.  Batchelder, W. H. Applications of formalism. Science, 1975, 189, 374-375.  Batchelder, W. H., & WEXLER, K. Suppes work in the foundations of psychology. In R. J. Bogdan (Ed.), Profiles-an international  series on contemporary philosophers and logicians: Patrick Suppes. Dordrecht: Reidel, 1979. Pp. 149-186.  Bauer, R. A. Some views on Soviet psychology. Washington, D. C.: American Psychological Association, Inc., 1962.  Bernstein, N. A. Ocherki po fiziologii dvizheny i fziologii aktivnosti. [Sketches on physiology of motions and physiology of  activity.) Moscow, 1966.  Blonsky, P. P. Izbrannye psichologicheskie issledovania. [Selected psychological studies.] Moscow: Prosveshchenie, 1964.  Boiko, E. I. Vremia reakcii cheloveka. [Time of reaction of a man.] Moscow: Medicina, 1968. Bongard, M.M. Problemy uznavania.  [Pattern recognition.] Moscow: Nauka, 1967. (Translated into English, East Lansing, Mich.: Spartan Press, 1970).  Brozek, J. Soviet psychology. In W. A. Hillix & M. H. Marx (Eds.), Systems and theories in psychology: A reader. New York:  McGraw-Hill, 1973. Pp. 521-568.  Calfee, R. C., & ATKINSON, R. C. Paired-associate models and theeffect of list length. Journal of Mathematical Psychology,  1965, 2, 254-265.  Chomsky, N. Formal properties of grammars. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, & E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical  psychology (Vol. II). New York: Wiley, 1963. Pp. 323-418.  Chudakov, V. H., & KONONENKo, K. I. Termodinamika processov informacii i myshlenia. [Thermodynamics of the processes of  informaion and thought.] Kharkov State Univ. Press, 1973. Doktorov, V. Z. Ob ispolzovanii metodov factornogo analiza v  rabotakh sovetskikh issledovateley. [On using factor analytic methods in Soviet research.] Voprosy Psichologii, 1969, 2,  142-146. Emelianov, S. V., & NAPELBAUM, E. L. Metody issledovania slozhnykh sistem [Methods of investigation of complex  systems.] Itogi nauki i tekhniki. Series: Tekhnicheskaya Kibernetika, 1977, 8, parts 1-2, 5-100.  Estes, W. K. Probability learning. In A. W. Melton (Ed.), Categories of human learning. New York: Academic Press, 1964. Pp.  89-128.  Falmagne, J. C. Random conjoint measurement and loudness summation. Psychological Review, 1976, 83, 65-79.  Feigenberg, I.M. Veroyatnostnoe prognozirovanie i deyatelnost mozga. [Probability prognostication and brain activity.] Voprosy  Psichologii, 1963, 2.  Feigenberg, I.M. Mozg, psichika, zdorovie. [Brain, psyche, health.] Moscow: Nauka, 1972.  Feigenberg, I. M., & ZHURAvLEv, G. E. (Eds.), Veroyatnostnoe prognozirovanie v deyatelnosti cheloveka. [Probability  prognostication in human activity.] Moscow: Nauka, 1977.  Fridman, L. M. Modelirovanie v psichologii i psichologia modelirovania. [Modeling in psychology and the psychology of  modeling.] Voprosy Psichologii, 1977, 2, 15-28.  Garner, W. R. Uncertainty and structure as psychological concepts. New York: Wiley, 1962.  Glezer, V. D., & TSUKERMAN, I. I. Informacia i zrenie. [ Information and vision.] Moscow: Academy of Sciences, USSR, Press,  1961.  SOVIET MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 179  Gorbov, F. D. Eksperimentalnaya gruppovaya psichologia. [Experimental group psychology.] In B. F. Lomov (Ed.), Problemy  inzhenernoy psichologii (issue 4). Leningrad, 1966.  Grossberg, S. Embedding fields: A theory of learning with physiological implications. Journal of Mathematical Psychology,  1969, 6, 209-239.  Grossberg, S. Behavioral contrast in short term memory: Serial binary memory models or parallel continuous memory models?  Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1978, 17, 199-219.  Greeno, J. G. Representation of learning as discrete transitions in a finite state space. In D. H. Krantz, R. D. Luce, R. C.  Atkinson, & P. Suppes (Eds.), Contemporary developments in mathematical psychology (Vol. 1). San Francisco: freeman, 1974.  Hartley, R. V. The transmission of information. Bell System Technical Journal, 1928, 17, 535-550. Hick, W. E. On the rate of  gain of information. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1952, 4, 11-26.  Hopcroft, J. E., & ULLMAN, J. D. Formal languages and their relation to automata. Reading, Mass: Addison-Wesley, 1969.  (Revised ed., 1978.)  Hurvich, L. M., & JAMESON, D. An opponent process theory of color vision. Psychological Review, 1957, 64, 384-404.  Ignatiev, M. V. Biometricheskie problemy antropologii. [Biometrical problems in anthropolology.] Sovetskaya Antropologia,  1957, 1.  Indlyn, Yu. A. Deyatelnost nabliudatelia v situacii obnaruzhenia i razlichenia. [An observer's activity in detection and  discrimination experiments.] Voprosy Psichologii, 1975, 3.  Indlyn, Yu. A. Model obuchaemogo nabliudatelia v situacii obnaruzhenia i razlichenia. (A model of a trained observer in a  situation of detection and discrimination.) In P. K. Anokhin & V. F. Rubakhin (Eds.), Problemy priniatia resheny. Moscow:  Nauka, 1976. (a)  Indlyn, Yu. A. Model razlichenia i zakon Vebera. [A model of discrimination and Weber's Law.] Voprosy Psichologii, 1976, 4. (b)  Itelson, L. B. Matematicheskie i kiberneticheskie metody v pedagogike. [Mathematical and cybernetic methods in pedagogy.]  Moscow, 1964.  Kharkevich, A. A. O tsennosti informacii. [Concerning the evaluation of information.] Problemy kibernetiki 4, Moscow, 1960.  Khinchin, A. I. Mathematical foundations of information theory. Dover, 1957.  Kieras, D. E. Finite automata and S-R models. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1976, 13, 127-147.  Klykov, Yu. I. Situacionnaya model upravlenia bolshoy systemoy. [A situational model of the control of a big system.] Izvestia  AN USSR, Technicheskaya Kibernetika, 1970.  Kobozev, N. 1. Issledovania v oblasti termodinamiki processov informacii i myshlenia. [Investigations in the area of  thermodynamics of processes of information and thought.] Moscow State Univ. Press, 1971.  Kogan, A. 1. O vzaimosviazi bystroty i pravilnosti vybora reshenia pri zritelnoy otsenke formy. jConcerning the mutual  connection between speed and correctness of choice in visual comparison of shape.] In Ob aktualnykh problemakh  eksperimentalnogo Isledovania vremeni reagirovania. Tartu, 1969. Korzh, N. N., & ZABRODIN, Yu. M. A model for pathological  states of the sensory system. Soviet Psychology, 1975, 13, No. 3, 91-101.  Krantz, D. H., Atkinson, R. C., Luce, R. D., & SUPPES, P. (Eds.), Contemporary developments in mathematical psychology (Vols.  I, II). San Francisco: Freeman, 1974.  Krinsky, V. 1. Ob odnoy konstrukcii posledovatclnosti avtomatov i ee povedenii v igrakh. ]Concerning the construction of a  special set of automata and its behavior in games.] Doklad11 Akademii Nauk USSR, 1964, 156, No. 6.  Krylov, V. Yu. Ob odnom stokhasticheskom avtomate assimptoticheski optimalnom v sluchainoy srede. jOn a special stochastic  automaton that is asymptotically optimal in a random environment.) Avtomatika i Telemekhanika, 1963, 24, No. 9.  Lakshmivarahan, S. Bibliography on learning automata. Journal of Cybernetics and Information Science, 1977, 1, 189-195.  180 LEFEBVRE AND BATCHELDER  Landa, L. N. Algoritmizacia v obuchenii. [Algorithmitization in learning and instruction.] Moscow: Prosveshchenie, 1966.  (Translation into English: Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Educational Technology Publications, 1974.)  Landa, L. N. Instructional regulation and control. Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Educational Technology Publications, 1976.  Lefebvre, V. A. The structure of awareness: toward a symbolic language of human refexion. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage  Publications, 1977.  Lenin, V. I. Materialism and empiriocriticism. Moscow: Foreign Languages Publications House, 1952. (First published in 1909.)  Leonov, Yu. P. Decision theory and the concept of threshold in psychophysics. Soviet Psychology, 1975, 13, No. 3, 78-90.  Leonov, Yu. P. Teoria statisticheskikh resheny i psikhofisika. [The theory of statistical solutions and psychophysics. ]  Moscow, 1977.  Leontiev, A. N. O formirovanii sposobnostey. [Concerning formation of abilities.] Voprosy Psichologii, 1960, 1.  Leontiev, A. N. (Ed.), Inzhenernaya psichologia za rubezhom. [Engineering psychology abroad.] Moscow: Progress, 1967.  Leontiev, A. N., & KRINCHIK, E. M. Pererabotka informacii chelovekom v situacii vybora. [Use of information by a man in a  choice situation.] Inzhenernaya Psichologia. Moscow State Univ. Press, 1964. Lepsky, V. E. Issledovanie refleksivnykh  processov v eksperimente na matrichnoy igre s nulevoy summoy. lInvestigation of reflexive processes in an experiment on a  zero-sum matrix game.] In D. A. Pospelov, V. N. Pushkm, & V. N. Sadovsky (Eds.), Problemy evristiki. Moscow: Vysshaya Shkola,  1969.  Liaudis, V. Yu. O structure mnemonicheskogo deistvia. [Concerning the structure of mnemonic activity.] In Inzhenernaya  Psichologia. Leningrad: 1967. Issue 3.  Lomov, B. F. Chelovek i tekhnika. [Human beings and technology.] Moscow: Sovetskoe Radio, 1966. Lomov, B. F. (Ed.), Problemy  psikhofisiki. [Problems of Psychophysics.] Moscow, 1974.  Lomov, B. F. Sixty years of Soviet psychology. Soviet Psychology, 1979, 17, No. 2. Luce, R. D. Individual choice behavior. New  York: Wiley, 1959.  Luce, R. D., & RAIFFA, H. Games and decisions: Introduction and critical survey. New York: Wiley, 1957.  Mandryka, A. M. Matematicheskie metody i ikh primenenie v psichotekhnike. [Mathematical methods and their application in  psychometrics.] Moscow: Sotsegiz, 1931.  Markov, A. A. Essai d'une recherche statistique sur le texte du roman "Eugene Onegin." Bulletin of the Academic Science, St.  Petersburg, 1913, 7.  Matiushkin, A. M., Ravich-Shcherba, 1. V., & FARAFONOVA, E. A. V Vsesoyusny s'ezd psichologov. jVth Convention of the USSR  psychologists.) Voprosy Psichologii, 1977, 6.  Meerson, A. M. O nekotorykh vozmozhnostiakh optimizacii rezultatov mnogomernogokorreliacionnogo analiza. Concerning some  possibilities of optimization of the results of multidimensional correlational analysis.] In Psichologia i Matematika. Moscow:  Nauka, 1976.  Miller, G. A. What is information measurement? American Psychologist, 1953, 8, 3-11.  Miller, G. A. The magic number seven, plus or minus two: some limits on our capacity for processing information. Psychological  Review, 1956, 63, 81-97.  Miller, G. A., Galanter, E., & PRIBRAM, K. H. Plans and the structure of behavior. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1960.  Molozhavy, S. s. Programma izuchenia povedenia rebenka i detskogo kollektiva. [A program of studying child behavior and  children's group behavior.] Moscow, 1924.  Napalkov, A. V. Informacionnye structury i mozg. [Informational structures and the brain.] Moscow, 1969.  Nebylitsyn, V. D. Sovremennoe sostoyanie factorialnogo analiza. [Contemporary state of factor analysis. Voprosy Psichologii,  1960, 4.  SOVIET MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 181  Nebylitsyn, V. Actualnye problemy differencialnoy psicho-fisiologii. [Actual problems of differential psychophysiology.]  Voprosy Psichologii, 1971, 6, 13-26.  Nevelsky, P. B. Issledovanie ob'ema kratkovremennoy i dolgovremennoy pamiati. [Investigation of the capacity of short and  long-term memory.] Problemy Inzhenernoy Psichologii. Moscow: Nauka, 1967. Offir, J. D. Automaton models of performance.  Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1973, 10, 353-363.  Panov, D. Yu., & ZINCHENKO, V. P. (Eds.), Inzhenernava psichologia. JEngineering psychology.[ Moscow: Progress, 1964.  Paz, A. Introduction to probabilistic automata. New York: Academic Press, 1971.  Peisakhov, N. M. Psichologicheskie i psichoftsiologicheskie osobennosti studentov. [Psychological and psychophvsiological  peculiarities of students.] Kazan Univ. Press, 1977.  Petrov, B. M. (compiler), & PLATONOV (Ed.), Kratky Psichologichesky Slovar-Khrestomatia. [Short Psychological dictionary and  reading book.[ Moscow: Higher Education Press, 1974.  Petrovsky, A. V. Na podstupakh k marksistskoy psichologii. [Toward Marxist psychology.] In N. F. Dobrynin (Ed.), Voprosy  teorii i istorii psichologii. Moscow, 1964.  Pittel, B. G. Odna prosteishaya veroyamostnaya model kollektivnogo povedenia. [A special simplest probability model of group  behavior.] Problemy Peredachi Informacii, 1967, 3, No. 3.  Ponomarev, V. A. Ob odnoy konstrukcii avtomata, assimptoticheski optimalnogo v stacionarnoy sluchaynoy srede. [Concerning the  construction of an automaton that is asymptotically optimal in a stationary random environment.] Bioftsika, 1964, 9, No. 1.  Pospelov, D. A., & PUSHKIN, V. N. Myshlenie i avtomaty. [Thought and automata.] Moscow: Sovetskoe Radio, 1972.  Pribram, K. H., Newer, M., & BARON, R. J. The holographic hypothesis of memory structure in brain function and perception. In  D. H. Krantz, R. D. Luce, R. C. Atkinson, & P. Suppes (Eds.), Contemporarv developments in mathematical psychology (Vol. 2),  San Francisco: Freeman, 1974. Pp. 416-457.  Reitman, W. R. Cognition and thought. New York: Wiley, 1965.  Repkina, G. V. Ob ob'eme operativnoy pamiati. [Concerning the capacity of operative memory.] Problem y Inzhenernoy  Psichologii. Moscow: Nauka, 1968.  Rosental, M., & YUDIN, P. Kratky filosofsky slovar. [Brief philosophical dictionary.] Moscow, 1954. Rozhdestvenskaya, V. I.,  Nebylitsyn, V. D., Borisov, M. N., & ERMOLAEVA-TOMINA, L. B. Sravnitelnoe izuchenie razlichnykh pokazateley sily nervnoy  sistemy u cheloveka. [Comparative study of different indicators of forces in the human nervous system.] Voprosy Psichologii,  1960, 5.  Saltzman, E. Levels of sensorimotor representation. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1979, 20, 91-163.  Scott, A. Neurodynamics: a critical survey. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1977, 15, 1-45. Shannon, C. E. A mathematical  theory of communication. Bell System Technical Journal, 1948, 27, 379-423.  Shannon, C. E. Prediction and entropy of printed English. Bell System Technical Journal, 1951, 30, 50-64.  Shapiro, S. 1. Ot algoritmov k suzhdeniam. [From algorithm to judgment.] Moscow: Sovetskoe Radio, 1973.  Shreider, Ju. A. Ob odnoy modeli semanticheskoy teorii informacii. [Concerning a model of semantic information theory. 1  Problemy Evristiki. Moscow, 1965. Issue 13.  Shreider, Ju. A. Modelirovanie Kollektivov. [Modeling groups.] In A. 1. Berg, B. V. Birukov, E. S. Geller, & G. N. Povarov  (Eds.), Upravlenie, informacia, intellekt., 1976, Part II, Chapter III. Shreider, Ju. A. Ob otsenke reshayushchey koalicii.  [Concerning the evaluation of a decision making coalition. 1 Kibernetika, 1977, 1, 126-128.  Sokolov, E. N. Psikhofiziologia tsvetorazlichenia. [Psychophysics of color discrimination.] Voprosy Psichologii, 1977, 5,  98-104.  Sokolov, E. N. Principles of psychophysiology. Soviet Psychology, 1980, 18, 69-82. [Translated from Voprosv Psichologii, 1979,  2, 66-73.  48012312 7  182 LEFEBVRE AND BATCHELDER  Sokolov, E. N., Izmailov, Ch. A., Izmailova, T. V., & ZIMACHEV, M.M. A spherical model for color vision. Soviet Psychology,  1979, 17, 85-96. (Translated from Vestn. Mosk. Ser. Psikhol., 1977, 1, 45-52, Moscow Univ. Press.)  Suppes, P. Stimulus response theory of finite automata. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1969, 6, 327-355.  Suppes, P. Learning Theory for probabilistic automata and register machines, with applications to educational research. In H.  Spada & W. F. Kempf (Eds.), Strucutral models of thinking and learning. Bern: Hans Huber Publishers, 1977. Pp. 57-79.  Teplov, B.M. Prosteishie sposoby factornogo analiza. [Elementary methods of factor analysis.] In B. M. Teplov (Ed.),  Tipologicheskie osobennosti vysshey nervnoy deyatelnosti cheloveka (Vol. V). Moscow: Prosveshchenie, 1967.  Toom, A. L. Sposoby priniatia resheny v odnom klasse igr. [Analysis of decision making in a special class of games.] Izvestia  AN USSR, Technicheskaya kibernetika, 1973, 3.  Toom, A. L., & TRUDOLIUBov, A. F. Refleksive wechselberiehungen im kollektiv. Ideen des exakten Wissens, 1974, 3.  Trudoliubov, A. F. Reshenia na setiakh zavisimostey i refleksivnye mnogochleny. [Decisions on graphs and reflexive  polynomials.] In VI Simposium po Kibernetike, Tbilisi, 1972. Pp. 188-193.  Tsetlin, M. L. Issledovanie po teorii avtomatov i modelirovaniu biologicheskikh sistem. [Automaton theory and modeling of  biological systems.] Moscow: Nauka, 1969. (Translated into English: Mathematics in science and engineering (Vol. 102). New  York: Academic Press, 1973.)  Tsypkin, Ya. Z. Foundations of the theory of learning systems. new York: Academic Press, 1973. Turing, A. M. Computing  machinery and intelligence. Mind, 1950, 59, 433-460.  Tversky, A. Additivities, utility and subjective probability. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1967, 5, 175-201.  Umriukhin, E. A. Osnovnye napravlenia matematicheskoy psichologii za rubezhom. [The main currents of mathematical psychology  abroad.] In V. F. Rubakhin (Ed.), Psichologia i matematika. Moscow: Nauka, 1976. Pp. 69-85.  Vaisburg, E. M., & ROSENSTEIN, G. SH. Qualitative models of disturbances in behavior. Part I. Biophysics, 1968, 13, 609-617; a  Part 11. Biophysics, 1968, 1281-1289. b  Varshavsky, V. I., & VORONTSOVA, I. P. O povedenii stokhasticheskikh avtomatov s peremennoy structuroy. [On the behavior of  stochastic automata with variable structure.] Avtomatika i Telemekhanika, 1963, 24, No. 3.  Vekker, L. M. Vospriyatie i osnovy ego modelirovania. [Perception and its modeling.] Leningrad, 1964. Vygotsky, L. S. Thought  and language. [Introd. by J. S. Bruner; trans. from the 1934 Russian ed. by E. Hanfmann and G. Vakar.] Cambridge, Mass.: MIT  Press, 1962.  Von Neumann, J., & MORGENSTERN, O. Theory of games and economic behavior. Princeton, N. J.: Princeton Univ. Press, 1953.  Wickelgren, W. A. Trace resistance and the decay of LTM. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1972, 9, 418-455.  Wiener, N. Cybernetics. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1948.  Yaglom, A. M., & YAGLOM, 1. M. Veroyatnost i informacia. (3rd ed.). [Probability and information.] Moscow: Nauka, 1973.  Yarmitsky, Yu. D. Problemy izmerenia i psichofizicheskie metody. [Problems of measurement and psychophysical methods.] Voprosy  Psichologii, 1977, 3, 115-122.  Yaroshevsky, M. G. Isotoria psichologii. [History of psychology.] Moscow, 1966.  Yellot, J. 1. Correction for fast guessing and the speed-accuracy tradeoff in choice reaction time. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 1971, 8, 159-199.  Young, F. M., & TORGERSON, W. S. Torsca, a Fortran IV program for Shepard-Kruscal multidimensional scaling analysis.  Behavioral Science, 1965, 13.  Zabrodin, Yu. M. Osnovania i svoistva matematicheskikh modeley sensornoy chuvstvitelnosti. [Foundations and pecularities of  mathematical models of sensitivity.] In P.K. Anokhin & V.K. Rubakhin (Eds.), Problemy priniatia resheny. Moscow: Nauka, 1976.  Pp. 190-223.  SOVIET MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 183  Zabrodin, Yu. M., & LEBEDEv, A.N. Psichofizika i psichoftziologia. [Psychophysics and psychophysiology.] Moscow: Nauka, 1977.  Zalkind, A. B. Osnovnye voprosy pedologii. [The main problems of pedology.] Moscow, 1927. Zaripov, R. H. Kibernetika i muzyka.  [Cybernetics and music.] Moscow, 1971.  Zhinkin, N. I. Nekotorye voprosy primenenia terorii informacii i psichologii. [Some problems of application of information  theory and psychology.] Voprosy Psichologii, 1958, 1.  Zhuravlev, G. E., Priniatie resheny vo vrazhdebnoy srede. [Decision making in a hostile environment.] In P. K. Anokhin & V. F.  Rubakhin (Eds.]. Problemy prinyatia resheny. Moscow: Nauka, 1976. Zhuravlev, G. E. Obsuzhdenie psichologicheskikh problem  ekonomicheskogo modelirovania (obzor konferentcii). Discussing psychological problems of economical modeling (conference  review).] Voprosy Psichologii, 1977, 5.  Zhuravlev, G. E., Kimberg, A. N., Petrova, A. E., & TSISKARADZE, M. A. Taktika i kontrtaktika prognosticheskikh resheny.  [Tactics and countertactics in prognostic decision making.] In P. K. Anokhin & V. F. Rubakhin (Eds.]. Problemy priniatia  resheny. Moscow: Nauka, 1976.  RECEIVED: September 10, 1980