10.1016/0022-2496(81)90060-2
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 23, 214-226 (1981)  A Heuristic Method for the Comparison of Related Structures  LAWRENCE .I. HUBERT AND REGINALD G. GOLLEDGE  The University of California, Santa Barbara  By extending a technique for testing the difference between two dependent correlations developed by Wolfe, a strategy is  proposed in a more general matrix context for evaluating a variety of data analysis schemes that are supposed to clarify the  structure underlying a set of proximity measures. In the applications considered, a data analysis scheme is assumed to  reconstruct in matrix form the given data set (represented as a proximity matrix) based on some specific model or procedure.  Thus, an evaluation of the adequacy of reconstruction can be developed by comparing matrices, one containing the original  proximities and the second containing the reconstructed values. Possible applications in multidimensional scaling, clustering,  and related contexts are emphasized using four broad categories: (a) Given two different reconstructions based on a single  data set, does either represent the data significantly better than the other? (b) Given two reconstructions based on a single  data set using two different procedures (or possibly, two distinct data sets and a common method), is either reconstruction  significantly closer to a particular theoretical structure that is assumed to underlie the data (where the latter is also  represented in matrix form)? (c) Given two theoretical structures and one reconstruction based on a single data set, does  either represent the reconstruction better than the other? (d) Given a single reconstruction based on one data set, is the  information present in the data accounted for satisfactorily by the reconstruction? In all cases, these tasks can be  approached by a nonparametric procedure that assesses the similarity in pattern between two appropriately defined matrices.  The latter are obtained from the original data, the reconstructions, and/or the theoretical structures. Finally, two numerical  examples are given to illustrate the more general discussion.  INTRODUCTION  A wide variety of procedures for the analysis of proximity data are now wellknown (see Carroll & Arabie, 1980). In fact, many  applied researchers may no longer feel the need to explain in detail the purpose behind, say, a multidimensional scaling or a  cluster analysis since both methods are already well-documented in the methodological literature of the social and behavioral  sciences (Shepard, 1974; Golledge & Rushton, 1971; Kruskal & Wish, 1978; Hartigan, 1975). These newer data analysis strategies  are very powerful descriptive tools, but unfortunately, they are also burdened with several unresolved evaluation problems  that limit their  Partial support for this research was supplied under NIJ Grant 80-IJ-CX-0061 and NSF-SOC-7728227. Address reprint requests to  Lawrence J. Hubert, Graduate School of Education, University of California, Santa Barbara, Calif. 93106.  0022-2496/81/030214-13$02.00/0  Copyright C 1981 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  214  HEURISTIC COMPARISON OF STRUCTURES 215  applicability. This is particularly true when a comparison is made with the highly developed statistical structures usually  associated with methods relying on the general linear model.  Although the methodology examined could be used in a variety of situations, we concentrate on developing and testing a method  for evaluating data analysis schemes that depend on sets of proximity measures; thus, its greatest use would be for  multidimensional scaling, clustering, and related strategies. In the applications considered, a data analysis scheme is  assumed to reconstruct in matrix form the given data set (represented as a proximity matrix) based on some specific model or  procedure. Thus, an evaluation of the adequacy of reconstruction can be developed by comparing matrices, one containing the  original proximities and the second containing the reconstructed values.  At least four major areas of difficulty can be identified in our understanding of how these newer data analysis techniques  mentioned above could be extended beyond their rather obvious but very useful descriptive roles:  (i) Given two different reconstructions based on a single data set, does either represent the data significantly better than  the other? The reconstructions, for example, may correspond to multidimensional scalings using different metrics or  dimensionalities or to two very different descriptive models that supposedly account for the original data.  (ii) Given two reconstructions based on a single data set using two different procedures (or possibly, two distinct data sets  and a common method), is either reconstruction significantly closer to a particular theoretical structure that is assumed to  underlie the data? In general, the term "theoretical structure" will refer to some array of numerical values given in matrix  form that is predicted for the data by some theory.  (iii) Given two theoretical structures and one reconstruction based on a single data set, does either represent the  reconstruction better than the other?  (iv) Given a single reconstruction based on one data set, is the information present in the data accounted for satisfactorily  by the reconstruction?  In all four areas, it is clear that descriptive measures of fit for specific methods could be calculated and merely compared  numerically (e.g., Klahr, 1969; Baker & Hubert, 1976; Girard & Cliff, 1976; Schalnemann & Carroll, 1970; and Spence, 1972).  However, general statistical techniques that could provide a broader evaluative context for these comparisons are rare indeed.  Our intent is to suggest one very general approach to some of the difficulties indicated by the four areas mentioned above.  Since our concern is to include within one framework many different possible data analysis schemes that attempt to assess  structure in a proximity matrix, the finer details that are usually associated with a statistical hypothesis test will be  missing, e.g., questions of degrees of freedom, power, and so on. Instead, we emphasize the evaluation of agreement between  two appropriately defined proximity matrices through a simple nonparametric method. As  216 HUBERT AND GOLLEDGE  will be shown, this evaluation gives either a way of assessing the degree of fit of a structure to a data set, or the  differences between the degrees of fit for alternative structures.  The lack of specificity in what we will discuss is not without its price, and for this reason, the technique we propose may be  best characterized as a heuristic. Since we do not at this time have a way of explicitly dealing with a differential degree of  freedom issue when comparing different structures, there are some applications that should be approached with caution,  particularly those relating to two different reconstructions based on a single data set. As will be mentioned in more detail  later, the baselines that can be established for our comparison statistic are still of value in these instances but they must  be interpreted with a clear understanding of their limitation.  We motivate the discussion by first reviewing in some detail a recent approach to testing the difference between two dependent  correlations. An analogous paradigm is then proposed in a matrix context as a way of dealing with more complicated data  analysis models in the four general categories sketched above.  BACKGROUND  The use of Fisher's Z-transformation in testing for a difference between two independent correlations (i.e., correlations  based on distinct samples) is a well-known and commonly accepted method. Unfortunately, there is no comparable procedure that  enjoys the same degree of universality for testing the difference between two dependent correlations, and in fact, a  substantial literature has been developed that debates the merits of various approaches (e.g., see Steiger, 1980; Neill &  Dunn, 1975). More recently, a simple approach has been suggested by Wolfe (1976, 1977) that, as will be seen later, can be  extended to a matrix context. Wolfe observed that if U, V, and W denote three random variables with some joint distribution  for which Var (V) = Var(W), then  Pa.v- w = PUV - Puw 2(1 -Pvw)  as long as pvw :t- 1.  Thus, Puv = Puw if and only if pu,v- w = 0, and a test of the equality of the two correlations puv and puw reduces to the test  of a zero correlation between U and V- W The relationship in (1) is a somewhat obvious algebraic identity and brings with it  the problem of assuming that the variances of V and W are equal in the population. It does, however, suggest that the  correlation between U and V - W does contain information on the relationship between U and V as compared to U and W.  One might consider using the standard parametric procedure based on the tdistribution for testing whether p(U, V - W) = 0.  However, our interests are in an alternative randomization strategy that is conditional on the obtained univariate data and  which can be stated and given meaning without an explicit population analogue  HEURISTIC COMPARISON OF STRUCTURES 217  for the sample correlation r(V, V - W). In addition, since the randomization paradigm is only defined with respect to the  observed data, the problem of variance equality can be avoided by an appropriate standardization. Specifically, suppose a data  set is available on three variables U, V, and W that consists of N trivariate observations. Based on these data, the scores on  the V and W variables are both standardized to mean zero and variance 1 and N new difference scores of the form V - W are  constructed. In terms of a descriptive analogue of (1) using sample correlations. we obtain  ruv - ruw  ru, v- w =  2(1 - rvw)  The particular hypothesis that is of interest is one of randomness in the patterning of the observed scores on U and V - W.  Specifically, it is assumed under this baseline conjecture that all N! possible permutations of the U scores are equally  likely compared to the sequence of scores on V - W (or equivalently, fixing the U scores and considering the N! permutations  of the scores on V - W as equally likely). We wish to reject the randomness hypothesis that the observed matching could have  been reasonably generated by picking one of the N! permutations at random. Operationally, ru, v-w is compared to the complete  distribution generated under the randomness assumption and the number of permutations giving values as extreme as the obtained  correlation is reported as the (one-tailed) significance level. Given the algebraic identity in (2) and the constancy of rvw  under randomization, a sufficiently small significance level would in turn suggest that the observed difference between ruv  and ruw is "real" in the sense that it cannot be reasonably attributed to a simple randomization of the obtained data.  The randomization procedure just described may not be the best strategy if we were willing to assume a specific population  model, e.g., with respect to such a model there may be more powerful procedures. However, the advantage of developing this  concept of randomness with respect to the obtained data is that no explicit population model has to be assumed; the randomness  conjecture has an operational meaning and interpretation in terms of the obtained data. More importantly, in the matrix  context developed below that is of major interest to us, the appropriate population models are not at all obvious; thus,  randomization may be the only alternative available that has the type of generality desired.  We do note in passing that at least in this simple three variable context, the randomization strategy on r,,v_w could be  reinterpreted as a conservative procedure with respect to its significance level if we were willing to assume the usual  population model. Specifically, under the null hypothesis that puv = Puw = P, the asymptotic variance of ru,, - ruw is (1 -  p,,w)(2 - 3p2 +PVWP2)/N (Neill & Dunn, 1975). Thus, the asymptotic variance is bounded above by 2(1 - pvw)/N and a  conservative test would be based on comparing the statistic  ruv - ruw  (2(1 - rvw))IN  218 HUBERT AND GOLLEDGE  to the standard normal (assuming the usual estimate rvw). Under randomization and mild regularity conditions (see Puri & Sen,  1971, p. 76), ru,v_w is asymptotically normal with mean 0 and variance 1/(N - 1). Thus, using equality (2), the same statistic  as in (3) could again be referred to the standard normal (with N- 1 replacing N).  In short, randomization can be interpreted as a conservative paradigm with respect to the usual population model;  consequently, if our sole interest were in this initial three variable problem, more powerful procedures are available (see  Steiger, 1980). In the context developed below, however, U, V, and W are replaced by proximity matrices. An analogue of  relationship (2) is again of interest but now the correlations are obtained between the corresponding entries in two different  matrices. In general, comprehensive population models are difficult if not impossible to formulate in this matrix framework,  which in turn suggests that randomization of some form may be the only reasonable strategy to follow.  METHODOLOGY  Some Notation  To provide a convenient terminology, suppose we have a set S of n objects and three n X n proximity matrices A, B, and C  defined on S X S. We assume the main diagonals are irrelevant and could just as well be set equal to zero. Defining the  entries in the ith row and jth column of the three matrices as a;;, bi;, and c,j, the simple correlations between the  corresponding entries (i.e., between a,; and b,,, a;; and ci;, and b,j and cu for all i *j) are represented by rAB, rAC, and  rBC, respectively. Finally, if commensurability is developed between B and C by, say, assuming the entries in both have been  replaced by their Z-scores (treating the off-diagonal entries in B and C as a sample), then an analogue of (2) can be obtained  as  rAB - rAC  rA~B_c=  V'2 (l - rBC),  as long as rBc * 1. (4)  The expression in (4) obviously implies that r,.B_C is zero if and only if rAB= r AC. Given the central task of evaluating the  importance of the observed difference between rAB and rAC with respect to the obtained data, the relationship in (4) suggests  one possible heuristic. If we argue that the entries in A and B - C have a similar patterning of high and low entries (as  measured by a comparatively extreme value of rA.B_C), then this conclusion must also be reflected in the difference between  rAB and rAC . In other words, we have a way of determining if the entries of A are differentially patterned against B and C.  Direct population analogues to (4) are generally missing in the matrix context, and consequently, an alternative randomization  model that is an extension of some work of Mantel (1967) is suggested as a way of assessing the relative magnitude of rA, B_C.  HEURISTIC COMPARISON OF STRUCTURES 219  The advantage of Mantel's scheme is that the internal structure of the matrices is maintained since the entries themselves are  not merely permuted at random. As before, the randomness conjecture has an inherent operational meaning for the given data set  and can be specified without the need for a particular population model.  To be explicit, a reference distribution for rA, B-C is constructed by arbitrarily fixing one of the matrices as is (e.g, B -  C) and permuting the rows and columns of the second (e.g., A) in all n! possible ways (the row and column permutations are  identical). When tabled for all permutations, these correlations serve as an exact reference distribution that can be used to  evaluate the relative size of rA, B_c. Since this matrix comparison strategy is developed in great detail elsewhere (e.g.,  Hubert & Subkoviak, 1979; Siemiatycki, 1978), we merely note here that a complete enumeration can be approximated by a process  of random sampling from it; in addition, the first two moments of the distribution, and thus, a Z-statistic can be calculated  by formula (although the assumption of asymptotic normality may not always be justified-see Mielke, 1978, 1979). The mechanics  are illustrated in the later numerical examples. An alternative approach would be to use a Pearson Type III distribution as an  approximation to the permutation distribution by using a skewness parameter set equal to the exact skewness of the permutation  distribution (see Mielke, 1979, for a more complete discussion).  GENERAL APPLICATIONS  Although it may now be apparent how expression (4) could be used as a method for approaching each of the four areas mentioned  in the introduction, we will briefly review the specifics. In all cases, it is assumed that B and C have been made comparable  by imposing the Z-score condition.  (i) Single Data Set, Two Different Reconstructions  Researchers and applied workers are often confused by conflicting claims as to which of several analyses of a set of data is  likely to provide the best "fit." In fact, the variety of classifications, typologies, or clusterings that could be developed  for a single data set may produce as much confusion for the applied worker as they do enlightenment. Similarly, there is a  growing concern in the multidimensional scaling area for selection of the most appropriate metric for representing data  (Golledge, 1978; Golledge, Parnicky, & Rayner, 1979; Spector, 1978; Lindman & Caelli, 1978; Pieszko, 1975; and Indow, 1979).  Analogous problems occur in network theory, or in evaluating outcomes from a scaling or an additive tree analysis (Sattath &  Tversky, 1977).  In the context of our notation, let A denote a raw proximity matrix and assume that B and C are reconstructions of A based on  two distinct analyses. Then, a test of rA.B_C is an attempt to assess which reconstruction is the most adequate. For example,  (a) B and C could represent interpoint distances from multidimensional scalings in the Euclidean and city-block metrics using  the proximities in A; (b) B and  220 HUBERT AND GOLLEDGE  C could refer to multidimensional scalings in two and three dimensions; (c) B could be obtained from a scaling and C from an  additive tree analysis, and so on. In general, two different reconstructions are obtained for a single data set and our  concern is with a decision as to which reconstruction is the best or if both mirror the data about equally well. In this  latter case, rA. B_C would not fall in the extremes of the permutation distribution.  Although applications of the type just described may initially appear straightforward, the comparison scheme we have just  outlined is so general that great care must be used when interpreting the results obtained from specific applications. As  mentioned in the introduction, there is no degree of freedom notion for the strategy, and consequently, certain comparisons  may be biased by the way in which they are constructed, particularly in this first area. For example, if A is a raw proximity  matrix and B and C represent multidimensional scalings in k + 1 and k dimensions, then we might expect rA,B_c to be positive  since intuitively there is a greater latitude for fitting in k + 1 dimensions than in k. It would be of great interest,  however, if rA,B_c could not be declared significantly different from zero.  Obviously, when B and C are generated from data analysis strategies that fit a differential number of "parameters" defined in  some broad sense, caution is appropriate in the interpretation of a significant correlation since it may be expected on an a  priori basis. No difficulty exists if the structure requiring the fewer "parameters" is the best or if rA,B_c is close to zero  when referenced against the permutation distribution. Whenever a positive bias may exist in the comparison under study, a  failure to reject could be the most interpretable outcome. Stated somewhat differently, a significant value for rA, B_C can be  viewed as a necessary but not sufficient condition when arguing, say, for the superiority of one reconstruction over a second.  (ii) Two Reconstructions, One Theoretical Structure  For this general area of application, instead of assuming that A is the data set used in generating B and C, we suppose A  represents some theoretical structure hypothesized a priori by the researcher (e.g., a partition, a linear seriation, or an  adjacency structure). A test of rA,B_c against zero is directed toward a question of which matrix, B or C, represents the  theoretical conjecture the best. For instance, suppose B and C are based on two distinct data sets and A represents a  partition hypothesized by the researcher, i.e. a;; = 1 if the corresponding objects O; and O; are assumed to fall within a  common subset and 0 otherwise. If rA,B_c is significantly greater than 0, then the partition is more apparent in B than in C;  alternatively, if rA,B_c is significantly less than zero, then the partition is closest to C.  (iii) Two Theoretical Structures, One Reconstruction  If A represents some reconstruction or is itself an original data set and B and C denote two different theoretical  conjectures, then a test of rA, B_C assesses which theoretical conjecture is closest to A. Thus, when B and C denote different  partitions  HEURISTIC COMPARISON OF STRUCTURES 221  and A some raw proximity matrix, the index rA. B-C can be used to evaluate which partition is closest to the data. Again,  however, the cautionary note regarding a possible bias in rA, H_c should be kept in mind.  (iv) Single Data Set, Single Reconstruction  When a given data set has been reconstructed by some model, a natural question arises as to how well the reconstruction  exhausts the manifest data structure. Significance tests provide one means for evaluating the adequacy of a reconstruction,  but where no acceptable tests of significance exist, alternative means of determining one's confidence in reproducing the  original data must be sought. We propose to focus on the relation between an original and a residual matrix as a means of  assessing whether the original data are reconstructed adequately.  When A = B, the general correlation equality (4) becomes  rA, A -C -  rAC  as long as rAC :t- 1. (5)  Consequently, if A is a data set and C represents some reconstruction, then rA, A-C is the correlation of the original data  and a residual matrix. The closer r A, A- C is to zero, the better the correspondence between A and C, i.e., rAC-+ 1 as rA,  A-C-4 0. Thus, C could be based on a multidimensional scaling, a clustering, and so on, and a test of rA,A-c against zero  would be a test of the goodness-of-fit for the reconstruction. The closer rA,A-C is to zero, the better the fit.  In all of these general problem categories, it should be remembered that since the evaluation strategies are conditional on  the obtained data, sample size considerations do not enter in any explicit degree of freedom calculation. Intuitively, when  proximities are based on small sample sizes, then the structure that actually underlies these proximities is not being  estimated very well. The correlations needed in our calculations are attenuated, reducing the sensitivity of our procedure if  true differences in structure exist. Conditional randomization inherits some of the same difficulties found in most of the  newer data reduction procedures, i.e., there is no generally appropriate way of separating out a failure to identify structure  from the lack of sufficient precision in the calculation of the original proximities.  Obviously, there is a great deal of generality in the correlational equality given in (4) and no complete listing of possible  research applications would be feasible. The four broad areas we have sketched, however, could serve as a guide and the reader  should be able to formulate a rather extensive list that is specific to a particular research concern. We present two examples  in the next section that should help explain the mechanics of carrying out the comparisons in more detail.  222 HUBERT AND GOLLEDGE  NUMERICAL EXAMPLES  As illustrations of the general ideas presented in the earlier sections, we consider two well-known data sets. The first is  from Ekman (1954) on the similarity among 14 colors and the second is from Anglin (1970) on the similarity among 20 words.  Both of these data sets have relatively clear structures and have been discussed in detail elsewhere, e.g., see Shepard (1978)  and Hubert and Levin (1976).  In Shepard's (1962) classic paper on multidimensional scaling it was demonstrated that the proximities among the 14 colors  used by Ekman could be arrayed in a circular pattern in two dimensions. Consequently, within the first category of inference  problems-the comparison of different reconstructions based on a single data source-we should be able to show the advantage of  going from one to two dimensions, and conversely, show no major advantage in going from 2 to 3. Based on standard  Shepard-Kruskal nonmetric multidimensional scalings in one, two, and three dimensions, three interpoint distance matrices were  reconstructed and normalized to satisfy the Z-score constraint. If A denotes the original proximity data and Bk denotes the  normalized interpoint distance matrix in k dimensions, the two correlations given below along with their associated  Z-statistics clearly indicate the need for two dimensions and the nonsignificance in the increase in fit in moving to three  (the correlations are negative since Ekman's original data are similarities rather than dissimilarities):  rA,B2-B, _ - 0.380; Z,.A,B2-Bt - - 3.80;  rA,B,-B2 = - 0.073; Z,.B,B3-B2 - - 0.69.  Based on a random sample of size 99 from the complete permutation distribution and the type of Monte Carlo significance  testing procedure described in Edgington (1969), Hubert (1978), and elsewhere, the two correlations rA,B2-B, and rA,B,_B2 have  p-values of 0.01 and 0.22, respectively. In other words, we get a substantial increase in the correlation moving from one to  two dimensions but a nonsignificant increase in moving from two to three dimensions. (Since the matrices are symmetric, the  Zstatistics throughout these two examples are based on a variance of [ 1/(i)] [ 1 + C], where C is a positive or negative  constant that depends on the structure of the matrices being compared-see Hubert & Subkoviak, 1979. Thus, each Z-statistic is  defined by multiplying the obtained correlation b the square root of the number of object pairs and a correction factor of 1/0  + C).)  These same nonmetric analyses can be reconsidered as an illustration of our fourth category of inference tasks, i.e., whether  a data set is accounted for sufficiently by a given reconstruction. Since A is keyed oppositely to that of BB2, Ba, we first  normalize the original proximity matrix A and take its negative to define A* prior to constructing the "residual" matrices A*  - B, , A* - BZ, and A* - B3. Using these matrices, the following correlations are obtained along with the indicated  Z-statistics and Monte Carlo significance levels based on a sample of size 99:  HEURISTIC COMPARISON OF STRUCTURES 223  rA*, A*-B = 0.379; ZrA*, A*-e, = 3.95 (p-value of 0.01),  rA*, A*-B2 = 0.125; ZrA,, A*-B2 = 1.21 (p-value of 0.09),  rA*, A* -1, = 0.109; ZrA*, A*-B3 = 1.02 (p-value of 0.13).  Again, we see that a two-dimensional solution is suggested by the size of the associated Z-statistics and p-values.  Our second example illustrates the remaining two general classes of inference tasks that are concerned with the evaluation of  one or more data sets against one or more theoretical structures. Specifically, Anglin (1970) obtained two proximity matrices  based on the free-sorts of 20 words by a group of 40 adults and by a group of 40 children. The adult and child proximity  matrices were defined by the proportion of times two words were sorted together and will be denoted by A and C, respectively.  Anglin was interested in a "parts-of-speech" hypothesis represented by a split of the 20 words into four classes: nouns,  prepositions, verbs, and adjectives. We specify this conjecture by a 20 X 20 matrix, HQ, in which an entry is 1 if the row and  column words are the same part-of-speech and a 0 otherwise. A second hypothesis, discussed in this same context by Hubert and  Levin (1976), will be used to define an alternative structure based on some ideas from Paivio et al. (1968). Here, the 20  words are subdivided into concrete nouns, prepositions, human processes, and adjectives, and the matrix corresponding to this  split denoted by Hb. Thus, there are two data sources, A and C, based on an adult and child sample, respectively, and two  possible theoretical structures, H,, and Hb. For convenience, we assume that A*, C*, Ho*, and H** all denote the appropriately  normalized matrices.  There are four correlations that are particularly relevant and we give these below along with their associated Z-statistics  and Monte Carlo significance levels based on a sample of 99 permutations:  rH,,A.-C* -_ 0.649; ZrH,,A*-C* = 8.79 (p-value is 0.01),  rHb,A,-c* = 0.399; ZrHb,A*-C* 5.45 (p-value is 0.01),  rA.HQ-H~ _ - 0.016; ZrA,H.-HI = - 0.22 (p-value is 0.36),  rc,H,-H~ - Zrc,H.-HE - 2.85 (p-value is 0.02).  - 0.208;    The two correlations rHQ,A*-c* and r,b,A.-c* can be used to illustrate the second class of inference tasks, i.e., which of two  data sets (A* and C*) is closer to a given theoretical structure. If our structure is represented by HQ or by Hb, it appears  that the adult sample is closer than the child sample to both conjectures. The other two correlations, rA,H,*_H, and  rc,H,*-HE, fall within our third category of inference problems, i.e., which of two theoretical structures represents a given  data set the best. It appears that the adult sample is about equally represented by either Ha or Hb but the child sample is  significantly better represented by Hb (even though Hb itself is closer to the adult data than to the child data).  224 HUBERT AND GOLLEDGE  POSSIBLE EXTENSIONS OF THE METHOD  Although indexing the correspondence between the two matrices A and B - C is basic to all of the previous discussion, the  choice of the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient is somewhat arbitrary. There are other measures that could have  been proposed that may be more appropriate for certain applications, e.g., those that are based on nonmetric analyses.  Unfortunately, these extensions may be computationally very costly if the matrices being analyzed are large, especially if  Monte Carlo significance testing is carried out with a reasonably large sample size. As one example, suppose we are given the  two matrices A, B, and C and define two three-place functions ut.ik and viik as follows:  u,jk = +1, if i, j, k are distinct and ai; > aik,  if i, j, k are distinct and a< aik,  = 0, otherwise;  vi;k = +1 if i, j, k are distinct and big > bik and ci; < e;k,  = -1, if i, j, k are distinct and big < bik and ci; > c;k,  = 0, otherwise.  Then, the raw cross-product statistic T = Ei,l,k utik vi;k is also a measure of similar patterning between A and B - C. For  instance, within the ith row of A we score a + 1 if a;j and a;k bear the same order relation as b;; and bik and the opposite  order relation to ci; and cik; conversely, we score a- 1 if ai; and ark bear the same order relation as ci; and cik and the  opposite order relation to bi; and bik. These scores are then summed within each row, and finally, across rows. Given this  scoring system for T, positive values reflect a greater similarity of A to B than of A to C; negative values would reflect the  opposite. We note that no standardization of the entries in B and C is now necessary, and furthermore, the comparisons are  carried out only within the rows of A, B, and C. This latter property suggests that I' would be appropriate for comparing  conditional matrices in which possibly different "metrics" are used in obtaining the proximities within the different rows in  each of the three matrices.  Many other generalizations of these indexing ideas could be pursued, but usually with rather prohibitive computational  requirements for large matrices when Monte Carlo significance testing is carried out. For example, a statistic could be based  on distinct object quadruples in which comparisons are now carried out across rows. In all of these cases, and although they  may be expensive to generate, permutation distributions are possible and evaluative baselines could be developed in complete  analogy to what was done for rA,B_C. Some of these options for generalized measures of a similar nature are discussed by  Hubert (1978, 1980), and the reader is referred to these sources for some additional background and clarification.  HEURISTIC COMPARISON OF STRUCTURES 225  REFERENCES  ANGLIN, J. M. The growth of word meaning. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1970.  BAKER, F. B., & HUBERT, L. J. A graph theoretic approach to goodness-of-fit in complete-link hierarchical clustering. Journal  of the American Statistical Association, 1976, 71, 870-878. CARROLL, J. D. & ARABIE, P. Multidimensional scaling. Annual  Review of Psychology, 1980, 31, 607-649.  EDGINGTON, E. S. Statistical inference: The distribution free approach. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1969. EKMAN, G. Dimensions of  color vision. Journal of Psychology, 1954, 38, 467-474.  GIRARD, R. A., & CLIFF, N. A Monte Carlo evaluation of interactive multidimensional scaling. Psychometrika, 1976, 41, 43-64.  GOLLEDGE, R. G. Multidimensional methods in the analysis of environmental behavior and design. In I. Altman & J. Wohlwill  (Eds.), Research on human behavior (Vol. II). New York: Plenum, 1978. GULLEDGE, R. G., PARNICKY, J. J., & RAYNER, J. N. The  spatial competence of selected populations (Vol. 1). Ohio State University Research Foundation and Department of Geography,  Columbus, Ohio, July 1979.  GOLLEDGE, R. G., & RUSHTON, G. Multidimensional scaling: Review and geographic applications. Technical Report #10, AAG  Commission of College Geography, 1971.  HARTIGAN, J. A. Clustering algorithms. New York: Wiley, 1975.  HUBERT, L. J. Generalized proximity function comparisons. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 1978,  31, 179-192.  HUBERT, L. J. Analyzing proximity matrices: The assessment of internal variation in combinatorial structure. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 1980, 21, 247-264.  HUBERT, L. J., & LEVIN, J. R. Evaluating object set partitions: Free-sort analysis and some generalizations. Journal of Verbal  Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1976, 15, 459-470.  HUBERT, L. J., & SUBKOVIAK, M. J. Confirmatory inference and geometric models. Psychological Bulletin, 1979, 86, 361-370.  INDOW, T. An approach to geometry of visual space with no a priori mapping functions: Multidimensional mapping according to  Riemannian metrics. Social Sciences Research Report, No. 25, School of Social Sciences, University of California, Irvine,  California, 1979.  KLAHR, D. A Monte Carlo investigation of the statistical significance of Kruskal's non-metric scaling procedure.  Psychometrika, 1969, 34, 319-330.  KRUSKAL, J. B., & WISH, M. Multidimensional scaling. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage Publications, 1978. LINDMAN, H., & CAELLI, T.  Constant curvature Riemannian scaling. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1978, 17, 89-109.  MANTEL, N. The detection of disease clustering and a generalized regression approach. Cancer Research, 1967, 27, 209-220.  MIELKE, P. W. Clarification and appropriate inferences for Mantel and Valand's nonparametric multivariate analysis technique.  Biometrics, 1978, 34, 277-280.  MIELKE, P. W. On asymptotic non-normality of null distributions of MRPP statistics. Communications in Statistics. Theory and  Methods, 1979, 15, 1541-1550.  NEILL, J. J., & DUNN, O. J. Equality of dependent correlation coefficients. Biometrics, 1975, 31, 531-543.  PAIVIO, A., YUILLE, J. C., & MADIGAN, S. Concreteness, imagery, and meaningfulness values for 925 nouns. Journal of  Experimental Psychology Monograph Supplement, 1968, 76 (1, Part 2).  PIESZKo, H. Multidimensional scaling in Riemannian space. Journal of Mathmatical Psychology, 1975, 12, 449-477.  PURI, M. L., & SEN, P. K. Nonparametric methods in multivariate analysis. New York: Wiley, 1971. SATTATH, S., & TVERSKY, A.  Additive similarity trees. Psychometrika, 1977, 42, 319-345. SCH6NEMANN, P. M., & CARROLL, P. M. Fitting one matrix to another  under choice of a central dilation and rigid motion. Psychometrika, 1970, 35, 245-256.  480/23/3-3  226 HUBERT AND GOLLEDGE  SHEPARD, R. N. The analysis of preximities: Multidimensional scaling with an unknown distance function I and II.  Psychometrika, 1962, 27, 125-140, 219-246.  SHEPARD, R. N. Representation of structure in similarity data: Problems and prospects. Psychometrika, 1974, 39, 373-421.  SHEPARD, R. N. The circumplex and related topological manifolds in the study of perception. In S. Shye (Ed.), Theory  construction and data analysis in the behavioral sciences, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1978.  SIEMIATYCKI, J. Mantel's space-time clustering statistics: Computing higher moments and a comparison of various data  transforms. Journal of Statistical Computation and Simulation, 1978, 7, 13-31. SPECTOR, A. N. An analysis of urban spatial  imagery. Doctoral dissertation, Department of Geography, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, 1978.  SPENCE, I. A Monte Carlo evaluation of three non-metric multidimensional scaling algorithms. Psychometrika, 1972, 37, 461-482.  STEIGER, J. H. Tests for comparing elements of a correlation matrix. Psychological Bulletin, 1980, 87, 245-251.  WOLFE, D. A. On testing equality of related correlation coefficients. Biometrika, 1976, 63, 214-215. WOLFE, D. A. A  distribution-free test for related correlation coefficients. Technometrics, 1977, 19, 507-509.  RECEIVED: October 24, 1980