10.1016/0022-2496(81)90041-9
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 24, 163-175 (1981)  Book Review  "Rational" Decision Making versus "Rational" Decision Modelling?'  MAURICE ALLAIS AND OLE HAGEN (Eds.). Expected Utility Hypotheses and the Allais Paradox: Contemporary Discussions of Decisions  under Uncertainty with Allais' Rejoinder. (Theory and Decision Library, Vol. 21). Dordrecht: Reidel, 1979. pp. vii + 681 +  indexes. $86.85.  Reviewed by MARK J. MACHINA2  Maurice Allais is Professor of Economic Analysis at the Centre d'Analyse Economique, Ecole Nationale Superieur des Mines de  Paris, from which he received his Ph. D. in 1949. He has received numerous awards and honors, including Officier Legion  d'honeur. He wrote the five-volume Traite d'Economie Pure, Imprimerie Nationale, 1952, and his research interests include the  economics of uncertainty, theory of general economic equilibrium, and capital theory. Ole Hagen is an Associate Professor at  the Norwegian School of Management, Oslo, having obtained degrees in Economics and Law from the University of Oslo. His  research interests include economics of uncertainty and inventory control, one recent article being "Utility and Morality," in  R. Henn and O. Moeschlin (Eds.), Mathematical Economics and Game Theory, Essays in Honor of Oskar Morgenstern,  Springer-Verlag, 1977.  The reviewer, Mark Machina, received his Ph. D. from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and is currently Assistant  Professor of Economics at the University of California, San Diego, and (1981-1982) Visiting Assistant Professor of Economics  at Princeton University. This review was written during a visiting appointment to the Department of Applied Economics,  University of Cambridge. His primary research interest is decision making under uncertainty.  I. AN EXTRAORDINARY CONTROVERSY  It is hard to think of a more notorious, long-standing, and often outright confused controversy in modern decision theory than  the continuing debate on the meaning of "rationality" in choice under uncertainty. Centered around the "expected utility"  theory of risk taking first proposed over two centuries ago by mathematician Daniel Bernoulli, this debate has seen the  dramatic reversal of Samuelson's and others' opinion of the theory from "logically arbitrary" to "logically compelling,"  repeated charges and countercharges of "nonscientific theories," "anti-scientific attitudes," and  ' A list of references at the end of the review includes all the sources implicitly mentioned in the text. Z I am grateful to  Vince Crawford and Frank Hahn for helpful comments, and to the Social Science Research Council for financial support.  163  0022-2496/81 /050163-13502.00/0  Copyright C, 1981 by Academic Press, Inc.  480/24/2-5 All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  164 BOOK REVIEW  circular definitions of "rationality," the appearance of a major article in the debate with an editorial warning to the reader  that it was being published "on the author's responsibility," and the reaction of, Savage who, upon being shown that the  preferences he expressed in a survey violated his own "rationality" postulate, concluded upon reflection that it was his  preferences, and not the postulate, which were in error!  Although this debate has at one time or another engaged some of the most respected mathematicians/statisticians,  psychologists, and economists of our time (de Finetti, Edwards, Friedman, Marschak, Morgenstern, Samuelson, Savage, Tversky,  Wold,...), the individual most responsible for its origin and continuation over 30 years is the French economist Maurice  Allais. Although the revival of expected utility theory in the forties due to its axiomatization by von Neumann and  Morgenstern generated much controversy, much if not most of this reflected a confusion over the meaning of the conclusion of  their (logically valid) argument-it was Allais who led the opposition to the premises of their theory of "rational" behavior  under uncertainty. Similarly, it was Allais' famous "Paradox" which until recently continued to provide the major refuting  evidence to the theory, and which is still discussed in textbooks on the subject, either as a classic example of scientific  refutation or as an accidental and correctable example of "irrational behavior," depending on the particular author's outlook.  On the other hand, Allais, primarily through sins of omission, has done much to hinder the debate, especially in regard to the  propagation of his own views. While it was he who initiated and organized the famous 1952 Paris conference on risk taking  where seminal contributions of Arrow, Savage, and Samuelson were first presented, the proceedings of this conference were  published only in French (and even then given limited distribution), and while many of the other participant's contributions  (including the above three) eventually found their way into English, Allais' equally important criticism of the  "neo-Bernoullian" or "American" school represented by the above authors was published in the United States in summary version  only, again in French. Yet while the theoretical critique he presented in that summary received at least some distribution,  the empirical results and analysis of his extensive survey on risk preferences, which were to provide the empirical support  for his arguments and were due to be published "shortly" in 1952, (to my knowledge at least) have still not appeared.  The present volume thus constitutes a most welcome addition to the literature on risk taking and "rational" behavior under  uncertainty. Its 681 pages contain (i) the first English translation of the full 1952 Allais "memoir" expounding his views and  criticisms of the American school and his own alternative theory, (ii) current views (pro and con) on the debate by some of  the original participants (de Finetti, Marschak, Morgenstern) as well as more recent entrants, and (iii) a lengthy statement  by Allais of his current views, including a partial analysis of the results of his 1952 survey. While both mammoth and  scholarly (Allais' contributions alone have 486 footnotes and cross-references), it provides a fascinating and well-balanced  combination of mathematical analysis, philosophical discussion, new empirical  BOOK REVIEW 165  evidence, personal reminiscences, and heated. debate. I shall try to give some of its flavor by presenting a critical, but I  hope fair, treatment of some of the key issues of the debate and the contributions of the present volume.  11. THE EXPECTED UTILITY HYPOTHESIS AND THE ALLAIS CRITIQUE  The controversy is best understood by beginning with the case of individual choice under certainty, where there is almost  universal agreement on the meaning of "rationality." If A is a set of conceivable alternatives, say alternative bundles of n  commodities so that A c R", then a (complete, reflexive) binary relation > on A X A (read "is at least as preferred as") is  considered "rational" if and only if it is transitive. In such a case (and granted an additional technical assumption of a  topological nature) it is always possible to mathematically summarize or "represent" > by a real valued "preference function"  V(x..... x") on A, in the sense that (x.., x") > (x;,..., x,,) if and only if V(x..... x") > V(x;,..., x;,), so that a  rational individual may be modelled as if trying to maximize the value of V(.) over the currently attainable (e.g.,  affordable) subset of A. Besides (essentially) guaranteeing its existence, however, "rationality" places no further  restrictions on the representation V(.): any further restrictions are either testable hypotheses on preferences which a  rational individual may or may not satisfy, or else assumptions, such as differentiability, made for analytic convenience. It  is not "irrational," for example, to hate asparagus.  Although weak, the assumption of rationality is clearly not without implications. An increase in disposable income, for  example, can never make the individual worse off, but it is important to note that this is not because V(.) must be increasing  in all or any of its arguments, merely that the maximum value of any function can never decrease as the attainable (i.e.,  affordable) set increases. It is also crucial for our purposes to note another aspect of preference functions. In the previous  century, economists originally assigned a psychological reality to the function V(.), calling the units it was measured in  "units of satisfaction" or "utils." Since "satisfaction," like temperature or location along a line, has no natural origin or  unit of measure, V(.) was regarded as a "cardinal" function: by proper choice of origin and units we might equally  legitimately represent the individual's satisfaction by any positive affine transformation a + bV(.) of V(.) (b > 0), however,  V(.) could not be subjected to nonlinear transformations without changing some "real" aspect of the individual's preferences.  Economists have since come to realize that, as a representation, V(.) is actually "ordinal:" any monotonically increasing  transformation f (V(. )) will represent the same preference ranking > and hence the same choice behavior, and indeed, given  the individual's awareness of >, there is no need to assume that he or she consciously thinks in terms of any actual  preference function at all.  It is possible, and would seem natural, to extend this approach to the case of choice under uncertainty, where the natural  objects of choice are probability distributions or "lotteries" over outcomes. Consider the set P of all alternative  166 BOOK REVIEW  lotteries over the set J$Q'__u, so that a typical element in P may be represented by (po,..., pm), where p, is the probability  assigned by the lottery to the outcome of winning $i (so P is the unit simplex in R"). By analogy with the certainty case,  "rationality" would appear to require only that the preference ranking >* over P be transitive, and hence (given the  above-mentioned topological assumption) representable by a preference function V*(po,..., pm). Actually, since we are now  working with money directly rather than with commodity bundles, we would also want to impose the "more money is better"  implication of the previous paragraph and require that any shift of probability mass from an outcome $i to a higher outcome $j  be preferred. This property, termed "monotonicity," is equivalent to dV*(po,..., pM)/dpi < dV*(po,..., pm)/dp; whenever i < j,  and is ordinal in that it is preserved under monotonically increasing transformations of V*(.). Beyond this, however,  rationality would again seem to warrant neither further restrictions on V*(.) nor that the individual aware of his or her >*  ranking think in terms of any particular V*(.) at all.  What then is the "expected utility hypothesis"? It is that >* be representable by a preference function which is linear, and  hence of the form V*(po,..., pM) - Y_ u, pi for some fixed set of coefficients {ui}rr o. The phrase "expected utility" comes  from the fact that if we call the coefficient u, of pi the "utility" of receiving the outcome $i, then V*(.) consists of the  mathematical expectation of "utility" implied by the lottery (po,..., pm). A useful account of the expected utility and  related models is given in the present volume by Gunter Menges.  Now while linearity is typically a useful first approximation to any function, economists and statisticians were at first hard  put to see why a rational individual must necessarily have a linear V*(.) (see the elegant statement of the "pre-1950  Samuelson" in this regard). Yet today most professionals indeed do view linearity as a sine qua non of rational behavior  toward risk, so much so that Pratt could with full conviction write "I am all in favor of any argument which will convince  anyone not already convinced that maximizing expected utility is the only behavior worth rational consideration."  Although it is possible with strong enough additional assumptions to interpret expected utility maximization as a "rule of  long run success" (a derivation is given in the present volume by A. Camacho), the primary reason for this direct about face  on what decision modellers viewed as "rational" behavior was the discovery by Ramsey, von Neumann and Morgenstern, Marschak,  Rubin, Samuelson, Savage, and others that "linearity in the probabilities" was equivalent to what has been termed the "strong  independence axiom." One of several equivalent statements of this axioms reads "a lottery (po..... pa,) will be preferred to  (po,..., p' ) if and only if the lottery A(po,_, pM) + (I - A)(po...., p"v) is preferred to A(po ~..., pM) + (I - A)(po....,  p"),  for all A G (0, 1) and (po,..., pm), (po,..., pM), and (po,.... p") in P." The argument for the "rationality" of this  prescription is straightforward: the choice among the latter pair of prospects is equivalent in terms of final probabilities  to being presented with a coin which has a (1 -A) chance of landing tails (in which case you will "win" the lottery (pu,....  p")) and being asked before the flip whether you would prefer to  BOOK REVIEW 16)7  win the lottery (po,..., p,N) or (p...... pM) in the event of a head. Now, either the coin will land tails, in which case your  choice won't have mattered, or else it will land heads, in which case you are in effect back to a decision between (p,,...,p,)  and (p a,..., p' ) and you should clearly make the same choice as you did before. There is no doubt that the principle  enunciated here is compelling. Indeed, Friedman and Savage felt that "the Greeks must surely have had a name for it" and  Marschak (present volume) comes close to suggesting that it be taught in curricula along with the principles of arithmetic and  logic.  Besides the discovery and interpretation of the independence axiom, one other factor had a bearing on the eventual acceptance  of the theory. Recall that the preference relation >* of an expected utility maximizer can be represented by the set of linear  coefficients {u;}. In this case, it is straightforward to show that any positive affine transformation {a + bui } (b > 0) will  represent the same preference relation, but that no nonlinear transformation of the ui's will. Thus the economists of the late  forties and early fifties, who had none too recently cast off the mistaken notion of cardinality in the certainty case, were  once again asked to believe in it as part of a new and self-proclaimed "rational" theory of choice under uncertainty! This  quite understandably caused some confusion and resistance until it became generally understood that the objects of choice were  not outcomes but rather lotteries over outcomes and (thus) that even linear preference functions over P could be subjected to  nonlinear (but monotonic) transformations of the formf(Y- uipi) without changing preferences, and that in any event the  independence axiom was defined directly on the ranking >-* so that there was still no need to posit the actual psychological  reality of any V*(.) function, much less the set of coefficients {ui}. The theory in its final form thus consisted of the  beliefs that (i) satisfying the independence axiom is a necessary condition for rationality and the preferences of such a  rational individual could be represented by the expectation of a cardinal "utility index" jui}, but that (ii) there was no  reason to assume that any cardinal index actually exists in the mind of the individual. Imagine then the profession's reaction  upon being told by Allais that both these views were wrong!  Allais' views are complex and multi-faceted, and the otherwise well-read reader will be amazed to see how much of the  subsequent debate, as well as the theory of behavior toward risk in general, is anticipated in his 1952 memoir. His main  points, however, are:  (i) the actual psychological reality of a cardinal index {s;} (distinguish from {ui}) giving the "psychological values" of the  outcomes {$i} (and more generally, of nonmonetary outcomes as well), and which "can be defined operationally by considering  either psychologically equivalent variations... or minimum perceptible thresholds (Weber-Fechner),"  (ii) in choosing among actual lotteries, individuals take into account not only the expectation of psychological value implied  by each lottery, but the variance and possibly higher moments of s; as well, so that while the ui's of an expected utility  168 BOOK REVIEW  maximizer may be inferred directly from choice over lotteries, the s,'s of an "Allaistype" individual in general cannot be, and  (iii) it is perfectly rational for individuals to take into account more than just the mean of the s,'s, and indeed, except  for monotonicity (which he calls "absolute preference") and transitivity, "rationality" as such imposes no restrictions  whatsoever on preferences over lotteries.  Many of the differences, and most of the misunderstanding, between Allais and his critics stem from this fundamental  difference over whether preference rankings or psychological values are the underlying "real" generators of choice, and some  of the deeper philosophical and linguistic aspects of this difference of approach are discussed in the present volume by Wemer  Leinfellner and Edward Booth. One particularly long-lived and well-known argument has concerned whether an aversion to risk  (which both sides agree is consistent with rationality) may result in a "rational" individual choosing to violate linearity in  the probabilities. To the Americans, an individual is "risk averse" if he or she always prefers receiving the expected  monetary value of any lottery to the lottery itself. This condition on >* is completely consistent with the independence axiom  and (given the latter) is equivalent to the condition that the utility indices derived from >* form an increasing concave  sequence (i.e., 0 < (u,+, - u,) < (u, - u,_ ,) for all i). Thus to the Americans risk aversion is completely compatible with,  and requires no deviation from, linearity-the individual's aversion to risk is completely captured by the shape of the {u,}  index. To Allais the {s,} index exists independently of and logically prior to risk preferences, and since it is the s, 's  rather than the actual monetary values $i which measure the true psychological benefit of the outcomes, a risk averter would  naturally choose to take into account the dispersion as well as the mean of the s,'s in ranking lotteries. Thus the {s,} index  reflects nothing about attitudes toward risk, and it is perfectly rational for an individual to want to maximize something  other than the linear form Y_ sip,. Furthermore, since Allais argues that no (Allais-type) individual can satisfy the  independence axiom except by maximizing F sip;, it follows that rational individuals may, for reasons of risk aversion, choose  to depart from expected utility maximization.  However, since introspection reveals that I would choose among alternative lotteries by conjuring up neither a well-defined  preference ranking nor a cardinal index of psychological value, I turn from the above argument to those aspects of the debate  which are of practical importance to (i) the decision modeller, who as descriptive scientist is concerned only with the  differing observable implications of the two models and the available evidence, and (ii) the decision maker, who would like to  be thought of as "rational," but who wants to know if it is okay, in the words of the pre-1950 Samuelson, to "satisfy his [or  her] preferences and let the axioms satisfy themselves."  BOOK REVIEW 169  111. IMPLICATIONS FOR DECISION MODELLERS  Allais has sought to operationalize his notion of psychological value by means of either minimum perceptible thresholds or  "psychologically equivalent variations" in wealth. On the former approach, it would seem that the minimum perceptible  difference between two sums of money would depend on whether they were presented as two piles of bills and coins or two  account balances. In the nonmonetary case (say slices of pie) it would seem that the same fuzziness of perception that  resulted in imperceptible differences would also render these "minimum thresholds" themselves too fuzzy and unstable to be of  use in deriving his index. In a contribution to the present volume, Peter Fishburn has shown that much of expected utility  theory may be derived in a model that allows for fuzziness of perception (e.g., intransitive indifference) and it may  similarly be possible for Allais to do the same with his theory.  Allais' other method of deriving the cardinal {si} index, which he actually uses in his 1952 survey, consists of direct  questions of the form "for what value of i is your intensity of preference for $i over $100 the same as your intensity of  preference for $100 over $50?" Personally, I would respond to this question by asking what it meant. Would I rather obtain  $100 after having hoped for $i or obtain $50 after having hoped. for $100? Surely the former-$100 is better than $50  regardless of i. Would I prefer $100 to an even chance of $i or $50? Since an Allais-type individual would consider the  variance of psychological value and not just the mean in this situation, this also will not work.  Yet Allais' subjects did provide answers to such questions, and while these questions do not seem to correspond to any actual  or hypothetical choice behavior, they nevertheless do elicit verbal (or written) behavior. Nor is this theory of psychological  value irrefutable: if I really had such an {s,} index this would place restrictions on my answers to such questions. Although  Allais does not seem to have tested these restrictions directly, he concluded that subjects responded "consistently" to these  questions, revealing {si} indices which were approximately log-linear over large ranges of outcome values.  However, Allais' theory of psychological value is only a theory of risk taking to the extent that the {si} index is  specifically linked to a preference ranking >* or a preference function V*(.), and the exact nature of this link has caused  some confusion. One the one hand de Finetti (present volume) repeats the earlier argument that nothing besides the expectation  of the index ought matter, since risk preferences are already captured in the shape of the index. This is true for the ui's of  an expected utility maximizer, which are derived from >*, but not for Allais' si's which are derived from verbal behavior in a  riskless context. On the other hand, Allais' assertion that any individual satisfying the independence axiom must exhibit {u,}  = 3 a + bsi J (b > 0) also deserves careful scrutiny: in response to de Finetti's 1952 counterexample V*(.)-Y_f(si)pi, Allais  has reproven the result via the addition of an additional "axiom of isovariation." The amazing strength of this result,  linking nonrisk-related survey behavior to preferences over lotteries, leads one to wonder whether "isovariation" might not be  a lot stronger than it first appears.  0 BOOK REVIEW  Yet while the link between the survey behavior and risk preferences remains to be fully explored, I feel that the more  fruitful approach to the psychology of risk would be to concentrate on the nature of >* or T'*(.) directly. Over the years  Allais has been charged with providing little in this regard, and hence of fostering an "unscientific" theory (this was  Friedman's view in 1950 and is repeated by Yakov Amihud (present volume)). It is true that Allais offers many "psychological  factors of choices involving risk" without always suggesting how strongly, and in which direction, he expects them to operate.  Yet he does offer at least some well-defined refutable hypotheses (among them absolute preference), and his primary empirical  assertion, namely that rational agents will not always choose according to the independence axiom even after it has been  explained to them, is clearly scientifically legitimate (not to mention important, if verified).  Since the present volume still only offers "selected findings" of Allais' extensive 1952 survey, his primary (though not sole)  empirical contribution to the debate remains his well-known counterexample to the independence axiom, the so-called "Allais  Paradox." Before proceeding, the reader may wish to note his or her preferences over:  ~ 10% chance of $5,000,000  a,: { 100% chance of $1,000,000 versus a,: 89% chance of $1,000,000  1% chance of $ 0,  and  10% chance of $5,000,000 a3: ~ 90% chance of $ 0  versus a,:  11% chance of $1,000,000 89% chance of $ 0.  Allais and several researchers since him have found that the modal (if not majority) choice of subjects has been for a, over  a, and a3 over awhich can be shown to violate the independence axiom (i.e., there is no set {ui } of utilities which can  generate these choices). This was one of the examples with which Allais "tricked" Savage (who initially chose a, and a3) and  similar examples were offered in the early fifties by Allais and George Morlat.  The main objections to the Allais Paradox as "evidence" have been (i) that individuals would always, like Savage, change their  preferences upon being shown how they violate the axiom, and (ii) that the example in question is an isolated case, and  examples involving less extreme payoffs and probabilities would result in less if any violations of expected utility. On the  first point, although experimenters (especially ones who believe in the rationality of the axiom themselves) typically are  able to talk subjects out of violations, Slovic and Tversky as well as MacCrimmon have found that when subjects were presented  with written arguments for and against conforming with the axiom, there is an about equal propensity for preferences to change  in either direction.  On the second point, recent experiments have shown that, not only are such Allais-  BOOK REVIEW 171  type violations replicable with less extreme payoffs and probabilities, but that the nature and direction of such departures  from linearity are both systematic and predictable. The current volume contains two major studies of this type. Coeditor Ole  Hagen extends and formalizes many of Allais' ideas, offering well-defined refutable hypotheses on risk preferences as well as  theoretical implications and empirical tests of them. In a characteristically careful and illuminating piece, Kenneth  MacCrimmon (with coauthor Stig Larsson) provides an exhaustive compendium of the various alternative axiomatizations of  expected utility. as well as alternative decision rules, and presents evidence both new and old on the different types of  violations of expected utility and the dependence of these violation propensities on the parameter values (probabilities and  payoffs) involved. The outcome of these and other studies suggests that the two most systematic types of violations are (i)  that, relative to linearity, individuals are more sensitive to (i.e., proportionately overweight) the probability of the most  extreme outcome when this probability is small than when it is large (called the "common ratio effect"), and (ii) that the  nature of the "common consequence" on the tail side of the earlier coin example does influence individuals' choices over which  lottery they would prefer in the event of a head, with a more preferred common consequence leading to a more risk averse  choice (the "common consequence effect"). The conclusion is clear: preferences systematically depart from linearity, and if  the proportion of the above types of violations steadily drops as less extreme probabilities and payoffs are used, this simply  reflects the fact that linear functions provide better approximations to nonlinear ones "in the small" than they do "in the  large."  Elsewhere I have extended this last idea to show how much of what has been termed "expected utility" analysis in fact does not  require the independence axiom (i.e., linearity) at all. Recall the earlier result that risk aversion is equivalent to the  sequence {u;} of utilities ("linear coefficients") being concave. Taking an arbitrary nonlinear V*(.) and defining the  cardinal sequence {dV*(p,,..., p,,)/dp;} (i.e., the "local linear coefficients") as the "local utilities" at the point  (p...... pa,) in P, it may be shown that V*(.) is made worse off by all mean preserving increases in risk if and only if the  local utilities form concave sequences at all points in P. Similar generalizations of "expected utility" results may be  obtained, as well as a simple condition on the functions {dV*(-)/dp;} which generates both the "common ratio" and "common  consequence" effects.  The implications for decision modellers? To Allais, whose 1979 contribution consisted primarily of a restatement of his 1952  views, I would say "Your disciples and intellectual descendents have gone beyond criticizing the "rationality" of expected  utility and are now formalizing your thoughts into well-defined and testable alternative models. Join them!" To the  neo-Bernoullians: "The evidence against the independence axiom is mounting. You have always admitted, when pressed, that  expected utility was a prescriptive and not a descriptive theory. Take that admission seriously and join in this search for  480/24/2-6  172 BOOK REVIEW  IV. IMPLICATIONS FOR DECISION MAKERS  Having already presented the main argument in favor of the rationality of the independence axiom, I offer here what I feel to  be the strongest counterargument, drawing on the arguments of Allais as well as comments by Tversky, Dreze, and Samuelson (the  latter two, however, do not necessarily disagree with its rationality).  Consider the decision problem in Table 1, where the (mutually exclusive) outcomes a,#, y, and 6 denote completely specified  consequences, that is, exhaustive descriptions of every observable aspect of the world which would be attained under the given  outcome. In particular, we assume that each of the descriptions a, a, y, and 6 pertain solely to what will be true if they  occur, and not to aspects. of any of the other infinite number of conceivable states of the world (that is, to what might  otherwise have happened). In this case the prescription of the independence axiom is clear: since the possible outcome y is  common to actions b, and b2, and 6 is common to actions b3 and bI should choose over {bb2} and {b3, b,} solely on the  basis of a and P, so that I ought to prefer b, to b2 if and only if I prefer b3 to b,.  Now assume these four alternative consequences are identical in all respects except for the following: in each, your best  friend has been in the hospital for an operation, and in  a: comes out with a permanent limp, and receives flowers and a sympathy card from you,  /3: comes out with a permanent limp, and receives champagne and a box of cigars from you,  y: comes out in perfect health (no limp), and  6: dies during the operation.  If I were in a position where I had to choose ex ante between b, and b2, I would choose b, since in this case the 0.05  probability event would, relative to what I had reasonable cause to hope for, be a most unfortunate and unhappy outcome. On  the other hand, if my choices were between b3 and b, I would certainly specify champagne and cigars in the unlikely and near  miraculous event that my friend did not die. Furthermore, I do not feel that these choices would be "irrational."  TABLE 1    Outcome  Action 0.05 Probability 0.95 Probability  b, a Y  b, # Y  b, a 8  b, /3 S  BOOK REVIEW 173  I have constructed this particular example to highlight what I feel to be the key objection to the independence axiom: namely,  that my attitudes toward ("utility of') a particular outcome need not be independent of what might otherwise be expected to  happen and how likely these other possibilities are. Indeed, even if I were allowed to make my choice after learning the  outcome of the operation, my decision between a and /3 might "rationally" depend on whether I had expected y or 6 to have  almost certainly happened instead, and if such "complementarity" across mutually exclusive outcomes is legitimate ex post, it  could hardly be irrational ex ante.  One objection to this example is that it does not really violate the axiom because a and # are not really the "same" outcomes  in the {bbZ} decision as in the Ib , b4} decision: the complete description of a consequence must include not only its  physically observable aspects but also my "state of mind" if it were to occur, and clearly my state of mind in both a and #  would depend on whether I had been expecting y or expecting 6. Arguing this, however, is to defend the axiom by rendering it  observationally irrefutable: it allows me to defend any pair of choices in situations like the above table, the coin example,  or the Allais Paradox.  A more useful objection might be that "rationality" would at least require that the axiom be satisfied in the "ethically  neutral" case where the outcomes are purely monetary payoffs. However, this seems to fly in the face of the economist's  typical view that money is only valued for the nonmonetary outcomes it affords us. In any event, even if the outcomes were  purely monetary, say a a lottery ticket and #, y, and S sure payments with y very large and S very small, my preferences for  bearing further risk (i.e., a versus /3) may well depend, ex ante or ex post, on whether the alternative outcome would be (or  would have been) y, in which case not getting y would be a disappointment and I might be inclined not to gamble further, or  whether it would be (would have been) 6, in which case I would consider myself lucky if I don't get it, and possibly feel  willing to bear the uncertainty of an addition bet (a). It is important to note that it is not my estimation of the respective  probabilities of the gamble a which are affected here, merely my willingness to bear them.  The argument over the rationality of the independence axiom may well go on forever. The implications for decision makers?  "Make sure you understand the argument for the independence axiom, and the usefulness of structuring decisions to highlight  common consequences as in Table 1. But if you truly feel that your enjoyment of outcomes such as a or ,Q will depend on what  might have otherwise happened (or more to the point, what might still otherwise happen), then don't let anyone who doesn't  happen to share these preferences convince you that you're `irrational."'  V. AN IMPORTANT VOLUME  Besides those mentioned above, the contributors to this collection include Oskar Morgenstern on the need to continually be  looking beyond our scientific theories (of risk taking or anything else) toward richer and more complete descriptions of  reality,  174 BOOK REVIEW  Karl Borch on the usefulness of the "stochastic dominance" and related criteria in ordering uncertain prospects, Richard Cyert  and Morris DeGroot on adaptive behavior when the individual cannot completely determine the "utility" of an outcome without  experiencing it, and Samuel Gorovitz on the neglect of very low probability events and the St. Petersburg Paradox. Each of  these papers make original, if more specialized, contributions to the field of decision making under uncertainty.  As one of the many who were looking forward to this volume, I have only two regrets. The first is that it didn't include  contributions by some of the other original participants in the debate (Kenneth Arrow, Milton Friedman, Paul Samuelson) or  some of the psychologists who have made important theoretical and empirical contributions to the field (Ward Edwards, Amos  Tversky). The second was that Allais' 1979 contribution consisted more of a repetition of his 1952 memoir than of new views  and ideas or a detailed analysis of his 1952 survey. Nevertheless, this volume will someday be an important source for the  historian of thought, though since the controversy is if anything heating up again, this will not be for some time yet.  REFERENCES  ALLAIS, M. Le comportement de 1'hornme rationnel devant le risque: Critique des postulate et axiomes de 1'ecole Americaine.  Econometrica, 1953, 21, 503-546.  ARROW, K. J. The role of securities in the optimal allocation of risk-bearing. Review of Economic Studies, 1963-1964, 31,  91-96. Reprinted as Chapter 4 of K. J. Arrow, Essays in the theory of risk bearing. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1974. pp.  121-133.  DREZE, J.H. Axiomatic theories of choice, cardinal utility and subjective probability: A review. In J. H. Dreze (Ed.),  Allocation under uncertainty: Equilibrium and optimality. London: Macmillan, 1974. pp. 3-23.  FRIEDMAN, M. F., & SAVAGE, L. J. The Expected Utility Hypothesis and the Measurability of Utility. Journal of Political  Economy, 1952, 60, 463-474.  MACCRIMMON, K. R. Descriptive and normative implications of the decision-theory postulates. In K. Borch & J. Mossin (Eds.),  Risk and uncertainty: Proceedings of a conference held by the International Economic Association. London: Macmillan,1968. pp.  3-23.  MACHINA, M. J. "Expected utility" analysis without the independence axiom. Econometrica, in press. MORLAT, G. Comment on an  axiom of Savage. In Economitrie. Paris: Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 1953. pp. 156-167.  PRATT, J. W. Some comments on some axioms for decision making under uncertainty. In M. Balch, D. McFadden, & S. Wu (Eds.),  Essays on economic behavior under uncertainty. Amsterdam: NorthHolland, 1974. pp. 82-92.  SAMUELSON, P. A. Probability and the attempts to measure utility. Economic Review, 1950, 1, 167-173. Reprinted with 1965  postscript as Chapter 12 in J. E. Stiglitz (Ed.), Collected scientific papers of Paul A. Samuelson. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT  Press, 1966. Vol. I, pp. 117-126.  SAMUELSON, P. A. Utility, preference, and probability (abstract of a paper given before the conference on "Les fondements et  applications de la theorie du risque en econometrie," Paris, May 1952). Chapter 13 in Collected scientific papers of Paul A.  Samuelson. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1966. Vol. 1, pp. 127-136.  BOOK REVIEW 175  SAMUELSON, P. A. Probability, utility, and the independence axiom. Econometrica, 1952, 20, 670-678. Reprinted as Chapter 14 in  Collected scientific papers of Paul A. Samuelson. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1966, Vol. 1, pp. 137-145.  SAVAGE, L. J. The foundations of statistics. New York: Dover, 1972. (Revised and enlarged version of the work originally  published by Wiley, New York, 1954.)  SLOVIC, P., & TVERSKY, A. Who accepts Savage's axiom? Behavioral Science, 1974, 19, 368-373. TVERSKY, A. A critique of  expected utility theory: Descriptive and normative considerations. Erkenninis. 1975, 9, 163-173.  VON NEUMANN, J., & MORGENSTERN, O. Theory of games and economic behavior. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1944. 2nd ed.,  1947. 3rd ed., 1953.