10.1016/0022-2496(81)90037-7
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 24, 93-99 (1981)  Book Review  W. E. REICHARDT AND T. POGGIO (Eds.), Theoretical Approaches in Neurobiology. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1981. Pp. x + 252.  $20.00.  Reviewed by TERRY CAELLI  The Editors are associated with the Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Tiibiirgen, where Reichardt is the  Director, and Poggio is a Research Associate. The primary research interest of the Editors is the application of nonlinear  systems theory to the study of motion perception processes, particularly in the fly.  The reviewer is a Senior Lecturer in the Psychology Department, University of Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia. He has  spent some time at Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, New Jersey, with where his major research interest was the application of  systems theoretic ideas to image processing and motion perception. His book, Visual Perception: Theory and Practice, has  recently been released by Pergamon Press.  1. OVERVIEW  This book is based on a NRP (Neurosciences Research Program) chaired by Werner Reichardt, Vernon Mountcastle, and Tomaso  Poggio in May 1978. It is a book concerned with the exposition and evaluation of linear and nonlinear systems approaches to  the neurophysiology and psychophysics of visual information processing. But this does not restrict the readership to those  interested in vision as such. Rather, the workshop, and so the book, was concerned with developments of these systems in  general-vision happens to be an excellent example due to the known structures, at both physiological and psychophysical levels.  However, one warning should be given. The book covers a very wide range of vision from the retinal coding of photon energy to  the types of algorithms and invariance structures involved in the perception of three-dimensional rotating objects. For this  reason not all chapters will interest all readers-even those whose research is in visual perception.  The book does not pose as an introductory text in either systems evaluation or vision. However, it does contain up-to-date  developments of some distinguished researchers whose works have entailed the application of formal languages to studying  aspects of neurobiology. The nonlinear systems analysis of synaptic interactions and the specific applications in motion  perception by Poggio and Reichardt; the biophysics of the retinal transduction processes by Lamb; the linear 93  0022-2496/81/040093-07$02.00/0  Copyright 1981 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  and nonlinear aspects of texture perception by Julesz; and the computer simulation models of Marr are just some examples.  There are two disappointing aspects of the book. One, the Appendices, particularly those on nonlinear systems, are rather  short and insufficient as a reference to issues like Volterra expansions, etc. Most readers of this book are not adequately  informed in such areas and some more fundamental properties would have been useful. Second, some topics do not fit the almost  singular theme of the book: linear and nonlinear processes.  Otherwise the book does add substantially to the area of neurobiology, if only by presenting in a monograph the applications  of such technologies to information processing in the nervous system. I shall now deal with each section of the book and try  to evaluate the essential points discussed.  2. SECTION I: THE BIOPHYSICS OF INFORMATION TRANSFER  Here, four chapters involving Baylor, Lamb, Poggio, and Torre deal with molecular and cellular aspects of the retinal  biophysics. The chapters by Lamb and Baylor are more specific to the retinal transduction process, while the Poggio and Torre  chapters deal with the development of a language for neural interactions which has general application in neurobiology.  Lamb's initial chapter (appropriately placed) deals with issues related to the photon transduction process and, in short,  argues for a specific number (6) of reaction stages. These stages are coded as n in the hyperpolarization function for the  red-sensitive cone in the turtle (with low-intensity flashes),  u(t) = Snae-ar(1 _ e- ar)n-~ dt  where u is the hyperpolarization, I is light intensity, At is flash duration, t is time after the flash, and S and a are  sensitivity and rate constants. In fact the number 6 is not directly observed but argued to (a) by fitting (1) to the turtle  data and (b) by a hypothetical reaction process (involving the buildup of particles) where calcium ions are thought to be the  internal transmitter.  As to whether the process of transduction can be modeled by 1 or n different diffusion processes was discussed. However, the  chapter certainly embeds the transduction process in the language of signal detection in a noisy environment and maybe the  general properties of diffusion processes or stochastic decision theory are relevant.  Baylor's paper logically follows insofar as it deals with receptor coupling (electrical coupling interactions via gap  junctions) and noise processing in the retina. It is argued that such interactions may well account for the occurrence of  action potentials at the third-order level of the amacrine and ganglion cells. Baylor makes a series of important observations  concerning such interactions, for example, that the spatial  integration (indexed by "morphological distance") of such interactions improves the temporal response characteristics  (including smoothness) of these units. The amplification of signals via the gap function involved in coupling would increase  the response of the third-level units considerably and so, as pointed out in the discussion, may well result in acuities  greater than already observed.  However, more formal treatment of such neural interactions is dealt with in the remaining two chapters of this section. It  suffices to conclude that Baylor's position is that the signal amplification at this third level is due largely to such  coupling and that the implied convolution mechanisms may well define the receptive field profiles of these ganglion  cells-specifically, their spatio-temporal MTF. To preempt slightly, Baylor's concepts may be better phrased in terms of a  nonlinear system where the coupling components constitute the second-order term of the Volterra expansion for the third-level  units.  In the third paper Poggio and Torre expound a formal theory of synaptic interactions, based on the equation of neural  operations with various terms of the Volterra expansion. In doing so they develop a most useful (if not entirely unequivocal)  graphical language for representing the transduction of: (a) conductance input into a current; (b) current into a potential  change due to filtering; (c) a current via multiplication of a voltage charge with an input. In general, they argue that the  membrane potential change d V at some location p can always be written (and if enough terms are taken this is true!) as the sum  AVp=kpi*(E,-Eo)gi-kpi*{[kti*(El-EO)gil gi)+..., (2)  where * denotes convolution, kis the filter function (kernels) determined by the dendritic tree geometry, EJ is the battery  associated with ionic change, and g; is the physical input.  Such nonlinear generalizations of the cable equation have proved useful in studying the synaptic and general information  transmission characteristics of motion detection in the fly. Torre and Poggio in the final chapter consider this example of a  secondorder system.  In summary these four papers have one common theme: that transmission of information in the retina, from the basic  transduction process to the higher level of processing spatio-temporal information, not only depends on the coding process of  spatio-temporal linear filter mechanisms, but also on the interactions of individual stages. This interaction process is  argued to support the representation of neural coupling via nonlinear Volterra-type expansions.  3. SECTION II: ALGORITHMS AND INTERACTIONS IN NEURONAL SYSTEMS  In this section an attempt is made to bridge the gap between research on fundamental neural coding mechanisms (hardware) and  operations (software) relevant to the ultimate behavior goals of the visual system: to process the spatio-  961 BOOK REVIEW  temporal information in the external environment. Again, if there is any common issue between the contributions it is that of  the different roles that linear and nonlinear systems play in information processing.  Victor's first paper is concerned with the investigation of nonlinear interactions in the cat retina by observing the response  to pairs of inputs modulated in space and/or time. In this way the second-order kernel KZ(f1,f2) (where f1,fz correspond to  the two input frequencies) represents the amount of nonlinear response produced in the system due to f, and fz. KZ is  effectively the cross-correlation between the two response profiles, and so is zero when the two signals are processed  independently. Victor studies such kernels for the X and Y ganglion cells of the cat's retina in the context of a "sandwich"  model whereby the nonlinear component of the X and Y responses is defined by  kz(f ,f2) = cL I (f) - L 1(fz) L z(f. +fz)  for L, being a linear filter, and LZ a second-order filter involving cross-correlation. In this way the sandwich (nonlinear  components "sandwiched between" the linear X, Y alone responses) is represented by a rectifier.  This type of analysis has potential in the more general areas of psychology where the observer is asked to integrate, respond  to, and process in general at least two specified information sources. The analyses used by Victor would enable one to  ascertain, in general for these types of problems, whether the observer is acting as a linear or nonlinear system.  Unfortunately Victor does not show how this formulation can be related to the critical tests, for single- versus  multiple-channel models for spatial frequency processing as developed by Sacks, Nachmias, and Robson (1971) and others.  Poggio and Reichardt consider the movement processing system in the fly as a smooth, time-variant one with finite memory, at  least with respect to torque processing. They then demonstrate how the p-graph notation developed earlier can be applied to  the modeling of the types of neural connections one would expect from a nonlinear analysis of the system. Specifically, they  conclude that the Volterra expansions involve at least third-order terms before torsion processing can be related to the  neurophysiological structures involved.  Wilson then discusses the threshold detection of spatial gratings within the context of the spatial heterogeneity of the  visual field and the (nonlinear) probability summation model. Wilson's argument against the use of Fourier analysis hinges on  this heterogeneity but does not argue against its local involvement. A clear description of his four-channel model is given as  a summary of the experiments with Bergen (1979).  However, what happens at threshold may not occur with superthreshold vision and Julesz, in the next chapter, considers recent  work on texture discrimination in this context. This chapter complements his Annual Review chapter (Julesz & Schumer, 1981)  and a review article Nature (London) (1981), where the theme is developed that there are two processes in superthreshold  vision. One, pertaining to the amplitude  spectrum of an image, involves a form of spatial summation in texture discrimination where the orientation/size determinants  of receptive fields shape the discrimination dimensions. Here, the dipole (or second-order) statistics, representing the  interpoint distance and angle distributions for textures, are used to measure the relative balance of stimulation. However,  the authors (Caelli, Julesz, & Gilbert, 1978) show that texture discrimination can still occur even when these distributions  are identical (isoamplitude or iso-dipole statistics), thus leading to a second nonlinear process: defined by "textons." These  units are found to be limited in number and may hold the clue to phase encoding in the visual system.  In the final two chapters Hubel and Cowan respectively summarize and consider recent results on the organization and  developmentally determined arrangement for units of the visual system. Although other specific details are given, perhaps one  of the most salient points made by Hubel is that (p. 112):  As one moves across (visual) cortex and traverses column after column, whatever variable the particular set or system of  columns subserves runs through its repertoire of values and begins again. Meanwhile, the amount of territory covered in the  underlying topographical map is not so great that a given region of visual field is deserted before all values of the variable  have been covered at least once.  This condition clearly supports local (retinotopic) homogeneity and summation mechanisms for the extraction of spatially  distributed information like frequency, orientation, and amplitude.  Finally, Cowan gives an interesting derivation of retinotopic and cortical organizations from the developing nervous system  whereby specific features like the cortical magnification factor and orientation selectivity through neighboring cortical  units (the "conformal mapping concept" of Schwartz) are seen to naturally evolve. Whether these neuro-anatomical features do  "explain" the types of complementary images and illusions suggested by Cowan is not clear. At least, Cowan has axiomatized the  development process.  4. SECTION III: THE ORGANIZATION OF COMPUTATIONS  IN VISUAL INFORMATION PROCESSING  In this section attempts are made to connect models of function at either the neurophysiological or the psychophysical level  with behavior. In the first chapter Reichardt and Poggio consider the control system for common houseflies in motion-fixation  and tracking behavior. They consider a first-order approximation for the visually induced response (for the tracking case) as  ew(r) + ko(r) = -D(V(t - e)) - r(V) w(t - 8) + N(t) + S(t).  Here 9, k correspond to inertia moment and friction constants, respectively; t equals time; v(t) is the error angle between  target and flight direction; D(VI) is a position  code including direction sensitivity ("attractiveness"); r(V) yi(t - e) is a velocity computation; S(t) and N(t) refer to  object (being tracked) trajectory and noise components, respectively. Experimental evidence is then given for such a  formulation while questions concerning the smooth control system are raised. This chapter gives a clear statement of the  results of this excellent work and shows just how this type of control system modeling is relevant to behavior. One wonders,  however, whether a more simple time series analysis, in the context of a (spatial) random walk, would not be another type of  useful analysis, at least of the tracking behavior.  In the next two chapters two of the more well-known aspects of the MIT group are discussed-"computational" approaches to  spatial information processing and motion perception (Marr' and Ullman, respectively). Unfortunately, the Marr chapter does  not offer any new information on definite algorithms for the extraction of geometric properties of three- or even  two-dimensional "objects." Rather, Marr has simply rephrased many of the older notions of edge extraction, feature lists,  position coding, and "perceptual" differentiation in words like early processing, place tokens, primitive sketch. We have by  now a very large literature, in both computer pattern recognition and perceptual psychology, on explicit models (etc.) for  these processes-which are simply ignored by Marr. Second the concept of a 2Zdimensional sketch is more poetic than anything  else. In the context of perceptual algorithms and experimental results for the extraction of three-dimensional objects from  two-dimensional projections, much has been done-and, again, this work seems to simply replicate and ask many of the same  questions over again. No doubt the emphasis on explicit algorithms is important, no doubt the specific network filters  proposed for stereopsis (as a development of Julesz's dipole model) are specific-but, in general, the work on image processing  and motion perception still requires more explicit development.  Ullman essentially is concerned with the extraction of information about threedimensional objects under rigid motion from  two-dimensional projections (presumably), and uses the parallel projected cylindrical motion configurations to illustrate the  point that structure comes from motion (what we all know). Again, the idea is to examine "computational problems underlying  the interpretation of structure from motion and to develop a scheme" which can do it. Ullman introduces an explicit rigidity  assumption and what he terms the "structure-from-motion" theorem (for parallel projections) whereby a rigid three-dimensional  structure can be mathematically determined uniquely once the three-dimensional coordinates of three distinct noncoplanar  points have been found. Ullman considers some general features of these display characteristics but, again, does not consider  either the spatiotemporal filters involved in a quantitatively based computational procedure, nor just how direction,  curvature, and torsion parameters are calculated for the three  ' The recent death of David Marr not only brings personal grief to many, but also is a great loss to vision research. Although  many of his creations are controversial, they are, at least, creative and stimulating in an area which can get so easily  distracted by replication, ritual, and the heuristics of experimental practice.  dimensional motion paths. Otherwise, the chapter does clearly define problems and possibly strategies in this area.  In the final chapter Bizzi also considers visuomotor control as a computational problem. Here a clearer computational  procedure is developed to model the eye-hand movement control systems of the monkey, where final equilibrium joint position  results from a dynamic interaction analog between muscle activity and visual guidance.  5. CONCLUSIONS  One usually asks four questions of such a book. One, is it supplying the reader with new, relevant information and ideas? Two,  is it creative insofar as it generates new constructs in the area? Three, is it integrated, or, is there a theme? Four, it is  worth buying?! From the brief summaries of each contribution it can be seen that although the topics are widely distributed  there is one common theme: the application of systems theory and computational algorithms to vision. However, the clear bias  is toward nonlinear systems, particularly those represented by Volterra expansions or Wiener kernels. Unfortunately the most  disappointing section is that which has most relevance to perceptual psychologists: the MIT group work.  From the clear evidence of inter-channel interactions in motion processing, through the nonlinearities in texture  discrimination, it is clear that the technologies dealt with in this book are important for vision research.  REFERENCES  CAELLI, T., JULESZ, B., & GILBERT, E. On perceptual analyzers underlying visual texture discrimination, 11. Biological  Cybernbetics, 1978, 39, 201-214.  JULESZ, B. Textons, the elements of texture perception, and their interaction. Nature (London), 1981, 290,91-97.  JULESZ, B., & SCHUMER, R. Early visual perception. Annual Review of Psychology, 1981, 32, 575-627. SACHS, M. B., NACHMIAS, J.,  & ROBSON, J. Spatial frequency channels in human vision. Journal of the Optical Society of America, 1971, 61, 1176-1186.  WILSON, H., & BERGEN, J. A four mechanism model for threshold spatial vision. Vision Research, 1979, 19, 19-32.