10.1016/0022-2496(81)90034-1
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 24, 21-57 (1981)  Psychological Relations and Psychophysical Scales: On the Status of "Direct" Psychophysical Measurement  ROGER N. SHEPARD  Stanford University  Arguments, originally developed some fifteen years ago, concerning the sort of "direct" psychophysical measurement advocated  by S. S. Stevens are reproduced here in order to facilitate access by a wider audience. Considerations of measurement theory,  biological adaptation, perceptual invariance, and neurophysiological noise, as well as various empirical results, suggest (a)  that it is primarily the relations-particularly the ratios-between stimulus magnitudes and not the individual magnitudes  themselves that are represented within the organism and, accordingly, (b) that "direct" psychophysical measurement, by itself,  uniquely determines neither a psychological magnitude of any one stimulus nor a psychophysical law relating such psychological  magnitudes to corresponding physical magnitudes. What such measurement can uniquely determine, evidently, is a psychological  parameter characterizing each sensory continuum.  Whether the water in a pot feels cold, cool, warm, or hot depends both on how long the pot has been on the fire and on how  long the testing hand itself has been in  At the suggestion of Amos Tversky and the ensuing official invitations of the preceding and current editors of the Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, William Batchelder and A. A. J. Marley, this paper is being reproduced, with permission, from an  earlier version published in C. W. Savage (Ed.), Minnesota studies in the philosophy of science, Volume IX (Minneapolis: Univ.  of Minnesota Press, 1978, pp. 441-490) under the title "On the status of `direct' psychophysical measurement." I am indebted  to Tversky, Batchelder, and Marley for making possible a wider exposure of ideas originally outlined in a 1966 unpublished  note "What does the psychophysicst measure?" and then expanded into essentially their present form in a 1968 manuscript.  Regrettably, I was very slow in seeking publication of that manuscript following my move from Harvard to Stanford in 1968.  Regrettably too, I have made no attempt to keep up with developments in psychophysics during the ensuing years-except, of  course, to take note of the elegant formal development by David H. Krantz (1972a, 1972b) of some of the notions outlined here  and to stress, in two recent papers of my own, more "representational" and "cognitivestructural" approaches to psychophysics  (Shepard, 1981; in press). Looking back on the analysis attempted in the present paper, I think that its greatest weakness, as  a general psychophysical theory, may be its failure to deal adequately with the problem of the judgment of stimulus  differences and, hence, with the construction of category scales. Prospects for progress in this direction now appear  brighter, partly as a result of the extensive theoretical and empirical contributions of Birnbaum (1978}also see den Uyl  (manuscript in preparation). I acknowledge, again, the helpful suggestions concerning various drafts of this paper made during  its 15-year history by David Cross, David Krantz, and, most recently, William Batchelder and A. A. J. Marley. I also thank the  National Science Foundation for its support of this psychophysical investigation through Research Grants GS-1302 and BMS  75-02806. Address reprint requests to Roger N. Shepard, Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif. 94305.  21  0022-2496/81/040021-37502.00/0  Copyright C 1981 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  from the cold. In the recognition of such primitive facts, one can discern the beginnings both of physics and of psychophysics.  Certainly, the fundamental invariances of physics began to emerge in pure, mathematically expressible form only when it became  possible (a) to refine the scale of descriptive labels that could be applied to an object under study (e.g., from four such  crude labels as "cold," "cool," "warm," and "hot" to a hundred or more distinguishable levels in the height of a column of  mercury) and (b) to ensure that the descriptive label obtained from such a refined scale would relate more to the state of the  object itself and less to the state of the human observer or measuring instrument.  Once physics had attained this degree of quantitative precision and independence of the imperfectly correlated reactions of  the human observer, the question arose as to whether these purely "psychological" responses-now that they had been  conceptually distinguished from their purely physical correlates-might not be found to possess a certain kind of order of  their own. If so, one could begin to contemplate a science of psycho-physics; that is, a science that would have as its goal  the quantitative specification of any relations that hold between such a psychological order, on the one hand, and the  independently established physical order, on the other. What I have attempted in this paper is a clarification of the extent  to which we have approached this goal.  THE PROBLEM OF THE CONSTRUCTION OF PSYCHOPHYSICAL SCALES  In the development of purely physical science, mathematically formulated laws of predictive precison and generality were of  course made possible only through the extensive refinement of physical scales of measurement such, for example, as the scale  of temperature. It was therefore natural, in attempting the subsequent development of a psychophysical science, to strive for  a similar refinement of psychological scales of measurement. For, as long as the responses of the human observer were limited  to just a few ill-defined qualitative labels, the relations between these responses and the physical variables could not  approach the kind of precision and generality characteristic of the laws relating purely physical variables.  Construction of Scales for the Measurement of Physical Magnitudes  In the case of physics, the perfection of scales of measurement was critically dependent upon the development of theory. The  earliest temperature-sensitive devices, such as the "thermoscope" or "weather glass" of 1600, provided only a somewhat more  purified and objective way of gauging "warmth." The still largely intuitive notion of temperature had not yet acquired  sufficient theoretical articulation to support more than an ordinal structure. That is, although it could consistently be  determined whether one object was warmer or cooler than another (even when the difference was quite small), there was little  basis for asserting anything further about the quantitative magnitude of such a difference in temperature. Indeed, even when  the thermoscope was transformed into the first crude thermometer by the addition of a  graduated scale sometime around 1610 (Middelton, 1966), the scale was necessarily quite arbitrary and, so, did not really  provide an adequate basis for assigning numerical values to temperatures in any unique way.  It was the considerably later developments of thermodynamics and the kinetic theory of heat that furnished the structure  necessary for the transformation of the original, intuitive notion of warmth into the present, fully articulated concept of  temperature. Indeed it was only by recourse to abstract thermodynamic arguments concerning "ideal heat engines" (see, e.g.,  Becker, 1967, pp. 18-20) that in 1848 William Thomson (Lord Kelvin) was able to present a satisfactory rationale for the  specification of temperatures by numerical values that were unique up to multiplication by a positive constant (the arbitrary  unit of measurement that determines whether we are talking, say, about degrees Kelvin or degrees Rankine).  On the resulting "thermodynamic scale" the difference between two temperatures can be defined in terms of the mechanical work  extractable by a Carnot engine working between the two temperatures. Thus it became for the first time fully meaningful to say  that the difference in temperature between two cool objects, A and B, is equal to the difference in temperature between two  warm objects, C and D. In terms of the classificatory scheme of scale types set forth by Stevens (1946, 1951), the merely  "ordinal scale" of warmth had at this point become an "interval scale" of temperature. Further, with the conceptualization of  the absolute zero point of temperature which can only be approached but never attained (and which, according to the kinetic  theory, corresponds to the cessation of all relative molecular motion) it became meaningful to talk about ratios as well as  differences. Of two objects, A and B, one could not only say that the temperature of B is greater than the temperature of A,  one could further state that it is twice as great, three times as great, or whatever the case might be. At this point, the  scale of temperature finally emerged as what would be classified in Stevens' scheme as a full-fledged "ratio scale."  Apparently, then, the interval and ratio properties of the thermodynamic scale of temperature can be fully justified only by  reference to physical theory. It is of course a convenient (and not entirely advantitious) outcome that the equally spaced  graduations on the laboratory thermometer correspond to nearly (though, significantly, not precisely) equal differences on the  thermodynamic scale. But even the hydrogen thermometer, which most closely approximates the theoretically ideal thermodynamic  scale, is subject to correction owing to the departure of hydrogen from a perfect gas (with the consequence that the desired  "thermometric" property is approximated only as the product of pressure times volume is extrapolated to zero pressure). Again,  the real reason for specifying temperature on this scale (and for imposing slight corrections on the equally spaced  graduations of the thermometer) is the resulting simplification in the mathematical structure of physical theory as a whole.  For, this theory is concerned not just with temperature but, also, with a host of other variables and concepts that are  related to temperature and to each other in a vast, interdigitated complex.  In the last analysis, of course, the justification for the whole theoretical edifice must be sought in the account that it  provides for concrete empirical observations.  Nevertheless, it appears that the variables (such as temperature) that are measured by means of physical scales as now refined  are themselves essentially of the nature of theoretical constructs. For, to the extent that we identify the temperature of a  macroscopic body with the kinetic energy of its microscopic constituents, the temperature itself recedes from the realm of  concrete, directly experienceable entities.  Construction of Scales for the Measurement of Psychological Magnitudes  I have argued that refined scales for the measurement of purely physical quantities originally evolved out of attempts to  eliminate the influence of the variable internal states of the observer upon evaluations of the state of an external object.  This suggests the possibility of using a reverse strategy to develop comparably refined scales for the measurement of what  might be called purely psychological magnitudes; namely, those very states of the observing subject that, in the process of  perfecting physical measurement, had finally been cast entirely aside.'  Within the original use of such crude, descriptive labels as "hot" and "cold," one can discern the precursors of two quite  distinct concepts: (a) that of a purely physical magnitude (temperature) that is conceived as residing entirely within the  external object, and (b) that of a purely psychological magnitude (perceived warmth) that is conceived as residing entirely  within the observing subject. Indeed, either magnitude can exist quite independently of the other. The physical temperatures  of objects can be automatically registered without the occurrence of any sensation of warmth, while (during direct electrical  excitation of the cortex, spontaneous hallucinations, or dreams) a sensation of warmth can occur in the total absence of a  corresponding physical stimulus.  It might seem that I have ignored a fundamental asymmetry between the two types of magnitudes. For, even if physical  temperature is a theoretical construct, inaccessible to direct observation, the corresponding sensation of warmth, surely, is  directly experienced by the subject who reports its occurrence. However, with the adoption of the behavioristic orientation  toward sensations required for the intersubjective development of a public science, statements about sensations assume  fundamentally the same status as statements about the theoretical variables of physics. If the concept of a sensation of  warmth is introduced into behavioral theory, it is for the same reason that the concept of a temperature is introduced into  physical theory-not because it is demanded by any single observation-but because it simplifies the theory as a whole. Just as  a temperature is identified, theoretically, with a certain unobserved state of molecular agitation in the external object, a  sensation of  ' The development of chronometic measurement in the physical and then psychological sciences shows a parallel history.  Bessel's 1820 discovery that astronomers differed systemmatically in determining the time of transit of a star led to two  successive developments (Boring, 1950, p. 136): First, physical devices were perfected in order to reduce and then eliminate  dependence on the "personal equation" of the human observer and, second, experimental psychologists, starting with Donders in  1868 and continuing to the present day (Sternberg, 1969) have turned such improved chronometric techniques back onto the  problem of studying the temporal course of information processing within the human subject.  warmth would presumably be identified, theoretically, with some unobserved pattern or level of neuronal activity in the brain.  Now physical measurement owes its great power not only to its independence of the variable state of the observer but also to  its high degree of quantitative precision. To what extent can this same kind of precision be achieved in the measurement of  purely psychological variables-variables such as visual brightness, auditory loudness, or tactual warmth? Such sensations do  seem to have certain definite subjective magnitudes. But to what extent can we specify explicit procedures of measurement that  will enables us to pin such magnitudes down on anything approaching the refined structure of a numerical scale?  The history of physical measurement indicates that, if this is to be accomplished, its accomplishment will critically hinge  upon the available theoretical structure. A subject can of course say more about his thermal sensations than merely whether  each is "cold," "cool," "warm," or "hot." The subject can, for example, report that one such sensation seems about twice as  strong (i.e., hot) as another. But we cannot safely conclude that the one sensation is, in fact, twice the other just because  the subject makes such a verbal report-any more than we could conclude that the temperature is twice the other just because  the mercury rises to twice the height. The simple, bald-faced indication of either the subject or the thermometer might even  be true but, in the one case as much as in the other, a more than trivial theory is needed to substantiate the claim.  Role of Psychophysical Relations in the Construction of Scales  A physical magnitude such as temperature evidently derives much of its significance from its relations with other physical  variables. Similarly, if procedures could be devised for making quantitative determinations of psychological magnitudes, the  most significant advance in our understanding would come not from the mere measurement of this or that sensation per se.  Rather, it would come from the relations that might thus be found to hold between such psychological magnitudes and other  measurable variables. The enterprise becomes psychophysical (rather than purely psychological) to the extent that some of the  most important of these relations are with physical variables.  So far, psychophysical investigations have endeavored principally to determine the functional form of one particular type of  relation; namely, the relation between the psychological strength of a sensation (such as perceived loudness, brightness, or  warmth) and the physical intensity of the eliciting proximal stimulus (measured, say, in terms of energy-whether acoustic,  electromagnetic, or kinetic). Before such a determination can be made, however, it would seem necessary to meet two conditions.  First, other physical variables that might also influence the psychological magnitude under study must be carefully  controlled. One such variable (emphasized at the outset) is the intensity of stimulation to which the receptive organ has  previously been adapted. However, although such control may not always be easy in  practice, it does not appear to depend upon the resolution of any major theoretical issues and, so, will not be further  considered here.  The second condition is quite another matter. It is that the psychological magnitude in question must be measurable on a scale  with more than a merely ordinal structure. We must be able to find out more about a sensation than merely whether it exceeds  or falls short of some other sensation. Otherwise, the findings could as well be accounted for by any monotonic function of  physical intensity. And yet, just how the necessary further structure can be secured remains an issue of continuing dispute.  Actually, as the example of the temperature scale suggests, it is simplistic to suppose that one first erects a fully  structured scale and then proceeds to relate the variable measured on this scale to other variables. Rather, what seems to  have happened in physics is a bidirectional, mutually constraining interaction between these two processes. It was, in fact,  the attempt to perfect and simplify the relations with other variables that prescribed what form the internal structure of the  scale itself would finally have to take. Perhaps, then, the development of psychophysics can only progress by means of a  similar kind of cooperative alternation between the tightening of the structure of a scale and the simplifying of its  relations with other variables.  Discriminability as a Basis for Psychophysical Scaling  In view of the difficulties that have appeared to confront any attempt to measure psychological magnitudes directly, some  psychophysicists, notably Fechner and Thurstone, have turned to discriminability as a method for inferring psychological  magnitudes, so to speak, indirectly. In practice, all such approaches evidently depend upon the variability of subjects'  responses and, indeed, depend upon some specific assumption about the relation between that variability and psychological  magnitude.  Although he did not conceive of it in precisely these terms, Fechner (1860), who is generally credited with the founding of  psychophysics, assumed in effect that this variability is constant and independent of magnitude on the underlying  psychological scale. Thus he was led to identify the difference in the psychological magnitudes of two intensities on the same  sensory continuum with what amounts to the number of intervening differences in intensity that could be discriminated some  specified fraction of the time (i.e., the number of intervening "just noticeable differences" or "jnds").  In order to secure a ratio scale, then, Fechner had only to assume that a zero (or subthreshold) physical intensity leads to a  zero psychological magnitude. For, on the resulting scale, one can numerically specify both the difference between two  sensations (the number of jnds from the one to the other) and the ratio between those sensations (the number of jnds from zero  to the one divided by the number of jnds from zero to the other).  In his much later approach to psychophysics, Thurstone (1927) was more explicit about its dependence upon the variability of  the subject's responses. In particular, he expressly postulated that the same external stimulus leads to an internal  psychological magnitude, the "discriminal process," that varies from occasion to occasion. Moreover, in a manner that strongly  foreshadowed the modern theory of  signal detection (Green & Swets, 1966), he went on to specify a decision rule according to which the subject's overt response  to a particular stimulus was determined by whether the psychological magnitude to which it gave rise on a given occasion  exceeded or fell short of some internal criterion magnitude.  However, although he thus provided an explicit mechanism to account for Fechner's jnd, Thurstone himself preferred to take a  somewhat different aspect of the subject's variability as fundamental for the construction of psychological scales.  Specifically, instead of assuming that the distribution of the discriminal process has a fixed variance on the underlying  psychological scale, he assumed that this distribution has a fixed functional form-namely, the form of the normal (or  Gaussian) error function. Under this assumption, the normal distributions of discriminal processes arising from different  stimuli could have different variances and, in that case, equally often noticed differences would not necessarily correspond  to equal differences in psychological magnitude.  Scaling methods in considerable variety have evolved out of Fechner's and Thurstone's original attempts to base psychophysics  on discriminability. Essentially, these methods are designed to find a spacing of stimuli on the "psychological scale" such  that the overt responses of subjects can best be accounted for by some model of the Thurstonian type in which the hypothetical  distributions of psychological magnitudes all have either (a) the same variance, as suggested by Fechner, (b) the normal  functional form, as proposed by Thurstone, or perhaps (c) merely the same, unspecified functional form (Klemmer & Shrimpton,  1963; Kruskal & Shepard, 1974, p. 154; Levine, 1970, 1972; Shepard, 1965), or even (d) just an optimum degree of smoothness or  "continuity" (Carroll, 1963; Shepard & Carroll, 1966).  Since these methods lead to interval or ratio scales (i.e., to scales that are determined essentially to within a linear or  even a similarity transformation), they possess enough structure to support some determination of the "psychophysical  function." Fechner, as we noted, claimed to have what amounts to a ratio scale of psychological magnitude. All he then needed  was the empirical fact, already established by Weber, that the size of a jnd in units of physical intensity is approximately  proportional to intensity. From this empirical invariance (since known as "Weber's Law"), Fechner deduced that the  psychological magnitude of a sensation, as he defined it, must be a logarithmic function of physical intensity.  Fechner's proposed solution to the psychophysical problem appears rather weak, however, when we compare his scale of  psychological magnitude with physical scales, such as that for temperature. For, the structure of the thermodynamic scale of  temperature was, so to speak, conferred on it-not just by one relation-but by a richly interconnected web of mutually  reinforcing theoretical and empirical relations. By contrast, the structure of Fechner's scale was dictated by the attempt to  secure just one relation; viz., the relation that a just noticeable difference subtend the same separation in psychological  magnitude regardless of its position on the scale.  This weakness is not, however, inherent in the general choice of discriminability as a basis for psychophysics. Within the  broader, Thustonian framework there is at least the possibility of establishing mutually reinforcing relations among diverse  kinds of  experimental tasks. It could, for example, happen that one scale of psychological magnitude would be found to provide a simple  and unified account of (a) the distribution of stimuli classified as "same" or "different" or as "greater than" or "less than"  any given stimulus (Woodworth, 1938; Torgerson, 1958), (b) the pattern of errors made in tasks of absolute identification or  paired-associate learning (Garner, 1952; Luce & Galanter, 1963; Shepard, 1958b), (c) the shape of the "gradient" of stimulus  generalization (Guttman & Kalish, 1956; Shepard, 1965) or of discriminative reaction time (Curtis, Paulos, & Rule, 1973;  Falmagne, 1971; Shepard, Kilpatric, & Cunningham, 1975, p. 127 ff.; Welford, 1960), (d) the way in which accuracy of  comparative judgment decays with delay of the second stimulus (Shepard, 1958a; Wickelgren, 1969), and even (e) phenomena of  stimulus-response compatibility (Shepard, 1961) and of classification learning (Shepard & Chang, 1963; Shepard et al., 1975,  pp. 134-135). Then, surely, one could begin to have some confidence in such a psychological scale. (See, particularly, the  more recent work of Falmagne (1971).)  The extent to which such a synthesis can eventually be achieved for these various sorts of discrimination data appears to be a  largely empirical question. In any case, the logical status of such a discriminability scale now seems reasonably clear. So,  the remainder of this paper will be devoted to the examination of the entirely different proposal that, quite apart from the  possibility of inferring psychological magnitudes indirectly on the basis of discriminability, we can-and perhaps  should--obtain the desired estimates more directly by simply asking the subject for a straightforward, quantitative judgment  of these magnitudes.  Direct Judgment as a Basis for Psychophysical Scaling  The late S. S. Stevens, who was undoubtedly the foremost proponent of psychophysics in recent years, launched a sustained  attack against the whole attempt to base psychophysics on discriminability. He pointed out that, in physics, the analogue of  discriminability would be error variability-the converse of resolving power. But (except when we approach the irreducible  limitations of quantum physics) resolving power is clearly more dependent upon the particular measuring instrument used than  it is upon the underlying physical quantity to be measured. Thus, the recommendation that we adjust our scale of psychological  magnitude solely in order that error variability will be constant across the scale would be like calibrating a scale of  electric current just so that the inaccuracy in the deflection of the pointer will be constant across the scale of the  galvanometer. But, in this latter case (as in the case of temperature), it is relations other than those having to do with  such variability that furnish the most fundamental basis for an operational definition of the underlying physical quantity.  Possibly this is true as much for the definition of the strength of a sensation as for the definition of the strength of an  electric current. Certainly it can be seen as a curious aspect of scaling procedures based on discriminability that they  essentially depend upon the presence of what we usually seek to minimize-namely, variability or error.  At a turning point in his long continued endeavor to develop a method for  estimating psychological magnitudes without depending upon variability, Stevens (1956) proposed to have subjects simply report  direct, quantitative estimates of the strengths of their sensations. In the instructions to the subject, he explicitly  specified that the numbers given should be proportional to the strengths of the corresponding sensations. Suppose, for  example, that the first stimulus had been called "40." Then the instructions evidently required that, if the psychological  magnitude of the second stimulus seemed twice as great as that of the first, it should be called "80," if half as great, "20,"  and so on.  Now the responses obtained from subjects in this method of "direct magnitude estimation" have manifested an undeniable degree  of consistency and order for a wide class of sensory continua; namely, the class of what Stevens (1957) has called "prothetic"  continua. Principally, this class includes the "intensive" and "extensive" dimensions of stimuli along which variation is  perceived as the purely quantitative addition or subtraction of the same homogeneous quality-as in loudness, brightness, or  length. This class is thus contrasted with the class of "metathetic" continua along which variation is perceived, rather, as  the qualitative substitution of one kind of experience for another-as in auditory pitch or, perhaps, visual hue.  If we confine our attention specifically to "prothetic" continua, then, we find that the (geometric) mean of the numbers  produced by the subjects for each stimulus closely approximates a power function of the physical intensity of the stimulus,  and this relation has even been shown to hold for the raw, unaveraged responses of individual subjects. Moreover, although the  numerical value of the exponent in the best-fitting power function does vary somewhat from subject to subject, when the values  are averaged over even a small group of subjects, the resulting average value turns out to be a rather stable characteristic  of the particular sensory continuum. Such average values range from between 0.3 and 0.6, for the continuum of intensity of a  light (depending upon the visual size of the source), all the way up to 4.5, for the continuum of intensity of an electric  shock (Stevens, 1966a).  On the basis of these results, Stevens (1961) proclaimed that the logarithmic function that Fechner had derived for the  central psychophysical relation should be rejected in favor of a power function (a conclusion, incidently, that he notes had  been first advanced and then withdrawn, without the benefit of sufficient evidence, some 100 years earlier by Fechner's  contemporary, Plateau).  Even with the large body of evidence that Stevens and his followers have amassed, however, the claims that the power function  rather than the logarithmic function is in fact the true psychophysical law and that one can, and should, now measure  sensations by direct magnitude estimation has continued to come under repeated assault (e.g., Graham, 1958; Helson, 1964;  Luce, 1972; Savage, 1970; Torgerson, 1960; Treisman, 1963, 1964). For the most part, these attacks seem to be aimed at the  implications that Stevens claims to draw from this evidence, more than at the empirical evidence itself.  With respect to the empirical evidence, it is generally conceded that, empirically, systematic departures from the over-all  power function are found near threshold, near other "anchoring" background or reference stimuli, or when the stimuli to be  judged  are themselves drawn from a set of intensities that is unevenly spaced, bunched, or truncated on the "true" underlying  psychological scale. But, such departures seem susceptible to correction in principle, for example, by the rational  introduction of an appropriate, empirically estimable threshold constant, by the avoidance of undesired "anchors," and by  "iterative" experiments designed to converge on an optimum distribution or spacing of stimulus intensities (e.g., see Pollack,  1965). What follows here, in any case, will take the validity of the basic empirical generalizations for granted and will  focus, instead, on the implications of these generalizations for the measurement of psychological magnitudes and for the  development of psychophysical theory.  Some Apparent Limitations of Direct Magnitude Estimation  The first problem that we confront, here, is basically like the problem that the mere affixing of a numbered scale to a  thermoscope provided no sound basis for saying whether one temperature was twice or three times another. Indeed it later  became apparent that the numbers inscribed on these early scales very definitely were not proportional to the corresponding  absolute temperatures required by physical theory. Without a theory, then, how can we assume that the numbers proffered by a  subject -any more than the numbers indicated on the arbitrary scale of the thermoscopeare proportional to any underlying  quantity?  It serves no purpose, here, to insist that the subject is expressly instructed to give a number that is proportional to the  underlying psychological magnitude. For, in the absence of any independent access to that psychological magnitude, how could  we be certain that the subject is following our instruction? How, indeed, could we ever have taught the subject to make such  reports correctly in the first place? Surely, it would be a risky business to assume, just because an instruction was issue,  that it was followed. (What if we were to instruct the subject to repeat back a 24-digit number, or to report the direction of  a weak magnetic field?)  The difficulty inherent in this "direct" approach can be brought out in even clearer, mathematical terms as follows: According  to Stevens (1957) the fundamental psychophysical relation is of the general form  y'=A(S), (1)  where S is the physically measured intensity of a stimulus, V is the resulting psychological magnitude, and f, is the  "psychophysical" function that transforms one into the other. Clearly, though, this formulation is incomplete. It takes us  only from the external, measurable stimulus, S, into the internal, unobservable sensation, V.  In order to complete the formulation and to give it any empirical content, we must get back out to the externally recordable  response, R, by means of a second, reverse "psychophysical" transformation  variable, T, is not itself observable, the responses of the subject can at most determine the form of the single, over-all  "physical-physical" relation  R =f3(S) =f2{fi(S)l, (3)  in which P does not explicitly appear.  Apparently, unless we arbitrarily fix one of the two component functions off (viz., either ft or fz), the other component  function must remain wholly unknown. Hence, the conclusion that Stevens has drawn from the results of magnitude estimation  -namely, that the function f is a power function-evidently depends upon the implicit assumption that the instructions have  sufficed to ensure that fZ is itself a power function (with, perhaps, an exponent of unity). But the grounds for assuming that  the instructions would have precisely this effect seems never to have been adequately explained.  In fact the situation is even worse than this. For, what the subject really gives us in a magnitude estimation is, after all,  only a discrete, learned response (i.e., a word). It is not anything that itself even possesses a definite quantitative  magnitude. So, as a number of psychophysicists have noted, whether it is legitimate to speak of "ratios" or "differences"  between these verbal responses or, indeed, to compute their geometric means is not something that can safely be taken for  granted (Garner, 1954; Graham, 1958, p. 68; Luce & Galanter, 1963, p. 274; McGill, 1960, p. 67; Oyamo, 1968); it needs to be  justified.Z  But those who have considered how a child might learn to use such phrases as "twice as great," "three times as great," etc.,  have tended to argue that the relations among the public or objective quantities, S, rather than the relations among the  private or subjective mangitudes, P, generally furnish the criteria for correct use (Skinner, 1945, 1957; Treisman, 1964;  Warren, 1958; Wittgenstein, 1953). Thus, in a situation of comparing sticks of different lengths, the child may learn that the  phrase "twice as long" is appropriate when two of the equal, shorter sticks laid end-to-end reach just as far as the single,  longer stick.  It may even be that what one really learns is to infer these objective relations among the physical quantities, S, from the  subjective relations among one's immediately given psychological magnitudes, W. But no matter what these latter, purely  subjective relations may be, one's commerce with the public, physical world is likely, in the words of Thouless (1931), to  favor a "regression," in overt responses, to the "real objects." Whatever the relevant psychological distances, someone who is  attempting to jump from stone to stone across a stream, had better regulate each response so that it will achieve the  appropriate physical distance. It is perhaps not too surprising, then, that the empirically determined exponent in the power  law for visual extent is found to be close to unity (Stevens & Guirao, 1963; Teghtsoonian, 1965).  ' Gedanken experiments on psychophysical scaling with animals as subjects can be valuable in this connection. Such experiments  confront us with the issue of how the experimenter is to train the subject to make responses that will somehow reveal the  magnitudes of its sensory experiences without at the same time biasing the subject toward some particular psychophysical  relationship.  Just how subjects learn to make judgments on intensive, as opposed to extensive, continua is not entirely clear. It is,  however, a suggestive fact (Stevens, 1960, p. 64) that exponents close to ' rather than close to 1 have been obtained for  intensities presented to the "distance" receptors of vision (0.5 for the brightness of a point source), audition (0.6 for the  loudness of a binaural tone), and olfaction (0.55 for the strength of the odor of coffee). Possibly the judgment of an  intensive magnitude is in part based on the appreciation of an extensive magnitude. Certainly, if a source that is twice as  far away is called half as bright, loud, or strong, then the inverse square law might help to explain the clustering of these  fitted exponents about the value 0.5 (Treisman, 1964; Warren, 1958; Warren, Sersen, & Pores, 1958).  On the other hand, one must agree with Stevens (1964) that it seems unlikely that each individual subject has had the  opportunity to learn to apply numbers in this way to each separate continuum, de novo-particularly in the case of the more  novel continua which have been studied, such as strength of electric shock or apparent viscosity (Stevens & Guirao, 1964).  Possibly, then, much of this "learning" has been accomplished-not in the individual subject-but in the preceding biological  evolution of higher organisms in general (cf. Shepard, 1964, pp. 63-65; 1975, pp. 96, 115). In this connection, there is  reason to suppose that output transformations are more readily learnable if the function, f2 in Eq. (2), is of a suitably  standard or "simple" form (Carroll, 1963). If so, natural selection would tend to favor the development of input  transformations in which the resulting subjective magnitude represents an appropriate "phenomenal regression," if not always  to a "real object," at least to the physical magnitude relevant to the widest range of adaptive responses.  Regardless of how subjects come to be able to assign numbers consistently to stimuli differing along a sensory continuum, the  fact remains that what this assignment directly reveals is-not the form of the transformation of S into Y! but, rather, the  form of the complete transformation of S into R. Here we come back, then, to the essential dependence of measurement on  theory. For, surely, we cannot safely turn about and take the numerical face value of the overt response, R, as a direct  measure of the intervening, covert psychological magnitude, P, unless we have an acceptable theory as to why the output  function, f2 in (2), should be precisely the one of simple proportionality, R = kY!  For this purpose, moreover, such a theory should presumably be more fully articulated and confirmed than either the rather  vague evolutionary argument offered above or the remotely connected argument of simplicity seemingly invoked in the discussion  of this matter by Stevens (1964). Given that the over-all relation R = f 3(S) is empirically found to be a power function, it  may in some sense be simpler (as Stevens implied) to assume that the two component functions, f, and f2, are themselves both  power functions than to assume that the input function is logarithmic (as proposed by Fechner) while the output function is  the counteracting exponential. Later, however, Stevens adopted the attractive and plausible hypothesis that magnitude  estimation is really just a special case of "cross-modality matching"; and, within that more general framework, this argument  changes so as to lose much of its force.  Some Apparent Limitations of Cross-Modality Matching  Partly in order to answer some of the persistent objections to his interpretation of the numerical responses obtained under  direct magnitude estimation, Stevens (1959) introduced and subsequently placed increasing stress on results of experiments in  what he called "cross-modality matching." In these experiments the subject is presented, one by one, with stimuli that differ  along some sensory continuum just as in magnitude estimation; but, instead of giving a number for each stimulus, the subject  adjusts another, variable stimulus along a second sensory continuum until it seems to "match" each presented stimulus. Thus  the subject may adjust a tone of variable intensity until its apparent loudness seems psychologically equivalent to each  apparent brightness in a series of lights varying only in intensity.  As in the method of direct magnitude estimation, the subject may be explicitly instructed to maintain proportionality of  psychological magnitudes. So, if the second light seems just twice as bright as the first, say, the second tone should be  adjusted to sound just twice as loud as the first, and so on. Indeed, Stevens came to hold that magnitude estimation can  itself best be regarded as a kind of cross-modality matching (Stevens, 1966b, p. 388). The same can also be claimed for the  reverse procedure of "magnitude production," in which a number is given to the subject who then tries to match it by producing  an appropriate physical intensity (whether indirectly, by adjusting the attenuator on a tone generator, or directly, by simply  singing the desired tone).  The only special feature of these latter two varieties of cross-modality matching is that, for one of the two "modalities," a  physically given continuum of intensity (or extensity) is replaced by the conventionally established continuum of numbers. In  all of these cases, according to Stevens, what the subject really does is to search for the psychological magnitude on one  continuum that appears to "match" the psychological magnitude on another continuum. The results tend to substantiate his claim  that it makes little difference whether both of the continua are physical or whether one is the learned or conventional  "continuum" of numbers.  Indeed the over-all consistency of the results that have emerged from these various types of experiments is quite impressive.  Specifically, for each pair of continua studied, the intensities chosen on the one continuum have been found to be closely  fitted by a power function of the corresponding given intensities on the other continuum. Moreover, the exponent of this  fitted power function is uniformly in close agreement with the value predicted simply by taking the appropriate ratio of the  exponents obtained by magnitude estimation for each of the two continua separately (e.g., Stevens, 1959, 1966a). The exponent  estimated for each of the sensory continua apparently does represent a real, psychophysical property of that continuum.  However, the basic objection evidently remains that we are still only relating physical magnitudes. Although it is now clearly  legitimate to speak of ratios or differences between these physical magnitudes, it is not clear that we have moved any closer  to the measurement of the intervening, purely psychological magnitudes, 'P.  The model for magnitude estimation, which was formally stated in the earlier  Eqs. (1) and (2), is now replaced by the model for cross-modality matching, which I propose to express in the form  W = fs), Y" =f1(Sr),  "Match" when W= '1  Here the prime indicates a second sensory continuum (or, in application to magnitude estimation, the "continuum" of  conventional number words). The derived relation between empirical variables, which earlier took the stimulus-response form of  Eq. (3), now takes the stimulus-stimulus form  S=f_'V,(S')}1 S' =.f'-I V(S)}.  Although this revised model seems more general and, also, is more consonant with Stevens' later view that all psychophysical  judgments are based upon matching, a comparison of Eqs. (3) and (5) reveals that, as far as their empirical implications are  concerned, the two models are formally equivalent. In either case we simply end up with a functional relation of the general  form X = g(Y); and, regardless of whether X is conceived as a response or as a stimulus, X and Y are both observables and, so,  the functional relation, g, between them is equally susceptible to empirical determination.  More significantly, however, the two models are also alike in that neither provides any empirical basis for deciding among  alternative factorings of the over-all function, g, into its two theoretical components (f, and fz in the magnitude estimation  model, or f and f in the "matching" model). The basic empirical finding, viz., that the physical intensities that are matched  between any two continua are closely describable by a power function, is undisputed. But, contrary to the impression left by  Stevens, this finding does not by itself entail that the inner, psychological magnitudes, on the basis of which the subject is  assumed to be achieving these matches, are themselves power functions of the external intensities.  As several commentators have noted (e.g., Ekman, 1964; Luce & Galanter, 1963, p.280; MacKay, 1963; Treisman, 1963), the very  same finding could as well be explained by assuming (with Fechner) that the directly-to-be-matched psychological magnitudes  all arise-not through a power transformation of the form Y'=aSa-but through a logarihtmic transformation of the form W = a + #  log S. For, suppose (with Stevens) that intensities S and S' on two different continua (the unprimed and the primed continuum)  result in the desired psychological match, T = V, whenever  aSR = a'S"  this equation is exactly equivalent, mathematically, to the equation  log a + # log S = log a' + /3' log S',  which defines a match according to the logarithmic model.'  Stevens himself uniformly applied a logarithmic transformation to the physical intensities, S and S', before plotting the  resulting "matching functions." This is, of course, a perfectly natural and convenient thing to do-particularly since  engineers commonly express physical intensities in terms of a logarithmic transformation of energy (i.e., in decibels).  However, there are two more reasons for applying such a transformation here. First, the power relation between S and S' is  made, in this way, to appear as the graphically simpler linear relation between log S and log S'. And, second, the variability  of the judgments will, in accordance with Weber's law, appear of more uniform size in the resulting log-log plot. (One might  even argue that, since the unit of discriminability is approximately constant only on the logarithmic scale, considerations of  simplicity of the over-all psychophysical picture-including data on both direct judgment and discriminability-favors the  logarithmic over the power model.)  In any case, when magnitude estimation is recast into the general framework of cross-modality matching, it is no longer  necessary to invoke an exponential output transformation to counteract a logarithmic input transformation. For, now, in place  of one input transformation (1) and a separate output transformation (2), we will have two symmetrically related input  transformations (4). Clearly, all such input transformations could be either logarithmic or power functions and, in the view  of the above discussion, the previously mentioned argument against the logarithmic alternative on grounds of over-all  simplicity no longer commands much conviction.  Hypothetical magnitudes, Y';, that can be reached only through inherently indeterminate functions such as those contained in  Eqs. (3) and (5) have the unsatisfactory status of "nomological danglers" (Feigl, 1958, pp. 382, 428) and, ordinarily, would  suggest a hasty recourse to Ockham's razor. In the present case, however, to bypass the intervening variable, W, would be to  forfeit the major part of our predictive power. For, only by factoring the over-all, empirically determined relations, (3) or  (5), into their two theoretical components does it become possible to predict the overall relation to be found between new  combinations of previously studied continua. It is on such grounds that Stevens might argue-as have Hull (1943, pp. 111, 122)  and others, including myself (Shepard, 1958b)-for the retention of an intrinsically unobservable variable intervening between  the observable stimuli and responses.  Regardless of the ontological status accorded such intervening magnitudes in general, though, they appear to play a curiously  indeterminate role in the two models  ' In the logarithmic model just as much as in the power model-the parameter /3 must be regarded as an empirically determinable  property of each continuum and not merely as an arbitrary scale factor. Thus, as Treisman has noted, the supposition by  Stevens (1964) that the predictability of the interrelations among the exponents discovered in cross-modality matching would  be sacrificed in the case of the logarithmic model appears unfounded. (Also see Luce & Galanter, 1963, p. 280.)  for direct psychophysical judgment considered here. We are left with the following rather awkward state of affairs: In order  to provide a simple account for the whole range of cross-modality data, it appears desirable to assume that, corresponding to  the external, physical magnitudes, there are internal, psychological magnitudes with definite, quantitative values. But,  unless we arbitrarily assume some particular form for the input (or output) functions, nothing can be learned about these  values beyond their merely ordinal relations. In such a case it does not seem wholely justifiable to speak of the  "measurement" of a psychological magnitude-such as the loudness of a tone or the brightness of light.  Failure to Represent the Relativity of Perception  All of the above objections have taken for granted the traditional psychophysical presupposition that a single stimulus  intensity, S, gives rise, quite by itself, to a quantitatively unique magnitude, 'P, i.e., without reference to any other  comparison stimulus. That is, both of the two models considered were models for "absolute" psychophysical judgment. In  addition to the objections already raised, I want now to raise the different objection that this traditional presupposition  may itself be wrong. For, if an isolated stimulus gives rise to a unique magnitude, T, the subject himself seems strangely  incapable of making any use of it. The uncertainty and variability of absolute judgments are notorious.  Typically a subject cannot reliably distinguish more than about six or seven absolute levels along any one unidimensional  continuum (Miller, 1956). This is in striking contrast to a subject's refined sensitivity to relative differences between  stimuli that differ only slightly, which underlies the hundred or more discriminable steps of Fechner's jnd scale. Even in the  case of widely separated intensities, a subject may be able to report with considerable reliability and confidence that, with  respect to one intensity, the other is greater by half again, by three-and-a-half times, by nearly twenty times, or whatever  the case may be.  This superiority of relative judgments is understandable in physiological terms. As we noted at the outset, the absolute level  of neural activity depends upon both the intensity of the stimulus and the physiological state of the receptive system. Hence,  the absolute level of neuronal activity can provide only a very crude and variable indication of the absolute intensity of the  external stimulus, and it would not be adaptive for an organism to rely on it for anything more. But, while the absolute rates  for two fixed stimuli may thus vary over a wide range, some relationship between those rates (such as their difference or  ratio) may remain relatively constant (Cornsweet, 1970, p. 245 ff.). Thus it could well be adaptive for an organism to rely,  instead of on the absolute rates of firing, on something like relative rates as valid indicators of what is going on in the  external world. In the case of physical measuring instruments, of course, it is elementary that determinations of relative  energy are both easier and more accurate than determinations of absolute energy.  It is not surprising, then, that the preferred operations of the psychophysicist typically require the comparison of two or  more stimuli. In the method of magnitude estimation, for example, little significance is customarily attached to the number  that  the subject ~ produces in response to the first stimulus in the series. Although this number may be to some extent influenced  by the intensity of the first stimulus, it is typically regarded as a more or less arbitrary "modulus," and the subject will,  in fact, accept a quite arbitrary number for this "modulus." It is only with the presentation of the second stimulus that the  quantitative value of the subject's responses become of real interest. For, at that point, the subject is for the first time  constrained by the instruction that, relative to the modulus, the numbers given to succeeding stimuli should be proportional  to the magnitudes of the sensations to which they give rise.  A subject can of course tell us something about the intensity of an individual stimulus-if only to assign it to one of a small  number of levels (such as "cold," "cool," "warm," and "hot"). However, it is debatable whether a stimulus is ever presented in  total isolation and, so, the judgment may always be at least in part relative. Thus, in judging the brightness of a single  spot of light, the subject may compare the spot with the spatially adjacent and temporally coincident surround or with the  temporally adjacent and spatially coincident adapting field. We can of course attempt to eliminate all bases for a relative  judgment. In the case of brightness, we could reduce the spatial adjacency by substituting a completely uniform field  (ganzfeld) for the circumscribed spot, and we could reduce the temporal adjacency by bringing the illumination up to its final  physical intensity only gradually. Significantly, however, we then come face to face with the problems of shifting adaptation  and, more importantly, with the curious instability, indeterminacy. and even intermittent cessation of visual experience that  is characteristic under prolonged ganzfeld conditions (Cohen, 1957; Hochberg, Triebel, & Seaman, 1951).  Conditions that would truly force an absolute judgment may be realizable only in "gedanken" experiments. Imagine a line  segment that, although it does have a definite physical length, (e.g., on the retina), is somehow presented in such a way as  to prevent comparison of its visual extent with any reference extent (such as its distance, its width, another visual object,  or even the apparent extent of the visual field as a whole). Although the line could presumably still appear to be extended  under such hypothetical conditions, it is doubtful whether its extent could be appreciated as a uniquely defined psychological  magnitude, 'P. Not only do subjects have difficulty in assessing truly absolute retinal extent within the same eye (Rock,  1975, p. 37), they are often unable even to determine which eye has been stimulated (Pattie, 1935; Pickersgill, 1961). Again,  natural selection has favored nervous systems that are primarily tuned to what is "out there" in the external world and, as in  the case of physical measurements, what is out there is most easily and accurately determined by making comparisons.  Those instances in which there does appear to be some basis for genuinely absolute judgment seem to involve the "metathetic"  continua such as those of auditory pitch or, possibly, visual hue rather than the intensive or extensive "prothetic" continua  considered here. Moreover, even on metathetic continua, relative judgment may typically play a more prominent role than  absolute judgment. In the case of pitch, although anyone with a "musical ear" can identify one tone as a third above, or a  fifth below another, say, only a very small fraction of the population is able to  identify the pitch of a single note absolutely (Siegel, 1972; Ward, 1963). The familiar ability of normal subjects to identify  a spectral hue (as red, orange, yellow, green, blue, or violet) might be considered a commonly occurring visual analogue of  auditory absolute pitch. But Land's compelling demonstrations show that the experience of a particular color, although it may  have a subjectively unique quality, generally depends upon a comparison across a color boundary (Land, 1964, 1966; McCann,  1972). And, again, when the possibility of such comparison is removed under gansfeld conditions, the experienced color tends  to desaturate and even to disappear entirely (Hochberg et al., 1951).  Whether or not all perception is relative, it does appear that the perceived magnitude of a stimulus on a prothetic continuum,  at least, is generally largely, if not totally, relative to some comparison magnitude on that same continuum. But, if so, any  model which deals with but a single stimulus at a time on each continuum may already impose the wrong sort of structure.  REINTERPRETATION VIA A "RELATION THEORY" OF PSYCHOPHYSICAL JUDGMENT  It was the recognition of the importance of the relativity of perception that led me, now some fifteen years ago, to  investigate the consequences of this relativity for the fundamental indeterminacy of "direct" psychophysical scaling  demonstrated in the preceding sections of this paper. Toward this end, I proposed, in place of either of the two models for  absolute psychophysical judgment given in Eqs. (1)-(3) or (4}-(5), a rather different model which Krantz, in his  well-formulated development of it, has named the "relation theory" (Krantz, 1972a).The following sections are devoted to the  examination of this alternative theory, its justification, and its consequences for the problem of "direct" psychophysical  measurement.  Reconsideration of the Fundamental Matching Operations of Psychophysics  Stevens' suggestion that all psychophysical judgment amounts to the matching or equating of external, physically specifiable  things with respect to their inner, psychological effects has considerable appeal. As Stevens pointed out, it uniformly places  the subject in the conceptually simple role of a sort of "null instrument." Or, in the spirit of the cybernetic analysis of  control through feedback (cf. MacKay, 1963; Powers, 1973), to produce a response (whether by squeezing a hand dynamometer in  "magnitude production" or by finding an appropriate number in "magnitude estimation") is really to instate a certain stimulus;  namely, the one that  In revising the present section, I have adopted Krantz's now relatively entrenched term "relation theory" instead of speaking,  as I did in my original 1968 draft, of "interpretation via a model for relative psychophysical judgment." Otherwise, I have  retained my original exposition and derivations rather than attempting a reformulation along the somewhat different, though in  parts more elegant, formulation offered by Krantz (1972a). Krantz's Eqs. (18) and (12) correspond, respectively, to my  invariance and transitivity Eqs. (6) and (13) and, from these, he arrives at essentially the same conclusions as I did. Also  see Krantz (1972b, 1974) for his further work along related lines.  results in a match of the corresponding internal magnitude, V, to the appropriate comparison magnitude, W. Thus, a subject  who, in a magnitude estimation experiment, gives a particular number, say, "45," to a particular intensity of tone is merely  telling us which number matches the given tone with respect to the two corresponding internal magnitudes, Y' (for the tone)  and 'P' (for the number).  However, according to the preceding argument for the relativity of perception, even if every psychophysical judgment amounts  to the establishment of a match between two things, the two things that are thus said to be psychologically equivalent may not  be two individual stimuli but, at least, two pairs of stimuli.  In some situations this structure may be imposed quite explicitly, as when the subject is given a pair (Si, S) and is asked to  adjust a variable stimulus, SX, in a second pair (Sk, SX) until the two pairs become in some way psychologically equivalent.  If the physical intensity of Sj is just twice the physical intensity of Si, this might happen when, for example, the physical  intensity of SX is adjusted to just twice the physical intensity of Sk. The same sort of operation can of course be performed,  too, when there are only three stimuli-as when the pairs to be compared are, in effect, (Si, Sj) and (S;, Ss) In other situations, such as cross-modality matching, the composition of the pairs may not be explicitly specified. Suppose a  subject is required to adjust the loudness of a variable tone, S' , until it matches the brightness of a fixed spot of light,  Si (where the prime indicates that the variable stimulus is on a different continuum). The subject may not be able to do this  directly, but only derivatively-by comparison of the pairs (So, Si) and (So, S'), where So and S' are corresponding implicit  reference stimuli for the two continua (perhaps the initial or background levels of visual and auditory stimulation,  respectively.)  The response to the first stimulus in a magnitude estimation task could be generated in a similar manner, provided that  numbers are treated like stimuli on any purely sensory continuum. The variable and often seemingly arbitrary character of this  first response could still be explained in terms of the subject's uncertainty about the unspecified reference levels So and  (for the number continuum) So. (Then too, this uncertainty might be accentuated owing to the generally great distance of the  presented stimulus, Si, from the chosen reference stimulus, So.) So, again, it is only with the presentation of the second,  explicitly constraining stimulus, that we can expect an orderly pattern to emerge in the subject's responses.  Now it might seem that, with the presentation of the third and subsequent stimuli, our analysis must rapidly increase in  complexity. It might even appear that we should have to specify whether each successive stimulus is related just to the  immediately preceding stimulus, to all of the preceding stimuli, or to some weighted combination of those presented most  recently-a specification that could easily involve us in unresolved issues concerning temporal information processing,  mechanisms of shortand long-term memory, attention, and the like. Fortunately, according to the relation theory, an  understanding of the logical basis of psychophysical scale construction can be gained without making such further  specifications. For, it follows from that theory that all of the information is internally consistent ("transitive") in such a  way that,  except for distortions introduced by memory itself, a subject's judgment should be the same regardless of which preceding  stimuli are taken as a basis for the judgment.'  Equivalence Classes of Pairs of Stimuli  Instead of starting, as in classical psychophysics, with a mapping of S into V, we begin, in the relation theory, with a  mapping of the Cartesian product set S X S into Y! That is, the results of the fundamental matching operations define  equivalence classes of all pairs (SSj) that are judged to be psychologically equivalent and that, for this reason, are  assigned to the same subjective magnitude, Y! The psychophysical data also enable us to establish an ordering of these  equivalence classes. For, if two pairs (SSj) and (S,SO are clearly not equivalent, the subject can tell us-not only that  they are not equivalent-but also, in what direction they depart from equivalence. The subject can say whether the contrast  presented by the pair (Si, Sj) is greater or less than the contrast presented by the pair (S,Sk). Since such judgments are  generally consistent (i.e., transitive) for all except marginally equivalent pairs, they define an ordering on the set of  psychological magnitudes, 'Y.  In order to go further, we need to specify something about the structure of these equivalence classes or, in other words,  about the nature of the function W(Si, Sj), mapping each pair, Si and Sj, into an element of the ordered set 'Y. For this  purpose we must, for any given continuum, adopt a particular measure of the physical magnitude of any stimulus on that  continuum. What we want is some measure of the amount of the stimulus, so that the physical measure is properly additive if we  combine stimuli. For intensive continua, the most reasonable measure seems to be the traditional one of physical energy.  What the psychophysical data of Stevens and his students then show is that, to a first approximation, it is equal ratios of  physical magnitude that are psychologically equivalent. This amounts to saying that, if we increase the physical magnitudes of  any two stimuli by the same constant factor, k, the psychological relation between them remains invariant or, in functional  notation,  'P(SI, Sj) ='II(kS,, kSj), (6)  provided, of course, that SSj, and k are all greater than zero.  This is, moreover, a rule with considerable adaptive utility. As Plateau noted in 1872, an object with surfaces of  characteristic reflectances could then be recognized as the same object under widely different levels of illumination  ' After this section was originally written, Ross and DiLollo (1968, 1971) independently reported new psychophysical results  and analyses (including some theoretical developments related to those described here) that, however, complicate the  unidimensionally consistent picture presented above. In the case of magnitude estimation of heaviness of lifted weights, in  particular, Ross and DiLollo found that the dimension that is effectively being judged tends to shift back and forth between  the nonlinearly related attributes of weight and density depending upon the context of recently presented weights. As they  noted, other continua might also be susceptible to such shifts in the basis for judgment (as, in the case of size judgments,  between linear extent and area). In such cases, the above claim that all the judged ratios should be consistent with one  another might need some modification.  FIG. 1. Loci of points corresponding to pairs of physical magnitudes, S; and S;, on the same  sensory continuum that produce psychological contrasts of the same magnitude, T.  1966, pp. 75-79). Likewise, figures composed of lines of different lengths could be recognized as the same figure when viewed  from different distances (cf., Rock & Ebenholtz, 1959); speech sounds could be recognized whether loud or soft; music would  sound much the same whether a record is played at 33 or at 45 rpm; and, perhaps similarly, speech could be understood whether  uttered by a young child or an adult male.  The implications of Eq. (6) are perhaps easier to see if we display the iso-T contours, graphically, in the S, X Si space, as  shown in Fig. 1. What (6) requires is that these contours all be straight lines radiating from the origin. (The origin itself  as well as narrow regions all along both zero-intensity axes should, as indicated by the broken lines, be excluded by proper  ancillary conditions on this equation.)  Each of these linear contours is defined by the similarity relation Si = c - S, or, in other words, by the requirement that  the ratio Si/S, is a constant, c. Now (6) also requires that Y'(SS,) = Y'(Sj, Si) for all i and j. Clearly, then, the  function 'P' must have the form  IF(Si, Si) =f(Si). (7)  Whereas in the classical formulation P is the subjective magnitude corresponding to the intensity of a single stimulus, in the  present formulation W is the subjective magnitude corresponding to the ratio of two stimuli.  In addition, we noted that we can establish an ordering on these subjective magnitudes. Within any one continuum, this  ordering is determined by the requirement that  ~V(Sb, SO > "(Si I Si)  From this further condition it then immediately follows that the function, f, in (7) is monotone increasing, as indicated in  Fig. 1.  Now, if we are given any two intensities, S, and S2, on the same continuum, we can construct a sequence, SS2, S3, S4,...,  such that the psychological magnitude, tl1, is the same for all adjacent pairs; i.e., so that for any i  "(St, Si+ 1) _ 'Y(St+ 1 I St+2) = const. (9)  But, according to (8), this psychological equivalence entails a physical relation in which the ratios between successive  intensities are all the same; i.e., in which  S2 S3 = S,_ = ... St = const. S1 = S2 S3  And from this it follows that the intensity S; must be expressable in terms of the two originally given intensities, S, and  S2, as follows:  SZ t-~ St=(S) .S1. 1  (10)  In short, assumption (6) leads directly to the conclusion that, if the psychological relations between successive stimuli are  to be constant, the stimuli must form a geometric series: viz.,  SCSC 2Sc3S..,  where c is the ratio between the two intially given intensities.b  Relations among Different Continua  The results obtained so far have shown how we might construct a sequence of stimuli such that the psychological effect is the  same for any pair of stimuli separated by the same number of steps along the sequence. In this sense, of course, we might be  said to have provided a basis for a scaling of the physical stimuli with respect to their psychological effects. We have not,  however, provided any basis for a scaling of those psychological effects themselves; and, surely, it would not be correct to  say that we are now in a position to measure any internal, psychological magnitudes. Stevens' work suggests that if a basis  for such a scaling or such measurements is to be found,  6 In the original 1968 version of this paper, I had also explored the possibility that, in some tasks, subjects might equate  differences rather than ratios of physical magnitudes. In preparing the present version, I have eliminated that discussion  because I believe that the treatments of this possibility by Krantz, Luce, Suppes, and Tversky (1971) and, more recently, by  Birnbaum (1978) are more promising. The judgment of sense distance as opposed to sense ratios underlies widely used methods of  multidimensional scaling. It is noteworthy that, whereas I conclude here that merely ordinal information about ratios does not  permit the recovery of a ratio scale of magnitude, in the context of nonmetric multidimensional scaling, I have shown that  merely ordinal information about distances does permit the recovery of a ratio scale of distance (Shepard, 1962, 1966, 1980).  it is probably to be found in the psychological relations among different sensory continua. Let us turn, therefore, to a  consideration of "cross-modality" matching which, as we shall see, does place one further constraint on our model for relative  psychophysics.  Suppose, then, that we have two sensory continua, the primed and the unprimed (corresponding, for example, to continua of  auditory and visual intensity). If our psychological matching operations can be extended from the one continuum to the other,  they will define a mapping of the Cartesian product sets S X S and S' X S' into either the same ordered set, V, or  equivalently, into two ordered sets, YJ and 'P', with a uniquely defined one-to-one correspondence between them. In order to  be consistent with the formulation of the matching model, we shall adopt the latter interpretation.  It then follows that, if we are given any pair (S,, SZ) on the unprimed continuum, we can not only construct a sequence, S SZ, S3, ..., on that same continuum satisfying (9), we can also construct a sequence, S;, S2, S;,..., on the primed continuum  such that  y(S~ , S;+ 1) = V(S;, Si, t) = const. (11)  The first stimulus, S;, on the primed continuum may be arbitrarily supplied by the experimenter or it may be left to the  subject to choose either arbitrarily or, possibly. by resorting to comparisons with some implicit reference stimuli, S, and  S;,, to achieve an at least rough match between the pairs (So, S,) and (So, S;). (We do not suppose that a pair such as (S S,) produces a unique psychological magnitude directly when the two intensities are on different continua.) In any case, once  S; has been fixed, the remainder of the sequence of stimuli needed to satisfy the matching condition (11) on the primed  continuum will be rigidly determined. Indeed, just as in the case of the unprimed continuum, this sequence will form a  geometric series:  _ (S S,, S, - S, S, .  (12)  The two geometric sequences and the correspondence between them are illustrated, graphically, in Fig. 2. If the first two  stimuli on the unprimed continuum had been at the intensities of S2 and S, (instead of at the intensities of S, and Sz), while  S; was  PHYSICAL MAGNITUDE  0 S1 S2 S3 S4 55 S6 -_~  Fic. 2. Psychological correspondences between physical magnitudes on two different continua, such as those for brightness and  loudness.  still retained as the first stimulus on the primed continuum, then the second corresponding stimulus on the primed continuum  would have been S, and the new correspondence would be as shown by the dashed lines.  So far, we have two geometric series of stimuli: one (12) on the primed continuum and one (10) on the unprimed continuum. From  the assumptions, two things follow. First, within either series, stimuli separated by the same number of steps constitute  psychologically equivalent pairs. And, second, between the two series, pairs separated by one step in one series are  psychologically equivalent to pairs separated by one step in the other series, as required by (11). However, for n > 1, it  does not yet follow that pairs separated by n steps in one series (although equivalent with each other) are also equivalent  with pairs separated by n steps in the other series. This further correspondence between the two series apparently requires  the explicit introduction of an additional assumption.  My former associate David Cross, who first made me aware of the importance of this additional assumption (and who contributed  significantly to the following derivation),' proposed that it be called the assumption of "transitivity" of equivalence  relations. It takes the form  if Pl(Sli, Si) = W(Sil Si)   and (13)  then V (Si I Sk) - W(Si I Sk)  This assumption seems to be well supported by the empirical results obtained by Stevens and others from experiments on  cross-modality matching. As we shall see, it implies that the function, f, in (7) cannot have an arbitrarily different form  for each continuum.  Strictly, we also need to make an implicit Comparability Assumption explicit, as follows: For any Si and Sj in the unprimed  continuum and any S; in the primed, there exists an S; in the primed continuum such that  T(Si, Si) = V (Sli, Si l). (14)  As we already noted in deriving Eq. (7) from (6), the most general solutions to the functional equations in the Invariance  Assumption are  W(S,,Sj)=f (Si) and 'y'(Si,SJ)=g(S`),  where f and g are arbitrary functions.  ' In the version of this work published earlier (see footnote 1), 1 presented both my original derivation and the alternative,  more succinct and elegant derivation to which Cross contributed so much. For brevity here I include only that second  derivation.  DIRECT PSYCHOPHYSICAL MEASUREMENT 45  However, by the Comparability Assumption (14),  .f (Sr) = g (S~).  By applying g-' to both sides, we obtain  S; h (I Sr ~, where h = g- f.  Then, by the Transitivity Assumption (13),  But  Sk = (Sk) Sk ('sk  S11 S, sj S/ Sf S1   S; Sj S; S.% Sr  Thus  h (!sj~k-) =h (~S-k) i. h (SjSrl.  (15)  For some a>Oandb>0,  S; = aSr, Sk = bS;, and hence Sk = abSi. Substituting into (15), we have  h(a - b) = h(a) - h(b).  This classical functional equation of Cauchy has, as its most general continuous solution, the power form  h(t) = t  Hence, for any i and j, if f(SJJSi) = g(Sj'ISt ), the forms of f and g, instead of being arbitrary, are constrained by the  composition  ~Lj) . (16) g- if ( isij ) = ( SS j P  Two familiar classes of functions that satisfy the functional composition (16) are the class of logarithmic functions  and the class of power functions  f (X) = xa, g(y) = ya.  However, there is also a more general class of functions, which subsumes the above two classes, that also satisfies the same  functional composition (16); viz.,  f(x) = h(xa) and g(y) = h(Ya"),  where h is any monotone increasing function. For, if g(x) = A [f(x)1+  then  g-1(x)=f2'ff1'(x)l,  and so  i i a p/a i a p/a i p  g-1 [f (x ) ] h-1 [h (x ) x x  X ~ I = [ (X ) I = (~) -  With respect to the two sequences that have been matched on the primed and unprimed continua (Fig. 2), the power p is given by  p = log (ST)'log (SZ) S' S,  independently of the particular values of SSZ, S;, and S' . Hence, the exponent, p, depends only on the two continua  themselves, and not at all on the particular stimuli, SS2, and S;, arbitrarily chosen to construct the two matching  sequences on these continua. Thus, in Fig. 2, the alternative correspondence between stimuli indicated by the broken lines  still leads to the very same exponent, p. Apparently, then, the inherent differences in the way two prothetic continua operate  psychologically can be fully accommodated simply by expressing the relation between the two continua in terms of a power  transformation with a uniquely defined exponent or power, p.  Indeed, the relations among all such continua can be most parsimoniously explained simply by associating with each of the  individual sensory continua, say, S, S', S", etc., a characteristic power, p, p', p", etc., such that the exponent  characterizing the relation between any two of these continua is given simply by the appropriate ratio of the two powers  associated with the continua compared. A consequence is that, while the exponent relating any two continua is determined  completely (i.e., up to the identity transformation), the exponents associated with the individual continua themselves are  determined only up to multiplication by an arbitrary constant. Hence, the exponents associated with the primed and unprimed  ratios could as well have been q and qp (with any arbitrary q), instead of simply 1 and p.  In practice, of course, this arbitrary factor, g, can be fixed for all continua by adopting the convention that the exponent  characterizing some particular or preferred continuum (such as the continuum of visual length or that of the number responses  in direct magnitude estimation) shall be unity. The empirical results of the crosscontinuum matching experiments, together  with this convention, then suffice to determine the exponents for all other continua uniquely (to within experimental error).  Apparently, then, the fundamental relation of relative psychophysics can be written in the final, more explicit form  W(Si, Si) = g I (Si), ~,  (17)  where, again, g is any monotone increasing function. Now, however, in order to ensure satisfaction of the "transitivity"  condition (13), the function g, whatever its form, must be regarded as having the same form for all continua. The difference  between the psychophysical functions, f and f , for any two different continua is thus entirely absorbed into the power  function indicated by the exponent p.  The Irreducible Indeterminacy of the Psychophysical Function  It is clear that, if we are given any sequence of physical magnitudes, Sa, Sb, Sc,..., on one continuum, and any one  intensity, SQ, on a second continuum, we can construct a sequence, S' , S6, S.,..., on the second continuum such that, for any  i and j  g I (Si )v -g ~ (S'l S  )P~ ,  where p and p' are the powers associated with the two continua in question. Clearly, too, the form of the monotone increasing  function g is totally irrelevant to the outcome. (Application of g-' to both sides has no empirical consequences.)  In order to account for the principal results that Stevens and his followers have found for cross-modality matching (including  magnitude estimation and magnitude production), then, we need not assume that there is, corresponding to a given intensity,  Si, any uniquely defined subjective magnitude, 'II(Si). Instead, we need merely assume that for any pair of intensities, Si  and S;, there is some subjective magnitude  where g is some fixed, monotone increasing function whose form is not otherwise constrained by the psychophysical data.  We could, of course, assume that  g(x) = axa (18)  (where, as an even more special case, we could take a = # = 1). Then we would have  S , an  ~(Sr,S;)=a \S'I , (19) and none of the previous conclusions would be altered by this specialization. If, then, we take S, =  So, this amounts to the power law adopted by Stevens.  On the other hand, we could as well assume that  g(x) = a +,Q log x, (20)  in which case we would find that  W(S;, Sj) = a + ap(l og S; - log S). (21)  Again, nothing would be changed although, in this case, we see that, with respect to the new physical variable log S, 71 can  be regarded as a difference rather than as a ratio of physical magnitudes.  DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS  The relation theory has led to the conclusion that the operations of magnitude estimation and cross-modality matching are not  sufficient to determine anything beyond the ordinal relations among the psychological magnitudes, V;. I want to conclude by  explicitly setting down what I take to be the implications of this result for perennial questions concerning (a) what it is  that the psychophysicist measures, (b) what the status is of the so-called psychophysical law, and (c) what type of scale it  is that is constructed in psychophysical scaling. But, first, some clarification is in order concerning what appears to be a  possible dependence of the relation theory upon implicit absolute psychophysical judgments, and concerning the extent to which  the present conclusions are dependent upon the relation theory.  Relative versus Absolute Perception, and the Role of Memory  In the preceding analysis, relative psychophysical judgment has been described as if the resulting psychological magnitude,  say, 'I'(Si, Sj), is something that arises from the comparison of two stimuli, S, and Sj, that are both available  simultaneously. Actually, the stimuli within any one continuum are usually presented successively. In most cases, then, it is  not entirely correct to say that the two stimuli, S; and S;, are compared directly. At best, each presented stimulus in these  cases can only be compared with some sort of memory trace of any preceding stimulus.  This, however, raises a perplexing conceptual problem for the notion that a welldefined psychological magnitude, such as W,  arises only upon the presentation of at least two stimuli from any one continuum. For, surely, if `P(S,, S;) assumes a  welldefined value even though S; was removed before the presentation of S;, then the  trace of S, alone must have had a well-defined value. In other words, how could the ratio S;/S;, upon which W(S,, S;) depends,  be available to the subject unless definite, quantitative information about S, was somehow preserved within the subject? But,  if such quantitative information about individual stimuli is thus represented within the subject, in what sense can it  properly be claimed that a definite psychological magnitude, V/, comes into being only upon comparison with a second stimulus?  Indeed the same problem remains even when the two stimuli are presented simultaneously. Even if they are not separated in  time, they are nevertheless separated in some other way (e.g., in space). But the two external stimuli are not themselves  brought together within the subject's nervous system; what is brought together can only be some internal representation of  these two stimuli. Again, if the result of this comparison depends upon the ratio of the two physical magnitudes, then the  quantitative information necessary to determine this ratio must be contained in the two internal representations-even before  they are brought together.  What, then, is the explanation for the fact that relative judgments are more stable and precise than absolute judgments? Even  though there must indeed be some quantitative representation of each stimulus separately, I have already argued that these  separate representations will necessarily be highly dependent upon such external variables as distance and condition of  illumination that are not inherent in the perceived object itself. Moreover, these separate representations are likely to vary  widely with the internal state of the organism. It seems reasonable to suppose that changes in internal state (like variations  in external conditions) tend to affect the neurophysiological encoding of magnitudes in a similar way. Rate of neural firing,  for example, might be affected additively or multiplicatively. If so, it would only be when two such separate representations  are brought together and a difference or ratio formed that a quantitative representation would be obtained that has a suitably  invariant relation to the external stimulus.  Such a supposition would explain the well-known fact that even relative comparisons become less stable and precise as the two  stimuli are separated in time, space, or along some other dimensions (e.g., wavelength for colors to be matched in brightness,  or frequency for tones to be matched in loudness). For, as two stimuli are separated in any way, it becomes more probable that  the local internal states prevailing in the relevant nervous centers will differ significantly and, thus, fail to be cancelled  out in the subsequent computation of the ratio or difference. This is particularly clear in the case of a separation in time  and seems, therefore, to provide a plausible account of the well-established decay in recognition memory with time (cf.  Shepard, 1958a; Wickelgren, 1969).  Under favorable conditions, in which the separation is not too great, on the other hand, the computed ratio or difference will  be relatively independent of the perturbing physiological parameters since these will affect both components entering into the  computation alike. It would not be surprising, then, if natural selection had favored an organization of the brain such that  these purified ratios or differences are readily connectable to voluntary responses (including verbal reports), whereas the  contamined raw components of these ratios or differences are kept relatively inac-  cessible in order to decrease the probability of an inappropriate response to the external world.  Nevertheless, since there must be some sort of quantitative, internal representation or magnitude for each individual  stimulus-even before any comparison takes place, we cannot dismiss the possibility that subjects may sometimes be able to  report truly absolute psychophysical judgments. The only points that I wish to emphasize about such absolute judgments are the  following two: First, according to the arguments made just above (and earlier in this paper), such judgments are likely to be  less reliable than relative judgments. And second, even under conditions in which such judgments are sufficiently reliable,  the analyses presented here-particularly following Eqs. (3) and (5}-and elsewhere by other commentators indicate that the  constraints provided by absolute judgments are no greater than those provided by relative judgments. Our basic conclusion as  to the quantitative indeterminacy of the psychological magnitudes Y',, does not depend, then, upon the adoption of the  relation theory. What, then, must our answers be to the long-debated questions concerning psychophysical "measurements,"  "laws," and "scales"?  What Does the Psychophysicist Measure?  Usually when one speaks of measuring something, one has in mind the assignment of a number on a numerical (i.e., interval or  ratio) scale. Having measured some objects in this sense, one can legitimately report such facts as that one object is twice  as long as another, or is equal in weight to the sum of two others, and so on. Naturally, then, when someone speaks of  measuring a sensation, it suggests that the sensation has likewise been fixed on a numerical scale, and that one can thereby  determine whether one sensation is twice another, is equal to the sum of two others, and so on.  According to the analysis presented above, however, the operations, of magnitude estimation and cross-modality matching, upon  which Stevens proposed to base psychophysical measurement, do not determine any more than an ordinal structure on the  psychological magnitudes, Y',. So, although the subject himself can tell us that one such inner magnitude is greater than  another, the psychophysical operations that we have considered are powerless to tell us anything further about how much  greater the one is than the other. My conclusion-like those of Krantz (1972a, 1972b), Luce (1972), and Savage (1970)-is that  these operations do not in themselves permit us to measure inner senstions in any quantitative sense.  What the psychophysical operations of magnitude estimation and cross-modality matching do enable one to measure on a ratio  scale is the exponent, p, that characterizes a given (prothetic) sensory continuum for a given subject or population of  subjects. In short, what the psychophysicist measures is an important constant governing how a subject transduces any stimulus  from a particular sensory continuum, such as the continuum of lights varying in intensity, tones varying in amplitude, or  lines varying in length. The psychophysicist apparently does not measure the magnitude of any one inner subjective sensation  produced by one stimulus or pair of stimuli as opposed to another along any such continuum.  What Is the Status of the Psychophysical Law?  While it is possible to determine, for each prothetic continuum, the exponent, p, that characterizes that particular continuum  uniquely (up to multiplication of all such exponents by an arbitrary constant), the psychophysical relations between physical  magnitudes and the postulated inner psychological magnitudes, 'P;, for all such continua are seen to contain the same  indeterminate function, g. Stevens' claims, that the psychophysical law is a power law, appear to be implicitly based on the  argument that g should be taken, on grounds of simplicity, to be a power function-indeed the identity function. But such an  argument seems to me to lack the richness of supportive interconnections with the rest of the sciences of sensation,  perception, cognition, and neurophysiology to inspire conviction.  Indeed, a consideration of the neurophysiology of sensory perception suggests that the notion that a physical stimulus gives  rise to some one unique inner magnitude, Wi, is rather simplistic. Such a notion seems to be based on the tacit assumption  that there is some one stage, during the propagation of the sensory signal through the nervous system, at which a coded  representation is displayed before some "homunculus" or "ghost in the machine." Instead, I find it more satisfactory to  suppose that this propagation proceeds through a whole series of transformations. The results of different ones of these  transformations may well correspond to different forms of the function g.  Such a view is consonant, also, with evolutionary considerations. For, if it is adaptive for an organism to be able to learn  new responses without also having to master, each time, some new and nonlinear function de novo, then it will also be useful  for the organism to have, for each important physical variable, a choice of representations corresponding to different,  generally useful transformations (linear, logarithmic, etc.). Much as in the "pandemonium" model of Selfridge (1958), then,  the process of learning would be one in which the response becomes attached to the most appropriate (i.e., simply related) of  these available alternative representations. Even if an elucidation of the psychophysical problem along these lines has no  other virtue, it at least accounts for the troublesome fact that diverse psychophysical procedures often lead to equally  diverse results!  What Type of Scale Is Constructed in Psychophysical Scaling?  In Stevens' widely used classification scheme, scales are assigned to a type on the basis of the group of transformations  under which the empirically significant properties of the scale remain invariant (Stevens, 1946, 1951). The most commonly  considered types are the ordinal scale, in which only order is significant and, so, any monotone transformation is  permissible; the interval scale, in which the equivalence or nonequivalence of differences (i.e., intervals) is significant  and, so, the monotone transformation must also be linear; and the ratio scale, in which the equivalence or nonequivalence of  ratios (as well as differences) is significant and, so, the linear transformation must be restricted to a similarity (i.e., to  multiplication by a constant). When they can be constructed, ratio scales are preferable to interval scales  which, in turn, are preferable to merely ordinal scales. This is because the former types provide greater quantitative  leverage. Indeed, since determination on a merely ordinal scale really provides only qualitative rather than quantitative  information, it seems to be stretching the usual meaning of the word "measurement" to apply it to the ordinal case at all.  Whereas Stevens claimed that his psychophysical operations permitted measurement on a ratio scale, this appears to be the case  only for the measurement of the parameter, p, governing each prothetic continuum-not for the measurement of the magnitude of a  sensation within any continuum. There is, however, another possible way of construing Stevens' contention concerning scale  type. Although we cannot obtain a quantitative determination of the psychological magnitudes themselves, we nevertheless can  use the empirically determined equivalences among these magnitudes to construct a spacing or "scale" that does have some  quantitatively unique properties with respect to a particular, designated physical variable. Thus, if we take energy as our  fundamental measure of physical magnitude on a certain prothetic continuum, the psychological equivalences that are determined  by crossmodality matching lead to a geometric spacing on that physical variable. Now this spacing is unique (on that variable)  up to a power transformation; a geometric series remains geometric after, and only after, all terms are multiplied by a  constant and/or raised to a power. Since more general, monotonic transformations destroy this property, the result is stronger  than a merely ordinal scale.  However, it does not correspond to either an interval or a ratio scale in Stevens' sense. Rather, it appears to amount to a  different type of scale based upon the equivalence of ratios without the prior equivalence of differences. It is somewhat  curious, then, that with regard to this new type of scale, later recognized by Stevens and dubbed the "logarithmic interval  type,"' Stevens (1957, p. 176) stated that "it has thus far proved empirically useless." On the one hand, he was clearly aware  that, in order to convert such a logarithmic interval scale into a full ratio scale, we must be able either (a) to equate  differences or else (b) to determine the numerical values -rather than just equivalences-of ratios. But, on the other hand, he  seems not to have made clear how his psychophysical operations provide a satisfactory basis for doing either of these things.  Whatever the type of such a scale, it is not strictly a scale that permits the quantitative measurement of psychological  magnitudes. If there are unique psychological magnitudes, these could, as we saw, be related to this scale by any monotonic  function. Furthermore, any measurement performed on such a scale would be  s After independently noting the possibility of this type of scale, I proposed to Stevens (personal communication, 1956) that,  for over-all consistency in his classificatory scheme, the designation "ratio scale" should properly be reserved for scales of  this new type (in which equivalences are defined for ratios only) while scales that he had been designating in this way should  more properly be called "interval-ratio scales" (since, in them, equivalences are defined for both differences and ratios).  However, when he subsequently extended his classificatory scheme to encompass scales of this new variety (Stevens, 1957), he  preferred to introduce, for them, the new term "logarithmic interval scales," in order to avoid a departure from the earlier  usage of the term "ratio scale."  "derived" rather than "fundamental" measurement (Suppes & Zinnes, 1963), since it depends upon the existence of a previously  established physical scale; viz., the ratio scale of energy. Such a measurement is arbitrary in the sense that a change to a  different physical variable (say, number of decibels, which is logarithmically related to energy) can induce a non-admissable  tranformation in the derived scale (the geometric series can become arithmetic).  Concluding Remarks  The reinterpretation of the results of direct psychophysical judgment in terms of the relation theory seems to offer several  advantages. It takes account of the wellestablished superiority of relative over absolute judgments. It is consonant with  evolutionary arguments for the selective advantage of a perceptual system that responds principally to ratios of intensities  and extensities. It suggests a general neurophysiological basis for a variety of phenomena of comparative judgment and memory.  And, as Krantz (1972a, 1972b) has noted, it leads to empirically testable consequences beyond those directly suggested by the  traditional theories of absolute psychophysical judgment. The reinterpretation made possible by the relation theory does not,  however, provide a way of circumventing the fundamental indeterminacy of the implications of magnitude estimation and  cross-modality matching concerning the subjective magnitudes of sensations.  I conclude that, if we are to pin down any of what may well be several monotonically related types of internal representations  of the magnitude of a stimulus, quantitatively, we are going to have to move outside the circumscribed system of relationships  provided by these "direct" psychophysical operations. Possibly depending on the type of internal representation, we may find  the necessary additional relationships in the neurophysiological results of single-cell recording (Cornsweet, 1970; Kiang,  1965; Luce & Green, 1972; Perkel & Bullock, 1968); in the behavioral results of experiments on stimulus generalization  (Shepard, 1965), discrimination and disjunctive reaction time (Curtis et al., 1973; Falmagne, 1971; Shepard et al., 1975); or  in the cognitive results of experiments on the mental combining of perceived magnitudes (Anderson, 1970; Falmagne, 1976;  Levelt, Riemersma, & Bunt, 1972; Luce & Tukey, 1964; Sternberg, 1966). According to the theoretical analysis I have presented,  the empirical findings of Stevens imply that the internal representations of sensory magnitude that are compared with each  other in any given task are all related to physical magnitude by the same function, g. This result must, I believe, have some  empirical significance. It encourages me, anyway, to believe that the search for further relationships at the  neurophysiological, behavioral, and cognitive levels will not go unrewarded.  REFERENCES  ANDERSON, N. H. Functional measurement and psychophysical judgment. Psychological Review, 1970. 77, 153-170.  BECKER, R. Theory of heat. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1967.  BIRNBAUM, M. H. Differences and ratios in psychological measurement. In N. J. Castellan & F. Restle (Eds.), Cognitive theory.  Hillsdale, N. J.: Erlbaum, 1978.  BORING, E. G. A history of experimental psychology. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1950. CARROLL, J. D. Functional  learning: The learning of continuous functional mappings relating stimulus and response continua (ETS RB 63-26). Princeton, N.  J.: Educational Testing Service, 1963. COHEN, W. Spatial and textural characteristics of the Ganzfeld. American Journal of  Psychology, 1957, 70, 403-410.  CORNSWEET, T. N. Visual perception. New York: Academic Press, 1970.  CURTIS, D. W., PAULOS, M. A., & RULE, S. J. Relation between disjunctive reaction time and stimulus difference. Journal of  Experimental Psychology, 1973, 99, 167-173.  EKMAN, G. Is the power law a special case of Fechner's law? Perceptual and Motor Skills, 1964, 19, 730.  FALMAGNE, J. C. The generalized Fechner problem and discrimination. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1971, 8, 22-43.  FALMAGNE, J.-C. Random conjoint measurement and loudness summation. Psychological Review, 1976, 83, 65-79.  FECHNER, G. T. Elemente der Psychophysik. Leipzig: Breitkopf and Hartel, 1860. (Translation of Volume I reprinted as Elements  of psychophysics, New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1966.) FEIGL, H. The "mental" and the "physical." In H. Feigl & M.  Scriven (Eds.), Minnesota studies in the philosophy of science. Minneapolis: Univ. of Minnesota Press, 1958. Vol. 11, p.  370-497.  GARNER, W. R. An equidiscriminability scale for loudness judgments. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1952, 43, 232-238.  GARNER, W. R. Context effects and the validity of loudness scales. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1954, 48, 218-224.  GRAHAM, C. H. Sensation and perception in an objective psychology. Psychological Review, 1958, 65, 65-76.  GREEN, D. M., & SWETS, J. A. Signal detection theory and psychophysics. New York: Wiley, 1966. GUTTMAN, N., & KALISH, H. 1.  Discriminability and stimulus generalization. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1956, 51, 79-88.  HELSON, H. Adaptation level theory. New York: Harper & Row, 1964.  HERRNSTEIN, R. J., & BORING, E. G. (Eds.), A source book in the history of psychology. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press,  1966.  HOCHBERG, J. E., TREIBEL, W., & SEAMAN, G. Color adaptation under conditions of homogeneous visual stimulation (Ganzfeld).  Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1951, 41, 153-159.  HULL, C. L. Principles of behavior. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1943.  KIANG, N. Y-S. Discharge patterns of single fibers in the cat's auditory nerve. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1965.  KLEMMER, E. T., & SHRIMPTON, N. Preference scaling via a modification of Shepard's proximity analysis method. Human Factors,  1963, 5, 163-168.  KRANTZ, D. H. A theory of magnitude estimation and cross-modality matching. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1972, 9,  168-199. (a)  KRANTZ, D. H. Measurement structures and psychological laws. Science, 1972, 175, 1427-1435. (b) KRANTZ, D. H. Measurement  theory and qualitative laws in psychophysics. In D. H. Krantz, R. C. Atkinson, R. D. Luce, & P. Suppes (Eds.), Contemporary  developments in mathematical psychology. San Francisco: Freeman, 1974.  KRANTZ, D. H., LUCE, R. D., SUPPES, P., & TVERSKY, A. Foundations of measurement. New York: Academic Press, 1971. Vol. 1.  KRUSKAL, J. B., & SHEPARD, R. N. A nonmetric variety of linear factor analysis. Psychometrika, 1974, 39, 123-157.  LAND, E. H. The Retinex. American Scientist, 1964, 52, 247-264.  LAND, E. H. Color vision: From retina to Retinex. William James Lectures, presented at Harvard University, November 1966.  LEVELT, W. J. M., RIEMERSMA, J. B., & BUNT, A. A. Binaural additivity of loudness. British Journal of Mathematical and  Statistical Psychology, 1972, 25, 51-68.  LEVINE, M. V. Transformations that render curves parallel. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1970, 7,410-443.  LEVINE, M. V. Transforming curves into curves with the same shape. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1972, 9, 1-16.  LUCE, R. D. Individual choice behavior: A theoretical analysis. New York: Wiley, 1959.  LUCE, R. D. What sort of measurement is psychophysical measurement? American Psychologist, 1972, 27, 96-106.  LUCE, R. D., & GALANTER, E. Psychophysical scaling. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, & E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical  psychology. New York: Wiley, 1963. Vol. 1, p. 245-307.  LUCE, R. D., & GREEN, D. M. A neural timing theory for response times and the psychophysics of intensity. Psychological  Review, 1972, 79, 14-57.  LUCE, R. D., & TUKEY, J. Simultaneous conjoint measurement: A new type of fundamental measurement. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 1964, 1, 1-27.  MACKAY, D. M. Psychophysics of perceived intensity: A theoretical basis for Fechner's and Stevens' laws. Science, 1963, 139,  1213-1216.  MCCANN, J. J. Rod-cone interactions: Different color sensations from identical stimuli. Science, 1972. 176, 1255-1257.  MCGILL, W. The slope of the loudness function: A puzzle. In H. Gulliksen & S. Messick (Eds.), Psychological scaling: Theory  and applications. New York: Wiley, 1960. Pp. 67-81.  MIDDLETON, W. E. K. A history of the thermometer and its uses in meteorology. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins Press, 1966.  MILLER, G. A. The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our capacity for processing information.  Psychological Review, 1956, 63, 81-97.  OYAMO, T. A behavioristic analysis of Stevens' magnitude estimation method. Perception & Psychophysics, 1968, 3, 317-320.  PATTIE, F. A. A report of attempts to produce uniocular color blindness by hypnotic Journal of Medical Psychology, 1935, 15,  230-241.  PERKEL, D. H., & BULLOCK, T. H. Neural coding. Bulletin, Neurosciences Research 221-348.  PICKERSGILL, M. J. On knowing with which eye Psychology, 1961, 13, 168-172.  POLLACK, I. Iterative techniques for unbiased Psychology, 1965, 17, 139-148.  POWERS, W. T. Behavior: The control of perception. Chicago: Aldine, ROCK, I. An introduction to perception. New York:  Macmillan, 1975. ROCK, I., & EBENHOLTZ, S. The relational determination of perceived size. Psychological Review, 1959, 66,  387-401.  Ross, J., & DILOLLO, V. A vector model for psychophysical judgment. Journal of Experimental Psychology Monograph Supplement,  1968, 77 (3, Part 2).  Ross, J., & DILOLLO, V. Judgment and response in magnitude estimation. Psychological Review, 1971, 78, 515-527.  SAVAGE, C. W. The measurement of sensation. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1970.  SELFRIDGE, O. G. Pandemonium, a paradigm for learning. In Proceedings of symposium on the mechanization of thought processes.  National Physical Laboratory, Teddington, England. London: H. M. Stationery Office, 1958.  SHEPARD, R. N. Stimulus and response generalization: Deduction of the generalization gradient from a trace model.  Psychological Review, 1958, 65, 242-256. (a)  SHEPARD, R. N. Stimulus and response generalization: Tests of a model relating generalization to distance in psychological  space. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1958, 55, 509-523. (b) SHEPARD, R. N. Role of generalization in stimulus-response  compatibility. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 1961, 13, 59-62.  suggestion. British Program, 1968, 6,  one is seeing. Quarterly Journal of Experimental rating scales. Quarterly Journal of Experimental 1973.  SHEPARD, R. N. The analysis of proximities: Multidimensional scaling with an unknown distance function, I & II. Psychometrika,  1962, 27, 125-140, 219-246.  SHEPARD, R. N. Computers and thought: A review of the book edited by Feigenbaum and Feldman. Behavioral Science, 1964, 9,  57-65.  SHEPARD, R. N. Approximation to uniform gradients of generalization by monotone transformations of scale. In D. I. Mostofsky  (Ed.), Stimulus generalization. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Univ. Press, 1965. Pp. 94-110.  SHEPARD, R. N. Metric structures in ordinal data. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1966, 3, 287-315.  SHEPARD, R. N. Form, formation, and transformation of internal representations. In R. Solso (Ed.), Information processing and  cognition: The Loyola Symposium. Hillsdale, N. J.: Erlbaum, 1975. Pp. 87-122.  SHEPARD, R. N. Multidimensional scaling, tree-fitting, and clustering. Science, 1980, 210, 390-398. SHEPARD, R. N.  Psychophysical complementarity. In M. Kubovy & J. Pomerantz (Eds.), Perceptual organization. Hillsdale, N. J.: Erlbaum, 1981.  Pp. 279-341.  SHEPARD, R. N. Structural representations of musical pitch. In D. Deutsch (Ed.), Psychology of music. New York: Academic  Press, in press.  SHEPARD, R. N., & CARROLL, J. D. Parametric representation of nonlinear data structures. In P. R. Krishnaiah (Ed.),  Multivariate analysis. New York: Academic Press, 1966. Pp. 561-592.  SHEPARD, R. N., & CHANG, J.-J. Stimulus generalization in the learning of classifications. Journal of Experimental Psychology,  1963, 65, 94-102.  SHEPARD, R. N., KILPATRIC, D. W., & CUNNINGHAM, J. P. The internal representation of numbers. Cognitive Psychology, 1975, 7,  82-138.  SIEGEL, J. A. The nature of absolute pitch. In I. Gordon (Ed.), Studies in the psychology of music. Iowa City: Univ. of Iowa  Press, 1972. Vol. 8.  SKINNER, B. F. The operational analysis of psychological terms. Psychological Review, 1945, 52, 270-277.  SKINNER, B. F. Verbal behavior. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1957.  STERNBERG, S. Four theories of the effect of distance on apparent size. Paper read at the Psychonomic Society meeting, St.  Louis, October, 1966.  STERNBERG, S. The discovery of processing stages: Extensions of Donders' method. Acta Psychologica, 1969, 30, 276-315.  STEVENS, S. S. On the theory of scales of measurement. Science, 1946, 103, 677-680.  STEVENS, S. S. Mathematics, measurement, and psychophysics. In S. S. Stevens (Ed.), Handbook of experimental psychology. New  York: Wiley, 1951. Pp. 1-49.  STEVENS, S. S. The direct estimation of sensory magnitudes-Loudness. American Journal of Psychology, 1956, 69, 1-25.  STEVENS, S. S. On the psychophysical law. Psychological Review, 1957, 64, 153-181.  STEVENS, S. S. Cross-modality validation of subjective scales for loudness, vibration, and electric shock. Journal of  Experimental Psychology, 1959, 57, 201-209.  STEVENS, S. S. Ratio scales, partition scales, and confusion scales. In H. Gulliksen & S. Messick (Eds.), Psychological  scaling: Theory and applications. New York: Wiley, 1960. Pp. 49-66.  STEVENS, S. S. To honor Fechner and repeal his law. Science, 1961, 133, 80-86.  STEVENS, S. S. Concerning the psychophysical power law. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1964, 16, 383-385.  STEVENS, S. S. Matching functions between loudness and ten other continua. Perception & Psychophysics, 1966, 1, 5-8. (a)  STEVENS, S. S. On the operation known as judgment. American Scientist, 1966, 54, 385-401. (b) STEVENS, S. S., & GUiRAO, M.  Subjective scaling of length and area and the matching of length to loudness and brightness. Journal of Experimental  Psychology, 1963, 66, 177-186.  STEVENS, S. S., & GUIRAO, M. The scaling of apparent viscosity. Science, 1964, 144, 1157-1158. SUPPES, P., & ZINNEs, J. L.  Basic measurement theory. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, & E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical psychology. New York:  Wiley, 1963. Vol. I, p. 1-76.  TEGHTSOONIAN, M, The judgment of size. American Journal of Psychology, 1965, 78, 392-402. THOULEss, R. H. Phenomenal  regression to the "real" object, I & 11. British Journal of Psychology, 1931, 21, 339-359; 22, 1-30.  THURSTONE, L. L. A law of comparative judgment. Psychological Review, 1927, 34, 273-286. TORGERSON, W. S. Theory and methods  of scaling. New York: Wiley, 1958.  TORGERSON, W. S. Quantitative judgment scales. In H. Gulliksen & S. Messick (Eds.), Psychological scaling: Theory and  applications, New York: Wiley, 1960. Pp. 21-31.  TREISMAN, M. Laws of sensory magnitude, Nature (London), 1963, 198, 914-915.  TREISMAN, M. Sensory scaling and the psychophysical law. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1964, 16, 11-22.  WARD, W. D. Absolute pitch. Sound, 1963, Part 1, 2, 14-41; Part 11, 3, 33-41.  WARREN, R. W. A basis for judgment of sensory intensity. American Journal of Psychology, 1958, 71, 675-687.  WARREN, R. M., SERSEN, E. A., & PORES, E. B. A basis for loudness judgments. American Journal of Psychology, 1958, 71, 700-709.  WELFORD, A. T. The measurement of sensory-motor performance: Survey and reappraisal of twelve years' progress. Ergonomics,  1960, 3, 189-230.  WICKELGREN, W. A. Associative strength theory of recognition memory for pitch. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1969, 6,  13-61.  WITTGENSTEIN, L. Philosophical investigations. New York: Macmillan, 1953. (Translated by G. E. M. Anscombe.)  WOODWORTH. R. S. Experimental psychology. New York: Henry Holt, 1938.