10.1016/0022-2496(81)90053-5
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 23, 115-133 (1981)  A Moving Average Model for Sequenced Reaction-Time Data  JOSEPH B. KADANE AND JILL H. LARKIN  Carnegie-Mellon University  AND  RICHARD H. MAYER  University of California, Santa Barbara  Reaction times are often collected in order to study the durations of hypothesized subprocesses. In many important cases,  reaction times are collected for a sequence of tasks in which the processing for one task is a subset of the processing  required for the next in the sequence. Data of this sort have been analyzed by multiple-regression methods. Here we propose a  more sophisticated moving average model for such data. We show that ordinary multiple-regression methods produce estimates  that are consistent, but not efficient, and that the usual RZ statistic may provide a misleading impression of goodness of  fit. One consequence of the suggested statistical model is that it allows the same quantity of data to be used to fit a  psychological model to a larger range of tasks.  1. INTRODUCTION  We present a refinement of a technique for cognitive analyses of intellectual tasks. In particular, we focus on studies in  which response latencies are collected for processes that are hypothesized to occur in a sequence of states.  More than a century ago, Donders (1868) described a procedure for measuring the duration of individual mental processes which  were hypothesized to be sequential components of a larger task. For example, compare a simple reaction-time task in which a  subject must respond to light using the right hand, with a choice reactiontime task in which a subject must respond using the  right hand for a red light and the left hand for a white light. According to Donders, both tasks require exactly the same  sequence of internal processes except that the choice reaction-time task includes extra processes for deciding which stimulus  was presented and deciding which response  This work was supported in part by funds from the Ford Motor Company Research Fund and Carnegie-Mellon University.  Correspondence concerning the article should be sent to the first author, Department of Statistics, Carnegie-Mellon  University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213. We thank Honor Reynolds and David Trader for their able research assistance, and Ramona  Trader and Thomas Wickens for helpful comments on earlier drafts.  0022-2496/81/020115-19$02.00/0  Copyright ~El 1981 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  116 KADANE, LARKIN, AND MAYER  should be executed. On the average, response latencies for the choice task were 0.154 sec longer than for the simple task, so  Donders concluded that the time to make mental decision in the choice task is approximately 0.154 sec. This procedure, which  has been called the "subtraction method," provides for decomposing a task into a series of internal processes and for  systematically determining the duration of each. The basic features of the method are: (1) Overlapping tasks. Two (or more)  tasks are used such that task n and task n + 1 consist of identical processes except that task n + 1 also contains one  additional process. (2) Task analysis. Each of the tasks is analyzed into a sequence of processes. (3) Response latency.  Multiple response latencies are observed for each task for each subject. (4) Subtraction. The average difference in response  time between task n + 1 and task n yields an estimate of the time for the process which is unique to task n + 1.  More recently, the rebirth of interest in the cognitive analysis of intellectual tasks has relied on a modified version of  Donder's subtraction method. Current work, however, differs from earlier reaction-time research in a number of significant  ways. First, the tasks being analyzed are more complex than earlier reaction-time tasks. Second, alternative models of the  underlying sequence of processes are being compared and tested. Third, the subtraction technique has been coupled with modern  regression statistics for evaluating the goodness of fit between a model-i.e., a hypothesized sequence of component  processes-and observed response time data. Fourth, measurement accuracy has increased since Donder's era.  The current literature on cognitive analysis of intellectual tasks can be divided into two broad classes-what we call "task  component comparisons" and "problem state comparisons." In the first class, be begin with two or more overlapping tasks such  that task n + 1 contains exactly one more process than task n and so on. For example, if JP;} refer to component processes,  then  task n = P, + --- P;,  task n+l=P,+,,*P;+P;+ and  task n+2=P,+-P;+P;+,+P;+z1  In this procedure subjects are given many overlapping tasks, such as described originally by Donders. For example, in a  Sternberg memory scanning task (Sternberg, 1969) response time increases linearly as a function of the number of letters to be  scanned, i.e., response time for a task with n + 1 letters in the memory set required approximately 38 msec more than response  time for a problem with n letters in the memory set. If each additional letter in the memory set adds exactly one "mental  comparison" component to the task, then the time to make a mental letter comparison can be estimated at 38 msec. Similarly,  components of mental arithmetic tasks may be estimated (Groen & Parkman, 1972; Woods, Resnick, & Groen; 1975, Danserau, 1966;  Ashcraft & Battaglia, 1978). For example, for some subjects time to  MOVING AVERAGE MODEL 117  add mentally two single-digit addends is a linear function of the value of the smaller number (Groen & Parkman, 1972). A  counting model of addition posits that increasing the value of the smaller addend by one adds one incrementing process to the  task, a duration observed to be 0.34 sec in Groen and Parkman's data. Carpenter and Just (1975) have applied a similar  analysis to sentence picture verification tasks. For example, according to their analysis true-affirmative questions require n  steps, false-affirmative require n + 1, false-negative require n + 4, and true-negative require n + 5. In a typical study  response time is a linear function of the number of required steps, with each additional step requiring between 0.116 and  0.174 sec. A final example is provided by analysis of performance in Posner letter matching tasks (Posner & Mitchell, 1967).  Response time for physical identity judgments-e.g., AA-is 84 msec faster than for name match judgments-e.g., Aa. Presumably,  the latter task requires the additional process of locating the letters in long-term memory and finding their names. Thus it  can be concluded that the time to decode the letters' names is approximately 84 msec. In this example the two tasks, decoding  and searching, are not necessarily sequential, but the time difference still reflects the time required by one of the task  components. In each of these examples, the subtraction method is used to determine the time of a component process, and in  most cases linear regression techniques are used to evaluate the goodness of fit between the model and the data.  A second major class of tasks which have been analyzed using a modified subtraction technique are what we call "problem state  comparisons." A given task can be represented as a problem space consisting of a given state, a goal state, and a set of  intermediate states generated by applying legal operators to all states. Adjacent states in the problem space may be defined  as follows: two states, n and n + 1, are adjacent if state n is one more operation closer to the goal than state n + 1. Thus,  state n = n more operations must be applied before the goal is reached,  and  state n + 1 = n + 1 more operations must be applied before the goal is reached.  For example, in a recent study of algebra equation solving (Mayer & Larkin, 1980) the problem state, x - 5 = 5, involves one  more operation (moving a number) than problem state x = 5 + 5. Responses from many subjects averaged 1.43 sec for each such  "move" process (Mayer & Larkin, 1980). Thus, by starting subjects at different states in the problem space, response times may  be collected for adjacent states.  Just as current techniques involve a refinement over Donder's original method-i.e., the use of complex task analysis, multiple  and accurate measures, and regression statistics-the present paper proposes a further refinement in the regression technique  currently in use.  The current analysis of sequenced reaction-time data (Section 2) is discussed to prepare for the introduction of our model in  Sections 3 and 4. The consequences of  118 KADANE, LARKIN, AND MAYER  this model for estimation (Section 5), model evaluation (Section 6), and experimental design (Section 7) are then addressed.  As an example throughout the paper we shall use a task we have studied, that of solving simple linear algebra equations. The  subject's task is to enter an answer as soon as possible after seeing the original equation presented on a CRT screen.  2. CURRENT ANALYSIS OF SEQUENCED REACTION-TIME DATA  We consider the responses of a single subject. Many problems j each in different states of solution i are given to the subject  and reaction times tij are recorded. Problem-states are presented in a random order and with sufficiently many different  problems that the subject is unlikely to learn that all the answers are in a restricted set. Suppose that analysis suggests  several cognitive tasks required to solve problem j from state i. For example, our preliminary analysis of the  equation-solving tasks suggests that to solve problem  (5x-4)/2= 10+x  to obtain  requires four moves (of a term or number from one side to the other); 5 calculations combining two numbers; and one shift of  goal (as specified in our model described elsewhere (Mayer & Larkin, 1980)). To solve the same original problem, from an  intermediate state:  5x-4=20+2x  (to obtain the same result, x = 8) requires three moves, three calculations, and zero shifts of goal. Statistical analysis of  reaction-time (solution-time) data for a variety of problem states allows inferences about times required for the various  cognitive tasks. For example, in our algebra task, analysis of these data allow us to estimate the times associated with the  movement of a number or term, with a calculation, and with a shift in goal. The reaction time tJ to solve a problem i from a  state j is then estimated as the number of moves multiplied by the time parameter associated with a move, plus the number of  calculations multiplied by the time parameter associated with that, plus a similar term for shifts in goal.  In general a reaction time tiJ is given by  til-NO+flZlij+#2Z2iJ+ . +#,Zrij+UiJ,  where /3Q are estimates of time parameters associated with the r subtasks appearing in the cognitive model; zqu are the number  of times subtask q is hypothesized to occur in solving problem j from state i. The constant #0 is added to account for overhead  MOVING AVERAGE MODEL 119  incurred for each state and each problem, e.g., in reading time. Finally u;j is the error due to all causes. Initially, we  consider each problem (including repetitions) to be a new problem. Thus we can take each problem j at each state i to have  been given to the subject exactly once, and to is the corresponding measured response time. In Section 4 we consider  repetitions.  Typically when faced with data that can be organized as in (1), there are two purposes of an analysis, first, to estimate the  unknown coefficients#, and second, to assess how well the function fo +Q,z,ij + --- +#,z.,j fits the observed times tij, or,  equivalently, to estimate the size of the errors u;j.  A standard method of analysis for such data is as follows: Let t be a column vector of observed times tij, and, Z be the  matrix of independent variables. Let (3 be the vector of unknown coefficients, and let u be the vector of errors. Then the  original equation (1) can be rewritten in vector notation as  t=Z/3+u.  Assume that the matrix Z is of full rank. The ordinary least-squares estimate for # is  fl = (Z'Z)-'Z't,  and the usual method for asessing how small the errors u are is to compute R2, defined as  Rz = 1 _ (t _ t )'(t _) (4) t't '  where t = Zfl is the vector of estimated values for t. Values of RZ close to one indicate a model that fits well; values close  to zero indicate a poor model.  Properties of (3) and (4), especially (3), are discussed extensively in the statistical literature. The general outcome is  that both the favorable properties of (3) (in particular, efficiency, discussed in Section 5) and the usefulness of (4) as a  measure of how well a regression fits, depend critically on the following assumptions about error u;j  (a) For different problems (at any state) or for the same problem at different states, the errors u,j are uncorrelated.  (b) The variance of the error u;j is the same whatever the problem i and state j.  We accept for the purpose of this paper a third crucial assumption, that the errors u;j have a joint normal distribution with  zero mean. All these assumptions taken together say that the covariance matrix of u is u'I, where oZ is the common value of  the variances, and I is the identity matrix.  Neither assumption (a) nor assumption (b) is reasonable for sequenced reactiontime data. One would expect adjacent states of  the same problem to have (positively) correlated errors, because modeling errors affecting one state are likely also to affect  120 KADANE, LARKIN, AND MAYER  adjacent states. However, it is reasonable to expect these correlations to diminish monotonically to zero for states farther  apart, even in the same problem. Similarly one would expect greater variance associated with states further from the goal of  the same problem than with states closer to the goal, because modeling errors would tend to accumulate. Thus both assumptions  listed above are untenable.  Since we do not accept assumptions (a) or (b), and consequently question the use of (3) and (4), we purpose here an  alternative set of assumptions on the behaviour of the vector of errors u. We then discuss what statistical procedures these  new assumptions suggest in place of the use of (3) and (4). Failure to take into account even moderate amounts of serial  correlation in the errors can result in poor approximations to error bounds for least squares estimates, whether summarized as  a significance test, a confidence interval or a posterior distribution (Box, 1954).  3. A MODEL OF THE ERRORS IN SEQUENCED REACTION-TIME DATA  Our goal is to develop a model that accounts for the principal sources of variation in the observed reaction time t;i for each  problem j in each state i. There are two such principal sources. The first is that the linear theory cannot be expected to fit  unfailingly. Thus even if we could measure each tip many times, and find the average t ~ of those t,j 's, we should not expect  the linear theory Z/3 to fit these t* exactly. Thus a modeling error is included in our analysis. For example, if the  assumption of linearity of the selection of parameters were badly reflected in the data, one would expect large modeling  errors. Second, each measurement tii is made with some random error (relative to t!) due to all the unaccounted for  happenstances of a single reaction time observed for a single problem j at a state i. Thus a measurement error is included in  our analysis. For example, if a subject were to be sporadically inattentive, one would expect a large measurement error. In  other literature these sources of error are called systematic and random, respectively (Reif, Brackett, & Larkin, 1975). To  build our model, we first build a model for the modeling error between t ~ and the theoretical quantity Z# and then model the  random error between t* and tip.  To model the expected reaction times t*, we focus instead on y*, the time expected to be required by the subject to solve the  problem from state i beyond what is required to solve the problem from state i - 1. Thus, by definition  y = t j - t* ,,j, for i = 1,..., n, and j = 1,..., p. (5)  We suppose that problem j has nj states, and that there are p problems. (For consistency, we take to,; to be zero for all  problems j). The advantage of focusing on y* instead of t* is that y* reflects only processes between states i - 1 and i. Now  let  Wu = Zu - Zi _,,j, for i = 1,..., n; and j = 1,..., p. Let Zoj = 0 for all j.  Then W,i is the vector specifying how many more of each explanatory variable is required to solve problem j from state i than  is required to solve the same problem  MOVING AVERAGE MODEL 121  from state i - 1. Consequently the number Wii# is a vector product of explanatory variables (in our example, the number of  moves, calculations, and goal shifts) times the relevant coefficient ,(3g. Theoretically Wii# is equal to how much longer it  should take to solve the problem from state i than from state i - 1. Thus we model y* with the linear relation  yii = Wiia + ERi  for states i = I,..., ni and problems j = 1,..., p, (6)  where the Eii are assumed to be independently normally distributed with mean 0 and variance aZ and independent of all other  random variables. The magnitude of Cr' indicates how good a description the linear model Zii# is of the expected times y*.  We assume that the variance az does not vary with problem state. This corresponds to an assumption that transition between  successive states always requires about the same amount of processing. More generally, one might assume the Eii to be normally  distributed with zero mean and variance cijc', where cu is a known constant depending on problem i and state j. Such a  generalized model is easy to estimate by methods analogous to those discussed here, but for simplicity, we take cii = 1.  The second part of our model posits a relationship between the expected quantities t*~ and the observed quantities tii. To  specify this relationship, we take the very simple equation  tii = t* + Sii for state i = 1,..., ni and problems j = 1,..., p, (7)  where bii is assumed to be normally distributed with mean 0 and variance 'r2 and is assumed to be independent of all other  random variables, including the Eti's. The magnitude of r' indicates how variable the subject is.  Equation (7) can be regarded as a distribution of tii given t*. It is possible that the variance of Sii might increase with  t*. While not unreasonable, this more complex model presents novel difficulties of analysis and estimation. Consequently we  accept Eq. (7) as a useful special case.  Equations (6) and (7) together with definition (5) completely specify our model. We now proceed to explore the structure of  this model, and specifically to show that it has the properties argued for in our objections to (a) and (b) in Section 2.  In order to simplify notation we consider only a single problem and hence suppress the subscript j. We find it convenient to  discuss the observed difference in reaction time between state i and state i - 1, which we call yi. Using (6) and (7), we have  Yi=t;-ti-I=t*+bi-t* ,-6i_, =Wi#+Ei+bi-S;_,, i=2,3,...,n,  and  Y,=t,-to=ti +b,=W,/3+E,+b,. (8)  122 KADANE, LARKIN, AND MAYER Thus the vector  (yl, V2, ..., yn) is normally distributed with mean vector  'U = (W1 A W2#1 ..., WA,  and variances and covariances  Var(yi) = aZ + 2rZ, i > 1, Var(y,) = a2 + TI,  COV(yi,yi-1)=-r2, i> 1,  with all other covariances zero. Hence (yy2, ..., y has the covariance matrix  62 + r2 -r2 0 ... ... ... 0  -r2 Q2 + 2r2 -r2 0 ... ... 0  0 -r2 aZ + 2r2 -r2 0 ... 0  0 0 -r2 ... ... ... 0  0 0 0 0 0 ... a' + 2.C2  To make the analysis tractable, we transform the parameters of error structure in the following way. Let vo, v.., vhave  independent normal distributions with zero means and variances UZk (which for the moment is an arbitrary number). Let a, be  another arbitrary number. We seek to choose a' and a, so that  wi = vi + a, v;_i = 1, ..., n, (10)  has the covariance matrix E given in (9). The vector (w.., w is then said to be a first-order moving average process  (Anderson, 1971). Choosing such a, and a* is not always possible, but depends on the special structure of this problem. Except  for Var(y,), the other variances in Eq. (9) will match provided  a'* (1 +a2)=Var(wi)=Q2+2rZ, i > 1. (11) Similarly we must have  a*a, = Cov(wi, w;+,) =-TZ, (12)  and  Cov(w;,wj)=0, 1 i-ji >2. (13)  MOVING AVERAGE MODEL 123  Solving (11) and (12) for a, and Q* in terms of a2 and T2,  a, = [1 - (1 -4 p2)-u2]/(2p)'  where p = -T2/(Q2 +2 T2), and  (14)  Here a, has been chosen so that it lies between -1 and 0, corresponding to p which lies between -1/2 and 0. A special value  for Var(vo) can be chosen so that  Var(w,) = a2 + T2,  namely, so that  Q* + a, Var(vo) = Var(w,) = a2 + T2,  which has the solution  Var(vo) = -2T2/a, . (15)  With these choices for ao* and Var(vo), the covariance matrix for (w.., w is exactly Z as given in (9). Since linear  combinations of normally distributed random variables are again normally distributed, (w.., w has a normal distribution.  Since normally distributed random variables with the same means and covariance matrices have the same distribution, we  conclude that (y, ,..., yn) -,u has the same distribution as (w, --- w,). Thus, after this reparameterization, the problem is  reduced to a linear regression with first-order moving average errors.  The expression of this problem in terms of observed differences between reaction times of adjacent states, while convenient,  is not necessary. Thus we may write, from (6) and (7),  ti = t* + 6i  `l .yk + 6i k<i  `l (Wka + SO + bi k<i  (16)  Wk+ ` Ek+6i k<f k<i  =Zifl+ ' Ek+bi. k<i  124 KADANE, LARKIN, AND MAYER  Consequently, appropriately modifying the regression to sum the relevant state effects of all past states, (16) can be run as  a regression provided the variance-covariance matrix is appropriately taken into account. From (16), we have  Var(t;) = a2i + z2,  Cov(ti I tk) = a2 Min(i, k). Thus (t.., t has covariance matrix  a2 + z2 a2 62 a2     a2 2a2 + z2 2a2 2a2     a2 2a2 3a2 + z2 3a2     a2 2a2 3a2 ...   (17)    ... ... (n _1) a2   a2 2a2  ... (n - 1) a2 na2 + r2   The covariance matrix S2 has the properties argued for intuitively in the first section. The variances increase down the  diagonal, i.e., states further from the goal have larger variances. The correlation Pi,k between states further from the goal  have larger variances. The correlation P;.k between states i and k (k < i) is  Cov(ti I tk) a2k  P,,k Var(t;) Var(tk) (a2i + z2)(a2k + r2)  (18)  which is positive, and approaches zero as i - oo. That more distant states have lower correlations than do closer states, is  shown by the following argument: Suppose i > k. Then  a2k a2k  Pr+i,k -Pi,k = -  (a2(i + 1) +72)(a2 a1i + z2)(a2k + r2)  _ I ) - ( + )~<0.  (a2k + z2) (a2(i + 1 + 7.1) a2i z2  Hence the correlations are positive, and diminish monotonically to zero for states farther apart. Thus the correlations using  this model have all the properties argued for in the introduction.  Whether to use the regression in the form (8), with covariance matrix (9), in the form (16), with covariance matrix (17) or,  to use the moving average form (10), is a matter of convenience in estimation, to which we turn in Section 5.  MOVING AVERAGE MODEL 125  4. EXTENSIONS OF THE MODEL  We now extend the model discussed in the preceding pages in two ways. First we address the analysis of a set of reaction times  that correspond to a branched (rather than linear) set of tasks. Second we consider the treatment of replications of  essentially similar tasks.  In collecting data for a complex task, it seems often useful not to restrict oneself to a linear sequence of states as we have  done so far. For example, in our equationsolving task all of the states shown in Table 1 might be used as stimuli for the  subject. The result is that more complex states can be presented without the overhead of having to present the simpler  subsequent states more than once.  In such a "branched" set of states, we let k(i) be the state first reached in a solution from state i (with k(1) = 0). Thus in  the example in Table 1, k(3) = 2 and k(7) = 2. So far, in assuming a linear sequence of states we have assumed that k(i) = i -  1, but this assumption is unnecessary to the analysis. In this more general  form, the basic equations are   *- * (19)     in place of (5) and (6), and   ti=t*+ b;, (20)  in place of (7). Then we have   Y;=ti-tku1= Wifl+Ei+S;-Skct1 (i > 1)   (21)  Y1 =tt=Wlfl+El +61,   as in (8). This generates a covariance matrix E having elements as follows:   a= aZ + T2,   (22)  Oii = aZ + 2r2 (i > 1),   for i * j, if i = k(j) or j = k(i), then a;j = -r2; if not, then a;j = 0, which replaces (9).  TABLE I A Nonlinear (Branched) Set of States in an Equation-Solving Task  12. 3(5x-8)- I0x=3x    11. 3(5x - 8) = 10x + 3x    10. 3(5x - 8) = 13x 6. 15x = 12(x + 2) + x  9. 15x-24= 13x 5. 15x=24+ 12x+x  8. 15x-13x-24=0 4. 15x=24+13x  7. 2x-24=0 3. 15x-13x=24  2. 2x = 24 I. x= 12  126 KADANE, LARKIN, AND MAYER  Thus this more general tree structure modifies the matrix L' by moving some of the -t2's from the off-diagonal to other places  in the matrix, but otherwise leaves it unchanged.  In order to establish the moving average structure, we can replace (10) with the equation  wi = v, + a, vk(r) - (23)  Now the rest of the analysis above proceeds unchanged to obtain a linear regression with first-order moving average errors.  However, it must be noticed that in this moving average representation, "time" has a tree structure, which is a bit unusual.  In order to treat replications of essentially similar problems, we distinguish between problem-types and problem-instances. A  problem-type, for example, might be a set of equations of the form  (ax + b)/(cx + d) = e  together with all of its subsequent states  ax + b = e(cx + d),..., etc.,  where a, b, c, d, and e can be any numbers. A problem-instance is a particular choice of the parameters a, b, c, d, and e,  together with all its subsequent states. Of course, each state of each problem-instance is presented to the subject once, in  some order sufficiently scrambled that the subject cannot remember the answer from a previously solved state of that  problem-instance.  When several different problem-instances of the same problem-type are used in an experimental design, we must specify how we  believe the measurements from those different problem-instances might be related. Since the error e;, in (6),  y* = Wu9 + Eli,  relates to how well the linear model Wi;# fits the y*, it is reasonable to suppose that that fit is constant over  problem-instances of the same problem-type at the same state, and independent for different states. However, the second source  of error, the S;; 's in Eq. (7),  measure all the instantaneous error associated with that particular reaction-time measurement. Then the by's are assumed to be  different and independent from problem-instance to problem-instance of the same problem type. Then the covariances between two  different problem-instances of the same problem type is modeled to be u'I. As an example, suppose that one problem-type is  replicated, so that it has two problem-instances, and a second problem type is not replicated. Let Z, and Lyz be the  MOVING AVERAGE MODEL 127  covariance matrix E derived in (9), or (22) for these two problem-types, respectively. Then the covariance matrix for the  whole vector of time differences y would be  [,E, a2I 0  E* = a21 E, 0 (24) 0 0 EZ  5. CONSEQUENCES FOR ESTIMATION  Among the most important properties of an estimator are consistency and efficiency (or asymptotic efficiency). Let jx; } be a  sequence of random variables providing information about 6, a quantity to be estimated. Let Tbe an estimator of 6 based on  the first n variables, x, - - - x Then Tis said to be a consistent estimator of 6 if and only if Tconverges to 6 in  probability as n gets large. Roughly, consistency says that Tconverges to a definite quantity, which happens to be the true  value to be estimated. A good treatment of efficiency is given by Rao (p. 283, ff.) whose definition follows:  "Let P( ., ..., . 16) be the probability density of the random variables x, ,..., x and define the random variable  z 1 d log P(x, - - - x10)  Z,1 n d6  A consistent estimator Tof 6 is said to be efficient if  n'/2 IT. - 6 - y(6) Zn I  converges to zero in probability, where y does not involve the observations."  Thus an efficient estimator Tnot only approaches 6, as required by consistency but does so as rapidly as possible. The  appropriate rate of convergence is nut. Because consistency and efficiency are large-sample properties, they do not guarantee  a sensible estimator for samples of reasonable size. Nonetheless, they have proven to be the most durable and generally useful  sampling theory properties for estimators. The most essential property of consistent and efficient estimators is that if T and T'are two consistent estimators of 6, then IT,, - TI converges to zero in probability. Consequently consistent and  efficient estimators approximate one another in large samples.  One of the most common methods of estimation is maximum likelihood estimation, which for problems of the type studied here  gives consistent and efficient estimates. The likelihood function for a vector z, normally distributed with mean m and  variance matrix V is proportional to  exp{(z - m)' V-'(z - m)12 1/1 Vl1Z. (25)  128 KADANE, LARKIN, AND MAYER  Maximum likelihood estimates have the following invariance property: the same estimates of /3, r2 , and a2 will be found  regardless of whether the differences in reaction times between states are used (as in (8)), with V=2=., or the reaction times  themselves (as in (16)) are used, with V = .Q. Thus the choice between those two forms of the model (which should be  irrelevant since they are merely two equivalent expressions of the same ideas), is indeed irrelevant in maximum likelihood  estimation. Maximizing (25) with respect to the parameters involves computing the inverse of V, which for both E in (9) and .0  in (17) is computationally very difficuly. Attention is drawn, then, to other methods of estimation which, although not  maximum likelihood, share the properties of consistency and efficiency with maximum likelihood estimates, and hence  approximate maximum likelihood estimates.  One method with these properties is the following: We use the moving average representation of the state-to-state changes in  reaction times, as developed in Section 3. First, compute an ordinary least squares estimate of # (which, under our  assumptions, is consistent but not necessarily efficient). Then calculate residuals, the difference between individual  observations (difference in reaction time at states i + 1 and i) and differences in reaction times predicted on the basis of  the parameters in /l. Next calculate the autocorrelations of these residuals to find estimates for a, and a* . In  psychological settings each sequence of states (corresponding to one problem) is usually short, but there are many such  sequences represented in the data. Therefore the pooled sample correlations should be roughly normal. Since the method of  Walker (1961) relies on this asymptotic normality, it should be well suited to such problems. From a, and a* we obtain  estimates of a2 and r2 that are consistent. Substituting these estimates into (9) and computing an Aitken estimator yields  efficient estimates for fl. Finally the correlations are recomputed, and new estimates found for a, and a* and then for a2 and  r2. This can be continued until convergence is reached, although at the second state an efficient estimate of a will have been  obtained (Theil, 1971).  A second method that is simpler, but that has almost all the good properties of the Walker method, is as follows: Perform an  ordinary least squares with dependent variable y and independent variables W. Compute the residuals  r=y-Wfl=y-W(Wrw)_'Wy.  Estimate rz as follows:  iz =_V r;rk(n/m,  (26)  where m is the number of summands in the numerator sum, and the sum extends over all pairs (i, k(i)) such that 6;,k(;) _ -rz.  Let rW denote that element of the residual vector r corresponding to problem type i, problem instance h and state j. In the  covariance matrix 2='* there are terms a2 + r2 corresponding to the variances of the first state of each problem-instance and  estimated by r ;,, , terms a2 + 2r2 corresponding to variances of all other problem  MOVING AVERAGE MODEL 129  states and estimated by r;hJ (j* 1), and terms a2 corresponding to covariances between equal states of different  problem-instances of the same problem type, and estimated by rihj rih,J for (h * h'). Then a2 can be estimated as  Q2 = Li,h (rihl - T2)+ + Y_i.h,J>1 (rihl -2 T2)+ + ~+i.J,h>h' (rihjrih'j)+' N  (27)  where N is the number of terms, and (x)+ is defined to be the positive part of x, equal to x if x is positive and zero  otherwise.  Now a second-round Aitken estimator can be computed substituting these estimated values into the covariance matrix. The  first-round estimate of # is consistent, the estimates z2 and a2 in Eqs. (26) and (27) are consistent, and the second-round  estimate of P is efficient.  Our preliminary data analysis indicates that the estimate of /3 change very little between the first and second rounds,  indicating that an ordinary least squares treatment of the y's together with the above estimates of z2 and a2, may suffice for  practical purposes.  6. CONSEQUENCES FOR MODEL EVALUATION  In some cases, sequenced reaction-time data are analyzed not so much to measure the reaction time coefficient # as to  distinguish among models. Some special comments are in order.  First, the most common methods of comparing regression models do so by computing R2, which is  R2= 1 _ (s- s), (s_s) S's '  (28)  as previously given in (4). Here s is an n X 1 vector of observations, and s is an n X I vector of fitted values of s under  the model. If the fit is worthless, (in particular if s is the zero vector), R2 = 0. If the fit is very good, so that s - s is  the zero vector, R2 = 1. Thus R2, (or an adjustment of R2 that accounts for degrees of freedom) is taken to be a measure of  how much of the variance is explained by the regression (see Theil, 1971).  In fact, Eq. (28) is a special-case expression for R 2 appropriate only if the covariance matrix is proportional to I, the  identity matrix (see Appendix). In general, if V is the covariance matrix of s, then R2 is given by  R2= 1 _ (s _ s)' V_1(s-s). (29) s' V-'s  480/23%2-3  130 KADANE, LARKIN, AND MAYER  Thus, according to the model of Section 3, RZ should be computed using V = 2:. in (9) if differences in reaction times are  used, or using V = .fl in (17) if reaction times are used. These two ways of computing RZ yield the same value if maximum  likelihood estimates are used to obtain s, and yield approximately the same value if any consistent and efficient estimates  are used.  If the form (28) is used incorrectly when V ~ I, RZ can be dramatically different depending on whether first differences y are  used instead of reaction times t. While the numerator (s - s)'(s - s) is not different because the maximum likelihood estimate  of # is the same, the denominator s's is clearly much larger for reaction times than for differences in reaction times. Thus  while both uses of (28) to calculate RZ are wrong, computations based on reaction times (rather than differences) should be  viewed with particular care because their large values tend to give false authority to the model. In pilot data, for example,  RZ's have dropped from 0.75 to 0.01 when differences instead of reaction times were used as dependent variables.  With respect to a degree of freedom correction, one method is to divide (s - '(s - s) by n -p, where p is the number of  parameters being estimated, and to divide s's by n. This is a reasonable heuristic, which ensures that RZ is not automatically  increased by including more independent variables in a regression. In the data we have been studying, p is about 5, and n  ranges from 900, with a full data set, to perhaps 100, for various disaggregations. Consequently our discussion below omits  the degrees correction, because it will have no appreciable effect on our R "s. We note, in passing, that a rigorous theory of  RZ does not seem to be available.  If the purpose of computing RZ is to obtain a statistic for use in discriminating among models, then a better method is to  embed the several models in a single larger model, so that each is a special case. This permits simultaneous consideration of  several explanations of reaction times, since more than one explanatory variable may be important. Then estimates can be  studied to see how much predictions made from the models would change if some of the variables were eliminated. We prefer this  to the classical, and unfortunately standard, method of testing the significance of coefficients, since the latter are so  heavily influenced by sample size. Thus one's notion of the underlying psychological processes would be much too heavily  influenced by the size of the experiment that was run, which surely should be extraneous. A more detailed view of the process  of model simplification is given elsewhere (Kadane & Dickey, 1980).  7. CONSEQUENCES FOR EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN  A standard computer package includes facilities for performing ordinary leastsquares estimates as in (3), and calculating R2,  as in (4) and (28). Usually it does not have the capability for analyzing many short moving average regressions.  A reasonable response to this lack is to measure the reaction times t;; for many problems j having the same expected time t*,  and estimating t* with the average of  MOVING AVERAGE MODEL 131  the observed reaction times. If reaction times are measured for k such problems, Eq. (7) might be replaced by  k  tj = L tij/k= t* + bi,  where 8; is assumed to be normally distributed with mean 0 and variance rZ/k (and independent of all other variables). Hence  by taking k to be large, the quantity r2Ik can be made arbitrarily small. Not knowing the magnitude of 'c2, a careful  experimenter could choose a rather value of k. Once this is done, ordinary least squares might be performed using as dependent  variable the first differences of the averages, t; - t; _ I . Similarly the usual RZ as in (4) might be used to measure how  well the regression model fit the data.  However, this approach encourages an experimenter to redo the same problems (or very similar problems) many times, rather than  extend the applicability of the theory to the fullest extent possible. So the method of averaging pushes an experimenter  toward learning more and more about less and less, a tendency criticized by Newell (Newell, 1973). Using the full moving  average model and analysis, by contrast, permits the experimenter to try his theory in all circumstances in which he thinks it  applies, dealing explicitly with the always present random error r2.  8. CONCLUSIONS  We have proposed a model for the error structure in sequenced reaction time data, one that we believe better expresses the  likely dependencies in the observations. The model is shown to be a first-order moving average linear regression, whose  estimation can be accomplished using known statistical methods. The measure RZ of how well a linear regression has fit the  data requires modification in a way specified here. Finally use of our model allows the same quantity of data to be used to  fit a psychological model to a wider range of instances.  APPENDIX  Suppose the variance matrix V is not proportional to the identity matrix, the conditions for applicability of (28). Then  consider the linear model  y =X# + e, (30)  where e has a normal distribution with mean 0 and variance matrix V. This model can be converted to a linear model with  variance matrix to I by the following transformation.  132  KADANE, LARKIN, AND MAYER  Because V-' is a positive definite square matrix, there is a square nonsingular matrix P such that  P'P = V'.  Multiplying (30) by P, we obtain  y* = X*,Q + e*,  (31)  where Y* = Py, X* = PX, and e* = Pe. Now e* has a normal distribution 0 and variance matrix PVP' =7. Thus the estimate for ,Q  from (31) is  with mean  l~= (X*'X*)-lX*fy*  _ (X'P'PX)-IW'P'Py  _ (X'V-IX)-'X'V-'y, (32) which is the Aitken least-squares estimator (Theil, 1971), and R2 is transformed to  y *1 y*  (33)  In the preceding equation,  -X*a=Py-PXfl=P(y-Xfl).  Then  R2= 1 _ (Y-X9)'P'P(Y-A Y'PPY  or  R2= I - (Y-X#)'V-I(Y-X#) Y, V -'y  which is Eq. (29) used in Section 6.  (34)  REFERENCES  ANDERSON, T. W. The statistical analysis of time series. New York: Wiley, 1971.  ASHCRAFT, M. H., & BATTAGLIA, J. Cognitive arithmetic: Evidence for retrieval and decision processes in mental addition.  Journal of experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 1978, 4 (5), 527-538.  Box, G. E. P. Some theorems on quadratic forms applied in the study of analysis of variance problems II: Effects of inequality  of variance and of correlation between errors in the two-way classification. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 1954, 25,  484-498.  MOVING AVERAGE MODEL 133  CARPENTER, P. A., & JUST, M. A. Sentence comprehension: A psycholinguistic processing model of verification. Psychological  Review, 1975, 82, 45-73.  DANSEREAU, D. F. An information processing analysis of mental multiplication. Master's thesis, Graduate School of Industrial  Administration, Carnegie Institute of Technology, 1966.  DONDERS, F. C. Over de snelheid van psychische processen. Onderzoekingen gedaan in het Physiologisch Laboratorium der  Utrechtse Hoogeschool, 1868-1869, Tweede reeks, 1868, II, 92-120 Translated by W. G. Koster, On the speed of mental processes.  Acta Psychologica, 1969, 30, 412--4311.  GROEN, G. J., & PARKMAN, J. M. A chronometric analysis of simple addition. Psychological Review, 1972, 79, 329-343.  KADANE, J. B., & DICKEY, J. M. Bayesian decision theory and the simplification of models. In J. Kmenta & J. Ramsey, (Eds.),  Evaluation of Economic Models. New York: Academic Press, 1980. MAYER, R., & LARKIN, J. H. Analysis of problem-solving  strategies for algebra word dd equation problems. Technical Report, University of California, Santa Barbara, 1980.  NEWELL, A. You can't play 20 questions with nature and win: Projective comments on the papers of this symposium. In W. G.  Chase (Ed.), Visual information processing, New York: Academic Press, 1973. POSNER, M. I., & MITCHELL, R. F. Chronometric  analysis of classification. Psychological Review, 1967, 74, 392-409.  RAO, C. R. Linear statistical inference and its applications. New York: Wiley, 1965.  REIF, F., BRACKETT, G. C., & LARKIN, J. H. Principles of physics for the physical and biological sciences, preliminary  edition. New York: Wiley, 1975.  STERNBERG, S. Memory-scanning: Mental processes revealed by reaction-time experiments. American Scientist, 1969, 57, 421-457.  THEIL, H. Principles of econometrics. New York: Wiley, 1971.  WALKER, A. M. Large-sample estimation of parameters for moving average models. Biometrika, 1961, 48,343-357.  WOODS, S. S., RESNICK, L. B., & GROEN, G. J. An experimental test of five process models for subtraction. Journal of  Educational Psychology, 1975, 67, 17-21.  RECEIVED: June 24, 1980