10.1016/0022-2496(81)90036-5
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 24, 88-92 (1981)  Book Review  F. S. ROBERTS. Measurement Theory: With Applications to Decisionmaking, Utility, and the Social Sciences. Encyclopedia of  Mathematics and Its Applications, Vol. 7. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1979. Pp. xxii + 420. $24.50.  Reviewed by ZOLTAN DOMOTOR  The author is Professor of Mathematics at Rutgers University. He received his Ph.D. in Mathematics from Stanford University,  and has been associated previously with the Psychology Department at the University of Pennsylvania, with the Rand  Corporation, and with The Institute for Advanced Study. Dr. Roberts' major research interests have involved mathematical  models in the social, behavioral, and environmental sciences. He has served as Editor and Board Member for various  professional journals, and is Editor of the Mathematics and Social Sciences section of the "Encyclopedia of Mathematics and  Its Applications." His book, "Discrete Mathematical Models, with Applications to Social, Biological, and Environmental  Problems," Prentice-Hall, 1976, has been called a classic.  Professor Domotor, the reviewer, is Chairman of the Department of Philosophy at the University of Pennsylvania, and has also  spent one year as an Associate Professor in the Department of Philosophy at the University of California at Berkeley. His  major research interests concern the philosophy of the social sciences, and foundational studies of measurement, probability,  and decision. He has contributed to several books edited by Professor P. Suppes, the most recent contribution appearing in  "Foundations of Quantum Mechanics," Reidel, 1975.  It is a rare pleasure for a reviewer to deal with a book on measurement as good as Roberts'. It will undoubtedly become a  popular introductory textbook in the social sciences, and deservedly so. I do not mean to suggest of course that there are no  questions, criticisms, and disagreements worth expressing. I shall consider some of these later in the review, but first let  me survey some of the excellent features of Roberts' work.  The most outstanding aspect of this book is a judicious selection of some of the most important results of axiomatic  measurement theory and a lucid and rigorous exposition of these results with plenty of nice examples, manageable exercises,  and useful references.  In view of limitations on space and time it would scarcely be possible to summarize every topic which Roberts covers.  Nevertheless let me run through a few general themes which emerge from this work. The book is divided into eight chapters of  approximately the same length. The first two chapters cover the usual background on relational structures and serve as an  introduction to the representation dogma of 88  0022-2496/81/040088-05$02.00/0  Copyright C 1981 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  measurement. The presentations here are for the most part admirably clear and concise, and should prove accessible to any  student who understands "finite mathematics."  The next couple of chapters deal with ordinal, extensive, and difference measurement with special applications to  psychological scaling. Again, the sections are clearly written and should serve very effectively as a crisp introduction to  more or less recent themes of representational measurement theory. The second half of the book opens with conjoint measurement  and discusses, among many other things, the Luce-Tukey Theorem, Scott's Theorem, and Guttman scales. Here some of us may have  wanted to learn more about puzzles such as "Jones is more honest than smart," "Most women live longer than most men," "X has  read more books in more languages than Y," and "X is more larger than Y than Z is larger than W." Let us keep this in mind for  a later occasion.  The last three chapters are devoted to measurement of utility and probability. Roberts' approach is not simply to report who  said what, but to offer his own results and adaptations of the major topics of recent years.  Roberts' book differs from, say, the influential monograph "Foundations of Measurement" (1971, Vol. 1; Vol. 11 is forthcoming)  by Krantz et al. in several respects. Perhaps one can sum them up by saying that Roberts favors practical applications,  simplicity and pedagogy, and Krantz et al., comprehensiveness and abstract theory. However, their overall outlook is the same:  axiomatics and representation.  I gather Roberts has undertaken his project mainly because he thinks it will be useful to social scientists and applied  mathematicians. I cannot but agree with him regarding the general importance of measurement theory in answering questions  about measuring preference, IQ, air pollution, TV violence, and so on (p.2). However, as Roberts himself implies, it is to be  doubted whether the axiomatic and representational theory of measurement will provide more than part of the answer to these  questions. Consider, for example, the problem of measuring TV violence. Most social scientists bothered by this issue will not  be completely satisfied if we tell them to come up with an axiomatization of the binary relation "movie X is more violent than  movie Y" in such a way that the axioms will entail the existence of a homomorphic embedding of the collection of possible  movies into the order structure of reals. We know that motion pictures have complex attributes that affect viewers in many  different ways, contingent upon their cultural, moral, and other conditioning. As far as we can tell, specialists in social  science are not looking for a string of weakordering-type axioms to be imposed on "more violent than." Rather, their main  object of interest is a comprehensive social communication theory that ties the foregoing comparative relation in a powerful  way to a longer list of intrinsic sociological, psychological, cultural, and perhaps moral concepts. To obtain numbers for a  relation which is isolated from the rest of the universe is not the key issue. The problem is to isolate a correct qualitative  structure within which comparatives can play their descriptive or prescriptive role.  From a logical point of view, much of axiomatic representational measurement  theory may be viewed as a series of instantiations of the following dual pair of Ramsey formulas:  Representation  O(L), p) .4* 3P[dx, y E L) [xpy => P(x) < P(y) ] & T (V, P) ]  Uniqueness  O'(I_), P) p vP[dx, y E D[xPY => P(x) < P(Y) ] =:> T'(L?, P) I (b)  Here O and O' are suitable testable observational axiomatic systems, applicable to various intended empirical qualitative  relational structures (D, p), while T and T' are posited theoretical axiomatic systems, satisfiable by appropriate  quantitative structures (D, P). As a toy example, take (D, p) to be a finite Boolean algebra (of subsets of a sample space)  impressed with a de Finetti-style qualitative probability relation. Now condition (a) holds when O is the axiomatic system  presented, e.g., by the well-known Scott axioms (p. 393) and T is the deductive system generated by the classical Kolmogorov  axioms for finitely additive probabilities. Along similar lines, O' is a deductive system of weak ordering and T' is the  deductive closure of sentences defining convex mixing. Indeed, a convex mixture of agreeing probabilities is again an agreeing  probability. Simply, T' singles out a subsimplex of the simplex of all probabilities defined on D_. In most applications T' is  an axiomatic system for groups or semigroups, depending on the choice of O'.  The main job of a representational measurement theorist, then, is to identify the axiomatic systems O and O', given systems T  and T' and a version of the "Correspondence Rule" `dx, y[xpy => P(x) < P(y)], in such a way that formulas (a) and (b) or  possibly their weaker variants will hold. Generalizations involving empirical operations and several binary or other relations  should not detain us here.  If we read formulas (a) and (b) from right to left, they in effect tell us how to do science without numbers. We see how real  number-valued quantities P are eliminated in favor of qualitative relations p. The converse reading of (a) and (b) is of  course what measurement is all about: introduction of numbers under guarded conditions.  One problem representational measurement theory suffers from is an endless proliferation of representation results. Formally  this problem stems from the fact that two existential quantifiers cannot be melted down into one in general. Suppose we have a  representation of qualitative probabilities under a correspondence rule  dx, Y [x ::<Y => PI (x) < P, (Y) ]  and a representation of qualitative probabilistic independence under the correspondence rule  dx, Y [X 1 Y =:> P2 (x n Y) = PZ(x) 'PAY)], resulting in axiomatic systems 0,(D, :<) and OZ(D_, 1). The agreeing probabilities  P,  and PZ are not equal in general. More importantly, a joint representation will not be the conjunction of marginal  representations. In particular, the equivalence  OW, K,, 1) a O,(D, <) & 02(D, 1)  is false. We need a third, joint representation result O(D, <, 1) whose projections will evidently give 01(Q,:<) and OZ(D,1).  So, measurement theories, unlike mature scientific theories, are not rejected piecemeal but as a whole.  Getting back to TV violence, we see that it would be naive to provide the usual weak ordering axiomatics O(D_, p) for "more  violent than" alone, since this representation will have to be reworked every time the social scientist comes up with a new  property, related to but not definable in terms of violence. There are several other problems with the representational  doctrine of measurement, but I will not be able to mention them here. For example, the axioms in O(D, p) will not be true in  all substructures of (D, p), unless the axioms are universal. The next question is testing these axioms.  My more general point is that axiomatization of relations of the form  ... is O-er than ...,  where 0 is an empirical attribute, does not provide in itself sufficient understanding of the property measured. And here I do  not mean the measurement problem of, say, "fatter than" in "Mrs. X is fatter than she looks," "Mrs. X looks fatter than she  is," or "Mrs. X is fatter than she was." I have in mind a systematic axiomatization of two or more interacting comparatives  (and empirical operations), a bit like in the following intensional correct (respectively, incorrect) inferences:  The merrier our party becomes, the noisier our songs will be. The noisier our songs are, the madder our neighbors will get.  .'. The merrier our party is, the madder the neighbors will get.  The uglier a woman is, the more cosmetics she uses.  The more cosmetics a woman uses, the less ugly she looks.  .'. The uglier a woman is, the less ugly she looks.  It is not clear to me whether Roberts is prepared to apply ordinal measurement to syllogisms of medieval vintage (1) and (2).  Let us turn to another general question-the way numbers enter the scene of representational measurement. In extensive  measurement the relevant observational axiomatic system of formula (a) is nothing but an implicit theory of the real line.  This much is clear from the meaning of Holder's Theorem and its variants. In physics the process of introducing numbers is  much more straightforward. We start with a space/dual space pair S/S* of intensive and extensive quantities and then proceed  to postulate an inner product type bilinear map ( I ): S X S* -+ Re which numerically  evaluates every intensive quantity f at an extensive quantity P, as, e.g., in the RadonNikodym integral  (f1P)= f fdP.  Measurement in physics amounts to various empirical realizations of the inner product. To my best knowledge, axiomatic  measurement theorists have not succeeded thus far in convincing physicists to go beyond the inner product representation of  measurement. Needless to add, on this point Roberts can hardly be faulted.  Roberts' book is long enough, and, at the same time, a masterpiece of compression. Kinky theorems and proofs are avoided with  indications where to find them in the literature. One should not complain about omissions. All the same, there is one major  branch of measurement which is scarcely mentioned at all, but whose importance does seem to call for at least one longer  chapter. This branch is dimensional analysis.  My smaller criticism concerns Roberts' peculiar understanding of "objective" probabilities. The Kolmogorov axioms of  probability calculus do not make probabilities objective (p. 371). The objective/subjective distinction of probabilities comes  from specific interpretations (propensity of random systems vs belief attitude of agents) which provide actual evaluations of  probabilities on events and propositions. Simply, Kolmogorov axioms do not tell us how to evaluate given probabilities.  Some of Roberts' examples of measurement structures seem to me wrong or inadequate in some way. For example, on p. 308 he  considers the utility of death to be 0 and the utility of a healthy life 100. 1 am not convinced, to say the least, that  people value life and death in this manner.  Although the book is somewhat oversymbolized, most remarkably, there are hardly any misprints.  It is no easy matter to see whether Roberts' recommendations on how to apply axiomatic measurement to reality agree with  common sense or scientific practice, since most of his examples and applications appear to be simplistic. But, whatever the  issue, Fred Roberts is to be congratulated on his skillful presentation of the highlights of representational approach to  measurement.