10.1016/0022-2496(81)90040-7
IOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 24, 139-162 (1981)  The Proper Role of Clusters in Mathematical Models of Continuous Recall  DOUGLAS J. HERRMANN AND PHILIP M. PEARLE  Hamilton College  Previous research has shown that the number of words cumulatively recalled (N) at time (t) is a negatively accelerated  function that reaches an asymptote as t ~ tb. Research has also shown that the increase in N with t occurs in bursts or  clusters. Several models purport to account for this cumulative recall curve in terms of cluster characteristics. The present  research shows that previous models have not in fact successfully linked continuous recall to cluster characteristics. This  research demonstrates that cluster models need to employ three empirical characteristics of clusters: Tb, the time between  clusters; T., the average time between words within a cluster; and W,, the number of words within a cluster. It is shown that  these three quantities determine the cumulative recall curve, and these three quantities may in turn be characterized by four  parameters. Of these four parameters, only three actually characterize the cumulative recall curve. Two parameters determine  the initial slope and final asymptote of the curve, while a third parameter, which we introduce for the first time,  characterizes the curve's shape. This latter parameter may be interpreted as the ratio of the time spent in retrieving and  discarding a cluster that has been previously recalled to the amount of time spent in retrieving and outputting a newly  encountered cluster. It is pointed out that previous success in fitting the cumulative recall data with a two-parameter  function may be explained by the fact that this parameter lies in a restricted range about unity. Further experimental work is  suggested to elucidate the behavior of this new parameter. Two models are then proposed to account for these characteristics  of clusters and the shape of the recall curve.  1. INTRODUCTION  The continuous recall task is frequently employed in psychology; for example, researchers use the task to study the  functioning of human memory and psychometricians use it to assess mental ability. In this task subjects attempt to recall as  many exemplars as possible of a certain category (e.g., Birds) until told to stop. The results are typically presented by  graphing the total number (N) of words recalled up to a particular time (t) versus this time; this is the cumulative recall  curve.  The cumulative recall curve has been found to behave as follows: N increases rapidly at the outset, increases less rapidly  subsequently, and finally increases no more, i.e., N reaches an asymptote for large t. Moreover, N increases in bursts or  Requests for reprints should be sent to Douglas J. Herrmann, Department of Psychology, Hamilton College, Clinton, N.Y. 13323.  139  0022-2496/81/050139-24S02.00/0  Copyright ^c,, 1981 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  140 HERRMANN AND PEARLE  clusters (Bousfield & Sedgewick, 1944) of items that are conceptually or associatively related (Pollio, 1964). The negatively  accelerated behavior of the cumulative recall curve and the clustering phenomena are, therefore, the primary phenomena for  which models of continuous recall must account.  To account for these two characteristics of continuous recall, models have been proposed which assume that underlying recall  is (1) a process in which there is a search for clusters, and (2) recovery of items within clusters, (Dean, 1971; Graesser &  Mandler, 1978; Gruenewald & Lockhead, 1980; Shiffrin, 1970). Models of this general form will be referred to here as cluster  models. Our purpose is to present the mathematical analysis underlying such models more completely than has been done  previously, to propose two new cluster models that are more explicit and more powerful than existing cluster models, and to  see what conclusions can be drawn about the continuous recall process by comparing our mathematical analyses with the  experimental data.  In order for a cluster model to account for the experimental behavior of the cumulative recall curve, it must describe three  features of the recall process. These features (to be defined more precisely later) are: the time between adjacent clusters  (Tb), the average time spacing between words within a cluster (TW), and the size of a cluster, i.e., the number of words  within a cluster (W.). We will show that these three functions (Tb, T, Wc) completely determine the cumulative recall curve  These three features of continuous recall are illustrated in Fig. 1. The figure represents the data of a single subject from a  larger study on continuous recall (Herrmann, Note 1). It displays the cumulative number of examples recalled for the category  of pets as a function of time. Subsequent to recall, the subject also indicated those words that he recalled successively as a  unit, i.e., in the same cluster (a procedure similar to that of Buschke, 1977). Each circled point in Fig. 1 denotes the last  word in each cluster identified by the subject. It should be noted that the analysis in Fig. 1, as well as the rest of this  article, focuses on the temporal aspects of the recall of clusters. Thus, we will not discuss aspects of word recall such as  sequential dependencies and variability between and within subjects.  None of the existing cluster models (Dean, 1971; Graesser & Mandler, 1977; Gruenewald & Lockhead, 1980; Shiffrin, 1970),  however, have attempted to account for these three features, nor shown the relationship between these features and the  cumulative recall curve. Indeed, none make it clear how the parameters of the model are related to these three characteristics  of clusters. It appears that these models are based on an ad hoc curve fitting analysis rather than on a rational,  mathematical development based upon the characteristics of the recall process.  The present article has the purpose of presenting a better account (mathematically and otherwise) of continuous recall than  existing models. The article is organized in the following manner.  In Section 2, the experimental data are mathematically analyzed. First we show how any experimental cumulative recall curve  can be described by the three functions of time Tb, TW, and Wc. Next we critically review the history of past experiments,  CLUSTERS IN CONTINUOUS RECALL 141  0  v z a  v  Z o 0  E  y o v 3  We  0  0  0 0  0  10  - F I-i I '  30 40 50 60 70 so  Time ( t ) in Seconds  FIG. l. A typical cumulative recall curve displaying the number of words recalled (N) versus time (t). (Data are from one  subject who recalled examples from the category pets.) On this graph is indicated the words per cluster (W,), time between  clusters (T,), and average time per word within a cluster (T.) for a typical cluster. Note that the total time to recall a  cluster is (Tb) + (W,)(Tw), as illustrated for the sixth cluster.  emphasizing that there have been essentially two fits to the experimental data, an "exponential" curve, and a "hyperbolic"  curve, both depending on two numerical parameters. Finally, we consider the experimental behavior of Tb, TW, and Wc, and  conclude that T,,, and We are essentially constant, while Tb grows with time. However, the experimental evidence is not  sufficiently good to determine Tb's time dependence.  In Section 3 we introduce two possible functional forms for the time between clusters Tb(t), that are consistent with the  present experimental data. We obtain a differential equation for N(t), the cumulative recall function, and show that the  solution of this equation yields the exponential or hyperbolic curve, depending upon which functional form of Tb we choose,  and depending upon the existence of an "accidental" numerical identity relating the constants TW, W, and a constant describing  the growth of Tb. The significance of this result is discussed.  Section 4 presents two new cluster models that are explicitly linked with characteristics of clusters in continuous recall and  that have advantages over existing models in predicting the data. We call these the single urn and double urn models. It is  shown that the single urn model predicts the exponential cumulative recall curve,  O  0  142 HERRMANN AND PEARLE  while the double urn model predicts the hyperbolic cumulative recall curve, provided an "accidental" numerical identity is  satisfied.  Finally, we conclude with a discussion of the psychological implications of this analysis. It will be seen that the approach  presented here is comprehensive and detailed, that it suggests further experimental work, and that it gives increased insight  into the importance of clusters in continuous recall from very long-term memory.  2. ANALYSIS of EXPERIMENTAL DATA  The Exact Relationship between N(t) and Cluster Characteristics  As described above, many investigators have proposed that the process of continuous recall involves recall of clusters and  items within clusters. However, no one has attempted to derive the mathematical function that would precisely express N(t) in  terms of cluster retrieval. In this section, we derive such an exact equation. More precisely, our mathematical expression  will exactly describe the position of the last item in each cluster. These items all lie on the cumulative recall curve, they  may be considered to be markers of cluster positions, and the remaining items within a cluster will never lie far from a  smooth curve drawn between these points. Thus the curve that goes through these points will not differ in any significant way  from any best-fitting cumulative recall curve. We emphasize that, except for the terminal item in a cluster, our equation will  not precisely specify the position of all items on the cumulative recall curve, although their approximate positions can be  estimated fairly well from the positions of the terminal items.  As discussed above, the recall of a cluster can be characterized by three quantities:  Wjn), the number of words in the nth cluster,  TW(n), the average time per word in the nth cluster,  Tb(n), the time between the last word in the n - lth cluster and the first word in the nth cluster (the reason for the prime  will be given presently).  We shall derive exact expressions for the number of words N(n) produced at the end of the nth cluster, and for the time T(n)  at which the end of a cluster occurs. These exact expressions will only depend upon W, TW, and Tb, so it will be clear that we  only need to understand the behavior of these three quantities to understand the data.  Consider a typical graph of the data, the number N of words produced versus time t, illustrated in Fig. 1. As mentioned  earlier, each circled point in the graph indicates the end of a cluster. The coordinates of each circled point are N(n), the  total number of words recalled by the end of the nth cluster, and T(n), the time at which the end word of the nth cluster is  recalled. A smooth curve through these points is the graph that our equation will exactly describe.  On the axes of this graph are indicated N(n), Tb(n), and T(n). We can immediately write down an expression for the number of  words in the nth cluster,  N(n) - N(n - 1) = W jn); n = 1, 2,3.... (2.1)  CLUSTERS IN CONTINUOUS RECALL 143  (note: N(0) - 0). We can also see from the graph that the difference in time between the end of the nth and the end of the n -  Ith clusters is the sum of Tb(n) and the time spent in producing the nth cluster,  T(n) - T(n - 1) = Tb(n) + { Wr  ,(n) - 1 } TW(n); n = 1, 2, 3,... (2.2)  (note: T(0) = 0).  At this point, it is helpful to modify the preceding equation to reflect the fact that Tb(n) is a biased estimator of Tb.  Consider the expression of time spent recalling within a cluster:  time within a cluster - {Wc(n) - I { TW(n). (2.3a)  According to this expression, if a cluster consists of just one point (Wc(n) = 1), there is no time spent within the cluster.  This is a useful expression when analyzing the data, because with just one point, one cannot calculate the average time spent  within a cluster. However, when making models, one may prefer to think of TW(n) as the time spent accessing a word within a  cluster, and think of each word as having an access time, so that a better expression would be  time within a cluster - Wc(n) T,,,(n). (2.3b)  Then even one word clusters would have an access time (but it would be incalculable from the data). With this definition, the  time between clusters would have to be defined as  Tb(n) - theoretical time between clusters - Tb(n) - T,(n) (2.4)  since the time between clusters would be the time between the last word of one cluster and the beginning of the access time of  the first word of the next cluster (which takes place T,, seconds before the first word itself). We may then write Eq. (2.2) as  T(n) - T(n -1) = Tb(n) + Wc(n) TW(n). (2.5)  In order to compare the data with the models, we will prefer to define the time between clusters as Tb(n), and work with Eq.  (2.5), rather than use T'(n) and Eq. (2.2).  We may now demonstrate our main point: the cumulative recall curve can be accounted for by the three characteristics of  clusters. If we sum both sides of Eq. (2.1) and of Eq. (2.2) or (2.5) from n = 1 to n = m we obtain  m (2.6)  N(m) = S~ Wc(n).   n=l   m m (2.7a)  T(m) _ Y- Tb(n) + Y { Wc(n) - 1 } TW(n)   n=1 n=1   m m (2.7b)  = L Tb(n) + Y WJn) TW(n).   144 HERRMANN AND PEARLE  Since N(m) and T(m) are the coordinates of the mth data point delineating the end of a cluster, Eqs. (2.6), (2.7) prove our  contention that each data point can be completely characterized by knowledge of the three quantities Wc(n), TW(n), and Tb(n)  (or Tb(n)).  N(m) and T(m) are parametrized expressions: by eliminating m, one can obtain N(T). With the exception of the beginning of  Section 4, in the remainder of this paper it will be assumed that the dependence of N is upon time.  Established Findings Regarding Continuous Recall: The Function Relating N and t  In their seminal work on continuous recall, Bousfield and Sedgewick (1944) reported that the equation N(t) = C(1 - e-'")  provided a good empirical fit of the plot of cumulative number recalled with time. We shall call this the exponential  equation. C was interpreted as reflecting the recall size of the category and m, the growth parameter of the function. These  investigators did not purport to have a model of continuous recall nor was their use of the exponential form inspired by such  a model. They also identified the phenomena of clustering in their recall data but did not link the phenomena mathematically  to the cumulative recall curve.  Subsequently, several models were developed to account for the data of continuous recall. First, a scanning model was proposed  in which a person is assumed to randomly scan items stored in memory under the appropriate category (Indow & Togano, 1970) and  to recall an item except when it has already been recalled. These assumptions were shown to lead directly to an exponential  function. However, cluster behavior was not included in this model: in fact, formulations of this model explicitly stated that  clusters do not contribute to the recall process (Indow & Togano, 1970; Indow, 1980; Indow & Takada, 1981).  Second, a search set model was proposed that used Bousfield & Sedgewick's (1944) exponential equation and that assumed recall  proceeded by retrieving search sets (clusters) in a category (Shiffrin, 1970). However, the exposition of this model never  explained how cluster characteristics could lead to the exponential equation.  More recently, a third model has been introduced, which like the search-set model assumes that continuous recall is based on  retrieving clusters from categories and items within clusters. It was claimed that this clustering model leads to a different  mathematical account of the continuous recall curve, i.e., the hyperbolic equation N(t) = Cmt/(1 + mt), where C and m have  analogous implications as in the exponential equation (Gruenewald & Lockhead, 1980). However, exposition of this model also  fails to include a mathematical account of how the cluster assumption leads to the hyperbolic equation. Proof that the  hyperbolic equation is superior to the exponential equation was based on the fits of the two equations to continuous recall  data of several subjects and categories. Unfortunately, we argue that the data from this study were not interpreted properly.  Since the problems of interpretation that appeared in this study could easily reoccur in other studies of this kind, we will  make a short digression to discuss these problems.  First, a comparison of the exponential and hyperbolic models is of little value when based simply on curve fitting.  Statistical comparison of mean-square  CLUSTERS IN CONTINUOUS RECALL 145  discrepancies did favor the hyperbolic fits (x = 12.6) over the exponential fits (.k = 14.8), t(24) = 3.02, p > .01, in  Gruenewald and Lockhead's data; however, analysis of this difference shows that it accounts for less than 196 of the variance  (Vaughan & Corballis, 1969) in the mean-square discrepancies. When a model fails in comparison to another by a negligible  amount, it seems obvious that other predictions of the models should be examined before discarding one of the models. This is  not novel advice on our part. More than four decades ago, Gullicksen (1934) chastised investigators of his era for trying to  choose among various equations of the learning curve (exponential, hyperbolic, and others) on the basis of fits alone.  Second, comparison of models requires that not only the fits be compared but also that all parameters generating the fits be  evaluated for plausibility. The Gruenewald & Lockhead (1980) study criticized the exponential equation for occasionally  generating asymptotes that underestimated actual recall. However, for some unknown reason, they did not notice that the  asymptotic values for the hyperbolic equation often overestimated actual recall. For example, asymptotic recall supposedly  reflects the number of words a person knows, or at least can recall for a category. A normative estimate of the number of  animals a person knows is 79 (Joelson & Herrmann, 1978; Murray, 1975). In Gruenewald and Lockhead's study, asymptotic  performance was 120 for the exponential model but 233 for the hyperbolic model. For the category of birds the asymptotes did  not differ markedly but for the category of foods, the hyperbolic asymptote was 70% larger than the exponential asymptote  (which itself appeared to overestimate actual vocabulary size). Thus, if one looks for weaknesses in the parameters of either  equation, they are just as apparent.  It is our conclusion that so far there is not sufficient evidence to support the claim that either the exponential equation or  the hyperbolic equation is superior to the other, and this will be reflected in the remainder of this paper.  Findings About T, W, and Tb  In addition to attempts to fit the cumulative recall function, some research has gone beyond fits and examined more detailed  characteristics of continuous recall. Most recently, the Gruenewald and Lockhead (1980) study showed that Tb increases with  time whereas T,,, and Wc are approximately constant over time. While the increase in Tb over time appears to be well  established (Dean, 1971; Graesser & Mandler, 1978; Herrmann, Note 1), the conclusion that TW and Wc are invariant over time is  a simplification. We have found that TW increases about twofold in the initial 2 min of recall (Herrmann, Note 1); this  increase was not evident in the Gruenewald and Lockhead study apparently because their analysis averaged Tw over 5-min  intervals. Similarly, Wc has been found to initially decrease over time in the initial minutes of recall (Graesser & Mandler,  1978; Herrmann, Note 1). Incidentally, the time between words within a cluster was observed to be constant over serial  positions in a cluster (Gruenewald & Lockhead, 1980; Herrmann, Note 1) but two studies have found the time between words to  increase over recall positions (Graesser & Mandler, 1978; Rubin & Olsen, 1980). It is unclear what procedural differences may  be responsible for these discrepancies.  146 HERRMANN AND PEARLE  In summary, over time Tb increases, T,, and W. initially decrease and quickly asymptote. For a first order mathematical  analysis, it will be sufficiently accurate to assume that TW and W, are constant throughout the recall period.  3. MATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS OF CONTINUOUS RECALL  IN TERMS OF CLUSTER CHARACTERISTICS  Behavior of the Function Tb(t)  While it may be assumed for simplicity that TW and W. are invariant over time, the marked increase in Tb over time raises the  question of what function may describe the time dependence of Tb. Unfortunately, there are at present insufficient  experimental data to settle this question. A plot of Tb versus time is presented in Fig. 5 of Gruenewald and Lockhead (1980).  It is clear from the figure that Tb grows more rapidly than linearly, but it would be premature to identify one particular  curve for the Tb(t) function. Nevertheless, it is useful to suggest two curves that provide a reasonably good fit.'  or  Tb(t)=a#(eVa- 1) (3.1a)  Tb(t) = a(3 G + Z~z ) . (3.1b)  In both equations a is a dimensionless constant of order of magnitude of hundredths and fl is a time constant of the order of  magnitude of tens of minutes. It should be noted that both expressions have the same initial slope a and the same initial  second derivative (a/#) and have the same general property of increasing slope with time.  As will become evident, the two functions (3.1) have been carefully chosen: one gives rise to the exponential cumulative  recall curve, the other to the hyperbolic cumulative recall curve. However, it must not be thought that our method of analysis  is dependent upon the particular choice of these functions. On the contrary, should another functional form for Tb(t) be found  that fits future data better than either of Eqs. (3.1) (although Eqs. (3.1) are both simple and at present quite  satisfactory), such a form can be incorporated in our analysis (see Eq. (3.5) et seq.) resulting in an expression for N(t)  different from exponential or hyperbolic. However, to the extent that the data have indicated that N(t) is exponential or  hyperbolic, this may be regarded as indirect experimental evidence favoring the forms (3.1) for Tb.  'There is some evidence that a small constant should be added to the righthand side of each equation (3.1), i.e., the data  suggest that Tb(0) * 0. This constant is small enough so that it may be neglected to the level of accuracy of our analysis.  Its inclusion would complicate our expression without adding anything essential, so we shall ignore it.  CLUSTERS IN CONTINUOUS RECALL 147  The Number of Constants Characterizing the Cumulative Recall Curve  The constants which characterize any time-evolving process are extremely important. Their sizes indicate the rate and scale of  the process. The number of constants are indicative of the complexity of the process.  Thus it is interesting to note that it appears we have shown that four constants are needed to describe the continuous recall  process: TW, Wc, a, and ,Q. However, as we have already remarked, the cumulative recall curve data have been decently fit' by  either an "exponential" function  N=N,,,,(1 -e") (3.2a)  (Bousfield & Sedgewick, 1944; Indow & Togano, 1970) or a "hyperbolic curve" (Gruenewald & Lockhead, 1980)  __ N.(tl-r) (3.2b) N 1 + (t/r).  These functions clearly depend upon only two parameters, N,,, (the maximum number of items the subject can recall) and r (the  time scale of the complete recollection process). How can we reconcile the four constants required by the cluster theory with  the experimental adequacy of only two constants? We will indicate the answer to this question here, and justify it later.  First, it will be shown that the cumulative recall curve in fact depends upon only three combinations of the four constants,  which may be taken as T", /3, and af/T,,, W, Thus the cumulative recall curve is in actuality a three-parameter curve.  Now in fact, the experimental data will be better fit by the three-parameter curves presented here rather than by the  two-parameter curves (3.2a) or (3.2b). This is nbt surprising as one expects to be better able to fit a curve to data when one  has more parameters to adjust. However, the fact that people believe the two-parameter fits are adequate requires explanation.  If the two-parameter fits to the data were perfect, this could only be explained by the existence of an "accidental" identity  relating the three parameters. That is, two parameters would not only determine the curve, but determine the third parameter  as well, so in effect there would be only two parameters in the theory. For example, it will be shown in the following  subsection that if the expression for Tb(t) is chosen to be (3.1a) (or 3.1b), the cumulative recall curve will be exponential  (or hyperbolic) provided the following accidental identity is satisfied:  a#  We T111 =1or2  (exponential or hyperbolic) (3.3)  z Bousfield and Sedgewick (1944) introduced the fit (3.2a); their parameters C and m (which have been used by other authors)  are related to our parameters by N. = C and r = m`.  480/24/2-4  148 HERRMANN AND PEARLE  (we are hereby introducing a new symbol y to represent the dimensionless ratio appearing in Eq. (3.3), because of the  importance of this ratio to our subsequent developments).  However, the two-parameter fits to the data are not perfect: in fact, as we argued in Section 2, one cannot decide whether the  data are better fit by an exponential curve or by a hyperbolic curve. If one adjusts y as well as T,, and P, one can obtain a  better fit to the data. The explanation for the goodness of the two-parameter fit to the data is that although y may not take  on the precise numerical value specified in Eq. (3.3), it has a limited range of values, probably not differing from unity by  more than a factor of 10.  To summarize, previous research has concentrated on characterizing continuous recall by two parameters. In the remainder of  this section, we shall show that this process is more naturally described by three parameters, and we shall investigate the  meaning of this new parameter y, and its effect upon the cumulative recall curve.  Derivation of Exponential and Hyperbolic Equations in Terms of Cluster Characteristics  Given that previous cluster models never demonstrated a link between the conceptual picture (i.e., free recall proceeds by  retrieving clusters) and the equations that supposedly expressed the conceptual model mathematically (i.e., the exponential  and hyperbolic equations), the question arises as to whether such linkage may be found. In this subsection, we will show that  the answer to this question is yes. In Section 4 we will present search models for the continuous recall process that yield  the exponential and hyperbolic equations. Here our treatment is essentially descriptive: for example, we do not explain here  where the expressions (3.1) for Tb might come from.  We now proceed to obtain a differential equation for the cumulative recall function N. We may do this by changing the exact  discrete expressions (2.1) and (2.5) to approximate continuous expressions. This is justified since the slope of the N versus  t curve is gradual and permits us to approximate differences by differentials:  N(n) - N(n - 1) dN (3.4a)  T(n) - T(n - 1) z dT. (3.4b)  Then using Eqs. (2.1), (2.5), and (3.4a,b) we can write the following differential equation for N:  dN _ W. (3.5) dT W, T,, + Tb  Equation (3.5) is the basic equation which describes how the time dependence of the three quantities, W.  ., TW, and Tb determine N. Indeed, this equation can be integrated to determine N(T).  Now, let W, and TW be constant as was justified in the previous section, and use  CLUSTERS IN CONTINUOUS RECALL 149  (3.1a) or (3.1b) to describe Tb(T). (Here we replace t by T in Eqs. (3.1) so the equation deals with the positions of the end  word in a cluster rather than the positions of all words). As a result, we obtain the differential equation  or  dN 1 1   _ (3.6a)  dT TW 1 + (afl/TW Wc)(eTl   - 1)   dN 1 1   _ (3.6b)  dT TW 1 + (aff/TW W. .)(T/Q + TZ/2fl')   It is clear that these equations, and therefore their solutions, depend upon only the three parameters TW, y, and f3, which  proves the assertion made in the previous subsection. The general solution of these equations is given in Appendix A. Here we  will concentrate on a special case.  Let us suppose that the accidental numerical identity (3.3) holds, then Eqs. (3.6a) and (3.6b) simplify to  dN e-TIA   dT T... ' (3.7a)  dN 1 (3.7b)  _   dT TW(1 + T/#)2   which are readily integrated to give respectively   N(T) = # ( I TI"   - e- }, (3.8a)  W   N(T) (3.8b)  TW 1 + (TIM   We recognize that Eqs. (3.8a) and (3.86) are identical in form to the empirical equations (3.2a) and (3.2b), with the  identification of constants  ,Q= r, Tw = r/Nx,. (3.9)  Thus, we have shown how the empirical expressions (3.2) for the continuous recall curve can be deduced from the three  empirical expressions W. = constant, TW = constant, and Tb given by (3.1a) or (3.1b). In so doing we have introduced a more  detailed mathematics than has hitherto been used in modeling continuous recall but this detail enables us to discuss the  cumulative recall curve with added insight. Consider the interpretations of the three constants, the two time scales TW and  fl, and the dimensionless constant y.  TW, the average time between words in a cluster, may also be regarded as charac-  150  HERRMANN AND PEARLE  terizing the initial behavior of the cumulative recall curve. In fact, 1/T', is the initial slope of this curve, as can be  seen by setting T= 0 in Eqs. (3.6). Thus, if Tb is initially negligibly small, the subject initially immediately accesses a  cluster and thereupon outputs one word every T seconds. This is followed without delay by further clusters, and thus further  words appear at the same rate. This helps to explain the observation that the intial slopes of different cumulative recall  curves vary across subjects (Indow & Togano, 1970) and categories (Herrmann & Murray, 1979) by a relatively small amount  (approximately a factor of 2) while the asymptote varies by a much larger amount (e.g., approximately a factor of 10 or  greater). This restricted range in the initial slope can thus be understood as a consequence of the approximate constancy of  T,w, which implies that, once they have found a cluster, individuals output words at the same constant rate.  /3 is the time that characterizes the nonlinear behavior of the continuous recall curve. When T is in the neighborhood of /i,  the continuous recall curve proceeds to bend over toward its asymptote, as can be seen from Eqs. (3.8). This in turn is caused  by the fact that when T is comparable to #, the curve of Tb versus T ceases to be linear and slopes upward as can be seen from  Eqs. (3.1). As indicated above, not enough data have been published on the Tb(t) function to enable one to estimate /3  accurately, or indeed to determine the correct functional form for Tb(t). # can be estimated indirectly from Eq. (3.9),  because there are a great deal of continuous recall data in the literature (Bousfield & Sedgewick, 1944; Gruenewald &  Lockhead, 1980; Herrmann & Chaffin, 1976; Herrmann & Murray, 1979; Johnson, Johnson & Mark, 1951; and Metlay, Handley, &  Kaplan, 1971). This estimate is crude because Eq. (3.9) depends upon the assumption that the accidental numerical identity  (3.3) holds exactly, whereas it may only hold approximately.  The dimensionless ratio y = afl/T,w W, has the following interpretation. The denominator TW W,: is the amount of time it takes  to output a typical cluster. The numerator a(3 is approximately the value of Tb at time Q (since a is the initial slope  dTb/dT). a# may thus be interpreted as a "typical" time spent between clusters. This is because a characterizes the time scale  of the recall process: for times much less than 9, the cumulative recall curve rises rapidly and Tb is less than a/3, while  for times much greater than fl, the cumulative recall curve approaches its asymptote, and Tb is greater than a#. So y is the  ratio of these two characteristic times.  As mentioned in the previous subsection, the fact that people have been successfully fitting the cumulative recall curve with  the two-parameter exponential or hyperbolic curves (3.2) could be interpreted as meaning that y is of order of magnitude  unity. This suggests that the "typical" time between clusters is of the same order of magnitude as the "typical" time to  output a cluster. This interpretation of y is worded very generally here because our treatment of y in this section is model  independent. In Section 4, where we discuss two search models, the interpretation of the meaning of y will be made more  precise in terms of the model parameters, and we defer further discussion of this point until then.  The solution of Eqs. (3.6a,b) for arbitrary y is given in Appendix A, Eqs. (A.1), (A.2). A graph of Eq. (A.1) (or (A.5)) is  displayed in Fig. 2, for different values of y.  CLUSTERS IN CONTINUOUS RECALL 151  N/Nm  T/ N ~Tw  FIG. 2. A graph of the theoretical expression for the cumulative recall curve displaying the number (N) of words recalled  (divided by the asymptotic number recalled N.) versus the cluster recall time T (in appropriate units of N. T.). Each curve  represents a particular value of y, the parameter characterizing the ratio of time spent within a cluster to time spent  between clusters.  It is clear that as y is increased, the curve rises more gradually to its asymptote. This behavior is to be expected according  to our understanding of the meaning of y, since as y is increased, the time between -clusters increases, slowing down the  recall process.  We shall conclude this section with one further example of the utility of our mathematical analysis. Gruenewald and Lockhead  (1980) have tried to argue that continuous recall data are better fit by the hyperbolic curve (3.2b or 3.8b) than the  exponential curve (3.2a or 3.8a). One of their arguments was that the best fitting exponential curve sometimes slightly  underestimated the actual experimental asymptote. We have noted that the hyperbolic curve sometimes grossly overestimated this  asymptote. The reason for both these results can be understood first by noting that we have chosen our expressions so that the  hyperbolic and exponential curves (3.8a,b) both have the same initial slope T,,' and the same asymptote N,., =/3/TW. However,  the hyperbolic curve rises more slowly than an exponential curve, (j d'N/dT' j at T=O is twice as large for the hyperbolic  curve as it is for the  152 HERRMANN AND PEARLE  exponential curve). If instead we choose our parameters so that the hyperbolic curve and the exponential curve are both made  to fit a cumulative recall curve well initially by making their first and second derivatives at the origin identical (which is  what is effectively done by a least-squares program because there are more initial data points than final data points on a  cumulative recall curve and most experiments terminate before the asymptote is reached), the hyperbolic equation asymptote  will be twice as big as the exponential equation asymptote (in effect, an exponential curve turns over more sharply than a  hyperbolic curve with the same initial slope and rate of change of slope).  4. CLUSTER SEARCH MODELS OF CONTINUOUS RECALL  The Single Urn Cluster Model  Here we propose two models of continuous recall. They are more precise than the previous models that have been given, because  not only do we specify a search scheme, but, in addition, we associate a time scale with each aspect of the search scheme.  These models will be shown to predict that the exponential and hyperbolic functions represent the cumulative recall curve when  an appropriate "accidental" identity is satisfied. It will be seen that these models represent alternative schemes that might  be used in searching semantic memory.  The first model we will call the Single Urn Cluster Model. Imagine an urn filled with N,,,/Wc "balls": each ball represents a  cluster filled with W, words. The searcher is supposed to reach into the urn and pull out a cluster (ball) at random. If he  finds a cluster that has not previously been found, he reads the words in the cluster: each word is preceded by a "search"  pause of TW seconds, so an unread cluster takes TW W, seconds to read off. The ball is then marked and returned to the urn. On  the other hand, if the selected cluster is one that has been previously selected (marked), it takes a certain time to  ascertain this fact. We will denote this (constant) interval by the symbol d (cf. Indow & Togano, 1970). After this time  interval, this bill too is returned to the urn. All other intervals (such as the time it takes to pick up or return a ball, or  to mark a ball once it has been read) are assumed to be negligibly small.  We can now proceed to construct an expression for dN/dT, where N is the number of words read at the end of each cluster, which  occurs at time T. If n - 1 clusters have been found at time T(n - 1), then when the nth cluster is found, we can write  N(n) - N(n - 1) = W, (4.1)  as in Eq. (2.1). We now wish to write an expression for the mean time interval it takes before the nth cluster is found,  analogous to Eq. (2.2) or (2.5).  CLUSTERS IN CONTINUOUS RECALL 153 The probability that the next cluster picked will not have been previously selected  P(n) =_ 1 - N(N 1) . (4.2)  For example, the first selection will surely be an unread cluster so P(1) = 1 (N(0) - d), but if half the clusters have been  read N(n - 1) = N.J2, then P = 1/2. It is not hard to showthat the mean number of previously read clusters one picks up  before one finds an unread cluster is  1 _ N(n - 1)/N.  P(n) - 1 I - (N(n - I)/N.)  (4-3)  For example, if half the clusters have been read, on the average one picks up one read cluster followed by one unread cluster  in the next sequence of draws from the urn. Since it takes d seconds to dispose of a previously read cluster, and W,TW seconds  to dispose of an unread cluster, the mean time between the n - Ith and nth clusters is  T(n) - T(n - 1) = W,: TW + AN(n - I)/N~ (4.4) 1 - (N(n - 1)/N. )  We now equate the ratios of the left hand and right hand sides of Eqs. (4.1) and (4.4), approximate the differences by  differentials according to Eqs. (3.4), and thereby obtain the fundamental differential equation that governs this model:  dN WI: (4.5a)  _   dT W, TW + (AN/N.)/(1 - N/N.)   (N/N~) (4.5b)  TW I -(N/N.){I -(AlWc TW)}   (We have replaced N(n - 1) on the right hand side of Eq. (4.4) by N(n) instead of by N(n) - W, in taking the limit: in so  doing we are neglecting W,/N. compared to I, which is a quite valid approximation consistent with the approximation of  replacing differences by differentials.)  Equation (4.5) is, like Eq. (3.5) or (3.6), a differential equation which may be solved to yield a predicted expression for  the cumulative recall curve. However, it is  ' N.1 W, is the total number of balls in the urn, and N(n)/Wc = n is the number of clusters found up to time T(n). We prefer  to write all expressions in Section 4 in terms of the dimensionless ratio N/N.. Although, strictly speaking, this is the ratio  of the number of words found to the number of words that can be found, it is also the ratio of the number of clusters (balls)  found to the total number of clusters (balls) in the urn, since W, is a constant.  The proof is as follows. If p is the probability of picking an unselected cluster, then (1 -p)mp is the probability that there  will be m unsuccessful picks followed by a successful pick (gym-a(1 -p)'"p = 1). Therefore, the mean number of unsuccessful  picks is given by ~m-o m(1 - p)'"p = p-' - l.  154 HERRMANN AND PEARLE  unlike these equations, in that the right hand side of Eq. (4.5) is not a function of time; it is a function of N. Therefore,  once we solve this equation, we will obtain not only a prediction of the cumulative recall curve, but also a prediction of the  time behavior of Tb, which is given, by comparing Eqs. (3.5) and (4.5a), as  _ AN/N. T b 1 - (N/N. )  (4.6)  Integration of Eq. (4.5) is straightforward: the general result is given in Appendix B. Here we will only consider the special  case that the "accidental" identity  d W, TW  = 1 (4.7)  is satisfied. The denominator of Eq. (4.5b) simplifies, and the integral of the resulting equation  dT T {I -NIN.} (4.8)  W   is   N(T) = N. J I - e-TIN_Tw} (4.9)  and the expression for Tb according to Eqs. (4.6) and (4.9) is   Tb = d (eTIN_T- _ 1). (4.10)  Thus, we have shown, first, how the Single Urn Cluster Model predicts that the exponential function (4.9) fits the continuous  recall curve. Second, the predicted behavior for Tb given in Eq. (4.10) is demonstrated to be identical to the plausible  experimental fit (3.1a), and third, the model's "accidental" identity (4.7) is the same as the previously discussed  "accidental" identity (3.3), provided the constants that appear in the model and the experimental constants are related by the  equation N. T,, = fl (encountered earlier in Eq. (3.9)) and by the equation  d = a#. (4.11)  According to this model, the increase with time of Tb arises because in the beginning of the search process almost every  cluster that is found is an unread cluster, while near the end of the search process almost every cluster found is a  previously read cluster. This model offers a new insight into the meaning of y and of the "accidental" identity. The quantity  d has a precise conceptual meaning: it is the time to process a previously read cluster. Therefore y is the ratio of this time  to the time required to process an unread cluster.  If the "accidental" identity (4.7) holds, then the time to process a previously read cluster is equal to the time it takes to  read a new cluster, i.e., the degree of prior  CLUSTERS IN CONTINUOUS RECALL 155  processing has no effect on the time of new processing. Prior processing affects ongoing retrieval only to the extent that  prior processing requires added search. This implication must be regarded with some caution. As we have noted earlier, the  experimental data are probably better fit with any one of the three-parameter curves given in Appendices A and B than with the  exponential (or hyperbolic) twoparameter curve, so the accidental identity is probably only approximately satisfied, i.e., d  and W~ TW are probably not exactly equal. Also there is ample evidence that certain kinds of prior processing of words will  facilitate subsequent processing (Morton, 1970). Nevertheless, the processing of words in continuous recall may be so shallow  as not to substantially affect subsequent processing.  The Single Urn Cluster Model does have its limitations. The model deals with what might be called the "first order effects" of  the continuous recall process. It surely could be modified to take into account subtler features such as a statistical or time  variation of W,, or TW, or a non-zero value of Tb at the time t = 0. But the most important question is whether other models  with quite different or important additional conceptual structures could be introduced which could also give the same  mathematical agreement with data. This is possible: consider, for example, the Double Urn Model.  The Double Urn Cluster Model  The Double Urn Cluster Model rests on the assumption that a category in memory may be represented by two urns each filled with  N,,,,/Wc "balls." The balls in the first urn do not contain words, but the balls in the second urn each contain W, words.  Retrieval begins by pulling a ball out of the first urn. If it had been previously marked it is returned, but this takes d  seconds. If it is unmarked, retrieval proceeds to the second urn and pulls out a ball. If this ball has been marked, both  balls are immediately returned to their respective urns, and this whole process also takes d seconds. However, if it is  unmarked, this ball is opened, the W, words it contains are read, and both balls are then marked, the ball from the first urn  being labelled to reflect the contents of the ball from the second urn. Then both balls are returned to their respective urns,  and this whole process occupies W~ TW seconds. All intervals other than those stated are assumed to be negligibly small and  both urns are initially filled with unmarked balls.  Given these assumptions, the probability that an unmarked ball will be found in the second urn is  P(n) N(n - 1) Z  (4.12)  (compare Eq. (4.2)). The mean number of choices until an unmarked ball is selected from both urns is P-' and so the mean  number of unsuccessful attempts before a successful attempt (i.e., an unread cluster is found) is P-' - 1, as before.Thus  the mean time between the n - lth and nth cluster is  156 HERRMANN AND PEARLE  T(n) -T(n- 1) = Wc T.+d {1{1 (1(NN(n 1)/N)}) } (4.13)  (compare Eq. (4.4)). As before, we utilize Eqs. (4.1) and (4.13), replace differences by differentials, and proceed to the  limit to obtain the differential equation that governs this model.  dT W,: T.+d({1 -(1 -N/NJ}/{1 -N/N.}2)  1 (1 -N/NJ  1 - {1 -(N/NJ) {1 -(AlW,T.)I  (4.14a)  (4.14b)  (compare Eq. (4.5)). Also as before we can abstract an expression for Tb from Eq. (3.5) and Eq. (4.14a):  _ { 1 - (1 -N/NJ Tb d (1 -N/NJ  (4.15)  The general integral of Eq. (4.14) is given in Appendix B. Once more we shall only consider here the special case that the  "accidental" identity (4.7) is satisfied, in which case the differential equation becomes  d-=T (1-N/NJ (4.16)  W   whose integral is   T   N 1 (4.17)  _   TW 1 + (TIN. TW)   and the expression for Tb according to Eq. (4.15) and (4.17) is   T 1 T (4.18)  Tb _ 2d ~W~-T,, + ( )   2 N T   Thus, the Double Urn Cluster Model predicts that the hyperbolic function (4.17) fits the continuous recall curve. As before,  the expressions for Tb given by Eqs. (4.18) and (3.1b) and the "accidental" identities (4.7) and (3.3) are identical provided  N.,, T,, = a as in Eq. (3.9), and  2d = af.  (4.19)  Since nothing similar to the Double Urn Cluster Model has been proposed before, it is necessary to justify such a model on  psychological grounds. One such justification will be offered here. This justification is based on the notion that memory  CLUSTERS IN CONTINUOUS RECALL 157  retrieval involves performing a series of information processing stages (Lachman, Lachman, and Butterfield, 1979). For  example, the single urn model may be regarded as two stages consisting of a review of clusters until an unretrieved cluster is  found (selection of already marked balls from the urn until an unmarked ball is found) followed by recalling the contents of  the new cluster (emptying the contents of the unmarked ball). In the case of the double urn model, three stages can be  interpreted as consistent with the construct of the model. The first stage consists of a review of cluster labels until  evidence is found that it is possible to find an unretrieved cluster (selection of already marked balls from the first urn  until an unmarked ball is found). In the second stage, a cluster is retrieved, which may or may not have been recalled  previously (selection of a ball from the second urn). If this cluster had been recalled previously, the person returns to the  first stage for new evidence. However, if this is a new cluster, the person proceeds to the third stage in which the contents  of the new cluster are recalled (emptying the unmarked ball). This justification would appear to be as reasonable as that of  other cluster recall models (Dean, 1971; Graesser & Mandler, 1978; Gruenewald & Lockhead, 1980; Shiffrin, 1970), including the  single urn model discussed here. Therefore, both models are equally sound on psychological grounds.  The urn models, like their predecessors, have their limitations. The urn models address the retrieval of clusters without  regard for the nature of clusters and items retrieved. It has been well established that subjects are more likely to recall  certain words early and others late in the recall sequence (Bousfield & Barclay, 1950; Kaplan & Carvellas, 1969) and that  subjects tend to recall items within a cluster also in a reliable order unique to the subject (Buschke, 1977; Friendly, 1977).  Also as mentioned earlier, there is some evidence suggesting that the spacing of words within a cluster increases as retrieval  proceeds from the beginning to the end of the cluster (Graesser & Mandler, 1978; Rubin & Olson, 1980). At present, we perceive  no way to readily incorporate aspects of the order of recall into the urn models, or for that matter in the previous cluster  models. Nevertheless, accounting for order of recall would appear to be a high-priority objective for future modeling of  continuous recall.  5. DISCUSSION  The models discussed here, past and present, all assume essentially the same conceptual basis, i.e., the notion that  continuous recall proceeds by retrieving clusters and emptying them. Despite this common conceptual heritage, the construct of  clustering was never explicitly represented mathematically previously. Moreover, the mathematical forms that were used to  represent different variants of cluster models were selected only to account for the cumulative recall curve and not to  simultaneously deal with characteristics of the models' central construct: clusters. The present article has shown that  explicit consideration of this construct and its empirical manifestations not known previously, offers insights into the  success of past models, enables development of more complete cluster models, and enhances  158 HERRMANN AND PEARLS  theoretical understanding of the possible ways that semantic memory is searched for categories and their exemplars.  Previous modeling of the cumulative recall curve employed two parameters that served to anchor the ends of the curve. The  equations (exponential or hyperbolic) of these models predict asymptote performance and initial rate of recall. In anchoring  the ends of. the curve, the equations are able to do a reasonably good job in accounting for the entire curve. Nevertheless,  it is clear that anchoring the ends of the curve does not preclude variation in the shape of the curve between the ends. The  analysis presented here focuses upon the information that may be gained by careful attention to the shape of the curve, and  suggests the following direction for future research.  It is first necessary to determine the correct shape of Tb(t): does it rise exponentially as in Eq. (3.1a), or does it rise  parabolically as in Eq. (3.1b), or is its behavior something different? Once this behavior is determined, the functional form  of N(t) can be found as shown in Section 3 and Appendix A. In particular, N will depend upon three parameters, say, the  initial slope TV, the final asymptote N,,,, and the parameter y.  Then, experimental cumulative recall curves should be fit with this three-parameter function. Not only will the two constants  N,. and T,, about which much is known be better determined (in particular, we would hope that the undershooting or  overshooting of the asymptote by the two-parameter exponential or hyperbolic curves would disappear), but something would be  learned about the parameter y of which very little is known, not even its range. y, which might be called the "seek to speak  ratio," has been interpreted here as reflecting the relationship between the amount of time a person spends reviewing the  contents of a cluster that had previously been retrieved and that of reviewing the contents of a cluster that has not yet been  encountered. As such, y can be used as an indicator of retrieval processes in a particular task. If y is less than 1, it would  be interpreted as quick recognition and rejection of previously retrieved clusters by the subject. If y is greater than 1, the  subject may be presumed to have difficulty in recognizing a cluster as old. A y of 1 would show that consideration of old and  new clusters is equally time consuming. With this interpretation of y, the bases of cluster retrieval may be investigated by  examining the value of y under different circumstances, for example, by determining what task conditions influence y.  Although our analyses have dealt with many features of continuous recall, there are subtler aspects of this phenomenon that  require further examination. For example, the present models rest on the assumption that Tb varies over time but that T" and  W, do not. Since there is evidence in some studies (Mandler & Graesser, 1978; Herrmann, Note I) that TW and W, decrease over  the very early period of recall, the present models are not applicable to continuous recall in which deviations from  invariance in TW and W,, are marked. Future research might be spent on (1) determining what psycholinguistic variables lead TW  and W,, to decrease over time and (2) modifying the present models to deal with situations in which TW and W, are not  invariant.  CLUSTERS IN CONTINUOUS RECALL 159  Although this article has focused on cluster models of continuous recall, it is possible that the process for retrieving and  emptying clusters may be interpreted differently. The recall process as depicted here is automatic; subjects search memory in  a systematic fashion and generate, accept or discard clusters almost by reflex. But it has also been known that, when memory  fails, subjects treat recall as a problem solving task, i.e., they often invoke a lengthy process of reasoning in order to  find items that have yet to be considered. Thus, instead of a single recall process, continuous recall may involve two  processes, which we may call reflex recall and reasoned recall. Reflex recall is what we have modeled as cluster retrieval.  Reasoned recall is a new process that cluster models, including our own, do not take into account. However, these models can  be modified so as to be consistent with such an assumption. For example, in the case of our models, the growth in Tb is  totally due to the increasing amount of time spent in selecting clusters already encountered. This behavior is responsible for  the asymptotic behavior of the cumulative recall curve. However, it is possible to consider the continuous recall process as  consisting initially of just reflex recall and gradually being increasingly composed of reasoned recall. We could add such an  effect to our model, so that the asymptotic behavior of Tb and the cumulative recall curve would be modified. Future research  on continuous recall might also be profitably directed at determining whether continuous recall does in fact represent two  processes. Regardless of whether the recall process is assumed to be unitary or dual in nature, the success of the present  modeling indicates that clusters will remain central to theorizing about that process.  APPENDIX A  In this appendix we give the solutions to Eqs. (3.6a) and (3.6b) for the cumulative recall function N(T). The solution to Eq.  (3.6a) is (defining y - a#/T,,, W,)  N(T) =TW'(1 -y)-'{T-#1n(1 +y(eT"- 1))}. (A.1) (A.2a)  The solution to Eq. (3.6b) is    N(T)= # {y(2 - y)}-`~Z jtan-'(2y-' - 1)-'iz T + 1  l    -' uz    - tan -'(2y - 1)-    if y < 2, and    -    N(T) Tl/3 + 1 2y 1 + 1 - 2y  = T { y(y -12  1 ~  - 2)) In ~ VV/'11--- 1    W T/J3+1+ 1-2y- 1- 1-2y     (A.2b)  if y>2.  160 HERRMANN AND PEARLE  Both solutions go as TIT,, for small T (as is obvious from Eqs. (3.6), since dN/dT= TW' for T=0). Both solutions approach  constant values at T-+ oo (as is obvious from Eqs. (3.6), since dN/dT-+0 for T--+ oo). Indeed, the asymptotic value of Eq.  (A.1) is  N(T) roo' Tw( #- Y) In y-' (A.3 )  while the asymptotic values of Eqs. (A.2a) and (A.2b) are respectively  N(7) roo' T {Y(2 - Y) } - uz 2 -tan-' (2y-' - 1)uz (A.4a) w  1  N(T) roo' T {Y(Y -- 2) } -1fz In ~.1 + i - 2Y-1 ~ , (A.4b)  Each of these solutions depends upon three constants. Instead of thinking of these three constants as Tw, Q, and y, one can  think of them as the initial slope TV, the final asymptote N. ((A.3), (A.4)), and a third constant-)x-which characterizes the  transition between the initial and final behavior of the curve. When y is set equal to 1 (in (A.1), (A.3), and (A.5)) or equal  to 2 (in (A.2) and (A.4)) the transition behavior is fixed and we obtain as the limit of these equations the exponential and  hyperbolic functions described in Section 3. As y is decreased a graph of N versus T rises to its asymptote more rapidly,  while if y is increased, the asymptote is reached more slowly.  For example, we can write Eq. (A.1) in terms of these three constants as  N(T)=N. ('-Y)-' N T -ln y-] ln(l +y(e(T1NWTW)on7-a(1-v))- l)) . ((( . w  (A.5)  Figure 2 contains a graph of NIN. versus TIN. Tw, as given by Eq. (A.5), for various values of y. Provided Tb truly has the  exponential form displayed in Eq. (3.1a), fits of (A.5) to experimental data will determine y.  APPENDIX B  In this appendix we give the solutions to Eqs. (4.5) and (4.14), which describe the single urn and double urn models. The  solution to Eq. (4.5) is (defining y=AlW': T.):  N= N. { 1 -e- (Y-1T/N_TW)-(N/N~)(1 -Y-') } (B.1)  CLUSTERS IN CONTINUOUS RECALL 161 The solution to Eq. (4.14) is  N={N./2(1-y)}{((y-T/N,,,TW)2+4T/N.TW)UZ-(y+T/N.TW)}. (B.2)  REFERENCES  BOUSFIELD, W. A., & BARCLAY, W. D. The relationship between order and frequency of occurrence of restricted associative  responses. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1950, 40, 643-647. BOUSFIELD, W. A., & SEDGEWICK, H. W. An analysis of  sequences of restricted associative responses. Journal of General Psychology, 1944, 30, 149-165.  BuSCHKE, H. Two-dimensional recall: Immediate identification of clusters in episodic and semantic memory. Journal of Verbal  Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1977, 16, 201-215.  DEAN, J. D. Organizational structure and retrieval processes in long-term memory. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University of  California, San Diego, 1971.  FRIENDLY, M. L. In search of the M-gram: The structure of organization in free recall. Cognitive Psychology, 1977, 9, 188-249.  GRAESSER, A., II, & MANDLER, G. Limited processing capacity constrains the storage of unrelated sets of words and retrieval  from natural categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning & Memory, 1978, 4, 86-100.  GRUENEWALD, P. J., & LOCKHEAD, G. R. The free recall of category examples. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning  and Memory, 1980, 6, 225-240.  GULLIKSEN, H. A rational equation of the learning curve based on Thorndike's Law of Effect. Journal of General Psychology,  1934, 11, 395-434.  HERRMANN, D. J., & CHAFFIN, R. J. S. Number of available associations and rate of association for categories in semantic  memory. Journal of General Psychology, 1976, 95, 227-231.  HERRMANN, D. J., & MURRAY, D. J. The role of category size in continuous recall from semantic memory. Journal of General  Psychology, 1979, 101, 205-218.  INDOW, T. Some characteristics of word sequences retrieval from a given category. In R. S. Nickerson (Ed.), Attention and  performance VIII. Erlbaum, 1980. Chap. 31, pp. 621-636.  INDow, T., & TAKADA, H. Recognition of retrieved sequence of words. Acta Psychologica, 1981, 47, 207-228.  INDOW, T., & TOGANo, K. On retrieving sequence from long-term memory. Psychological Review, 1970, 77, 317-331.  JOELSON, J. M., & HERRMANN, D. J. Properties of categories in semantic memory. American Journal of Psychology, 1978, 91,  101-114.  JOHNSON, D. M., JOHNSON, R. C., & MARK, A. L. A mathematical analysis of verbal fluency. Journal of General Psychology, 1951,  44, 121-128.  KAPLAN, I. T., & CARVELLAs, T. Response probabilities in verbal recall. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1969,  8, 344-349.  LACHMAN, R., LACHMAN, J. L., & BUTTERFIELD, E. C. Cognitive psychology and information processing: An introduction. Hillsdale,  NJ.: Erlbaum, 1979.  METLAY, W., HANDLEY, A., & KAPLAN, 1. T. Memory search through categories of varying size. Journal of Experimental Psychology,  1971, 91, 215-219.  MORTON, J. A functional model for memory. In D. A. Norman (Ed.), Models of human memory, New York: Academic Press, 1970.  MURRAY, D. J. Semantically cued retrieval of words from long-term memory. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 1975, 5,  134-136.  POLLIo, H. R. Composition of associative clusters. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1964, 67. 199-208.  RUBIN, D. C., & OLSON, M. J. Recall of semantic domains. Memory and Cognition, 1980, 8, 354-366.  162 HERRMANN AND PEARLE  SHIFFRIN, R. M. Memory search. In D. A. Norman (Ed.). Models of human memory, New York: Academic Press, 1970.  VAUGHAN, G. M., & CORBALLIS, M. C. Beyond tests of significance: Estimating strength of effects in selected ANOVA designs.  Psychological Bulletin, 1969, 72, 204-213.  REFERENCE NOTE  1. HERRMANN, D. J. Category size, intra-category organization, and the rate of continuous recall from semantic memory. Paper  presented at the Psychonomic Society, Phoenix, November, 1979.  RECEIVED: February 9, 1981