10.1016/0022-2496(81)90054-7
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 23, 134-152 (1981)  Sequential Item Selection: Optimal and Heuristic Policies  S. P. MARSHALL  University of California, Santa Barbara  This paper considers testing in which the goal is to minimize the number of test items required to establish a learner's state  of ability. Focus is on optimal or near optimal selection over a well-defined universe of items or stimuli. Selection policies  are determined for the case in which the items have hierarchical or partial hierarchical relationships. Derivation of an  optimal policy rests upon techniques from dynamic programming. For situations in which an optimal policy may be too costly to  compute, two heuristic approximations are offered. One heuristic counts the hypothetical estimates of ability that remain  tenable following a response to each item and chooses the item that minimizes the expectation of that number. The other  selects the item that maximizes the statistic of information.  How does one evaluate individual performance on a learning task? One can present items representing all aspects of the task,  one can present a random selection of such items, or one can seek an optimal or near optimal sequence of items. Item selection  is, of course, more general than the context of learning tasks and has applications in any study of individual performance.  This paper is concerned with optimal and near optimal item selection.  Previous studies of optimal item or stimulus selection generally were concerned with optimal repetition of some or all of the  items for the purpose of allowing the subject to learn the skills involved (Chant & Atkinson, 1973; Atkinson, 1972; Atkinson &  Paulson, 1972; Groen & Atkinson, 1966; Karush & Dear, 1966). For example, the Karush and Dear model selects as the current  test item that item with the least probability of having been learned by the individual. The model presupposes that items have  already been presented once in random order, producing estimates of which items are unlearned. Similarly, Atkinson and Paulson  compare three strategies of item presentation using three distinct models of learning. In all of these studies, the emphasis  is on which of the already presented items to repeat. Initial selection of items is random.  Consider an alternative situation in which the objective is optimal selection of items that will be presented only once.  Restriction to this case may be motivated by considerations of experimental design or by cost of testing. Items may be  difficult or costly to administer more than a single time (e.g., oral examinations or laboratory  Address reprint requests to Dr. S. P. Marshall at: Department of Psychology, University of California, Santa Barbara, Calif.  93106.  0022-2496/81/020134-19$02.00/0  Copyright 1981 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  134  SEQUENTIAL ITEM SELECTION 135  procedures), the individual to be evaluated may be available for only a limited amount of time, or the evaluator's time may be  constrained.  The situation of interest here is that in which at least some of the items to be tested have common components and in which  there is at least a partial hierarchical ordering of the items. One model for optimal item selection in this case is a Markov  decision process that depends upon the current estimate of an individual's ability as well as the internal structure of the  items themselves. The latter refers to distinguishable components of each item in addition to the item's relationship to other  items in the universe. It is typically not necessary to test every possible item. Some items will be dependent upon others,  and lack of ability on one item implies a similar lack on others.  This paper has four sections. The first consists of the specification of item types, the characterization of any individual's  ability on the items, and the probability distributions over the possible ability characterizations. The second section  defines the model as a Markov decision process, and an optimal policy for item selection is derived. In the third section, two  heuristics approximating the optimal policy are presented. One heuristic selects the item that minimizes the number of  remaining tenable ability states, and the second selects the item that maximizes the statistic of information. The final  section contains comparisons of the optimal policy and the two heuristics.  ITEM TYPES AND PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTIONS  Suppose there is a set of components or skills to be tested. It is possible and even desirable to test these components  individually and also in logical combinations. A hierarchical relationship exists between a combination and its component  parts, and under the usual restriction of hierarchical structures, success on any combination requires success on all  individual components of that combination. Thus, it will be advantageous to avoid testing any combinations containing  components known to be unmastered by the individual being tested. Similarly, if the individual has demonstrated mastery on a  combination item, it will be unnecessary to test singly the individual components of the combination. These components must be  mastered since the individual has demonstrated the ability to use them in conjunction with other components.  Many items are typically available for each skill or combination of skills. The class of items for a specific skill or  specific combination is called an item type. For example, assume there are three basic components to be tested: c, , c2, and  c, . The logical combinations of these are c, + c2, c, + cc2 + c,, and c, + c2 + c,. The number of possible item types is  seven, three individual components and four combinations. At the most, seven items could be presented by giving each type  once, and at the least, one item could be presented. In the latter case, a correct response to the combination of c, + c2 + c,  would indicate mastery of all components and combinations. If the individual were given the combination c, + c2 as the first  item  136 S. P. MARSHALL  and responded correctly, certain information is obtained from the structure of the item and the response. It is now known that  the individual has mastered not only C1 + CZ but c, and CZ by themselves as well. Consequently, the number of possible items  that remain to be tested is four rather than six.  Although the assumption is made that a correct response on a combination implies mastery of the components of the combination,  it is not assumed that mastery of the individual components implies similar mastery of the combination of those components.  Thus, in the above example, suppose the individual had been presented c, and Cz as the first two items and had responded  correctly. It would still be necessary to test C1 + CZ because of a possible synergistic relationship between the combination  and its components. That is, the whole may be greater than the sum of its parts. Some added complexity is present in the  combination of the components. This complexity has been previously defined as the procedural component (Cotton, Gallagher, &  Marshall, 1977). The procedural component may be the result of needing to perform the component skills in a certain order or  may be simply a confusion factor occurring when several components are present in the same item. In any case, mastery of  individual components does not imply mastery of combination items.  It is convenient to have a summary of an individual's achievement on the possible  TABLE 1  Possible Ability Estimates for Seven Item Types  Ability estimates c, c2 c3 Item types + c3 c2 + c3 c, + c2 + C3     c, + C2 c,     1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1  2 1 1 1 1 1 1 0  3 1 1 1 1 1 0 0  4 1 1 1 1 0 1 0  5 1 1 1 0 1 1 0  6 1 1 1 0 0 I 0  7 1 1 1 1 0 0 0  8 1 1 1 0 1 0 0  9 1 1 1 0 0 0 0  10 1 1 0 1 0 0 0  11 1 0 1 0 1 0 0  12 0 1 1 0 0 1 0  13 1 1 0 0 0 0 0  14 1 0 1 0 0 0 0  15 0 1 1 0 0 0 0  16 1 0 0 0 0 0 0  17 0 1 0 0 0 0 0  18 0 0 1 0 0 0 0  19 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  SEQUENTIAL ITEM SELECTION 137  item types. A vector of 0's (nonmastery) and 1's (mastery) provides this information. The number of elements in the vector is  determined by the number of possible item types. A matrix can be developed, with each row being a possible ability  characterization of the individual. For p item types, there are 2p vectors. This is an upper bound, and it is of interest  because it applies generally. Formulas for the actual number of vectors would necessarily vary with the hierarchical structure  of the model. For instance, in the simple example of 3 individual components given above, there are 7 item types and 19  possible vectors, rather than 2' or 128. For a simpler example, with only two components, there are 3 item types and only 5  vectors rather than 8.  The vectors for the three-component example above are shown in Table 1. The vector containing all 1's indicates the  individual's mastery of all item types. The vector containing all 0's indicates ignorance of all item types. The ability  vector (1 1 1 0 1 10) means that the individual could successfully respond to item types of CC2, C3, CI + C3, and C2 + C3.  The individual has not shown mastery on c, + C2 or C, + c2 + C3.  The set of vectors in Table 1 represents all possible characterizations of an individual being tested in the three-component,  seven-item example. At each stage of the testing process, there is some probability that the individual is characterized by  each of these vectors. Testing is complete when all but one of the characterizations have probability zero.  It is convenient to introduce the following notation in order to specify probabilities for the general case of p item types  and n ability vectors:  a = 1,..., p item types  R(a) = 1 if correct response to a = 0 if incorrect  0 = 1, ... , n ability types  D = [do.] matrix relating ability types to item types (n X p)  de~ = 0 if ability 0 cannot answer a  = 1 if ability 0 can answer a  de = (de, de2 "' dep) ability vectors  S = (s(1) s(2) ... s(n)) probability distribution over ability types  s(0) > 0 probability that 0 is true ability where Y_e s(B) = 1; s(9) may also be denoted se.  When an individual responds to a specific question a, the response is recorded as correct or incorrect (1 or 0). The current  information now consists of the vector S of prior probabilities plus the new information contained in the individual's  response R(a). The probabilities can be adjusted in light of the new information. This is a natural situation in which to  apply Bayes' theorem. The objective is to calculate the  138 S. P. MARSHALL  conditional probability that the individual' has the true ability summarized in a particular vector given the individual's  response to an item. Suppose there is an initial probability vector S as defined above. An item of type a is presented, and  the response observed. The probability of ability 0, given this response, is  s* (0) = prob(OIR(a)) -_ prob(R(a)10) s(0) (prob(R (a) 10') s(0' ))  For some abilities 0, prob(R (a) 10) = 0; consequently, s* (0) = 0 for such vectors. A new vector,  S* = (s*(1) s*(2) ... s*(n)),  may be formed from the repeated application of (1) over all 0. This is the posterior distribution, and it can be used as a  prior distribution for the next item presentation.  OPTIMAL ITEM SELECTION  The Markov Decision Process  The set of ability vectors, an initial probability distribution across the set, and a rule for updating the probability  distribution are used in the model of optimal item selection. The logic connecting these features is that of a Markov decision  process. A state of the model is a probability distribution across the possible ability vectors. Under this definition, the  prior S described above is a state of the system. The states are denoted S;.  Although the system in theory contains an infinite number of states, in fact there is a finite set of possible successor  states given any particular prior. Given a prior, the number of possible states of the system is 3 The number 3 indicates  the outcomes for any possible item type: answered correctly, answered incorrectly, or not yet presented.  Under hierarchical restrictions on the item types as described above, the number of possible states is further reduced. For  example, with two components, there are three item types p: the two components and their combination. The number of distinct  states is 3' = 27. Under hierarchical restrictions, the number of distinct states is 3 3 - A, where .1 represents the number  of restricted states. For this example, A = 3 (the states are eliminated for which mastery of the combination occurs jointly  with the nonmastery of either or both components). For other cases, calculation of A is a complex combinatorial problem and is  not considered here. The important point for the current model is the determination of 3as the upper bound for the number of  distinct states.  The system described here is a Markov process. The probabilities for moving from one state to another can be given in a matrix  of transition probabilities. The  SEQUENTIAL ITEM SELECTION 139  probability of being in any state on trial t + 1 depends only upon the state of the system in trial t. One typical row of such  a matrix is given below by S;  Trial t + 1  S, SZ ... Si-1 S; S;+1 ... Sk-I Sk Sk+1  Trial t  S, Sz  S;  0 0 ... 0 Q 0 ... 0 (1-Q) 0  For S, (the prior distribution), S; and Sk are the posterior distributions derived from the individual's response (correct or  incorrect) and the distribution of S,. For any row, only two entries will be nonzero, because only two transitions are  possible as a function of the two categories of response. Given a particular prior, there are only two posterior distributions  that can be calculated.  The individual's response depends upon the particular item a presented. Details of the selection process are discussed in the  next section of this paper. For the moment, assume that a selection process exists and that it is a function of the current  state of the system. Define this function as a(Si) with S; being the current state. In State S;, a(Si) generates an item and  the individual responds. Let Q be the probability of a correct response. Then Q is also the probability of the transition from  S; to S;  Q = prob(R(a(S;)) = 1 I S;).  In general, the transition probabilities will be designated qu, the probability of moving from S, to S;.  The process is observed at time points t = 1, 2,... to be in one of a certain number of possible states. For any observed S;,  an action must be taken. An action may be either the presentation of an item or the termination of testing. If the process is  in S; at time t and action a is chosen, the next state is identified by the transition probability qu(a), the conditional  probability that the system moves to S; at time t + 1 given S; and a.  There will be costs associated with giving the test. Costs are naturally denominated subject hours, experimenter hours,  dollars, or other units. In general, the cost is dependent upon the number of items. For simplicity, assume a constant  incremental cost per item and, without further loss of generality, take the incremental cost to be unity.  The incremental cost of stopping the test is zero. However, the process should only stop in "terminal" states, where a  terminal state is one with certainty of identification, i.e., one in which S; has a single unitary element and zeros  elsewhere. The technical means of assuring termination only in "terminal" states is to define m, the cost of terminating in a  nonterminal state, to be sufficiently large. Loosely, one takes m to be  140 S. P. MARSHALL  infinity. The cost assumptions surrounding the decision to offer another item or to stop testing are summarized by  QS,,, at) = 0 if action is termination and Si is terminal  = m if action is termination and S; is not terminal = 1 otherwise.  Both the transition probabilities qu(a) and costs C(S,, a) are functions only of the current state and action. The process is  by definition a Markov decision process, and as such, it has properties that allow determination of an optimal policy for  taking any action. This optimal policy is defined here as the optimum next-item function and is described below.  The Optimum Next-Item Function  There are three considerations here: to define what it means for a policy to be optimal, to assure the existence of such a  policy, and to find practical means to synthesize the optimum. The general method of characterizing an optimal policy is  derived from dynamic programming principles. For any policy 7t and initial state Si, define the total expected cost to be  Vn(Si) = En ( V C(Si,t, a,) I Si )_ i > 0. t-0  En is the conditional expectation given policy 7c. For C(Si,t, at) = 1 for all t, prior to appropriate termination, the total  expected cost of testing is the average number of items needed to reach the terminal state that identifies the ability vector.  An optimal policy may be defined as follows. First, let V(Sj) be the valuation function having the smallest value resulting  from any policy 7c, when the model is in state Si. Thus,  V(Sj) = inf V,(Si), i > 0. n  A policy 7c* is optimal if  VAST) = V(Si).  One can compute expected values V,(Si) for all possible policies in order to select an optimal one, but for a large number of  policies, the calculations may be difficult. Computational effort can often be reduced by use of the following theorem from  dynamic programming.  THEOREM 1.  00  V(S) = min C(S,, a) + S' gij(a) V(S;) , i > 0, (z) a ~ j=0  SEQUENTIAL ITEM SELECTION 141  where all terms are as defined above. The general proof of this theorem can be found in any text of dynamic programming and is  therefore omitted here (see for example, Dreyfus & Law, 1977, or Ross, 1970).  With Theorem 1, one finds the minimum cosi of Si by adding the cost of the next item C(Si, a) to the cost of each possible  next state and then taking the minimum value of the calculated sums. Equation (2) is the functional equation of the optimal  Optimum policies exist because the policy space is essentially finite, as shown above. (The number of items is finite, and  each needs to be presented only once.) It remains to synthesize an optimum policy. Define a stationary policy as a function  mapping the state space into the action space. Policy f is the policy that selects action f(Si) when the process is in S,. Let  N(I) be the set of all functions from Si into nonnegative real numbers, and let u' be a policy. Then, u(S,) = V.,(Si) is the  corresponding valuation. Clearly, u is a member of N(I). Given policies f and u', one can define a valuation Tfu for following  policy f for one step, and thereafter following u'. That is,  Tfu(Si)=C{Si,f(Si)}+V gu{f(Si)Iu(Sj).  This defines a mapping Tf: N(I) -+ N(I). If policy f is followed for the first step only, we have Tfu. If it is followed for  the first two steps and then policy u' is followed, we have Tfu. Tfu is, therefore, the valuation for following policy f for  the first n steps and policy u' thereafter.  From dynamic programming, we have the following lemma and theorem:  LEMMA 1. For u, v E N(I), and f a stationary policy,  (I) Il < v-> Tfu < Tfv,  (ii) TfVf= Vf,  (iii) (Tf 0)(Si) - V~S,) as n-+ oo for each Si,  where 0 represents the function that is identically zero, Tf = Tf, and for n > 1, T~Tn _' ).  Tf =  THEOREM 2. Let f be the stationary policy that, when the process is in state S,, selects the action (or an action) minimizing  C(Si, a) + ~_ gii(a) V(S;).  Then  Vf,(SI) = V(Si) for all i > 0  and f, is optimal.  142 S. P. MARSHALL  (For proofs of Theorem 2 and Lemma 1, the reader is referred to Ross, 1970.)  In summary, there exist optimum policies and subsequent V(S), the optimum valuation. Given the optimum valuation, one can find  f, the optimum policy. In practice, one may sometimes use policy improvement routines related to Lemma 1 in synthesizing  optimum or near optimum policies.  Two HEURISTICS APPROXIMATING THE OPTIMAL POLICY  Given the functional equation (2) of the valuation function, one can construct an optimal policy by use of dynamic programming  strategies. However, in many instances there are large numbers of intermediate states and the calculations become unwieldly,  if not impossible. The problem lies in the number of states that must be specified prior to the backward enumeration process  of dynamic programming. Characteristically, the solutions to dynamic programming problems are too costly to compute, and the  preferred approach to computation is through heuristic or systematic approximations to the true solutions. Two heuristics are  evaluated here.  Heuristic One (HI)  The objective in the experimental testing situation defined here is the classification of an individual's ability over a set  of items, using as few of the items as possible. One heuristic way to appoach this objective is to select an item that will  reduce the number of plausible ability characterizations as much as possible. Recall that {de} is the set of vectors  describing ability over the items and that S is a probability distribution across the set. Under the assumption that an  individual does not guess successfully, the response to any given item will increase or leave unchanged the number of zero  elements in S. A value of 0 for any se means that de is an impossible description of the individual's ability. The objective  may be restated as the maximization of the number of zeros in S. The next item should yield the fewest nonzero terms for S.  Formally, HI'S next item function a(S) is defined in the following way. For n ability vectors and p items, construct a matrix  W of order n X p. The typical element We, is the number of expected reductions in tenable ability vectors, given true ability  0 and item type a. Weight each we. by the probability of having ability 0, and sum the results by column. In matrix notation,  that becomes SW = X', with X' being the transpose vector of weighted reductions. The next item to be presented is the one  corresponding to the largest element in X. Thus, a(S) is the item achieving  max Xa =max Se We. for a = 1,..., p. (3) a a e-,  The matrix W changes following item presentation and response of the individual. Some of the n vectors will be replaced by  vectors of zero entries, indicating that they are no longer possible, and the column corresponding to the item selected will  contain  SEQUENTIAL ITEM SELECTION 143  only zeros also, since no new information can be gathered by repeating an item known to be mastered or nonmastered. The  function is applied repeatedly until a final state of ability identification is obtained with only a single nonzero vector  remaining in W.  Heuristic Two (H2)  An alternative approximation to an optimal policy depends upon the statistic of information (Attneave, 1959). This is a  number, 0 < I < 1, referring to the amount of information conveyed by the use of any item. According to information theory,  the more probable the message the less information..it carries. Information is an inverse monotonic function of probability,  and  I(xi) < I(x1) iff prob(x,) > prob(x,)  where x; and x, are the messages. The usual definition of I(xi) is  I(x;) = -log, prob(xi)  (see Coombs, Dawes, & Tversky, 1970, for the derivation of the definition from more elementary concepts). The expected  information obtained from receiving one of a set of m messages is  m  E(I) _ - prob(x;) log, prob(x;) (4) r=  and this is commonly called uncertainty.  The criterion for this heuristic approach is the maximum information conveyed by an item. In effect, the item with information  value closest to unity will be selected. Each item leads to one of two messages: x, = correct and x, = incorrect. We want to  determine the value of prob(x,) that characterizes the item x; with maximum information. Clearly, prob(x,) as close as  possible to '-, characterizes the best item: If prob(x,) = z and prob(x,) = z, then from (4) we have  E(I) _ - 112 l09, 12 + 12 l09, 12 }  - 02 (l09, 1 - l09, 2) + 12 (109, 1 - log, 2) I =-(log, 1 -log, 2}  =1.  But unity is the maximum possible value of E(I). The heuristic, therefore, selects the item with prob(x,) closest to ''z or  .50.  The procedure is similar to that used in the first heuristic. Instead of the matrix W, however, we use the original matrix D  of ability vectors. Define X as the row vector formed by weighting each row of D by the appropriate value se and X = SD. The  next item is found by selecting the value in X that is closest to .50. That is,  n  min X. = min ( sBdBa -.50 ). e-1  144 S. P. MARSHALL  COMPARISONS OF THE HEURISTICS AND OPTIMAL POLICY  At issue is the question of how similar or dissimilar are the two heuristics and the optimal policy. There are two general  cases to consider: (1) uniform priors and (2) nonuniform priors. These are evaluated separately.  Uniform Priors  Comparison of the two heuristics with the optimal policy: An example. With relatively few item types, it can be shown that  both heuristics coincide with optimal policies, given a uniform distribution. For example, in calculating an optimal policy  for the case of two components and three items, there are five possible vectors ae characterizing ability:  c, c2 c, + c2  (1) 1 1 1  (2) 1 1 0  (3) 0 1 0  (4) 1 0 0  (5) 0 0 0  and a state of the model is defined as a five-element probability vector. Possible actions are: a present c,; a2, present  c2; and a3, present c, + c2. The decision to stop is automatically invoked when a terminal state is encountered. There are 38  possible states in this example, but only 13 are distinct. These are shown in Fig. 1.  To calculate V(S,) in Fig. 1, it is necessary to determine all possible V(S;). That is, it is necessary to find a cost for  each state that includes the cost of all subsequent actions. These costs may be calculated by beginning at the outermost point  of the tree, where subsequent cost is zero and action is termination. Figure 1 also gives the costs for the current example;  they are the numbers in parentheses.  The optimal policy is determined by backward enumeration. There are three levels of decisions; these are indicated by dotted  lines in Fig. 1. In backward enumeration, one begins at the outermost decision points and works back up the tree. Consider the  decision at level 3. The value of zero for all succeeding states is sufficient information to calculate the best policies for  states in level 3. For each of the nonterminal states (SS9, S,2, S2, and S,), there is only one informative question to ask  since the other two have already been presented.  Now move up one level and consider the state S, . Either item 2 or 3 can be asked. (Item I has been presented; repetition of  it would cause no transition). One calculates the cost of each item and selects the minimum. Thus,  Cost (item 2) = (.67)(1) + (.33)(0) = .67,  and  Cost (item 3) = (.33)(0) + (.67)(1) = .67.  SEQUENTIAL ITEM SELECTION 145  FIG. 1. Decision levels for the three-item example. Actions are circled numbers, and states are S;. Costs are below state  labels. States are terminal; no action is taken. Possible responses to an action in a nonterminal state are correct (+) and  incorrect (-).  The cost of item 2 is the probability of answering item 2 correctly given the current state times the expected cost of the  state to be reached given that response-(.67)(1)-plus the probability of answering incorrectly times further expected  costs-(.33)(0). Item 3 is similarly defined.  The expected costs can now be expressed in the following way:  V(SI) = min  C(Sa,) + .67V(S,) + .33V(S,) C(Sa,) + .67V(S,) + .33 V(S,)  or  1 +.67(1)+.33(0)= 1.67  V(S,) =min 1.67. 11 +.67(1)+.33(0)= 1.67 ~  The first term in the brackets is the cost of presenting the current item. The second term is the probability of answering the  problem correctly times the expected cost of the state obtained with a correct response. The third term is the product of the  probability of an incorrect response and the expected value of the state obtained. For  480/23/24  146 S. P. MARSHALL  Seither item 2 or item 3 is best as the next item. Expected costs are calculated for SZ, SSand S6 in the same way.  Now there is enough information to evaluate the initial decision point at level 1. From the expected costs of SS2, SSS5,  and S6, one calculates the expected cost of asking each of the three item types. The final minimization is  V(S,,) = min  1 +.60V(S,)+.40V(SZ)= 1 +.60(1.67)+.40(1) =2 .4 1 +.60V(S3)+.40V(S4)= 1 +.60(1.67)+.40(1)=2.4 1 + .20V(SS) + .80 V(S6) = 1 +  .20(0) + .80(2) = 2.6  The optimal strategy is the presentation of item 1 or item 2 as the first problem in the testing process, and the expected  cost is 2.4. If the first item is answered correctly, either of the remaining items may be presented. If the first is answered  incorrectly, the remaining item to be asked is the other single component.  Heuristic H1 obtains the same policy. The matrix W has the form  W=  F2 2 4 2 2 1 3 2 1 2 3 1 L3 3 1  and S = (.20 .20 .20 .20 .20). From Eq. (4),  s  max ( ~ se we,,, = max(2.4 2.4 1.6) = 2.4. 9=1  Either c, or CZ is selected as the next item. Suppose c, is given and is answered  correctly. Now  W  0 1 2 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 2 1 0 0 0 -  with tenable ability vectors of 1, 2, and 4. Vectors 3 and S correspond to nonmastery on c, and are impossible given a correct  response to this item. The vector S now is (.33 .33 0.33 0). Application of Eq. (4) again yields X = (0 1.33 1.33), and either  CZ or C, + CZ can be the next item. Continued application of HI results in a policy coincident with the optimum.  SEQUENTIAL ITEM SELECTION 147  When the second heuristic, H2, is applied to the same example, the optimal policy is also obtained. If  1 1 1 1 1 0 D= 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0  and S = (.20 .20 .20 .20 .20), from Eq. (5)  5 1.60-.501 =.10  min \ sB dea -.50 ) = min (.60 -.501 = .10 = .10.  a ( e=' 1.20 -.501 =.30  Again, either c, or c2 would be the first choice. If c, is selected and answered correctly, S = (.33 .33 0.33 0) and repeated  application of Eq. (5) yields  (1.99-.501=.49  min 1.67-.501=.17 =.17 x.33 -.501 =.17  and either c2 or c, + c2 will be presented next.  Thus, for the three-item example, both heuristics are optimal, given a uniform prior distribution of probabilities. It has  already been pointed out that the optimal policy cannot always be calculated at a reasonable cost when there exists a large  number of items. For this reason, comparison of the two heuristics with the optimal policy cannot be made for the general  case, and only the two heuristics are considered below.  Comparison of the two heuristics: The general case. A uniform prior is defined as a vector whose elements have identical  value. Priors containing some numer of zero elements and having all remaining terms identical will be termed quasi-uniform.  Given either a uniform or quasi-uniform prior, an item and an individual's response to the item, application of Bayes' theorem  (1) leads to a new quasi-uniform distribution. (This is a result of the assumption that the individual cannot guess the  correct response.) Thus, in the model presented here, uniform vectors lead only to quasi-uniform ones, and quasi-uniform  vectors lead to other quasi-uniform ones. It will be shown below that the two heuristics select the same next item given  either a uniform or a quasi-uniform distribution.  LEMMA 2. Let n* be a positive number and {Xa}, a = 1,..., p, be a collection of numbers such that 0 < Xa < n*. Let Ya = n*  -Xa. Then a* maximizes Xa Ya if and only if it minimizes I Xa - n */2 1.  148 S. P. MARSHALL  Proof. (1) a* maximizes X,, Ya if and only if it maximizes Xa n* - X,',a ; that is, if and only if it minimizes X., - n*X,.  (2) a* minimizes IX,, - n*/21 if and only if it minimizes (X, - n*/2)Z; that is,  if and only if it minimizes XQ - n*Xa + n*z/4. Since n* is a constant, this  corresponds to (1) above. Q.E.D.  THEOREM 3. Let S be a distribution of n probabilities having n* nonzero entries, all of which are equal. Then max, ~e-, se woa  and mina I Ee-, sodoa -.51 select the same item a as the next item to be presented.  Proof. Define  d**a =do,, if so > 0  = 0 otherwise.  Then xa = do *a, the number of remaining 1's in column a. Ya = n* -Xa, the number of remaining 0's. Then  (1) woa = Ya if so > 0 and d**a = 1; there are X, such 0 = Xa if so > 0 and d*oa = 0; there are Y,, such 0 =0 if SO =0.  The only values so can take are 1/n* or 0. Thus,  n  max V so woa = max (X, Y,/n* + Xa Ya/n*) a B-, a  = max 2X, Ya/n* = 2/n* max Xa Y,. a a  X, and Y, are both nonnegative, and the constant 2/n* can be dropped.  (2) Similarly,  man I S, sodoa-.5 =man V (1/n*)dea-.5I e=1  = min IX,/n* - 1/21 a  by definition of X,. Factoring out 1/n*, the problem becomes  n  min i, sodoa -.51 = 1/n* min JX, - n*/2 1.  a ~ 9=, a  By Lemma 2, the solutions to max, Xa Ya and mina JX, - n*/2 1 are given by the  same item type. Q.E.D.  SEQUENTIAL ITEM SELECTION 149  Given either a uniform or a quasi-uniform prior, both heuristics Hl and H2 will choose the same item type for the next test  item. Since a uniform prior can lead only to posterior distributions in which all nonzero entries are identical, every item  type selected by Hl will also be selected by H2 until final diagnosis of ability is made. This is true regardless of the  number of ability characterizations n or the number of item types p.  Nonuniform Priors  Comparison of the two heuristics with the optimal policy. The above theorem is true only for the uniform or quasi-uniform  distributions as specified. For nonuniform priors in general, the two heuristics are not necessarily the same, and there is no  general theorem to determine similarities between them and an optimal policy.  It is useful, in this case, to return to the simple example of three items and five ability vectors characterizing performance  on the three items. To compare the two heuristics and the optimal policy in terms of expected costs for this situation, 500  prior probability distributions were generated. The elements for each vector were selected randomly under the obvious  constraint that they sum to unity.  The results of this comparison are presented in Table 2. The expected cost of an optimal policy given each distribution was  determined as well as the expected costs of the policies generated by Hl and H2. The costs of the heuristics' policies were  found by taking the costs generated for each possible state when calculating the optimal policy and then applying these costs  to the strategies selected by each heuristic.  For the 500 vectors, Hl was an optimal policy in 460 instances (92%) and H2 was optimal in 434 instances (87%). For all but a  single vector, either Hl or H2 coincided with an optimal policy. The average difference in expected costs across the 500  vectors was 0.011 for H1 and 0.006 for H2.  A pattern is evident in the deviation of H1 from the optimal policy. For 37 of the 40 vectors in which Hl had a higher  expected cost that the optimal, Hl selected a simple component (c, or CZ) rather than the composite (c, + c,). In contrast,  only once in 66 instances of disagreement did the second heuristic select a single component rather than the composite. In the  remaining 65 cases, H2 selected c, rather than CZ or vice versa.  TABLE 2  A Comparison of Heuristic 1 and Heuristic 2 with Optimal Policies, Based on 500 Probability Distributions  Number Average difference Standard deviation  Result of cases in expected cost of difference  Hl = H2 = optimum 395 - -  Hl H2 = optimum 39 0.1403076 0.1174705  H2 HI =optimum 65 0.0457846 0.0442967  H1 = H2 * optimum I - -  150 S. P. MARSHALL  Comparison of the two heuristics over many items. Given the high rate of coincidence between the optimal strategy and the two  heuristics (92% and 87%), it appears that either one will perform well. While neither is optimal in all cases, both have high  percentages of concurrence. Of course, as more items are added, the differences between the heuristics and the optimal  policies may change. Some of the changes can be examined by comparing the selections for the two heuristics in a larger set of  items. This has been done for the situation of testing individuals abilities in fraction arithmetic. Details of the skills or  components are given elsewhere (Marshall, 1980). There are 5 single components and 12 composites. The usual hierarchical  relationship between composite and single skills leads to the assumption that mastery on any composite implies mastery on the  components of that composite, as described earlier. For the 17 item types, there are 220 vectors characterizing an  individual's ability. Thus, S is a vector of 220 elements.  There are two cases of interest, the uniform prior distribution and nonuniform ones. Theorem 3 dictates that both heuristics  will select the same item as the first item to be presented. Selection of the second item will depend upon the individual's  response to the first, but again, Theorem 3 assures the selection of an identical item by Hl and H2.  The nonuniform case is more interesting. The issue is whether the two heuristics select the same or similar sets of problems  for an individual with a particular ability type, given the same nonuniform prior. To compare the two heuristics, an arbitrary  prior was constructed. This distribution is approximately symmetric with the middle range of abilities more heavily weighted  than those representing almost total mastery or almost total ignorance. No element was given zero value, and the range of  probabilities was 0.001 to 0.009.'  For this prior, diagnosis was made as if each of the possible vectors were the true state. Thus, 220 diagnoses were made with  each heuristic, and a set of problems was determined for each ability vector. In each diagnosis, items continued to be  selected until certainty of diagnosis was obtained, i.e., until a single state had nonzero probability. Table 3 gives the  results of the 440 computer simulations of an individual's responses, given a particular true state of ability and each  next-item function.  From the 17 items, the maximum number presented by either heuristic was 11, and the minimum was 6. The mean number of items  presented by H1 was 8.045; that for H2 was 8.345. The standard deviations were 0.888 and 1.436, respectively. Regardless of  true ability, in general the heuristics required presentation of fewer than half of the set of items in order to obtain  certain diagnosis.  The number of items presented was identical for 103 of the 220 diagnoses. In 84 of these, the two heuristics presented  identical sets of problems. For the diagnoses in  ' The probability distribution p used in the computer simulation was  (1111111111111112222222222222223333333333444444444444444555555555555555  6666666666777777777777777888888888899999999998888888888777777777777777  SEQUENTIAL ITEM SELECTION 151  TABLE 3  Number of Items Needed to Obtain Certainty of Identification of an Individual's True Ability  Number of HI H2  items    6 5 9  7 57 63  8 92 75  9 56 17  10 10 28  11 0 28  which the two strategies did not select the same number of items, the number of problems in 87 of the 117 instances differed  by a single item and differed by two items in an additional 24 instances. The largest discrepancy in the number of problems  presented by the two heuristics is 3, but this occurred only six times. The average discrepancy was 0.6727, and the standard  deviation was 0.7599. In general, H1 presented fewer items for the extreme cases and H2 presented fewer items for the middle  range of abilities.  SUMMARY  A model has been developed for defining and synthesizing an optimal policy of item selection when items can be presented at  most once. Although the optimum can always be defined under the constraints of the model, in practice the computations  involved in determining it may exceed the capacity of most computers if the number of possible items to present is large.  An alternative to optimal item presentation is offered through the development of two heuristics that approximate optimal  policies. While it can be shown that neither heuristic is optimal in general, comparisons of the two indicate that both  approach optimal strategies in the case of few possible items. A further comparison using computer simulation reveals that  rather than presenting the full set of possible items, both heuristics substantially reduce the number of items that need to  be presented in order to estimate an individual's ability over a large set of items.  REFERENCES  ATKINSON, R. C. Ingredients for a theory of instruction. American Psychologist, 1972, 27, 921-931. ATKINSON, R. C., & PAULSON,  J. A. An approach to the psychology of instruction. Psychological Bulletin, 1972, 78, 49-61.  152  S. P. MARSHALL  ATTNEAVE, F. Applications of information theory to psychology. New York: Holt, 1959.  CHANT, V. G., & ATKINSON, R. C. Optimal allocation of instructional effort to interrelated learning strands. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 1973, 10, 1-25.  COOMBS, C. H., DAWES, R. M., & TVERSKY, A. Mathematical psychology. Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall, 1970.  COTTON, J. W., GALLAGHER, J. P., & MARSHALL, S. P. The identification and decomposition of hierarchical tasks. American  Educational Research Journal, 1977, 14, 189-212.  DREYFUS, S. E., & LAw, A. M. The art and theory of dynamic programming. New York: Academic Press, 1977.  GROEN, G. J., & ATKINSON, R. C. Models for optimizing the learning process. Psychological Bulletin, 1966, 66, 309-320.  KARUSH, W., & Dear, R. E. Optimal stimulus presentation strategy for a stimulus sampling model of learning. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 1966, 3, 19-47.  MARSHALL, S. P. Procedural networks and production systems in adaptive diagnosis. Instructional Science, 1980, 9, 129-143.  Ross, S. M. Applied probability models with optimization applications. San Francisco: Holden-Day, 1970.  RECEIVED: July 17, 1980