10.1016/0022-2496(81)90061-4
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 23, 227-256 (1981)  Efficient Sets, Decision Heuristics, and Single-Peaked Preferences  K. MICHAEL ASCHEN13RENNER  Ruprecht-Karls-Universitdt, Heidelberg, West Germany  The origins of single-peaked preferences in multiattribute choice behavior are analyzed. The starting point is Coombs and  Avrunin's (Psychological Review, 1977, 84, 216-230; Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1977, 16, 261-266) theory which  explains single-peakedness as the joint effect of task and behavior characteristics. Whereas the task conditions-so-called  efficient sets-are retained, and their importance is even more stressed, it is argued that Coombs and Avrunin's behavioral  assumptions-classical marginally decreasing preference functions-may not be representative of actually displayed choice  behavior. Rather, the information processing approach to decision research has shown that multiattribute choices are often  based on simplifying heuristic rules which, due to their possible intransitivity, are inconsistent with Coombs and Avrunin's  behavioral requirements. Tversky's (Psychological Review, 1969, 76, 31-48) additive difference model is used as an algebraic  framework for analyzing such so-called attribute-based choice rules. Sufficient (and in the continuous case also necessary)  conditions are presented which guarantee that the additive difference model will also be single-peaked on efficient sets.  These conditions show that the behavioral principles yielding single-peaked preferences are far more general than Coombs and  Avrunin assumed and include most of the empirically substantiated forms of attribute-based choice rules. Further, a necessary  and sufficient condition is derived which insures that elimination rules, like the conjunctive rule, for instance, and  generalizations thereof are single-peaked. Finally, making use of a result by Edgeworth, (Mathematical Psychics, London, Paul,  1881), it is shown that efficient sets per se may originate in quite different ways. It is concluded that the phenomenon of  single-peakedness is mainly a function of the task rather than of some specific behavior.  Preference is called single-peaked if it increases monotonically along some order of a set of options up to a certain point  where the direction of preference changes to decrease monotonically afterwards. Well known examples are the preference for  temperature, first described by Priestley (1775), or the amount of sugar one likes to have in a cup of tea. Such single-peaked  preferences have been observed at least since the days of Fechner (1871) and Wundt (1874) for quite a number of perceptual and  other continua, like, for instance, taste (Engel, 1928; Young & Falk, 1956), complexity of visual stimuli (Dember &  Earl, 1957; Thomas, 1973), number of children (Goldberg & Coombs, 1962), or risk (Coombs & Meyer, 1969; Aschenbrenner, 1978).  Although single-peakedness alone preferences it, nevertheless, puts quite preference orders. With six alternatives,  does not predict an individual's specific strong structural restrictions on the possible for instance, already only 4 % of the  possible 227  0022-2496/81/030227-30s02.00/0  Copyright X 1981 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  228 K. MICHAEL ASCHENBRENNER  preference orders are single-peaked. Further, single-peakedness has strong and useful consequences in other contexts, e.g.,  collective choice (Fishburn, 1973). In this light, the large number of available procedures attempting to identify and scale  singlepeaked preferences is not astounding (cf. Caroll, 1972; Shocker & Srinivasan, 1979).  In contrast to the many findings of and attempts to identify single-peaked preferences, theoretical and empirical attempts to  analyze the origins of this phenomenon are quite rare. The only general and elaborate theory of single-peaked preference was  provided by Coombs and Avrunin (1977a, 1977b). They explained single-peaked preferences as the joint effect of certain task  and behavior characteristics.  Here, the term task characteristics refers to aspects of the situation or environment a person is exposed to. In the present  context these are characteristics of the set of choice alternatives a person has or is given and, especially, structural or  configural relations among these alternatives. Behavior characteristics are aspecs of a person's ways of dealing with the  situation, that is, in the present context, his or her intuitive or reflected ways and strategies for evaluating and choosing  alternatives. These behavior characteristics should be distinguished from the phenomenon to be explained, i.e., the expressed  preferences or choices, which are viewed as a consequence of both situation and behavior.  In these terms, Coombs and Avrunin have shown that the phenomenon of singlepeaked preferences will always occur if both the  alternatives satisfy certain structural requirements and a person's choice or evaluation process obeys certain principles,  whereas either condition alone is not sufficient to guarantee single-peakedness.  In general, task and behavior characteristics need not be independent, rather they may mutually interact. In choice  experiments, for instance, the number of available alternatives affects the decision maker's course of acquiring information  about the alternatives (Payne, 1976), which in turn may affect the final choice. A good example of the converse interaction is  given in Coombs and Avrunin's theory. They assume that in natural situations the critical task conditions for single-peaked  preferences are again the result of a foregoing more general behavioral process, which led to the exclusion of certain  alternatives from the environment (see below).  For the present analysis, however, such interactions can be ignored. Whether the task conditions are fulfilled or not, can be  objectively determined or even deliberately arranged. And for the behavioral part, the analysis is of the "what happens, if"  type. Various decision strategies that have been suggested or empirically supported in the literature will be considered  without assuming that any of them is the correct one. If any of these are actually used by people, and, if so, which ones, are  empirical questions to be answered by the existing reports (which I will cite at appropriate places) or new experiments.  Moreover, one conclusion will be that the latter question is of minor importance for the phenomenon of single-peakedness.  Finally, the reason for the following analysis was the observation of empirical evidence (Aschenbrenner, 1978) that  single-peaked preferences actually depend on the task conditions, Coombs and Avrunin defined, whereas recent decision research  (e.g., Svenson, 1979) casts serious doubts on the representativeness of Coombs and  SINGLE-PEAKED PREFERENCES 229  Avrunin's behavioral assumptions for actually displayed choice behavior. In this light, a further analysis of the behavioral  component of the theory seemed worthwhile and appropriate. The resulting generalization is presented in the following.  COOMBS AND AVRUNIN's THEORY OF SINGLE-PEAKED PREFERENCES'  Let x > y stand for the relation "x is at least as preferred as y." As usual, let x > y = (x > y and not y > x) mean "x is  preferred to y," and let x - y = (x > y and y > x) mean "x is indifferent to y." In order to be compatible with the preference  relations defined by the attribute-based decision rules to be discussed below, > should be reflexive and connected but is not  required to be transitive, because some of the choice rules to be considered below are prominent for their systematic  violations of transitivity. Then single-peakedness can be defined as follows.  DEFINITION 1. Let S be a set of options and > be a strict order on S. Let > be another relation on S that is reflexive and  connected. > is single peaked on S with respect to > iff (if and only if) for all x > y > z E S  (1) if x > y then y > z,  (2) if z > y then y > x.  Actually, this definition of single-peakedness is somewhat stronger than the one given by Coombs and Avrunin (1977b, p. 262),  who required "not (x > y and z > y)" instead of (1) and (2) of Definition 1. The difference lies in the treatment of plateaus,  i.e., two or more neighboring options which are indifferent. Definition 1 allows (in accordance with Fishburn, 1973, Chap. 9)  plateaus in the preference apex but not in the increasing and decreasing branches, while Coombs and Avrunin's definition also  allows plateaus in the branches. That is, the case x > y - z, for instance, is compatible with Coombs and Avrunin but not with  Definition 1. In their further development, Coombs and Avrunin, however, proved that the stronger form of Definition 1 follows  from their further assumptions.  The task conditions that give rise to single-peaked preferences can be characterized as an approach-avoidance conflict  resulting from a set of options having both attractive and unattractive attributes. Coombs and Avrunin call such a set  efficient if the attractive and unattractive aspects are ordered the same within the options, so that the decison maker has to  put up with more of each unattractive attribute if he desires more of some attractive attribute. Further, it is required that  the unattractive attributes increase relatively faster than the attractive ones.  The reader who is unfamiliar with Coombs and Avrunin's theory may find a more vivid presentation and justification in Coombs  and Avrunin (1977a), which formal parts are, however, restricted to the two-dimensional case. Coombs and Avrunin (1977b)  provide a formal presentation of the n-dimensional case.  230 K. MICHAEL ASCHENBRENNER  Formally, Coombs and Avrunin consider a multiattribute alternative, x, as an ntuple of real numbers, i.e., as a point in  n-dimensional space (xXZ,...I xn), where x; stands for the level of alternative x on the ith attribute. They then define an  ndimensional approach-avoidance efficient set as follows (Coombs and Avrunin, 1977b, p. 262):  DEFINITION 2. An approach-avoidance efficient set in n dimensions (n > 2) is a subset S of IRn together with a partition of  the integers 1, 2,..., n into two non-empty subsets I, and IZ with indices from I, denoting the attractive components and  indices from Iz denoting the unattractive components, such that the following conditions are satisfied:  (1) For any pair of n-tuples (x,,...,xn) and (Y, -.,Yn) in S,  (i) x; > y; for some i iff xj > y, for all j = 1,..., n, and  (ii) x; > y; for some i E I, iff xJ > yj for some j E IZ  (2) For each triple of n-tuples (x.., xn), (Y..,Yn), (z.., z in S with x, <Y1 < z, there exists a c > 0 such that  c > Z' -Y` for all i E I, , Y;-xi  c< Z'-Y' for allj G,2' Yi - xi  Coombs and Avrunin argue that at least in two dimensions such sets may be often found in our environment as a consequence of  the principle of ignoring dominated alternatives, i.e., alternatives that are not better than some other alternative on any  attribute and worse on at least one attribute. Eliminating all dominated alternatives from a two-attributed set would yield a  set fulfilling condition (1) of Definition 2, thus coming quite close to being efficient.  Since all attributes of an efficient set have to be same-ordered, any attribute can be used to define the strict order >  required by Definition 1.  Efficiency can be easily extended to approach-approach and avoidance-avoidance conflicts. Approach-approach or  avoidance-avoidance efficient sets have solely attractive, or solely unattractive, attributes which are also partitioned into  two subsets. In these cases, however, the attributes have to be inversely ordered in the two subsets. If I, is the set of  indices of one and IZ the set of indices of the other subset and if e,= 1 for i E I, and e;=-1 for i E IZ then S = { (x, ,...,  xn) } is an approach-approach, respectively avoidance-avoidance efficient set if and only if [ { (e, x, ,..., en xn) },1, , 12  1 is an approach-avoidance efficient set.  The behavioral mechanisms which, according to Coombs and Avrunin, yield single-peaked, preferences are seen in the principle:  "Good things satiate, bad things escalate." Formally, Coombs and Avrunin (1977b, p. 263) try to capture this principle by a  so-called proper preference function (PPF). A PPF is a function that is  SINGLE-PEAKED PREFERENCES 231  monotonically increasing with every attractive attribute and monotonically decreasing with every unattractive attribute, that  is partially differentiable with respect to every attribute, and that is not positively accelerated with respect to any  attribute. That is, a PPF is nothing else but a classical marginally decreasing multiattribute utility function with  unspecified combination of the components, as first defined by Edgeworth (1881).  DEFINITION 3. A function F : P" -+ IR is a proper preference function (PPF) for a set of options S ~:_ IR" if  (1) all its first-order partial derivatives 8F/8u; exist, where the u; are the coordinate functions,  (2) xj < yj for all j and x; < y; implies  OF (x1 ~,.., x") ) aF (Y,,..., y") > 0 aui au;  when the ith component represents an attractive attribute,  (3) xj < y, for all j and x; < yI implies  0 > aF (x, ,..., x") > (Y1'...' Y" au  when the ith component represents an unattractive attribute.  The unspecified nature of the combination rule for the components of a PPF allows us to consider various special cases. For  instance, the well known additive model is a PPF when its component value functions are not positively accelerated. Various  multiplicative and interactive models may also be PPFs.  Coombs and Avrunin's main result is a theorem (1977b, p. 264) stating that all PPFs, and also all strictly monotone  transformations thereof, are single-peaked on any efficient set. That is, efficiency is a necessary and sufficient condition  for all PPFs being single-peaked, whereas being proper is only sufficient but not necessary for preference functions being  single-peaked on an efficient set. Coombs and Avrunin argue that, although there may be other special instances giving rise to  singlepeakedness, their PPF assumption is the most obvious and simple one.  For an empirical test of this theory in the domain of multiattribute choice Aschenbrenner (1978) designed sets of simple  gambles in which one had to pay a stake in advance in order to win a certain amount of money with a certain probability and  otherwise nothing. The stake was considered an unattractive attribute, the winning and its probability were considered  attractive. When presented in terms of these attributes the gambles formed efficient sets. By a simple transformation the same  gambles were also presented in non-efficient form. In this form the stake appeared as a possible loss occurring with one minus  the probability of winning, the transformed winning was the former one minus the stake. Thus the subjects were presented the  232 K. MICHAEL ASCHENBRENNER  gambles in form of their final outcomes and their probabilities. As predicted by Coombs and Avrunin's theory, nearly all  subjects had single-peaked preferences for the gambles in the efficient stake presentation mode, whereas far fewer subjects  had such preferences for the same gambles when these were presented in terms of their final outcomes.  Thus this result might be considered as supporting Coombs and Avrunin's theory, if there were not a lot of other evidence from  decision research that contradicts the use of proper preference functions. More specifically, recent research on information  processing in choice situations has shown that multiattribute choices are often made by the use of simplifying heuristic rules  (cf. Svenson, 1979). Especially, decision rules comparing alternatives on an attribute basis seem to be prominent in choice  behavior in general, as well as in the special case of choices among gambles (Payne & Braunstein, 1978). Such behavior,  however, is usually not compatible with PPFs (Tversky, 1969). Thus, in light of the empirical evidence, some further analysis  of the behavioral principles yielding single-peaked preferences seems worthwhile. Since PPFs are only sufficient but not  necessary for single-peakedness it does not automatically follow that choice behavior inconsistent with PPFs will not be  singlepeaked-rather, I will prove the opposite.  The next section will be concerned with the large class of attribute-based decision rules. After that a further class of  empirically substantiated decision rules that are inconsistent with PPFs is considered, so-called elimination rules. Finally,  returning to Coombs and Avrunin's PPF, a result by Edgeworth (1881) is presented showing that under conditions of exchange  between two persons the assumption of efficient sets is not needed but PPFs alone are sufficient to guarantee single-peaked  preferences.  ATTRIBUTE-BASED DECISION RULES  From an information processing point of view, decision rules that are used for multiattribute choices may be classified into  two broad categeries according to the order of processing aspects of the alternatives: processing by alternative versus  processing by attribute.  Processing information by alternative means that the decision maker considers all relevant attributes of one alternative at a  time in order to amalgamate them into some form of global evaluation of the alternative. Choice is then based on a comparison  of the global evaluations of the alternatives. Usually it is assumed that the most highly evaluated alternative is chosen or  that the alternatives' preference order is given by the order of their global evaluations. PPFs clearly belong into this class.  In contrast, in processing by attribute two or more alternatives are compared on each individual attribute. Choice is  accomplished by some aggregation of the results of these comparisons over attributes. For instance, the alternative being best  on most attributes may be chosen. Attribute-based decison rules became prominent in decision research with the supposition  that the often observed intransitivities of choices were not merely random errors but a systematic consequence of the decision  rules used  SINGLE-PEAKED PREFERENCES 233  (May, 1954). Whereas alternative-based decison rules are always transitive, nearly all attribute-based rules permit the design  of situations where they yield intransitive choices (Tversky, 1969).  For analyzing such intransitive preferences Tversky contrasted the alternativebased additive model with the additive  difference model (ADM), which may be viewed as a general algebraic framework to study attribute-based decision rules.  DEFINITION 4 (after Tversky, 1969, p. 41). A preference structure is called an additive difference model (ADM) iff there exist  real valued functions v.., vand increasing real valued functions w, ,..., wsuch that  iff wi[vi(xi) - vi(y!)] > 0,  where wi( - d) = - wi(d).  The ADM assumes a comparison of alternatives on an attribute basis. Before the results of these comparisons are added over  attributes, transformations by some unspecified weighting functions are allowed. Note, that in contrast to the usual additive  model, the w; are functions and not simply multiplicative factors.  Especially, the so-called process-oriented approach to decision research (cf. Payne, Braunstein, & Carroll, 1978; Svenson,  1979) has found attribute-based decision rules prominent in choice behavior and has empirically identified several specific  rules that are used by decision makers, all of which may be treated as special cases of the ADM. Examples are May's (1954)  majority rule, Tversky's (1969) lexicographic semiorder, and Huber's (1979a) weighed-sets-of-dimensions model. I will come  back to these later. In a review of nine process-tracing studies reporting together 18 experiments using 13 different kinds of  alternatives and 500 subjects it was found that attribute-based choice behavior predominated in about three quarters of the  choice tasks (Aschenbrenner, 1979). Whereas this prevalence seemed to be quite independent of the kind of alternatives used,  it was certainly dependent on the mode of presenting the alternatives. All these studies presented the alternatives in some  form of an attribute by alternative matrix allowing both kinds of processing with equal ease. If information is presented by  alternative, processing by attribute is far less prominent (Bettman & Kakkar, 1977). Nevertheless, Johnson and Russo (1978)  found a strong tendency to reorganize information about familiar products in an attribute-oriented form in memory even if the  information is presented by alternative. Finally, the matrix form of information presentation is not as unrealistic as is  sometimes argued. Consumer journals, for instance, usually report their test results in matrix form.  Single peaked additive difference models. Tversky (1969) proved that for more than one attribute the ADM is transitive only  under highly restrictive conditions. For two attributes transitivity only holds if w,(d) = w2(td) for some real t. With more  than two attributes the wi are even required to be linear, i.e., wi(d) = tid with real ti > 0, in order to guarantee  transitivity. In the latter case the ADM is equivalent to an additive model. The more interesting cases of the ADM including  especially the  234 K. MICHAEL ASCHENBRENNER  empirically identified ones are all intransitive. Being intransitive these choice rules cannot be PPFs nor can there exist any  order preserving function mapping them into a PPF as required by Coombs and Avrunin's theorem.  The conditions under which the ADM yields single-peaked preferences for efficient sets are, however, far more general than  those under which the ADM is transitive. Single-peakedness of the ADM is dependent on the v; as well as on the wi.  The conditions for the individual value functions v; are nearly identical to those of Coombs and Avrunin. They must be  monotonically increasing for attractive attributes and monotonically decreasing for unattractive attributes, and they must not  be positively accelerated for any attribute. Differentiability, however, is not needed; the v; may be discontinuous.  DEFINITION 5. A value function v is not positively accelerated iff for all real x<y<Z  V(Z) - v(Y) Z -Y  V(Y) -v(x) y-x  for attractive attributes and,  v(Z) - v(Y) Z -Y  V(Y) -v(x) y-x  for unattractive attributes.  The requirement for the weighting functions w; I will call quotient-orderpreservation (QOP) since it requires that the w; do  not invert the greater/equal relation among quotients.  DEFINITION 6. An ordered pair of functions (wi, w;) is called quotient-orderpreserving (QOP) iff for all real a, b, c, d, with  b, c :~: 0,2  b``d  implies wi(a) wj(c) w;(b) w;(d)  will be shown in Lemma 1, the only functions satisfying this condition are power functions of the form wk (d) = tk sign (d) I  d Ir with tk > 0 for all k, r > 0, and sign(d) = 1 for d > 0, 0 for d = 0, -1, for d < 0. All weighting functions, wk, must  As  2 b, c * 0 is required to avoid the undefined case of 0/0. This exclusion is not harmful since the differences b and c  becoming zero is already excluded by Definition 2(2). Thus the behavior of the functions w, and wj in these cases is  irrelevant. Note, however, that a and d may become zero in Definition 6 as well as in an efficient set with more than two  attributes, if it is accepted that the result of dividing some positive number by zero is greater than any other quotient with  non-zero denominator. Consider, for instance, the case of one attractive (the first) and two unattractive attributes. Then the  configuration x, < y, < Z, , x2 < Y2 < z2, and x, =Y, < z, is consistent with Definition 2 as long as there is no other  alternative u with x il- u < y. If one does not accept division by zero, one may as well replace b, c * 0 by b, d * 0 in  Definition 6, since in this case one would not accept the latter set as efficient either, and the exclusion would again be  without consequences.  SINGLE-PEAKED PREFERENCES 235  have the same exponent r, whereas the factors tk may vary over attributes. The only pupose of the absolute value and the sign  function is to keep the QOP property and the symmetry condition of the ADM, wk(-d) = - wk(d), for negative arguments. Note,  however, that the degenerate case of r = 0 becomes the sign function per se. With this type of function a proper ADM (PADM)  may be defined as follows.  DEFINITION 7. Let S 9; IR" and I, be the subset of indices of attractive and IZ the subset of indices of unattractive  attributes. An ADM is proper (PADM) with respect to (S, I, , I,) iff  (1) v; is monotonically increasing for all i E I, and monotonically decreasing for all i E 12 1  (2) all v; are not positively accelerated, and  (3) all w; have the form w;(d) = t; sign(d) IdI' with t; > 0 and r > 0.  Now it can be shown that efficiency is a necessary and sufficient condition for all PADM being single-peaked over the set of  options. If (S,1I,) is not an efficient set, then there exist PADM which are not single-peaked on S.  THEOREM 1. Let (S, II,) be as in Definition 7. All PADM are single peaked on S i (S, I, , I,) is an efficient set.  Before proving Theorem 1, Lemma 1 will show that the defined power function is the only one having the desired QOP property.  LEMMA 1. An ordered pair of functions (wi, wj) is QOP Of wk, k = i, j, is of the form wk(d) = tk sign(d) I dj' with tk > 0 and  r > 0.  Proof of Lemma 1. In a theorem on cross-modality orderings Krantz, Luce, Suppes, and Tversky (1971, pp. 164-167) have shown  that functions that are strictly QOP, i.e., where Definition 6 is an equivalence rather than an implication, must have the  form tkd' with tk, r > 0 for d > 0. It is immediately seen that the inverse is also  true; all such functions are strictly QOP, because (tka')l (tkb') = (alb)' is continuously increasing for (alb), r > 0. Thus,  the tk may be different for different attributes, whereas the exponent r must be the same for all attributes. Taking absolute  values and multiplying with the sign function makes no substantial change of this result, but merely extends it to negative  arguments while keeping the symmetry requirement of the ADM.  However, Definition 6 also allows the case alb < c/d while wi(a)lwi(b)= w;(c)lw;(d), and there is exactly one type of function  yielding this case for almost all a, b, c, d, the weighted sign function wk(d) = tk sign(d). This function clearly is the  limiting case of tk sign(d) I d I' for r-+ 0, thus giving rise to r > 0.  That the weighted sign function is QOP follows immediately from sign{ [tk sign(a)]l [tk sign(b)] } = sign(a/b) for all a, b  with a $ 0 or b * 0. For showing that it is the only function allowing for alb < cld while w;(a)lw;(b)=  236 K. MICHAEL ASCHENBRENNER  wj(c)/wj(d), assume that this holds for some a, b, c, d > 0. It follows that wi must be constant over some positive interval:  Choose a' such that a < a' < be/d. Then a'/b < c/d will hold. If w,(a') > wi(a) we would get w,(a')/w,(b) > wj(c)/wj(d) in  violation of Definition 6. Since wi must not decrease, wi(a') = wi(a) has to hold, and the same has to hold for all values  between a and a'. If w, is constant for some interval [a, a'], 0 < a < a', then wj has to be constant for all positive as well  as for all negative values. To prove, assume that wj is strictly increasing at or around some value c *~ 0, i.e., wj(d) <  wj(e) for all d, e such that d < c < e. Then choose some e with same sign as c and absolutely small enough that a/a' < (c - e)  j(c + e). Since wi(a) = w;(a'), we have w,(a)/w;(a') = 1, whereas wj(c - e)f wj(c + e) < 1, because wj is increasing at c.  Thus wj has to be constant everywhere except at 0 to be QOP if wi is constant somewhere. This, in turn, implies that w, also  has to be constant everywhere within the positives and within the negatives by a smiliar argument. Finally, this constants  cannot be zero since this would yield the undefined case of 0/0. Thus, by symmetry, there remains wk(d) = tk sign(d), k = i,  j, as the only possibility. Q.E.D.  Proof of Theorem 1. First, it is shown that all PADM are single-peaked on an efficient set. Let (S, II,) be an efficient set  and x < y < z E S. Then according to Definition 2, (z; -yi)/(y; - x;) < (zj - yj)/(yj - xj) for all i E I, and all j E I,. If  all vx are not positively accelerated then also  yi(zi) - yi(Yi) Zi -Yi '< zj -Yj < yj(zj) - vj(Yj)  vi(Yi) - vi(xi) Yi - xi Yj - xj vj(Yj) - vj(xj)  for all i E I, and j E 12. For simplicity write now dk,, for vk(rk) - vk(Sk).  If all pairs of weighting functions (wi, wj) with i E I, and j E 12 are QOP they will also preserve the relation between the  relative increase of the attractive and unattractive attributes of an efficient set. Thus,  wi(dizy) <wj(d,,,)   wi(de,X) wj(djyx) for all i E I, and all j E I2. (1)  But then it also follows that   Lei, wi(dizy) Lje77 wj(dj.,y) (2)  LEI, wi(diyx) L.+jej, wj(d,,,)   as is easy to show: Let (i) alb < c/d and (ii) a'/b' < c/d. Condition (i) implies ad < cb and (ii) implies ad < cb'. Addition  yields ad + a'd < cb + cb', i.e., (a + a') d < c(b + b'), which immediately yields (a + a')/(b + b') < c/d. By replacing alb  in (i) with (a + a')/(b + b') one can proceed at pleasure. Analogously it follows that alb < (c + c')/(d + d') if c'/d > alb.  By repeated application, (2) is derived from (1).  SINGLE-PEAKED PREFERENCES 237  Now, let x > y. Since x < y < z, y > z must follow to fulfill single-peakedness. By Definition 4 (ADM), x > y implies  Wk(dkyx) < 0+  k e l,Ul2  which implies in turn  V Wi(diyx) < - V wj(djYx), (4) iEl~ jEl2  since, due to the required monotonicity of vi, diyx > 0 for all attractive attributes and dj,,x < 0 for all unattractive  attributes. Moreover, since by Definition 4, wk is increasing and symmetric about the origin, it follows that both sides of  (2) and (4) are positive. Therefore, multiplying the respective left and right sides of (2) and (4) by each other will not  change the direction of the inequalities and results in  Wj(dj,x) ~LIE1, Wi(dizy) < -V Wl(dlvx) Ljel2 Wj(djzv) Yj.l, Wi(di,x) jEl2 Ejsl2 Wj(dJYx)  which is equal to  V Wi(dizy) < -` Wj(djzy). (5) !El, jC-l2  It follows that LkelIUl2 Wk(dkzy) < 0 and thus y > z.  The proof that z > y implies y > x runs analogously except that (2) has to be transformed by dividing both sides by both  numerators and multiplying both sides by both denominators.  Finally, it must be shown that if (S, I2) is not efficient then there exists a PADM that is not single-peaked on S. It  suffices to show that this is the case for two dimensions, dimension 1 being attractive and dimension 2 being unattractive,  and for violations of part (2) of Definition 2, since (a) if part (1) of Definition 2 were violated, the strict order with  respect to which we speak of single-peakedness would not be defined. (b) A set is efficient in n attributes if it forms an  efficient set for each pair of attributes. Therefore, any inefficient set in n attributes must also be inefficient in some  pair of attributes. The PADM developed below is easily generalized to the ndimensional case by choosing wk for the other  attributes in such a way that they will not affect the choice, e.g., wk(dk) = tdk with t arbitrarily small.  So let, contrarily to Definition 2(2),  Zi -Y1 > ZZ -Yz  Y1 -x1 Y2-x2  238 K. MICHAEL ASCHENBRENNER  Now trivially ((Z2 - x2)/(Z, - x,))(z, - x,) = z2 - x2 , and since z; - x; = zi -yi + y; - x; for all i, it is also true that  2 - x2 [(z, -Y1) + (Yi - x01 = (Z2 -Y2) + (Y2 - x2)' (7) z, _X1  Equation (6) implies that at least one of the following inequalities (8) and (9) must hold, because if (8) and (9) were  simultaneously C then (6) could not hold  ZZ - x2 (_1 -Y1) > Z2 -Y2, z, -xl  Y2-x2 > Z2-x2 (Y. -x'). z, _X1  But according to (7), (8) implies (9) and vice versa. Since one of the two inequalities must be satisfied according to (6)  they must thus both hold.  Setting v,(r,) = rv&2)_ -r2, w,(d,) = d,(z2 -x2)l (Z, -x,), and W2(d2)=d2 yields a PADM. This PADM specifies z > y according  to (8) and x > y according to (9). Thus there is a PADM that is not single-peaked on the non-efficient set S.  Q.E.D.  As noted above, the ADM is consistent with a PPF when the w; are linear and the ADM is equivalent to the additive model. This  is also a special form of the power function with an exponent of one. Thus it is obvious that the class of decision rules that  is single-peaked on efficient sets is far larger than Coombs and Avrunin's PPF.  Special forms of the ADM. There exist several studies in which it was shown that there are individuals using one or another of  the following five special cases of the ADM in multiattribute choice tasks: majority rule, weighed-sets-of-dimensions  strategy, lexicographic rule, lexicographic semiorder, and greatest- attractivitydifference rule. Usually such studies display  quite large individual differences, and in no study were all subjects using the investigated strategy. Nevertheless, different  methods, like constructing specific alternatives, recording eye movements, thinking aloud techniques, have provided convergent  evidence that there are persons using these rules. Furthermore, it should be noted that the actual course of information  processing in executing such a decision rule may look quite different for the various rules. Nevertheless, these rules may be  defined in a way algebraically equivalent to the ADM.  The majority rule was introduced by May (1954) to explain intransitive preference. Evidence for its application is provided by  Huber (1980) and Russo and Dosher (note 1). It states that in choosing two alternatives at a time one should choose the one  that is better on more attributes. The ADM becomes the majority rule with v; being the identity, vi(x;) = xi, for attractive,  respectively the inverse identity, VI(XI) =-x;, for unattractive attributes and with w; being the sign function.  SINGLE-PEAKED PREFERENCES 239  Huber's (1979a) weighed-sets-of-dimensions rule is fundamentally a weighted majority rule. It states that the decision maker  at first determines on which attributes he prefers one alternative and on which the other. Then the two subsets of attributes  are compared in importance, and the alternative being preferred on the more important subset is chosen. Convincing evidence  for the use of such a rule is provided by Huber (1979b). As a special case of the ADM this rule differs from the majority rule  only by an additional weight of the sign function, wi(d) = ti sign(d) with real ti >0.  According to the lexicographic rule, alternatives are first compared on the most important attribute, and if one alternative  is uniquely most preferred on that attribute it is chosen. If two or more options appear equally good on that attribute they  are compared on the next most important attribute, and so on. Evidence for the use of this rule is given by Huber (1980). One  way to define the lexicographic rule as a special ADM is similar to the foregoing rule with an additional restriction on the  weights of the sign function that guarantees that each attribute's weight exceeds the sum of the less important attributes'  weights. With n attributes and the index i displaying the rank of importance this is accomplished by setting wi(d) = 2"-'  sign(d).  The lexicographic semiorder was considered by Tversky (1969) as a special case of the ADM. It differs from the lexicographic  rule by assuming an indifference threshold on the attributes rather than strict indifference. That is, for each attribute  there is an interval ei and alternatives are considered indifferent on that attribute if they do not differ by more than ei.  As a special ADM this rule is similar to the lexicographic one except for the following modification of the weighted sign  function:  wi(di) = 2"-' for Sidi > siei  =0 for IdiI < IeiI  =-2"-i for sidi<-Siei,  with s; = 1 and ei > 0 for attractive and si = -1 and ei < 0 for unattractive attributes. The greatest-attractivity-difference  rule assumes that the decision maker is comparing two alternatives at a time on each attribute and evaluates the value  difference on each attribute. Then the alternative which is better on the attribute with the greatest absolute value  difference is chosen. Huber (1979b) and Russo and Dosher (note 1) provided compelling evidence for the use of this rule by  some subjects. This rule is an ADM with any value function vi and wi(di) = di for I di I = maxj ldfl and 0 otherwise. In the  cited reports on the use of this rule the vi were linear.  As can be seen from the results in the foregoing section, with the exception of the lexicographic semiorder these special  cases of the ADM are single-peaked on efficient sets.  COROLLARY 1. The majority rule, weighed-sets-of-dimensions rule, and lexicographic rule are single peaked on every efficient  set; the greatest-attractivity-  240 K. MICHAEL ASCHENBRENNER  difference rule is single peaked on every efficient set if the value functions vi are not positively accelerated.  Proof. For the first three rules single-peakedness follows from the QOP property of the (weighted) sign function.  Single-peakedness of the greatest-attractivity-difference rule (GAD) follows from the QOP property of the power function,  since one can always find an exponent r large enough such that replacing the maximum function in an ADM by a power function  with that exponent will not alter the preference order. That is, there exist r such that for all x, y  n n  V sign(dixy) I dixy I' > 0 iff S f xy > 0, (10)  ii- t i=I  where  fixv -" dixy for dixy I = nmax I d jxy I and fixy = 0 otherwise.  Let us first consider the most disadvantageous case that there is just one attractive attribute (the first) on which the  absolute value difference between x and y is just slightly larger than on each from an arbitrarily large number, n, of  unattractive attributes, i.e., let 0 < d,xy = -dixy + e for i = 2,..., n with e > 0 but arbitrarily small.  Then it has to be shown that there is an r such that   (-dixy + e)' r (11)  - n I dixy > 0,   or equivalently   (-dixy + e)r > n I dixy I", (12)  or   dixy+e   ) '_ e r (13)  - l+ ) >n.   I dixy I I dixy I   Such r exist for any e > 0 and n due to the archimedian property of the reals. Thus there is an ADM with a power function  yielding the same choices as the GAD, and since all power functions are QOP these choices will be single-peaked, provided the  value functions vi are not positively accelerated.  The presence of other non-maximal attractive attributes or absolute value differences smaller than E dixy I on some of the  unattractive attributes will not change this result. Equations (11) to (13) would become more complicated, but all that can  happen is that the left side of (12) becomes greater, or that the right side becomes smaller. The argument runs analogously  when the maximal I dixv I is on an unattractive attribute.  SINGLE-PEAKED PREFERENCES 241  There is one case, however, where (10) is not true, i.e., where the maximum function and the power function will not agree, no  matter how large r is. This occurs when there are (a) an equal number of attractive and unattractive attributes with  absolutely equal and maximal value difference, and (b) other attributes with less than maximal value difference. In this case  the attractive and unattractive maximal attributes will cancel each other in both the maximum and power function ADM. Then,  however, with r sufficiently large, the power function will choose according to the next greatest value difference, whereas  the maximum function ADM will be indifferent. This problem can be resolved in two ways: Either by restricting (10) to x, y not  showing this special configuration, or by viewing this behavior of the power function as a natural extension of the GAD and  redefining it accordingly. Neither solution is harmful since if such configurations occur in an efficient set, they must be  located at or next to (depending on the chosen resolution) the preference apex. What persons using the GAD will actually do in  this case is an empirical question. Q.E.D.  To show that the lexicographic semiorder is not single-peaked, consider the following efficient set with the first dimension  being attractive and the second being unattractive: {x = (1, 1), y = (2, 3), z = (5, 10)}. Now let the first dimension be more  important and let e, = 2 and e2 = -1. It follows that x > y because Ix, -y, I < e, and x2 > Y2 + e2, whereas z > y because of  z, > y, + e,.  Nonnecessity of the PADM conditions. As with Coombs and Avrunin's PPF the stated conditions for the PADM are only sufficient  but not necessary for singlepeakedness. With the first dimension being attractive and the second being unattractive the  following mixture of lexicographic rule and semiorder provides a counter example that is single-peaked although it is not QOP:  w,(d,xy) = 0.1 sign(x, -y.) for Ix, - y,I < 1  = slgn(x, - y,) for Ix, -y, I > 1,  W2(d2x,) = 2 sign(Y2 - x2)  This rule will yield single-peaked preferences over each two-dimensional approach-avoidance efficient set since the first  dimension can only affect preference when there is no difference on the second dimension. In a two-dimensional efficient set,  however, the case y, > x, while Y2 = x2 can never occur for it would violate Definition 2 (1, ii).3  Now consider the efficient set: {x= (1, 1), y = (2, 2), z = (4, 5) ~. For this set  d2Z,,/d2,,x=-3/-1 > 2/1 =d,Zy/d,,,x,  ' Thus this rule will always yield the special case of monotonically decreasing preferences. Note however, that with more than  two attributes such rules can yield a preference apex at the second or next to last element of an efficient set. In the set  described in footnote 2, for instance, a lexicographic rule that weighs the attributes in the order 3, 1, 2 will yield the  single-peaked preference order v > x > z.  480/23/3-4  242 K. MICHAEL ASCHENBRENNER  as is required by Definition 2. For the w;, however, follows contrarily to Definition 6  Wz(d2Z,)/W2(dzyx) = -2/-2 < 1/0.1 = w,(d,Z,)I w,(d~yx).  Thus the pair (w,, WZ) is not QOP, nevertheless it is single-peaked.  Such counter examples can, however, be only found for discontinuous value or weighting functions. If these functions are  continuous, positive acceleration of the value functions or violation of the QOP property will yield complete intervals (ri,  si) and (rj, s;), i E Ij E IZ such that  wi(dizv)1 wi(diy,,) > w,(dj~y)/wi(diyz)  will hold for all x, y, z with r < x < y < z < s. By applying the intermediate-value theorem to this case one can always  construct an efficient set for which singlepeakedness will be violated.'  Finally, to complete the argument about necessity, it is trivial that a continuous ADM with non-monotone value functions  (Definition 7(l)) permits the design of efficient sets for which single-peakedness will be violated.  Thus, what can be shown is that being proper is necessary for a continuous ADM to be single-peaked on every efficient set.  There may, however, exist numerous efficient sets on which a non-proper continuous ADM is nevertheless single-peaked.  Positively accelerated value functions, for instance, may be compensated by an even stronger acceleration of the unattractive  attributes as compared to the attractive ones in some efficient sets, so that single-peakedness will not be violated.  Single-peaked ADM and transitivity. By guaranteeing single-peakedness, the task condition of efficient sets induces  considerable regularity in the behavior of proper ADM. Thus, one may also wonder about transitivity. The answer is that  efficiency greatly reduces the PADM's possibilities for intransitivity but cannot completely exclude it. More specifically,  strict preference, >, will always be transitive but intransitive indifference may occur if the exponent of the wi's becomes  zero and if there are more than two attributes. As an example consider the case of two attractive (1, 2) and two unattractive  attributes (3, 4). In this case one of the attractive attributes, for instance, may have the same level for the last two  alternatives of an efficient set, i.e., one may have x, < yi < zi for i = 2, 3, 4, whereas x, < y, = z, . Now consider the  majority rule. It will yield x - y since each of x and y is preferred on two attributes, and it will yield z - x for the same  reason. If, however, y and z are compared, the majority rule will yield y > z in violation of transitive indifference, because  y is better on the two bad attributes, whereas z is better on only one good attribute.  An intuitively appealing counterargument arises for the case that both the value functions were positively accelerated and the  weighting functions were everywhere violating QOP. Then the value functions will invert the relation of the relative increases  of unattractive and attractive attributes and the non-QOP w; will invert it again, so that the original state is restored.  This argument does not hold, however, since any positive acceleration of the value functions can at least locally be overcome  by an even stronger acceleration of the unattractive attributes as compared to the attractive ones. That is, one can always  construct an efficient set where positively accelerated value functions invert nothing.  SINGLE-PEAKED PREFERENCES 243  THEOREM 2. Let > be the preference relation generated by a PADM on an efficient set S. Then  (1) > is transitive, and  (2) - is transitive if (i) the exponent of the weighting functions wi is greater zero or (ii) S has only two attributes.  Moreover, intransitive indifference may only occur in triples including the first or the last alternative in S.  Proof. Let (S, IIZ) be efficient and x < y < z E S. Since the three configurations (x > y and z > y), x > y - z, and z > y -  x are excluded by single-peakedness and since transitivity cannot be violated in the case of y > x and y > z, there remain  five cases where transitivity may be violated: (1) x > y > z, (2) x - y > z, (3) x - y - z, (4) z - y > x, and (5) z > y > x.  Cases (1), (3), and (5) can be cleared by showing that (a) x > y implies x > z, (b) z > y implies z > x, and if either premise  is strict, so is its conclusion. The proof will only be sketched since it runs quite close to the one of Theorem 1. By simple  arithmetics or geometric inspection (take any three points on a convex line) it is found that (i) (zi - xi)/(yi - xi) < (zj -  xj)/(yj - xj) and (ii) (zi -yi)/(zi - xi) < (zj -yj)/(zj - xj) for all i E I, and all j E IZ must also hold if S is efficient.  Using the same notation and line of argument as in the proof of Theorem 1, (i) and (ii) yield inequalities corresponding to  (2) except for the indices of the ds:  Eici, wi(dfzx) Y-i.i2 wj(djzx) (14)  LEI, wi(djYX) Y-jEi2 wj(djyx)   LEI, wi(dizy) (15)  < Yj.i2 wj(djzy)   Y_ lE1, wi(dizx) Y-jEi2 wj(djzx)  Using (14) and (15) in the same way as (2) was used in the proof of Theorem i will yield the desired four implications.  Assuming z > y, for instance, merely requires us to replace < by > in (5), and dividing this new inequality by (15) will  result in z > x after some transformations. Together, (a) and (b) guarantee x - z for case (3), and the strict versions of  (a), respectively (b), yield x > z for case (1) and z > x for case (5), thus guaranteeing transitivity for these three cases.  To complete cases (2) and (3), note, again by simple arithmetics, that, if either (i) or (ii) is strict, i.e., <, for some i  and j, the other has to be strict for the same i and j. lf wk(d) = tk sign(d) I dj' with r > 0 for all k, it follows that (14)  is strict if and only if (15) is strict, because wk is strictly QOP for r > 0, as was shown in the proof of Lemma 1. Now,  assume that x - z and correspondingly  Y, wi(dizx)=-Y wj(djzx). iEi, jEi2  (16)  Multiplying (16) by (15) shows that y>z if and only if (15) is strict. Equation (15) being strict is equivalent to (14) being  strict, and dividing (16) by (14) yields y > x. Thus, y > z is equivalent to y > x if x - z, and consequently x - z cannot  hold in  244 K. MICHAEL ASCHENBRENNER  cases (2) and (4). Since (a) requires x > z for case (2) and (b) requires z > x for case (4), we get x > z, respectively, z >  x, as is needed for transitivity.  If r=0, however, both (14) and (15) will be = in most cases. Equation (14) may become < only if diyx = 0, which may happen if  x and y are the first two elements of S. Similarly, (15) is strict if and only if diz y = 0, which can occur if y and z are  the two last elements of S. Other ds may not become zero.due to efficiency and not positively accelerated value functions.  Furthermore, by Definition 2(l), the above ds becoming zero can only occur if there are more than two attributes. In these  cases, < in (14) does not necessarily require < in (15) and vice versa. On the contrary, (14) and (15) can only be strict  simultaneously, if x, y, and z are the only alternatives in S. Consequently, x - z - y > x or z - x - y > z may occur in case  (2) or (4) if and only if r = 0 and there are more than two attributes. Q.E.D.  ELIMINATION RULES AND THEIR GENERALIZATIONS  Another class of decision rules that have received some empirical support but are not consistent with PPFs consists of  so-called elimination rules. Such rules can be characterized by two properties: (1) choice is not accomplished by comparing  alternatives with each other but rather by comparing the alternatives' standing on the attributes with a priori set criteria  on the attributes, and (2) rather than providing a ranking or other comparison of all alternatives these rules partition the  alternatives in at most two subsets: accepted and rejected alternatives. Well known examples of such rules are the conjunctive  and disjunctive rule and Tversky's (1972) elimination-byaspects rule.  The conjunctive rule requires the decision maker to set a criterion or aspiration level on every attribute. Then each  alternative in turn is compared with the criteria on its attributes. If an alternative does not fulfill the criterion on any  attribute, it is immediately rejected. Alternatives satisfying all criteria are accepted.  The disjunctive rule is usually viewed as a complement to the conjunctive rule. Here an alternative is accepted if it fulfills  the criterion on any attribute. Only alternatives satisfying no criterion are rejected. A deeper discussion of these rules and  the consequences of their use can be found in Dawes (1964).  In practice one may also find all kinds of intermediate rules. For instance, in job announcements one may often find that  applicants should be qualified in at least three of some five fields, etc.  The elimination-by-aspects rule may be viewed as a mixture of the conjunctive and lexicographic rule. It requires selecting  the most important attribute first, and setting a criterion only on that attribute. All alternatives that do not fulfill this  criterion are rejected. With the remaining alternatives the same is done on the next most important attribute, and so on.  Tversky (1972) originally suggested proceeding in this way until only one alternative remains which is then chosen. Payne  (1976), however, found that subjects using this rule ceased its use when there were still two or three remaining alternatives  (from originally eight or twelve), and then applied another rule providing  SINGLE-PEAKED PREFERENCES 245  a more thorough comparison of the remaining alternatives for their final choice. Further evidence for the use of the  elimination-by-aspects as well as the conjunctive rule was provided by Payne and Braunstein (1978) and Thorngate and Maki  (note 2).  Obviously, all these elimination rules can never satisfy strict single-peakedness as defined in Definition 1, because  alternatives are considered indifferent within the accepted as well as within the rejected subset. While indifference among  the accepted alternatives would be consistent with a preference apex plateau, indifference among the rejected alternatives  would have to be viewed as a plateau in the branches of the preference function, which is not allowed in Definition 1. The  same argument shows that an elimination rule cannot be a PPF nor strictly monotonically transformed into one, since PPFs yield  strictly single-peaked preferences for efficient sets.  There are, however, two reasons why elimination rules shall, nevertheless, be analyzed further. The first reason is that under  certain conditions they may yield Coombs and Avrunin's (1977b) weaker form of single-peakedness which only requires that the  intermediate one of three ordered alternatives is not least preferred. I will call the accepted subset satisfying this weak  form of single-peakedness a singlepeaked subset.  DEFINITION 8. Let S be a set of alternatives and > a strict order on S. A subset T ~_ S is called a single peaked subset of S  iff the following condition is satisfied for allx,y,zESwith x>y>z:  if x E T and z E T then y E T.  The second reason is the observed switch from elimination rules to other rules. The cited investigations suggest that  elimination rules are mainly used to reduce the number of alternatives when it is large. Other rules are then applied to  compare the alternatives accepted by the elimination rule. If the accepted subset were not singlepeaked, it may appear as if  the second rule were not single-peaked although its sole application without prior elimination would have yielded  single-peaked preferences. Thus combined use of a single-peaked elimination rule and a second single-peaked rule will yield  single-peaked preferences.  For investigating elimination rules the preference relation > is used analogously for attribute levels as for alternatives. It  is assumed that preference is monotonically increasing with attractive and monotonically decreasing with unattractive  attributes, and that a criterion c; is satisfied by an attribute level x; iff x; > c; . Then an elimination rule can be  formally defined by  DEFINITION 9. Let S be a set of n-dimensional alternatives and c = (c..., c;, ..., c a vector of criteria on the  dimensions. A decision rule is called an elimination rule (ER) iff it satisfies the following three conditions:  (1) ER partitions S into exactly two subsets; the set of accepted alternatives A and the set of rejected alternatives A. One  of A or A may be empty.  246 K. MICHAEL ASCHENBRENNER  (2) Inclusion of an alternative x in A or A is solely determined according to the relation > between ci and x; for at least  one i.  (3) If x; > c; for all i then x E A, if c; > x; for all i then x E A for all x E S.  A necessary and sufficient condition for an ER to accept only single-peaked subsets of an efficient set is the following.  DEFINITION 10. An ER is proper iff the following holds for all S, x E S:  (1) x; > yi iff x, > yi for all i E I, , and yj > x; iff x; > y, for all j E I,  (2) If x E~ A then there exists a subset J, J 9 I, or J 9 1, such that c; > x; for all i E J, and for all y E S c; > y; for  all i E J implies y (~ A.  THEOREM 3. Let (S, II,) be an efcient set and A be the subset of S accepted by an ER. A is always a single peaked subset of  S i ER is proper.  Proof. Let x < y < z E S and let S be efficient. First, it will be shown that being proper implies that if y E~ A then x (~ A  or z E~ A; otherwise A would not be a singlepeaked subset of S.  (i) If the premise of Definition 10(2) is not fulfilled, i.e., if there is no x such that x (~ A, then all x E S are accepted  and A is a single-peaked subset.  (ii) Let y E~ A. Then according to Definition 10(2), there is a subset J of the good or bad attributes for which y failed to  meet any criterion. If J E I, , then being proper implies x (~ A since x; < yi < ci and thus c; > xi for all t E J 9_ I, . If  J 9_ I2, then being proper implies z (~ A, because ci < yi < zi and therefore c; > zi for all 'E J9,2'  Next, it has to be shown that an improper ER may select a non-single-peaked subset. It suffices to consider violations of  Definition 10(2), since if part (1) is violated there is no guarantee that xi < yi < c; for i E J ~_ I, implies c; > xi and  the argument in the preceding paragraph fails. Let c; > y; for all i. Then y (~ A. Now there may be x < y and z > y in S such  that x, > c; for some i E IZ and z; > cj for some j E I, . If ER is not proper it does not have to reject x or z on grounds of  ck > yk > xk for all k E I, and ck < yk < zk for all k E 12. Thus x E A, z E A, and y (~ A may occur. Q.E.D.  Corollary 2 is an immediate consequence.  COROLLARY 2. The conjunctive rule and the elimination-by-aspects rule accept only single-peaked subsets of ejficient sets, the  disjunctive rule does not.  Proof. The conjunctive rule and the elimination-by-aspects rule are proper since they reject all alternatives not satisfying  the criterion on any considered attribute. The disjunctive rule accepts any alternative satisfying any criterion. Thus it is  not proper; if an alternative fails to meet any criterion in a subset J E I, , it may, nevertheless be accepted for fulfilling  some criterion in IZ and vice versa. Q.E.D.  SINGLE-PEAKED PREFERENCES 247  The meaning of part (2) of Definition 10 is quite interesting. In words, it requires that for an alternative to be rejected  there must be a subset of good or of bad attributes such that the alternative does not satisfy any criterion in the subset. If  this is the case, then all other alternatives not satisfying any criterion in this subset must also be rejected. Efficiency  guarantees that all alternatives preceding (if J 9_ I,) or all alternatives succeeding (if J 9J2) a rejected alternative will  also fail to meet any criterion in the critical subset, thus securing that a proper ER will only accept singlepeaked subsets.  The conjunctive rule is the most strict among the proper elimination rules. With this rule the subset J must always have size  one. Theorem 3 shows that there are much less strict elimination rules that are proper and thus single-peaked.' In the least  rigorous case the rule may be, so to say, disjunctive within all attractive as well as within all unattractive attributes.  Only in combining I, and IZ it has to be conjunctive, that is, an alternative must pass at least one criterion on a good and  one criterion on a bad attribute to be accepted. A reasonable intermediate example of a proper elimination rule would be to  accept an alternative if it is not too bad on any unattractive attribute and good enough on a least some attractive attribute.  Making friends may be a case in point. He or she should have no attributes that disturb you and he/she must have at least some  attribute you like or that makes him/her interesting for you. Otherwise, the friendship will never begin or it will not last  for long due to boredom. Unfortunately, people do not appear to form efficient sets, oherwise life might be much easier.  A somewhat similar rule was proposed by Dawes (1964) for student admission. He suggested using both a set of lax criteria and  a set of high criteria on the same attributes and being conjunctive with respect to the lax criteria and disjunctive with  respect to the high ones. That is, an applicant must not stand below any of the lax criteria and has to exceed at least one  high criterion. This rule could be transformed into the foregoing one by dividing each dimension into two new ones at some  value between the low and high criterion, for instance, cut the IQ scale at 100 and use the upper half as an attractive  intelligence dimension and invert the lower half into an unattractive stupidity dimension.  Finally, note that the task conditions under which proper ERs yield single-peaked subsets are actually somewhat broader. Only  condition 1 of the efficiency definition, which requires the same order on all attributes, was needed for the proof of Theorem  3. Thus Theorem 3 would also hold for sets of alternatives which are only same-ordered on all attributes but do not fulfill  the requirement about the relative increase of Definition 2(2). In this case, however, the subsequent application of another  rule may violate single-peakedness.  Generalizations of ER. There have been several proposals to generalize the conjunctive and disjunctive principles in such a  way as to provide a complete ranking  5 This was noticed by a referee. Originally, I thought such index subsets must have size one in order to guarantee  single-peaked subsets of alternatives.  248 K. MICHAEL ASCHENBRENNER  or evaluation of the alternatives. One such proposal, which has been considered by Pras and Summers (1975) or Wright and  Barbour (1977), for instance, is the systematic variation of the criteria. One may, for instance, start with a vector of  criteria such that no alternative satisfies any criterion on any attribute. Then the criteria are simultaneously lowered by  comparable quantities' and the conjunctive, respectively disjunctive, rule is applied. This procedure is repeated until in the  final step the respective rule accepts all alternatives. The preference order of the alternatives is then given by the  temporal order in which the alternatives are accepted by the successive applications of the rule. Pras and Summers report  evidence that subjects were using this conjunctive ranking procedure, whereas Wright and Barbour did not find such subjects.  It can be easily seen from the foregoing results that the conjunctive ranking will yield single-peaked preferences for  efficient sets, whereas the disjunctive ranking will not. Conjunctive ranking yields a series of subsets where each foregoing  set is a single-peaked subset of its successor. By setting the amounts by which the criteria are lowered for each successive  application sufficiently low one can insure that no more than one additional alternative from each side of the foregoing  subset will be included in its successor. Thus, the rank order of acceptance will be a strict single-peaked order.  Analogously, the disjunctive ranking will not yield single-peaked peferences since the disjunctive rule does not yield  single-peaked subsets.  Dawes (1964) proposed alternative evaluation rules based on the conjunctive and disjunctive principles. In these evaluation  rules the alternatives are evaluated on all attributes on the same value scale v. The conjunctive evaluation of an alternative  x is then given by its minimum value over all attributes: v(x) = min; v(x;), and the disjunctive evaluation is given by its  maximum value: v(x) = maxi v(x;). More recently ordinal versions of these two rules have become prominent in processoriented  decision research under the name maximin and maximax rule for reasons of their similarity to the respective principles in game  theory (cf. Svenson, 1979). Huber (1980) provides evidence that these rules are sometimes used in pairwise multiattribute  choices.  It is obvious that these evaluation rules will yield the same ranking of the alternatives as the respective ranking rules, if  the amounts by which the criteria are changed in the ranking rules are consistent with the value scale, i.e., equal intervals.  Thus it follows that the conjunctive evaluation rule and the maximin rule are also single-peaked on efficient sets whereas the  disjunctive evaluation and the maximax rule are not.  b Of course, the use of such rules makes only sense under additional assumptions about inter-attribute comparability. The  following results about single-peakedness, however, are completely independent of such assumptions. They do not even require  intea-attribute comparability for successive changes of the criteria.  SINGLE-PEAKED PREFERENCES 249  A RELATED RESULT By EDGEWORTH (1881)  Whereas the foregoing sections showed that the behavioral principles yielding single-peaked preferences for efficient sets are  somewhat broader than Coombs and Avrunin assumed, this section will review some results from Edgeworth's (1881) book  "Mathematical Psychics" showing that efficient sets per se may originate in quite different ways. Actually, the jurist  Edgeworth was pursuing quite different objectives with his "calculus of pleasure and pain" (p. 1). He was interested in the  effects of contract and competition regulations on economic behavior rather than in a general theory of single-peaked  preferences. Single-peakedness is only a side result of his analysis, and he restricted himself to the two-dimensional case of  an approach-avoidance conflict. But, nevertheless, the parallelism to Coombs and Avrunin's work is astounding.  Completely identical are Edgeworth's assumptions about processing pleasure and pain. With the first two axioms of the  "Utilitarian Calculus," the "Law of diminishing utility" (p. 61) and the "Law of increasing labour" (p. 65), he also  postulated the satiation of the good and escalation of the bad thus arriving at the same proper utility functions as Coombs  and Avrunin:  Here x represents the sacrifice objectively measured of Ia person) X it may be manual work done, or commodity manufactured, or  capital obstained from during a certain time. And 1, is the objectively measured remuneration of X. Hence, it may be assumed,  according to the two first axioms of the Utilitarian Calculus, the law of increasing labour, and the law of decreasing  utility, that P being the utility of X, (1) dPldx is continually negative, dPldy positive; (2) d2P/dx', d2Pldy2, d,Pldxdy  continually negative. (p. 34, original italics,  added)  Differing, however, is Edgeworth's assumption about the origin of efficient sets-he is not using this term either. Rather,  Edgeworth is considering the exchange between two persons X and Y having some commodity x, respectively y, at their disposal.  He was pursuing the question of the exchange on which they will agree in the case that each of them would like to receive some  quantity of the other's commodity. Such a situation is characterized for both persons by an attractive and an unattractive  dimension. For X the attractive dimension is the quantity of y he obtains; unattractive is the quantity x he has to give in  exchange. For Y the attractive and unattractive dimensions are correspondingly interchanged.  Now, Edgeworth considered the partners' indifference curves in the x -y plane, that is the exchanges of x for y being equally  preferred to one, respectively the other person. In doing so, he postulated proper preference functions for both. This,  however, implies that X's indifference curves are convex towards the x-axis (Edgeworth, p. 36). Figure 1 displays three such  indifference curves denoted by X,, X2, and X3 .  Since the x-axis is attractive and the y-axis unattractive for Y it immediately follows that X's indifference curves are  efficient sets for Y (Def. 2). Correspondingly, Y's indifference curves (Y,-Y3 in Fig. 1) are convex towards the y-axis and  thus represent efficient sets for X.  250 K. MICHAEL ASCHENBRENNER X3 X  give x (for X ); receive x ( for Y )  FIG. 1. Exchange plane with indifference curves of person X (X, -X,), of person Y (Y, - Y3), and the contract-curve. (This  figure is added by me for illustrative purposes, because Edgeworth was relying on the reader's imagination.)  Having drawn the parallels so far, it is not very amazing any more that Edgeworth arrived at the conclusion that Y's  preferences will be single-peaked with respect to X's indifference curves, and vice versa. Edgeworth proved this by showing  first that there are points in the x -y plane at which none of the partners will get the other's agreement with any preferred  change of the exchange. These points lie on a line connecting the points where X's and Y's indifference curves tangent each  other-the so-called contract curve.  X's direction of maximally increasing preference is perpendicular to his indifference curves towards the upper left.  Correspondingly, Y's direction of preference goes downwards right. Thus the contract-curve is bounded by the indifference  curves passing the origin (X, and Y, in Fig. 1) since points outside this convex hull would be equivalent to giving something  of one's commodity for nothing for one of the persons (Edgeworth, p. 28).  At each point within this convex hull that is not on the contract curve (e.g., a and b in Fig. 1), however, Y can increase his  utility without decreasing X's by moving the exchange along the respective indifference curve of X towards the contract curve,  because this will increase the distance to Y's indifference curve passing through a, respectively b. The same holds for X  analogously.  If then we enquire in what direction X and Y will consent to move together, the answer is, in any direction between their  respective lines of indifference, in a direction positive as it may be called for both. At what point then will they refuse to  move at all? When their lines of indifference are coincident (and lines of preference not only coincident, but in opposite  directions); whereof the necessary condition is (dP,/dx)(dPY/dy) - (dPX/dy)(dPY/dx) = 0. (p. 22)  SINGLE-PEAKED PREFERENCES 251  In other words, each partner's preferences are single-peaked with respect to the other's indifference curves-which are  efficient sets.  Comparing Edgeworth's and Coombs and Avrunin's theory, the only substantial difference is in the assumptions behind the origin  of efficient sets. Coombs and Avrunin can do without a partner and trace efficient sets back to the behavior of the decision  maker ("Dominated alternatives are ignored."), whereas Edgeworth's efficient sets originate from the behavior of a partner. If  one considers, however, that the opportunity for choice requires one who offers the choice, this difference appears not very  large. Coombs and Avrunin's assumption is somewhat more general in that it also allows suppliers not having any preference  function at all, like nature, for instance. In return, Edgeworth's theory is more economical subsisting upon the assumption of  proper preference functions alone; and this assumption is more precise being sufficient for efficient sets, whereas Coombs and  Avrunin's assumption of ignoring dominated alternatives is only necessary for efficient sets. Finally, one has to consider the  extension to more than two dimensions and the greater elegance of the proof as an advantage of Coombs and Avrunin's theory.  But even this was foreseen by Edgeworth: "No doubt the one theory which has been thus differently expressed could be presented  by a professed mathematician more elegantly and scientifically" (p. 24).  DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS  While the task condition-efficient sets-which Coombs and Avrunin suggested being responsible for eliciting single-peaked  preferences is retained I have shown that the behavioral principles leading to single-peakedness in such tasks are somewhat  broader than Coombs and Avrunin assumed. Especially, the often found attributebased decision rules which can formally be  summarized under the additive difference model yield single-peaked preferences under fairly weak requirements, including a  vast number of cases in which this model may yield even intransitive preferences for other sets of alternatives. This  expansion of the theory also goes in a more realistic direction, since recent process oriented decision research has provided  evidence that decision rules consistent with Coombs and Avrunin's proper preference functions are rarely used by individuals.  Rather choices seem to be based on heuristic rules making use of ordinal comparisons of the alternatives' attribute levels.  The analysis has shown that most of these empirically supported rules do also yield single-peaked preferences for efficient  sets.  The only exception among the presented attribute-based choice rules is the lexicographic semiorder. Tversky (1969) used  approach-approach efficient sets of one-outcome bets combining decreasing amounts to win with increasing probability to  demonstrate the use of this rule. In order to render the discrimination of the presumably more important probability attribute  more difficult the probabilities were presented only graphically by means of sectors of circles while the amounts to win were  presented numerically. With probability differences of 0.042 and winning  252 K. MICHAEL ASCHENBRENNER  differences of 25~ between neighboring bets Tversky found that about one third of his subjects seemed to apply the  lexicographic semiorder choosing the bet with the greater amount to win from pairs of bets with small probability differences,  whereas choices among more distant bets were based on the probability to win. However, this proportion of subjects was not  only greatly reduced (to one-sixth) by increasing the probability differences to 0.083 but also by reducing the winning  differences to 10~ while probability differences were kept at 0.042. Thus it seems that two conditions must be simultaneously  met in order to have some decision makers apply this rule: (1) the alternatives' attribute levels on the more important  attribute must be hard to discriminate, and (2) these differences must appear neglible in comparison to the difference on the  next most important attribute. Thus it should not be difficult to identify specific situations in advance where its use is to  be expected.  Among the elimination rules discussed and their generalizations, only those rules making full use of the disjunctive  principle, i.e., rules that accept alternatives or rank them high on the basis of their good standing on some attribute no  matter how bad these alternatives are on other attributes, do not yield single-peakedness. Whereas the use of proper  elimination rules appears quite reasonable and, furthermore, there is considerable evidence that the single-peaked conjunctive  and elimination-by-aspects rules are applied by decision makers, applications of the disjunctive rule are hard to find. To my  knowledge, only Huber (1980) found subjects using the maximax rule. And even in his study it was only used after other  (single-peaked) rules did not allow a choice. In efficient sets these other rules, however, will usually allow a choice. With  the greatest-attractivity- difference rule which, according to Huber, most often leads to switches to the maximax rule,  indifference may occur between two alternatives of an efficient set located in the preference apex. In this case, however, not  even subsequent application of the maximax rule will yield violations of single-peakedness since this would require at least  The importance of Coombs and Avrunin's task condition of efficient sets, on the other hand, has been stressed even more.  Efficient sets are not only necessary for all PPFs to yield single-peaked preferences, as Coombs and Avrunin have shown, they  are also necessary for the presented class of proper additive difference models being single-peaked. Only when elimination  rules are considered can the efficiency requirement be somewhat relaxed, but only as long as the decision maker does not  subsequently apply one of the other rules.  If one wants to trace back the origin of efficient sets to other behavioral principles, as Coombs and Avrunin intended with  their assumption of ignoring dominated alternatives, one again dicovers that there are other equally sound assumptions  yielding the same or even more conclusive results. Reinterpreting Edgeworth's (1881) result, it could be shown that in  exchange situations efficient sets arise from the offering person acting according to proper preference functions. Last not  least, one should not forget that in many cases efficient sets may arise four technical, natural, or economic reasons alone  without any additional behavioral interference. For instance, consider such trade-offs as price versus quality or durability  of some manufactured requisite. As long as no technical revolution occurs, further increases in durability beyond  SINGLE-PEAKED PREFERENCES 253  some level usually become increasingly costly since the required accuracy in manufacturing increases faster than the  additional durability gained by it. Or in car driving, for instance, the unattractive gasoline consumption is a positively  accelerated function of the (at least for some persons) attractive speed because of the natural law that air resistance  increases quadratically with speed.  In summarizing these arguments, one sees that efficient sets may originate in various ways. When efficient sets are present  nearly everything a decision maker can do will result in single-peaked preferences. Thus it seems that single-peaked  preferences are mainly a function of the task, whereas the specific behavior is almost irrelevant. If the role the behavioral  requirements (e.g., no positive acceleration of value functions or quotient-order-preserving weighting functions) serve in the  proofs of Coombs and Avrunin's or my theorems is inspected more deeply, it becomes evident that their only purpose is to  insure that the decision rule does not invert certain environmental relations found in efficient sets. As long as this is  guaranteed anything else does not matter. Although peoples' use of decision rules may be simplifying and suboptimal it is,  nevertheless, not insensitive to task characteristics (Aschenbrenner, 1980). Since the relatively faster acceleration of the  unattractive attributes is probably the most important and prominent characteristic of efficient sets it is not too surprising  that decision behavior preserves this relation.  Thus the present analysis fits well into some other recent studies showing that previously unexplained behavioral phenomena  are simply functions of the task rather than of the specific way the human mind works. Other examples are Dawes' (1975)  analyses of the overwhelmingly good fit of additive models in clinical judgement studies and of the acquisition of formal  logical operations or Einhorn and Hogarth's (1978) analysis of the often observed phenomenon of overconfidence in one's  judgments. As Edwards (1971, p. 640) stressed most pointedly, this task determination of behavioral phenomena was first  recognized by Brunswik (1956) and is still not sufficiently attended to in psychological research:  Probably the most underrated psychologist of the 1937-1955 period was Egon Brunswik... he saw one thing very clearly that  seems to have escaped all of his contemporaries except the very few who took the trouble to understand him. He saw that  psychology is not only about people who emit behavior-it is also, perhaps more importantly, about the tasks that elicit that  behavior. That is, he saw that the task-relevant characteristics of the environment are a necessary part of every process  theory in psychology.... My own guess is that most successful models now available are successful exactly because of their  success in describing tasks, not people.'  The present analysis concentrated on single-peaked preferences in multiattribute choice behavior. Single-peaked relations  have, however, been also found in quite different fields, like, for instance, the well known Yerkes and Dodson (1908) law on  the single-peaked dependence of performance on arousal. Some link between such excitement concepts an preference is provided,  for instance, by Berlyne's (1967)  ' How successful the task condition of efficient sets actually is in eliciting single-peaked preferences will be reported in  another paper.  254 K. MICHAEL ASCHENBRENNER  explanation of the single-peakedness of hedonic tone, which was already postulated by Wundt (1874). Berlyne assumed that the  central-nervous excitation which is increasing with stimulus intensity will arouse two antagonistic processes: At first a  reinforcement mechanism promoting excitation, and later with increasing arousal an avoidance mechanism the influence of which  is, however, increasing faster. Assuming an additive compensatory cooperation of the two mechanisms results in  singlepeakedness. The correspondence with Coombs and Avrunin's proper preference functions is obvious.  Although I would not insist that the rules considered here would provide better explanation for such single-peaked relations  in other fields, the present analysis yields at least two conclusions which generally apply to such single-peaked relations.  First, it shows that single-peakedness may be as well a result of noncompensatory interaction of discontinuous processes as it  may be an effect of the usually assumed compensatory processes. Further, the former class even seems to allow a much wider  variety of combination rules than the latter. On the other hand, the analysis shows that the observation of single-peakedness  alone is not sufficient to test theories of its origin. Rather, the identification of and discrimination among the choice  rules presented here requires sophisticated construction of sets of multiattributed alternatives that do not come close to  being efficient at all (cf. Huber, 1980). A necessary requirement is the possibility of independent variation of the  attributes involved. Under task conditions that yield single-peakedness the rules are indistinguishable. It is questionable  whether such independent variation can be accomplished for the central-nervous mechanism assumed to be involved in other  single-peaked relations.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  This paper is based on parts of my doctoral dissertation submitted to the Faculty of Social and Behavioral Sciences of the  Ruprecht-Karls-Universitat in Heidelberg. Dietrich Albert's and Joachim Werner's comments and discussions were very helpful in  preparing the dissertation. Thanks are also due to George S. Avrunin, Clyde H. Coombs, and Robin M. Hogarth for critically  reading a previous draft of this paper. Last not least, the competent comments of two anonymous referees were extremely  helpful for preparing the final manuscript and removing some flaws in the arguments. Parts of the reported work were done  while I was at the Sonderforschungsbereich 24 ,Sozialwissenschaftliche Entscheidungsforschung" at the Universitat Mannheim  with support from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and the Land Baden-Wdrttemberg. Requests for reprints should be sent to  Dr. K. Michael Aschenbrenner, Psychologisches Institut, Universitat Heidelberg, Hauptstr. 47-51, D-6900 Heidelberg, West  Germany.  REFERENCES  ASCHENBRENNER, K. M. Single-peaked risk preferences and their dependability on the gambles' presentation mode. Journal of  Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 1978, 4, 513-520.  ASCHENBRENNER, K. M. Komplexes Wahlverhalten als Problem der Informationsverarbeitung. In H. Ueckert & D. Rhenius (Eds.),  Komplexe menschliche Iq/ormationsverarbeitung. Bern: Huber, 1979.  SINGLE-PEAKED PREFERENCES 255  ASCHENBRENNER, K. M. Kaufentscheidung. In C. Graf Hoyos, W. Kroeber-Riel, L. v. Rosenstiel, & B. Striimpel (Eds.),  Grundbegriife der Wirtschaftspsychologie. Munich: Koesel, 1980.  BETTMAN, J. R., & KAKKAR, J. Effect of information presentation format on consumer information acquisition strategies. Journal  of Consumer Research, 1977, 3, 233-240.  BERLYNE, D. E. Arousal and reinforcement. In D. Levine (Ed.), Nebraska symposium on motivation, 1967. Lincoln: Univ. of  Nebraska Press, 1967.  BRUNSWIK, E. Perception and the representative design of experiments. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1956.  CAROLL, J. D. Individual differences in multidimensional scaling. In R. N. Shepard, A. K. Romney, & S. B. Nerlove (Eds.),  Multidimensional scaling, Vol. I: Theory. New York: Seminar Press, 1972. COOMBS, C. H., & AVRUNIN, G. S. Single-peaked  functions and the theory of preference. Psychological Review, 1977, 84, 216-230. (a)  COOMBS, C. H., & AVRUNIN, G. S. A theorem of single-peaked functions in one dimension. Journal of Mathematical Psychology,  1977, 16, 261-266. (b)  COOMBS, C. H., & MEYER, D. E. Risk preferences in coin-toss games. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1969, 6, 514-527.  DAWES, R. M. Social selection based on multidimensional criteria. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 1964, 68, 104-109  DAWES, R. M. The mind, the model, and the task. In F. Restle, R. M. Shifrin, N. J. Castellan, H. R. Lindman, & D. B. Pisoni  (Eds.), Cognitive theory (Vol. 1). Hillsdale, N. J.: Erlbaum, 1975. DEMBER, W. N., & EARL, R. W. Analysis of exploratory,  manipulatory, and curiosity behavior. Psychological Review, 1957, 64, 91-96.  EDGEWORTH, F. Y. Mathematical psychics. London: Paul, 1881.  EDWARDS, W. Bayesian and regression models in human information processing-a myoptic perspective. Organizational Behavior and  Human Performance, 1971, 6, 639-648.  EINHORN, H. J., & HOGARTH, R. M. Confidence in judgment: Persistence of the illusion of validity. Psychological Review, 1978,  85, 395-416.  ENGEL, R. Experimentelle Untersuchungen iiber die Abhangigkeit der Lust and Unlust yon der Reizstarke beim Geschmackssinn.  Archiv fur die Gesamte Psychologie, 1928, 64, 1-36.  FECHNER, G. T. Zur Experimentellen Asthetik. Abhandlungen der Koniglich Sdchsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften:  Mathematicah-Physische Klasse, 1871, 9, 555-635.  FISHBURN, P. C. The theory of social choice. Princeton, N. J.: Princeton Univ. Press, 1973.  GOLDBERG, D., & COOMBS, C. H. Some applications of unfolding theory to fertility analysis. Paper presented at the 1962 Annual  Conference of the Midbank Memorial Fund on Emerging Techniques in Population Research. Reprinted in G. M. Maranell (Ed.),  Scaling. Chicago: Aldine, 1974.  HUBER, O. Nontransitive multidimensional preferences: Theoretical analysis of a model. Theorv and Decision, 1979, 10, 147-165.  (a)  HUBER, O.Intransitive Praferenzen and Strategien fur multidimensionale Entscheidungen: GewichtetePraferenz-Mengen-Strategie  and Differenz-Strategie. Zeitschrift ftir Experimentelle and Angewandte Psychologie, 1979, 26, 72-93. (b)  HUBER, O. Dominance among some cognitive strategies for multidimensional decisions. In L. Sj66erg, T. Tyszka, & J. A. Wise  (Eds.), Human decision making (Vol. II). Lund:Doxa, 1980.  JOHNSON, E. J., & Russo, J. E. The organisation of product information in memory identified by recall times. In H. K. Hunt  (Ed.), Advances in consumer research (Vol. 5). Ann Arbor: Association for Consumer Research, 1978.  KRANTz, D. H., LUCE, R. D., SUPPES, P., & TVERSKY, A. Foundations of measurement, Volume 1: Additive and polynomial  representations. New York: Academic Press, 1971.  MAY, K. O. Intransitivity, utility, and the aggregation of preference patterns. Econometrica, 1954, 22, 1-13.  PAYNE, J. W. Task complexity and contingent processing in decision making: An information search and protocol analysis.  Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 1976, 16, 366-387. PAYNE, J. W., & BRAUNSTEIN, M. L. Risky choice: An  examination of information acquisition behavior. Memory &Cognition, 1978, 6, 554-561.  256 K. MICHAEL ASCHENBRENNER  PAYNE, J. W., BRAUNSTEIN, M. L., & CAROLL, J. S. Exploring predecisonal behavior: An alternative approach to decision  research. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 1978, 22, 17-44. PRAs, B., & SUMMERS, J. A. A comparison of linear an  nonlinear evaluation process models. Journal of Marketing Research, 1975, 12, 276-281.  PRIESTLEY, J. Introductory essays to Hartley's theory of the human mind. London, 1775.  SHOCKER, A. D., & SRINtVASAN, V. Multiattribute approaches of product concept evaluation and generation: A critical review.  Journal of Marketing Research, 1979, 16, 159-180.  SVENSON, O. Process description of decision making. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 1979, 23, 86-112.  THOMAS, H. Unfolding the baby's mind: The infant's selection of visual stimuli. Psychological Review, 1973, 80, 468-488.  TVERSKY, A. Intransitivity of preferences. Psychological Review, 1969, 76, 31-48.  TVERSKY, A. Elimination by aspects: A theory of choice. Psychological Review, 1972, 79, 281-299. WRIGHT, P., & BARBOUR, F.  Phased decision making: Sequels to an initial screening. In M. K. Starr & M. Zeleny (Eds.), Multiple criteria decision making.  Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1977.  WUNDT, W. M. Grundzuge der physiologischen Psychology. Leipzig: Engelmann, 1874.  YERKEs, R. M., & DODSON, J. D. The relation of strength of stimulus to rapidity of habit formation. Journal of Comparative  Neurology and Psychology, 1908, 18, 459-482.  YOUNG, P. T., & FALK, J. L. The relative acceptability of sodium chloride solutions as a function of concentration and water  need. Journal of Comparative Physiological Psychology, 1956, 49, 569-575.  REFERENCE NOTES  1. Russo, J. E., & DOSHER, B. A. An information processing analysis of binary choices. Unpublished manuscript, Pittsburg:  Graduate School of Industrial Administration, Carnegie-Mellon University, 1976.  2. THORNGATE, W. S., & MAKI, J. Decision heuristics and the choice of political candidates. Unpublished manuscript, Edmonton:  Psychology Department, University of Alberta, 1976.  RECEIVED: November 5, 1980