10.1016/0022-2496(81)90038-9
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 24, 101-111 (1981)  Finite and Infinite State Confusion Models  JAN P.H. VAN SANTEN  Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, New Jersey  AND DONALD BAMBER  Veterans Administration Medical Center, St. Cloud, Minnesota  A confusion model is defined as a model that decomposes response probabilities in stimulus identification experiments into  perceptual parameters and response parameters. Historically, confusion models fall into two groups. Models in Group I, which  includes Townsend's (Perception and Psychophysics, 1971, 9, 40-50) overlap model, were developed on the basis of the notion  that stimulus identification is mediated by a finite number of internal states. We call the general class of models that have  this processing interpretation finite state confusion models. Models in Group 11, which includes Luce's (R. 0. Luce et al.,  Eds., Handbook of Mathematical Psychology (Vol. I), New York: Wiley, 1963) biased choice model, were not developed on the  basis of an explicit processing interpretation. It is shown here that models in Group II are not finite state confusion  models. We prove in addition that except for Falmagne's (Journal of Mathematical Psychology,. 1972, 9, 206-224) simply biased  model models in Group II belong to a certain class of igftnite state confusion models, namely, models asserting that stimulus  identification is mediated by a continuous space of vectors representing detector activation levels.  I. INTRODUCTION  A number of models have been proposed for explaining data from standard stimulus identification models, i.e., experiments  where on each trial one of n possible stimuli has to be identified. These models express identification data in terms of  perceptual and response parameters. It is assumed that these parameters reflect underlying perceptual and response processes.  Historically, confusion models fall into two groups (which we call Group I and Group II; see Fig. 1) that were developed on  the basis of different conceptions of the stimulus identification process.  The first author's present address is: Department of Psychology, New York University. The paper was completed while the first  author was supported by grant AFOSR-80-0279 of the United States Airforce. The second author was supported by the Veterans  Administration. We express gratitude to Jim Johnston, Jim Townsend, and John van Praag for helpful comments, and in particular  to Dave Noreen for a thorough review and for suggesting a shorter proof of Theorem 1. Address reprint requests to Jan P. H.  van Santen, Department of Psychology, New York University, 6 Washington Place, New York, N.Y. 10003.  0022-2496/81/050101-11S02.00;0  Copyright C, 1981 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  102 VAN SANTEN AND BAMBER  Models in Group I were based on the notion that stimulus identification is a finite state process. According to this  conception, a perceptual process produces one of a finite number of possible outputs (which we call internal states) that  subsequently form the input to a response process. More explicitly, this conception rests on two assumptions. First,  processing is strictly sequential in that the response process has no information about the stimulus other than what it  receives from the perceptual process. The second assumption is that for a given stimulus set there is some finite set of  internal states that is used as input to the response process.  The general class of models that have this processing interpretation will be called finite state confusion models (Bamber &  van Santen, Note 1). Models in Group I, however, do not merely assume that, for a given finite stimulus set, the set of  internal states is finite. They specifically assume that the internal states correspond to (potentially overlapping) subsets  of the stimulus set. Using terminology introduced below, these models belong to the class of sophisticated quessing models, as  defined by Townsend and Ashby (Note 2). Group I consists of the overlap model (Townsend, 1971), the pure quessing model  (Broadbent, 1967), the informed quessing model (Pachella, Smith, & Stanovich, 1977), and the confusion-choice model (Nakatani,  1972).  Models in Group II were not developed on the basis of a finite state process, or, in fact, on the basis of an explicit  processing interpretation. These models apply Luce's (1959) choice axiom to the stimulus identification situation: the  probability of a response is given by the ratio of the strength of that response to the sum of the strengths of all responses.  Response strength, in turn, is given by the product of perceptual and response parameters. Group II consists of the biased  choice model  FINITE  OVERLAP MODEL  SOPHISTICATED   STATE  PURE GUESSING MODEL  GUESSING -   CONFUSION  INFORMED GUESSING MODEL  MODELS   MODELS  CONFUSION-CHOICE MODEL  GROUP I  INFINITE STATE CONFUS1011 MODELS  BIASED CHOICE MODEL  MULTIPLICATIVE SIMILARITY MODEL  L RESPONSE BIAS MODEL SIMPLY BIASED MODEL  GROUP II  FIG. l. Overview of various classes of confusion models. All relations involve strict subsets. For example. sophisticated  guessing models form a strict subset of finite state confusion models.  CONFUSION MODELS 103  (Luce, 1963), the response bias model (Broadbent, 1967), the multiplicative similarity model (Smith, Note 3), and the simply  biased model (Falmagne, 1972).  It appears, then, that very different psychological theories underlie the models in Group I and Group II. However, it has  sometimes been discovered in mathematical psychology that models which appear to be very different have a common processing  interpretation. For example, in preferential choice theory Luce's (1959) choice model was originally proposed as a random  response model (i.e., fixed internal stimulus representations but a random response rule); however, Luce (1959) showed that it  also could be interpreted as a random utility model (i.e., randomly fluctuating internal stimulus representations but a  deterministic response rule). Thus, it had essentially the same processing interpretation as Thurstone's (1927) theory of  comparative judgment (Case V), the only difference consisting of the type of distribution of the internal stimulus  representations. The goal of the present paper is to investigate whether a similar situation exists in the context of  confusion models, i.e., whether Group II models can be given essentially the same processing interpretation as Group I models.  In this paper, we first show that models in Group II cannot be interpreted as finite state confusion models. Because  sophisticated guessing models form a special case of finite state confusion models, this result shows that models in Group II  cannot be interpreted as sophisticated guessing models. In addition, because sophisticated guessing models have an upper bound  on the number of states (the bound corresponding to the number of subsets of a set of n stimuli, i.e., 2"), the above result  implies that one cannot construct sophisticated guessing models that approximate Group II models arbitrarily closely. Second,  we show that except for Falmagne's (1972) simply biased model all models in Group II belong to a certain class of infinite  state confusion models. These models differ from finite state confusion models in that their set of internal states is a  continuous multidimensional space where each dimension corresponds to the fluctuating activation level of a stimulus detector.  Some Properties of Finite and Infinite State Processes  The assumption of strict sequentiality appears extremely general. Yet, an important mathematical consequence can be derived.  Strict sequentiality implies that PQI i, k), i.e., the probability of response rj given stimulus si and internal state k, is  equal to P(j I k), i.e., the probability of response rj given internal state k.  For finite state confusion models (with m states) it follows that  CII=PUIi)= Y, P(kJi)P(jJk). (1) k=l,m  This provides a decomposition of the observable confusions P(1I i) into probabilities P(kI i), that characterize the  perceptual process, and probabilities P(II k), that characterize the response process. Interestingly, given m, (1) can be  tested while making only assumptions of a very general nature about the underlying conditional probabilities P(kI i) and  P(jJk) (Bamber & van Santen, Note 1).  104 VAN SANTEN AND BAMBER  The analogous decomposition for the infinite state confusion models considered in this paper involves an integral of products  Q(kJi)P(jJk), where Q(kl i) is a probability density measure ranging over random vectors k.  Definitions'  We first define a confusion matrix for a stimulus set S = {s; I i = 1,..., n} and a response set R = Irj U= 1,..., n} as an n  X n matrix C= [c,j ], where cU is the conditional probability that response rJ is made when stimulus sr is presented (it is  assumed that, for k = 1,..., n, rk is the correct response to stimulus Sk). Let Uand Vbe sets of possible values that  vectors of perceptual and response parameters, respectively, are allowed to take; let Mmap UX Vinto C", where Cis the  set of all n X n confusion matrices. Then (M U", V is a confusion model (for n stimuli).  A confusion model (M", U V is a finite state confusion model if an only if there exist a finite set Kand conditional  probability density functions f (") ( - I i; u) and 9(n)( - I k; v), such that for all i, j = 1,..., n, and for all u E U" and  v E V"  M"(u, v)r, = E f("'(kl i; u) g l"1(j Jk; v). (2)  In other words, a confusion model is said to be a finite state confusion model if its perceptual and response parameters can  be interpreted as parametrizing conditional probabilities that characterize a finite state process. It is essential that the  perceptual parameters of the model (u) parametrize only the probabilities characterizing the perceptual process C f), and that  the response parameters of the model (v) parametrize only the probabilities characterizing the response process (i.e., g).  A confusion model is an unite state confusion model if and only if there exists a Cartesian product K" of a finite number of  real intervals, and conditional probability density functions f t"1( - I i; u) and g k; v) such that for all i, j = 1,..., n  and for all uEU"andvGV":  M"(u, v)u=J f(n)(kIi; u) g (") (j; k; v) dk. (3) keX In all cases considered in this paper K" is R" (=real n-space). Obviously, definition (3) describes only one type of infinite  state confusion model; there are other cardinalities or topological dimensions of K" that could have been chosen instead. The  justification for this particular definition will become more apparent below.  There are two observations we wish to make. First, a superficial reading of definition (2) may lead one to think that the  standard signal detection model is a finite state confusion model, because one could regard the stimulus process being above  or below the criterion as representing the (two) internal states. However, the conditional probability that stimulus i gives  rise to one of these two internal states depends on the criterion, which depends on response parameters. Hence the  'Some of the notation in this section was borrowed from Townsend (1978).  CONFUSION MODELS 105  requirement that f be independent of v is not satisfied. More generally, models that at some point quantize a continuum are  not trivially finite state confusion models if the quantization depends on response parameters. The second observation is that  by considering Kin Eq. (2) as a quantization of some Cartesian product of a finite number of real intervals, it can be  demonstrated that any finite state confusion model can also be given an interpretation as an infinite state confusion model.  However, the probability density functions f ( in this interpretation are multidimensional histograms, and hence this  interpretation might be considered pathalogical.  Sophisticated Guessing Models  As was stated earlier, all models in Group I belong to the class of sophisticated guessing models, as defined by Townsend and  Ashby (Note 2). According to their definition, sophisticated guessing models assume that output from perceptual processes  consists of partial information that is compatible with some alternatives (constituting the confusion set), but incompatible  with the remaining alternatives. Subsequently, response processes choose an alternative from this confusion set. Thus,  sophisticated guessing models are finite state confusion models that assume that states correspond to confusion sets.  Formally, a confusion model (M U,,, Vn) is a sophisticated guessing model if and only if (a) it is a finite state confusion  model, and (b) there exists a family of sets CS = JCS,, cs2 ,... }, where each csk is a subset of S, such that:  If f(n) (kli; u) * 0 then Si E Csk.  If g `)(jjk; v) 9E 0 then Si E Csk.  Rather than providing full formal definitions of the models in Group 1, we merely state which confusion sets these models  assume. Townsend's (1971) overlap model assumes that CS = ( {s, },..., {s}, {sS2), ..., is,,-,, s11. According to  Broadbent's (1967) pure guessing model, CS = { {s, },..., {s}, is,,..., s.)). In the informed guessing model (Pachella et  al. 1977), CS is the union of the CS's of the overlap model and the pure guessing model. In Nakatani's (1972) confusion-choice  model, CS is simply the set of all subsets of S.  It is important to point out that Nakatani's (1972) model, even though it assumes an underlying multidimensional continuum, is  a finite state confusion model because this continuum is quantized independently of response parameters (p.106, Assumption 5).  II. MODELS THAT ARE NOT FINITE STATE CONFUSION MODELS  We first prove the following general lemma:  LEMMA 1. A st#f1cient condition for a confusion model (M U V not to be a finite state confusion model is that for every  integer p there exist perceptual vectors  106 VAN SANTEN AND BAMBER  u(1),..., u(p) E Un, response vectors v('),..., v(p) E Vn, nonzero reals A...... Ap, and B.., Bp, distinct reals X.., Xp,  distinct reals Y.., Yp, and indices io,ju, such that for all r, c = 1,..., p:  Mn(u(r), v(c))(du = ArBcl (Xr - Yc).  Proof. Consider any u('),..., u(p) E Un and v(1),..., v(p) E V Let L,, be the n X n matrix M,,(u(r), V(c)), and let L be the  partitioned np X np matrix having L, in "cell" (r, c).  Now suppose, contrary to the assertion of the lemma, that (Mn, Un, Vn) is a finite state confusion model. Then, for each r, c  = 1,..., p, we can write  Lrc = [ E f(n)(kl i' . u(r)) g (n)hj k' . v(c))~ keK.  Let m(n) be the number of elements in Kn. When fr denotes the n X m(n) matrix consisting of elements f (")(kl i; u(r)), where  i = 1,..., n and k = 1,..., m(n), and when gc denotes the m(n) X n matrix consisting of elements g (n)v l k; v (c)), where j =  1,..., p, then we can write L,=f,gc. If we let f* be the partitioned np X m(n) matrix consisting of a vertical stack of the p  n X m(n) matrices f ,..., fp, and g* the partitioned m(n) X np matrix consisting of a horizontal stack of the p m(n) X n  matrices g..., gp, then we can further simplify the above matrix equality as  L=f*g*.  It is well-known that Rank(L) cannot exceed the number of rows of g* (or the number of columns of f*), which is m(n). What we  now show is that under the conditions of the lemma, for any p we can always construct L such that Rank(L) >, p. Hence, by  taking p > m(n) we complete the proof.  The conditions of the lemma directly imply that L contains a p X p submatrix T = [A,B~/(X, - Y,)]. Because the rank of a  matrix does not change when any of its rows or columns is multiplied by a non-zero scalar, the rank of T equals that of T*,  defined as the p X p matrix 1/(X, - YJ It is known (e.g., Muir, 1930, p. 348; Noble, 1960, p. 223, 224) that the determinant  of T* is non-zero. Hence Rank(T*), and thus Rank(T), is p. Because T is a submatrix of L, Rank(L) > p. This completes the  proof.  THEOREM 1. The following models are not finite state confusion models:  1.1. The biased choice model (Luce, 1963).  U_ { n l n is an n X n matrix, 1(U = nor > 0, nrr = 1, rl,i > l ik nki }' Vn = 1,6 is an n X 1 vector, fl1 > 0, Y Qj = 1 ,  ( J=1, n ~  Mn(u, v)U=?lrjflj' Y_ ?lik#k' k= 1, n  CONFUSION MODELS 107  1.2. The response bias model (Broadbent, 1967):  U= {a la is an n X 1 vector, aj> 1}, V.= t V I V is an n X 1 vector, Vj > 0 },  Mn(u' Oi1 = VII (L..~ Vk + ai Vi) I/ k#i  if jai  =ajV1/ (y- Vk+atVj) r k*i  1.3. The multiplicative'similarity model (Smith, Note 3): U {ala is an n X 1 vector, a,>01, V,,= { c 1c is an n X 1 vector,  v,>0},  Mn(u,v)ti=aialcll(Y aiakCk+Ci) f II k#i  Ci y aiakCk+Ci 1(k*i )  1.4. The simply biased choice model (Falmagne, 1972): U= { g I g is an n X 1 vector, gi > 0j, V= { f If is an n X 1  vector, gi > 0 }  M,,(u, v)ti = f' (Y- fk + g) k*i  if j*i  =gi/ (Efk+gi) f j=i. 111 k*f  Proof of 1.1. Let io =ju = 1. Choose p distinct reals e( l),..., e(, where  0 < e(r) < 1. Let ,(r) = e(") if j :f i, and 1 if j = i. Choose vectors fl('~,...( E V such that no two vectors have  equal ratios of the first element to the sum of the last n - i elements. Let Ar = Xr = 1/,,;i), B, = 1, and Y, = -Y-k=2.Ok  )I#;`)). It can easily be demonstrated that thus defined, Ar, B, Xr, and Y,, satisfy the conditions for Lemma 1.  The proofs of Theeorems 1.2-1.4 are essentially the same, and are omitted.  One can consider the ?Icrrs and /f`)'s used in the proof as constituting the simplest special case of the biased choice model.  This suggests that no reasonable version of the biased choice model is a finite state confusion model.  108, VAN SANTEN AND BAMBER  III. INFINITE STATE CONFUSION MODELS  In this section we show that models in Group II, except for Falmagne's (1972) simply biased model, are infinite state  confusion models, as defined in (3). We first prove the following lemma, which is basically a corollary to Lemma 6 in Yellott  (1977 ).Z  LEMMA 2. A sujf1cient condition for a corl/usion model (Mn, Un, Vn) to be an infinite state confusion model is that there  exist (positive) real-valued functions z,j and p;, such that for all i, j = 1,..., n, u E U and v E Vn  M" (u, v)rt=ru(u)pj(v) zi1(u)p1(U)~ 1=1,n  '  Proof. Let k E K= Rn (=real n-space). Define the following conditional probability density functions:  f(n)(kl i; u) = H e-'-(k(-1uY*,Dun e-lk,-108 sY)h 1=1,n  g(n)(j j k; v) = 1/tk,if k; +log p,(v) = maximum{k, + log p,(v) l 1 = 1,..., n}, and 0 otherwise. Here, tk is the number of  1's for which the above maximum is obtained.  Let h,,= log rj(u) + log pj(v), and let, for fixed i, Xt..... X(,, be independent random variables, each having as probability  density function the double exponential distribution with parameters 1 and 0, i.e.:  fxxu) = e-e-zue-xu.  Then we can write  ff(n)(k l i; u) g (n)!; l k; v) A keK = P[X;j + hu = maximum{X+ ht, l 1 = 1,..., n} ]. (4)  By Lemma 6 in Yellot (1977), it follows that:  P[Xu + h(u =maximum{X(, + hl 1 = 1,..., n}) = ehu' 1=1,n  e'`".  Using the definition of hug the definition of infinite state confusion model given in (3), and (4), we complete the proof.  THEOREM 2. The biased choice model (Lute, 1963), the response bias model  'Townsend (Note 5) independently stated essentially the same result.  CONFUSION MODELS 109  (Broadbent, 1967), and the multiplicative similarity model (Smith, Note 3) are infinite state confusion models.  Proof. For the biased choice model, let r,j(rl) = jj, and let pj(f) = P,. For the response bias model, let r,j(a) = a, if j =  i, 1 if j $ i, and let pj(V) = Vj. For the multiplicative similarity model, let r,j(a) = 1 if j = i, a; aj if j:* i, and let  pj(c) = cj. This completes the proof.  These results imply that the biased choice model has the following processing interpretation (the interpretations for the  response bias model and the multiplicative similarity model are analogous). The perceptual process involves activation of n  "noisy" detectors D.., D associated with responses r.., r When stimulus i is presented, detector Dj has output x,j +  log rl,;, where x,j is random noise and where ?I1j reflects the similarity of stimulus i to stimulus j. The noise components  have a double exponential distribution with parameters 1 and 0, and are independent across the n detectors. The response  process adds log #j (representing a stimulus-independent bias towards response j) to the output from Dj and chooses the  response that corresponds to the maximum of the resulting n values.  Note that Falmagne's (1972) simply biased model was not shown to be an infinite state confusion model. It can be shown that  Lemma 2 does not apply to this model. The reason is that the cross ratios Mu, v),,Mu, v)jj/(Mu, v)UM(u, v)ji) must be  independent of v in order to satisfy Lemma 2, but are dependent on both f and g in Falmagne's model. Of course, this does not  establish that this model is not an infinite state confusion model.  IV. CONCLUSIONS  We have shown that several recent models-in fact all models in Group 11-are not finite state confusion models. With the  exception of Falmagne's simply biased model, these models were shown to belong to a certain class of infinite state confusion  models. The processing interpretations that can be given to the two groups are similar in that they share the assumption of  strict sequentiality. However, they differ fundamentally in that the information passed from the perceptual process to the  response process consists of a small number of confusion sets for Group I and of vectors in a continuous multidimensional  space for Group 11.  These results lead to the following questions. First, how does the fact that the overlap model and the biased choice model are  data-equivalent in the sense that (within a subset of Csatisfying certain inequality restrictions) a confusion matrix that  satisfies one model also satisfies the other (Pachella et al., 1977) relate to the fact that the overlap model is a finite  state confusion model and the biased choice model is not? Second, are there empirical grounds for choosing between Groups I  and II, and in particular between the overlap model and the biased choice model? Third, how plausible is our infinite state  interpretation of the biased choice model as compared to the finite state (confusion set) notions that underlie the overlap  model?  110 VAN SANTEN AND BAMBER  The answer to the first question is simple: data-equivalence of two models does not imply that the same psychological  conception of the stimulus identification process underlies both models. In this sense, model-equivalence is deceptive,  because it may lead to the belief that the overlap model and the biased choice model are completely interchangeable in the  context of any experiment. However, the two models do not merely differ in their processing interpretations, but they may  actually yield contradictory inferences from the same data set. To see this, note that Pachella et al. (1977) show equivalence  of the overlap model and the biased choice model by defining a unique correspondence between the parameter sets of the two  models. More specifically, they express the perceptual parameters of the overlap model in terms of both the perceptual and the  response parameters of the biased choice model (similarly for the response parameters). This implies that when one model  indicates that an experimental factor affects only the perceptual process, the other model indicates that it affects both the  perceptual and the response process (Note: it can also be shown that the two models may provide different orderings of either  perceptual parameters across stimuli or of response parameters across responses, again leading to contradictory  interpretations).  The answer to the second question-concerning empirical grounds for choosing between the overlap model and the biased choice  model-is related to that to the first question. Due to the data-equivalence discussed above, tests that distinguish between  the biased choice model and the overlap model cannot rely on a single confusion matrix. Rather, these tests have to involve  manipulation of experimental factors that can be assumed to have selective effects at the perceptual and response levels.  Using this approach, Noreen (Note 4) provided suggestive evidence against a large class of sophisticated guessing models. He  showed that models in this class (which includes all models in Group I) predict that the proportion of correct responses  averaged over stimuli is independent of response bias. Noreen (Note 4) cites data indicating that this prediction is not  fulfilled in general. Rather, the overall proportion of correct responses tends to be maximal when response bias is  homogeneous (as, interestingly, is predicted by the biased choice model).  As for the third question-about the plausibility of the infinite state interpretation of the biased choice model-it is obvious  that the choice of double exponential noise distributions was made on the basis of its mathematical properties and not on the  basis of either logical necessity or insight into nature. (In the context of preferential choice theory this distribution can  be derived from deeper principles [Yellott, 1977] that do not seem to apply in the stimulus identification situation.)  However, it might be the case that detector models with double exponential noise distributions are quite difficult to  distinguish empirically from detector models with other noise distributions. In preferential choice theory, for example, the  choice model and the theory of comparative judgment (Case V) make near-identical predictions, although the former uses the  logistic distribution and the latter the normal distribution for the differences between the discriminal processes (Luce,  1959). Thus, it could be that for all practical purposes the biased choice model is representative of a large class of  detector models that share the assumption of identically and independently  CONFUSION MODELS III  distributed noise distributions and the assumption that the response stage uses the maximum rule. At present, it seems  difficult to judge whether these general assumptions are more or are less plausible than the ideas underlying sophisticated_  guessing models.  REFERENCES  BROADBENT, D. E. Word-frequency and response bias. Psychological Review, 1967, 74, 1-15. FALMAGNE, J. C. Biscalability of  error matrices and all-or-none reaction time theories. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1972, 9, 206-224.  LUCE, R. D. Individual choice behavior. New York: Wiley, 1959.  LUCE, R. D. Detection and recognition. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, & E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical psychology  (Vol. I). New York; Wiley, 1963.  MUIR, T. A treatise on the theory of determinants. Albany, N.Y.: Privately published, 1930.  NAKATANI, L. H. Confusion-choice model for multidimensional psychophysics. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1972, 9,  104-127.  NOBLE, B. Applied linear algebra. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1960.  PACHELLA, R. G., SMITH, J. E. K., & STANOVICH, K. E. Qualitative error analysis and speeded classification. In J. Castellan &  F. Restle (Eds.), Cognitive theory (Vol. III). Potomac, Md.: Erlbaum, 1977.  STANOVICH, K. E. Studies of letter identification using qualitative error analysis: Effects of speed stress, tachistoscopic  presentation, and word context. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human perception and Performance, 1979, 5, 713-733.  STANOVICH, K. E., PACHELLA, R. G., & SMITH, J. E. K. An analysis of confusion errors in naming letters under speed stress.  Perception and Psychophysics, 1977, 21, 545-553.  THURSTONE, L. L. A law of comparative judgment. Psychological Review, 1927, 34, 273-286. TOWNSEND, J. T. Theoretical analysis  of an alphabetic confusion matrix. Perception and Psychophysics, 1971, 9, 40-50.  TOWNSEND, J. T. A clarification of some current multiplicative confusion models. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1978, 18,  25-38.  YELLOTT, J. I., JR. The relationship between Luce's choice axiom, Thurstone's theory of comparative judgment, and the double  exponential distribution. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1977, 15, 109-144.  REFERENCE NOTES  1. BAMBER, D., & VAN SANTEN, J. P. H. Testing discrete state models using conditional probability matrices. Paper presented at  the Thirteenth Annual Mathematical Psychology Meetings, Madison, Wisc., 1980.  2. TOWNSEND, J. T., & ASHBY, F. G. Toward a theory of letter recognition: Testing contemporary feature processing models.  Unpublished manuscript, Purdue University, 1977.  3. SMITH, J. E. K. Models of confusion. Paper presented at the Psychonomic Society, St. Louis, Mo., 1968.  4. NOREEN, D. L. Testable properties of some models of confusion. Paper presented at the "Representations of Alphabetic  Confusion" Symposium, Joint meeting of the Psychometric Society and the Society for Mathematical Psychology, McMaster  University, August 26, 1978.  5. TOWNSEND, J. T. Models of recognition and confusion. Paper presented at the Fourth Annual Interdisciplinary Conference,  Jackson Hole, Wy., January, 1979.  RECEIVED: June 27, 1980