10.1016/0022-2496(82)90039-6
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 26, 124-148 (1982)  A Mathematical Analysis of a Natural Class of Partitions of a Graph  WILLIAM H. BATCHELDER AND VLADIMIR A. LEFEBVRE  University of California, Irvine  Any finite graph (nondirected, no loops) can be coupled with its complementary graph producing what we term a completed graph.  This paper studies completed graphs in the context of a structural concept called stratification that is motivated by  theoretical work in social psychology and sociology. A completed graph is stratified in case its node (vertex) set can be  divided into two nonempty subsets with exactly one of the two types of ties holding between every pair of nodes from distinct  sets. A completed graph is totally stratfed in case every one of its nontrivial completed subgraphs is stratified. The first  part of the paper relates the concept of stratification to the familiar graph property of connectedness. In particular, a  completed graph is totally stratified if and only if it does not have a four point completed subgraph that is connected in  both the original graph relation and its complementary relation. Using the concept of stratification, completed graphs can be  decomposed uniquely into taxonomic structures, that is, nested sets of partitions. An algorithm for the decomposition based on  the work with the concept of stratification is developed. The relationship between the notion of stratification and the ideas  in balance theory is examined, and stratification is viewed as a generalization of Davis' notion of clustering. It turns out  that the concepts of clique, status, and structural equivalence used throughout the social networks literature can be defined  in an interesting way for completed graphs. Cliques are sets of nodes with similar internal links and statuses are sets of  nodes with similar external links. Structurally equivalent sets are both cliques and statuses. The concepts of status and  structural equivalence are closely related to the decomposition algorithm. In particular, for any totally stratified completed  graph, the set of all statuses and the set of all maximal structurally equivalent sets can be generated by mathematical  operations performed on the taxonomic decomposition of the completed graph. Finally some of our resuls are informally related  to the blockmodeling approach to analyzing social network data discussed in several previous Journal of Mathematical  Psychology articles.  In network theory, a dichotomous property of pairs of social units is often represented by an undirected graph. Presence of  the property between a pair of units is represented by a tie or undirected arc connecting the pair. It is frequently of  structural interest to see if the entire set of units can be partitioned into two sets such that every pair of units from  different sets has the property. It is also of interest if such a partition can be found where all the between-set pairs of  units lack the property. As will be seen in Section V, this pair of related structural questions lies at the foundations of  balance theory (Cartwright and Harary, 1956), the notion of structural  Requests for reprints should be sent to William H. Batchelder, School of Social Sciences, University of California Irvine,  Irvine, California 92717.  0022-2496/82/050124-25$02.00/0 Copyright C) 1982 by Academic Press, Inc.  124  NATURAL PARTITIONS OF A GRAPH 125  equivalence (Lorrain and White, 1971), and the techniques of blockmodeling (Arabie, Boorman, & Levitt, 1978).  This paper explores these two complementary structural questions in depth from a graph-theoretic perspective. In particular,  we characterize the set of undirected graphs that have the property that all of their nontrivial induced subgraphs satisfy one  or the other of the two structural properties mentioned above. This class of graphs has a number of nice properties as  follows: (1) The class can be characterized by a very elementary property. (2) Each such graph can be related to a certain  type of taxonomic system that provides the basis for uniquely decomposing it into related substructures. (3) The decomposition  in (2) provides structurally interesting information about the original graph. "Fast" algorithms that test for property (1)  and provide the decomposition in (2) exist and are described. After the properties above are established and the decomposition  algorithm is described, applications of these ideas to the social network concepts of balance, structural equivalence, and  blockmodeling are provided.  1. PRELIMINARIES  We define G = (V, R) to be a (undirected) graph in case V is a nonempty, finite set of nodes and R is a symmetric and  irrejlexive relation on V. If (x, y) E R, we write xRy and say that x and y are tied by R. Suppose U is a nonnull subset of V,  then by the subgraph of G induced by U, we mean the (algebraic) structure H= (U, S), where S = R rl (U X U). It is easy to see  that H is a graph. By the complementary graph of G, denoted by G, we mean the structure G = (V, k), where, for all x, y E V,  xRy if and only if (iff) x * y and not xRy. It is easy to see that G is a graph.  Let G = (V, R) be a graph and let x and y be distinct nodes of G, then y is said to be connected to x in case there is a  positive integer N and a finite set of nodes in V, say, x for 1 < n < N, such that x, = x, x,, = y, and, for all 1 < n < N,  xx,, ,. We adopt the convention that every node x in G is 'connected to itself, and define the connectedness relation, C c V  X V, by the rule: xCy if and only if y is connected to x. It is easy to see that C is an equivalence relation on V, and that  it induces a partition C(R) on V which we call the decomposition of V induced by R. The members of C(R) are called components  of V in R and the number of such members is denoted by C(R)j. _ _  Suppose G = ( V, R_) is a graph with complementary graph G = (V, R ), then the structure S = (V; R, R) is called the completed  graph of G or simply a completed graph. A completed graph S has the property that, for all distinct pairs of elements x, y C  V, one and only one of xRy and xRy holds, and if V is a singleton set, S is said to be trivial. If U is a nonempty subset of  V, then T = (U; _P, P)_ is the completed subgraph of S induced by U in case P = R r1 (U X U) and P =,W r) (U X U). It is easy  to see that T is a completed graph.  A completed graph S = (V; R, R) is said to be connected in R in case the graph G = ( V, R) is connected in R, that is, C(R) =  { V j. The property of S connected in R  126 BATCHELDER AND LEFEBVRE  is defined analogously, and if S is connected in both R and R it is called coconnected. Two completed graphs S, = (V, ; R,,  R,) and S, = (VZ; RZ, Rz) are said to be isomorphic in case there is a one-to-one function f from V, onto V, such that, for  all distinct x_, y E V, , xR, y if and only if f (x) RZ f (y) (and, of course, xR, y if and only if f (x) RZ f (y), which  follows from the preceding condition). Other preliminary notions will be introduced in the body of the paper as needed.  II. STRATIFICATION  In this section, we define the idea of stratifying a completed graph in one of its relations (see, Lefebvre, 1982, for a  discussion of some of these ideas). The idea of stratification is designed to capture formally the intuitive ideas of the  first paragraph.  DEFINITION 1. A completed graph S = (V; R, R) is said to be stratified in R in case there is a proper, nonnull subset of V,  namely A, such that, for all x E A and yE V-A, xRy. In this case we write AR(V-A) with an unambiguous interpretation. The  notion of S stratified in R is defined analogously. If S is stratified in either R or R, we say, simply, that S is stratified.  If S = (V; R, R) is, for example, stratified in R, then it can be divided (not necessarily uniquely) into two disjoint,  nonnull subsets, where all pairs of points in different sets are tied by R. This is the formal counterpart to the informal  idea in the first paragraph. Theorems _1 and 2 are elementary and characterize the two types of stratification (in R and in R  ). All proofs are presented in Appendix A.  THEOREM 1. Suppose S = (V; R, R) is a completed graph. Then S is stratified in R if and only if it is not connected in R, and  it is stratified in R if and only if it is not connected in R.  THEOREM 2. Suppose S_ = (V; R, R) is a completed graph. Then if it is stratified in R it is not stratified in R, and if it is  stratified in R it is not stratified in R.  Figure 1 gives all types of completed graphs based on a three element node set V = {a, b, c }. A plus sign between nodes  indicates an R-tie and a negative sign an Rtie. It is easy to see that S(3, 3) and S(3, 2) are stratified in R and S(3, 1) and  S(3, 0) are stratified in R. For example, let A = {a, b} and B = {c}, then for S(3, 3) we have ARB. Technically there are  eight different completed graphs possible for V since we are labeling the nodes; however, each of them is isomorphic to one of  the four depicted in Fig. 1.  There exist nontrivial completed graphs S = (V; R, R) that are not stratified. An example of such a graph is shown in Fig. 2.  We label this graph S(4) because it will play an important role later in the paper. It is easy to see that S(4) is connected  in both R and R (coconnected), so by Theorem 1 it can not be stratified in either R or R. It is interesting to note that S(4)  is isomorphic to its dual graph given by  NATURAL PARTITIONS OF A GRAPH 127  S(3,3) S(3,2) S(3,1) S(3,0)  FIG. 1. All types of completed graphs based on the three element node set V= (a, b, c). The k in the labels S(3, k), for k =  0, 1, 2, 3, denotes the number of plus signs (R connections) in the completed graph.  interchanging R and R connections. Also, it is easy to see that any coconnected, four point, completed graph is isomorphic to  S(4). Now we are in a position to define the central notion of the paper as follows.  DEFINITION 2. A completed graph S = (V; R, R) is said to be totally stratified in case it is nontrivial and for every subset U  of V with two or more elements, the completed subgraph of S induced by U is stratified.  Theorem 3 gives a very elementary property that completely characterizes the class of all totally stratified, completed graphs.  THEOREM 3. Suppose that S = (V; R, R) is a nontrivial completed graph that is coconnected. Then it contains a completed  subgraph that is isomorphic to S(4).  COROLLARY 1 (to Theorem 3). A nontrivial completed graph S = (V; R, R) is totally stratified if and only if it does not  contain a completed subgraph isomorphic to S(4).  Corollary 1 provides an elementary four point property that characterizes (negatively) all totally stratified graphs, and the  property can be used to test to see if any completed graph is totally stratified. In particular, it would be elementary to  S(4)  FiG. 2. An example of a four point completed graph that is not stratified in either R or R (R connections are indicated by  plus signs).  480/26/2-3  128 BATCHELDER AND LEFEBVRE  construct a "fast"' algorithm that examines all the (a ) four point completed subgraphs of a completed graph having n points  and to see if any of these subgraphs is isomorphic to S(4). The test is based on Theorem 3 which, despite its elementary  character, we have been unable to locate in the graph theory literature.  III. DECOMPOSITION OF COMPLETED GRAPHS  If a completed graph S = (V; R, R) is stratified, say in R, then there may be several different ways to divide V into two  nonnull sets A and V - A so that AR(V-A). In this section, we seek a refinement on the notion of stratification that yields a  unique decomposition of V when S is stratified C(k) R (or R). The basic idea is to look at the_ partitions of V given by C(R)  and C(R) (see preliminaries), where C(R) and C(k) are the decompositions of V induced by R and R, respectively._ It is  possible to restate the contents of Theorems 1-3 in terms of C(R) and C(k) as follows:  COROLLARY 2 (to Theorems 1-3). Suppose that S = (V; R, R) is a completed graph with more than one node in V. Then the  following four propositions are true:  (i) The set C(R) has more than one member if and only if S is stratified in R, and C(R) has more than one member if and only  if S is stratified in R.  _ (ii) If C(R) has more than one member, then, for all A E C(R ), AR (V - A). If C(R) has more than one member, then for all A  E C(R), AR (V-A).  (iii) At least one of the sets C(R) and C(k) has only one member.  (iv) If both C(R) and C(k) are singleton sets, then S is coconnected and it contains a completed subgraph isomorphic to S(4).  Corollary 2 implies that any completed graph S = (V; R, R) can be uniquely decomposed into a collection_ of completed  subgraphs. If S is not coconnected, then exactly one of C(R) and C(k) has more than one component. Say C(R) has m > 1  components, A.., Am. Then each of the completed subgraphs T; = (A;, R rl (A; X A;), R n (A; X A;)) is an element of the  decomposition. Of course T, is connected in R, but if it is not connected in R, then T; can be further decomposed into  completed subgraphs-this time by using the components of the decomposition of A; induced by R. This process of alternate  decompositions based on R and R can  ' A problem in graph theory indexed by a positive integer n is said to be solvable by a fast algorithm in case the solution  time is bounded above by a fixed polynomial function in n. For a completed graph with n nodes, it may be necessary to test all  (n- 6n' + I In' - 6n)/24 four point subgraphs for isomorphism to S(4). Each check, itself, can be accomplished within a  constant time (independent of n). Putting these facts together, shows that the solution time is of order n' (see Carre, 1979,  pp. 75-83, for a more careful statement of the idea of a fast algorithm).  NATURAL PARTITIONS OF A GRAPH 129  be recursively continued until each succeeding completed subgraph is either trivial (takes the form ({a}; 0, 0), for some a E  V) or else coconnected.  The elementary recursive process just described is stated precisely in the form of a decomposition algorithm (DA) in Appendix  B, and it is described mathematically in Theorem 4. Appendix B also discusses the computational complexity of the DA and shows  that the algorithm is "fast" (see footnote 1). For current purposes we need to develop an indexing system for the elements of  the decomposition. The index of a given element needs to code two pieces of information: (1) the geneology of its path from  the original completed graph S and (2) whether or not it is a terminal element of the process. Let L(S) be the decomposition  of S. A convenient recursive scheme is to code S, itself, by the vector (1). Then any other element of L(S) is coded by a  finite row-vector of positive integers subject to the following rule. If (1, n, , n2,..., n;_, , n;) codes an element T E  L(S), then T is the completed subgraph of the element in L(S) coded by the vector (1, n, ,..., n; _.,) induced by its n; th  component in the decomposition. For example, suppose that S is disconnected in R and that C(R) has three or more components.  Then if A3 is the third component, the completed subgraph of S induced by A3 would be coded by the vector (1, 3). If this  completed graph is disconnected in R and it has five or more components, then the vector (1, 3, 5) would be the code of the  completed subgraph of the element in L(S) coded by (1, 3) induced by the fifth component in R. Then the code, say, (1, 3, 5,  7, 2) defines a "parent to offspring" geneology starting with S and involving the codes (1), (1, 3), (1, 3, 5), (1, 3, 5, 7),  and (1, 3, 5, 7, 2). All that remains is to provide a special code for a terminal element in L(S), and this is conveniently  accomplished by affixing an asterisk (*) at the end of the code. For example, if there is an element in L(S) with code (1, 3,  5, 7, 2)*, then that element, if not trivial, is coconnected.  To illustrate both the decomposition and the associated coding scheme, consider the following example. Let V = ~a, b, c, d, e}  and let the relation R and R be defined by the incidence matrix  a b c d e  a 0 1 -1 1 1  b 1 0 -1 1 1  M=c -1 -1 0 1 1 ,  d 1 1 1 0 -1  e 1 1 1 -1 0      -  where for all x, y E V, Mx,, = 1 means xRy and Mxy = -1 means xRy, and the zeros in the main diagonal mean neither R nor R  loops occur. Table 1 provides the coded elements of L (S) corresponding to the completed graph S = (V; R, R). Naturally, the  order of the components of any disconnecting relation is arbitrary.  It is clear that any completed graph will result in a coded decomposition like Table 1, except that some of the starred  elements may be coconnected instead of trivial.  130 BATCHELDER AND LEFEBVRE  TABLE 1  The Coded Elements' of L(S) When the DA Completes Work on the Structure Defined by M.  Structure Code Disconnecting Relation  {a, b, c, d, e} (1) -  la, b,c1 (1, 1) R  {d, e1 (1,2) R  {a, b1 (1, 1, 1) R  {c1 (1, 1, 2)* R  {d1 (1, 2, 1)* R  {e1 (1, 2, 2)* R  {a1 (1, 1, 1, 1)* R  {b1 (1, 1, 1, 2)* R  Only the node set of each structure is listed. If A _is the node set of a structure T in list L, then T = (A; R (1 (A X A), R  r) (A X A)).  In the definitions and theorems to follow, it is desirable to describe L(S) recursively in more mathematical terms than  afforded in the algorithm of Appendix B. _If S = (V; R, R) is a completed graph and A c V, then we denote by CA (R) and CA (R)  the components of the subgraph of S induced by A in R and A, respectively. Corollary 2(iii) (to Theorems 1-3) assures us that  either CA(R) = {A} or CA (R) = {A }. The next definition captures the idea of the descendent function implicit in the previous  description of how L(S) is derived from S.  DEFINITION 3. Let S = (i7; R, R) be a completed graph and let 5'(V) be the power set of V. Then the descendent function d for  S is a function from 5'(V) into . (?(V)) given by, for all A E 9'(17),  d(A) = {A}, if C1(R)=CA(k)={A), = CA(R), if I CA (R)I > 1,  =CA(R), if ICA(R)I > 1.  In terms of Definition 3, the node sets in L(S) can be defined recursively as shown in Theorem 4.  THEOREM 4. Let S = (V; R, R) be a completed graph, let L(S) be the set of node sets in V in the decomposition of S described  earlier and also in Appendix B, and let d be given as in Definition 3. Let T c .5'(V) satisfy the following properties:  (i) {V}cT.  (ii) If A E T, then d(A) c T.  (iii) T consists of only sets generated by (i) and (ii). Then T=L(S).  NATURAL PARTITIONS OF A GRAPH 131  Since Theorem 4 merely states the recursive procedure described in Appendix B in mathematical terms, its proof is not  presented. A reading of Appendix B should make this point clear.  IV. DECOMPOSITION AND TAXONOMIES  In this section, we assume that a completed graph S = (V; R, R) has been decomposed into L(S) by the DA, and for convenience,  that L(S) consists just of the indexed node sets of the resulting completed graphs. It is possible to view L(S) as a taxonomy  of V as the next definition and two theorems show.  DEFINITION 4. Let V be a finite set and PA a partition of V, for every ~. = 1, 2,..., N and N some positive integer. Then  9`= IPA IA=1,2,...,N}  is a taxonomy of V in case: (i) P, = { VJ, (ii) for all A = 2, 3,..., N, for each A E PA there is a B E P,, _ , such that A c  B. Further, F' is said to be a strict taxonomy of V in case it is a taxonomy of V and (iii) for all A = 2, 3,..., N each A E  PA is either a singleton set or there is a B E PA_, such that A c B and A * B and (iv) P,, = { {x f I x E V ~. Each subset of  V in a taxonomy is called a taxon (plural, taxa).  The idea captured in Definition 4 is that of nesting partitions so that successive partitions give rise to further refinements  of the taxa. Strict taxonomies have the property that each taxon in the subdivision that is not a singleton set must be  further refined in the next partition. Definition 4 is standard in taxonomic science (for example, Sneath & Sokal, 1973). A  taxonomy provides a decomposition of a set, and, as Theorems 5 and 6 show, the decomposition is closely related to the  decomposition provided in Section III.  THEOREM 5. Suppose S = (V; R, R) is a completed graph and that the DA produces L(S), where L(S) consists of the indexed sets  of nodes corresponding to all obtained completed subgraphs of S. Then there is a taxonomy of V whose taxa are the members of  L(S). Further if S is totally stratified, then there is a strict taxonomy of V whose taxa are the members of L(S).  THEOREM 6. If 9- is a strict taxonomy of a set V, then there is a totally stratified, completed graph S = (V; R, R) whose node  sets in the decomposition L(S) are exactly the taxa of F_.  To illustrate the ideas of Theorems 5 and 6, first consider the completed graph S with incidence matrix given by Eq. (1) and  whose decomposition L(S) is given in  132 BATCHELDER AND LEFEBVRE  Table 1. The strict taxonomy corresponding to L (S) is given by ?- = {P.j I A = 1, 2, 3, 4 ~, where  P,={)a,b,c,d,e)),  P2= Z)a,b,c), {d, e) ),  P3 = {{a, b}, {c}, {d}, {e) ),  and  Pa={{a), {b), {c), {d), {e)).  It is easy to see that each P, is defined by the rule  P,j _ )T I T E L(S) and T has a A-dimensional code or a (.i - i)dimensional starred code, for some 0 < i < A ),  where the dimension of a code is simply the dimension of the corresponding vector. In fact this rule is the correspondence  rule used in the proof of Theorem 5.  On the other hand, suppose that we were given the strict taxonomy r. Then the proof of Theorem 6 defines the function, for all  distinct x, y E V,  g(x, y) = max {A l l < A < N and there is an A E PA with x, y E A).  To construct the totally stratified, completed graph S = (V; R, k), the proof uses a coding rule like the following: xRy iff  g(x, y) is odd. From 9- it is easy to show that the values of g(x, y) are given by the off-diagonal terms in the matrix  a b c d e  a 0 3 2 1 1  b 3 0 2 1 1  c 2 2 0 1 1  d 1 1 1 0 2  e 1 1 1 2 0  and the coding rule operating on the off-diagonal terms of this matrix, retaining diagonal zeros, yields the incidence matrix  M defined in Eq. (1) (corresponding to Table 1).  Suppose instead that the coding rule in the proof of Theorem 6 was xRy iff g(x, y) is even. If this rule were used, the dual  completed graph of S would result, that is, the roles of R and R would be interchanged. Nevertheless, the same strict taxonomy  9would result from the dual of S. This concept is developed next.  COROLLARY 3 (to Theorem 6). Let 9- be a strict taxonomy of a set V and S = (V; R, R) be a totally stratified, completed graph  whose node sets in the decom-  NATURAL PARTITIONS OF A GRAPH 133  position L (S) are exactly the taxa of g'. Then the completed graph T = (V; P, P), with P = R and P = R, also has this  property.  Theorem 6 and Corollary 3 show that there are two ways to create a graph coding of a strict taxonomy of V It is tempting to  try and interpret R for the coding scheme S = (V; R, R) in terms of characteristics of the strict taxonomy itself, however,  there is no reason why the coding relation should be substantively interpretable; hence the graph coding of taxonomies should  be viewed simply as a succinct, alternate data structure.  V. APPLICATIONS TO SOCIAL NETWORKS  In the next three subsections, the social network concepts of balance, structural equivalence, and blockmodeling are discussed  in terms of the analysis developed in the earlier sections. If a network consists of a single completed graph, the  decomposition of the graph illuminates features of the network related to each of these three concepts. In order to make  contact with more complex and substantively interesting networks, some extensions of the methods would be required, and some  discussion of this possibility is provided in Section VI.  V.1. Balance Theory  Roberts (1976, Sect. 3.1) provides a detailed discussion of the formal literature concerning the concept of balance in a  signed graph. A signed graph is just a graph G = (V, R) where each element of R is labeled by a plus or a minus sign. In fact,  Davis (1967) defines the concept of a complete signed graph, and this is formally equivalent to a completed graph with, say, R  interpreted as a plus tie and R as a minus tie.  The concept of balance was due to the psychologist Fritz Heider, and it was formalized in a now classic paper by Cartwright &  Harary (1956). Cartwright and Harary consider prototypes of all the three point completed graphs of Fig. 1, and based on  Heider's analysis, S(3, 3) and S(3, 1) are said to be balanced and S(3, 2) and S(3, 0) are not balanced. If we think of the  nodes as actors, R as the tie of having a "good" relationship, and R of having a "bad" relationship, then, for example, the  lack of balance in S(3, 2) stems from the fact that actors b and c have a bad relationship, whereas they both have a good  relationship with actor a. Cartwright and Harary define any signed graph to be balanced in case all its cycles (sequences of  nodes that connect a node to itself in the graph) are positive in the sense that the product of the signs of all ties in the  cycle is positive. For example, S(4) of Fig. 2 is not balanced since the sign of the cycle (a, b, c, a) is negative.  In the above form, the idea of balance may not seem closely related to a concept like stratification; however, Cartwright and  Harary go on to present the "structure theorem," which states that a signed graph is balanced iff it can be partitioned into  two subsets such that each positive tie is within a subset and each negative tie is  134 BATCHELDER AND LEFEBVRE  between subsets. Davis (1967) generalizes the condition of the structure theorem by defining a signed graph to have a  clustering in case it can be partitioned into two or more subsets with each positive tie within a subset and each negative tie  between two subsets. If a signed graph is not balanced, it may still have a clustering.  Both the structure theorem condition and Davis'' generalization of it are stronger than stratification in the sense that if S  = (V; R, R) is a completed graph (with R playing the role of plus and R minus), with R nonnull, then if it has a clustering it  is stratified in R. In fact a clustering of a completed graph, if it exists, consists exactly of the components of the_ graph  in R, subject to the restriction that each component is probibited from having R ties between nodes. Davis (1967, Theorem 2)  presents three conditions for complete signed graphs which he shows are equivalent to the condition of having a clustering.  Based on our work, a fourth equivalent condition is provided in the following: a completed graph S = (V; R, R) has a  clustering (in R) iff R is null or S is disconnected in R and the members of the decomposition L(S) are exactly V itself, all  components of V in R, and all singleton subsets of V. The truth of the new equivalence is obvious once one sees that all the  cells of a clustering are disconnected by R into singleton sets.  The idea of stratification is a natural weakening, in two ways, of Davis' notion of clustering (for a completed graph). First,  plus and minus are treated symmetrically since there are two types of stratification (see Definition 1). Second, by Theorem 1,  stratification in R or R implies disconnection in R or R, respectively. Thus, if a completed graph is, say, stratified in R_,  it can be "weakly clustered" into two or more components (in R). In this case, only R ties occur between cells; whereas, both  R and R ties are allowed within a cell so long as it is connected in R. While these two generalizations of clustering are a  long way from Heider's original concept of balance, they can provide useful tools for understanding the structure of a network  as will be seen in the next two subsections.  V.2. Statuses, Cliques, and Structural Equivalence  The concepts of status, clique, and structural equivalence are important structural concepts in social network theory (see  Burt, 1980, Sect. 4). They are global concepts designed to apply to networks of several actors, and they are usually applied  in cases where there are several types of ties in the network. There are a variety of formal definitions as well as informal  traditions of use in the literature for each of these concepts. Usually a status is defined as a set of actors in a network  characterized, among other things, by having similar ties to other actors outside the set, and a clique is a set of actors in  a network characterized by having the same tie between all pairs of actors inside the set. A pair of actors is structurally  equivalent, at least in the sense used by Lorrain & White (1971), if they have identical ties to each of the actors in the  network, that is they are "perfect substitutes" for each other. The next definition gives one possible characterization of  these concepts in the case of a single completed graph. In particular, Lorrain and White's notion of structural equivalence is  treated somewhat differently here; however, as will be seen, the two treatments are almost  NATURAL PARTITIONS OF A GRAPH 135  identical. The concepts of Definition 5 turn out to be closely connected to our decomposition process which is the main thrust  of this subsection.  DEFINITION 5. Let S = (V; R, R) be a completed graph and let A be a subset of V with at least two points. Then, (I) A is said  to be a status in case, for any c E V - A, if there exists _a E A with aRc, then, for all a E A, aRc (or equivalently, if  there exists a E A with aRc, then, for all a E A, aRc). (2) A is _said to be an R-clique 2 in case, for all distinct a, b E A,  aRb, and A is said to be an R-clique in case, for all distinct a, b E A, aRb (if A is an R-clique or an R-clique, it is called  a clique). (3) The elements of A are said to be structurally equivalent in case A is both a status and a clique. Hereafter,  such an A will be called structurally equivalent for brevity.  Let S = (V; R, R) be a completed graph with I V 1 = N. Then there are N(N - 1)/2 distinct pairs of points each of each  involves either an R or an R tie. Suppose A c V is a clique with JA I = K, 2 < K < N. Then it is easy to see that if there are  a, b E A with aRb, then there are (K(K- 1)/2] - 1 additional restrictions on S of the sort uRv, for all u, v E A. Since the  number of restrictions increases with the size of the clique, and further, since subsets of cliques (of cardin_ality greater  than one) are also cliques, it is natural to define a maximal R-clique_ (R-clique) to be an R-clique that that is not a proper  subset of any other R-clique (R-clique). If A is either a maximal R-clique or a maximal R-clique, it is called a maximal  clique.  If A is a status, it is easy to see that if a E A, knowledge of how a is connected to b, for all b E V - A places (K - 1)(N -  K) restrictions on S. Viewed as a continuous function of K, for 1 < K < N, this expression is maximized for K = (N + 1)/2.  Further, subsets of statuses need not be statuses; hence it is not productive to define the concept of a "maximal status," at  least in the same way that a maximal clique is defined.  If A is structurally equivalent, then there are [K(K - 1)/2 j - 1 + (K - 1)(N - K) constraints on S implied by how a given a E  A is tied to all b E V - la }. Since this expression is an increasing function of K, and further since subsets of structurally  equivalent sets are structurally equivalent (see Theorem 7) it is natural to define A to be a maximal structurally equivalent  set in case A is structurally equivalent and it is not a subset of any other structurally equivalent set.  Consider the matrix M defined in Eq. (1) that gives rise to the decomposition in Table 1. Then all the two element subsets of  V = la, b, c, d, e } are cliques and so are la, b, d} and la, b, e). Further, all these cliques except la, b}, la, e}, la, d},  lb, d}, and l b, e} are maximal cliques. The members of L(S) in Table 1 with more than one element constitute those and only  those subsets of V which are statuses. Finally,  Z In the graph theory literature, cliques are defined as maximal, complete subgraphs rather than just complete subgraphs as  allowed in our definition (for example, see Roberts, 1976). Sometimes cliques are required to have three or more points, and,  more important, the usual treatment does not permit Rcliques. Our weakening of the usual concept of clique is desirable in  this paper. After Definition 5, the idea of a maximal clique is defined.  136 BATCHELDER AND LEFEBVRE  {a, b~ and {d, e} are the only stucturally equivalent subsets of V and these are also maximal structurally equivalent sets.  Theorem 7 provides some elementary properties of the notions of status and structural equivalence. The definition of a clique  is sufficiently standard that its properties are well known. That is, if S = (V; R, R) is a completed graph, then the set of  cliques of S consists simply of a subcollection of maximal cliques along with all their subsets of two or more elements.  THEOREM 7. Let S = (V; R, R) be a completed graph and let A, B c V. Then the following propositions are true:  (i) Suppose A and B are statuses. If A r1 B * 0, then A U B is a _status and A r1 B is a status or a singleton set. If A n B =  0, then either ARB or ARB.  (ii) Suppose A and B are structurally equivalent. If A (1 B * 0, then A U B is structurally equivalent. If C c A, then C is  structurally equivalent or a singleton set.  Theorem 7 shows that if A and B are not disjoint, then both their union and intersection (if not a singleton set) preserve the  properties of status and structural equivalence if they are possessed by both A and B. The intersection propery for structural  equivalence is not stated directly in Theorem 7, but it is an obvious consequence of the subset property in (ii). The last  fact of (i) shows that disjoint statuses are trivially related to each other, and since structurally equivalent sets are also  statuses, his property holds_ for structural equivalence as well.  Let S = (V; R, R) be a completed graph and let 5and X, respectively, denote the sets of statuses and structurally equivalent  sets of S. Both Sand bP have interesting mathematical structures with interesting connections to the decomposition L(S).  These observations are developed Definition 6 and Theorems 8 and 9.  DEFINITION 6. Let S = (V; R, R) be a completed graph with descendent function d. Then by the extended descendent function d we  mean the function from ,_`?(V) into .i'(.i'(V)) such that, for all A c V,  d(A) _ C I C = U B;, where B...... Br E d(A), for some positive integer r , r=i  that is, d(A) consists of all unions of the members of d(A).  THEOREM 8. Let S = (V; R, R) be a completed graph and let L(S) be the decomposition of S described in Theorem 4. Let Y be the  set of statuses of S, and let  _W={BI JBI >2andBEd(A),forsome AEL(S)}.  Then _W c Y, and further, if S is totally stratified, then .W = 5  Theorem 8 has several interesting implications. Since all nonsingleton members of L(S) are in _~e, it follows that all such  members are statuses. The theorem is stronger,  NATURAL PARTITIONS OF A GRAPH 137  however, in that it states that arbitrary unions of the descendents of any member of L(S) are also satuses (or singleton sets).  There may be statuses which are not in e, and this raises the more general question of what structural features of S must  necessarily appear in L(S). If S is coconnected, then L (S) = { V ~ and it is easy to see that there may be cliques, statuses,  and structurally equivalent sets, none of which appear in L(S). Consequently, suppose that S is totally stratified. It is  still the case that any of our three structural properties may hold for a set A c V and yet A (~ L(S).  To see this, suppose V = {a, b, c, d } and define the following, totally stratified graph by its incidence matrix:  a b c d  a 0 1 1 -1  M=b 1 0 1 -1  c 1 1 0 -1  d -1 -1 -1 0  where the conventions of Eq. (1) hold. It is easy to see that S = (V; R, R) is totally stratified and that  L(S) = {V, {a, b, c}, {a}, {b}, {c}, {d}}.  Now (a, b} is structurally equivalent and, therefore, it is both a clique and a status. However {a, b} E~ L(S); consequently,  any of our structural properties may fail to appear in L(S) even if S is totally stratified.  Even though a set that satisfies one of our structural properties is not in L(S), it may be obtainable by performing  mathematical operations on L(S). In fact, the last part of Theorem 8 provides one such result. Basically is shows that if S is  totally stratified, then all the statuses derive from L(S) by performing the operation of taking arbitrary unions of the  descendents of each of its members. Theorem 9, to follow, shows that the set of all structurally equivalent sets of a  completed graph S can be "generated" from the set of all its two element statuses. Thus if S is totally stratified, it is the  case that all its statuses and all its structurally equivalent sets can be obtained by performing elementary mathematical  operations on L(S).  THEOREM 9. Let S = (V; R, R) be a completed graph, S 2 be the set of all two element statuses of S, and  E,= { (a, b) j a, b E V and a = b or there is an A E Y, with a, b E A }.  Then EZ is an equivalence relation on V and its nonsingleton equivalence classes are exactly the maximal structurally  equivalent sets of S.  Theorem 9 shows that the maximal structurally equivalent sets of S can be generated from the set of all pairs of structurally  equivalent actors (two element  138 BATCHELDER AND LEFEBVRE  statuses). It is an immediate consequence of Theorem 7(ii) that the set of all structurally equivalent sets of S, namely X,  consists of the collection of maximal structurally equivalent sets along with all their subsets of two or more elements. This  fact is a consequence of the union and subset properties of that theorem (see proof of Theorem 9).  Lorrain & White (1971) provide a definition of structural equivalence of objects in a network. Their framework was  productively extended by Boyd (1979) and we can think of the framework as involving a finite set V along with a set M of  binary relations on V. In the two frameworks, .P has an interesting structure; however, for our purposes we need to look only  at Lorrain and White's definition of structural equivalence; namely, a, b E V are said to be structurally equivalent iff for  any c E V and any R E , aRc iff bRc and cRa iff cRb. Thus Lorrain and White's definition is based on the standard device in  logic of reducing a relational system by defining a "perfect substitutes" relation (see Roberts, 1979, for a general  discussion of this strategy), and, as noted by Lorrain and White, their definition leads to a partition of V into equivalence  classes of mutually substitutable elements.  If the Lorrainn and White definition is applied to a completed graph S = (V; R, R ) with .' = {R, R }, it is an unfortunate  consequence that no distinct pair of elements can be structurally equivalent. To see this, suppose a, b E V are distinct. Now  either aRb or aRb, and if a is structurally equivalent to b it must be the case that either bRb or bRb (by picking c = b in  the definition), and this is impossible. One productive way to weaken _Lorrain and White's definition for completed graphs is  the following: let S = (V; R, R) be a completed graph and a, b E V, then a and b are weakly structurally equivalent in case,  for all c E V - {a, b}, aRc iff bRc (or equivalently, aRc iff bRc).  It is easy to see that distinct a, b E V are weakly structurally equivalent iff A = {a, b} is a status in the sense of  Definition 5. Furthermore, it is not hard to verify that, for all A c V with JA I > 2, A consists of pairwise, weakly  structurally equivalent elements iff A is both a clique and a status. Thus it is clear that the only differences between the  notion of structural equivalence in Definition 5 and Lorrain and White's definition applied to completed graphs is in the  treatment of loops in the underlying graphs.  The concepts of status and structural equivalence have shown utility in understanding social networks, and it seems  interesting that they can be linked to a concept like stratification. In fact, the linkage is strong in the case of a totally  stratified completed graph because, as we have seen, the set of all statuses and the set of all structurally equivalent sets  of V can be generated by performing set-theoretic operations on the decomposition of the completed graph. Of course total  stratification is a strong property, and it is likely to be possessed only by idealized social structures or in normative  frameworks. However, as with other idealized properties of social networks such as homomorphisms to blockmodels or balance, it  may be productive to find practical approximations to total stratification to motivate algorithmic data processing routines  that are designed to reveal structure in network data. A step in this direction is described in the next subsection.  NATURAL PARTITIONS OF A GRAPH  139  V.3. Relationships to Blockmodeling  In the social network area, a popular approach to analyzing relational structures due to Harrison White and his co-workers is  known as blockmodeling (see Arabie et al., 1978, for a review). In general, the methods of blockmodeling are designed to  handle multiple, directed graphs, and the working concepts are designed to handle cases involving sampling error in assessing  relationships between nodes. However, in the case of a single graph relation, there are interesting connections between our  decomposition and those provided by forming blockmodels.  Suppose that V = {vv2,..., VA is a set of N nodes and that R is an irreflexive, symmetric relation on V. Arabie et al.  (1978, p.31) discuss the problem of finding two-element partitions of V, namely {A, B }, so that the incidence matrix of the  graph G = (V; R) can be written in the block form (using the conventions of Eq. (1))  A B  A [ X ~ -1  =  B -1~Y  where X and Y are arbitrary incidence matrices for the completed graphs induced by A and B, respectively. It is interesting to  _note that such a partition of V exists if and only if the completed graph S = (V; R, R) is stratified in R. Heil & White  (1976) describe a computer program called "BLOCKER" that permits one to design various target structures and seek partitions  of V that fit the target. Usually in blockmodeling one deals with "sparse matrices" (low density of R-type ties or 1's in the  incidence matrix), so it is usual to define, say, an A to B block as a 1-block in case there exists a E A, b E B with aRb. If  we strengthen the idea by defining the A to B block to be a 1-block in case, for all a E A and b E B, aRb, then S is  stratified in R iff BLOCKER can find a partition {A, B } of V such that the incidence matrix of G = (V; R ) conforms to the  pattern  where X and Y are as before.  Our decomposition can be related to blockmodeling in a natural way. For example, if S is disconnected in R, the decomposition  algorithm seeks a maximal partition JA, , A,,..., A m } of V so that the incidence matrix can be permuted to the form  140 BATCHELDER AND LEFEBVRE  A, Az ... A, X, -1 -1 AZ 1-1 Xz ... -1  Am  where X; is the incidence matrix for the completed subgraph induced by Ai, and of course, each A; will be a component of S in  R (such a representation was termed a "weak clustering" in Section V.1).  Then the decomposition is reapplied to each A; except with R playing he role of R in the initial decomposition. Thus our  decomposition algorithm can be viewed as successively alternating the goals of providing maximal partitions in terms of R and  R. In fact, even if the original completed graph is sparse in R-type ties, the various components of V in R will not be so  sparse; hence the plan of successively alternating M- and N-type goals seems like a natural one for the blockmodeling approach.  In blockmodeling methods, there is a computer program called "CONCOR" (see Arabie et al., 1978) that provides a successive  binary decomposition of V. It does not work directly with incidence matrices, but instead, works with derived indices  typically based on correlating each pair of nodes in terms of "received ties," that is column by column correlations of the  incidence matrix. The output of CONCOR is a binary taxonomy of V. We regard it as an open problem to see if our decomposition  and the decomposition obtained by CONCOR are related in an interesting way.  VI. DISCUSSION  The first four sections of the paper describe a new strategy for studying the structure of a graph G = (V, R ). First, the  graph is completed producing S = (V; R, R ), and second, the completed graph is decomposed into a taxonomy of completed  subgraphs by successively alternating the goals of disconnecting the completed graph in R and in R, respectively. Section V  shows that this new strategy can provide structural information about G that is related to, but goes beyond, several  approaches in the social network area.  In an applied setting, an R-tie may reveal something substantively interesting about a network, whereas, an R-tie may not. For  example, let R be the relation of "having worked together" (on a project of suitable definition) defined_ on the set of all  university professors. Then most pairs of professors stand in the k relation, and this fact does not reveal much of direct  interest about the corresponding graph. For our methods to reveal substantively interesting properties about a graph, it would  seem desirable to restrict V so that both R and R have interesting interpretations that are natural, exhausive opposites. For  example, if we restrict the previous example to a  NATURAL PARTITIONS OF A GRAPH 141  small academic department, then because of close proximity, it seems that both R and R can be interpreted as exhaustive  opposites in a substantively interesting way. Sometimes one may have two substantively interesting opposites, for example,  friend and enemy (based on some suitable definition); however, neither may apply meaningfully to certain pairs of people. In  this case, the network could be represented by a signed graph; however, unless the graph were complete, our methods could not  be applied. It might be desirable to develop analogues of our methods for general signed graphs; however, arbitrary signed  graphs may not be connected in either the plus or minus tie, so the disconnecting algorithm might have two choices at any  stage in the decomposition. Nevertheless, it seems like an interesting open problem to see if productive extensions of our  decomposition algorithm can be developed for signed graphs. Another obvious direction of generalization would be to extend our  methods to the domain of directed graphs.  Many substantively interesting networks have several types of ties. For example, the frameworks of Lorrain & White (1971) and  Boyd (1979) involve sets of "fundamental" ties and other ties that can be generated from them. Thus it may be productive to  extend our methods to deal simultaneously with several interrelated completed graphs.  Our decomposition is halted by the presence of subgraphs isomorphic to S(4) (see Theorem 3), and such subgraphs are bound to  occur if V is large and any random factors contribute to the obtained completed graph. However, as with blockmodeling methods;  it might be productive to extend our approach in ways similar to those developed by blockmodelers to cover multiple, "somewhat  random," and directed graphs.  Finally an interesting substantive problem would be to theorize about the implications of the presence of S(4) subgraphs in an  idealized or normatively based social structure. The absence of such subgraphs makes the entire structure so easy to  comprehend that one is tempted to speculate that the presence of S(4) subgraphs in a designed social structure may represent  some sort of a "design flaw."  APPENDIX A: PROOFS  Proof of Theorem 1. Let S be stratified in R. Then there exists a proper, nonnull subset A of V such that AR (V - A). Suppose  S is connected in R. Pick a E A and b E V -A. Then there must be nodes x, , X21 ..., XN, for some positive integer N, such  that x, = a, xN = b, and, for all 1 < n < N, xx,. Further, there must be a least positive integer m such that x. E A and  x+, E V - A; however, this means x.Rxm+, which is a contradiction. Thus S is not connected in R.  Suppose S is not connected in R, and let A be a component of V in R. Then by hypothesis, A must be a proper nonnull subset of  V. Suppose a E A and b E V - A, then aRb because, otherwise_, b would be connected in R to a, which contradicts A being a  component of V in R. Hence AR (V-A), so S is stratified in R. The second half of Theorem 1 follows similarly.  142 BATCHELDER AND LEFEBVRE  Proof of Theorem 2. Suppose S is stratified in R. Then there is a proper nonnull subset A of V such that AR(V-A). Pick a, b E  V. If a E A and b E (V-A), then obviously aRb. If a, b E A, then there is a c E V - A such that aR c Rb. Finally if a, b E V -  A, then there is a c E A such that aR c Rb. Thus S is connected in R, and by Theorem 1 it is not stratified in R. The second  part follows similarly.  Proof of Theorem 3. Let V = { v, , vz ,..., vN } and, for 1 < n < N, let V= { v, ,..., v} and Sbe the completed subgraph  of S induced by V. Now N > 1 since S is nontrivial by hypothesis, and SZ and S3 cannot be coconnected (see Fig. 1), so there  is a largest m such that Sm is not coconnected and S+, is cocon_nected and 3 < m < N. Without loss of generality, suppose Sm  is not connected in R, then (by Theorems 1 and 2) it is connected in R.  Since Sm+, is connected_ in R, there must be a point a E Vm with aRvm+,. _Let A be the component of Vm in R with a E A, and  since Sm is not connected in R, A is a proper nonnull subset of Vm with AR (V,, -A). There must be points b E A and c E Vm -A  with bRo+, and cRo+, because, otherwise, either A or Vm -A would have only R-type ties to vm+, and this is impossible  since S+, is _connected in R by hypothesis. Now since a, b E A and A is a component of Vm in R, there must be a positive  integer K and elements xk E A, for k = 1, 2,..., K, so that x, = a, xK = b, and xkRxk+for 1 < k < K. Since x,Rv+, and  XKRvm+there must be a largest i such that x;Rv+, and x;+,Rvm+,. Consider the set U= {x;,x;+rr,+,, c_}. By construction  all points are distinct and (1) x;Rvm+(2) x;+,Rvm+(3) x;Rx;+(4) cRvm+,, (5) x;Rc, (6) x;+,Rc, where the last two facts  follow from the fact that AR (V. -A) established earlier. Let T be the completed subgraph of S induced by U. Then these six  facts establish that T is coconnected. It is easy to see that it is isomorphic to S(4) (see Fig. 2).  Proof of Corollary 1 (to Theorem 3). -Suppose S = ~ V; R, R) is totally stratified and contains a completed subgraph  isomorphic to S(4), _say, T. Since T is coconnected, by Theorem 1 it is not stratified in either R or R. This is a  contradiction, therefore S cannot contain such a graph T. Suppose S does not contain an induced, completed subgraph isomorphic  to S(4). Let U be a subset of V with two or more elements, and let T be the completed subgraph of S induced by U. Clearly, T  cannot contain an induced, completed subgraph isomorphic to S(4). By Theorem 3, T is not coconnected, so it can be stratified  in either R or R by Theorem 1. Hence S is totally stratified.  Proof of Corollary 2 (to Theorems 1-3). (i) Suppose C(R) has more _than one member. Then S is not connected in R so by Theorem  1, it is stratified in R. If S is stratified in R, it is not connected in R by Theorem 1; therefore C(R) has more than one  member. The argument proceeds similarly for the second part of (i).  (ii) This follows from the definition of C(R) and C(R).  (iii) Suppose C(R) has more than one member. Then S is _disconnected in R. Let A E C(R), then A is a proper nonnull subset of  V and AR-(V -A). Suppose  NATURAL PARTITIONS OF A GRAPH 143  a, b E V_. If _a E A and b E (V -A), then aRb. If a E A and b E A, pick c E (V - A). Then aR c kb. If a E (V - A) and b E (V -  A), pick c E A. Then aR c kb. Thus a is connected in R to b, so S is connected in R and C(R) has only one member.  (iv) If C(R) and C(R) both have only one member, then S is coconnected by definition. By Theorem 3, S must have an induced,  completed subgraph isomorphic to S(4).  Proof of Theorem 5. Let N be the largest integer such that there is a member of L(S) whose code is an N-tuple of positive  integers. Define, for each A = 1, 2,..., N,  Px = {T I T E L (S) and T has a A-dimensional code or a (.1- i)-dimensional starred code, for 0 < i < A},  where the dimension of a code is simply the dimension of the corresponding vector. We show 9- = IPx I 1 < A < N} is a taxonomy  of V by induction. Since V is the only member of L (S) with a 1-tuple code, K-, = { { V 11, which is a taxonomy of V. Suppose,  for 1 < i < N, 9-i = {Px I 1 < A < i } is a taxonomy of V. Consider the members of P,+,. They can be divided into a set A  consisting of all T E L (S) with an (i + 1 -j)dimensional starred code, for 0 < j < i + 1, and a disjoint set B of all T E L  (S) with an (i + 1)-dimensional code. Clearly, A U B = Pi+,. The members of A are pairwise disjoint because they were also  members of P,, which is a partition of V by assumption. The members of B are pairwise disjoint because they are components of  sets in P;, which are pairwise disjoint by assumption. Also  U T = V,  TEA UB  since P, is a partition of V by assumption so any element of V is either in a member of A or in a component of a member of P,.  Consequently, P,+, is a partition of V and any member of P,+, is a subset of a member of P,, so Fi+, = Fi U {P,+, } is a  taxonomy of V. So by induction, K, = 9- is a taxonomy of V.  If S is totally stratified, then the only starred codes of elements of L(S) are trivial (one point) completed graphs. Thus it  is easy to see that 9- will be a strict taxonomy.  Proof of Theorem 6. Suppose 9- = {Px I A = 1, 2,..., N} is a strict taxonomy of a (finite) set V. For all distinct a, b E V,  define the function g(a, b) by  g(a, b) = max (A, I there is an A E PA with a, b E A }. x  Then g(a, b) is well defined since a, b E V and P, = { V } E K_. Now consider the completed graph S = (V; R, k), where aRb iff  g(a, b) is an odd integer and aRb iff g(a, b) is an even integer. Let T= U'=, PA, then we want to show T=L(S). We accomplish  this by showing that T satisfies the three defining conditions of L(S) stated in Theorem 4.  480/26/2-4  144 BATCHELDER AND LEFEBVRE  First, P, = {V} c T. Second, suppose A E T, then A E PA, for some A = 1, 2,..., N. If A = N, then A is a singleton set since  9- is a strict taxonomy. In this case, d(A) = {A } c T. Let A = 1, 2,..., N - 1. Again if A is a singleton set, then d(A) = {A  } c T since 87 is a strict taxonomy. Suppose IA I > 1, then there is a B E Pj +, with B c A and B * A since 9- is a strict  taxonomy. Let  -W={BIBEPA+, and BcA}.  Clearly .W has more than one element. We want to show that d(A)=,W, since that would establish that d(A) c T since, of course  .W c T. Let B E ,W, then for all b E B and a E A - B, g(a, b) = A. Suppose A is odd, then aRb and, more generally, BR (A-B).  If A is even, then BR(A-B). Without loss of generality, suppose A is odd so BR (A -B). If we can show_ that B is connected in  R, then B E CA(R) thus B E d(A). If CBI = 1, then_ B E CA(R) by definition. Suppose IBS > 1 and let b, c E B. If g(b, c) is  even, then bRc. If g(b, c) is odd, then g(b, c) > ~ + 2 (in this case it must be that A + 2 < N). Let D E PA+2 with b, c E D.  Since g" is a strict taxonomy, there is a CEP, + , with D c C_ and D * C. Let d E C - D, then g(b, d) = g(c, d) = A + 1. Since  A + 1 is even, bRd and cRd, thus c is connected to b in R. Hence B is connected in R, so B E d(A) since we already established  that BR (A -B). Thus .~9 = d(A) c T. Finally since F- is a strict taxonomy, all members of T are either in PA for some unique  A or they are singleton sets, so the three defining conditions for Theorem 4 are met by T, thus T = L (S).  All that remains is to show that S is totally stratified. If it were not totally stratified, then it would have a four point  set U whose induced completed subgraph of S would be coconnected by Corollary 1. If a E U, then {a} E~L(S) since d(U) = (U};  however, { a } E T since F' is a strict taxonomy, and since T = L (S) as established earlier, this is a contradiction. Hence S  is totally stratified.  Proof of Corollary 3 (to Theorem 6). Let S = (V; R, R) be the totally stratified, completed graph obtained for F- in Theorem  6. It was obtained by the coding rule; for all distinct a, b E V, g(a, b) is odd iff aRb and g(a, b) is even iff aRb. It is  easy to show that if the coding rule is changed to g(a, b) is even iff aRb and g(a, b_) is odd iff aRb, then the completed  graph T = (V; P, P) results, where P = R and P = R. It is obvious that the proof of Theorem 6 would go through for T as well  as S.  Proof of Theorem 7. (i) Suppose c E A n B and let d E V - (A U B), then if aRd, AR {d) since c E A and A is a status. For the  same reasons, BR {d }, so (A U B) R {d}. Similarly, if cRd, (A U B) R{d}, so A U B is a status. Next suppose  l A n B l > 2 and let a, b E A r) B and c E V - (A r) B). Suppose aRc. If c E V - (A U B), then bRc since a, b E A and A is a  status. If c E B - A, then bRc for the same reason. Finally, if c E A - B, then bRc since a, b E B and B is a status. Thus (A  n B) R {c}. Similarly, if aRc, then (A n B) R {c}, so A n B_ is a status. Finally suppose A rn B = 0 and pick a E A and b E B.  Either aRb or aRb. In the first case, AR {b} since A is a status, and thus ARB since B is also a status. Similarly if aRb then  ARB.  NATURAL PARTITIONS OF A GRAPH 145  (ii) If A, B c V are structurally equivalent, then by Definition 5 they are both statuses and cliques. From (i), A U B is a  status, and without loss of generality, suppose A is an R-clique. Now if A c B or B c A, it is clear that A U B is also an  Rclique so it is structurally equivalent. Consequently, suppose not A c B and not B c A, and let a E A - B, b E B - A, and c E  A r1 B (which is nonempty by hypothesis). Now Ma since A is an R-clique by assumption. Further, bRa since B is a status and b,  c E B and a (t B. Finally bRc since A is a status and a, c E A and b E~ A. Hence A U B is an R-clique, and since it is also a  status, it is structurally equivalent. Next suppose C c A with I C I > 2. Since A is structurally equivalent it is both a  clique and a status. Without loss of generality suppose A is an R-clique. Clearly, C is also an R-clique. Let c E C and b E V  - C and suppose cRb. If b E V - A, then CR {b } because A is a status. If b E A - C, then CR { b } because A is an R-clique.  Thus C is a status, and since it is also an R-clique it is structurally equivalent.  Proof of Theorem 8. Define 5* to be Salong with all singleton subsets of V. First we establish that L(S)cY* by showing  that S satisfies the first two conditions of Theorem 4. First, V is a status trivially, so { V} c Y*. Suppose A E .Y *. If A  is coconnected (or a singleton set), then d(A) = {A } c .Y *. If A is not coconnected, without loss of generality suppose it  is connected in R, so d(A) = CA (R). We want to show d(A) c So*. Let B E d(A), clearly, if JBI = 1, B E , S`' *, so suppose I  B I > 1. Let b E B and c E V - B. Suppose bRc. In this case c E _V - A since B is a component of A in R; thus BR {c) since _A  is a status. Instead if bRc, then if c E V - A, BR { c } as before. If c E A - B, then BR { a } since, otherwise, B would not  be a component of A in R. In either case B is a status; so d(A) c Y*. Thus L (S) c .S since S satisfies Theorem 4(i) and  (ii).  Now we want to show .W c Y. Suppose B E .W, then there is an A E L (S) with B E d(A). Now d(A) c Y * since we have shown L(S)  c Y *. By Definition 6, there is a positive integer r and D.., Dr E d(A) such that B = U r=, D;. If A is coconnected, then  d(A) = {A } so B E Y *, and since I B I > 1, B E S Suppose A is not coconnected and, without loss of generality, suppose it  is disconnected in R. Let b E B and c E V - B. If c E A - B, then BR {c} since each D; c B is a component of A in R. Suppose  cE V-A, then bRc implies BR{c} and bRc implies BR{c} since B c A and A is a status. Thus B is a status, hence B E .Y and so we  can conclude c . Y as required.  Finally suppose S is totally stratified and there is an A E Sand A (~ .W. Since A c V E L (S), there is a member of L (S)  that contains A. Further there is a B E L (S) such that A c B and B is minimal in the sense that if C E L (S) and A c C, then  B c C. This is true because by Theorem 5 the members of L(S) are the taxa of a strict taxonomy of V, so two members of L(S)  are either disjoint or in a subset relation.  Now A (~ d(B) since A E~ Y by assumption and it has been established that .W c Y. This means that there are BBz E d(B) with  Br r1 A :f- 0, BZ tl A * 0, and B, -A* 0 because, otherwise, either A E d(B) or the minimality property of B  146) BATCHELDER AND LEFEBVRE  would be violated. Without loss of generality, suppose B is not connected in R, so B, , BZ E CB(R) and, of course, B, RB2. Now  let c E B, - A, d E B, n A, and e E BZ n A. Since B, is connected in R and c, d E B, , there is a positive integer N  and elements x, , x, ,..., xN in B,' so that x, = c, x,, = d, and for all 1 < n < N, xx,. Since c E B, -A and d E B, n  A, there must be an_ m such that x E B, - A and x+, E B,nA, and of course, x.Rxm+,. Now x Rme since xm E B, and e E BZ.  Further since A is a status by assumption and e E A and x+, CA, it must be that xmRx,+, ; however, this is a contradiction.  Thus A E .W, so if S is totally stratified .~e = . ~".  Proof of Theorem 9. First the set ._X, corresponds to the set of all two element structurally equivalent sets. By construction  EZ is reflexive and symmetric. Suppose a, b, c E V and aE2 b and bEz c. If the elements are not all distinct, it is clear that  aE2 c. If the elements are all distinct, then la, b } and j b, c } are structurally equivalent by Definition 5, and by the  union and subset properties of Theorem 7(ii), so is la, b, cl and thus la, c). Hence aEZc and therefore EZ is transitive. Thus  EZ is an equivalence relation and it induces a partition .,,1' of V consisting of the equivalence classes of EZ, whose  nonsingleton members are, by construction, maximal sets of pairwise structurally equivalent sets. Suppose M E ..', we want to  show that M is a maximal structurally equivalent set in the sense of Definition 5. Pick a E M, then M is the union of all its  two element subsets containing a, and since each of these is structurally equivalent, so is M by the union property of Theorem  7(ii). If M was not a maximal structurally equivalent set, then there would be a structurally equivalent set M' such that M c  M' and M * M'. Pick b E M' - M, then for all a E M, by the subset property of Theorem 7(ii), la, b} is structurally  equivalent, and this contradicts the property of M that it is a maximal set of pairwise structurally equivalent sets. Thus M  is a maximal structurally equivalent set, so .,el' is the set of maximal structurally equivalent sets of S  APPENDIX B: DECOMPOSITION ALGORITHM  The DA _is defined recursively in such a way as to start with a completed graph S = (V; R, R) and produce a set L(S)  consisting of indexed subsets of V. Corresponding to each A E L(S) is the completed graph given by  T= (A;Rn(AXA),Rn(AXA)).  Each member of L(S) is given an index by the DA which is a finite row vector of positive integers (see Section III). If an  asterisk (*) is affixed to the right hand of the index, it means that the corresponding completed graph cannot be further  decomposed. The steps of the algorithm follow (initially L(S) = 0):  Step 1. Start with a completed graph S = (V; R, R) index V with tag(V) = (1) and place it in L(S). Go to Step 5.  NATURAL PARTITIONS OF A GRAPH 147  Step 2. Consider the induced,_ completed graph (A; P, P), where P = R n (A X A), and calculate C(P) and C(P). Go to Step 3.  Step 3. If I C(P)S = M > 1, order the components of A, arbitrarily, A, , AZ,..., AM. For i = 1, 2,...,M, index A; with tag(A  i) = (tag(A ), i). Place A and each Ai in L(S) and go to Step 5.  If I C(P)S = 1, go to Step 4.  Step 4. If I C(P)S = M > 1, order the components of A, arbitrarily, A, , A 2,..., AM. For i = 1, 2,..., M_, index Ai with  tag(AI) = (tag(A), i). Place A and A; in L(S) and go to Step 5. If I C(P)l = 1, index A with tag(A ) * and return A to L (S)  and go to Step 5.  Step 5. If there are members of L(S) whose index does not have an asterisk (*) at the right, select one, say A, and go to Step  2. If all members of L(S) have starred indexes, then go to Step 6.  Step 6. Stop and print L(S).  The set L(S) produced by the DA corresponds to the L(S) that was less formally defined in the body of the paper. Actually the  indexing scheme for the DA produces extraneous parentheses inside the indexes. The only computationally difficult step in the  algorithm is in determining the components of a completed graph. Carre (1979, p. 77) discusses a simple algorithm for  obtaining the components of a graph which is computable in polynomial time. Since the members of L(S) form a taxonomy of V by  Theorem 5, the component-determination step will be used for no more than 2 1 V1 - 1 times. This follows since the maximum  number of taxa in a taxonomy of an n element set is 2n - 1. Thus the entire algorithm is "fast" (see footnote 1).  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  We would like to thank John Boyd, Lin Freeman, Louis Narens, Kim Romney, and Peter Woodruff for valuable discussions related  to the early stages of this project, and Philippa Pattison for her detailed comments on the first draft that led to a  substantial change in Section V.2.  REFERENCES  ARABIE, P., BOORMAN, S. A., & LEVITT, P. R. Constructing blockmoddls: how and why. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1978,  17, 21-63.  BOYD, J. P. The universal semigroup of relations. Social Networks, 1979, 2, 91-117. CARRE, B. Graphs and networks. Oxford:  Clarendon Press, 1979.  CARTWRIGHT, D., & HARARY, F. Structural balance: a generalization of Heider's theory. Psychological Review, 1956, 63, 277-293.  DAVIS, J. A. Clustering and structure balance in graphs. Human Relations, 1967, 20, 181-187.  HEIL, G. H., & WHITE, H. C. An algorithm for finding simultaneous homomorphic correspondences between graphs and their image  graphs. Behavioral Science, 1976, 21, 26-35.  LEFEBVRE, V. A. The algebra of conscience. Dordrecht: Reidel, 1982.  148 BATCHELDER AND LEFEBVRE  LORRAIN. F. P., & WHITE, H. C. Structural equivalence of individuals in social networks. Journal of Mathematical Sociology,  1971, 1, 49-80.  ROBERTS, F. Discrete mathematical models. Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall, 1976. ROBERTS, F. Measurement theory.  Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1979.  SHEATH, P. H. A., & SOKAL, R. R. Numerical taxonomy. San Francisco: Freeman, 1973.  RECEIVED: June 11, 1982