10.1016/0022-2496(82)90053-0
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 25, 282-284 (1982)    Book Review    Ventures in Multilinear Algebra    GCJNTER LEHMANN. Figurale Wechselwirkungen im Gesichtsfeld (Configural Interaction in the Visual Field).  G6ttingen/Toronto/ZUrich: Hogrefe, 1981. Pp. 208. DM 58.00.    Reviewed by JAN DR6SLER    hor holds a Ph.D. in Psychology from Technische UniversitAt Braunschweig and has been teaching at Universitdt G6ttingen since  1964. He has published on various topics in mathematical psychology. The reviewer, a Professor of Psychology at Universitiit  Regensburg since 1973, holds a Ph.D. from Universitiit Bonn and has taught at Universitiit Marburg, Universitdt G6ttingen and  Technische Universitiit Braunschweig. He has published on the foundations of multidimensional scaling among other areas of  mathematical psychology.    taltists' slogan of the whole being "more than just the sum of its parts" might well be understood as a warning against the  abuse of linear models in pattern perception if not in all of psychology. It is additivity,    f(x + Y) =f(x) +f(y),    besides homogeneity which comprises linearity of a function f. Is it not time to yield to nonlinear models, even if the last  of the gestaitists are presently retiring? Lehmann says "no"; the linear approach, if handled correctly, is powerful enough to  describe and predict visual phenomena, including those reeking of apparent nontinearity. How does he do it? By using tensors:  If t: (X*)p X Xq -~ R    is a (p + q) linear mapping with X a vector space over the reals R and X* its dual, namely, the set of homomorphisms (or  linear forms) L: X-4 R,    then the mapping t is a tensor of type (pq). The algebra is tractable if p and q are small. It enables the researcher, in a  manner borrowed from the physicists, to define tensor fields which are mappings of a vector space X into the set of all  tensors of a    requests should be sent to Professor Jan Dr6sler, Department of Psychology, UniversitAt Regensburg, 8400 Regensburg,  UniversitAtsstrasse 31, Federal Republic of Germany.    282  0022-2496/82/030282-03$02.00/0    Copyright (cD 1982 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  BOOK REVIEW 283    given type. In color perception, McAdam's ellipses of differential sensibility to hue changes are a, hitherto unnoticed,  example of a tensor field in visual psychology. In Lehmann's case, the vector space is the two dimensional visual field and  the tensors are 2 X 2 matrices describing the lengthening (or foreshortening) influence (in terms of direction and magnitude)  of an experimental "generator" line stimulus on a test line stimulus at a given position in X. The actual lengthening of a  test line is found empirically by the method of reproduction. Subjects are asked to reproduce a given stimulus line on a sheet  of paper. Theoretically it is represented in a candidly ungestaitist way by means of adding the (infinitesimal) influences as  they are projected into the direction of the test line (p. 70ff). Different sources of influence due to various "generator"  stimulus lines are represented again by addition.  s development could very well have floundered at the level of intelligent speculation, were it not for two imaginative feats  of Lehmann's. Working, as his references demonstrate, quite independently of the constraints of Anglo-Saxon laboratory  routines, he at first conducted what most likely would be looked down upon as data fitting by some: He represented his  empirical data in the form of the parameters of two dimensional symmetric Newtonian polynomials. Then he used these parameters  to estimate the parameters of the tensor field. Second, he found a way to communicate the intricate patterns (one for each  generator stimulus) to the reader. Lehmann simply let his computer print out little orthogonal crosses all over the  representation of the visual field. The bar lengths of each cross indicate (in principal axes) the magnitude of the  lengthening effect, and the inclination of the cross represents the direction of the effect at that point of the visual field,  The method conveys the field information almost as easily as iron filings with magnetic poles. The analogy with physics ends  there, because Lehmann's visual field forces, in contrast to those in the conventional sciences, tend to increase with  distance.  e of the results is presented in Chapter III which contains analyses of several different types of fields and introduces a  probabilistic model for the interaction of generator and test stimuli. The variance of deformations is found to be  proportional to line length and the deformation itself.  re be empirical validity in such novelty? Lehmann demonstrates that there is by invading the gestaltists' own proving grounds,  the realm of optical illusions. Using parameter estimates from his own experimental paradigm he correctly predicts eight  classical visual illusions among them notable ones like the Maller-Lyer and the Poggendorf.  k is scholarly, the result of more than 10 years of effort. Lehmann started publishing on the subject-matter in 1967. Still,  there are weak points. The first is poorly controlled experimentation. In the experiments one would recommend control of  eye-movement, possibly by computer feedback. A major problem in the experiments appears to be the size limitations of the  stimulus as well as those of the response fields. A Ganzfeld type of presentation would appear more appropriate. Still, the  results have stood up against statistical analysis. So, even if they would concern the central field of vision alone, the  effects are there.  e reasoning from the local (infinitesimal) to the global effects warranted a  284  BOOK REVIEW    discussion of the Fechner problem. Lehmann is aware of this. On page 21 he cites Faimagne's work but does not relate his own  development to it. This, in my opinion, is a grave omission, since it might lead to a classification of the work as the result  of mere engineering spirit: successful as to the objective, largely oblivious of theory. This would be unjust to the author  since he literally spent years in erecting the theoretical framework.  , there is the question of foundations. As was indicated above, the method of reproduction, although of Fechner's own vintage,  is not high up in the charts these days. Is it because its mathematical foundations are unclear, or vice versa? At any rate,  there is not a word about foundations in the entire book. It is as if the author had tacitly argued as follows: stimuli, as  well as responses, are physical lengths, and the foundation for their measurement has long be taken care of by H61der.  effort of studying the book an advisable investment? In the reviewer's opinion it is, not only for the student of  (contemporary scientific) German. Anyone interested in psychological application of tensor algebra gets a readable exposition.  So many words have been written and said in the past about "f"ields" in psychology. This is, to my knowledge, the first book  which gives a technical introduction, together with application of several varieties of fields in psychology. Finally, he who  wants to make life more interesting for his computer, stuffed with bilinear algebra, will get numerous incentives.    REFERENCES    FALMAGNE, J. C. Grundiagen der Fechnerschen Psychophysik, In W. H. Tack (Ed.), Bericht tiber den 28. Kongress d. Deutschen  Gesellsehaft f Psychologie. Band2: Psychologische Methodik und    Mathematische Psychologie. Hogrefe: G6ttingen, 1973. Pp. 12-50.    HDER, 0. Die Axiorne der Quantit und die Lehre vom Mass. Berichte er die Verhandlungen der    Kiglichen Shsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften, (Leipzig) Mathematisch-Physikalische    Klasse, 1901, 53, 1-64.