10.1016/0022-2496(82)90035-9
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 26, 68-77 (1982)  Book Review  Some Light upon Latency and the Limitations of Models  A. T. WELFORD (Ed.), Reaction Time. New York: Academic Press, 1981. Pp. ix + 418. $67.00.  Reviewed by R. PIKE  Welford is Emeritus Professor at the University of Adelaide. He has been at Adelaide since 1968, prior to which he was at St.  Johns College, Cambridge. Professor Welford has published numerous books and many articles in the area of skilled performance,  including work on aging and human skill.  The reviewer is associated with the Department of Psychology, University of Queensland. He obtained his Ph.D. from London  University in 1967, and was at the University of Strathclyde prior to his present position. His major research interest is  reaction time models.  A book which surveys the experimental results involving reaction time is very welcome. Reviews of the reaction time data have  in the past often been left to introductory texts with consequent large gaps in the description of data and accounts of how  the findings relate to current theory. It should be said, however, that this work is not a complete review and is somewhat  inappropriately titled. Of course, any text completely describing all of the areas involving reaction time would have to be  large. The present authors were aware of this fact and decided as a consequence to restrict the domain to that with which they  were familiar. Since this domain largely centers around the topic of choice reaction time they could have taken the more  conservative course of concentrating entirely upon this area, giving the work the more restricted title. As it stands, the  major chapters which appear upon perceptual discrimination and memory modelling are somewhat isolated (in spite of tentative  attempts to achieve some kind of synthesis by an occasional reference to the model for perceptual discrimination discussed at  length in one chapter). The inclusion of a short review of the history of reaction time studies and of chapters dealing with  reaction time as applied to personality and retarded development only partially detract from the major theme of choice  reaction time (RT). There is one chapter which presents the effects of age, sex and stress upon RT as a satisfactory synthesis  of the different forms of RT. But overall, the authors could well have restricted this volume to choice reaction time, keeping  the remainder to an expanded companion volume.  There is evidence of "mateship" in the book. This term, for the benefit of the nonAustralian reader, is of sentimental origins  stemming from early settlement days in Australia. All the authors are working or have at some time worked at the University 68  0022-2496/82/040068-10$02.00/0  Copyright 1982 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  BOOK REVIEWS 69  of Adelaide and tend to look upon each other's work benevolently. There are exceptions to this, although the non-benevolence  is then only implied. This point is, of course, made not denying the excellent work upon choice and decision time which has  come from that University, largely under the guidance of the senior author, and indeed continues to do so since his departure.  Each of the contributors to the book reviews a particular area or areas and in some cases the aim of the chapter is towards  the advocacy of a particular model originating with the author. Where the latter occurs there is naturally an uncritical  acceptance of the model, the reader usually being referred elsewhere to a more complete justification. Thus the work is only  partially a text; it is partially a series of viewpoints. As already mentioned, it is restricted in scope and entirely omits  some important and interesting topics currently being researched, such as that concerning response time in item-matching tasks  or in item-identification tasks. Although such topics may not be considered strictly within the domain of "reaction time," the  boundaries must be considered hazy in terms of models of information processing. Largely then, the book is a mix of some facts  reviewed and some models proclaimed.  On the whole, the factual reviews of the areas dealt with are well handled by the authors. The first chapter by Welford and  Brebner provides a brief but useful historical introduction to the study of simple reaction time and choice reaction time. The  history of reaction time study is now so large and diverse that a volume on that topic would find many interested readers. A  brief review, therefore, must achieve a consensus and this one appears to do so. However, this is the last we hear of simple  reaction time until later chapters on personality, sex, and age differences, the introduction being followed by a chapter on  discrimination, three chapters on choice reaction time, the single-channel hypothesis, memory models, personality, stress, age  and sex, and finally psychopathological states.  The second chapter by D. Vickers opens well but overall gives the impression of yet another statement of his "accumulator"  model and its large capacity for extension into complex behavior description. Since the "accumulator" model figures largely in  the book it is discussed in detail later. The chapter by Welford reviewing choice reaction time results is generally excellent  and, as one would expect, he is thoroughly at home here. Commencing with a description of simple choice time and the  information equation he clearly explains the possible models and shows that his "positive check" model is capable of  explaining some of the data, but not all. The positive check model describes choice reaction time in terms of a simple check  against all response possibilities until the correct response is found. There is a good deal of flexibility allowed for the  search path in the model depending upon biases of various kinds. Consequently it is a good example of a model with a large  potential for modification such that a large range of strategies used by a subject in the choice reaction situation can be  accounted for. It then becomes an easy matter for Welford to account for many data in terms of the model and at the same time,  probably by not stretching the model to its full potential, to point out that there are some data it will not account for. The  positive check model founders in the tangle of possible strategies, as Welford indirectly admits. To quote Welford at this  point, the author is  70  BOOK REVIEWS  "all too well aware of the many possible ways of accounting for the data that were tried but found not to be satisfactory." He  does not seem to realize how critical an interpretation may be placed upon this statement, in the methodological sense. Also,  the fact that the data "cluster around" the predictions of the model with differing display layouts is encouraging but hardly  final. The conclusion that there is "some factor of association between signal and responses which is important but not yet  fully defined" seems to take us back to the beginning. Welford also refers to the Vickers model for discrimination as possibly  modelling choice reaction time although that model is not discussed in any detail by Vickers with respect to choice reaction  time.  The Adelaide variety of choice reaction time studies is somewhat preoccupied with fingers. Although this does have a rational  explanation in so far as they have used vibrotactile stimuli, thus optimizing the ability of the human operator to employ  distinct input channels, it does lead to a high degree of specialization both in the modelling, as we see later with Smith,  and with the experimental manipulations. In gaining the precision afforded by a specialized stimulus situation there is, of  course, a marked loss of generality of explanation but this may not be a bad thing for rudimentary theory. Thus the Adelaide  school of choice reaction time has developed in a way which forces consideration of the many differing strategies available to  a subject for the choice of correct finger reactions, an important point for researchers not preoccupied with generality.  Welford has two further chapters, both of which again demonstrate very effective scholarship. These are a chapter on the  single-channel hypothesis and a chapter on the effects of fatigue, stress, age, and sex. On the former he is particularly  penetrating and his account should satisfy most workers in the area. It is in the collection and presentation of the evidence  with regard to the effects of such factors on RT, and the review of the work upon the single-channel hypothesis that the true  worth of these chapters emerges. Again, when he resorts to model building the outcome is not so successful. For example, he  describes a tentative model for the effects of stress upon RT in vigilance tasks which is a good example of one which confuses  description with explanation. The model describes errors and RT in terms of (a) the theory of signal detectability and (b)  changes in the observation distributions occurring according to an increase in "arousal." However, data in the situation he  describes can always be given in terms of the four stimulus-response (S-R) categories of the signal detection paradigm and  hence the first part of the model cannot be faulted. It is a fact that many authors still resort to the detection paradigm as  if it were explaining their data when in fact it is describing the data, albeit in a very useful way. As noted by others  (e.g., Anderson & Bower, 1972) many models owe their capacity to describe the data well to the use of the signal detection  paradigm rather than to explanation of the data in terms of intrinsic features of their model. When Welford then links the  detection scheme to the "arousal" hypothesis he is lost. It has been well argued (e.g., Revelle, Humphreys, Simon, &  Gilliland, 1980) that the inverted U hypothesis concerning the link between arousal and performance is better considered  purely as a description, rather than an explanation, of the change in performance which occurs  BOOK REVIEWS 71  with stress, the change being due to factors which can be defined otherwise than in terms of "arousal."  Kirby's chapter is a commendable review of the findings related to sequential effects in choice reaction time. He examines the  effects of the number of stimulus-response alternatives, the time interval between the last response and the following  stimulus, the compatibility of the stimulus-response arrangements, and the probability of repetitions and alterations.  Broadly, Kirby examines two viable explanations of repetition and alternation effects. These are automatic facilitation and  cognitive strategy, the former in terms of residual peripheral activation and the latter in terms of the saving in processing  in coding at a less peripheral level.  Kirby's discussion ranges over most of the possible experimental conditions from two to multiple choice and also looks at  higher order sequential effects. The arrangement of this chapter is particularly useful and he carefully weighs each  alternative explanation of the various sequential effects. In particular he considers the interaction of the identification  process, S-R coding, and response selection. He emphasises that the capacity of the subject to store information clearly plays  an important part in the selection of strategy. As Kirby says, the complexity of the results obtained in this area appear to  have a number of implications for the use of RT in the study of human behaviour. In essence he claims that some of the  characteristic features of sequential effects in choice RT will be involved in any RT task which involves a choice and that,  as a consequence, models based upon simplistic assumptions about the constancy of sequential parameters are unlikely to  succeed. He claims that the complexity of sequential effects vitiates any attempt to portray the decision process in more  complicated tasks as a simple repetitive one.  Kirby's thesis is worth paying attention to. It concerns the model builder who attempts to go from the comparatively simple to  the complex. It is fashionable at present to support attempts at complex model building, so that many aspects of cognitive  behaviour can be encompassed by a single all-embracing scheme. Unfortunately, the comparative ease with which some ingenious  model builders can do this is not matched by the viability of the models they produce to stand up to a detailed analysis, so  that the models are unable to explain the details of the structure it is supposed to encompass. The sacrifice of detail for  generality in these cases has not proven its worth in terms of explanatory power, only the worth of the model builders. Thus  Kirby's chapter is a reminder of the difficulties which confront experimenters who would wish to establish the general  validity of particular models rather than discover the facts concerning the related behaviour. Unfortunately and on the other  hand, models devised for particular and exclusive situations do not seem as lastingly potent in experimental psychology as  they often are in other scientific disciplines. They may work for a time but then fail when confronted with other experimental  findings, severely reducing their apparent potential. A now classic example is the memory scanning model of Sternberg (1969),  reviewed in the McNicol and Stewart chapter.  As if to take up this problem, Smith's chapter commences with consideration of "the general problem of modelling" and  describes Edwards (1965) as being  72 BOOK REVIEWS  pessimistic in the latter's well-quoted statement concerning the limitations of models. However, Smith clearly seems to be  aware of the need for such limitations. Smith then classifies models for choice reaction time into complete criterion and  relative criterion models and describes extant models in these terms. The former implies that processing takes the form of  rejection of all alternatives except one, whereas the latter is based upon the accumulation of "tentative evidence" until the  decision system reaches a criterion. Although this dichotomy is convenient it is debatable whether the relative criterion  models (such as those sequential decision models discussed by Vickers for discrimination) were ever intended to describe  choice reaction time. In choice reaction situations the perceptual discrimination is easy, in contrast to the psychophysical  situation where it is usually difficult. So if a relative criterion model is going to work, the time rates of events must be  suitable for fast processing. This, in fact, is how Smith conceives the model he finally proposes.  The special situation in which Smith is interested,. the kind of situation for which he argues that models are well suited, is  that where the stimuli are vibro-tactile. Thus we are involved in the processes of high compatibility between stimulus and  response, where there is no increase of RT with the number of stimuli. Smith has a long and inconclusive section on "the  discrete stage approach" before describing his model-it is difficult to see why. However, other sections on the features of  data in the vibrotactile are more directly pertinent to that situation.  Smith's model describes a system which directs stimulus excitation to each of the possible responses, within each cycle of an  accumulation process and with the correct response having the largest excitation. The important latency feature of the model  is that the cycle time shortens as an inverse function of the cycle number, hence the name "accelerating cycle" model. It is  clearly devised to obtain a logarithmic relationship between the number of alternatives and RT. Also, by defining its main  time parameter for the accumulation of excitation for a particular response as depending upon stimulus-response compatibility  many of the features of the vibrotactile task can be exploited. Thus the model is descriptively promising and provided we  accept the decreasing time rate for each cycle as plausible, some form of such a model could prove useful for choice reaction  time.  Unfortunately, Smith's mathematical derivation of the time to response, leading to RT = A + B log(N + C), where C depends upon  the ratio of stimulus excitation increment to final excitation threshold, is in error and hence places his whole further  comments in doubt. In particular, he seems to claim that T, 1/k for k = 1 to x is equal to log x for discrete x and when x is  to be considered in important instances for only small values. He also appears to be in error when deriving the expression for  the number of cycles to reach threshold, and since that error leads to the presence of the all-important term C, above, it  seems to be an important one. Thus his comparisons of model predictions and data are seriously to be questioned. But the  general form of the model could prove to be fruitful in choice RT research when a greater accuracy has been achieved in its  derivations.  The chapter by McNicol and Stewart upon reaction time in the study of memory (largely recognition memory) is both lucid and  interesting although it is by no means  BOOK REVIEWS 73  a complete survey (e.g., the absence of reference to the work of Nickerson). It contains the personal viewpoint of those  authors upon a complex research scene. Commencing with an attempt to describe a genetic tree for recognition models they  proceed to examine serial search, parallel search, and direct access models. The Sternberg model is naturally given much  attention and after highlighting the usual criticisms of the exhaustive scan model they give consideration to error  responding. That model does not stand up to their particular interpretation which is given in terms of errors in matching  alone. They do not consider the possibility of intrusions into and omissions from the memorised set, errors which could  predict different latency trends to the ones they consider. The chapter gives a good account of the merits and flaws in the  Murdock conveyor belt model, leading to an appreciation of Ratcliff's analysis of distributional data.  They then examine strength and direct access models, emphasising its inadequacies and conclude with a section on multiple  observation sequential processes, that is, "the sampling of evidence from an ambiguous trace," a concept which they clearly  It is clear from their discussion of the situation that the controversy over modified search and strength models presents a  challenge to researchers. The situation has aspects of a "dual nature" approach-now the recognition process appears to be  based upon search, now upon strength with multiple observations. Hence the dualprocess models for recognition appear to be  what is required, if only that model could describe latencies for error responding in a simple way. McNicol and Stewart  mention the problem that error responses are not faster than correct as predicted by the model. It has been claimed that  errors can occur in the search process but the trouble with this explanation is that it considerably complicates a model which  already contains several parameters. If errors occur in search it makes the observer's task a difficult one in controlling the  placement of the two "familiarity" criteria for optimal performance. Moreover, if search errors are allowed to vary for  positive and negative probes, as they do indeed seem to do, then the model must contain even more parameters. It would then,  no doubt, be able to predict most of the data but using such a model to explain item-recognition data would hardly be  convincing.  There are other dual-process explanations of recognition data. The familiarityretrieval dichotomy presently being argued for  by Mandler is too general in form to pin down in terms of recognition latency but more promising perhaps are the associative  memory models of Anderson (1973) which have aspects related to both matching and strength. The concept of "matching strength"  may prove to be crucial in item recognition, bringing together the essential elements of search and strength in a detection  paradigm. It is the central concept of a system based not upon strength of familiarity in the simple "tagging" interpretation,  but upon strength of concordance of the to-be-recognised item with a large number of possible memory set items. Whether such  matching strength is derived from an holistic memory, of the kind described by Anderson and others, or from a system with  separable items is an open question.  Brebner's chapter is largely based upon his recent papers in which he has taken  74 BOOK REVIEWS  some basic personality theory relating to extraversion/introversion, that espoused by the schools of Pavlov, Cattell, and  Eysenck, to produce an amalgamation in the form of a prescriptive sketch. The main point he makes is that there may be a  personality dimension which can be interpreted as response versus stimulus domination. He describes his experiments which  range from simple reaction time to studies of "viewing time" and which indicate that extraverts and introverts do indeed  differ in the stimulus versus response domination variable. His prescription for behaviour along that personality dimension is  therefore seen to be appropriate. This is all Brebner claims and his work is modest, to be aligned with that of Kirby and,  later, Nettlebeck in so far as he regards it purely as a small step in the right direction.  Finally, Nettlebeck has an informative chapter on RT in mental retardation. It is important, because there seems to be  evidence that some features of performance time may be fairly specific to the retarded state. Nettlebeck is justly  conservative in his approach to the validity of such discriminating features but the indications are there.  The chapter is, in general, a review of the various factors affecting RT in mental retardation and brain damage. The prime  feature of retardation is, as might be expected, a decrease in performance with the resulting increase in RT and increase in  variability. Of course such a gross feature can only grossly discriminate and no attempt is made to claim that performance  levels can indicate the type of mental disturbance; rather it is a matter of the degree, particularly in chronic  schizophrenia. Nettlebeck considers the effects of stimulus intensity, discrimination, and choice reaction time and looks at  response factors and such effects as are due to arousal, motivation, and cognitive influences. The results of discrimination  experiments indicate a difference in strategy between retardates and non-retardates and Nettlebeck is consequently very much  aware of the fact that retardates can often be regarded as a different population in so far as performance is concerned, so  that they may be performing in different ways to those expected from the non-retardate population. The chapter has affinities  with the one by Kirby. It stresses the observational approach whereby any theory or odel can only be expected to fit broad  aspects of the data. Even then the fit is usually partial and indicates the inadequacy of the model to account for more than a  small part of the complex data set generated by the experiments. In Kirby's case it is sequential effects; here it is  retardation. In both apparently, RT is of little use in confirming simple models, but of considerable use in exploring the  nature of the phenomenon itself.  There are thus chapters in the book which between them nicely capture three contrasting approaches to model building. These  are that of the comprehensive general model which can be extended to complex situations, that of a model set up for one  particular situation with strict limits on its pretensions to applicability, and a third approach which is atheoretical and  espouses that no model can be completely satisfactory in view of all the facts. These approaches are exemplified by the  chapters by Vickers, Smith, and Kirby. Thus, after some preliminaries the chapter by Vickers is largely concerned with the  virtues of the "accumulator" model for discrimination and then for more general perceptual decision making. Smith is  particularly keen to define the limitations of model building before describing his own model for choice  BOOK REVIEWS 75  reaction time in the vibro-tactile stimulus situation. As already noted, Kirby gives an excellent exposition of the features  of choice reaction sequential dependency and repetition data and comes to the conclusion that no extant theoretical model  would be sufficient to cope with them. Kirby's chapter is the best of the three; it is probably the one with the greatest  survival value.  Had the book been confined to choice reaction time the Vickers chapter would not, presumably, have been included. The topic of  discrimination as dealt with in the chapter is that of psychophysical discrimination and as such has stronger connections with  psychophysics than choice reaction time. This is evident in the use which Vickers makes of the theory of signal detectability  in discussing the various models. Other authors in the book refer to the Vickers "accumulator" model but this seems to be more  of a matter of the generality claimed for it than any direct relevance to choice reaction time. Vickers has extended the  accumulator model in an ingenious way to account for several differing situations, although he has done so at a largely  qualitative level. His method is to make extensive simulations of the accumulator model and thereby to show congruence with  certain extant data in varying situations. Since he does this with some success and even though it is usually a post hoc  rather than a predictive congruence which he achieves the model has a face validity and accordingly demands attention.  Vickers begins by relating the discrimination problem to the signal detection paradigm and then highlights some important  points in the study of mean response times for different degrees of difficulty of discrimination. He puts forward the argument  for optional-stopping models for discrimination RT. The various kinds of optional-stopping rules are then discussed and the  "accumulator" rule, whereby evidence is accumulated continuously, in discrete time intervals until a fixed criterion point is  first reached, is then given prominence. There is little doubt that the "accumulator" can account for many of the features of  psychophysical discrimination but Vickers is very prone to present only qualitative justifications for supporting the model  and some of these are suspect at close inspection. For example, after apparently accepting the argument of Weatherburn (1978)  upon the inherent ambiguity in the use of graphs depicting the relationship between latency and response probability, he bases  much of his justification of the accumulator model upon a very similar form of graph, except that it is now in an even more  ambiguous form. This is his graph relating mean number of "observations" to internalised and standardised stimulus  differences. Unfortunately, this graph gives no indication of the ranges of stimulus discriminability involved, these being  different for the different values of the "critical count" on the graph. It is a matter of guesswork on the part of the reader  as to how latency is related to stimulus difficulty when the discrimination is difficult. From the curves presented for these  differing values, Vickers is apparently satisfied since it gives a gross correspondence with some , of the main trends in the  data. However, the important features of these main trends are apparently depicted as occurring for degrees of discrimination  well outside those normally used in the difficult discrimination experiment. In fact it is precisely such points on the graphs  to which the Weatherburn argument is most applicable, where discrimination is very  76  BOOK REVIEWS  easy, and where the assumption of the models concerning the constancy of the time rate parameters is most suspect. The same  emphasis on qualitative correspondence is seen in his evaluation of the accumulator in terms of graphs depicting RT  distribution indices. One way to generate a more rigorous assessment of the model would be to compare its predictions with  other models as to the direction and extent of change in latency distribution indices when speed and accuracy conditions are  varied in the same task.  The accumulator model has decided advantages over other sequential decision models in terms of the options open to it under  simulation conditions. It is a complex model in so far as varying amounts of activation are allowed to accumulate towards a  response in each time interval. Vickers compares the accumulator with models which are only allowed fixed unit amounts of  increased activation in any one time interval. However, these models can make some very different predictions (for example,  concerning the trend of skew with an increase in response probability) if these intervals are allowed to become continuous  (activationwise or timewise) which is a realistic assumption concerning any sequential decision model. It is also realistic to  assume that a human decision system would not operate with fixed "critical counts" but that such criteria would vary between  trials. Such variation can then help to explain many of the latency data, as is acknowledged by Smith in his later chapter  when discussing error latencies in regard to his own model.  Vickers has an interesting hypothesis concerning confidence judgments. The sequential discrimination models are, of course,  particularly useful in this respect since the interaction of time and confidence can be well described by the interplay of the  implicit observations (cf. Audley, 1960). The "balance-of-evidence" hypothesis proposed by Vickers is quite similar to other  proposals because of this and its precise form could, therefore, be slightly modified to suit most sequential systems. The  "balance-of-evidence" hypothesis considers, in the two choice case, that if the counts for responses A and B are a and b,  respectively, at the time response A is made, then confidence is a direct function of a - b. This is clearly suitable for  accumulator-type processes but not suitable for random-walk-type processes where a - b is constant at the time of decision.  However a more general type of "balance-of-evidence" criterion might be a/a + b or a - b/a + b; these criteria would suit both  types of sequential decision processes. Both of the latter forms of confidence are different from the original proposal of  Audley (1960) which was simply a + b and which Vickers claims to be inadequate. A more rigorous presentation of the  accumulator model would be welcome and is apparently forthcoming.  Those sequential decision processes considered by Vickers are of the type where the decision criterion is fixed prior to the  sequence of observations. A rather different approach to discrimination would be to say that the decision process first adopts  a strict decision criterion only suitable for easily discriminated stimuli. As a trial proceeds and more observations are  taken with no response forthcoming, then the criterion becomes more and more lax until the observer could eventually accept a  randomly determined decision. Such a model has similarities to that of a signaldetection-like model of Cartwright and  Festinger, discussed by Vickers but where the  BOOK REVIEWS 77  two decision criteria close together with each additional observation until finally they unify, making the next observation  sure to determine the decision. In fact much human discrimination behaviour could be described as proceeding like this,  looking for the easily made decision but upon realizing it is more difficult, extending the sequential process until a  decision is finally reached. This is to assume, of course, that "equals" are not allowed.  REFERENCES  ANDERSON, J. R., & BOWER, G. H. Recognition and retrieval processes in free recall. Psychological Review, 1972, 79, 97-123.  ANDERSON, J. A. A theory for the recognition of items from short memorised lists. Psychological Review, 1973, 80, 417-438.  AUDLEY, R. J. A stochastic model for individual choice behaviour. Psychological Review, 1960, 67, 1-15.  EDWARDS, W. Optimal strategies for seeking information: Models for statistics, choice reaction times, and human information  processing. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1965, 2, 312-329. REVELLE, W., HUMPHREYS, M. S., SIMON, L., & GILLILAND, K.  The interactive effect of personality, time of day and caffeine: A test of the arousal model. Journal of Experimental  Psychology: General, 1980, 109, 1-31.  WEATHERBURN, D. Latency-probability functions as bases for evaluating competing accounts of the sensory decision process.  Psychological Bulletin, 1978, 85, 1344-1347.