10.1016/0022-2496(82)90043-8
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 26, 182-189 (1982)  Book Review  Logical Development  C. L. BAKER AND JOHN J. MCCARTHY. The Logical Problem of Language Acquisition. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1981. Pp. xii +  358. $30.00.  Reviewed by ROBERT C. BERWICK  The Editors of this book are associated with the Department of Linguistics and the Center for Cognitive Science, at the  University of Texas, Austin. Professor Baker received a Ph. D. in Linguistics at the University of Illinois in 1968, and his  research interests include language acquisition and linguistic theory, particularly syntax; he authored An introduction to  transformational-generative syntax, Prentice-Hall, 1978. Dr. McCarthy is an Assistant Professor, having received his Ph. D. in  Linguistics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1979; his major research interest is phonological theory,  particularly stress and syllabification.  The reviewer is an Assistant Professor of Computer Science and Engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, from  which he received his Ph. D. in 1982 in Computer Science. His primary research interests involve computer models of language  acquisition and computational complexity theory. He has recently edited (with J. M. Brady) and contributed to Computational  models of discourse, MIT Press, which is in press.  One of the most striking achievements of twentieth century science has been the cracking of the genetic code-the -astonishing  discovery that the helical whirl of a DNA molecule can store, in a universal language, the information necessary to describe a  bat, a rose, a virus, or a person. Though our ignorance about such matters is vast, we are beginning to know something about  the initial blueprint for such creatures. We can also begin to perceive, just about as dimly, the complex regulatory dance  that constitutes the workings of the final product. But we are in nearly complete ignorance about just bow it is that the  blueprint gets turned into organism, in general, how an initial state (the raw DNA) gets projected into a final state (a  working creature). The few examples where something is known shows that the mapping from initial to final state is quite  sophisticated, often involving a subtle, but limited, interplay of external influences. From a formal and more general point  of view, the problem is how to explain the emergence of complex properties out of the interaction of many simpler components  that unfold over time.  Requests for reprints should be sent to Dr. Robert C. Berwick, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of  Technology, 545 Technology Square, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139.  0022-2496/82/050182-08$02.00/0  Copyright C 1982 by Academic Press, Inc.  182  BOOK REVIEW 183  Enter the theory of generative grammar. Ever since Chomsky revived the metaphor, it has been a favorite refrain of linguists  that the study of language is (or ought to be) "just like" the study of any other organ of the body-with the difference that  the organ in question is an abstract capacity (language) rather than a blood and guts piece of flesh. If this is really so,  then one would expect that an account of how that capacity comes to be acquired (what might be called "language learning,"  though the word "learning" fails us here) would be "just like" the study of the ontogenesis of any other highly structured  functional unit like the kidney or the hand. It is the aim of this volume of collected papers, presented at a symposium on  language acquisition at the University of Texas in March 1980, to show that not only is this "just like" claim warranted, but  that, ironically, our knowledge of the linguistic system has advanced to such an extent that its ontogenesis is in a sense  better understood than that of mere flesh and blood biological organs. (In this respect the current volume is quite similar in  scope and intent to another recently published symposia proceedings edited by S. Tavakolian, Language Acquisition and  Linguistic Theory, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1981. Even some of the same authors are represented in this other volume.) The  scope of this demonstration is quite broad, ranging from "macroscopic" attempts to show that the entire system of abstract  representations posited by linguists can in fact be acquired under relatively realistic biological conditions (papers by H.  Lasnik, K. Wexler, E. Williams), to more "microscopic" case studies of the ontogenesis of particular linguistic subsystems  (such as phonological rules, in the papers by Dresher and McCarthy, or the English auxiliary verb system in the paper by  Baker), to "middle-level" proposals that advance a general paradigm in which to state developmental explanations but in the  context of specific linguistic abilities (papers by Roeper and Grimshaw). There is even one fascinating paper that, not  unexpectedly, turns the familiar line that "ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny" on its head, and tries to explain part of the  history of the English language by appeal to its development in the individual (Lightfoot). (There is one paper that seems out  of place: Baltin's. Although perfectly acceptable as a linguistic analysis, and tangentially about the ontogenesis of language  in the same sense that all linguistics is, it does not really come to grips with the question of how the the abstract  representations posited by linguistic theory interact with language acquisition.)  But why is there a problem with language acquisition? And why a logical problem? And why, finally, should readers of a  mathematical bent be interested in these matters mainly linguistic? To answer these questions in turn, the familiar answer to  the first is that language acquisition is a problem because it is not clear just why it should be possible at all. One of the  contributors, D. Lightfoot, puts it well:  A child is exposed to some particular linguistic environment consisting of a fairly haphazard set of sentences and  pseudosentences uttered in an appropriate context. That environment normally suffices to trigger the emergence of a mature  system of knowledge that goes far beyond the triggering experience: one comes to know without instruction that certain  sentences are ambiguous, others are paraphrases of each other, others are ungrammatical.... (p. 86)  184 BOOK REVIEW  In short then, the problem of language acquisition is simply the problem of describing the initial and final states, and the  way that initial state is mapped onto the final attained state via the mediation of external triggering experience. Of course,  here the linguist is doubly handcuffed compared to the embryologist: whereas the mature physical state of some organ might be  known with a fair degree of certainty, the "state" of the brain that is coupled to an abstract capacity is not so directly  accessible. Similarly for the initial state. What is surprising is that armed with what can at best be an indirect microscope,  linguists have made impressive inroads into figuring out how linguistic knowledge is represented in the minds of adults, and  how it might be initially represented before exposure to a particular language. The central image is like that of a General  Motors automobile factory: underneath the superficially distinct Impalas, Chevrolets, and Buicks is a common chassis; a  particular model automobile is constructed by taking the basic chassis and filling in the holes by selecting from a small  number of basic design options, such as the door and hood style, interior design, and the like. Analogously, it is assumed  that the array of possible human linguistic systems can be described in terms of a basic underlying chassis that is  instantiated as any one of several "makes" according to the selection of certain options triggered by the (presumably  linguistic) environment in which a child finds itself. Thus the space of possible human linguistic systems (grammars) is  delimited as the spanning set of possible parameter combinations.  The questions of mathematical import now become, first, whether the space so defined has any mathematical structure when taken  as a whole, and second, whether the actual time course of filling in the basic chassis has any interesting mathematical  structure. The problem is a logical one because given the assumed constraints on the kind of information that the external  world can supply, some ways of building up the finished product are possible and others are impossible. That is, the process  of fixing a final grammar is like the logical sequence of steps in proving a theorem, where the axioms correspond to the  initial state, the rules of inference to the possible design steps that can be made, and theorems to attainable grammars.  But then, what makes a theorem unprovable, or a grammar, unattainable? It turns out that there is a single logical hurdle that  is at the root of nonattainability, and each contributor to this volume simply attempts to work out in detail just how this  hurdle is to be crossed. The hurdle is the following: Suppose that the external triggers supplied by the environment cannot  include explicit negative reinforcement-roughly, can furnish the acquisition system with only examples of what the find  attained language is, and cannot tell the acquisition. system when it has gone astray. In the standard parlance of the field,  the external world provides only positive evidence, and to a certain extent only positive superficial evidence (the language,  not the grammar) of what the right final attained state should be. Then the following logical problem ensues: Suppose that the  acquisition system is at state S, (i.e., has already fixed a certain set of parameters) and its observation of datum da  sentence of the language associated with the "right" final state, gives it a choice: it can fix parameter P, to have either  one value or another, say 0 or 1. If it sets P, = 1, then it has determined that a final grammar Ggenerating language L, ,  will be acquired; if P, is set to 0,  BOOK REVIEW 185  then a different final state, a different grammar and language, will be fixed. Now suppose in addition that L2 is the "right"  language, and that L, ::) L2. Then if the system fixes a parameter that selects the language that is too large, Lno further  positive evidence from L, will ever disagree with this choice, since L, subsumes L2, and so the system will never be able to  back off from its errant selection. The ordering relationship so imposed implies a set of dependency relationships among the  set of parameters, the operating rules of the assembly line that dictate how the final grammar (with its associated language)  gets built. This key "forcing function" for acquisition is taken for granted by each of the contributors to this volume, and  lies at the heart of their individual efforts.  To take a concrete example of this phenomenon discussed in the chapter by Lasnik, consider the problem of learning a  linguistic system (a grammar) in which some rules must obligatorily apply, and other rules only optionally apply. How could  one learn if a rule is obligatory or optional in the absence of negative reinforcement? Observe that in general if a rule R  can apply or not as it will, then the generated class of outputs is larger than if R must always apply. But then, a system  that guesses that R is optional when in fact it is obligatory will find itself in the situation above where the overly general  language L, is incorrectly chosen. One may conclude that either all rules are obligatory or else that the initial hypothesis  must be more restrictive, namely, that rules are obligatory unless proven otherwise by explicit (positive) evidence. Thus one  can draw a linguistic conclusion on the basis of a logical argument about acquisition. And there are many other linguistic  examples. For instance, consider the so-called rule of "Dativization" that associates sentence pairs such as "I gave a book to  Bill" H "I gave Bill a book." Evidently this rule cannot be extended willy-nilly to all verbs, since we do not have, "I  donated a book to the library" H ? "I donated the library a book." Therefore, there must be some mechanism that ensures a  conservative hypothesis choice in such cases.  The lesson to be drawn then is that ontogenetic choices must be skillfully arranged so as to religiously avoid the sin of  pernicious overgeneralization. It is this moral behavior that imposes certain logical dependencies in acquisition, in turn  permitting investigation of which parameter choices lead to blind alleys, and hence cannot be a part of a working acquisition  system, and which choices are compatible with the observed course of acquisition in people.  The general mathematical situation here has been settled for some time, since the work of Gold (Information and Control,  1967). But it was not clear until the work of Angluin (also appearing in Information and Control, 1978) that the moral  universe of acquisition was in fact quite circumscribed, in the sense that the mortal sin of overgeneralization is roughly the  only possible mortal sin. Angluin proved that a necessary and sufficient condition for acquisition from positive-only evidence  for a recursively enumberable family of recursive languages is the existence of a sequence of properly nested triggering data  sets. Roughly, the sequence of guessed languages is ordered by the subset inclusion relation, what might be dubbed the subset  principle. This mathematically oriented analysis of acquisition is currently undergoing something of a renaissance, with  researchers investigating various permutations of the  186 BOOK REVIEW  sort familiar in computational complexity theory, namely, assumptions about the topological character of the space of  grammars, restrictions on the computational power available to form new hypotheses, and the like. (See the work by Blum and  Blum in Information and Control, 1975; Osherson and Weinstein, Cognition 1982; Osherson, Stob, and Weinstein Cognitive  Science, in press; Case and Lynes, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Proceedings of ICALP 82, 1982. These articles form a  useful mathematical adjunct to the present volume.)  These formal results bear roughly the same relationship to "real" studies of acquisition as the results about Turing machines  bear to the study of actual computer programs. That is, they describe the broad limits of what is possible, but do not say how  acquisition actually occurs. The nitty-gritty work of formulating "real" acquisition models has been left to those like the  contributors of the present volume, whose taste runs to something akin to writing "real" computer programs in some specific  programming language. Now, if one was going to investigate specific computer programs instead of abstract computing machines,  there would seem to be roughly two ways to proceed. On the one hand, one could specify a concrete programming language (like,  say, Algol) and then try to prove general theorems about the correctness of programs written in that programming language  generally. On the other hand, one could simply try to write programs in a particular programming language and rest content  with establishing the correctness of each individual program.  The first approach corresponds to picking some specific theory of grammar (like, say, transformational grammar) and then  proving that the entire framework is consistent in the sense that acquisition "programs" written in the theoretical vocabulary  of that grammar succeed. This in fact is the tack taken by K. Wexler and his associates, admirably summarized by Wexler in the  second chapter of this collection. The "programming language" that Wexler selected for study was the version of  transformational grammar presented in Chomsky's Aspects of the Theory of Syntax, with the acquisition of individual  transformations playing the part of individual steps of the program. What Wexler and his colleagues first discovered was this  raw theory was too unconstrained-there was no way to guarantee that a transformational grammar could be acquired in this  incremental, piecemeal fashion from positive-only data. The solution? Wexler found it sufficient to introduce a battery of  additional constraints on the programming language-restrictions on the functioning of transformational rules. For example, one  crucial shackle is that transformational rules are not permitted to act over an unbouned domain. Thus constrained, an  intricate combinatoric argument shows that the system is in fact learnable, from positive and relatively simple (hence  psychologically plausible) evidence. For additional details, the reader should consult Wexler's mammoth report on this project  (reviewed in this journal by S. Pinker, 23, 1981, 9Q-97.) In this volume Wexler reflects instead on the implications of his  project: which auxiliary assumptions are important and why; whether the restrictions on rule functioning can be replaced by  restrictions on rule form; what is the lesson of this study for theories of learning generally. Since Wexler's constraints are  simply sufficient and not  BOOK REVIEW 187  necessary, one might wonder whether some other set of constraints would do the trick. E. Williams' contribution shows that the  answer is yes. One can alter the constrained programming language posited by Wexler slightly in order to bring it more in line  with what is known about the representation of linguistic knowledge and still obtain learnability.  The second approach, that of writing specific programs and establishing that they meet the test of acquisition correctness, is  also exemplified in the volume under review: in fact, the remainder of the contributors take this line of attack. Here one  looks for a mini-"program" (any program) that "works," that is, can lead one from some assumed starting state (usually not a  true initial state, but rather some intermediate point along the way from start to finish) to an assumed goal state, a grammar  that describes the desired fragment of linguistic knowledge. There is much common ground here. As mentioned, first and  foremost is the logical hardle demanded by the absence of negative evidence. All the contributors mention this as the lynchpin  for their efforts to come up with a set of constraints on the particular linguistic subsystem of interest that ensures  learnability. Since all the contributors also subscribe to the view that acquisition is modular, in the sense that syntactic  rules are best stated and learned in syntactic terms, rather than as part of some general scheme of concept acquisition, this  means that the fault lines of their studies split according to the geology of generative linguistics: phonology, morphology,  syntax, and semantics, along with allowances for work at the interstices of each subfield. The chapters on syntax include  those by Lasnik, Lightfoot, Baltin, and Baker; phonology, by Dresher and McCarthy; morphology and word formation, that by  Roeper; and the boundary between syntax and semantics is discussed by Grimshaw. Grimshaw in particular makes the important  point that the relative autonomy of syntax and semantics, their modularity, is a tremendous boon to acquisition since it means  that the components of the linguistic system can be acquired additively rather than multiplicatively. If syntactic and  semantic rules had to be collapsed together, then all possible combinations of statements (a multiplicative number) might have  to be learned. The basic advantage of this "divide and conquer" approach is taken for granted by all the authors; to my mind,  it is a powerful argument against those researchers in cognitive psychology who vote for a uniform representation of knowledge  in the mind. There is little disagreement among the authors as well about the basic nature of language acquisition: it  proceeds mostly by the incremental fixing of rule systems or parameters rather than by any kind of radical reorganization of  underlying representational schemas (though there are hints that an underlying atomic change might redound through the system  to produce the surface appearance of a rather explosive kind; this is Lightfoot's model of historical change in language).  Where do the authors differ? Both Lasnik and Baker aim to account for the basic learnability of the English auxiliary verb  system given the same assumptions about the lack of negative evidence, the relative independence of syntax and semantics, the  existence of phrase structure, and so forth. But Lasnik opts for working within the basic transformational paradigm, again  suggesting that learnability can be achieved at least in the subsystem he examines by drastically paring down the form and  188  BOOK REVIEW  functioning of transformational rules. He also adds implicit ordering principles that have the effect of enforcing the subset  principle, for example, that specific rules take precedence over more general rules. It is this principle that prevents the  (incorrect) application of a rule of do insertion from applying to a sentence such as "John (present tense) not have en  arrive" to yield the ungrammatical "John does not have arrived." The reason is that do insertion is more general than another  rule that can also apply to this structure, the one that outputs, "John has not arrived." (Plainly the definition of "more  general than" is relative to the notational scheme that is adopted for writing rules.) In contrast, Baker gets this effect of  the subset principle by replacing a system of general transformational rules by what amounts to an expanded set of more  specific context-sensitive rewrite rules. (These rules generate only contextfree languages, however.) Instead of a general  rule of do insertion and the specificbefore-general principle, Baker's scheme is to adopt the conservative principle that  there are two basic verbal structures in English, those with do and those without. "John does not have arrived" is not  produced because the learner can be assumed to hear an emphatic sentence with have but without do: "I have n't been sick.  Because each use is in effect "memorized" on a case by case basis, the problem of overgeneralization is side-stepped. This  so-called "lexical" approach is also examined in Roeper's article. As Roeper notes, it is perfectly fine to simply memorize  that tell can be used in a sentence such as "I told Bill a story" but said cannot be, "*I said Bill a story." This trick meets  the subset principle but is not very revealing. For one thing, it does not explain productive acquisition; if safety lies in  being cautious, why should a learner assume anything about a novel verb until it hears all its possible uses? Roeper's answer  to this conundrum in the case of complex verbs formed by adding prefixes like re or un to simple verbs is to advance a theory  of how properties of simple verbs are transmitted to their complex offshoots. Not surprisingly, the model adheres to the  subset principle. For example, the noun phrase (NP) arguments that appear with a verb must appear unless positive evidence  indicates otherwise. This has the effect of forcing the acquisition system to guess the narrowest possible language first; if  "I walked to the store" is heard, then "I walked" is not considered possible until it too is heard.  Grimshaw also grapples with this problem, and comes up with yet another application of the subset principle. Evidently, some  verbs allow NP questions and wh questions as objects, e.g., "I asked John the time" and "I asked John what the time was";  other verbs allow just wh questions. But no verb allows NP questions but no wh questions. Why? The riddle is broken by  Grimshaw's claim that syntax and semantics make contact by paring each syntactic unit, e.g., an NP or a sentence (S), with a  default semantic unit. The idea is the familiar one that early on, syntactic and semantic representations are closely yoked.  (For an earlier and explicit formulation of this proposal, see an article by J. Limber, in T. Moore (Ed.) Cognitive  Development and the Acquisition of Language, Academic Press, 1973.) In the case at hand, the semantic unit is a question, and  the syntactic reflex of questions (and propositions and exclamations) is naturally assumed to be a sentence. This plus the  subset principle explains the observed data. If a sentence with an object question is heard, then  BOOK REVIEW 189  the semantic-syntactic yoke is invoked, and a sentence is permitted as the object; this happens no matter what the syntactic  form of the embedded question is. Therefore, if a sentence like "I asked John the time" is heard, then both Ss and NPs are  permitted as question objects. But if just an embedded wh question is encountered, then by the subset principle, the system  cannot leap to infer that NPs are also permitted, for this could be an invalid overgeneralization. The result: if a verb  permits an embedded question, it can be either S and nothing else, or both S and NP.  What is one to make of these exercises? To use Baker's phrase, these efforts often take on the nature of "puzzles" about this  or that specific rule of grammar, as in the case of Dativization, described above. Unfortunately, this characterization is  often a bit too apt, since just like solving brainteasers, these piecemeal studies are often appetizing but ultimately  unsatisfying, rarely fitting together into some overall theory and usually relying on so many fixed background assumptions  just to describe the assumed "starting point" that they cannot be easily extended. A good case in point here-though it should  not be singled out in this regard-is McCarthy's analysis of the rule system underlying certain forms of Maori verbs. McCarthy  wants to make the standard assumption that the hypotheses made by the language learner are ordered according to a criterion of  "simplicity" that just counts the number of symbols in the rule system. Unfortunately, the structure this metric imposes on  the corresponding space of Ll's does not meet the learnability criterion. What McCarthy shows is that this mismatch is only  apparent, and that when a full range of data about Maori verbs is analyzed, the simplicity metric works after all. The  solution is impressive, but the general reader would probably be left thinking that much sweat had been expended for meager  rewards.  Such highly technical arguments with telling punchlines would best be recast in some overall framework of acquisition, but  this kind of grand scheme is, not surprisingly, missing in these proceedings. This, the biggest flaw of the book, deserves to  be remedied. What would such an overall framework look like? One tack would be to take the programming language metaphor  seriously. Ontogenesis would then be pictured as the execution of a computer program; an advantage, since it could be argued  that the mathematics developed for analyzing computer programs is the best formal framework we know of for studying how a  complex system "emerges" out of the interaction of smaller decisions made over time. Grand frameworks aside, it should be  apparent by now that this book is important not so much for what is says but for what it adumbrates. The specific findings of  the papers in this book ought not to be regarded as fixed and final pronouncements, but rather as the tentative glimmerings of  a new field of logical ontogenesis, a field that is itself just being born.  Printed in Belgium