10.1016/0022-2496(82)90033-5
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 26, 13-30 (1982)  Some Theorems in Haploscopic Vision  STEVEN K. SHEVELL  University of Chicago  Three formal hypotheses are specified concerning the combination of neural signals from the two eyes. The hypotheses are (1)  that a large uniform light presented to the opposite eye has no effect (independence), (2) that all information from one eye  relevant to a given percept (for example, brightness) is encoded by a single neural signal (isolation), and (3) the mutually  exclusive and exhaustive alternative to isolation (interaction). Though independence or isolation often has been claimed or  simply assumed to hold, these hypotheses imply specific empirical relationships. These relationships are derived for  brightness and for equilibrium colors. In addition, one model consistent with the interaction hypothesis is developed. The  isolation hypothesis is important for generalizing results from monocular experiments to normal binocular vision. If it is  false, monocular results can reflect a combination of one eye's neural signals that never occurs with binocular stimuli.  Psychophysical research in vision often is conducted with stimuli presented only to one eye. Usually the other eye is patched  to prevent uncontrolled light from affecting the subject's visual percepts. This strategy is appropriate for many  investigations designed to explore retinal mechanisms.  On the other hand, some research strategies involve presentation of different stimuli to each of the two eyes. It often is  claimed that this design can reveal the level within the visual system at which mechanisms mediate observer performance. For  example, suppose the threshold intensity for a flashed test spot presented only to the left eye is raised equally by (1) an  adapting field stimulating the same eye or (2) the same adapting field presented only to the opposite eye. This would suggest  an adapting mechanism operating at a central locus. In point of fact, threshold data are not at all like this; threshold  intensity is not affected equally by an adapting field stimulating either eye. In many cases, light presented to the non-test  eye has little or no effect on threshold. This experimental finding is consistent with retinal mechanisms of adaptation,  though the claim sometimes made that these data demonstrate only retinal mechanisms is not justified. Central mechanisms that  respond selectively to stimuli only from one eye would give identical empirical results.  The level (or levels) within the visual system at which an adapting field affects perception may be explored with binocular  (specifically haploscopic) experiments  This work was supported by National Science Foundation Grant BNS-7924024. Address reprint requests to Steven K. Shevell,  Department of Behavioral Sciences, University of Chicago, 5848 S. University Ave., Chicago, IL 60637.  13  0022-2496/82/040013-18$02.00/0 Copyright If, 1982 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  14  STEVEN K. SHEVELL  where each eye is presented with differentially intense adapting and test fields, but the properties of the visual system to  be inferred from such observations are not always obvious (Long, 1979; Blake, Overton, & Lema-Stern, 1981). The focus of this  paper is the empirical relationships implied by hypotheses concerning what neural signals from the two eyes are combined. In  the first part, three distinct hypotheses are developed concerning the processes by which light absorbed in one eye can affect  what is "seen" through the other eye. One hypothesis considers whether a given eye's contribution to a visual percept can be  expressed by a single neural signal that incorporates effects of adaptation; this hypothesis implies adaptation occurs only  before neural signals from the two eyes are combined. In the second part of the paper are theorems that reveal (experimentally  testable) empirical implications of the hypotheses. Of special interest are results that can indicate the presence of central  (as opposed to retinal) mechanisms. Much of the discussion will address brightness perception, but similar results hold for  threshold detection and color perception.  HAPLOSCOPIC VISION HYPOTHESES  Consider four distinct lights (A,, TL, AR, and TR) with each eye stimulated only by two of them (a test light and adapting  light for each eye; see Fig. 1). The fields are spatially adjusted so that the binocularly fused percept is a single test on a  single background. Stimulus parameters must be carefully chosen to achieve fusion rather than rivalry, but appropriate  procedures are well known (Thomas, Dimmick, & Luria, 1961; Matin, 1962; Levelt, 1965; De Weert & Levelt, 1976a; Ikeda &  Sagawa, 1979). The perceived test field is the fused percept from left-eye test light T,, and right-eye test light T,; the  test is seen superimposed on a background which is the fused percept from left-eye adapting field A,, and right-eye adapting  field A,. In general, the perceived brightness of the single fused test field will be a function of the four lights A, TL, AR,  and TR. Denoting this function F8the perceived brightness of the fused test is FB,(A,, T,, AR, TR). It is convenient to  consider the size, temporal features, border sharpness, and similar characteristics of each stimulus light to be fixed, though  this is not essential for the arguments (except where explicitly noted). The three hypotheses to be considered are summarized  schematically in Fig. 2. The  LEFT EYE RIGHT EYE  Test Light  I, TR  Adapting  `-~ Light A,  AL and AR  FUSED  -- -TL and TR  FIG. 1. Stimuli giving the binocularly fused percept of a single test field superimposed on a single background. The perceived  test field results from binocular fusion of lights T,, and T,; the perceived background is due to fused stimuli A,, and AR.  HAPLOSCOPIC VISION THEOREMS 15  STIMULI  Signal due to TL presented with AL  ft (A~,T,,) Signal resulting in D- percept of test area tRtARjR~  ISOLATION  LEFT  Signal resulting in percept of test area  RIGHT  AR'--/ " presented with AR  INDEPENDENCE  LEFT  RIGHT  Signal due to T~ Signal due to  Signal due to TR [ Signal due to AR  INTERACTION  Signal resulting in percept of test area  FIG. 2. Schematic representations of the three hypotheses. The interaction model shown is only one example of a model  consistent with the interaction hypothesis.  hypotheses may be applied to many different percepts (for example, threshold detection, achromatic brightness, or equilibrium  colors).  Isolation  The first hypothesis specifies that the effect on the brightness of the fused test field due to an adapting field presented to  a given eye is expressed completely by changes in the test-field signal from that eye; this single signal carries all of the  relevant information from that retina related to the brightness of the fused test. Thus the effect of an adapting light  presented to, say, the left eye on the perceived brightness of the fused test patch is expressed completely by the adapting  light's influence on the signal for the left-eye test area. This hypothesis will be called isolation, since the effect of the  adapting field is isolated to the test-patch signal from the same eye.  Under the isolation hypothesis, the left-eye's neural test-patch signal' may be  ' The term "left-eye's neural test-patch signal" is a convenient abbreviation for "the neural signal from the left eye related  to the given visual percept (e.g., brightness) for the retinal area of the left eye corresponding to the binocularly perceived  test patch."  480/26/1-2  16  STEVEN K. SHEVELL  written as a two-argument function, f,, of the two left-eye lights AL and T,,. Thus the left-eye signal is f,(A,, TL).  Similarly, the right-eye test-patch signal is f,(AR, TR). The perceived brightness of the fused test patch will depend on both  of these signals. A formal statement of the isolation hypothesis is that  FB,(AL, TI., A,,, TO =HBr1fL(ALI TL),fR(4RI TIM+ (1)  where HBr is a two-argument function that relates the two signals (one from each eye) to the brightness percept. The isolation  hypothesis sometimes has been assumed implicitly in theoretical arguments concerning interocular adaptation (e.g., Teller &  Galanter, 1967; Whittle & Challands, 1969). However, it is a nontrivial assumption that implies specific empirical  relationships (these will be discussed in a later section).  Independence  The second hypothesis specifies that a large uniform adapting stimulus (without a test field) presented to the opposite eye  has no effect on perception of the test patch. This hypothesis includes Hering's (1964) view: "...completely homogeneous  illumination of the retina of one eye keeps it from contributing to the contents of the binocular visual field in the same way  that complete darkening of it does" (pp. 269-270). Results from some experiments are consistent with this hypothesis. For  example, under some conditions a steady contralateral adapting light has no effect on threshold detection (Crawford, 1940;  Whittle & Challands, 1969; Yellot & Wandell, 1976). These data reflect a strong form of interocular independence; that is, the  adapting light presented to the opposite eye essentially has no effect. This hypothesis will be called independence.  Independence can be expressed formally as a special case of the isolation hypothesis when the opposite-eye test light has zero  luminance. With a test field presented only to the right eye, independence is a case of isolation where f,(AL, 0) is constant  for any AL (the argument "0" indicates a light of zero luminance). Under the isolation hypothesis,  FBr(AL,O, AR, TO = HBr1f1(AL+ 0), ,,(AR, T,)]. (2)  Adding the independence hypothesis, f, (A,, 0) = const.; thus (2) may be written as  FBr(AL 9 0, AR, TO = HBr[const.,fR(AR, TR)]  = GRar(AR e TR)'  Similarly if a test field is presented to only the left eye, independence is a special case of isolation where fR(AR 10) is  constant, and thus the brightness of the test field may be written as the two-argument function GLBr(ALI TL).  Interaction  The third hypothesis allows complex interactions among the four lights AL, TL, A R , and TR. In addition to the test-patch  signal sent from each retina for central  HAPLOSCOPIC VISION THEOREMS 17  processing, a signal also results from each adapting light. It may be that the binocularly fused test-field percept depends on  each adapting light in a way that allows the two eyes' adapting stimuli to interact beyond simply affecting the signal for the  test stimulus presented to the same eye. For example, a sensitivity change may occur for each eye that depends on a  complicated function of both the left-eye and right-eye adapting lights A, and A,. This would be an example of interocular  adaptation in a complex sense; the fused binocular test-field percept is not simply dependent on a single signal from the left  eye and a single signal from the right eye.  Alternatively, in general the fused brightness may not be expressible as some combination of one signal from the left eye and  one signal from the right eye. With no adapting fields, left-eye test light T, might result in signals L, and LZ, and righteye  test light TR might give signals R, and RZ. The brightness of the fused test patch might be a two-argument function M of the  form M[m,(LR,), m,(LZ, RZ)]; that is, each distinct signal type (1 and 2) is combined separately at a central locus prior to  the mechanism whose output encodes the brightness of the fused percept.  In either case the four-argument brightness function, FBcould not be expressed as the two-argument function HB,. This kind  of adaptation process will be called interaction. In terms of a formal model, the interaction hypothesis includes all forms of  function FB, that cannot be expressed as the special case that defines isolation (Eq. (1)). A specific model consistent with  the interaction hypothesis will be discussed in a later section.  Note that the formal hypotheses relate to the possible locus of adaptation. Specifically isolation implies that a single  signal for each eye, determined completely by the stimuli presented to it, encodes all of the information from that eye  related to the brightness of the fused test patch. If numerous, sensitive tests of the isolation hypothesis fail to reject it  then one may conclude, at least for the experiments completed, that the two eyes operate as though adaptation is localized at  the retina. Of course the isolation (and independence) hypothesis-maven if true-cannot prove adaptation mechanisms are  restricted to the retina; retinally specific central mechanisms may not be excluded. Still, if the isolation hypothesis is not  rejected by stringent tests then it may be concluded that the empirical results can be accounted for by adaptation mechanisms  located only at the retina.  Rejection of the isolation hypothesis demonstrates that at least two distinct signals from each eye are affecting the  brightness of the fused test patch. Since the information from each eye cannot be expressed as a single signal, rejection of  isolation indicates the presence of central mechanisms that incorporate (that is "mix") more than one signal from each eye. It  cannot be that central mechanisms simply combine many signals from one eye; this is consistent with isolation. Rather, one  left-eye signal must be combined with a right-eye signal and, separately, at least one other left-eye signal must be combined  with some right-eye signal. Each binocular signal, due to inputs from each eye, is in turn an input to a mechanism that  affects perceived brightness.  18 STEVEN K.SHEVELL  THEOREMS  A number of straightforward theorems demonstrate some empirical implications of the independence and isolation hypotheses.  Some of the proofs require one assumption concerning the isolation function HB,: this two-argument function must be strictly  monotonic and continuous in one argument for any fixed value of the other argument. This assumption is called conditional  monotonicity.  ASSUMPTION: "Conditional Monotonicity." Let function H.,[fL(ALI T,,), MAR, TR)] be written as H,,(x, y). For any fixed x,  H8,(x, y) = hx(y) is a strictly monotonic and continuous function of y. For any fixed y, HB,(x, y) = h,,(x) is a strictly  monotonic and continuous function of x.  This testable assumption can be expected to hold over most stimulus intensity ranges. Fechner's paradox would be a notable  violation of conditional monotonicity (De Silva & Bartley, 1930), but it is easy to avoid conditions under which Fechner's  paradox is observed.  Empirical Implications of the Independence Hypothesis  Brightness. Consider the simulus arrangement shown in Fig. 3a. A large adapting field, AL, and a small test field, TL, are  presented to the left eye. The right eye views similar adapting and test fields AR and TR, and in addition a second small  comparison field, CR. The fused percept has two small incremental patches; the one on the right is the fused percept due to  test lights TL and TR, and the one on the left is due to comparison light C,. The fused adapting field results from lights AL  and AR. Suppose the stimuli are at levels such that the two small incremental patches in the fused percept match in  brightness. Then, holding the right-eye stimuli AR, TR, and CR fixed, the luminance of the left-eye adapting light AL may be  changed. The observer then is asked to adjust the luminance of left-eye test light TL so that the two fused incremental  patches again match in brightness. This done, the luminance of adapting light AL is changed again and the observer again asked  to adjust TL to reestablish the match. From this procedure, one may plot TL luminance as a function of AL luminance. The  points in the plot would represent pairs of lights (AL, TL) presented to the left eye that result in a brightness match, given  the fixed stimulus conditions of the right eye.  With the stimuli adjusted for a brightness match, now the luminances of the lefteye lights AL and TL may be fixed. Then the  three right-eye stimulus luminances may be altered, subject only to the constraint that the two incremental patches in the  fused field match in brightness. There is a considerable range of right-eye luminance levels that might be chosen.  Independence and isolation together specify that for any such triple of right-eye lights, all previously determined points in  the left-eye "TL luminance versus AL luminance" plot will maintain the brightness match. That is, any left-eye stimulus pair  (AL, TL) that resulted in a brightness match with the previous right-eye stimuli also must result in a brightness match with  HAPLOSCOPIC VISION THEOREMS 19 (a)  TR  AL and AR  FUSED  TR  FIG. 3. Stimuli for testing the independence hypothesis for (a) brightness perception and (b) color perception.  stimuli. This is proved in the theorem below, which gives a more general result in terms of physical lights (rather than  luminances of lights that do not vary in other characteristics). It shows that if there is a set A = {aa2,..., a} of  left-eye light pairs, where each pair (1) results in signal sA and (2) when fused with opposite-eye stimuli b, results in a  match between the two incremental patches, and if any particular lefteye light pair from set A when fused with a different  triple of opposite-eye lights b2 results in a match between the patches, then any light pair from set A when fused with b2  THEOREM 1. Consider the stimulus arrangement shown in Fig. 3a. With fixed right-eye lights AR*, T,*, and C,*, let set A  contain all pairs of left-eye lights (A,, TL) such that the two fused incremental patches match in brightness. Let (A *, T,*)  be any specific element of set A.  Let set B contain all triples of right-eye lights (AR , TR, CR ) such that (A *, TL*) and (AR, TR, CR) presented together  result in a brightness match between the two fused incremental patches.  Given the conditional monotonicity assumption, independence and isolation imply that any element of set A and any element of  set B presented together will result in a brightness match between the two fused incremental patches.  Proof. Given lights Ai , Ti , AR*, TR , and CR , by isolation the brightness of the fused test field is  Fer(ALI Ti, AR, TR)=HBr[ fL(4i Ti), fR(4R TR)~  20 STEVEN K. SHEVELL  by independence, the brightness of the comparison field is  FBI(AL , O, AR , CR ) - GRer(AR CR )'  When the test and comparison fields match in brightness,  HB.LfL(AL , TL*), fR(AR, TR )] = GRR.(AR1 CR*).  This match will hold for all light pairs (AL, TL) such that fL(AL, T,) =fL(A *, T,*). By conditional monotonicity, these light  pairs are exactly the elements of set A.  By definition of set B, for any element (AR, TR, CR) of B,  HBr[fL(AL, TL),fR(AR, TR)] = GRJAR, CR),  assuming isolation and independence. Further, by conditional monotonicity this brightness match will hold for and only for all  pairs (AL, TL) such that fL(AL, TL) = fL(Ai, TL*); these (AL, TL) light pairs are exactly the elements of set A. Q.E.D.  Equilibrium colors. When corresponding areas of the two eyes are stimulated with different wavelengths of light, a binocularly  fused color often is perceived (Hecht, 1928; Prentice, 1948; Hurvich & Jameson, 1951). For example, a spectral light that  normally appears green may be presented to one eye and a spectral light that normally appears red presented to the other eye;  for appropriate luminances of the two lights, the binocular mixture will appear yellow. While there is no doubt that  presenting to each eye a different wavelength of light can result in a homogeneous fused color percept, successful fusion is  not guaranteed. Reliable binocular fusion requires that the stimulus parameters be chosen carefully (Thomas, et al., 1961; De  Weert & Levelt, 1976a; Ikeda & Sagawa, 1979).  Consider the stimulus arrangement shown in Fig. 3b. An adapting field AR and incremental test field TR are presented to the  right eye. The only left-eye stimulus is the adapting field AL, which is fused binocularly with adapting field AR. Each field  may be a mixture of two or more wavelengths (in general, each may have any spectral distribution). Suppose that the perceived  hue of the incremental patch is a red/green equilibrium color (i.e., any color percept that is neither reddish nor greenish;  see Larimer, Krantz, & Cicerone (1974) and Krantz (1975)). Independence implies that any left-eye adapting field will not  cause the incremental patch to appear reddish or greenish; that is, the incremental patch will remain a red/green equilibrium  color for any left-eye adapting stimulus (a special case is the absence of a left-eye adapting field). The theorem is below;  it shows that if the right-eye stimuli result in a signal that represents a red/green equilibrium percept, given a particular  opposite-eye adapting light, then the right-eye stimuli will continue to give a signal representing a red/green equilibrium  percept for any opposite-eye adapting light.  THEOREM 2. Consider the stimulus arrangement shown in Fig. 3b. With fixed lefteye adapting light A*, let set A contain all  pairs of right-eye lights (AR, TR) that result in a red/green equilibrium percept for the incremental patch.  HAPLOSCOPIC VISION THEOREMS 21  Independence implies that for any element of set A and any arbitrary adapting light AL presented together, the incremental  patch will be a red/green equilibrium color.  Proof. In general, the red/green chromatic response for the incremental patch is a four-argument function, F,,g, of the  adapting and test fields AL, TL, AR, and TR. In the absence of a left-eye test field, TL, independence specifies  Frlg(AL 9 0, AR, TR) = H.1x[const.Jie(A,, TR)] ~  GRr1R(AR, TR).  A red/green equilibrium percept results when the red/green response is zero. Since under independence the red/green response  GRrld(AR, TR) does not depend on AL, GR.J.(AR, TR) will be zero in the presence of any left-eye adapting light AL if and only  if GRr9(AR, TR) is zero with adapting light Ai . Q.E.D.  In practice the adapting stimuli, AL and AR, will be limited to fields that reliably can be fused.  Empirical Implications of the Isolation Hypothesis  Consider now the isolation hypothesis. This is the hypothesis of greatest interest, since rejecting it reveals complex roles  for central mechanisms.  Brightness. A test of isolation requires a more complex stimulus arrangement, as shown in Fig. 4a. With each eye, the observer  views two backgrounds (each background with its own incremental test field). The spatially corresponding fields are fused,  giving the binocular percept shown in the lower part of Fig. 4a. Note that in this stimulus configuration there are eight  different lights.  LEFT RIGHT  FUSED ALCoad ~~ ARC  ~A-A,and ARI  CL and CR--\__,/ \__/ TL and TR  LEFT RIGHT  FUSED  TL and Tn  FIG. 4. Stimuli for testing the isolation hypothesis for (a) brightness perception and (b) color perception.  STEVEN K. SHEVELL  With the left-eye stimuli turned off, the right-eye lights may be adjusted so that the two incremental patches match in  brightness. This is simply a monocular brightness matching task. It is possible that the perceived brightness of either  incremental patch may be influenced by all four right-eye lights (for example, the perceived brightness of the patch CR might  be affected by lights ART and TR), but it can be shown (see below) that such interactions among stimuli presented to the same  eye do not invalidate a test of isolation. With the right-eye lights set for a monocular match, these lights are fixed. Now  consider lights presented to left eye. The left-eye stimuli may be presented alone and the incremental patches similarly  adjusted for a monocular brightness match. As before, interactions among within-eye test and comparison adapting and  incremental stimuli do not invalidate a test of isolation. Assuming conditional monotonicity, the isolation hypothesis implies  that any left-eye stimuli for which the incremental patches monocularly match in brightness when fused with any right-eye  stimuli for which the incremental patches monocularly match in brightness must give fused incremental patches that match in  brightness. This result is stated formally in the following theorem. The proof shows that if righteye lights alone result in  two incremental percepts U and V represented respectively by signals su and s,where su = s,and if left-eye lights alone  result in two incremental percepts X and Y represented respectively by signals sX and s}., where sX = s,,, then fusion of U  and X will match the fused percept due to V and Y.  THEOREM 3. Consider the stimulus arrangement shown in Fig. 4a. Let set A contain all quadruples of right-eye lights (ARC, CR,  ART, TR) such that the two incremental patches match in brightness when no left-eye stimuli are presented. Let set B contain  all quadruples of left-eye lights (ALC, CL, ALT, TL) such that the two incremental patches match in brightness when no  right-eye stimuli are presented.  Given conditional monotonicity, isolation implies that any element of set A and any element of set B presented together will  result in a brightness match between the two fused incremental patches.  Proof. By isolation, for any element of set A  HBr1fL(O, 0)1fR(ARC1 CRA = HBr1fL(01 0)I fR(ART, TRA;  for any element of set B,  HBI[f,(ALC+ CL)IfR(O1 0)] = HBAfL(ALT+ TL)I fR(O1 0)1'  Conditional monotonicity implies that f1(ARC, CR)-fR(ART, TR) and that  fL(ALC1 CL) -fL(ALT1 TL).  In general with fused stimuli, isolation specifies that the two fused incremental patches will match in brightness when  HBILfL(ALC+ CJfR(ARC I CR)] - HBr[fL(ALTI TL)efR(ART' TR)]'  HAPLOSCOPIC VISION THEOREMS 23  Since the elements of set A satisfy f,(ARc, CR) =fR(ART, TR) and the elements of set B satisfy f,(ALc, CL) =f,(ALT, TL),  lights from sets A and B presented together will result in incremental patches that match in brightness. Q.E.D.  Two simple corollaries of practical interest follow from Theorem 3. First the stimuli for one of the eyes may be restricted to  monocular physical matches rather than monocular brightness matches (e.g., require ALC =ALT and CL = TL, in which case it  follows immediately that fL(ALC, CL) =MALT, TL), assuming retinal radial symmetry with central fixation or local retinal  homogeneity otherwise). Such matches may be less variable and easier for an observer to make; a minor consideration is that  the instrumentation for testing this implication of isolation is slightly less complex (seven light channels rather than  eight).  The second corollary involves stimulus configurations with incremental fields presented only to one eye (e.g., CL = TL = 0).  Isolation implies that stimuli resulting in a monocular brightness match between the incremental patches (e.g., the elements  of set A) will continue to result in a brightness match between the patches when fused with opposite-eye adapting lights that  are identical (e.g., ALT = ALC). This follows immediately from the first corollary, taking the special case where CL = TL = 0  (or CR = TR = 0). This suggests a still simpler test of isolation.  Note that the proof of Theorem 3 follows the identical argument if the twoargument function f,(ARC, CR) is replaced by a  four-argument function f,(ARC, CR, ART, T,,); that is, the signal for the right-eye comparison patch may depend on all four  stimuli presented to the right eye (similarly, replace f,(ART, TR) by MART, TR, ARc, CR), fL(ALC, CL) by fL(ALC, CL, ALT, TL),  etc.). Thus interactions among stimuli presented to the same eye may occur without altering the conclusion of Theorem 3.  Equilibrium colors. The isolation hypothesis for color perception may be evaluated using the stimuli shown in Fig. 4b. An  adapting field and incremental patch are presented to each eye. The adapting fields and the incremental fields are fused; thus  the observer perceives a single incremental patch upon a single background. Suppose the right-eye stimuli are fixed and the  left-eye stimuli varied, subject to the condition that the fused patch be a red/green equilibrium color. Let all such pairs of  left-eye lights (AL, TL) be called left-eye equilibrium pairs. Consider one such left-eye pair. With these left-eye stimuli  held fixed, the right-eye stimuli may be varied subject to the constraint that the fused incremental patch remains a red/green  equilibrium color. Let all such pairs of right-eye stimuli (AR, TR) be called right-eye equilibrium pairs. Isolation implies  that any left-eye equilibrium pair presented together with any right-eye equilibrium pair will give a fused color appearance  for the incremental patch that is a red/green equilibrium color. Note that single-eye stimuli presented alone need not result  in an equilibrium percept for the incremental patch; only when both eyes' stimuli are fused must the incremental patch appear  neither reddish nor greenish. The theorem below shows that if there is a set A = {aa2,..., a of left-eye light pairs,  where each pair (1) results in signal sA and (2) when fused with oppositeeye stimuli b, results in a red/green equilibrium  color, and if any particular left-eye  24 STEVEN K. SHEVELL  light pair from set A when fused with a different pair of opposite-eye lights bZ gives a red/green equilibrium color, then the  fusion of bZ with any light pair from set A will give a red/green equilibrium color.  THEOREM 4. Consider the stimulus arrangement shown in Fig. 4b. With fixed right-eye stimulus lights AR and T,*, let set A  contain all pairs of left-eye lights (AL, TL) that result in a red/green equilibrium percept for the incremental patch. Let  (AL , Ti ) be a specific element of A.  Let set B contain all pairs of right-eye lights (AR, TR) such that (A *, T,*) and (AR, TR) presented together result in a  red/green equilibrium percept for the incremental patch.  Assuming conditional monotonicity (applied to the red/green chromatic response given by function Hr/g, rather than the  brightness function Her), isolation implies that for any element of set A and any element of set B presented together, the  incremental patch will be a red/green equilibrium color.  Proof. By isolation, for any particular element (A* , Ti) of set A and light pair (AR*, TR ), a red/green equilibrium percept  implies  Given right-eye lights (AR , TR ), a red/green equilibrium percept will occur for all lights (AL, TL) such that fL(AL, TL)  =fr'I (Ai , TL ). By conditional monotonicity, these light pairs are exactly the elements of set A. Similarly, given left-eye  lights (A* , TL ), a red/green equilibrium percept will occur for all light pairs (AR, TR) such that fR(AR, TR) =fR(AR, TR ).  By conditional monotonicity, these light pairs are exactly the elements of set B. Thus for any light pair (AL, TL) from set A  and any light pair (AR, TR) from set B, Hr/g[fL(AL I TL),fR(AR, TA is zero. Q.E.D.  An Interaction Model  No additional explicit test of the interaction hypothesis need be specified. By definition, interaction is the mutually  exclusive and exhaustive alternative to isolation; so rejection of the isolation hypothesis implies interaction. There is an  infinite number of specific functional forms consistent with the interaction hypothesis.  One model for brightness that lends itself to direct empirical tests is described below. This model specifies that brightness  of a monocularly presented incremental light depends on (1) the eye's sensitivity and (2) a contribution to the increment's  brightness from the adapting lights. Similar processes affect color perception under chromatic adaptation (cf. Jameson &  Hurvich, 1972; Shevell, 1982). The interaction hypothesis is included in the model because each eye's sensitivity may depend  on the adapting lights stimulating either or both eyes.  Consider the stimulus arrangement shown in Fig. 5. A single background and incremental patch are presented to each eye. The  background fields are fused, resulting in a single perceived background due to lights AL and AR. The two incremental patches,  C (comparison) and T (test), are not fused; each is seen  HAPLOSCOPIC VISION THEOREMS 25 LEFT RIGHT  FUSED  AL and AR  FIG. 5. Stimuli for testing the two-process model for brightness (an interaction model).  separately on one side of the center of the adapting field (see Fig. 5). The observer's task is to adjust the luminance of  incremental stimulus T so that, for given levels of AL, AR, and C, the incremental patches match in brightness.  Each incremental field (resulting from light entering only one eye) is seen upon a background due to light entering both eyes.  Thus both the left-eye adapting field AL and the right-eye adapting field AR might affect the brightness of incremental patch  T, and similarly both adapting fields might influence the brightness of patch C. The specific model to be proposed is that the  brightness of each incremental patch is a (unknown) strictly monotonic and continuous function, h, of (1) a weighted sum of  the quantum absorptions for the three receptor types in the incremental area (each weight a function of both adapting lights)  plus (2) an "additive" (or "counterbalancing") effect due to the adapting lights. Sensitivity changes are reflected by the  weights; the background fields' direct contributions to the patches' brightnesses are included in the "additive" effect. The  model resembles in form the two-process theories for color perception (Jameson & Hurvich, 1972; Shevell, 1978, 1982), and will  be referred to as the two process model for brightness. It is restricted to lights AL, AR, C, and T of identical relative  spectral distributions (e.g., achromatic stimuli or stimuli all of the same wavelength); thus the well-known violations of  Abney's Law (Guth, Donley, & Marrocco, 1969) are avoided. A formal statement of the model is below.  THEOREM 5. Consider the stimulus arrangement shown in Fig. 5. Let the brightnesses of incremental patches C and T, Brc and  Br,, respectively, be given by  Brc = h (Ic + IAL) ~y- eA[acl(AL, AR) aA + acz(AL, AR) #a A  and  +aCAAL,AR)YAI -Sc(AL5AR)I  BrT = h I(IT + IAR) S~ eA[aTi(4L, AR) aA + aTZ(AL, AR)YA A  +aT3\AL,AR)YLJ -ST(AL9AR)11  26 STEVEN K. SHEVELL  where  ai; is the weighting coefficient for the jth receptor type in the area of the ith patch,  a,,, fl.,, and y.. are the spectral sensitivities of the three receptor types,  e, is the spectral distribution for unit energy of light (all lights identical in relative spectral distribution),  ICI IT, IAL, and IAR are respectively the energies of lights C, T, AL, and AR,  si is a function giving the additive (possibly counterbalancing) effect for the i th patch, and  h is an unspecified strictly monotonic and continuous function.  For given adapting lights AL and AR, test light energy IT is related to comparison light energy Ic by the function  IT= 1IC +A (AL, AR)] g(AL, AR);  equivalently, the total energy in the test patch area is related to the total energy in the comparison patch area by the  function  (IT +IAR) =I (IC + IAL) +J 2(AL, AR)] g(AL, AR)'  Proof. For convenience, given spectral distribution e, let  Ec(AL, AR) _ eA[aci(AL, AR) aA + ac2(AL, AR) #A  + aC3(AL, AR) YAI  and  ET(AL,AR)_ eA[aTl(AL,AR)aA+aT2(AL,AR)#A  A  + aTa(AL+AR) Y.A]'  Since the function h is strictly monotonic and continuous, incremental patches C and T will match in brightness when and only  when  (Ic + IA.) Ec(AL, AR) - SC(AL, AR) = (IT + IAR) ET(AL, AR) - ST(AL, AR)'  Rearranging terms,  IT = VC +.f (AL, AA g(AL, AR)  HAPLOSCOPIC VISION THEOREMS 27  where  g(AL AR) = Ec(AL, ARYEr(AL 9 AR),  .fi(AL, AR) = IAL - VAR ET(AL, ARVEc(AL, AR)]  + ISr(AL, AR) - SC(AL, AR)IIEC(AL, AR).  Alternatively the terms may be arranged to yield  (IT +IAR)= RIC +IAL) +.fz(AL,AR)] g(AL,A,),  where g(AL, AR) is defined as above and  .fz(AL, AR) = ISr(AL, AR) - SC(AL, AR)IIEC(AL, AR). Q.E.D.  The two-process model for brightness is easy to test because of the quantitative relationships of Theorem 5. For any equation  of the form Y= (X + c,) c2, a plot of "log Y versus log X" must follow one of the template curves shown in Fig. 6. The  absolute values of the constants c, and c2 alter only the horizontal and vertical positions of the curves; their shape and  orientation are invariant. When c2 is positive (as it must be here), the sign of c, dictates the shape of the curve (Fig. 6a  if c, > 0, Fig. 6b if c, < 0). The model can be tested by measuring test-patch luminance for many levels of the comparison  patch, given two adapting fields AL and A,. Such measurements then can be repeated for various pairs of adapting fields. For  any pair, a plot of test-patch luminance as a function of comparison-patch luminance should fall along one of the Fig: 6  template curves. Measurements that deviate from the templates would serve to reject the model.  Equivalently, the model specifies that plots of "log(I, + IA,) versus log(Ic + IA,)" also must fall along one of the template  curves. However comparing such plots to templates provides a rather insensitive test since, for many observed values of IT.,  log(I, + IAR) will depend mostly on IA, Values of I, that deviate substantially from  3.0  2.0  r L0 0  log c, 0 og c2  -1.0  logi Ilag Ic,l  ~tl i I ( -mKT I , I I  -m _0L I'D 2.0 3.0 4.0 0 I .o 2.0 3.0 a.0  LOG X LOG X  -il  FIG. 6. The template curve implied by the two-process model for brightness when (a) c, > 0 and (b) c, < 0 (see text).  Y=(X,)c2, (C, >0)  28  STEVEN K. SHEVELL  the model's prediction might pass unnoticed, since the deviations could be swamped by the larger IAR value.  Estimates of the parameters, f (AL, AR) and g(AL, AR), are found directly from the fit of the appropriate template to the data  points. Given the function Y = (X + C,) C2, for values of X very much larger than the absolute value of C, the plot of "log Y  versus log X" approaches a 45line. When c, > 0, the curve approaches a horizontal asymptote as X approaches 0 (i.e., as log  X approaches -oo); when c, < 0, the curve approaches a vertical asymptote as Y approaches 0 (i.e., as log Y approaches -oo ).  For either template curve, the two asymptotic lines intersect at the point [log( C, 1), log(Ic,1) + log(c2)I (see Fig. 6). In  terms of the equations in Theorem 5, f2(A,,, AR) may be interpreted more easily than f (At,, AR); rather than fitting plots of  "log(I, + IAR) versus log(Ic + IAL)," an estimate of f2(AL, AR) may be found by fitting plots of "log IT versus log I," and  then computing f,(A,, AR) from the relationship  f2(AL, AR) -fl (A L, AR) - IAL + [IARlg(A,, AR)]'  In practice parameter estimates (including the sign of c,) may be found by fitting the model to values (rather than plots) of  I,. and Ic, using a least-squares criterion.  DISCUSSION  Most empirical studies of interocular adaptation have focused on the independence question. Does a light presented to the  opposite eye have any effect? Though a steady contralateral adapting field does not affect threshold, it can affect the  minimum modulation depth for flicker (Fiorentini, Bayly, & Maffei, 1972) and critical usion frequency (Lipkin, 1962). Whether  a contralateral field can affect brightness is not clear; Whittle and Challands (1969) found a contralateral adapting light  has a very small effect on the brightness of a 200-msec test but, as they point out, the effect may be an artifact of the  stimulus arrangement. With regard to color perception, Whittle (1973) reported informally that a steady, chromatic  contralateral adapting field alters slightly the hue and saturation of a brief colored test flash. As one would expect, the  independence hypothesis does not hold in general (though the conditions for and nature of the failure have received little  systematic attention).  In terms of neural mechanisms, the isolation hypothesis is far more interesting. Failure of independence indicates some neural  signal (or many signals) from one eye is affecting the percept due to light entering the other eye; isolation specifies a  class of models that limits the nature of the effect due to the opposite eye. Isolation is implicit in many viewpoints of  binocular perception. An example is the view that binocular achromatic brightness results from combining a ("brightness")  signal from the left eye and a ("brightness") signal from the right eye. It is not true a priori that such signals exist. If  they do exist then the empirical relationships of Theorems 3 and 4 are implied.  HAPLOSCOPIC VISION THEOREMS 29  The isolation hypothesis places an important constraint on neural models even in the absence of adapting fields. It specifies  that all of the information for an isolated test field (presented to a dark-adapted eye) related to, for example, brightness  is encoded by a single neural signal (that is, some single neural response). The perceived brightness of the fused percept  will depend only on this signal and a similar signal from the other eye. The isolation hypothesis applied to other  fused-stimuli percepts (for example threshold, red/green equilibrium, or heterochromatic brightness) specifies the same  relationship between neural signals and percept. It might be that isolation holds for fused stimuli presented alone but not  for fused stimuli on adapting fields, or for some percepts but not others. There is evidence that isolation does not hold in  general for heterochromatic brightness (Thomas et al., 1961; De Weert & Levelt, 1976b).  Rejection of the isolation hypothesis means that the extension of results from monocular experiments to normal binocular  vision is questionable. With no oppositeeye stimuli, there must exist a single neural signal (due to the lights presented to  the one eye) related to, say, the perceived brightness of the test field. Isolation specifies that this signal (though of  course not perceived brightness) is context independent; that is, it does not depend on there being no opposite-eye stimuli.  Rejection of isolation indicates that with binocular stimuli no such signal from a single eye exists; that is, the monocular  results reflect an aggregation of one eye's neural signals that occurs at or after a locus of binocular mechanisms. The  aggregation of the eye's signals that takes place in the monocular experiment never occurs with binocular stimuli, and  therefore conclusions about brightness perception inferred from monocular data may be misleading. The theorems in this paper  reveal crisp empirical tests of the isolation hypothesis and therefore of any physiological model postulating that all the  information from one eye relevant to brightness (or equilibrium colors) can be encoded by a single neural signal.  REFERENCES  BLAKE, R., OVERTON, R., & LEMA-STERN, S. Interocular transfer of visual aftereffects. Journal of Experimental Psychology:  Human Perception and Performance, 1981, 7, 367-380.  CRAWFORD, B. H. Ocular interaction in its relation to measurements of brightness threshold. Proceedings of the Royal Society,  Series B, 1940, 128, 552-559.  DE SILVA, H. R., & BARTLEY, S. H. Summation and subtraction of brightness in binocular perception. British Journal of  Psychology, 1930, 20, 241-250.  DE WEERT, CH. M. M., & LEVELT, W. J. M. Comparison of normal and dichoptic color mixing. Vision Research, 1976, 16, 59-70. (a)  DE WEERT, CH. M. M., & LEVELT, W. J. M. Dichoptic brightness combination for unequally coloured lights. Vision Research, 1976,  16, 1077-1086. (b)  FIORENTINI, A., BAYLY, E. J., & MAFFEI, L. Peripheral and central contributions to psychophysical spatial interactions. Vision  Research, 1972, 12, 253-259.  GUTH, S. L., DONLEY, N. J., & MARROCco, R. T. On luminance additivity and related topics. Vision Research, 1969, 9, 537-575.  30  STEVEN K. SHEVELL  HECHT, S. On the binocular fusion of colors and its relation to theories of color vision. Proceedings of the National Academy  of Sciences, USA, 1928, 14, 237-241.  HERING, E. [Outlines of a theory of the light sense] (L. Hurvich & D. Jameson, trans.) Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press,  1964.  HURVICH, L. M., & JAMESON, D. The binocular fusion of yellow in relation to color theories. Science, 1951, 114, 199-202.  IKEDA, M., & SAGAWA, K. Binocular color fusion limit. Journal of the Optical Society of America, 1979, 69, 316-320.  JAMESON, D., & HURVICH, L. M. Color adaptation: Sensitivity, contrast, and afterimages. In D. Jameson & L. M. Hurvich (Eds.),  Handbook of Sensory Physiology (Vol. VII/4). Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1972. Pp. 568-581.  KRANTZ, D. H. Color measurement and color theory: II. Opponent-colors theory. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1975, 12,  304-327.  LARIMER, J., KRANTZ, D. H., & CICERONE, C. M. Opponent-process additivity.-I. Red/green equilibria. Vision Research, 1974, 14,  1127-1140.  LEVELT, W. J. M. On binocular rivalry. Soesterberg: Institute for Perception RVO-TNO, 1965.  LIPKIN, B. S. Monocular flicker discrimination as a function of the luminance and area of contralateral steady light. I.  Luminance. Journal of the Optical Society of America, 1962, 52, 1287-1295.  LONG, G. M. The dichoptic viewing paradigm: Do the eyes have it? Psychological Bulletin, 1979, 86, 391-403.  MATIN, L. Binocular summation at absolute threshold of peripheral vision. Journal of the Optical Society of America, 1962, 52,  1276-1286.  PRENTICE, W. C. H. New observations of binocular yellow. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1948, 38,284-288.  SHEVELL, S. K. The dual role of chromatic backgrounds in color perception. Vision Research, 1978, 18, 1649-1661.  SHEVELL, S. K. Color perception under chromatic adaptation: Equilibrium yellow and long-wavelength adaptation. Vision  Research, 1982, 22, 279-292.  TELLER, D. Y., & GALANTER, E. Brightness, luminance, and Fechner's paradox. Perception and Psychophysics, 1967, 2, 297-300.  THOMAS, F. H., DIMMICK, F. L., & LURIA, S. M. A study of binocular color mixture. Vision Research, 1961, 1, 108-120.  WHITTLE, P. The brightness of coloured flashes on backgrounds of various colours and luminances. Vision Research, 1973, 13,  621-638.  WHITTLE, P., & CHALLANDS, P. D. C. The effect of background luminance on the brightness of flashes. Vision Research, 1969, 9,  1095-1109.  YELLOT, J. L, & WANDELL, B. A. Color properties of the contrast flash effect: Monoptic versus dichoptic comparisons. Vision  Research, 1976, 16, 1275-1280.  RECEIVED: April 1, 1982