10.1016/0022-2496(82)90042-6
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 26, 179-181 (1982)  Book Review  CHARLES F. MANSKI AND DANIEL MCFADDEN (Eds.). Structural Analysis of Discrete Data with Econometric Applications. Cambridge,  Mass.: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press, 1981. pp. xxv + 477. $29.95 (U.S.).  Reviewed by DAVID M. GRETHER  C. F. Manski is Associate Professor of Economics at Hebrew University. He received his Ph.D. at Massachusetts Institute of  Technology in 1973, and spent the years 1973-1979 at Carnegie-Mellon University. His major research interests are discrete  choice analysis and decision theory. D. McFadden is Professor of Economics at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He  received his Ph.D. from the University of Minnesota in 1963, and was at the University of California at Berkeley from then  until 1978. His major research interest is economic theory, and theoretical and applied econometrics.  The reviewer is Professor of Economics at California Institute of Technology. He received his Ph.D. at Stanford in 1969 and  was a member of the faculty at Yale University before coming to Caltech in 1971. He is interested in theoretic and applied  econometrics, individual choice behavior, and social choice theory, and authored with M. Nerlove and J. L. Carvalho, Analysis  of Economic Time Series: A Synthesis. New York: Academic Press, 1979.  This informative book consists of thirteen essays concerning the structural analysis of bodies of data in which some of the  variables to be explained are either discrete (e.g., a set of behaviors a subject might exhibit) or are in some way limited or  constrained (e.g., the fraction of votes obtained by the winning candidate in an election). The majority of the essays make  theoretical contributions, and some contain applications to data. These applications primarily in Chapters 10, 11, and 13 are  all to economic studies and, hence, the final phrase in the title. Actually the intended audience for the book includes  statistical workers in social sciences generally and in psychology especially.  In the following the contents of the major chapters which seem likely to be of interest to readers of this journal are  discussed briefly.  Chapter 1 by Manski and McFadden, "Alternative Estimators and Sample Designs for Discrete Choice Analysis," provides a careful  and fairly complete discussion of estimation of discrete choice models. The situation studied is roughly as follows: an  individual may choose an element i from a set C of M alternatives. There is a space Z of attributes of the individual and of  the alternatives. It is assumed that the  Requests for reprints should be sent to David M. Grether, California Institute of Technology, Department of Economics,  Division of the Humanities and Social Sciences 228-77, Pasadena, California 91125.  179  0022-2496/82/050179-03$02.00/0  Copyright C0 1982 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  180 HOOK REVIEW  probability of choosing i E C given z C Z is a known parameterc function depending upon an unknown vector of parameters O.  Thus, what is to be estimated is this conditional distribution p(i I Z, O). The authors present estimators for the problem  under various assumptions about what is or is not known a priori-namely, the marginal distribution of the attributes and the  alternatives. Considerable attention is paid to proper estimation when the sampling schemes are choice based or endogenous.  For example, in studying job choices one might sample jobs of given types noting the attributes of the workers in those jobs  rather than developing, say, a random sample of workers and recording their attributes and job choices. The resulting  statistical problems are quite different and generally require different procedures. Formal definitions, development of  likelihood functions, and expressions for the asymptotic covariance matrices of estimators are presented. Proofs of  consistency and asymptotic normality are given in an appendix. The main results from Chapter 2 by S. R. Cosslett are included  in this chapter.  Suppose one observes the following: individuals who have had a certain experience in the past are more likely to have the  experience in the future than individuals who have not had the experience. Examples are accident proneness, unemployment,  labor force participation, and giving "correct" responses to certain situations. Two qualitatively different explanations are  (1) having the experience changes something about the individual or the individual's environment, (2) some individuals are  just more likely to have the experience-due presumably to some unmeasured characteristics. In Chapters 3 and 4 James J.  Heckman develops models which allow one to test these alternative explanations. Methods of estimation are discussed. The  exposition is clear and thoughtful. The substantive meanings of the models are discussed as is what precisely is estimable  with different types of data sets.  In Chapter 5 McFadden presents a formal survey of probabilistic choice models. In addition to surveying a variety of models, a  number of generalizations are presented. As with other chapters in the volume the emphasis is on applications, and estimation  procedures are developed and applied to an example. This chapter should be especially interesting to psychometricians.  Lung-Fei Lee in Chapter 9 considers a variety of simultaneous equation models containing endogenous variables which are  limited in some fashion. He allows for variables which are observed only when positive, some of which are unobserved latent  variables for which there are binary indicators, e.g., we observe Ij = 1 if Yj > 0, Ij = 0 if Yj C 0, etc., and some variables  which may be censored. Following an earlier work of Amemiya and Nelson & Olson for each of five different combinations of  variables he develops two consistent and relatively convenient estimators, gives their asymptotic covariance matrices, and  examines their relative efficiency. The actual derivations are not included.  Gregory W. Fischer and Daniel Nagin consider the use of random coefficient specifications in discrete choice models. Suppose  that the utility of the ith alternative to the jth person is U" =f (Zip, O) + 6u, where Z's are attributes, O's parameters,  and e is a random variable. The individual choses the ith alternative if its utility is maximal in the choice set. One common  specification is to assume the eus to be  BOOK REVIEW 181  independent across individuals and alternatives. In Chapter 6 Fischer and Nagin adopt the specification, e`1= Z'J8' + yip,  where y'1s are independent across alternatives and individuals. This formulation allows error terms to be correlated across  alternatives though independent over individuals. This formulation has a number of potential advantages, e.g., it may be more  robust against omitted variables and variations in tastes. The models are applied and compared, using some data from students  at Duke University as an example.  The book contains an index though no bibliography. References (not always current) are given at the end of each chapter. In  summary, this is a worthwhile book. Much of the results contained in it are new; those that are not are generally presented in  a useful survey form. Though often elegant in presentation, complicated proofs are placed in appendices, making a readable and  useful book for applied researchers and a satisfying one for the more theoretically inclined. To noneconomists, a couple of  warnings: (a) by and large you will have to supply your own examples, and (b) the language is that of econometrics:  "endogenous," "exogenous," decision makers tend to be "consumers," etc. For the major substantive chapters, these should not  prove an impediment. The book contains an introduction by the editors which gives an overview of each essay and should be  especially helpful to noneconomists. Overall, this is a useful book which deserves wide and serious attention.