10.1016/0022-2496(82)90002-5
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 26, 204-236 (1982)  An Approach to Geometry of Visual Space with No A Priori Mapping Functions: Multidimensional Mapping According to Riemannian  Metrics  TAROW INDOW  School of Social Sciences, University of California-Irvine, Irvine, California 92717  A method of multidimensional mapping is described which constructs a configuration of points {P; f in a Euclidean map of  Riemannian space of constant curvature (hyperbolic, Euclidean, and elliptic) from the dissimilarity matrix (dij). The method  was applied to the distance matrix in visual space where stimulus points Q; were either small light points in the dark or  small black points in the illuminated field surrounded by white curtains and d;; represent scaled values of perceptual  distances. Configuration of points {Q,I were at intersections of parallel or distance alleys and horopters for the subject in  the horizontal plane of the eye level. In contrast to the theoretical equations for {Qi} by Luneburg and Blank, no a priori  assumption on mapping functions between {Qi} and IP;} is necessary in this procedure to fit theoretical curves to {Pr} in the  Euclidean map. The data were accounted for better by equations in the hyperbolic plane than by ones in the Euclidean plane.  Discussions are made on robustness of Euclidean representation and on how to approach geometry of visual space as a dynamic  entity under more natural conditions than the traditional frameless condition for alley and horopter experiments.  The purpose of this paper is twofold. First, to show, with some results, a new approach to Luneburg's model of binocular  visual space, i.e., alleys and horopters in the horizontal plane of the eye level. Second, to describe a multidimensional  scaling method of constructing a configuration in a Euclidean map of Riemannian space of constant curvature. Luneburg's model  is concerned with geometry of visual space as a whole under binocular observation. That space is frameless in the sense that  stimuli are presented in a homogeneous Ganzfeld without any visible frame of reference such as ceiling or walls (Indow,  1974a). Ultimately, the model is reduced to the following two postulates:  The main experiment reported here was supported by a grant from the Ministry of Education in Japan, and carried out by Akira  Nakada in 1975 and Atsuko Watanabe in 1976. The latter collaborated with the author in analyzing the data also. A test of  robustness of MDS stated in the third section was made in collaboration with Keiko Watanabe (nee Matsushima). Thanks are due  to these collaborators and also to subjects who participated in the experiment. The manuscript was completed since the author  moved to School of Social Sciences, University of California, Irvine, and partially supported by Grant 1ST80-23893 from the  National Science Foundation. Requests for reprints should be sent to Tarow Indow, School of Social Sciences, University of  California, Irvine, California 92717.  204  0022-2496/82 $2.00  Copyright 1982 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  (1) If it is frameless, visual space (VS) is describable in terms of a Riemannian space of constant total curvature K.  (2) A set of specific mapping functions holds between the physical space in which stimuli are presented and the Euclidean map  onto which VS is projected.  This study discusses the possibility of making explicit the geometry of VS solely on the basis of the first postulate with no  a priori assumption on mapping functions. For that purpose, information traditionally not used in studies in this area is  required, i.e., perceptual distances between stimulus points. Scaled perceptual interpoint distances as the data have to be  processed by a multidimensional scaling method which represents the perceptual points according to Riemannian metrics of  constant curvature. We now have many different algorithms of multidimensional scaling (e.g., Shepard, Romney, & Nerlove, 1972;  Shiffman, Reynolds, & Young, 1981). However, most of these have been developed from methodological interest, whereas the  present method has been explored with a real psychological problem to apply in mind.  The following abbreviations and notations will be used throughout in this article:  MDS: Multidimensional scaling.  R: Riemannian space of constant curvature in which the Gaussian total curvature K is a constant.  E: Euclidean space: R with K = 0.  VS: Visual space, especially frameless visual space if not otherwise stated, which is regarded as an R according to the  postulate (1).  EM: Euclidean map (Poincare model) representing VS in E.  X: Physical space as E in which stimuli are present.  Q: Stimulus point in X.  P: Perceptual point in VS or its representation in EM.  If it is necessary to make explicit the dimensionality m, an expression like VS"', R, will be used. Throughout, p or e  represents a Euclidean distance in EM or X, respectively, b a perceptual distance in VS as a latent variable, and d its scaled  value as the data. A matrix is denoted by (du), etc., and a configuration of n points is represented by {Q;} or JP;}. The  subject is counted as a point in (Q;} or JP;} and denoted by 0 or Po .  LUNEBURG'S MODEL OF FRAMELESS VISUAL SPACE  A stimulus point Q in X is given in terms of either the Cartesian coordinates (x, y, z) with the origin 0 or the bipolar  coordinates (y, 0, 0) with the eyes (L, R) as origins (Fig. 1). In order to meet the condition of being frameless, each Qi is  either a small light point in the dark or a small black point on the visual field under illumination limited by white curtains  without any clear boundary. A point P in EM is given in terms of either the Cartesian coordinates (~, rl, () or the polar  coordinates (po, (p, 0) both with origin 0 at the subject (Fig. 2). It is hard to define 0 in EM more  FIG. 1. A stimulus point in the physical space X'. Cartesian and bipolar coordinates.  precisely than saying that it should be the cyclopean eye from which all radial distances are defined. Unless K=O, it is  impossible to represent VS' in E' isometrically without distortion of shape. Luneburg (1947, 1948, 1950) adopted a special  representation; EM, Poincare's model (e.g., Smart, 1978, p. 229). The logic underlying this representation and derivation of  equations for curves in EM have been previously stated (Indow, 1979). Hence the following properties of EM will be used herein  without derivation. A more extensive survey of related literatures was given also in that article.  (EMI) It is a representation in E' of VS' as a R' including all three cases; K < 0 (hyperbolic), K = 0 (Euclidean), and K > 0  (elliptic). In the first three sections, the case K = 0 will not be included since EM' is VS' itself in this case. It is worth  mentioning that no additional dimension is necessary in EM in contrast to other models in which, for example, a hyperbolic  surface R' is represented as a pseudosphere or a saddle shaped surface in E'.  (EM2) Angles in VS' are preserved in EM', so rendering the mapping conformal (Lobell, 1950). It is impossible to have an  isometric representation of VS' in EM'. In other words, a Euclidean distance p,i in EM' is not the same length with either the  perceptual distance bit in VS' as a geodesic in R3 or the scaled value di; as data. However, b and p are related in simple  ways.  K<0, K>0,   qbij ` -   = sinh qpU   q b - qpu   i, . - sin ,   GiG~ GiGj (1)  Gi = [I - (gpoi)2 ] 112, Gi = [ I + (gpoi)2 ]112,   GI= [I - (gpol)2]III, (,j= [1 + (gpoi)2]'i2.   For radial distances in which P, = 0, Pi = P (po = poi),   qbo = tanh-' qpo, qbo = tan-' 9po~ (2)  where q is a positive constant related to the curvature.  (EM3) In these equations, qb or qp can be regarded as a single variable, and it is not really necessary to separate q from b  or p. If b or p is to be given as a quantity, their units have to be those by which the radius of curvature of R', r, is  given, and the constant q is related to K and hence to r in the following ways:  K<0, K>0,  I'-  V-K- I VK_ 1 (3)  q __ 2 2r' q 2 -2r  In EM', we can define the basic sphere with radius po = q-' that corresponds to the boundary in the following sense: In the  hyperbolic case, the basic sphere represents the set of points P at infinity. In the elliptic case, it represents the set of  points at which all straight lines in a given direction intersect with each other. There is no "parallel" line in the entire  space of elliptic R. Nevertheless, within the basic sphere (qpo < 1), as is the case in hyperbolic space, there are a number  of nonintersecting straight lines in a given direction.  .(EM4) When K < 0, the basic sphere has the following additional property. All nonradial perceptual straight lines are  represented by circles in EM' which are orthogonal to the basic sphere. All radial perceptual straight lines are represented  by straight lines in EM' which extend from the origin 0. These are also orthogonal to the basic sphere.  It has been taken for granted that X and VS are three dimensional (i.e., m < 3) as a whole. An interesting property of VS is  that it is bounded in all directions. Our line of sight always ends with some percept if darkness or blackness in perception  is counted as a percept. In other words, we cannot perceive infinity or nil by itself so that there is no gap in the boundary  of VS in front of us. Let us denote by max bo the maximum perceptual radial distance corresponding to Q at infinity in X under  a given condition; for example, the perceptual radius of the night sky (Indow, 1968). Besides, it is conceptually possible to  extend two perceptually straight lines up to the  boundary of VS without intersecting each other. The boundary of VS of which radius is max 80, a sphere if max 6, is  independent of direction, has to be represented within the basic sphere (qpu = 1) in EM'. Define the scale for p such that max  po = 2, then, since q max po < 1, from Eq. (3)  -1 <K<0 or 0<K< 1. (4)  On the basis of postulate (1) alone, equations representing various properties in VS can be defined in EM. These equations  include ~, 1, C or po, rp, 0 as variables with q as the only personal constant in which K is implicitly included. In order to  compare a prediction of these equations as to P in EM with the position of corresponding stimulus point Q in X, however, we  have to know the relation between EM and X which maps (~, ?1, C) to (x, y, z) or (po, (p, 0) to (e(0, Q), 0, 0). Luneburg  assumed that the mapping functions  Po = 2e-, a > 0,  (5) (6)  hold under all circumstances. Then, the whole geometrical structure of VS of a subject can be specified by two personal  constants only; K in (3) and a in (5). A distinguished characteristic of the Luneburg's model is its tightness in logical  structure. The first postulate is based on a set of rationales (Blank, 1953, 1958, 1959; Indow, 1979; Luneburg, 1947).  Concerning his second postulate, i.e., mapping functions (5) and (6), the story is somewhat different. Equation (5) was  proposed on the intuition that pn has to be an increasing function of the physical radial distance of stimulus point e(0, Q)  having an asymptote and on the assumption that the ratio P,,IP,> between any pair of points P;, Pf depends only on the  difference y; - y; (Luneburg, 1950, p. 638; Lukas, 1981). The asymptote was defined to be 2 in order to meet condition (4).  Hardy, Rand, Rittler, Blank, & Boeder (1953) tried to replace Eq. (5) by another function of y, but they accepted Eq. (6). As  to (6), Luneburg referred to the following situation: Suppose a subject observes a network of wires representing a  Vieth-Mueller torus of constant y that consists of vertical curved wires of constant 0 and horizontal curved wires of constant  0, then the network would appear around the subject with the circles of longitude and latitude in accordance with (5) and (6)  (Luneburg, 1947, p. 27; 1950, p. 633). That may be approximately true, because the network has no hierarchical relationship  among wires. It does not mean, however, that the same is true of { Qi J under all circumstances. If we assume the simple  mapping functions (5) and (6) in addition to postulate (1), there will be no possibility to deal with such phenomena as the  anisotrophy of VS which seems to exist even in the frameless condition. For example, nobody will say that the night sky  appears as a complete sphere, which is at variance with Eq. (5) being independent of direction. It seems to the author that  the limitation of VS being frameless is necessary mainly because of these simple mapping functions in which only the relation  of each Q; to the subject 0, not relations among Qis taken into account.  Perceptual processes in VS are dynamic in nature and VS cannot be regarded as an empty container into which different sets of  perceptual objects are thrown in without affecting its geometry and/or mapping functions. If the geometry of VS changes  according to pattern and size of {Q,}, we cannot talk about the geometry of VS in general. However, VS under a given  condition, must have a geometry. Though we cannot claim that it must be one of mathematically established geometries, it is  interesting to see to what extent VS is describable in terms of R (the first postulate) at least with such configurations JP,}  to be discussed in this paper. If we obtain (Pi l in EM without using a priori mapping functions, we can determine a  posteriori mapping functions under the given condition by comparing {P,} with {Qi}. Then, we shall be able to extend the same  approach to VS with framework and to explore the geometry of VS under more natural conditions where percepts may have colors,  textures and a clear hierarchical organization may exist among percepts, under the assumption that the mapping functions and  value of K may change according to these circumstances but not the geometry of VS. Through Eqs. (1) and (2), Euclidean  distances in EM, Pi;, P0, can be obtained from perceptual distances a;;, 60. Hence, if we have scaled values dij, d0, for 6ii,  60, by applying MDS, we can construct {P;} directly in EM with a value of K. No mapping functions are needed to do so, and,  once JP,) is obtained, the relation between {P,} and {Qi} is given as a result. It seems plausible that phenomena such as size  constancy, figure and ground, proceeding or retreating colors, be mainly due to change of mapping functions according to  conditions of {Qi}, whereas the geometry of VS remains the same throughout these different conditions.  ALLEY AND HOROPTER EXPERIMENT IN THE  HORIZONTAL PLANE OF THE EYE LEVEL  Suppose that two rows of points (QQ3, Q5, ..., and QZ, Q4, Q6,...) are presented at the level of the eyes of the subject (z  = 0, 0 = 0) in such a way: Q, , QZ are the farthest lateral pair, Q3, Q4 are the next, and so on. When the alley Q; and Qi+,  (i= 1, 3,...) are arranged to appear straight and parallel, each pair Qi and Qi+, does not appear laterally equidistant.  Conversely, when pairs Q;, Qi+, are arranged to appear laterally equidistant, the lines of points Qi and Q;+, (i = 1, 3,...)  do not appear as parallel straight lines. In other words, the parallel alley (P) and the (equi) distance alley (D) are  perceptually not the same and usually the latter lies outside the former in X2. In either case, the subject perceives the  alley of Pi in VS' (C = 0, 0 = 0) and the impression is so definite that minor shift of any point P; is felt to-destroy, for  example, parallelness of the alley. With monotone mapping functions between EMZ and X2, no matter what their functional form  is, the discrepancy between P- and Dalleys is in accordance with VS' being RZ with K < 0. If K > 0, P-alley has to be outside  D-alley, and if K = 0, both have to coincide. All experiments so far conducted were concerned with P- and D-alleys on the  horizontal plane of the eye level. It is an interesting question whether or not the same discrepancy is expected, if K * 0,  with  alleys, for example, running horizontally or vertically in front of us like framework of a window. That question was pursued  in other articles (Indow, 1979; Indow & Watanabe, 1982) and in this paper discussion will be limited to the traditional case,  i.e., P- and D-alleys in the horizontal plane. Another experiment having been carried out often in the horizontal plane is  concerned with the horopter (H). In this case, a fixed point Qi is presented on the x axis and two points Qi_Qi+, on both  sides are adjusted so that the three appear to be fronto-parallel to the subject. While results of a series of experiments  have been previously reported (Indow, 1975, 1977; Indow, Inoue, & Matsushima, 1962a,b, 1963), this article will show results  of recent experiments in which three subjects constructed both alleys and horopters simultaneously in each of two conditions;  dark and illuminated. In this section, the results are analyzed according to the Luneburg's scheme using mapping functions (5)  and (6), and in the next section the method of analysis in which no a priori mapping functions are used will be described.  In order that farther stimuli are not occluded by nearer ones, the eyes of the subject were slightly, less than 3 cm usually,  above the horizontal plane X2 in which all Qi were presented. The head was fixed but the subject was encouraged to scan the  field freely by moving the eyes. The farthest pair Q, and Q2 were placed symmetric with regard to the x axis, x, = x2, y2 =  -Y21 z, = Z2 = 0. In constructing P-alleys, first Q, , Q2 and three points Q3, QA, Q, were presented in which QA was fixed on  the x axis. The subject was asked to adjust positions Of Q3 and Q, in such a way that P, , P3 and P2, P, defined two  perceptual straight lines parallel with each other and also P,, PA , P, defined the perceptual straight line fronto-parallel  to the subject. Then QA was removed and another set of three points, Q5, QBI Q, were presented in which QB was fixed closer to  the observer than QA on the x axis. Positions of Q, and Q, were adjusted so that QQ3, Q, and Q2, QQ, appeared parallel and  Q5, QB, Q, appeared fronto-parallel. In this way, the experiment was continued until { Qi } was obtained in which each Qi (i =  3, 4,...) corresponded to an intersection of the right or left member of P-alley passing through P, or P2 and the horopter  passing through a fixed point P. in the center (a =A, B.... ). Whenever the subject felt it necessary, the subject was allowed  to readjust any Qi which had already been adjusted. In constructing D-alleys, first QQ2 and three points Q3, QA, Q, were  presented and adjusted so that Q3, QA, Qa appeared fronto-parallel and QQ2 and Q3, Q, appeared laterally equidistant. Then,  Q3, QA, Q, were removed and another set of three points, Q, , QB, Q, were presented with Q, , Q2 in which QB was fixed on the  prescribed position on the x axis. Positions of Q, and Q, were adjusted so that QQB, Q, appeared fronto-parallel and QQZ  and QQ, appeared laterally equidistant. In this way, {Qi} was constructed in which each Qi (i=3,4,...) corresponded to an  intersection of the right or left member of D-alley passing through P, or P2 and the horopter passing through a fixed point P,  This procedure was different from the traditional method of constructing D-alley only in the following respect: the lateral  interval between Qi and Qi,, having Q,, in the middle was matched herein with the lateral distance between Q, and Q, having no  Q in the middle. Each adjustable stimulus point Qi was movable by the subject freely and  continuously in the directions of x and y. When stimuli were not being adjusted, the aperture through which stimuli were  visible was closed. Constructing each alley was repeated twice. As seen in Figs. 3 and 4, the final result in each alley to  which the theoretical curves were fitted is one line of points; the right member of the alley  DARK  Y  0 20 40 CM 0 20 40 0 20 40 60 80  b c  Intersections of P- and D-alleys with horopters in X' under the dark condition and curves based on mapping functions (5) and  (6). ( A = P; O, A = D) In Figs. 3c and 4c, horopter curves were drawn over a wider range in order to show the behavior of  HQ in Eq. (7). Within a certain range of xtr, H, has an inflection, in Fig. 3, two curves of x = 120, 80 cm change their  directions at y = 60, 50 cm. In Fig. 4, the curve for xa = 220 cm has this property but the inflection is around y = 120 cm,  and not included in that figure. The range of xa in which He has this property depends upon values of K and a. Of x, beyond  that range, Ha is convex toward the subject and of xa closer than this range, Ha is a concave curve passing through both eyes  R and L.  FIG. 3. theoretical  300 CM  X  200  100  ILLUMIT. I.  K - 0.38  L   . 5. T. F.   - 0.27 - 0.37  24.62 21.86  5.9 7.1  Y  0 20 40 CM 0 20 4 0 20 40 6 80  a b c  FIG. 4. Intersections of P- and D-alleys with horopters in Xz under the illuminated condition and theoretical curves based  upon mapping functions (5) and (6). ( A = P; O, A = D)  symmetric to the x axis which was defined by means of Qi and Q;+,. Hence, except fixed points QI, Q2 and Q. (a = a, b.... ) on  the x axis, each point in the figures was the mean of four settings.  Dark Condition  An elaborate mechanical apparatus was used in which two tiny light points, less than 1 mm in diameter, were movable by motors  simultaneously and independently over the range of 280 cm on x, 120 cm on y and 80 cm on z. The subject could NATED  control each stimulus through three small knobs. In this experiment, z was fixed and only two knobs were used. Whenever the  subject finished settings of the two adjustable lights in P- or D-alley experiment, two other light points were placed at  exactly the same positions with the settings and the movable light points were used for the next setting. The fixed points Q,  , Q2 were at x, = x2 = 418, y, = -y2 = 40 cm and Q,, were presented at five positions as shown in Fig. 3. All lightpoints were  adjusted in intensity and size to appear approximately the same at positions of their use. Nothing was visible to the subject  except light points in use.  Illuminated Condition  Small black balls, 0.5 cm in diameter, were presented on a white board of 322 cm, 111 cm in the directions of x and y,  respectively. The board was surrounded by white curtains and illuminated from above (about 70lux at the center). As the  subject was seated at a distance of 36.5 cm from the edge of the board and the eyes were placed at only 1.5 cm above the  surface of the board, the surface itself was invisible and the whole visual field was covered by the white curtains against  which black balls were seen. The subject controlled two white flat elastic tapes by the respective hands and a black ball was  fixed on each tape. As the end of each tape was fixed at the other edge of the board and the tape was elastic, the subject  could move each stimulus freely in the directions of x and y. The tapes were practically invisible. Whenever the subject  finished setting the two stimuli on the tapes in P- or Q-alley experiment, two other black balls were placed on the board at  exactly the same position and the two on the tapes were used for the next setting. The fixed points Q, , Q2 were at x, = x2 =  355, y, = -y2 = 30 cm, and Q. were presented at five positions as shown in Fig. 4. In this case, sizes of black balls were not  adjusted according to distances of their use. Size constancy was not perfect and the difference in perceptual size of points  could contribute to the difference in perceptual distance from the subject.  The experiment was conducted with three subjects; T.I., the author and experienced in these observations, and two other naive  observers. The results were given in Figs. 3 and 4, where fixed points Q,(y00) and Qa(y,,, 0, 0) on the x axis are  indicated by (D. Though there are some irregularities, the series of O (D-alley) tend to be outside the series of (P-alley),  especially at Q's closer to the observer. Hence, equations for P- and D-alleys and horopters in the case that K < 0 were  fitted to the respective series of Q's.  P: cosh(ay + k) CP _CP cosh(Qy, + k)   = sin 0, =   2 2 sin   D: sinh(Qy + k) = 2sin 0, 2n + k) (7)  = sinhs ny,   H.: cosh(ay + k) C2   = C2 cos 0, = cosh(ay, + k),   k 1  (8)  = In    These equations in Xz are obtained from the following theoretical curves in EM2 (see Indow, 1979) through mapping functions  (5) and (6):   Cp 1 +(gpo,)2  P: (gpo)Z - Cr(gi1) + I = 0, _   _   q?l I   z   -  D: (gPO)Z + CD(q?]) - I = 0, CD I (gPoi)   _   -   9rl i  H.: (gpo)Z - CH.(q~) + I = 0, CH. 1 + (q a)2   qua  where q is defined in Eq. (3). Values of the two personal constants, a and K, were estimated by the steepest descent method to  maximize the fit of P- and D-equations to the data {Q, }. As 0 = 0,  4x/f _ 8x Z  y=tan' (4Lfa)(x2+YZ)_ 1, 0 2  = !tan (41f ')(X2 if y2)+ 1'  where f represents the inter-pupil distance. Curves representing H,' were not used in estimating the parameters and drawn  afterward with the respective values of K and a. The fit of P- and D-curves under the dark condition is in general of the same  degree of goodness as in previous experiments. However, the fit under the illuminated condition in Fig. 4 is unusually poor  with all the three subjects for unknown reasons.  CM 300  200  100  FIG. 5. An example of fit of P- and D-alley curves under the illuminated condition (O, parallel; X, distance).  TABLE I Summary of Analysis According to Luneburg's Scheme  Year Dark a Year Illuminated a   K   K   T.I. 1958 -0.30 11.0 1974 -0.41 23.9  1959 -0.30 15.0     1960 -0.30 15.0     1976 -0.31 16.5 1977 -0.38 19.8"  K.M. 1960 -0.40 15.0 1974 -0.24 23.6  1976 -0.18 20.6     S.A. 1974 -0.41 17.5 1974 -0.14 24.7  N.Y. 1974 -0.12 9.7 1974 -0.30 18.6  S.T. 1974 -0.34 10.1 1974 -0.24 13.7  L.S. 1976 -0.29 8.7 1977 -0.27 24.6"  T.F. 1976 -0.29 12.9 1977 -0.37 21.9"  Rows are results of the present study.  For comparison, the data of one of the subjects (T.I.) in which an unusually large number of points on each alley were  obtained under illuminated condition (1974) are shown in Fig. 5. Notice that the scale of the y axis is enlarged in this  figure in order to keep the two sets of points separate. Hence, deviations are magnified also. Nevertheless, the fit is better  in Fig. 5 than in Fig. 4. Some summary results of K and a obtained by the same procedure under both dark and illuminated  conditions are shown in Table 1. It is of interest to note that, according to this procedure, the change from dark to  illuminated conditions is reflected more in the increase of a rather than in the decrease of JK J. From Eqs. (2) and (5)  d6o - opo  dy I - (gpo)2 .  In other words, the sensitivity of perceptual radial distance So with regard to change of y is larger for larger value of a.  MULTIDIMENSIONAL MAPPING ACCORDING TO RIEMANNIAN METRICS  Multidimensional scaling (MDS) is a method to give a spatial representation to a set of objects in the following way: The  input to MDS is a matrix (d;i) consisting of distance or dissimilarity measures between objects i, j (i, j = 1, 2,..., n) and  the output is a configuration of n points {Pt} usually in E' of which interpoint distances d~, are related to d,, in one way  or another (e.g., Lingoes, 1977; Schiffman et al., 1981).  When given values of d are taken as such and d is proportional to d, it is called metric MDS (Torgerson, 1958), and when only  ordinal information among di; is used and d is monotonic to d, it is called nonmetric MDS (e.g., Krushal, 1964a,b). As  mentioned in the first section, we now have many different methods of MDS: some require input other than (d;i) (e.g., Carroll,  1972), some incorporate individual differences in a clever way (e.g., Carroll & Chang, 1970), and some use various definitions  of distance d (e.g., Young, 1972), etc. To employ a non-Euclidean distance d is equivalent to representing {Pi} in a  non-Euclidean space. A non-Euclidean distance that has been thoroughly studied and widely used is the Minkowski metric (Beals,  Krantz, & Tversky, 1968; Tversky & Krantz, 1970; Krantz, 1967). Attempts to construct {P;} in a Riemannian space R'is  relatively new (Indow, 1975; Lindman & Caelli, 1978).  The present method has been explored with applications to the study of geometry of VS in mind. However, it will be described  here in general terms because the applicability is by no means limited to that problem. If objects are representable as {Pi }  in R' according to Riemannian interpoint distances 6, it is equivalent to say that {P;} is definable in EM' of which Euclidean  interpoint distances p are related to 6 according to Eqs. (1) and (2). There are two points to be mentioned, however. First,  in order for Eqs. (1), (2) to hold, it is necessary that p and b are given in terms of the same unit by which the radius of  curvature r in (3) is defined (Indow, 1979). This is the reason that both are combined with q in the equations. In general, it  is impossible to have the scale for 6 having this proper unit from the beginning. In the case of VS, 6 is perceptual distance  as a latent variable and in some other applications 6 may be dissimilarity between colors or nationalities, etc. In either  case, we have no information about the unit of scale adequate for 6 in Eq. (1). Hence the essence of the present method  consists of finding the adequate unit. Second, in order to use Eqs. (1), (2), a point Po has to be designated as the origin 0.  In the application to VS, as previously stated, the subject is always defined to be 0. Further discussion concerning this  problem will be made in the last section.  Suppose we have the scaled value d representing a latent variable 6 under discussion. The scaling method in the present  application by which perceptual distances were converted to d will be stated in the next section. Assume that 6 can be  regarded as a quantity and d is proportional to 6.  d=u6, u > 0. (10)  This is an operational definition of 6 and the problem is to see whether 6 (=u -'d), can be interpreted in the way as defined  by Eq. (1). Putting (10) in (1) and (2), we have, for K < 0,  qpu= [{1 -tanh2(cdo,)}{1 -tanh2(cdoj)}]'12 sinh(cd j),  qpo = tanh(cdo),  (11)  DATA i  A VALUE OF C  IgPy EQ~1 d  METRIC MDS  ~>  Pi } I rl E Mm 1QPii/  CRITERIA  C m  FiG. 6. Flow diagram of multidimensional mapping in R.  and for K > 0,  qpu= [{1 +tan2(cdo;)}{1 +tan2(cdoj)}]'~2 sin(cdu),  qpo = tan(cdo), (12)  By the use of a value of c, a matrix of Euclidean distances (qp;j) can be obtained through (11) or (12) from the data (drj).  Then, by applying either metric or nonmetric MDS to (gprj), we have JP;} in EM'. The dimensionality m and the configuration  {P;} can be obtained simultaneously. We need some criteria by which appropriateness of {Pj} is evaluated to select the optimum  value c and to obtain {Pj} based upon c (Fig. 6). Hence, the problem is reduced to optimization of c with respect to the  criteria. As only one variable c is involved,' any search method like the Fibonacci technique, or by golden section, will be  applicable (e.g., Jacoby, Kowalik, and Pizzo, 1972). In the program we have now, no such method is implemented and c is simply  varied in a given range with a prescribed step to search for c. And, insofar as the application to VS is concerned, methods of  nonmetric MDS are perhaps too flexible (Indow, 1974b) and the metric MDS in the sense of Torgerson (1958) was used in the  program shown in Fig. 6. The method of search and also the MDS can be easily replaced by more elaborate ones, if necessary. In  total, eight criteria were tried with the data to be described in the next section. All criteria are given in the last section  and the result in the present application with particular two criteria will be given in the section after the next.  USE OF PERCEPTUAL DISTANCE  Since 1962, the author and his collaborators have started to scale and use perceptual interpoint distances S. Procedures used  to convert 8 to scale value d are described at the end of this section. Until 1965, with the purpose of testing the  possibility that VS is Euclidean, metric MDS was directly applied to the matrix (du) of more or less randomly distributed  points {QI} so that a Euclidean representation {P,} was obtained in EZ or E3 according to the dimensionality of {Q;} (Indow,  1968, 1974b). Herein, the conversion constant c was not necessary. The reason why a  ' As will be described in the next section, the data (du) are based upon ratio judgments and hence no additive constant was  used in the present application of metric MDS.  nonmetric MDS was not used was threefold. At that time we did not have access to a computer large enough to process the data  by a nonmetric MDS algorithm. Second, we wanted to make use of the maximum amount of information in the data, and third,  nonmetric MDS is sometimes too flexible. There was such an experiment in the series in which stars in the night sky were used  as Q;. Though the subject was included as a point Qu, the use of nonmetric MDS would have been apt to yield the sky as a flat  surface EZ instead of a sphere-like shape in E'. It became apparent, at that time, that configurations of perceptual points  {P,} in VS' or VS' can be represented as JP;) in E' or E' with sufficient accuracy. In other words, when Euclidean interpoint  distances A, of {Pi} were plotted against the data d, points scattered along the straight line passing through the origin with  the unit slop and the degree of scatter was within the range expected from the instability inherent in the data; discrepancies  between d,; and d;; which are separately obtained. There was an experiment (1963) in which small light points were presented  in the dark, all at eye level, and these were binocularly observed with the head fixed; exactly the same condition in which  most of alley experiments were performed. This is the case where the separation between P- and D-alleys is largest and VS is  hyperbolic according to Luneburg's scheme. Still, a Euclidean representation could reproduce the data without any appreciable  nonlinearity between d and p (Indow, 1968), which suggests that MDS is robust and insensitive to the curvature.  The following attempt was made to test the robustness of MDS and to examine to what extent configurations in R 2 where K * 0  can be represented in E2. A hypothetical configuration { Qr } in X' given in Fig. 7, similar to the stimulus pattern  300 CM  210  130  80  50  70 35 0 30 70 CM  FIG. 7. A hypothetical stimulus configuration IQ,) in X2 used for testing robustness of MDS.  in the 1963 experiment, was once converted to {P,} in EM' by mapping functions (5), (6),. and then (au) was obtained from {P;}  through Eqs. (1)-(4), with specified values of K and a. Then the metric MDS was applied to (6,,) directly; d = 6. Values of K  and a were systematically varied in 20 ways, but it will suffice to show only three examples in Fig. 8. Accoding to the scale  of EM' defined by Eq. (4), -1 < K < 0. When K = -0.25, a = 11, i.e., a representative case for Table 1, the coincidence  between 6 and P is perfect; here P represents hyperbolic interpoint distance of {P,} in EM', the input to the MDS, and P  represents Euclidean interpoint distance of the configuration {P,} in EZ as the output. This coincidence does not imply that  {P,} is the same in shape with {Q,} in X or with {P;} in EM', because the mapping functions intervened between {Q,} and JP,}  and because the hyperbolic measure S was used with {Pi}. Figure 8 gives {P, } also, and the distortion of JP, } in comparison  with {Qi} is opposite to the theoretical horopter curves in XZ under the mapping functions (Figs. 3 and 4), because Q; are  straight along the y axis in Fig. 7.2 Even when K = -0.95, if a is large, as shown in an example in Fig. 7, the coincidence  between 6 and p is almost perfect, though the distortion of {P; } becomes more marked in the direction discussed above. When K  = -0.95, a = 11, the discrepancy between 6 and p is only moderate and, as shown in Fig. 7, when K = -0.95, a = 5, the  discrepancy becomes conspicuous in the plot 6 versus P. Numerical agreement between 6 and p alone is not a sufficient  criterion to tell whether 8's are Euclidean distances or not. It is true, however, that JP,} we obtain in E is distorted in  form if K* 0.  In the first two attempts (Indow 1975, 1977) in which MDS was applied to (gpri) by the procedure given in Fig. 6 all the  criteria to select c were based upon comparison of 6 or qp with qp. In the light of the above-mentioned result, the comparison  cannot be very sensitive. In the present application, a different comparison was attempted as will be seen in the next  section. In all the experiments concerning 6, the data were obtained in the following way. The basic judgment was estimation  of ratio between perceptual distances S,k and S,1 starting from the same point P, in VS. First, Qi and another point Qk were  designated by the experimenter and then each of the remaining points P, (j 0 i, k) were designated one by one. The subject was  asked to give a number du, k, e.g., 0.75, 1.25, which is supposed to represent the subjective ratio between 6ik and 6,i for  each P1. In this way, all elements in a row i, d,1,k (j = 1, 2,..., n), were obtained with the same unit 6ik and d,i,k = 0,  dik.k= 1 by definition. If judgments on distances from the same point P, were repeated with a different unit 8 and the  corresponding dri,K were obtained, means of du.k and d,;.K (j = 1, 2,..., n) are still proportional to each other. In this  way, elements in each row i of the matrix n X n, are given with the unit e;, and the remaining problem consists in adjusting  difference between e, (i = 1, 2,..., n) and representing all elements du in terms of one and the same unit. The procedure for  Z Insofar as mapping functions (5), (6) are used, the same family of horopter curves as shown in Figs. 3 and 4 are obtained in  XZ for cases that K=0 and K > 0. What changes according to K is the position at which the curve shifts from concavity to  convexity. The distance from 0 to that point increases as K varies from -1 toward positive.  N N O  EUCLIDEAN INTERPOINT DISTANCE Of I P- ~; RESULT OF MDS  FIG. 8. Examples of JP;} in EM' obtained by MDS from {Q;1 in Fig. 7 and of correspondence between hyperbolic interpoint  distances 6 and Euclidean interpoint distances P under the values of K and a.  doing such has been previously described (Indow, 1968; Indow & Uchizono, 1960). The subject was always included as a point Po  and hence one row of (du) consisted of radial distances do;. If necessary, during the process of filling out a row i, the  definition of unit was shifted from a unit 6ik to another unit 61K according to point P,, as it is not easy for us to estimate  a ratio once it exceeds a certain range. With this kind of estimation, we are in the same situation as some primitive tribe  who counts things in the following way; one, two, three, and many. Within the range, for example, between about 0.3 to 3.0, we  can estimate ratios with certain confidence, especially in the case of perceptual distances. Suppose 6ii were compared to 6ik  (j= 1, 2,...) and 6ii (e.g., l --' 6, 7,...) were compared to SiK and PK is a point in the former group Pj, then  dij.k- 6u a lk  ,  diK.k= 6ik dil.K- SiK  and by definition  dii.k 6" -,  6ik  hence it can be obtained by  dil k = dil-KdiK-k  Thus, elements in a row i are always expressible with the same unit Sik.  As we are ignorant of the information processing by which the subject generates verbal responses dil.k, we cannot claim that  the response dii.k is related in the way as stated above to perceptual distances 6if, 6ik as latent variables. Perhaps a  subjective ratio between 6i, and Sik, if these are regarded as quantities, is converted to a verbal response dij.k as a number  in the following way that du .k = (6iilbik)a with /3 * 1 (e.g., Krantz, 1972; Shepard, 1978). This type of bias in responding  cannot be detected by the check of consistency in judgments, which has been pointed out from the beginning (Indow, 1968; Indow  & Uchizono, 1960). Hence, what we can do at best will be as follows: When obtaining ratio estimations, we should avoid, as far  as possible, such a condition that is likely to make more marked the possible nonlinearity between d and 6. This is the reason  for the unit being chosen not to include extreme ratios. When interpreting the result d, we should keep in mind that the  problem is to see whether we can define from d such a variable 6 according to Eq. (10) that can be interpretable as a  Riemannian distance in accordance with Eq. (1). Whether or not an additional meaning can be attached to 8 so that 8 is really  the latent variable underlying the alley and horopter experiment should be judged from consistency in the final results. It is  widely known that judgment on ratio and judgment on difference do not yield the same scale. However, visual length is a case  where the discrepancy between the two scales is smallest.  HYPERBOLIC AND EUCLIDEAN REPRESENTATIONS OF  INTERSECTIONS OF ALLEYS AND HOROPTERS  The method by which ratio estimations were made is as follows: Because a more complicated procedure was taken in the dark  condition, the illuminated condition is stated first.  Illuminated Condition  According to the results of the alley and horopter experiment described in the second section, {QiI consisting of n = 26  points, were defined for each subject. Fixed points, QQ2, and five points Qa on the x axis, were common for the three  subjects. The subject is represented by Qo and the remaining 18Qi were the results of setting of the subject, i.e.,  intersections between P- or D-alley and horopters, 9 on the left and 9 on the right of the x axis. These were not exactly  symmetric to the x axis. Except the farthest horopter, always four points were on each horopter in addition to one fixed point  Q,, in the center. On the farthest horopter passing through Q,, the separation between P- and D-alleys was small, and only the  intersections with P-alley on both sides were taken so that there were two points in addition to Qn on this horopter. The  whole configuration {Qi} was not presented simultaneously because not only is it too confusing to the subject but also it has  a systematic structure, e.g., all lateral distances between Qi's for the D-alley look the same. At a time, a subset consisting  of about 13Qi semirandomly chosen from {Qi} was presented. In fact, these appeared as a random pattern to the subject and  judgments on perceptual distances starting from point Pi with a point Pk as the definition of unit were made within this  subject in the manner previously described. The two black balls Qi, Qk were set about 2 mm higher than others to make them  easily recognizable. When judgments on the remaining black balls Pj (j * i, k) were made once, either some other points in the  same set were designated as a new pair of Qi, Qk, or another subset of about 13Qi was presented. In this way, the experiment  was continued until dei with the unit e; were obtained once with all possible pairs of the whole set {Qi}. As to interpoint  distances between fixed points Q, Qa on the x axis, judgments were repeated twice because, when the result of MDS, JP, J, was  symmetrized with regard to the x axis, two judgments were available with other distances but not with these distances. In  order to obtain the whole data, eight to nine sessions of about one and a half hours each were necessary with each subject.  Dark Condition  For each subject, {Qi} consisting of 28 points was used. In this case, four intersections with P- and D-alleys were taken on  the farthest horopter as on the remaining horopters and hence n = 28 instead of 26 in the illuminated condition. Five subsets  of Qi, 12 points in each were defined all of which included QQ2, and Qu representing the subject. Remaining Qi were  distributed so that each Qi was contained in two different subsets, e.g., Q, in subsets 1 and 2. A subset was presented as a  whole at a time and five matrices (dii), 12 X 12, were obtained on the basis of two repetitions of  TABLE 2  The First Four Eigenvalues in the Illuminated Condition with 6 in the Hyperbolic Representation and in the Euclidean  Representation  Hyperbolic Euclidean  e A,  A, A, x2 A, A,  T.I. 0.55 0.454 0.082 0.030 0.021 0.102 0.035 0.016  R.S. 0.50 0.330 0.053 0.022 0.012 0.051 0.021 0.013  T.F. 0.35 0.218 0.050 0.016 0.008 0.038 0.015 0.010  Note. In the Euclidean representation, for comparison, A, was multiplied by a constant to make A, equal in value to d, in the  hyperbolic case.  judgments of all possible pairs within each subset.' In total, about 10 h were needed to complete the whole experiment. From  each (du), 12 X 12, {P, }t, t = 1 - 5, was obtained in EM' by MDS with the use of one and common c throughout the five  subsets, and these were finally synthesized by the use of several common points among them as pivots to give the whole  configuration {P,}, 28 in number. In the case of subject, T.I., the result of a subset suggested that some misrecordings might  have taken place during the experiment and the whole {P,} for this subject was defined on the results of the remaining four  subsets.  With each subject, there was one D = (dU) under the illuminated condition and five D's under the dark condition (four for  T.I.). For hyperbolic representation of VS, the procedure described in Fig. 6 was applied to each of these D's. For the sake  of comparison, Euclidean representation of VS was also obtained in which the metric MDS was applied to each of these D's  directly. Examples of values of eigenvalues AR, a result of the metric MDS, under illuminated conditions are given in Table 2.  The P,, always representing fixed stimulus points Qa on the x axis and Po representing the subject appeared on or very close  to the first axis corresponding to the largest eigenvalue A, . In another word, the first axis could be defined as the 4 axis  in Fig. 2. Similarly, when the origin is shifted from the centroid of {P,} to Po, the second axis corresponding to 4 was  always in the direction of the I axis, because {Q,} was of the structure balanced with regard to the x axis. Since {Q,} is of  a rectangular like shape stretching in the direction of x, only A, has a large value and A2 is much smaller. Hence, there was  no abrupt drop in value from A2 to f3. As all Q were on eye level (z = 0) and they are perceived on the same horizontal plane,  m was defined to be 2 0).  ' In this experiment in the dark, when the subject felt it helpful, auxiliary points Qw were introduced in obtaining a ratio  estimate d,,. For example, Su appears more than two times larger than SW two auxiliary points QQb were set in such a way;  QQb appeared on the perceptual straight line between QQ, in that order and d,Q = Sob = S,k and if Sb, appeared 0.4 of  these distances, then d,,.= 2.4. This procedure was once used extensively in a previous experiment under illumination  (Indow, 1975). In the present experiment, Qk was chosen to avoid extreme ratios, and the use of auxiliary points Qu was made  only once or twice in each subset.  Once {P,} in EM2 was obtained, (q~;,qi],) was symmetrized with regard to the ~ axis by averaging two corresponding points on  both sides. Thus the symmetrized configuration {P,} was obtained in which e.g., q~,=q~2, qrl,=-qq2 and six P. about on the ~  axis. Then, theoretical curves of alleys in EM2, Eq. (9), were fitted to two series of P; in {P, }, one for the P-alley and  the other for the D-alley, both on the side qq, > 0. The curves pass through P, by definition and deviation of each of  remaining points P; from the respective curves e, was given by the length of the normal from P, to the curves. When P, was  outside the curve, E, was defined to be positive. Goodness of fit of the two alley curves was evaluated by two indices,  average (AV) and root mean square (RMS) of e, normalized by qpo, (the largest distance), where i covers both sets of P, for P-  and D-alleys. Of all criteria for selecting c in Fig. 6, it was found that these two, [AV of E,] and [RMS of E,]/qpowere the  best.  In order to show how c was chosen according to these criteria, the result under the illuminated condition is given in Fig. 9.  By analysis based on the other criteria, the range of c in which 6 must exist was known with each subject and it was necessary  to search only over this range. As an example, however, the result of the search over a wider range is given with the subject  L.S. At about the same value of c, [AV of E,] passes the line representing 0 (unbiased) and [RMS of e; ]/qpo, becomes minimal.  This value of c was defined to be c and the configurations based upon c was denoted by JP,} in the case of hyperbolic  representation. For Euclidean representation, c was not necessary and the MDS directly applied to (di;) gave the configuration  in E2 which was also denoted by JP,). In the present analysis, the scale of (d;,) was always so defined in advance that do, =  1, where Po, P, represent the subject as a point and the farthest point on the right side, respectively. Numerical values of c  are conditional to this definition of unit.  0  0  a  0  ,oi-.6  De  .8  .7  .5 .+~  0 .2 .4 .6 C .8 1.0 1.2 1..4 C  Fic. 9. Determination of the optimum value of c; c. Three subjects. The illuminated condition.  In contrast with the illuminated condition, there were in the dark condition five subset configurations {Pi}t (four for T.I.)  separately constructed. With each subject, it was possible to select one and the same c for all the subsets, each of which was  of the form as shown in Fig. 9. There was no difficulty in superimposing subset configurations to define one whole  configuration JP,}, 26 X 26. The basic postulate underlying the scaling experiment of S in the present study is that bu  remains the same no matter in which subset configuration Q, and Qj may be contained. The postulate is common to both  conditions, dark and illuminated, since the whole set of Q, were not presented as a whole in either case for the reason stated  in the preceding section. Subsets were chosen not to destroy the size and nature of the whole configuration and, in view of  sensitivity of MDS, it will be said that the postulate was not untolerable.  .5  .4  .3  .2  0  ILLUMINATED  (1977)  FIG. 10. Hyperbolic representations in EM' with values of c and theoretical curves in EM' for Pand D-alleys and horopters by  Eq. (9). The illuminated condition. ( A = P; O, A = D)  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION ON VS  The hyperbolic representations {P;} in EM' finally obtained by the analysis stated in the previous section are shown in Figs.  10 and 11 with theoretical curves based upon c given in the figures. The curves for P- and D-alleys (-, - - - ) were made to  pass through P, of which q~qrl, are given by MDS (the values in the parenthesis). Horopter curves do not necessarily pass PQ  on the ~ axis because they were defined as follows: A family of horopters were generated which were based on c and intersected  the ~ axis at different positions. Then, a curve closest to each series of three points along the q7 axis was chosen by visual  interpolation. As in Figs. 3 and 4,  alternatively represent points on P-alley and the horopter whereas O, A represent  points on D-alley and the horopter.  The Euclidean representations {PI} in E obtained by the direct application of MDS to (d;,) are shown in Figs. 12 and 13. The  experimental fact in XZ as shown in Figs. 3 and 4 does not necessarily exclude the possibility that VS is Euclidean. Even if  VS is Euclidean and P- and D-alleys are the same in VS, if the mapping functions change  DARK (1976)  .6  .5  .3  .2  0  Fta. 11. Hyperbolic representations in EM' with values of c and theoretical curves in EM' for Pand D-alleys and horopters by  Eq. (9). The dark condition. (f, A = P; O, A = D)  ILLUMINATED( 1977)  .9  .8  .7  6  .5  .4  .3  ,2  FIG. 12. Euclidean representations in E2 and theoretical curves for P- and D-alleys and horopters. The trends in the data are  shown by -.-. The illuminated condition. ( A = P; O, A = D; -, what is expected when VS is Euclidean.)  under different observing conditions, then P- and D-alleys in X2 can be different. Certainly, the main direction of scanning  of the eyes while constructing alleys is along the x axis in the case of P and along the y axis in the case of D. If VS is  Euclidean and the discrepancy between P- and D-alleys is due to the difference of scanning direction, then the followings will  be expected in the present experiment of judging 6 since there is no dominant direction of scanning: both sets of P; in E2 (VS  itself in this case), are close to the line passing through P, and are parallel to the ~ axis, and PI on each horopter is  represented by a straight line parallel to the 17 axis. Horizontal lines in the figures were drawn by eye to pass through  respective sets of P1. As to horopters, it is not easy to compare goodness of fit between the hyperbolic representations  (Figs. 10 and 11) and the Euclidean representations (Figs. 12 and 13),  DARK (1976)  .9  .8  .7  6  .5  .4  .3  .2  Fla. 13. Euclidean representations in EZ and theoretical curves for P- and D-alleys and horopters. The trends in the data are  shown by -.-. The dark condition. ( A = P; O, A = D; -, what is expected when VS is Euclidean.)  because the fit is rather poor in both representations and the range is very small. Concerning alleys (... ), there is a clear  trend in Figs. 12 and 13 that P; tends to shift toward left from the straight line as q~, decreases. The trend is less  conspicuous in the illuminated condition. In a previous study under illuminated condition (Indow, 1975); the shift of the same  order of magnitude with Fig. 11 (dark) was observed.  Goodness of fit of the hyperbolic or Euclidean representations in terms of reproducibility of interpoint distances is  summarized in Table 3. To show the agreement between the original and reproduced distances, the product-moment correlation r  and the mean of discrepancies will be most convenient and intuitive. For the Euclidean representation, the data d and p of  {PI} in E were compared. For the hyperbolic representation, the comparison was made in two ways: qp obtained from d through  Eq. (I1) versus qp of {PI} in EM' (the upper row) or d versus 8(q#) obtained  TABLE 3 Goodness of Fit of Hyperbolic and Euclidean Representations  Illuminated Dark  c r AV c min max min max  Hyperbolic  T.I. 0.55 0.9854 -0.0046 0.700 0.9881 0.9970 -0.0025 0.0097 0.9862 0.0037 0.9762 0.9846 0.0222 0.0505 L.S. 0.50 0.9878 0.0010  0.700 0.9715 0.9847 -0.0038 0.0124  0.9874 0.0093 0.9694 0.9840 0.0235 0.0723 T.F. 0.35 0.9922 0.0043 0.755 0.9819 0.9917 -0.0118 0.0082 0.9913 0.0184 0.9723  0.9793 0.0099 0.0402  Euclidean '  T.I. 0.9867 -0.0083 0.9459 0.9975 -0.0066 0.0172  L.S. 0.9882 0.0026 0.9712 0.9871 -0.0042 0.0259  T.F. 0.9923 0.0137 0.9787 0.9925 -0.0163 0.0169  Note. In the hyperbolic representation, the upper row gives comparisons between qp and qp in EM` and the lower row gives  comparisons between d and S(q#), whereas in the Euclidean representation, d and P are compared. In the dark condition, there  are five fittings and the ranges of values are given.  from qP through Eq. (1) (the lower row). In general, the agreement was slightly closer in the former than in the latter,  presumably because the MDS was applied to qp instead to d.  In the hyperbolic case, one extra parameter c was adjusted whereas there was no such free parameter in the Euclidean case,  which makes difficult comparison of goodness of fit between the two cases. However, one thing is clear: JP, J in the Euclidean  case in Figs. 11 and 12 fail to reproduce the essential condition imposed upon the configurations (parallelness and  equidistantness). This finding confirms the result in a previous study (Indow, 1975). On the other hand, the hyperbolic  representations {P;l in EM' are qualitatively in accordance with the theoretical curves of alleys in EM', though  quantitatively the agreement is far less satisfactory. The experiment should be repeated again with an improved design and  with a more reliable procedure to scale perceptual interpoint distances. The number of stimulus points Q, should be larger to  cover the space more densely and perhaps the matrix (dtj) should be left incomplete, etc.  Should the value of curvature K be explicitly given by scale (4), it can be done by the use of radial distances qpo. The role  of K was discussed in detail in the previous article (Indow, 1979) and  .6 .4  .2  .6  FIG. 14. Mapping functions concerning radial distances in EM 2 and an attempt to estimate K. The illuminated condition.  where max q#u corresponds to the perceptual finite distance max qbo for Q at ffnity. In Figs. 14 and 15, qpa is plotted  against physical radial distance e(0, Q) in X2 and also convergence angle y in radians. In fact, most points plotted represent  more than one point in the results. We have no appropriate way of defining max qpo. The asymptote of qpo as an increasing  function of e(0, Q) is too far away to be determined by extrapolation. Logically, max gfio is the point corresponding to y =  0, though this is questionable psychologically. Presumably, what we can do, at best, will be to give  GEOMETRY OF VISUAL SPACE 231  .8  .6  0  n MAXQP6 0.86 K Y - 0.7 L. S.  C .700  f S.9 C M  FIG. 15. Mapping functions concerning radial distances in EM2 and an attempt to estimate K. The dark condition.  the lower bound for K (Indow, 1979). As an attempt, however, the curve as a decreasing function of y was extrapolated to left  and the value of qpo at y = 0 was defined as max qpo. Besides, the curve as an increasing function of e(0, Q) is extended to  have this max qpo as the asymptote. Values of K obtained by Eq. (13) from max qpo are given in the figures. When K and a in  Eq. (5) were estimated simultaneously, the difference between the two conditions, dark and illuminated, consists largely in  the difference in value of a rather than values of K (Table 1). According to the present procedure, the following differences  are pointed out. Under the illuminated condition in comparison with the dark condition, (1) K is closer to 0, (2) max qpo is  smaller, (3) the ratio qpo,/max qpo is smaller, and (4) qpo is more linear as a function of e(0, Q). Notice, under both  conditions, K is bounded by -1, qpo by 1. Results (1) and (2) are related to each other and that max qpo is further smaller  than 1 in the illuminated condition implies that VS under illumination has more room to expand if additional stimuli Q are  included beyond Q, . According to (3), there is more empty intervening space in illuminated condition between the farthest  point P, and the invisible boundary of VS. In the dark, if there is no light point at all, the subject feels as if the whole  darkness is concentrated right in front of his face; 25-40 cm according to Metzger (1930). When {Q;} is introduced in the  dark, VS expands accordingly, but there is no gap between P, and its dark background. When illuminated, VS will expand more,  and the white curtain at the end of line of sight by no means limits the whole VS. The subject feels that more points will be  perceptible beyond P, under the given condition and, if an invisible window at the position of the curtain is open and a  mountain becomes visible, then VS is expandable to include the whole landscape. In other words, the differences between dark  and illuminated conditions, (1)-(4), are in accordance, qualitatively at least, with the phenomenal differences between the  two spaces. In both conditions, K is closer to its limit, -1, than in Table 1 in which K and a were simultaneously obtained by  the use of Luneburg's mapping functions. It is due to the fact that Eq. (5) is of such a form that qpo as a decreasing  function of y intersects the ordinate at a lower point than the curves in Figs. 14 and 15. In other words, if fitted, Eq. (5)  In previous articles (Indow, 1975, 1977) under the illuminated condition it was found that, when radial distance do was  plotted against e(0, Q), the curve intersected the abscissa not at e(0, Q) = 0 but at e(0, Q) > 0, even 50 cm. Namely, the  virtual origin for radial distance tends to be in front of the subject. In the present study, the tendency was noticeable only  with subject T.F. under the illuminated condition (the top plot in Fig. 15) and the shift was of the order of 15 cm. It is  true that radial perceptual distances are felt less tangible and more susceptible to interpretation and attitude in  observation than nonradial perceptual interpoint distances.  Mapping functions in the hyperbolic or Euclidean representations can be obtained by comparng {P; } in EM' (Figs. 10 and 11)  and { Q; } in XZ (Figs. 3 and 4). Configurations obtained by MDS {P,} do not have the same unit with {Q1}, and hence {P;} can  be superimposed upon {Qr} with an appropriate adjustment of its unit (Indow, 1968, 1974b, 1975, 1977). The relation between X  and EM will be given not  in the form of equations like (5) and (6) but only as a graphic illustration. The relation may vary according to stimulus  condition as well as to observational condition like direction of scanning. The basic presupposition in the present approach  is to ascribe all complications stemming from dynamic property of VS to change in the mapping relation between X and EM in  order to retain geometry of VS as simple as possible: R s with constant K. In this approach, it is not necessary any more to  constrain VS frameless and textureless. As the first step, only such VS was dealt with in the present study which again has no  framework, no texture, and all Q, are on the plane of eye level in the range observable without moving the head. That was the  same under both dark and illuminated conditions. The discrepancy between P- and D-alleys was what is expected from the  assumption that VS is hyperbolic and it was the hyperbolic representation of (d;;), not the Euclidean representation, that  gave an understable pattern of {P, }. However, the goodness of fit to JP,} of alley curves with K < 0 was not satisfactory at  all. A number of possibilities will be suggested for that: (1) the scaling of d was not appropriate, (2) K was not constant  within the given VS, and (3) the. geometry of VS was not Riemannian, etc. These problems will be discussed in a separate  article and a word will suffice here, as to (3). It does not matter whether VS is frameless and textureless or not; under a  given condition it has a geometrical structure, but there is no logical reason that the structure must be described well by  one of mathematically well-established geometries. It may well be possible that the discrepancy between P- and D-alleys which  by itself strongy suggests the hyperbolic property of VS is actually a red herring that diverts us into following a false  scent. The present approach will be useful not only in opening up the possibility of including as objects of study VS under  more natural conditions but also as a test to check whether or not we are on the right track.  COMMENTS ON MDS ACCORDING TO RIEMANNIAN METRICS  In contrast to other attempts of MDS in non-Euclidean space (e.g., Lindman & Caelli, 1978), the present method is indirect in  the sense that configuration JP;} is constructed in a Euclidean space EM. Once the data (du) as metrics in R are converted to  Euclidean distances (qp,,) by Eq. (11) or (12), the remaining steps have nothing new from the viewpoint of MDS methodology.'  Equation (11) or (12) is valid only for Riemannian spaces of constant curvature R, and it has to be decided in advance which  point Po, out of n Pi's, should be defined as the origin 0. In the application to VS, the subject as a point in {P;} was  defined as 0. If the color space of constant brightness where colors vary in hue and saturation is regarded as R', it will be  natural to define grey of that brightness as 0. In general however, there will be no  As raised by a referee of this manuscript, it is an interesting question to ask which representation of R in E will be most  appropriate to apply MDS. The advantage of using EM, a particular representation, consists of the follwoing three properties:  (1) no extra dimension is necessary, (2) angles are preserved, (3) the global relation between geodesics S in R and Euclidean  distance p in EM is simple. However, deviations between d and d will be implicitly weighed in a particular way according to  where d is in EM.  particular stimulus point which should be defined as 0 on a priori grounds. No matter which Po is chosen as 0, interpoint  distances q#u of the resulting {P,} give the same information on Riemannian distances 6,j, but the shape of JP,} in EM changes  according to choice of Po. Hence, there will be two approaches; either to give a particular representation {Pj) with a  particular point PO as 0 or to define a representative point for {P, } as 0. The former approach will be appropriate if there  is a point Po which can be defined as 0 on a priori grounds. If the second approach is taken, the centroid of configuration of  points will be a good candidate for Po. When the dimensionality m is anticipated, by applying a nonmetric MDS to the data  (d,j) directly, we can have a configuration of points in E'". Then the centroid and hence distances do; from the centroid Pa  to all points P; are given. Notice that do; are not Euclidean distances in E', e(PO, P), but distances defined from e(PO, P)  through the monotonic relation between the data d,j and e(e,, ej) in general. Hence, do, are comparable with other scaled  distances d j and can be included in (d,j) as an extra row and an extra column. Then, (du), now (n + 1) X (n + 1), will be  used as input to the present method given in Fig. 6.  The two criteria which were used in the present application for determining c cannot be used for other cases. Several other  criteria were tried which have general applicability. Insofar as the data described in the present application are concerned,  the following (R5) and (R6) were found useful in addition to the two particular criteria stated before. As before, AV and RMS  denote average and root mean square, respectively.  I y JA, J, m < n'< n, (R 1) g=1  where Ag are eigenvalues in the order of magnitude obtained in the metric MDS in Fig. 6. With n' and m fixed, such value of c  can be selected as c that maximizes this index.  [AV of (gptj - gpij)], (R2)  [RMS of (gptj - 47p-,j)]/(SD of qpj), (R3) where qp represents e(P,, Pj) in EM for a given value of c and SD denotes the  standard deviation.   product moment correlation coefficient between gpfj and 4p-,j, (R4)  [AV of {dc, - S(gpu) I], (R5)  [RMS of {d,j-6(gpu)}), (R6)  where 6 qpu) represents Riemannian metrics obtained from gpij through (1) or (2). In contrast to (R3), there is no need to  normalize this RMS because S(p) always has the same unit with d. As a matter of course, such value of c should be defined as c  that gives the minimum value of RMS and the value of AV closest to zero.  I am rather skeptical as to what application of MDS we really feel a need for  constructing {Pt} in a non-Euclidean space in order to account for the data (du). If {Pt} is sought for simply as a schematic  representation for the data, because of the robustness of Euclidean representation described in this article, it will not be  necessary in general to use any other space than E' In the case of VS, we have good reason for testing whether it is  hyperbolic or not. Another necessicity for nonEuclidean representation which comes to mind is the application to the Munsell  color space. It is really surprising that the main part of the Munsell color space is embeddable into E' with a sufficient  reproducibility of (du), where du represent scaled perceptual color differences between colors i and j. Such is the case,  provided that judgment on color difference is confined within a certain range (Indow, 1980), and even when the color space is  densely sampled by 178 colors in total. However, in the marginal region for highly saturated colors, there is some indication  that we really need an elliptic representation in this case (Indow & Aoki, 1981). The same algorithm as described herein will  be applied to this problem, too.  REFERENCES  BEALs, R., KRANTz, D. H., & TVERSKY, A. The foundations of multidimensional scaling. Psychological Review, 1968, 75, 127-142.  BLANK, A. A. The Luneburg theory of binocular visual space. Journal of the Optical Society of America, 1953, 43, 717-727.  BLANK, A. A. Analysis of experiments in binocular space perception. Journal of the Optical Society of America, 1958, 48,  911-925.  BLANK, A. A. The Luneburg theory of binocular space perception. In S. Koch (Ed.), Psychology, a study of a science. Study I,  Vol. 1. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1959. Pp. 395-426.  CARROLL, J. D. Individual differences and multidimensional scaling. In R. N. Shepard et al. (Eds.), Multidimensional scaling:  Theory and applications in the behavioral sciences. Theory, Vol. 1. New York: Seminar, 1972.  CARROLL, J. D. & CHANG, J. J. Analysis of individual differences in multidimensional scaling via an Nway generalization of  "Eckart-Young" decomposition. Psychometrika, 1970, 35, 283-319.  HARDY, L. H., RAND, G., RnTLER, M. C., BLANK, A. A., & BOEDER, P., 1953. The geometry of binocular space perception. Knapp  Memorial Laboratories, Institute of Ophthalmology, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons.  INDOW, T. Multidimensional mapping of visual space with real and simulated stars. Perception and Psychophysics, 1968, 3, 45-53.  INDOW, T. On geometry of frameless binocular perceptual space. Psychologia, 1974, 17, 50-63. (a) INDOW, T. Applications of  multidimensional scaling in perception. In E. C. Carterette & M. P. Friedman (Eds.), Handbook of perception, Vol. 2, Chap. 14.  New York: Academic Press, 1974, 493-525. (b) INDOW, T. An application of MDS to study of binocular visual space. U.S.-Japan  Seminar: Theory, methods and applications of multidimensional scaling and related techniques, University of California, August  20-24, San Diego, Calif., 1975.  INDOW, T. A mathematical analysis of binocular visual space under illumination with no a priori assumption on mapping  functions. 9th Report. Department of Psychology, Keio University, Tokyo, 1977.  INDOW, T. Alleys in visual space. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1979, 19, 221-258.  INDOW, T. Global color metrics and color-appearance systems. Color Research and Applications, 1980, 5, 5-12.  INDOW, T., & AOKI, N. Multidimensional mapping of 178 Munsell colors. Color, Research and Applications, to appear.  INDow, T., INOUE, E., & MATSUSHIMA, K. An experimental study of the Luneburg theory of binocular space perception, 1. The 3-  and 4-point experiments. Japanese Psychological Research, 1962, 4, 6-16. (a)  INDow, T., INOUE, E., & MATSUSHIMA, K. An experimental study of the Luneburg theory of binocular space, 2. The alley  experiments. Japanese Psychological Research, 1962, 4, 17-24. (b)  INDOW, T., INOUE, E., & MATSUSHIMA, K. An experimental study of the Luneburg theory of binocular space, 3. The experiments in  a spacious field. Japanese Psychological Research, 1963, 5, 10-27. INDOW, T., & UCHIZONo, T. Multidimensional mapping of  Munsell colors varying in hue and chroma. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1960, 59, 321-329.  INDow, T., & WATANABE, T. Parallel- and distance-alleys on horopter plane in the dark. Studies in the Cognitive Sciences,  School of Social Sciences, University of California, Irvine, Calif., No. 18, 1982. JACOBY, S. L. S., KOWALIK, J. S., & Pizzo,  J. T. Iterative methods for nonlinear optimization problems. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1972.  KRANTZ, D. H. Rational distance functions for multidimensional Psychology, 1967, 4, 226-245.  KRANTZ, D. H. A theory of magnitude estimation Mathematical Psychology, 1972, 9, 168-199. KRUSKAL, J. B. Multidimensional  scaling by optimizing Psychometrika, 1964, 29, 1-27. (a)  KRUSKAL, J. B. Nonmetric multidimensional 115-129.(b)  LINDMAN, H., & CAELLI, T. Constant curvature Psychology, 1978, 17, 89-109.  LINGOES, J. C. (Ed.). Geometric representations scaling. Ann Arbor: Mathesis, 1977.  LOBELL, F. "Landkarten" der nichtenklidischen Vereinigung, 1950, 54, 4-23.  LUKAS, J. Die Struktur des Sehraumes: Ein Entscheidungsexperiment zu den Theorien  frontal Parallelen von Blank, Foley, and Luneburg. Ph.D. thesis, Universitit Regensburg, 1981. LUNEBURG, R. K. The metric of  binocular visual space. Journal of the Optical Society of America, 1950, 40, 637-642.  LUNEBURG, R. K. Mathematical analysis of binocular vision. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Univ. Press, 1947.  LUNEBURG, R. K. Metric methods in binocular visual perception. Studies and essays. Courant anniversary volume, 1948. Pp.  215-240.  METZGER, W. Optische Untersuchungen am Gonzfeld. II. Zur Phanomenologie des homogenen Ganzfeld. Psychologische Forschung,  1930, 13, 6-29.  SMART, J. S. Modern geometries, 2nd ed. Monterey, Ca: Brooks/Cole, 1978.  SHEPARD, R. N. On the status of "direct" psychophysical measurement. C. W. Savage (Ed.), Minnesota studies in the philosophy  of science, Vol. IX. Minneapolis: Univ. of Minnesota Press, 1978. SHEPARD, R. N., ROMNEY, A. K., & NERLOVE, S. B. (Eds.).  Multidimensional scaling: Theory and applications in the behavioral sciences. Theory, Vol. I.New York: Seminar, 1972.  SHIFFMAN, S. S., REYNOLDS, M. L., & YOUNG, F. W. Introduction to multidimensional scaling: Theory, methods, and applications.  New York: Academic Press, 1981.  TORGERSON, W. S. Theory and methods of scaling. New York: Wiley, 1958.  TVERSKY, A., & KRANTZ, D. H. The dimensional representation and the metric structure of similarity data. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 1970, 7, 572-596.  YOUNG, F. W. A model for polynomial conjoint analysis algorithms. In R. N. Shepard et al. (Eds.), Multidimensional scaling:  Theory and applications in the behavioral sciences. Theory, Vol. I.New York: Seminar, 1972.  scaling. Journal of Mathematical and cross-modality matching. Journal of goodness of fit to a nonmetric hypothesis. scaling: A  numerical method. Psychometrika, 1964, 29, Riemannian scaling. Journal of Mathematical of relational data: Readings in  multidimensional Ebene. Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker der visuellen