10.1016/0022-2496(82)90003-7
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 26, 237-251 (1982)  A Transformational Analysis of Form Recognition under Plane Isometries  MOU-TA CHEN  State University of New York at Brockport, Brockport, New York  AND  KATHLEEN CHEN  Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, New York  Several theorems on transformation theory were developed. These theorems establish a chain of plane isometric subgroups, three  series of plane isometric normal subgroups, and a technique for characterizing a geometric element by the minimal number of  its invariant points under an isometry. An experiment in form recognition was designed and conducted to test the theorems. The  experimental results agree with the theoretical models. An order (from best to worst) of recognition of the transformed images  is constructed under the identity, translation, rotation, and reflection or glide reflection. This order is quantified by a  scale of related invariant points -1, 0, 1, 2 under the respective isometries. For the rotated images, the larger the angular  departure from the upward vertical ray through the centroid of a form, the less probable is the correct recognition of its  image. The reflected and glide reflected images show the oblique effect. Hence the importance of directionality in form  recognition is demonstrated. The results also show that in a chain or a series, the smaller an isometric subgroups, the easier  the recognition of its images. Thus the chain and the series with their invariants serve as models for a principle of  simplicity in form recognition.  INTRODUCTION  Transposition in the orientation of a figure often has profound effect on its appearance, although there is no change in  internal geometry of the figure. The effect of orientation on recognition of shape was studied by Dearborn (1899), Gibson &  Robinson (1935) and Arnoult (1954). Their findings suggested that 90rotations had at least as much of an effect as 180 rotations. Rock (1973) found the effect to be maximal for rotations through 45and 90 and minimal for left-right reversals.  These transformational operations, rotations and left-right reversals, are special geometric transformations called  isometries. A transformation of the plane is a oneto-one map of the points of the plane onto themselves. An isometry is a  transformation that preserves distances; if an isometry maps points P and Q into P' and Q', respectively, then the distance  between P' and Q' is the same as the distance between 237  0022-2496/82 82.00  480/26/3-4  Copyright C 1982 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  P and Q. Due to its distance-preserving property, an isometry also preserves angles and the area of the interior region of a  simple figure. Hence it sends a figure into a congruent figure.  Transformations have played an increasingly important role in the study of form recognition. Cassirer (1944) related the  invariant properties of shapes that underwent transformations to perceptual constancy. Gibson (1950) suggested that the whole  problem of pattern-perception might be better examined through the geometry of transformation. The advent of information  theory with emphasis on the quantification of forms has given an impetus to the transformational approach to the study of  forms. Zusne (1970) proposed the use of translation, enlargement or reduction, rotation, and reflection as transpositional  parameters of forms. Changes in these parameters, as he argued, affect neither the information content of the shape nor its  self-congruence. Of the five operations only translation, rotation, and reflection are isometries.  In recent years, studies of form in orientational changes have been dominated by the concept of mental rotation. Behavioral  evidence seems to suggest that in geometric transformations of forms human observers can mentally transform the internal  representation of various shapes in order to make certain decisions about them. Shepard & Metzler (1971) reported that, when  subjects determined whether two objects were identical, the time it took them to do so was proportional to the angle between  the two objects: the viewers behaved as though they mentally rotated one of the objects at a constant rate until both were at  the same orientation. A series of reaction time experiments which explored the "mental rotation" of visual stimuli followed  (cf., Cooper & Shepard, 1973; Corballis, Zbrodoff, & Roldan, 1976; Corballis, Zbrodoff, Shetzer, & Butler, 1978; Hock &  Tromley, 1978; Pylyshyn, 1979; Shepard & Judd, 1976; Skinner & Stretch, 1976). Another aspect of mental transformation is  mental size transformation. Bundesen & Larsen (1975) reported that reaction time for correct reaction to test pairs of figures  of different sizes but of same shape and orientation consistently increased linearly as a function of the linear size ratio of  the figures. The results suggested that the task was performed by a gradual process of mental size transformation of a member  of the pair of figures to the format of the other.  A set of transformations with composition as a binary operation forms a group or an abstract group, if it contains the inverse  of each and the product of any two. When the order of the factors of the product is immaterial, the group is an Abelian or a  commutative group. A subset of a group is a subgroup if the subset is a group under the binary operation of the group. The set  of all transformations of the plane with composition is a group and the set of plane isometries forms a subgroup denoted by M  of the plane transformational group EZ (Dodge, 1972). The first attempt to apply the concept of group to perception was made  by Helmholtz in 1868. His endeavor had attracted little attention until Cassirer (1944) resurrected the role of groups in  perception. The group theoretical interpretation, as Cassirer saw it, enables us to conceptualize perceptual phenomena in  simple and precise forms and thus to disentangle them from difficulties and ambiguities. Cassirer suggested the use of group  structures and the concept of invariance as common denominators of certain mathematical and psychological problems. Gibson  (1950) put the group theory into practice by classifying the family of visual forms into mutually exclusive transformtional  group categories.  In 1872, Klein defined geometry as the study of those properties of a set that were invariant under transformations of some  transformational group (Dodge, 1972). The key concepts of Klein's definition are transformational group and invariance.  Klein's Erlanger program was introduced to psychology by Hoffman (1964) who defined a certain psychology as the study of  percepts of the human organism that were invariant under transformations. Based on Hubel and Wiesel's (1963) findings in the  cat and monkey cortex, Hoffman (1966) selected Lie groups of transformations under which the invariances of patterns served as  visual constancies. Shape constancy, size constancy, motion invariance, efferent binocularity, and circular memory are  respective perceptual invariances under the affine group, dilatational group, twodimensional Lorentz group, the group of  hyperbolic rotations in plane time, and the group of rotations in plane time. Hoffman's proposal of a psychological Erlanger  program offers a new approach to the study of perceptual invariance and form recognition. Koler & Perkins (1969) constructed  an Abelian group of eight transformations of letters: the identity, a halfturn, a vertical reflection, a horizontal  reflection, and the composite transformations of each of these four isometries with a vertical reflection. An interesting  point of their findings was that the perceptual decoding of the transformations did not follow the same rules as those  governing their geometrical construction. Caelli (1976) demonstrated how specific properties of vector fields (namely, their  local tangent vector information) and interactions as measured by commutability can predict the ease with which the visual  system can extract contours. He concluded that the Lie algebra model with its group structure and visual invariances has  greater theoretical scope than other languages proposed for representing human pattern perception. There are, however,  limitations on grouptheoretical applications to form recognition. Julesz (1971) pointed out that transformations did not  always have a group structure for psychology and suggested that perceptual invariances were closer to cooperative phenomena  than to transformational groups.  Transformed forms under isometries are not only shape invariant, but also size invariant. The images under the identity. are,  in addition, position invariant. Recent studies in computer vision have hypothesized that the size and position invariance in  perception are encoded in striate cortex by either analysis of simplex features such as lines and angles, or piecewise Fourier  transforms (Cavanagh, 1978). Cavanagh commented on the possibility that a spatial frequency analysis could lead to a size  encoding of visual patterns, and a similarity between a log polar frequency representation and the actual organization of  frequency and orientation axes in the striate cortex.  One purpose of the present study was to develop a transformation theory to describe and explain recognition of plane isometric  images. The isometries under study represent the four major types of isometries in the plane isometric group, i.e.,  translation, rotation, reflection, and glide reflection. The first three isometries will be called primitive isometries and  the last composite isometry. A translation moves every point the same distance in the same direction. A rotation moves every  point about a fixed point through a given angle. A line reflection or simply a reflection carries each point into its image on  the other side of the line such that the line is the perpendicular bisector of the segment determined by the point and its  image. A glide reflection is a combination of a reflection and a translation whose direction is parallel to the line of the  reflection. An experiment was designed to compare the results with the transformation theory.  TRANSFORMATION THEORY  This section comprises the development of a group structure of the isometric group by establishing chains and series of  isometric subgroups and of a technique to enumerate the invariant point(s) under an isometry.  It is shown that a plane isometry is a product of at most three reflections (Dodge, 1972). A translation is a product of two  reflections whose lines of reflections are parallel, wheras a rotation is a product of two reflections whose lines of  reflection intersect at a point, the center of rotation. Since a glide reflection is a composite isometry of a translation and  a reflection, it is a product of three reflections with nonparallel and nonconcurrent lines of reflection. A reflection is a  product of itself and the identity may be considered a translation moving every point 0 distance in any direction. Hence the  plane isometries may be classified into two types: a direct isometry which is a product of an even number of reflections and  an opposite isometry that is a product of an odd number of reflection(s). The direct isometries-the identity, translations,  and rotations-form a subset M+ of the set of plane isometries M.  The four types of isometries result in different numbers of invariant (fixed) points in the plane. While a translation has no  invariant point, a rotation holds exactly one point, the center, invariant. A reflection keeps a line, the line of reflection,  invariant; whereas the identity leaves the whole plane invariant. Since a glide reflection is a composite isometry of a  translation and a reflection, it leaves no invariant point.  THEOREM 1. The following ascending chain of plane isometric subgroups exists:  {i}=TcM+ c M.  Proof. Since M is a subgroup of EZ (Dodge, 1972) each isometry has an inverse of its own kind. It suffice to show the closure  of the subgroups of the middle segment of the chain, T c M+. We find it expedient to identify the product of two isometries by  summing the number of reflections of its factors. A direct isometry has 0, 1, or an infinite number of invariant points.  Suppose that the product of two translations has exactly one invariant point. Then both factors share this common invariant  point and  each factor must have at least an invariant point. This is absurd, for each factor is a translation with 0 invariant pont.  Hence the product is a translation with no invariant point or the identity with an infinite number of invariant points. Thus  translations form a group.  The product of two rotations is a rotation or a translation, depending on the sum of the angle measures through which the  rotations are defined (Yaglom, 1962). The product of a translation and a rotation has an even number of reflections and,  hence, is a direct isometry (specifically a rotation). The closure property ensures the formation of a group by the direct  isometries.  For Theorem 2, the following definition is given: A subgroup N of a group S is a normal subgroup or an invariant subgroup of  S, denoted by N d S, if sNs-' = N for every s in S where s-' is the inverse transformation of s.  THEOREM 2. The following two ascending normal series of the plane isometries exist:  {i } 4 T d M+,  {i}<T<M.  (2) (3)  Proof. The trivial group {i } is a normal subgroup of T, because tit-' = tt-' = i. It was shown that T is a group in Theorem  1. To show that T is a normal subgroup of M+ or M, we use indirect proof. Assume that sts` has an invariant point A, i.e., sts  -' (A) = A, where s is an isometry. If s is a translation, so is s `, and hence, sts -' is a translation. If s is not a  translation, we apply s-' to both sides of the equation and obtain ts-'(A)=s-'(A). This means that t has an invariant points  s`(A), a contradiction to the fact that t is a translation and thus has no invariant point. Therefore sts-' has no invariant  point. An isometry with no invariant point is either a translation or a glide reflection. The latter case is ruled out,  because sts-', a product of an even number of reflections, is a direct isometry. The only direct isometry with no invariant  point is a translation. Hence sts-' is a translation and sTs-' = T for every s in M or M+.  In constructing our target figures, each was placed in a circle. All rotated images were made about the centroids of the plane  forms and all reflected images were drawn such that the reflection lines passed through their controids. Since no extremely  skewed form was chosen, all rotations shared a common center N. Such a set of isometries that leaves the point N invariant  forms a group IN called an isotropy group (Guggenheimer, 1967) or a kaleidoscopic group.  THEOREM 3. The following ascending normal series of the isotropy group exists:  {i} a RN a IN, (4)  where RN represents the set of all rotations with the center N.  Proof. Applying the theorems that every rotation can be decomposed into a product of two reflections such that both lines of  reflection pass through the center of the rotation and that the product of three reflections whose reflection lines are  concurrent at a point is a reflection whose line passes through the concurrency, it can be easily seen that the product of two  rotations about the same center is a rotation about the same center, that the product of a rotation and a reflection is a  reflection and that the product of two reflections whose lines are concurrent at a point is a rotation about the same point.  To show that orQ-' or rr, rr, ' is a rotation, we factor each rotation into a product of two reflections 6iaj. Hence ar6-'=  a6, a, a-'=o(a,a3a-')=au,=r2 and  r, rr, ' = a, 626403 U261 = (6, a264)(63626,) = 6665 = r3.  THEOREM 4. If an isometry holds two distinct points fixed, it keeps every point on the line determine by the two points  invariant. If an isometry holds three distinct noncollinear points fixed, it leaves every point in the plane determined by the  three points invariant.  Proof. Given two distinct points A and B and a point C on line AB, if C = A or C = B, C is invariant. Otherwise C falls in  exactly one of the following cases: A lies between C and B, C lies between A and B, and B lies between A and C. Consider the  case when C is between A and B. Let f be an isometry such that f (A) = A, f (B) = B, and f (C) = C'. By the definition of  betweenness (Moise, 1964), AB =A C + CB, where AB, AC, CB are distances between the respective two points. Now under f, A 'B'  = A 'C' + C'B'. Since f preserves distances, AB = A'B' and hence, AC + CB = A 'C' + C'B' = AC' + C'B. Therefore C = C'.  To prove the second part of the theorem, let D, E, F be three distinct noncollinear points, X be a different point in the  plane, and g be an isometry such that g(D) = D, g(E) = E, and g(F) = F. If X lies on a line determined by any pair of points  D, E, and F, X is invariant by the above proof. If X does not lie on any line determined by the points D, E, and F, join D and  X. Then line DX either intersects line EF or is parallel to it. If they intersect, let the point of intersection be Y. Since Y  is on line EF, Y is invariant. Now X lies on line DY, where D and Y are invariant and by the above proof X is invariant. If  line DX is parallel to line EF, X lies on either the right or the left side of point D on line DX. Let X lie on the right side  of D as given in Fig. l; X and E lie on different sides of line DF. By plane separation postulate (Moise, 1964), lines XE and  DF intersect at point Z. Since Z lies on line DF, Z is invariant. Similarly X lies on line EZ, X is invariant. If X lies on  the left side of point D on the parallel line, it is easy to see that lines XF and DE intersect and X is invariant.  A. Method  EXPERIMENT  Purpose. The experiment is designed to test the theorems of the above transformation theory as applied to the area of visual  perception.  FIGURE I  Subjects. Seventy-six students of Rochester Institute of Technology participated in an approximately one-hour experimental  session. Forty-eight of the subjects were male and 28 were female. They were divided into three groups.  Stimuli. Kodalith slides of computer generated forms were used for both training and test trials. For training trials the  stimuli were the five angular forms illustrated in Fig. 2; they were generated by Attneave and Arnoult's (1956) Method 1 for  the construction of random nonsense shapes. The five angular forms depicted in Fig. 2 represents five levels of rated  complexity-6, 8, 12, 16, 24 points.  Stimuli used in test trials were 100 Kodalith slides of which five were the angular identity forms. Fifteen were the five  angular forms translated or moved along lines with angles of inclination of 45 -45 and 0 Thirty were the five angular  forms rotated about the centers with clockwise angular departures of 30 60 90 1201, 150 and 180from the upward  vertical axis. Thirty-five were the five angular forms reflected in 0 15 30 45 60 75 and 90angular departure of  reflection lines from the vertical axis. Fifteen were the five angular forms moved along lines with inclination angles of 45  -45 0and then reflected in parallel lines under glide reflection.  Note that a reflected image of a particular angle is twice the angular departure of lines from the vertical axis. This is due  to the symmetrical phenomenon in reflection that the included angle between the figure and reflection line is doubled to form  the included angle between the figure and its reflected image.  Procedure. During the training period subjects were given written instructions to study five angular forms to be projected on  the screen. With the written instructions were illustrations of a sample form and its rotated images, reflected images,  translated images, and glide reflected images. All questions were answered to ensure that all subjects understood the  different types of transformations. Translated images were explained as shifted images and glide reflected images as images  shifted then reflected. Following the instructions subjects were given two study trials of the set of five angular forms which  were projected singly for one minute each on the screen. After the study trials subjects were each given an answer sheet and  written instructions on how to mark their discrimination choices on the answer sheet. Test trials followed immediately; the  trials consisted of presentation of 100 Kodalith slides of computer generated forms that were arranged in ransom order. The  test forms were presented tachistoscopically for 1-sec duration using a Carousel projector and Stoelting tachistoscope. The  experimenter called out aloud the slide number prior to each slide projection and allowed time for all subjects to indicate  their recognition by marking on the appropriate columns of the answer sheets following each test trial.  B. Results and Discussion  Table 1 shows the recognition data for images under the isometries in the order of the identity, translations, rotations,  glide reflections, and reflections. Let c denote the  TABLE 1  M SD  Means, Standard Deviations, Percentages of Recognized   Images under Various Isometries   Identity Translation Rotation Glide reflection Reflection  i t r g a  4.72 4.45 4.00 3.53 3.30  .62 .67 .75 1.06 1.13  94.40 89.00 80.00 70.60 66.00  recognizability of figures under isometries, and let T, R, G, and X denote the sets of translations, rotations, glide  reflections, and reflections, respectively. Our findings ordered the four types of isometries in the following decreasing  sequence:  c({i}) > c(T) > c(R) > c(G) > c(E), (5)  where the significance level by 2-tail t test for each inequality was <.001 except the inequality between c(G) and c(E) which  was at .05 significance level. The graded degree of difficulty in recognition of images under the various isometries cannot be  explained by the feature-extraction theories of shape recognition that predicted invariance of recognition under rotation or  reflection (Deutsch, 1962 or Milner, 1974).  In Table 2 the data for recognition of images under rotations is parallel to the reports by Shepard & Metzler (1971) and  Cooper (1975) on mental rotation in which larger angular displacement required longer reaction time for recognition. The  present findings indicate that the larger the angular displacement, the more difficult it was for the rotated image to be  recognized. While the increment of reaction time for the mental rotation studies was represented by a linear function, the  increment of difficulty in recognition in the present study was represented by a nonlinear function as shown in Fig. 3. The  figure shows that the seven rotations formed four sets: {r(0)}, {r(30)}, {r(60), r(90) r(120)}, and {r(150), r(180)}, with no  significant difference in recognition of the figures under the isometries within each set, but with significant difference in  recognition between any pair of rotations from different sets. This grouping of the seven rotations establishes the following  monotonic decreasing sequence:  c(r(o)) > c(r(30)) > c(r(60)),z c(r(90),z c(r(120))  > *(150)) ;z c(r(180)), where,: denotes a statistically insignificant relation.  60 -~  60 120 180  Degree of Angular Departure from Vertical  FIG. 3. Recognition in percentage of rotated images with angular departure in degrees from the vertical axis. Measures with  statistically significant difference are joined by dotted line segment, while those without are connected with solid line  TABLE 2 Significance Levels for Identity, Rotations, and Reflections  Displacement  angles 00 300 600  Identity (<.001) (<.001) (<.001)  0<.O1 <.001 (<.01) (<.001)  300 <.O1 (n.s.)  60 90 1200  900 1200 1500 180 (<.001) (<.001) (<.00I) (<.001)  <.001 <.001 <.001 <.001  (<.001) (<.001) (<.001) (<.Ol)  <.05 =.001 <.001 <.001  (<.001) (n.s.) (<.001) (n.s.)  n.s. n.s. <.O1 <.O1  (<.001) (n.s.) (<.Ol) (n.s.)  'n.s. <.Ol =.001  (<.00I (<.00I (<.001)   <.O1 <.01   (<.Ol) (n.s.)  150n.s. (=.001)  Note. Rotations are not in parentheses; reflections are in parentheses. Tested by two tail t test; n.s. = not significant.  The difference in recognition of reflected images is also shown in Table 2, with the order (from best to worst recognized  images) being: o(0) or the left-right reflection; followed by images under a(30), x(180), or the up-down reflection, a(60),  0(120); 0(150); and finally the least recognized images under 0(90). This perceptual order may be shown by the following  monotonic decreasing sequence:  c(a(0)) > c(a(30)) ~t- c(a(180)) ~z, c(a(60)) ~z- c(a(120))  > *(150)) > c(a(90)).  The difference in recognition of the images under the reflection in lines with a departure of 15steps from the vertical axis  parallels Chen & Chen's report (1981) on reflected images. In Chen and Chen's report, the vertical reflection proved least  disturbing in form recognition, whereas a slight change of direction of reflection line required significantly longer time.  A comparison of the recognition of the rotated and reflected images is given in Table 3. It shows that with the same angular  displacement of a figure from the vertical axis reflected images were consistently more difficult to recognize than rotated  images. In a parallel study of the reaction time required to recognize rotated and reflected letters and digits, Corballis,  Zbrodoff, Shetzer, & Butler (1978) reported that the latencies to identify reflected characters were consistently longer than  those to identify the rotated characters, that the difference was least when the characters were upright, and that the effect  of angular orientation was more pronounced in the  TABLE 3  Means, Standard Deviations, Percentages, and Significance Levels of Recognition of Rotation and Reflection with Displacement  Angles and Corresponding Reflection Lines  Displacement angles 0306090120150180 Rotation M 4.72 4.40 4.08 4.14 4.04 3.67 3.62  r SD .62 .68 .93 1.11 1.19 1.10 1.31  % 94.40 88.00 81.60 82.20 80.80 73.40 72.40  Reflection lines 0153045607590 Reflection M 3.92 3.51 3.39 2.57 3.39 3.03 3.45  a SD 1.16 1.30 1.39 1.21 1.47 1.33 1.40  % 78.40 70.20 67.80 51.40 67.80 60.60 69.00  P <.001 <.001 <.001 <.001 <.001 <.001 <.001 n.s.  Note. Tested by two tail t test; n.s. = not significant  reflected images than the rotated ones. The superiority of recognition of rotated images to that of reflected images may be  explained by cerebral dominance. Bradshow, Bradley, & Patterson (1976) found evidence for normal letters to leave stronger  memory traces in the dominant cerebral hemisphere than the mirror-reversed letters by presenting both types of letters in the  right visual field. The poorer recognition of reflected images in our study may be explained in terms of the process of  mirror-image generalization, involving homotopic transfer of memory traces between the two halves of the brain such that  registration of a pattern leaves memory traces both for the pattern itself and for its left-right mirror image (Achim &  Corballis, 1977; Corballis & Beale, 1970, 1976). The subjects in our study were exposed in the training session to the target  figures in the version we considered as normal. Hence the reflected traces that depended on interhemispheric transfer rather  than on direct input were weaker than the normal ones.  APPLICATION OF TRANSFORMATION THEORY  This section compares the experimental results with transformation theory using the inclusion relation of subgroups and the  number of invariant point(s) to describe the ordering of recognizability of the images under the isometries of different  subgroups.  We define function l {ascending chains or ascending normal series of plane isometric subgroups } -i {descending sequences of  recognizability of the images under the isometries of the subgroups l by  where G, H, and J are isometric subgroups. Applying f to chains (1), series (2) -(4) developed in transformation theory, we  get the following descending sequences:  COW > c(T) > c(M+) > c(M), (6)  CO i }) > c(T) > c(M), (8)  C(M) > c(RN) > c(IN). (9)  On the other hand, sequence (5) from our experiment implies c({i})>c(T)>c(TUR)>c(TURUGUZ'), c({i }) > c(T) > c(T U R),  c({i }) > c(T) > c(T U R U G U E),  and  c({i})>c(R)>c(RUE).  Since M+ = T U R and M = T U R U G U E, sequence (5) agrees with sequences (6-8). Now RN c R, E', c E', and IN = RN U E,,  where the lines 1 of reflection all pass through the common center of rotation N. Hence sequence (5) concurs with sequence (9).  Since the product of opposite isometries are not closed in the algebra, it is natural to exclude them from the plane isometric  group M in order to form a subgroup. The exclusion of the inferior recognition of the images under opposite isometries from  the plane isometric group M ensures the superior recognition of the direct isometric subgroup M+. Similarly the formation of  the rotational subgroup by eliminating the reflections from the isotropy group enhances the recognizability of its images.  Another reason for the superior judgment of direct isometries to opposite isometries is the difference in complexity in mental  operation. A translation or a rotation can be performed by mentally gliding or turning a figure in a twodimensional plane, but  a reflection or a glide reflection requires mentally flipping a plane figure in three-dimensional space. It is natural to  suggest that a mental operation in space requires more effort than a mental operation in a plane and that the latter is less  complex than the former. This may explain why direct isometries induce more easily recognized images than opposite isometries.  Let A', B', and C' be the respective images of three noncollinear points A, B, and C under an isometry. Draw a curve through  A, B, and C in that order and a curve through A', B', and C' in that order. If both curves are in the same direction,  clockwise or counterclockwise, then we say that the isometry preserves the sense of triangle ABC. If one curve is clockwise  and the other is counterclockwise, we say that the isometry reverses the sense of triangle ABC. Direct isometries preserve the  sense of a triangle, while opposite isometries reverse its sense, i.e., the sense of a triangle is invariant under direct  isometries, while it is changed under opposite isometries.  Through the centroid of a form, an upward vertical ray may be constructed as in Fig. 2. The invariants under the isometries in  sequence (6) may be used to predict the sequential increase of ease in recognition of their images. The invariants under the  isometries of M include segment lengths, angle measures, concurrence of lines, collinearity of points, and congruence which  means same shape and equal enclosed area. Direct isometries in M+ have an additional invariant, the sense of a triangle.  Translations in T have one more invariant, the vertical ray, and the identity i has all these invariants plus  position-invariant. Similarly in series (7)-(9) a normal subgroup has more invariants ban its normal supergroup. The  invariants under the isometries of a subgroup or a normal subgroup constitute a perceptual constancy. A perceptual constancy  which occurs when the observer is at a standstill but the external objects change position falls into the Julesz (1971)  category of perceptual constancies of the second kind. In a chain or a series, the smaller the subgroup or the normal  subgroup, the more invariants under its isometries. The more invariants, the less complex is the information of the images.  The less complex information, the simpler the perceptual outcome and the simpler the perceptual outcome, the easier the  recognition. Thus the chain and series with their invariants serve as models for a principle of simplicity in form recognition.  Of the invariant properties, the invariant set of points plays an important role in our description and explanation of form  recognition. Let A be a nonempty set of points of the Euclidean plane and f be an isometry. We say that f leaves A pointwise  invariant, if f (a) = a for every point a in A. We define a related invariant set of points under the four major types of  isometries as a pointwise invariant set under a primitive isometry, or the larger invariant set of the two factor primitive  isometries under a composite isometry.  Favorable conditions for recognition are provided by the isometries that preserves the vertical ray, the sense of a triangle  or the position of the form. Under the identity, all of these three conditions are invariant and, hence, an image can be  recognized with most ease. A translation which is not subject to the restriction of having any invariant point preserves the  vertical ray and the sense, and induces easily recognized images. The invariant point hinders a rotation from preserving the  vertical ray and makes the image of a form difficult to recognize. The greater alteration of the direction of the vertical  ray, the more difficult it is to recognize the image. Since it is almost impossible for a reflection or a glide reflection to  keep a related line invariant and to maintain the uprightness of the vertical ray, its image becomes most difficult to  recognize.  We further define the minimum number of the related invariant points of an isometry as the smallest number of invariant points  that enable it to keep invariant the largest related geometric element such as a point, a line or a plane. By Theorem 4, the  minimum numbers of related invariant points of the identity, a translation, a rotation, and a reflection or a glide reflection  are 3, 0, 1, and 2, respectively. For the set of integers, -1 is the additive inverse of 1, i.e., -1 + 1 = 0; but in the  finite number system modulo 4, 3 is the additive inverse of 1, i.e., 3 + 1 =- 0. We may assign -1 as the minimum number of  invariant points to the identity. The sequence  of related invariant points 3, 0, 1, 2 becomes -1, 0, 1, 2. It is convenient to use the new sequence -1, 0, 1, 2 as a scale  for perceptual judgment. Consider the subgroup of translations T which consists of the identity with minimum number -1 and  translations with minimum number 0. The maximum of the minimum numbers of T is 0. Similarly the maximum of the minimum numbers  of M+ is 1 and that of M is 2. We note that the sequences of the maxima of the isometric subgroups in chain (1), sequences  (2), (3), and (4) are, respectively, -1, 0, 1, 2; -1, 0, 1; -1, 0, 2 and -1, 1, 2.  Given two images, their ease of recognition may be predicted by enumerating the related invariant points of their isometries  and checking with the scale of invariant points. In the modified scale, the larger the number of related invariant points  under the isometry, the less probable is the recognition of its image. There is no significant difference between the  recognition of two different translated images, for the number of related invariant points of all translations is 0. For  rotated images, we measure the angular departure from the upward vertical ray. The larger the angular displacement, the less  probable is the correct recognition of the image. The reflected and glide reflected images show the oblique effect (Appelle,  1972) as the images in vertical reflection lines are most easily recognized, followed by those in the horizontal reflection  lines and finally the images in oblique reflection lines are the most difficult to recognize.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  The authors thank Professor Evelyn Culbertson, School of Computer Science, Rochester Institute of Technology, for generating  the computer graphic forms used in this study. Address reprint requests to Mou-ta Chen, 5 Trailwood Circle, Rochester, New  York 14618.  REFERENCES  ACHIM, A., BG CORBALLIS, M. C. Minor-image equivalence and the anterior commissure. Neuropsychologia, 1977, 15, 475--078.  APPELLE, S. Perception and discrimination as a function of stimulus orientation: The "oblique effect" in man and animals.  Psychological Bulletin, 1972, 78, 266-278.  ARNOULT, M. D. Shape discrimination as a function of the angular orientation of Experimental Psychology, 1954, 47, 323-328.  ATTNEAVE, F., 8G ARNOULT, M. D. The quantitative Psychological Bulletin, 1956, 53, 452-471.  BRADSHAW, J., BRADLEY, C., & PATTERSON, K. The perception and identification patterns. Quarterly Journal of Experimental  Psychology, 1976, 28, 221-246. BUNDESEN, C., BC LARSEN, A. Visual transformation of size. Journal of Experimental Human  Perception and Performance, 1975, 1, 214-220.  CAELLI, T. M. The prediction of interactions between visual forms by products of Lie Mathematical Biosclence, 1976, 30,  191-204.  CASSIRER, E. The concept of group and the theory of perception. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 1944, 5, 1-35.  stimuli. Journal of study of shape and pattern perception. of mirror reversed Psychology: operators.  CAVANAGH, P. Size and position invariance in the visual system. Perception, 1978, 7 (2), 167-177. CHEN, K., & CHEN, M.  Reaction time of reflected plane forms, Journal of General Psychology, 1981, 105, 261-264.  COOPER, L. A. Mental rotation of random two-dimensional shapes. Cognitive Psychology, 1975, 7, 20-43.  COOPER, L. A., & SHEPARD, R. N. Chronometric studies of the rotation of mental images. In W. G. Chase (Ed.), Visual  information processing. New York: Academic Press, 1973.  CORBALLIS, M. C. & BEALE, I. L. Bilateral symmetry and Behavior. Psychological Review, 1970, 77, 451-464.  CORBALLIS, M. C., & BEALE, I. L. The Psychology of left and right. Hillsdale, N. J.: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1976.  CORBALLIS, M. C., ZBRODOFF, J., & ROLDAN, C. E. What's up in mental rotation? Perception and Psychophysics, 1976, 19, 525-530.  CORBALLIS, M. C., ZBRODOFF, N. J., SHETZER, L. I., & BUTLER, P. B. Decision about identity and orientation of related letters  and digits. Memory and Cognition, 1978, 6 (2), 98-107.  DEARBORN, G. V. N. Recognition under objective reversal. Psychological Review, 1899, 6, 395-406. DEUTSCH, J. A. A system for  shape recognition. Psychological Review, 1962, 69, 492-500. DODGE, C. W. Euclidean geometry and transformation. Reading,  Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1972. GIBSON, J. J. The perception of the visual world. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1950.  GIBSON, J. J., & ROBINSON, D. Orientation in visual perception: The recognition of familiar plane forms in different  orientations. Psychological Monograph, 1935, 46 (6, Whole no., 210).  GUGGENHEIMER, H. W. Plane geometry and its groups. San Francisco: Holden-Day, 1967.  HOCK, H. S., & TROMLEY, C. Mental rotation and perceptual uprightness, Perception and Psychophysics, 1978, 24 (6), 529-533.  HOFFMAN, W. C. Pattern recognition by the method of isoclines: A mathematical model for the visual integrative process. Boeing  Scienty1c Research Laboratories Math Note, 1964, No. 351, Seattle. HOFFMAN, W. C. The Lie algebra of visual perception.  Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1966, -3, 65-98.  HUBEL, D. H. & WIESEL, T. N. Receptive fields of cells in striate cortex of very young visually inexperienced kittens. Journal  of Neurophysiology, 1963, 26, 994-1002.  JULEsz, B. Foundations of cyclopean perception. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1971.  KOLER, P. A., & PERKINS, D. N. Orientation of letters and their speed of recognition. Perception and Psychophysics, 1969,  5(5), 275-280.  MILNER, P. M. A model for visual shape recognition. Psychological Review, 1974, 81, 521-535. MOISE, E. Elementary geometry  from an advanced standpoint. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1964. PYLYSHYN, Z. W. The rate of "mental rotation" of images: A  test of holistic analogue hypothesis, Memory and Cognition, 1979, 7 (1), 19-28.  ROCK, I. Orientation and form. New York: Academic Press, 1973.  SHEPARD, R. N. & JUDD, S. A. Perceptual illusion of rotation of three-dimensional objects. Science, 1976, 191, 952-954.  SHEPARD, R. N., & METZLER, J. Mental rotation of three-dimensional objects. Science, 1971, 171, 701-703.  SKINNER, N. F., & STRETCH, R. Imaging rotation of objects: Comment on Shepard and Metzler. Bulletin of Psychonomic Society,  1976, 7, 165-166.  YAGLOM, I. M. Geometric transformations I. New York: Random House, 1962. ZUSNE, L. Visual perception of form. New York:  Academic Press, 1970.