10.1016/0022-2496(82)90041-4
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 26, 169-178 (1982)  A Strong Developmental Theory of Field Dependence-Independence  HOBEN THOMAS II  Pennsylvania State University  Assume an X-linked gene in two alleles mediates performance on field dependent-independent tests such as the rod-and-frame  test. Only the recessive gene with relative frequency q facilitates field independence. Other genotypes lead to field  dependence. Under a simple genetic model, field dependence-independence may be viewed as outcomes of a discrete random  variable B with field independent and dependent probabilities n,q and 1 - n,q for men, and nig2 and 1 - n,q2 for women,  respectively. The parameter a, is a maturational ageindexed parameter, 0 < 7ti < 1, monotonically increasing with development  until maturity when Rk = 1. Observations of performance are made on a random variable W of the form W = B + N, where N is  normal in distribution independent of B; N represents a composite of influences including error. The model implies testable  age-related between- and within-sex predictions regarding E(W) and Var(W), predictions which appear to coincide with major  empirical findings; it also generates novel predictions. For instance, W is a mixture of normals distribution. The model is  briefly evaluates in two data sets.  Over thirty years ago Herman Witkin first reported results of studies employing tests which are familiar to most every  psychology student, the rod-and-frame test (RFT) and the embedded-figures test (EFT). These tests are commonly referred to as  tests of field dependence-independence. Variations of the original tests have been used in hundreds of studies worldwide  making them among the most widely used tests in psychology. Furthermore, the main results of many studies tend to show  striking consistencies: for example, it is almost always reported that sex differences in task performance favor males.  While numerous explanations have been offered to account for various reported findings (e.g., Witkin & Goodenough, 1981) there  exists no rigorous, coherent, falsiftable theory. This paper proposes such a theory. The theory provides explanations of many  commonly reported empirical findings, and it also generates new and interesting predictions which cannot be generated from  existing theory. All predictions can be evaluated in data, often in simple ways.  It is often assumed that several different tasks including the RFT, EFT, and occasionally picture drawing and block design  tests assess similar psychological processes. Witkin's own position on this issue changed over the years. His final  Address reprint requests to the author at Pennsylvania State University, Department of Psychology, 513 Moore Building,  University Park, Pennsylvania 16802.  169  0022-2496/82/050169-10$02.00/0  Copyright (J 1982 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  170 HOBEN THOMAS II  statement with regard to the EFT an the RFT was that the later assessed field dependence-independence, but that the former  assessed a different construct, termed cognitive restructuring (Witkin & Goodenough, 1981). The task of primary interest here  is the RFT; to date only RFT data have been used to evaluate the model; examples are provided below. However, since major  empirical data-based findings for the RFT and EFT are similar, the model may be useful for characterizing EFT data and perhaps  other data as well.  The RFT is well known. In the usual test situation the square frame is tilted 28to one side or the other; the task for the  subject is to align a rod, positioned inside the frame, to the true vertical. The usual dependent variable is the absolute  error setting of the rod, measured in degrees, with the true vertical defined as zero degrees error. Those subjects with small  (usually average) error settings have been called field independent and those with larger error settings field dependent. In  practice, data are aggregated over subjects, so conventional summary statistics on which general findings are based are group  sample averages.  The EFT is usually a timed test. The subject must discover a simple figure embedded in a complex design, then trace the  figure. Usually a latency measure, time to locate the hidden figure, is the dependent variable. Individuals with longer  latencies have been called field dependent, those with shorter latencies field independent.  Perhaps the best known finding is that adult males tend to be more field independent on the RFT than adult females (e.g.,  Witkin & Goodenough, 1981). Thus males have smaller average error settings than females. It will be of some theoretical  interest later to note that the average sex differences are almost always small in magnitude, and particularly on the EFT,  such differences are often not statistically significant. However, even insignificant differences almost always favor males  (van Leeuwen, 1978).  A second common finding, hardly unique to the RFT, however, is that average performance improves with age until adolescence or  maturity. Witkin, Lewis, Hertzman, Machover, Meissner, & Wapner (1954) provide clear data on this point; cross-cultural data  show similar findings (Witkin & Berry, 1975). A third finding, related to the second, is that significant sex differences in  task performance are evident in childhood, on the RFT. These differences typically remain stable through maturity. The picture  is less clear on the EFT, however. Reliable sex differences may emerge only later in development, in adolescence; still, such  differences, while not necessarily significant in earlier years, favor males (van Leeuwen, 1978).  An intriguing finding in the cross-cultural literature is that reliable sex differences are found in sedentary typically  agricultural cultures, but significant sex differences tend not to be found in hunting or nomadic food-gathering cultures  (Witkin & Berry, 1975). The EFT has primarily been used in cross-cultural studies due in part to the lack of portability of  the RFT apparatus.  Each of these findings can be accounted for within the simple theory proposed which derives much of its theoretical interest  from an old and sometimes controversial idea, namely, that field dependence-independence may be influenced by an X-linked  recessive gene. Witkin and Goodenough (1981) acknowledge this  FIELD DEPENDENCE-INDEPENDENCE  possibility and review existing evidence. Other than one recent study (Goodenough, Gandini, Olkin, Pizzamiglio, Thayer, &  Witkin, 1977) which suggests that among Italian families brothers with identical Xg(a) blood groups were more similar in field  dependence performance than brothers with different Xg(a) phenotypes, all other evidence is indirect and difficult to  interpret. There has existed no theory that embeds the X-linked hypothesis directly within a theory of performance with clear  data implications as a consequence. This feature of the proposed theory makes it unique.  THE MODEL  Assume an X-linked gene in two alleles, a recessive and A dominant, influences performance. Assume only the recessive gene a  facilitates performance. Thus, all hemizygous a males and all homozygous as females would display facilitative task  performance and would be field independent. The remaining A males, and Aa and AA females, would be field dependent. Let the  unknown population relative frequency of a be q, 0 < q < 1. Then under the simplest genetic hypothesis, assuming random mating  and independent assortment, the proportion of field independent males would be the gene frequency q and the corresponding  proportion of females would be q2, with 1 - q, and 1 - qZ being the proportions of field dependent males and females,  respectively.  Define the growth parameter 7r;, where i indexes age, such that 0 < ni < 1; if age j is younger than age k, then 7ri < 7rk.  Should age k be maturity irk = 1. Let the proportion of males displaying the facilitative effect of a at age i be Sri q, with  the corresponding proportion of females n;q2. Then for example 7rjq < 7rkq if age j is younger than age k. The effect of 7r;  is to limit the proportion of field independent subjects at each age i. This parameter might be regarded as reflecting an age  related lack of penetrance of a males or as females, or possibly various age related maturational or experiential processes  that influence behavior.  These ideas may be summarized in two discrete binary random variables, B.", for males and B f, for females at age i with mass  functions  g.;(0) = 7riq, if 0 = v,  = 1 - 7ri q, if 0 = t # v,  = 0, otherwise,  with 0 < 7t;q < 1, and  gr,(0) = 7riq', if 0 = v,  = 1 - 7c; q s, if 0 = t =,&v,  = 0, otherwise,  172 HOBEN THOMAS II  with 0 < 7r;g2 < 1, and where o denotes a particular task outcome. For instance, v would denote in the RFT (almost) vertical  settings of the rod, displayed by field independent subjects, while t would be the tilted setting displayed by field dependent  subjects. Note that B is not, in general, a conventional Bernoulli or binomial variable unless v and t are zero and one.  Performance is assumed to be influenced by various maturational and experiential variables collectively referred to as  individual differences variation. In addition, there are the usual random task and measurement influences typically termed  error. Let these influences be represented by a single composite random variable N, normal in distribution. Define W the  random variable on which observations are made as  for males at age i, and  W,,=B,,+N (1)  Wf.=Bf,+N (2)  for females at age i, where N for a particular age and sex is independent of other N and of B; all N are assumed identically  distributed with mean ,u and variance a2. Equations (1) and (2) summarize the model proposed. Although simple, it does have  interesting implications.  MODEL IMPLICATIONS  One interesting implication of Eqs. (1) and (2) concerns the distribution of W. The result is stated in the following  elementary theorem:  THEOREM. The distribution of W in (1) and (2) is a mixture distribution with two normal components, each with common variance  a2. The mixing probabilities of (1) are 7t;q and 1 -7r;q, and of (2) are niq' and 1 -7rjg2. The means of the corresponding  components are v +,u and t +,u, respectively.  Proof. Obtain the product of the characteristic functions of B and N; factor, then apply Feller's lemma (1971, p. 504).  This implication will be tested in RFT data below. The expectation and variance of (1) are  and  E(W.) = gniv + (1 - g7rr) t +,u,  V ar(W.) = q7r; (I - g7r;)(v - t)' + a 2 = am',  and for (2) they are  E(Wf,)=g27riv+(I -g27rr)t+k  and  Var(Wf,) = g2nr(1 - g27rr)(y - t)2 + a2 = al,.  FIELD DEPENDENCE-INDEPENDENCE 173  With v < t, if age j is younger than age k, then E(WmJ) > E(Wm) and similarly for females. Thus the model predicts that  average performance should improve with development, in agreement with empirical data.  Consider the mean difference between sexes at age is  E(Wr,- Wm,)=7c#-v)(q-q2) > 0, if t > v,  E(Wf,-Wm.)<0, if t<v.  Thus, at all ages the mean for females will exceed the mean for males (if, as in the RFT, v < t). The magnitude of the  expected between-sex differences depends on q and nj; the quantity (q - q2) is largest at q =1. Since 7c; is assumed to  increase monotonically with age, the expected between-sex mean difference will increase with age until maturity.  In practice, between-sex sample average differences are tested statistically, usually with t-tests. Often such differences do  not reach conventional significance levels. It is interesting to consider the statistical testing problem from the viewpoint  of the model in (1) and (2).  Let S2., and Sm, denote sample means and unbiased sample variances for a sample of males and a sample of females at age 1. For  simplicity assume equal sample size n for both sexes. Then if a realized value of the random variable  T = (Xr; - X.)/ (S f', + S.,)l n  exceeded the t-distribution critical value with 2(n - 1) degrees of freedom for some specified critical region, conventional  wisdom would reject the hypothesis of.equal population means. Under model (1) and (2) T is, of course, not t-distributed. But  it is of interest to determine the maximum (approximate) expected value of T under model (1) and (2).  E(T)  E(Xr;-X.) )In = E(WF,-Wm) V  E(S' + Smi) Qr  __ g7tr(l - q)(t - v)  g7tr(l - g7tr)(t - v)2 + g27rt(l - g27ri)(t - v)2 + 2a2  which becomes larger as Q2 -+ 0; thus this expression is less than  gnr(l -q) Vfn- (gnr)`12(l -q) V  'q (l -q7t;)+g27ti(l -g27ri) I +q-g7ri(l +q2) 1 - q'  since the preceding term is maximum at q = 0.366.  At the maximized expected value of T about 26 subjects would be needed in each  174  HOBEN THOMAS II  group to obtain an expected critical value of t of approximately two for a two-tailed .05 significance level test under  convention normal theory assumptions. (Since T is not t-distributed, under (1) and (2), the significance level of the test is  unknown.) However, this sample size is for a highly artificial and unrealistic situation since the parameter values have been  selected to maximize the expected value of T. It would not be surprising therefore if very large sample sizes would be needed  to obtain significance. Thus, in moderate size samples frequent statistical insignificance should be expected, but  insignificant differences should favor males. This is precisely what the literature suggests.  van Leeuwen (1978), in a review, reported that 17 of 34 EFT studies, and 11 of 23 RFT studies failed to achieve statistically  significant male-female sex differences but that almost always males demonstrated better performance than females. Among those  studies which achieved statistical significance, virtually all (26 of 29) favored males.  Consider the anomalous cross-cultural finding that there is an absence of significant sex differences on certain tasks  (usually the EFT) in hunting cultures, while sex differences are typically observed in sedentary agrarian cultures (Witkin &  Berry, 1975).  For the moment focus on color blindness a phenotype known to be X-linked recessive in its determination, and with known  between-culture differences in recessive gene frequencies. Post (1962) notes that in hunting cultures the recessive gene  frequency estimate for color blindness is about .02; thus, about 2% of the males and .04% of females are color-blind in  hunting cultures. However, for nonhunting cultures the gene frequency estimate is about .05. Suppose that performance on color  blindness tests could be modelled by Eqs. (1) and (2). If so, the expected between-sex difference, Eq. (3), would be less in  hunting than nonhunting cultures.  For hunters color blindness is a severe handicap. For this reason, Post (1962) argues that the gene frequency is lower in such  cultures because of genetic selection pressures working against color blindness. In nonhunting cultures, where color blindness  is less critical, selection pressures presumably are relaxed and correspondingly higher gene frequencies result.  It seems plausible to suppose that field-independence would be more adaptive for hunting and food gathering people than for  less mobile sedentary cultures. In fact, Witkin and Berry (1975) make this suggestion themselves. Thus for example, field  dependent persons would be expected to have difficulties distinguishing hunted animals from their natural cover, and would  possibly demonstrate impairments in spatial orientation as well.  It would be expected that the selection pressure would cause the recessive gene frequency among hunting people to be higher  than among sedentary people because, unlike color blindness, which is mediated by a deleterious recessive gene, the recessive  gene hypothesized to mediate field-independence is assumed to facilitate field-independence. Let qn be the recessive gene  frequency for field-independence in hunting cultures, and qs the gene frequency for sedentary cultures. For instance, if z <  q5 < qn, the expected sex differences, (3) and E(T) would be smaller in hunting  FIELD DEPENDENCE-INDEPENDENCE 175  than nonhunting cultures assuming the remaining parameters of the model were constant between cultures.  Recall the variance of (1)  Qmi = g7ri(I - g7ri)(t - v)2 + Q2'  and of (2)  a(, = g27ti(I - g27ri)(t - v)2 +,g2.  Inspection of these expressions suggests how the population variances, and thus sample data, vary within each sex over age.  Since the variances are maximum for males when g7ri = 1 and for females when g2rri = i, suppose q < z. For both sexes the  variances will increase monotonically with age. However, should it occur that q2 > Z, the variances for both sexes will be  nonmonotonic with age.  More interesting perhaps is the consideration of the relative between-sex sizes of variance overage. The following equivalency  is easily obtained:  Var(Wr, .) < Var(Wm;) iff g(1 + q) < 1l~ n~ iff q< - 71 + rci(7Z` + 4)-. 29ri  Since q(1 +q) is in the interval (0, 2) and I/7ri is in the interval [1, oo) the variance of males will exceed the variance of  females for all 0 < q < 1 when 7ci < 2. Thus, early in development, possibly in preschool, the variance of male scores will be  larger than the variance of female scores independent of gene frequency. When I/ni is smallest, at 7ci = 1, the variance of  males will exceed the variance of females only if q < 0.618. Since it is often observed that women's RFT scores have larger  variance than men's scores, this finding may suggest q > 0.618. Gene frequency estimates from the water-level task (Thomas &  Jamison, 1981), sometimes regarded as similar to the RFT, and estimates from RFT data analyzed below support this suggestion.  TESTING THE MODEL  Model implications concerned with mean and variance order relations can be evaluated in natural ways by using ordinary sample  variances and means to estimate Var(W) and E(W). The construction of tests on these sample quantities is more troublesome  since normal theory procedures collapse in the mixture situation. However, it might be expected, based on central limit theory  considerations, that conventional procedures might lead to tests with alpha levels roughly similar to normal model tabled  values, at least for some mixture model parameter values. But the problem is difficult, it has not been studied, and thus it  is difficult to provide recommendations.  Consider briefly the grouped RFT data on males and females at ages 8, 10, 15, 17, and adults provided by Witkin et al. (1954).  Sample size for each sex ranged from 23  480/26/2-6  176  HOBEN THOMAS 11  to 30 for ages 8-17, but was somewhat larger for adults. The female averages exceeded the male averages at every age. Both  sexes showed monotonic decreases in average error over age, except for the adult group. The female sample variances exceeded  the male sample variance at every age except at age 8 where they were identical; the theory predicts the variance of males  will exceed the variance of females at some young age; perhaps the cross-over point is just below 8 years. These findings are  in good agreement with the predictions of the model. The prediction of increases in between-sex average differences, over age,  was not supported although among the adults the average sex difference was largest.  The most interesting prediction concerns the mixture of normals' score distribution for each sex, and the associated estimates  of the model parameters. To obtain reasonable parameter estimates in mixture situations generally requires samples with sizes  larger than the Witkin et al. (1954) data (cf. Everitt & Hand, 1981, Chap. 4). To provide a flavor of the approach, Oltman's  (1968) standard Witkin RFT data will be used to evaluate the model. The subjects were college students, 83 women and 80 men.  The sum of each subject's eight absolute error predictions, in degrees error, with the vertical defined as zero, was the  dependent variable. The data, grouped according to Oltman's class intervals 0-19, 20-39,..., are shown in two histograms in  Fig. 1. Except for goodness of fit tests, all analyses were based on ungrouped data graciously supplied by Oltman.'  The sample mean and standard deviation for women were 62.7 and 49.9; for 79 men the mean was 52.46 with standard deviation  36.85. The male subject in the eleventh class interval, Fig. 1, with a score over 4.3 sample standard deviations from the  sample mean was regarded as an outlier and excluded from all analyses.  The analyses used maximum likelihood estimation approached through the EM algorithm (Dempster, Laird & Rubin, 1977). The  parameters estimated were q, a, t, and v. In this application it was assumed that 7r;= 1, although rc; can be similarly  estimated in growth data. Furthermore, it was assumed that E(N)=O. The solution criterion, suggested by Aitkin & Wilson (1980)  involves using several different starting values for the parameters and selecting the solution which minimizes -2 log  likelihood. In the region of the global minimum, different starting values should result in a solution converging to the same  parameter estimates, which was the case with these data. The maximum likelihood equations were based on the joint female-male  likelihood function. The score distribution for each sex was assumed to be a folded mixture of two normal components, not a  two-component normal mixture. The folded mixture arises if the density of interest is a mixture of normals but where only the  absolute values of the variables are recorded. Thus, a folded mixture of normals density is nonnegatively distributed. In  fact, it is easy to show that a folded mixture with two normal components is a mixture with two folded normal (Leone, Nelson,  & Nottingham, 1961) components.  ' Thanks are extended to Philip K. Oltman for providing data from Oltman (1968).  FIELD DEPENDENCE-INDEPENDENCE 177  8 91011 12 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011 Grouping Interval  FIG. 1. Frequency histograms of RFT data with numbered class intervals having widths 0-19, 20-39, etc. Data are from Oltman  (1968). Points on histograms are expected frequencies under the model fitted (see text). Inset is a folded mixture with two  normal components, each with variance 900. Means are 40 and 150. Mixing proportions of the left and right components are 0.9  and 0.1 respectively. Mean and variance of the density are 51 and 1989, respectively.  The folded mixture seemed a much more realistic distribution under models (1) and (2) because only absolute errors are  recorded in the RFT. Note also, in Fig. 1, that there is a large empirical probability mass for both sexes in the first class  interval, which suggests that a substantial number of responses would have been negatively distributed had not absolute errors  been recorded.  The parameter estimates were 4 = 0.9, d = 29.72, v = 41.82, and f = 151.55. These estimates were inserted as parameters into  the folded mixture of normals distribution function in order to determine the expected values for each class interval. The  expected values are shown on the two histograms in Fig. 1. These values suggest that the latent distribution is a bimodal  folded mixture of normals with substantial separation of component means, one mean at 41.82 for the larger component, and the  second mean for the smaller component at 151.55. A Pearson chi-square goodness of fit test of the data to the folded mixture  distribution was X'(12) = 18.86, p = .092. For women, the two largest class intervals were combined so the expected value  would exceed one.  It is interesting to note that the chi-square contribution from each of the 18 class intervals was typically quite small,  generally less than one; one class interval, the seventh class interval for men, contributed 5.1, more than a quarter of the  contribution to the chi-square value. This result suggests perhaps a better fit than the observed probability level would  imply. In any event, the fit of data to the model appears to be moderately good.  An interesting speculation concerns a plausible alternative distribution against  178 HOBEN THOMAS II  which the mixture distribution and thus the proposed model might be compared. Historically, when statistically testing RFT  data normality typically has been assumed, although such an assumption follows from no psychological theory. From examining  the histograms in Fig. 1, it is hardly surprising that normality is easily rejected in both data sets, X2(5) = 16.69, p < 0.01  for men, and X2(6) = 26.75, p < .005 for women; in both tests, the degrees of freedom were reduced by the need to collapse  adjacent categories with small expected values.  It might have been possible to achieve a better fit of the proposed model to the data by increasing the number of fitted  parameters, e.g., by allowing for each sex tl to be different. That, however, was not the intended goal here.  REFERENCES  AITKIN, M., & WILSON, G. T. Mixture models, outliers, and the EM algorithm. Technometrics, 1980, 22, 325-331.  DEMPSTER, A. P., LAIRD, N. M., & RUBIN, D. B. Maximum likelihood from incomplete. data via the EM algorithm (with discussion).  Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B, 1977, 39, 1-38. EVERITT, B. S., & HAND, D. J. Finite mixture  distributions. London: Chapman & Hall, 1981. FELLER, W. An introduction to probability theory and its applications. (2nd ed.,  Vol. II). New York: Wiley, 1971.  GOODENOUGH, D. R., GANDINL E., OLKIN, L, PIZZAMIGLIO, L., THAYER, D., & WITKIN, H. A. A study of X chromosome linkage with  field dependence and spatial visualization. Behavior Genetics, 1977, 7, 373-387.  LEONE, F. C., NELSON, L. S., & NOTTINGHAM R. B. The folded normal distribution. Technometrics, 1961, 3, 543-550.  OLTMAN, P. K. A portable rod-and-frame apparatus. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 1968, 26, 503-506. POST, R. H. Population  differences in red and green color vision deficiency: A review, and a query on selection relaxation. Eugenics Quarterly, 1962,  9, 131-146.  THOMAS, H., & JAMISON, W. A test of the X-linked genetic hypothesis for sex differences on Piaget's water-level task.  Developmental Review, 1981, 1, 274-283.  VAN LEEUWEN, M. S. A cross-cultural examination of psychological differentiation in males and females. International Journal  of Psychology, 1978, 13, 87-122.  WITKIN, H. A., & BERRY, J. W. Psychological differentiation in cross-cultural perspective. Journal of Cross-Cultural  Psychology, 1975, 6, 4-87.  WITKIN, H. A., & GOODENOUGH, D. R. Cognitive styles: Essence and origins. New York: Intern. Univ. Press, 1981.  WITKIN, H. A., LEWIS, H. B., HERTZMAN, M., MACHOVER, K., MEISSNER, P. B., & WAPNER, S. Personality through perception. New  York: Harper, 1954.  RECEIVED: July 19, 1982