10.1016/0022-2496(82)90047-5
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 25, 82-86 (1982)  Book Review  T. CAELLI. Visual Perception: Theory and Practice. Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1981. pp. x + 197. $42.00 (h), $20.00 (p).  Reviewed by JOHN 1. YELLOTT AND ALBERT AHUMADA  The author is a Senior Lecturer in the Psychology Department, University of Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia. He has  spent some time at Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, New Jersey, where his major research interest was the application of system  theoretic ideas to image processing and motion perception. He has written numerous articles in these and related fields,  including applications of relativistic ideas to visual processes.  Professor Yellott is with the School of Social Sciences, University of California, Irvine. He coauthored, with W. H.  Batchelder and R. A. Bjork, the book Problems in mathematical learning theory, Wiley, 1966, and has made significant  contributions to the study of choice models; his most recent work has been in vision. Dr. Ahumada is a Research Psychologist  at the NASA Ames Research Center. He has written numerous papers in the area of auditory processing, and is also interested in  the use of computer graphics.  This book describes itself as "an introduction to the technologies and mathematical techniques used by vision researchers." It  offers a guided tour through physical and physiological optics, Fourier transforms and linear systems, neural models, and  geometry (Euclidean and otherwise), followed by a survey of their applications in current vision research. It is relatively  brief, by current standards inexpensive, and bears the imprimatur of a major scientific publisher. And its author has  published papers in leading vision journals, some coauthored with eminent senior scientists. At first glance then, it looks  like it might be the perfect text for a course on quantitative methods in visual science-a book that would be especially  welcome because there's currently nothing like it on the market.  Unhappily that is not the case: despite good intentions and a sophisticated choice of material this is a dreadful textbook,  guaranteed to baffle and misinform. The problem, in a nutshell, is that it contains an astonishing number of errors.  To review the book we each read it independently and compared notes. Both of us were immediately struck by the extremely high  error rate-a rate so high that large sections make no technical sense at all and many passages convey information that is  completely wrong. Much of the problem evidently was due simply to a massive proofreading failure, but in addition it often  appeared that the author was sincerely mistaken on matters of fact or genuinely failed to understand mathematical points he  had undertaken to explain. Finally, throughout the book there was a general failure of  Requests for reprints should be sent to Professor John 1. Yellott, Jr., School of Social Sciences, University of California,  Irvine, CA 92717.  82  0022-2496/82/010082-05S02.00/0  Copyright 1982 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  BOOK REVIEW 83  logical progression-an overall tone of incoherence. In an effort to distinguish these three sources of difficulty (and  subsequently to quantify them) we divided the statements that bothered us into three classes: Typographical Errors (serious  enough to at least slow a student down), Misstatements of Fact (where contextual evidence suggested the author would not have  corrected the error even on proofreading), and Incoherent Statements (passages that either made no sense at all, or just  enough to convey the wrong impression). Admittedly these classes are quite fuzzy and from a student's point of view our  distinctions would often make little difference-he would be just as confused no matter how the error arose. Nevertheless  classifying things made our job more interesting: we felt a bit like cognitive archeologists. To illustrate our classification  scheme (and the flavor of the book itself) here are some examples chosen more or less at random.  Typographical Errors  p. 11: "A cos(k r) + i sin(k r) = Ik r."  [This is the second equation in the book. The first contains an undefined quantity. The right-hand side here should be Ae'k'`,  assuming parentheses had been appropriately placed on the left side. That's the only extrapolation that would make sense.]  p. 18: "The output intensity of the filter is determined by Mauls' law  I(0) = I(O) cos' 0, I(O) = e''Eo cost 0."  [Confused by the nonsensical "cosZ B" in the second equation, students might consult the index of an optics text. But they  won't find "Mauls' law"-they'll have to guess that it's really Malus' law.]  p. 40:  F(s) = J-x f (x) ersx dx "  [This is the book's version of Fourier's theorem. It's another double typo, and the "a,,," is a particularly nice touch.]  p. 44: "Secondly, the Fourier transform of the product of two functions is equal to the product of their transforms  .-'ir-(A X B)=Jio~_(A).__-~'_(B)  where A X B denotes  AXB=Jrx A(x)B(x-t)dx x  84 BOOK REVIEW  which is called the convolution of A and B. This second property is sometimes called the convolution theorem."  [This is an example of the difficulty one has deciding whether an error-here a double error-is really typographical. At first  we thought the author had simply written "product" when he meant to say convolution. But then we noticed that convolution  itself is misdefined. The entire treatment of this topic suffers from errors of this sort.]  p. 96:  03 05 07 "sin 0 = 1 + + - + 3! 5! 7!  [This one occurs three times in the same derivation.]  p. 109: "First, there seems to be different kinds of cells in terms of the frequency response: those that respond particularly  to low spatial frequencies (and high temporal frequencies-brisk transient or X-cells), and those that have a preference for  high spatial frequencies (and low temporal frequencies-sustained or Y-cells)."  [Here X and Y are reversed. This occurs again several sentences later, and that's the last time the X-Y distinction is  mentioned. That's a common problem here: Because the book races briskly through many topics the errors made on each one leave  a permanent impression. ]  p. 32: Figure 2.22. This figure, like many throughout the book, contains graphic errors. Specifically, the diagram that is  supposed to illustrate astigmatism actually shows no astigmatism at all, and the diagram illustrating the near point of a  hyperopic eye (where rays from the point should be focused on the retina) actually shows the rays converging behind the  retina. Here and in many other places it appears that the figures were redrawn from accurate original sources (in this case  Hecht and Zajac's Optics-an excellent book) but nobody checked the accuracy of the new drawings.  Misstatements of Fact  p. 30: "Interference refers to how two light sources interact to produce various interference patterns. Of course, when both  sources are polarized no interference effects would occur."  p. 40: " f(x) = 7 [f"00 A (k) cos kx dk + iB(k) sin kx dk I  given that  A(k)=f- f (x) cos kx dx and B(k) = -00 J 00  f (x) sin kx dx."  BOOK REVIEW HS  [The excess "t"' in the first equation might be a typo, but we don't think so: it occurs in the same place three pages earlier  in the author's parallel treatment of Fourier series. A student would probably conclude he means it and try in vain to work  things out accordingly. ]  p. 107: "We saw in Chapter 3 that any reasonably smooth image can be decomposed into spatial frequency and phase components.  It was also pointed out that in all optical systems these frequency components are not transferred with equal fidelity. The  MTF (Fig. 6.6) is typically damped at the low- and highfrequency ranges of the image."  [This is an interesting error. The fact is that for any optical system the MTF (modulation transfer function: the modulus of  the Fourier transform of the system's impulse response) can never be damped at the origin-its value there must always be at  least as great as its value elsewhere. (This is a general property of linear systems with nonnegative impulse responses.)  However, the so-called "MTF" of the human visual system (the psychophysically determined spatial contrast sensitivity  function) does show a pronounced decline near the origin-as Fig. 6.6 correctly shows. Precisely for this reason we know that  the low frequency damping of the human "MTF" cannot be due to optical defects of the eye, and must instead reflect neural  properties of the visual system. The passage just quoted leaves a very different impression. We include this somewhat esoteric  example to show that the book does not entirely confine itself to blatant errors-like the following.]  p. 172: "The molecule known to be responsible for encoding light quanta in the retinal rod and cone systems is rhodopsin  (visual purple)."  Incoherent Statements  p. 31: "The rods are not colour sensitive like the cones are; however the rods are more sensitive to light than the cones,  being related to peripheral vision (scotopic vision). Many rods drive the retinal ganglion cells, which, in turn, convey  information to the visual cortex. The cones are less sensitive to light and are directly related to foveal or central vision  (photopic vision) where down to one cone may drive one ganglion cell."  [We cannot resist adding that this passage continues "However, the purpose of this book is not to deal with these details,  which are assumed to be known to the reader."]  p.46: "The Fourier transform pair does not only provide an approximation to a function, but also introduces us to the concept  of a linear system. In this system we have an input-output relationship governed by a transformation Jil_ where for input  functions f , f2  ._'_(af + ffz) = a__'~'-(f ) + l (.fz)'  Here the input functions are carried through the system (represented by _,F-)  $( BOOK REVIEW  such that the linearity is preserved between them. In this sense the Fourier transform pair constitute a linear system. This  concept is illustrated in Fig. 3.7. The system is termed stationary if the input-output relationship is unaffected by charges  in image position.  One way of determining the output of a system to arbitrary inputs is through the system's responses to impulses or  6-functions. This is called the impulse response of the system, and the point-spread function corresponds to this output  function. With the Fourier transform this happens to be the sine or Bessel function (Mexican hat function)."  [And to cap things off, Fig. 3.7 contains three typographical errors.]  With these three classes in hand, our final step was to comb the first substantive section of the book (Section 2.1: "on the  nature of light"), counting and classifying all the errors we could find. In those eight pages we found twelve typographical  errors, four misstatements, and nine incoherent statements-an overall average of slightly more than three errors per page.  This rate seemed to be typical of the entire book.  After all this, of course, our recommendation is obvious: this book should be treated with great caution-it simply is not a  trustworthy guide to the territory it covers. However, in its own way it does describe a great range of important mathematical  ideas in contemporary vision research, and in this sense it is a unique contribution to the literature. So if the prospect of  taking this guided tour still appeals to you, despite its uncertainties, by all means do so-you'll certainly find the scenery  interesting. But take our advice: don't drink the water!  Printed in Belgium