10.1016/0022-2496(82)90036-0
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 26, 78-88 (1982)  Book Review  G. HINTON AND J. ANDERSON (Eds.). Parallel Models of Associative Memory. Hillsdale, N. J. Erlbaum, 1981. pp. viii + 295.  $26.20.  Reviewed by RICHARD HEATH  Geoffrey Hinton is a Research Scientist in the MRC Applied Psychology Unit at Cambridge, England. He obtained his Ph. D. in  artificial intelligence from Edinburgh University and has been a Research Fellow at Sussex University and a Visiting Scholar  in the Cognitive Science Program at the University of California at San Diego. His research interests lie in parallel  computational models of memory and perception and in the mental representation of spatial structures. Hinton's other  publications include a paper on mental imagery in Cognitive Science and a chapter on frames of reference in Attention and  performance IX.  James Anderson is an Associate Professor in Psychology and Neural Science at Brown University. He obtained a Ph. D. from MIT  in neurophysiology and has held research positions at the UCLA Brain Research Institute and Rockefeller University. His  current research interests lie in models of neural functioning and their psychological implications. He is also interested in  the hardware implementation of these models. Anderson's recent publications include several papers on neural models in  Psychological Review and a chapter on the cognitive implications of neural models in the book Basic processes in reading  edited by D. LaBerge and S. Samuels.  The reviewer is a Lecturer in Psychology at the University of Newcastle, Australia. He obtained a Ph. D. in psychology from  McMaster University in 1976 and is presently a Visiting Research Associate in Psychology at Brown University. His research  interests include stochastic models for decision-making in perception and memory, and adaptive filter models for the storage  and retrieval of information in memory. His publications include papers on stochastic models for response time in  Psychometrika (with S. Link) and the British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, and a paper on adaptive  filtering in Biological Cybernetics.  The book Parallel models of associative memory edited by Geoffrey Hinton and James Anderson contains a collection of papers  presented at an informal conference held at the University of California at San Diego in June 1979. The participants  represented a wide variety of viewpoints from the fields of neurophysiology, cognitive psychology, computer science and  mathematics. Despite this eclectic approach to issues in associative memory, the authors agree that "parallel interactions  among relatively simple units provide a better metaphor for the basic operations of the mind than long sequences of simple  steps" (p. viii) assumed in models based on a digital computer metaphor of human information processing.  This review was written by the author while on study leave at the Cognitive Science Center at Brown University. He wishes to  thank Jim Anderson, Geoffrey Hinton, and Stuart Geman for valuable discussions on their contributions to the book. Reprint  requests should be sent to Richard Heath, Department of Psychology, University of Newcastle, NSW 2308, Australia.  78  0022-2496/82/040078-11$02.00/0  Copyright C 1982 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  BOOK REVIEW 79  In their introductory chapter, Rumelhart and Norman compared the parallel distributed models for human memory discussed in  this book with current psychological models for memory. They noted that the major differences reside in the emphasis on  neurophysiological bases for the models, the deemphasis of the conceptualization of memory function in terms of a "spatial"  metaphor, and the use of a distributed parallel system with no executive controller. In the new approach to memory espoused in  the book, it is assumed that information is widely distributed so that many items are stored in the same neural units. The  generalization ability of human memory which serves to lower its information processing load results from the adaptive  formation of memory filters so that the assimilation of new information into memory is conditioned by the system's prior  experience. Although the linear models of associative memory have a superficial resemblance to earlier models such as that of  Norman and Rumelhart (1970), the parallel models differ in their emphasis on the storage of second-order properties of the  input such as the correlation between features. They also attribute an important role to context especially for the storage  and retrieval of lists of items.  Rumelhart and Norman concede that the average reader would find this book difficult reading because it requires knowledge of a  diverse set of concepts from mathematics, neurophysiology, computer science, and psychology. Nevertheless, most readers of the  Journal of Mathematical Psychology should be familiar with the linear matrix models required for"Mur of the chapters. Although  the chapters by Sejnowski and Geman introduce models based on more recent developments in stochastic differential equations,  the reader is not burdened by lengthy proofs and the solutions are interpreted verbally. The chapters by Feldman, Fahlman, and  Hinton utilize basic concepts from artificial intelligence which are supported by concrete examples. The chapter by Ratcliff  contains a brief summary of work previously published (Ratcliff, 1978) to which the reader should refer for a detailed account  of the diffusion model of memory retrieval. The chapters by Anderson and Hinton and Sejnowski provide a very readable review  of recent developments in relevant areas of brain neurophysiology.  This book would be a valuable reference in advanced courses in models for human information processing, especially those  emphasizing a multidisciplinary approach. For this purpose it would need to be supplemented by the references contained in the  bibliographies at the end of each chapter. For technical details on the linear model approach the books Associative memory: A  system-theoretical approach (1977) and Content-addressable memories (1980) by Kohonen should be consulted.  In the following review we will evaluate the models for associative memory in three sections representing an emphasis on  concepts from neurophysiology, computer science and psychology. The psychological significance of each contribution will be  considered as well as its theoretical importance.  480/26/1-6  80  BOOK REVIEW  ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY FROM A NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL VIEWPOINT  In this section we examine the contributions which have their theoretical foundation in recent work in neurophysiology that  has suggested that the brain might function like a highly parallel, distributed computing device. An important assumption of  such models is that information should be stored in a contentaddressable fashion so that items can be retrieved using probes  containing only partial descriptions. This idea is consistent with our ability for clustered recall and the "tip of the  tongue" effect.  The physiological basis for the matrix models for associative memory lies in the plasticity of synaptic junctions in cortical  networks. For example, information is stored by means of changes in the strength of synaptic connections as a function of the  cross-correlation between input vectors whose elements represent a relevant aspect of neural activity such as firing  frequency. In this way multiple associations can be stored in the same neural network by means of the summation of correlated  activity at each synaptic junction. If there are m associations represented by the m paired stimulus vectors (fk, gk), k = l,  m, then the m X m associative memory matrix is given by  m  A = V gkfi , k=1  where the superscript T represents vector transpose. The matrix A is a linear mapping between two vector spaces representing  activity in two neural networks. If activity fk occurs in one of these networks, then the associated activity in the other  network is given by g = Afk, which for orthonormal vectors yields gk, its associate during the learning phase. Hence the  matrix scheme is capable of perfect recall. Interestingly enough, a very good approximation to gk can be retrieved even though  a portion of the associative neural network is not functioning, a situation represented by setting some of the elements of A  equal to 0.  Anderson and Mozer have developed the matrix memory model to account for categorization which they consider to be the  formation of equivalence classes in a noisy, probabilistic environment. They offer a novel approach to the study of human  concept formation which has been a central topic in cognitive psychology for many years. If we equate the fk in Eq. (1) with  exemplars of the category represented by g, then the associative memory matrix becomes  m  A = g Y f'. (2) k=1  Equation (2) represents the activity of an average response computer which converges on the category or prototype vector, g.  Anderson and Moser also considered the spontaneous formation of selective memory categorizers as represented by a neural  network with self-feedback such as the recurrent collateral system of cortical pyramidal cells. In this case the associative  BOOK REVIEW 81  memory matrix was the sum of the self-products of the exemplar vectors and its eigenvectors represented macrofeatures to which  the neural network was maximally sensitive. Hence memory was likened to a tuned filter which resonates when excited by its  characteristic feature vector. Although this system contains positive feedback, stability is achieved by a limit on the vector  components due to the maximum neural firing frequency. Consequently, the characteristic macrofeatures of the system are  constrained by a hypercube in the linear feature space. A subset of the corners of the hypercube represents stable modes of  the linear system and provides a novel way of representing neurally based higher-order codes or macrofeatures.  The categorization ability of this "brain-state-in-a-box" model was tested by presenting the system with visually encoded  letters in a computer simulation. Although the categorization speed increased with learning as predicted by the model, it was  difficult to interpret the eigenvectors in terms of visual features of the letters, especially since the eigenvector matrix  was not rotated to facilitate the association of macrofeatures of the categorization process with the original letter  features. However, the model successfully categorized all the letters except N and W into their own class, i.e., a stable  corner of the hypercube, within 5000 trials.  Willshaw has also examined matrix models for associative memory, making use of techniques derived from optical holography.  Following a discussion of some limitations on the direct application of holographic models for associative memory due mainly  to a lack of information retrieval fidelity, Willshaw summarized derived models based on the application of a convolution  operation for information storage and a correlation operation for retrieval. This model is similar to Anderson's model owing  to its resistance to local damage and its operation as a memory filter useful in categorization. Willshaw showed that by  employing nonlinear elements, perfect recall could be achieved even when the stimuli were not orthogonal.  Of great interest was Willshaw's account of an inductive net which provides a possible neural mechanism for the process of  inductive generalization, a method for retrieving information from the network with only an incomplete retrieval cue. Although  Willshaw proposed a graph-theoretical representation of this information retrieval scheme, the mathematics was left  undeveloped and the reader was not convinced of the profitability of this more general approach to associative memory.  Kohonen, Oja, and Lehtio provided a detailed account of a linear model for associative memory which incorporates interesting  adaptive properties. Memory is assumed to operate like an adaptive filter which modifies its parameters (the associative  memory matrix) so that novel stimulus inputs generate large changes in the parameters, whereas redundant inputs do not alter  the parameters. The neural basis of the model is a laminar cortical network with recurrent connectivity which is stimulated by  both an input stimulus pattern s and a forcing stimulus pattern f. The output response vector r is given by  r=Ms+f,  where M is the associative memory matrix, the elements of which represent synaptic  82 BOOK REVIEW  conductivities of excitatory synapses on apical dendrites located within the laminar layer. Changes in M are proportional to  the correlation between f and s. This scheme is similar mathematically to Anderson's model. However, Kohonen et al. analysed  the model in greater detail. For example, they represented the system's response to a novel forcing stimulus by its regression  on the previous sequence of forcing stimuli which Kohonen et al. refer to as the optimal linear autoassociative recollection,  and by an orthogonal residual component which represents the new information contained in the stimulus. The adaptive property  of the model was illustrated by the fact that  novelty filtering is a useful fundamental operation in any natural information processing system, because those parts or  features of a pattern that are directly expressible in terms of the stored data are rejected, but the filter system is  transparent to the most interesting components of the new data. (p. 121)  By including delayed feedback and a shared context vector, Kohonen et al. were able to model the storage and retrieval of  temporal associations. Furthermore, they demonstrated both the reconstructive and generalization ability of the linear model  by means of computer simulation using digitized human faces.  Kohonen et al. elaborated the model to represent the processing of semantic relational triples such as "the color of an apple  is red." The primitives of the triple are stored in regions of a laminar network of memory elements called a memory field,  yielding a highly localized spatial representation of the information. By probing the memory with two incomplete triples with  a missing common attribute, the associative memory was able to reconstruct the common attribute with high fidelity. This  mechanism offers an interesting link between neurally based models and those motivated by work in artificial iltelligence,  since the memory field elements behave like nodes in a semantic network and the internodal links represent interactions  mediated by adaptive lateral connections. One problem with the model is its inability to distinguish between the triples "cats  eat dogs" and "dogs eat cats" due to the storage of the three terms in separate spatial locations without strong lateral  connections.  Sejnowski has described a dynamic, stochastic model for the behavio~ of a neural network containing N neurons with membrane  potentials 01, Y'2 ON and M inputs rl1 , ?12,..., AIM represented by the equation  N M  r d t0. + 0. - Y_ KabOb + Bacgc,  b=1 c=1  where Kab is the coupling strength between the ath and bth neurons, Bac is the coupling strength between the cth input and the  ath neuron, and r is an integrator time constant. This neural network behaves like a multidimensional linear filter and is  sensitive to inputs with frequencies given by the eigenvalues of K (=[Kab)) and to the input patterns given by the  eigenvectors of K.  Sejnowski investigated his model further by including a nonlinear transformation  BOOK REVIEW 83  of the membrane potential Y'b in Eq. (4), so that transient changes in membrane potential could be more accurately modeled.  With this modification, he showed that the network could process the covariance in membrane potential between neural elements,  which was important for memory storage operations. Since the network was shown to be maximally sensitive to membrane potential  fluctuations in the vicinity of the threshold, only a skeleton network of neurons operating near threshold made a significant  contribution to the covariance. Consequently, the system behaves as a skeleton filter processing covariance in a linear  fashion for gaussian fluctuations in membrane potential.  The skeleton filter subsumes many memory phenomena including the effect of context which is mediated by the average neural  firing rate modulating the filter's ability to process correlations in its inputs. Context may also facilitate the formation  of relational triples so that Sejnowski's model can, in principle, be applied to represent semantic structures. A possible  relationship between memory and selective attention is implied since "a skeleton filter with internally generated inputs  rather than sensory inputs driving the background firing rates is a candidate model for selective attention" (p. 207).  In our discussion of the neurally based models for associative memory we have observed considerable communality in their basic  neurophysiological and mathematical assumptions. In each case, information is processed in a network of interacting neurons  and all the authors agree that the model can be represented in terms of matrix operations in which second-order correlational  information plays a prominent role. Although there were no direct references to the psychological literature to justify using  the models to account for human memory, there is sufficient formal structure evident to permit a theoretical psychologist to  test the empirical validity of the models in more detail. The most profitable models for this purpose would be those of  Anderson and Kohonen for which the issue of adaptability could form the basis of an important psychological test of their  respective empirical validity. Evidence for novelty filtering in human concept formation would provide substantial support for  Kohonen's model. Recently, Murdock (1979), Metcalfe and Murdock (1981) and Knapp and Anderson (1982) have started a careful  experimental evaluation of these models.  ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY FROM A COMPUTER SCIENCE VIEWPOINT  The contributions discussed in this section have their theoretical foundation in the field of artificial intelligence and  involve the process of symbol manipulation within structured semantic networks. These models supplement those derived from  neurophysiology since "it is a fallacy to think that the kind of model which works well at one level must be applicable at all  levels" (p. 31). They differ from most semantic information processing schemes because of their emphasis on a parallel,  content-addressable memory structure. As Feldman has indicated, a parallel rather  480/26/1-7  84  BOOK REVIEW  than a serial system is consistent with the evidence from experimental psychology demonstrating relatively short durations for  complex cognitive operations.  Feldman described a model for visual memory based on the concept of a symbolic neural unit which is functionally equivalent to  a finite-state machine with hierarchically organized levels. According to Feldman, such a hierarchical structure with its  mutual inhibition between levels and multistate layers "provides a computational structure that is a much richer computing  mechanism than that provided by perceptrons" (p.59). The basic computational tool is relaxation, a process which represents  the system's assimilation of new information by means of changes in its activity levels.  Feldman proposed a randomly interconnected network which provides the high connectivity required of a parallel, distributed  memory model, together with the possibility of structural modifiability to incorporate learning. Unfortunately, the  quantitative aspects of the model were insufficiently developed to motivate its empirical evaluation. Since the concept of  relaxation plays an important role, the reader might have expected a more careful analysis of its mathematical properties,  especially since Feldman states that "the relaxation model predicts that spreading activation ... will be ubiquitous" (p. 75).  Fahlman indicated that although the serial models used in artificial intelligence generate outputs similar to human protocols  in tasks such as chess, they are less adequate for the manipulaion of large data bases required in the representation of  knowledge. He has proposed that his NETL model which is based on a parallel semantic network, may be a useful formal structure  for cognitive psychologists.  In this model, concepts are represented by labelled network nodes that are addressable in parallel by commands from a serial  controller. Information search in the network is guided by the matching of labels associated with the nodes so that it is  quite easy to detect and reject false statements due to a mismatch of labels. Unlike the matrix memory models, NETL can handle  transitive closure operations and multiple contexts. However, the memory system is not so highly distributed as in the matrix  models and is more susceptible to failure if one of its hardware elements, such as a node, is damaged.  Hinton has addressed the problem of implementing semantic networks in parallel hardware. Rather than representing nodes and  links by hardware units, as in the Fahlman and Feldman models, Hinton has defined a node as a pattern of activity in a large  network of interconnecting units. The complete semantic network represents the interactions between complex patterns of such  activity so that functional rather than structural aspects are emphasized. Predictions from the model were obtained by  employing a digital computer to simulate a parallel processor containing a number of interacting perceptron-like units, each  assuming one of two binary states, active or inactive. The binary output vector from a set of these units depends on the  binary input vector, the perceptron thresholds and a weight matrix chosen so that the appropriate association of outputs  occurs for a given set of inputs.  Hinton tested the model by requiring it to retrieve the missing component of a relational triple, a task it performed quite  adequately. These relational structures store  BOOK REVIEW HS  information in a content-adrressable form although an imperfect probe input can still retrieve the correct relational triple.  The assimilation of new relational information into the parallel semantic network was achieved by adjustments to the  interaction strengths which allow the system to approximate the new input on the basis of its current knowledge.  Hinton concluded his contribution with an interesting discussion of how the model can be modified to handle semantic  inference. This process could be mediated by the inclusion of skeleton filters which facilitate the transfer of common  information between relational triples to complete the inference process. Hinton showed that such an inference could be  computed quite rapidly in a parallel machine.  Geman has described a parallel processing machine composed of nonlinear and highly interconnected devices designed to discover  spatiotemporal regularities in a high-dimensional probabilistic environment. He developed the model with reference to 11  propositions summarizing important features of the model. The model is Bayesian in character with the prior distribution of  the feature vector determining the most likely relationships among both observed and unobserved features. This data-driven  model recreates unobserved features by predicting their values from evidence provided by the observed features. To this  extent, the model is similar to the reconstructive projection operator described by Kohonen, Oja and Lehtio.  Geman provided a detailed derivation of a local algorithm for the joint probability distributions of all pairwise conjunctions  of binary features, both observed and unobserved. The time course of the change in these probabilities as new information is  sampled was represented by a set of simultaneous stochastic differential equations. This system was transformed into a more  tractable deterministic system since it was assumed that the stimuli satisfied an ergodic mixing assumption and that the rate  of change in probability was small. The solutions for this system implied that the probability of successfully predicting the  unobserved features increases with both time and the probability of a joint observation of feature pairs. As we observed for  the matrix memory models, second-order correlation information in the inputs plays an important role in the storage of  information in associative memory.  Geman also considered the representation of higher-order features such as relational structures in terms of conjunctions of  lower-level features. In this way the model incorporated the concept of processing depth in which successively higher  processing units in the hierarchy operate on "chunks" of correlated inputs derived from the outputs of lower-order units.  Geman did not report any empirical tests of his model (hence the use of "notes" in the title of his chapter) so its  psychological value is difficult to assess. Nevertheless, the conceptualization of the human as a Bayesian processor of  statistical information in a noisy environment will be attractive to those psychologists who consider human behavior to result  from the interaction of internally generated adjustments to salient environmental pressures.  Although these models may represent more psychologically valid representations of human cognitive processes than the neurally  based models because of their prediction of higher-order properties of the system such as inference, they are difficult to  test empirically due to an absence of strong predictions that can be evaluated  86  BOOK REVIEW  experimentally. Without such predictions, these contributions will remain of dubious psychological value. It is the task of  the mathematical psychologist, therefore, to interface these models with the types of theoretical constructs prevalent in the  psychological literature such as those discussed by Anderson (1976). When the appropriate parallel hardware becomes available  the power of these models will become more apparent and they may provide useful insights into complex cognitive processes.  ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY FROM A PSYCHOLOGICAL VIEWPOINT  Although most of the contributors to this book suggest possible psychological applications of their models, only Ratcliff  tested his model with experimental data. Ratcliff began with a summary of a stochastic model for the speed-accuracy tradeoff  in the Sternberg item recognition paradigm described in more detail elsewhere (Ratcliff, 1978). In this model, the probe  stimulus is compared with each memorized item in parallel until the first match occurs and a "Yes" response is given, or all  comparisons result in a mismatch and the response "No" results. Each comparison process was modeled by a diffusion process  between two absorbing barriers representing the two possible outcomes, match and no-match. The drift rate is a function of the  "relatedness" of the probe and the corresponding item in memory. If this similarity metric can be expressed in terms of the  correlation of probe and memory vectors, then we have a model similar to Anderson's matrix memory model. It is important to  note that Ratcliffs contribution allows the psychologist to test the memory process hypotheses with data since unlike the  other models, his model predicts response proportion and response times which are the most common dependent variables in  experimental tasks.  In a comparison of his model with that of Anderson (1973), which was based on a matched filter retrieval process, Ratcliff  noted that since the items are added in a distributed memory the subject should not be able to recall the serial position of  the list items, nor be influenced by a prior stimulus context. In order to effect such predictions, Ratcliff was careful to  ensure that each item had an independent representation in memory, yielding a model with parallel memory access but localized  storage. This problem illustrated how important the closure of the gap between neurally based models and psychological data  really is.  Ratcliff also described an important series of experiments on recall facilitation by priming with a previous stimulus  presentation. When stimulus processing time was controlled experimentally, Ratcliff showed that the priming effect could be  resolved into two components, an automatic priming effect and a strategic priming effect. Such a finding imposes constraints  on any psychologically valid semantic retrieval model derived from artificial intelligence research. Ratcliff has also  expressed doubt in the role of spreading-activation as a useful mechanism for searching for information in a semantic network.  It is Ratcliffs thesis that the rate of spread of activation along  BOOK REVIEW 87  internodal links is too great to account for the reaction time differences observed in semantic verification tasks.  CONCLUSION  Hinton and Anderson have provided theoretical psychologists with a new insight on how people store and retrieve information in  memory. The contributors have offered quite different viewpoints on memory processes depending on their particular area of  expertise. These ideas are united, however, by the common conceptualization of memory as a parallel information processing  system. Although the storage of information was assumed to be distributed for simple neural models of memory, several  contributors including Kohonen, Fahlman and Geman incorporated local storage processes for higher-order information into their  memory schemes. Hence, any psychological investigation of the local versus distributed storage issue should be careful to  consider the type of information stored as a possible confounding variable.  Although many psychologists will be sympathetic to the view of memory expressed in this book, they will probably be  disappointed to find no guidelines as to how the important concept of a parallel memory system can be evaluated  experimentally. What seems to be lacking is a contribution by an experimental psychologist which extracts the psychologically  relevant aspects of each chapter and interfaces this information with what is currently known about human associative memory.  Despite such reservations this book should provide memory researchers with a fresh approach in their search for useful models  of the storage and retrieval processes. The matrix models of Anderson and Kohonen should be examined very carefully since they  are tractable and can be interfaced with stochastic models for the decision process to predict human performance. When  parallel computing devices become more widely available models like those of Hinton, Geman, and Fahlman will offer interesting  ideas for the simulation of the parallel processes which are probably associated with much of our intelligent behavior. When  the parallel computer is a commonplace, the psychologist with foresight will be glad that he has this interesting set of  papers on his bookshelf.  REFERENCES  ANDERSON, J. A. A theory for the recognition of items from short memorized lists. Psychological Review, 1973, $0, 417-438.  ANDERSON, J. R. Language, memory and thought. Hillsdale, N. J.: Erlbaum, 1976.  KNAPP, A. G., & ANDERSON, J. A. A signal-averaging theory of categorization. Unpublished manuscript, 1982.  KOHONEN, T. Associative memory: A system-theoretical approach. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1977. KOHONEN, T. Content-addressable  memories. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1980.  METCALFE, J., & MURDOCK, B. B. An encoding and retrieval model of single-trial free recall. Journal of Verbal Learning and  Verbal Behavior, 1981, 20, 161-189.  88  BOOK REVIEW  MURDOCK, B. B., JR. Convolution and correlation in perception and memory. In L.-G. Nilsson (Ed.), Perspectives in memory  research: Essays in honor of Uppsala University's 500th anniversary. Hillsdale, N. J.: Erlbaum, 1979.  NORMAN, D., RC RUMELHART, D. E. A system for perception and memory. In D. A. Norman (Ed.), Models of human memory. New York:  Academic Press, 1970.  RATCLIFF, R. A theory of memory retrieval. Psychological Review, 1978, 85, 59-108.