10.1016/0022-2496(82)90004-9
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 26,252-262 (1982)  Turning a Penrose Triangle Inside Out  THADDEUS M. COWAN  Kansas State University  Why do impossible figures, which cannot exist in three dimensions, appear to make threedimensional sense? In order to shed  some light on this question the limits may be tested to which three-dimensional operations on these figures can be performed.  In this paper a particularly difficult operation, viz., torus eversion is attempted. Not only is an eversion found to be  possible but an unfamiliar impossibility develops. The regular form of the eversion is shown to be unique.  The eversion of a torus is a well=known problem which appears now and then in recreational mathematics (Gardner, 1959). Its  appeal comes from the challenge it provides for the visual imagination. The problem asks, "If a hole is cut in the side of,  say, an inner tube, can the tube be pulled completely through the hole so that it everts or turns inside out?" You are now  asked to compound the problem and imagine (or try to!) the eversion of an impossible torus such as Penrose's triangle shown in  Fig. I a.  The eversion of a Penrose triangle may have significance beyond its status as a curiosity. Figures like this cannot exist in  our three-dimensional physical world, and we might deny their toroidal form on these grounds. Yet toruses they are; if they  were not they would seem flat (literally) and uninteresting. While Fig. la is not a projection of a real three-dimensional  object it is a representation, a "projection," of a perceptual object. The interesting question here is not why these figures  appear impossible, but why do we make perceptual sense out of them at all.  As a beginning we might try to discover the formal properties of such a perceptual torus. Included in the list of formal  properties are certain transformations we can accomplish with these figures. Since three dimensionality seems to be a  particularly crucial property here we might ask if there exists any three-dimensional transformation that cannot be performed  on a perceptual object. And while we cannot physically maneuver a Penrose triangle in three space, we might be able to  discover what the results of a given maneuver would be.  Here we choose inversion as a transformation problem because it is sufficiently complex so as to make it nontrivial.  Furthermore, there are reasons to believe that an eversion provides an impossible figure pattern that is different from the  ones we have been accustomed to seeing. These reasons will become apparent later.  Address reprint requests to Thaddeus M. Cowan, Department of Psychology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas 66506.  0022-2496/82 $2.00  Copyright 1982 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  252  FLAsk    E  &3  FIG. 1. (A)-(D) A Penrose triangle in knots and coming unglued; (E) an s, s, s, braided corner.  STIMULUS CUES FOR IMPOSSIBILITY  The Penrose triangle, like most impossible toruses, is edged and cornered, and this imposes a rigidity onto the figure which  would seem to obviate eversion. It is evident that we must somehow free the torus by either relaxing the corners, the edges or  both. However, it is necessary that those features which reflect the impossibility of the figure be retained during the  eversion; we want to make sure that the impossibility is carried through the eversion process. Our first task then is to  indicate which of the stimulus cues provides the perceptual confrontation.  We note that the corners appear right angled downward (or upward), and this leaves us with the impression that we are led out  of the plane in a consistant direction at every turn, and yet we end where we begin. This means that every impossible torus  figure has an impossible staircase counterpart. It is this aspect of the torus that creates its apparent contradiction, a fact  that has been suggested a number of times (Harris, 1973; Cowan, 1977; Draper, 1978). Moreover, it has been empirically  demonstrated that naive observers, although they are unaware of it, will rely on just this feature in judging the degree of  impossibility of a wide variety of such toruses (Cowan and Pringle, 1978).  It seems self-evident that to find the confrontation, the realization that one ends where one begins, we must scan the torus  in a circular manner around the center following whatever stimulus cue that guides us in that direction. Therefore, the parts  which best reveal this ascending-descending feature, the feature we want to preserve during eversion, are the longitudes or  those edges which run parallel to the center hole.  In recent years there have appeared a number of papers promoting different analyses of figure impossibilities (Huffman, 1971,  1977; Cowan, 1974, 1977; Draper, 1978; Terouanne, 1980). Each of these should have its own thing to say about torus eversion.  We choose the approach of knot topology and the related study of braids.  THE PENROSE TRIANGLE AS A BRAIDED STRUCTURE  One way to show how the edges are patterned in a Penrose figure is to show how the surface strips of the triangle are  arranged. The edges define the boundaries of these strips, and as Fig. 1 shows the edge and strip patterns are the same. The  strips in this figure have been separated. They are sometimes folded at the corners along lines parallel to the meridians  (cross section lines) of the torus. We ignore these creases, because they are orthogonal to the longitude lines critical to  impossibility.  The separated strips reveal a weaving pattern at each of the three corners. This weave can be considered a type of braid. The  corners are well represented by braided lines, and the topology of braids (Artin, 1941) serves as a useful tool for the  analysis of figures like this (Cowan, 1974). The braid for one of the corners is given in Fig. le. If we let the symbols Sk  and sk ' represent the kth edge from the right (following the longitude direction) passing over (Sk) and under (sk') the (k+  1)th edge from the right we find that each corner is SI s3 s2 braided. The corners of the Penrose triangle are all alike, and  the braid of the whole Penrose triangle is  S1S3S2S1S3S2S1S3S2  or (SIs3s2)3.  THE PENROSE TRIANGLE AS A KNOTTED STRUCTURE  Since we ignore the folds or creases in the braided strips (edges) we relax the corners and treat the edge pattern as a  general knot which we call a Penrose knot (see Fig. 2a). The analysis of a knot is an extraordinary example of a figure-ground  problem. A knot K is described, not by the course of the string entangled in it, but in terms of the way the space R 3  surrounding the knot (R' - K) is curved. Space curves differently around different loops of the knot which are set apart from  each other by certain nodes.  But how are we to describe the curvature of the various parts of the surrounding space? We can conceive of a given section of  space as a collection of directed lines or  A B V  ~~u  1,  X v  SlC 3  C1,,  7 0  V3  V2  D  C V, }  ~, V3  '__ '"  r i_  ct  r  V4 L V2  X  FIG. 2. (A)-(B) The Penrose knot and its over and under path group presentation. A single loop path (z,y, or z) is shown in  (A); (C)-(D) the "everted" Penrose knot and the presentation of its fundamental path group. (A) and (C) are homotopies.  paths emanating from a single base point. One of these paths is shown in Fig. 2a. Any path is deformable into any other within  the same section of space. Such paths are said to be homooopec. The equivalence classes of these paths with the basepoint  exhibit a well-defined algebraic structure called the fundamental path group of the knot.  Since we use the algebraic structure of the knot as an analytic tool we must find the fundamental path group of the Penrose  knot. The path group will point to a relationship between the Penrose knot and the common overhand knot or trefoil. We will  use this knot form to show how an edged torus figure can be everted.  FUNDAMENTAL PATH GROUP  It is beyond the scope of this paper to give a detailed account of just how the path group is found, and we approach the  problem in an algorithmic way by listing the  steps in the process. The reader is referred to Crowell and Fox (1963) for their justification. An' excellent introduction to  knot theory can be found in a Scientific American article on knot theory by Neuwirth (1979).  In order to present a fundamental path group we must first define a set of elementary paths or generators of the group. Then  we specify a set of group relations, an exhaustive list of equations each of which equals one or the identity of the path  group. (The identity is the set of all paths that can be deformed, here retracted, into the constant path or base point. Such  paths are homotopic to the constant path.) Each equation in the list of relations is reduced. That is, all contiguous inverse  products in the set of terms (including the first and last terms) which can be reduced to one are eliminated.  The fundamental path group of any knot, in this case the Penrose knot, can be determined by following the steps listed below.  (1) Give each knot a polygonal form. This form comes naturally to the Penrose knot.  (2) Give a direction to the string of the knot (i.e., the edges of the Penrose figure).  (3) Mark the string segments which incorporate unbroken sequences of overpasses. These are shown by the heavy lines in Fig. 2b.  (4) Cross each of these segments with an arrow which indicates a left-hand screw (the segment it crosses comes in from the  right). The individual arrows are actually segments of separate paths with a common base point which loop under and around the  overpass lines. These loop segments, labeled x, y, and z in Fig. 2b, define the elements or generators of the algebraic group  of the Penrose knot. The relations of the group, the set of reduced equations equal to one, are found in the following way:  (1) Enclose the segments which incorporate unbroken sequences of underpasses with a polygon.  (2) Draw a path c; from each corner of the three polygons to the base point po.  (3) Give a counterclockwise direction to the edges of the polygon and a bidirectional label to ci. The edges of the polygon  and c; form a path leading to the basepoint pn.  We now have three loop paths V*,, each of which are homotopic to the same constant path. That is, each path can be retracted  back to the base point without becoming entangled in the knot. Each path, therefore, is a unit path. Notice that each of these  loop paths crosses each overpass segment of the knot in the same way as the generator of the segment or its inverse (not  surprisingly, this presentation is called an over and under presentation). Therefore, the unit paths 1r can be considered  equal to a composite (product) of segments each homotopic to some generator.  For example, consider Y*. Starting at pu we encounter c, . Then the path crosses a  knot segment in a direction congruent with z, then y, etc. Therefore, the equation for the V* unit path is  V* = c,zyxzx-'y-'z-'x -' c;  Moving c, and c~ ' to the other side we find that this bidirectional segment can be omitted from the equation without loss.  Continuing,  V2 =xzyxy-'z-'x-'y-' = 1.  V3 can be determined from the other two. The formal presentation of the fundamental path group, Tc(R 3 - K), of the Penrose  knot then is  7c(R 3 - K) = I x, y, z: xzyx = zyxz, xzyx = yxzy 1.  THE PENROSE KNOT AND THE TREFOIL KNOT  We identify the three pairwise combinations of the three generators: xz = a, yx = b, and zy = c. Substituting these in Eq. 1  we find that ab = ca, and ab = bc. Some simple algebraic manipulations beginning with a solution for c leads us to bab = aba.  Consider the presentation  7c(R 3 - K) = I a, b: bab = aba 1. (2)  This is the presentation of the cloverleaf or trefoil knot (Crowell and Fox, 1963). Thus a relationship is established between  the trefoil and the Penrose knots. Multiply each side of the relation in Eq. 2 on the left (the algebraic group is  noncommutative) by aba,  ababab = abaaba.  Let u = ab and v = aba,  Equation 3 specifies two homotopic knot forms both of which belong to the same torus. For example, (v)2 may be taken as a  trefoil knot that follows a longitude path twice around the center of the torus (see Fig. 3a). That is, it winds itself two  times around the center hole; any line from the outside to the center intersects two strings of the knot projection, and we  say the winding number of the torus knot is two.  But what about (u)3, and how do we find it? First note that if the exponent gives the winding number, then the number of times  the string of the new knot wraps itself around the center hole should be three. Observe that there are three loops to the  trefoil in Fig. 3a, and each loop can be seen to follow the meridian of the torus. If we  A  B  C _c;  FIG. 3. (A)-(B) The common overhand knot (also called a trefoil or cloverleaf knot) and its homotopic form; (C) the eversion  of a torus showing the exchange of the meridian and longitude.  carefully lift the right edge of each loop and, moving clockwise, thread each in turn with, say, a pencil, we create the new  knot shown in Fig. 3b with the pencil in the center (an empirical verification of this with a real string has pedagogical  The new knot seems to be what we need; it has a winding number of three. But more importantly for our purposes, the meridian  loops we threaded are now the longitude strings of the new torus. That is, the torus longitude line and meridian line have  exchanged positions, and this is precisely what happens when the torus is everted (Fig. 3c). In short the eversion of the  torus containing the knot (v)2 will produce the knot (u)' and we can capitalize on this in everting the Penrose triangle.  EVERTING THE PENROSE TRIANGLE  Although the Penrose knot has the appearance of a trefoil knot (v)', it has a winding number of four not two; we might expect  something like  Return to the Penrose knot by expanding (u)' and (v)2,  (ab)' = (aba)2, (xzyx)I = (xzyxxz)2.  We can use the relations in the group presentation of the Penrose knot (Eq. 1) to show that  (ZYxz)' = (Yxz)a.  Setting e = zyxz and p = yxz we have  (e)' = (p)a  which is the desired result.  The Penrose triangle is evidently (p)a, but how do we construct (e)'? We can procede much in the same way that we did with the  trefoil by physically threading the three meridian loops of the Penrose knot. The results are shown in Fig. 2c. Of course in  creating this new knot we have found the edges of the everted Penrose triangle. Note that the winding number of the (e)' knot  is three. This tells us that there are three edges to the everted torus, thus its cross section is prismatic. Prismatic  impossible figures are unknown.  The fundamental group of this new knot is the same as that of the Penrose knot. The over and under group presentation of this  new knot (see Fig. 2d) is  7t(R' - K) = I w, x, y, z: wzy = zyx, xwz = yxw, yxw = zyx 1. Again the fourth relation is determined from the other three.  Solve for w in the third relation and substitute this value for w in the first and second relations,  7c(R' - K) = I x, y, z: zyxzy = yxzyx, yzyx = zyxz 1.  Using the relations in Eqs. 5 and simple algebraic manipulation we find (zyxz)' = (yxz)a or (e)' = (p)a.  We now transform this new knot into a cornered torus.  CORNERING THE EVERTED TORUS  We return to braid theory to help us form the corners. The braid representation of the everted Penrose knot is  SIS2SISZSISZSIS2 = (SIS2)a  as Fig. 4a shows. All of these braids are inverses but the inverse signs will be omitted for convenience; we will in effect be  dealing with the mirror image of the figure. Note  A -~ B C   - S;     r r.T ro. rTi  M    -r-ML-1 SO S1   S2     D E   L  OBVERSE AND  S, S2 OBVERSE S1S2S1 EQOIVALENT S2StSq  525,    FIG. 4. (A) The homotopy of the Penrose knot divided into braided segments; (B)-(E) some prismatic corners possible with the  Penrose homotopy. Each braid pair (not corner pair) are mutual obverses created by rotating the braid frame as indicated. (B)  An identity prism corner which is not considered here; (C) -(D) two corners that are considered viable; (E) s,s2s, is  considered viable but its obverse is not.  that since there are only three edges there are only two types of underpasses or overpasses (s, or s2) in each braid.  Now we pay the price for relaxing the corner braids of the Penrose triangle prior to eversion, for here we do not know how to  group the crossover nodes which will define the braids of the corners of the new figure. However, we can impose certain  logical restrictions on the corners to aid us in our efforts. For example, the figure is prismatic, and we will accept only  cornered crease patterns that match the cross section; i.e., the prism bends so that the creases form a triangle. This means  that each edge bends once and only once when rounding the corner to give three points through which the triangular crease may  form.  This has two consequences: First, there can be no more than three crossover nodes per corner, and second, no two edges may  cross then recross each other. Therefore, corner braids with more than three nodes will not be allowed nor will braids with s,  s, or s,s2 node pairs. This leaves braids sS2, (S,S2), (S2S,), (S,S2s,), and (S2S,S2). These are shown in Fig. 4 with  representative corners. The identity braid so is also shown, but this corner will not be used here because of the reduced form  of the knot relations.  The equivalence sksk+, Sk = sk+, sksk+, is one of two relations of the braid group presentation of which s, s2 s, = s2 s, s2  is a particular. The other relation is Sksk+2 = Sk+2Sk Which need not concern us since it requires a braid of at least four  strings. One of the two s2s,S2 corners is tetrahedral as Fig. 4e shows (the other is an obverse), and since the middle edge  bends twice here this corner will not be allowed.  PENROSE TRIANGLE 26)1  A  B  FIG. 5. (A) The everted Penrose triangle in its regular form. Its braid equation is (S ,S2)" (B) An irregular form of the  eversion. Its braid equation is ((s,)(s,))  Such a corner, when encountered, is easily transformed to the s, s2 s, form. The relevant braid relation allows us to write  numerous equivalent forms of Eq. 7. If we take each form and define the torus corners by gathering the nodes by ones, twos,  and threes, then include all their permutations and combinations, the number of torus figures becomes quite large. But the  Penrose triangle is a regular figure. That is, all corners are the same. We might expect as much of its everse.  We reduce the set of possible everted toruses, then, to the set of regular forms. The possible membership of this set includes  a form with all s, (or s2) corners, a form with all S,S2 (or S2s,) corners, and a form with all S,s2s, corners. However, there  is no way that we can use the equivalence relation to reduce all nodes to s, (or s2), since both s, and s2 are included in the  relation. Furthermore, since there are eight nodes in Eq. 7 there cannot be a regular figure formed out of s, s, s, braided  corners since the three nodes of s,s2s, do not divide eight evenly. The only possibility left is to partition Eq. 7 into four  s, s2 sets (or the obverse set MO.  The everse of the Penrose torus is shown in Fig. 5. It has four s, s2 corners, and it displays an interesting  ascending-descending impossibility. An irregular variant is shown next to it for comparison. There is an esthetic symmetry  here between the Penrose triangle and its regular everted form. The Penrose triangle has three corners and a cross section of  four sides; its regular everse has four corners and a cross section of three sides. Whether this is true for all regular  figures and their regular everses is not known.  26)2 THADDEUS M. COWAN  REFERENCES  ARTIN, E. Theory of braids. Annals of Mathematics, 1941, 48, 101-126.  COWAN, T. M. The theory of braids and the analysis of impossible figures. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1974, 11,  190-212.  COWAN, T. M. Organizing the properties of impossible figures. Perception, 1977, 6, 41-56.  COWAN, T. M., PRINGLE, R. An investigation of the cues responsible for figure impossibility. Journal of Experimental  Psychology: Human Performance and Perception, 1978, 4, 112-120.  CROWELL, R. H., & Fox, R. H. Introduction to knot theory. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1963. DRAPER, S. W. The Penrose triangle  and a family of related figures. Perception, 1978, 7, 283-296. GARDNER, M. Mathematical games. Scientific American, 1959  (January), 198 (1), 92-96.  HARRIS, W. F. Perceptual singularities in impossible pictures represent screw dislocations. South African Journal of Science,  1973, 69, 10-13.  Huffman, D. A. Impossible objects as nonsense sentences. In B. Meltzer & D. Michie (Eds.), Machine intelligence. Vol. 6. New  York: Halstead, 1971.  HUFFMAN, D. A. A duality concept for the analysis of polyhedral scenes. In E. W. Elcock and D. Michie (Eds.), Machine  intelligence. Vol. 8. New York: Halsted, 1977, pp. 475-492.  HUFFMAN, D. A. Realizable configurations of lines in pictures of Polyhedra. In E. W. Elcock and D. Michie (Eds.), Machine  intelligence. Vol. 8. New York: Halsted, 1977, pp. 493-509.  NEUWIRTH, L. The theory of Knots. Scientific American, 1979 (June), 240 (6), 110-124.  PENROSE, L. S., & PENROSE, R. Impossible objects: A special type of illusion. British Journal of Psychology. 1958, 49, 31-33.  TEROUANNE, E. On a class of impossible figures: A new language for a new analysis. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1980,  22, 24-48.