10.1016/0022-2496(83)90037-8
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 27, 456-460 (1983)  Book Review  R. S. MICHALSKI, .T. G. CARBONELL, AND T. M. MITCHELL (Eds.). Machine Learning: An Artificial Intelligence Approach. Menlo  Park, Calif.: Tioga, 1983. Pp. VI + 572.  Reviewed by EARL HUNT  Michalski is a Professor of Computer Science and Medical Information Science at the University of Illinois at  Urbana-Champaign. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Silesia, and prior to moving to the U.S.A. in 1970, he was a  Research Scientist at the Polish Academy of Sciences in Warsaw. His research interests include inductive inference, modeling  of human plausible reasoning, and automated pattern discovery. Carbonell is an Assistant Professor in Computer Science at  Carnegie-Mellon University, where he has taught since obtaining his Ph.D. in Computer Science at Yale in 1979. His research  interests span several areas of artificial intelligence, and in 1981 he published the book Subjective understanding: Computer  models of belief systems, U.M.I. Research Press. Mitchell is Associate Professor of Computer Science at Rutgers University. He  obtained his Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering from Stanford University in 1978. His current research on learning focuses on  machine learning of heuristics and problem solving strategies.  The reviewer is Professor of Psychology at the University of Washington. His primary research interests are Cognition and  Mathematical Psychology. He is Editor of the journal Cognitive Psychology, and author of Artificial intelligence, Reading,  Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1975.  The vision of a machine that could learn has long been a stockpiece of science fiction. Efforts to develop computer programs  that could be said to be capable of "learning" have been underway since the advent of computing. The program waxed in the  1950s, waned about 1965, and then picked up steam again around 1975. This book is a collection of papers that are intended to  represent the current wave. As the title indicates, the emphasis is on "Machine Learning," rather than on the simulation of  human learning or biological adaptability. The disparity of topics discussed shows that it is quite difficult to decide what  learning is. Intuitively, learning should be more than acquisition of knowledge. But what more? That question is not answered  here.  The editors state that their intention was to present state of the art reviews and research reports, in the hopes that these  would provide a text that would serve as an introduction to the field. As a result the book is a mixture of overviews of  approaches, summaries of research programs, and reports of specific research projects. The reader is left with the task of  inducing general principles from specifics; a formidable exercise in human learning: What these papers illustrate, and what  can be abstracted from the illustrations?  The papers fall into four rather different groups. The first group consists of papers that attempt to solve what has come to  be known as the Pattern Identification 456  0022-2496/83 $3.00  Copyright .C) 3983 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  BOOK REVIEWS 457  Problem. Consider an observer who is shown a set of items, exhaustively partitioned into two or more disjoint subsets. The  items from each subset are said to be examples of mutually exclusive classes. The items themselves can be described in terms  of fundamental attributes and values, from these one can extend the description by computing functions of the attributes and  values. The observer's task is to develop a rule for classifying items into their appropriate class. Furthermore, to avoid  reducing the exercise to a problem in statistical pattern recognition, the classification rule is to be expressed as a first  order predicate calculus statement about item descriptions, and not as the statement of a threshold value for a weighted sum  of indicators. In essence, pattern recognition by linear discriminant procedures is not fair game.  Four papers fall into this category; three by Michalski and various collaborators and one by Quinlan. The method of  investigation is the same in each case. A decision problem is stated as an abstract mathematical problem. That is, a "true"  answer is defined, and some technique is used to generate training items in accordance with this answer. An algorithm is then  applied to calculate a decision rule. The decision rule is compared to the true answer, either by inspection or by evaluating  its ability to predict the class membership of items outside of the training set. In an extension of this work the training  items may be chosen from some "real world" problem. Several interesting examples are given, including the classification of  cancerous and noncancerous cells and the classification of chess end-game positions into positions that would lead to a win,  loss, or draw. Of course, in dealing with a real world problem the correct classification rule is unknown. Empirical  evaluation is still possible, by determining how well the decision rule classifies items outside of the original training set.  Taken at face value, the papers report useful algorithms for dealing with pattern detection problems. The usefulness of each  algorithm to a user would depend on the extent to which the user's decision problem conformed to the problem that the  algorithm was designed to solve. Of course, exactly the same remarks could be made about any of a number of statistical  techniques, e.g., discriminant analysis. This raises a definitional point. The pattern classification techniques described  here are presented as cases of "machine learning," a catchy title. They could be presented equally well as techniques for  "exploratory data analysis dealing with categorical data," thus moving the topic from artificial intelligence to statistics.  Would this make any difference?  The answer to this question depends upon the purpose of studying the algorithm. One could look on the algorithms as potential  models of human behavior. In that case the topic would clearly be psychological, and validation would depend on a comparison  of human to program behavior. But that is not the case here. The algorithms are offered as ways of solving abstract pattern  detection problems. Given this goal, the algorithms might better be evaluated as exercises in statistics rather than  artificial intelligence. Investigations of techniques for data analysis should deal systematically with questions of  robustness and reliability. Statistics has a wellunderstood framework for dealing with such questions. If the algorithms  presented here were studies within the statistics framework I believe we would learn a great deal  458 HOOK REVIEWS  more about them. The investigation is essentially a certification procedure, analagous to the certification procedure applied  to new drugs before they are released for general use. Presentation of pattern classification methods as certified, understood  statistical procedures would certainly enhance their chances of being accepted by the broader scientific community.  The second category of "machine learning" papers deal with a quite different problem, the expansion of knowledge by detailed  analysis of single cases. Two subproblems are investigated in the papers in this category. One is to develop algorithms that  can solve a problem by drawing analogies between it and previously presented problems. The other is to develop algorithms that  can examine the successful solutions to two or more problems, and from this examination extract a single generalized problem  solving procedure.  Just as there are two issues to be investigated, there are two approaches that can be taken. One, which is nicely illustrated  by J. R. Anderson's paper on acquiring proof skills in geometry and by Mitchell, Utgoff, and Banerji's paper on symbolic  integration, is to make a detailed analysis of a single field. This has the advantage of making the issue concrete, in a way  that the more rarified discussion of classification procedures does not. This issue is turned on its head in papers by  Carbonell and by Hayes-Roth. These authors define abstraction and analogy problems in the abstract, and then solve the  abstract problem. (Note the analogy to the use of abstract problems in pattern classification.) As one would expect, there is  a complementarity to the two approaches. The analysis of single cases ensured that the problem being attacked was one that  someone, somewhere in the real world, really has. The analysis of abstract problems ensures that we know what computational  problem is being solved. We just do not know whether or not anyone has it.  In some ways, the above remarks are a bit unfair. Or, perhaps, they are the inevitable criticisms of a new field. Statistics  operates with idealized models of the world. We treat statisticians with respect because their models have been shown to be  useful. We simply have less experience with the sort of models that are useful for analogies and generalization problems. It  will be interesting to see how the field represented by these papers develops over the next ten years.  The third category is in some ways the most fascinating example of machine learning, the reorganization of knowledge. Given a  set of known to be true propositions about some body of knowledge, a machine ought to be able to generate "interesting"  propositions that can be inferred from that knowledge. The key word here is "interesting;" blind generation of all possible  inferences would quickly swamp the capacity of any conceivable computing machine.  Two papers on this topic are worth special mention. One is Lenat's paper on heuristics for expanding a knowledge base. This  paper is at once both fascinating and frustrating. In its fascinating part, it outlines the techniques Lenat used in this  thesis on the Artificial Mathematician (AM) program that "discovered" some interesting facts about elementary number theory,  including the concept of the prime numbers. (The work has been presented in much more detail and clarity elsewhere.) The paper  then goes on to describe the EURISKO program, which attempts to apply the same  BOOK REVIEWS 459  rules to a set of postulates about heuristics for making inductive statements. The idea is that some computing procedures were  applied to a characterization of mathematics in AM, to produce new mathematics. Why not apply the same computing procedures to  a characterization of themselves, to produce new procedures? The results of this endeavor are unclear. I suspect that it is  because our ability to characterize computing procedures is not nearly as well developed as our ability to characterize  mathematical objects.  The final part of Lenat's paper closes with a speculation that genetic evolution is somehow controlled by the same heuristics  used in the programs he cites. My own skepticism is monumental.  Many readers will find Lenat's paper the most fascinating in the book. However, it has to be treated with caution. A great  deal of generality is claimed for the methods described here, but the methods, the problems they solve, and the results  themselves are very loosely described. The claims that are made, e.g., about our present knowledge of heuristics, are stated  in such broad terms that they really cannot be refuted. I would urge the interested reader to use this paper as ari entry into  the field, but not as a reliable summary of the state of the art. Until the famous "dispassionate review" of the field is  published, serious readers will have to go back to the original literature to decide whether or not the claims made in  secondary papers such as this one are really justified. Different readers may well have different opinions.  A second paper in this group, by Langley, Bradshaw, and Simon, is considerably more modest in its scope, but far more concrete  in its accomplishments. They provide a concise description of a program (BACONA) that applies heuristic rules to facts about  experiments, thus rediscovering important regularities in the data. The results are the rediscovery of some of the classic  laws of physics and chemistry, e.g., Ohm's law. The Langley et al. paper is an elegant case example of "mechanical" induction,  in a project that has since been extended in modest ways, with little fanfare, but that has shown considerable progress.  One way of learning to do something is to receive instruction. How should one instruct a machine? This is a serious problem,  especially in the design of "expert systems" that are supposed to act as surrogates for, say, an experienced medical  diagnostician. How does the human expert communicate his or her knowledge to the machine in the first place. A paper by Mostow  deals with a special case in which a program is "told" how to play the game of hearts, in terms of strategies rather than  rules. A second example is offered, in which the machine accepts instructions for constructing musical compositions. This  paper, like others that have been cited, is an example of a good analysis of a specific problem. Two other papers, by Haas and  Hendrix and by Rychner, present overviews of large projects in information management or program construction. Both projects  evidently had to wrestle with the problem of machine construction. Unfortunately, the presentations are so general that it is  hard for the reader to do much more than extract the general project philosophy from the article.  What should a psychologist make of these papers? Indeed, what should a psychologist make of the whole machine learning  approach? While none of the  460 BOOK REVIEWS  papers presented here are proposed as specific psychological models, some of them could serve as the inspiration for  psychological models. There would be a great deal of work to be done to prove that they were or were not realistic. One can  agree (as I do) with the statement thay any sufficient model for problem solving is a candidate psychological model, and still  observe that not all candidates graduate! Some of the pattern detection techniques described here may well be useful additions  to our statistical armory, when they are worked out. The interested psychologist will certainly keep an eye on developments in  this field. But that eye will have to be a jaundiced one. The papers in this book sometimes provide overviews. These tend to  be uncritical, so the interested psychologist should be prepared to do some more reading. (There is nothing wrong with that!)  In other cases interesting specific studies are reported. They are admirable, but when they are used to draw general  conclusions about Learning not all readers will agree with the writers. Are psychologists unfamiliar with this situation?