10.1016/0022-2496(83)90015-9
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 27, 326-327 (1983)  Book Review  S. LAKSHMIVARAHAN. Learning Algorithms Theory and Applications. New York/Heidelberg/Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1981.  Reviewed by RADu THEODORESCU  Laksmivarahan is an Associate Professor at the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Oklahoma.  He has been at Oklahoma since 1979, prior to which he was at Yale University and The Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore.  His primary research interests are learning algorithms, analysis and design of parallel algorithms, and cryptography,  The reviewer is a Professor of Mathematics at Laval University. He has published extensively in the area of applied  probability, with his work in learning models (Random Processes and Learning. Springer-Verlag, 1969) being the most familiar  to readers of this journal.  This monograph is a recent and welcome addition to an array of books [1-4] dealing with various aspect of learning. Learning  has been studied by psychologists and mathematicians for decades from the point of view of modelling the observed behaviour of  animals. This approach has come to be known as the descriptive approach and the books by Bush and Mosteller 141, Iosifescu and  Theodorescu [I], and Norman [2] belong to this category. In System Science and Computer Science the interest in learning stems  from the desire to build a machine or a computer program that will learn to behave in a prespecifted manner. Accordingly, this  latter approach is known as the prescriptive approach. The book by Tsetlin [3] and the one under review belong to this latter  category. The entire book by Tsetlin [3] deals with the exposition of a class of algorithms now known as fixed structure  (automaton) algorithms. The book under review complements Tsetlin's book in the sense it exclusively deals with the so-called  variable structure learning (automaton) algorithms.  A systematic study of variable structure algorithms began with a paper by Varshavskii and Vorontsova [5]. Since then a number  of papers have appeared on this subject. This monograph summarizes well the state of the art in the areas of theory and  application of this class of learning algorithms. The organization of most of the chapters is centered around the author's own  contributions.  The book contains eight chapters and is divided into two parts with four chapters in each part. Part I is devoted to the  theory. Chapter 1 describes the structure and different classes of algorithms. It also introduces the various performance  measures. In Chapter 2 a general class of ergodic learning algorithms is analyzed using the theory of Markov processes that  evolve in small steps [2]. This class includes the well-known linear reward-penalty algorithm [ 1, 4 ]. In addition, this  chapter discusses 326  0022-2496/83 $3.00  Copyright (c) 1983 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  BOOK REVIEW 327  for the first time the theory of ergodic, s-optimal algorithms. This latter class of algorithms has come to be known as L,e-Ep  algorithms. Chapter 3 describes the class of absolutely expedient and absorbing barrier algorithms. Time-varying counterparts  of the algorithms in Chapter 2 are studied in Chapter 4. This class of algorithms resemble the stochastic approximation  algorithms.  Part II deals with applications to three areas: two-person zero sum games with imperfect and incomplete information, perfect  cooperative games with imperfect and incomplete information, and control of a Markov chain with incomplete information.  There is an extensive bibliography given at the end of the book. Further, each chapter has a number of exercises and points to  a variety of open problems.  This book could be well adopted for a graduate course or used for self-study by researchers in the field. The author is right  in his claim that a good background in probability theory would be essential to pursue the developments in the book. There are  some typographical errors but they do not distract from the overall development. All in all, this book is well written and a  timely addition.  REFERENCES  [11 IOSIFESCU, M., & THEODORESCU, R. (1969). Random Processes and Learning. New York/Heidelberg/Berlin: Springer.  121 NORMAN, M. F. (1977). Markov Processes and Learning Models. New York: Academic Press.  131 TSETLIN, M. L. (1973). Automation Theorv and Modelling of Biological Svstems. New York: Academic Press.  141 BUSH, R., & MOSTELLER, F. (1958). Stochastic Models for Learning. New York: Wiley.  151 VARSHAVSKII, V. I., & VORONTSOVA, I. P. (1963). On the behaviour of Stochastic Automata with Variable Structure.  Automation and Remote Control, 24, 327-333.