10.1016/0022-2496(83)90017-2
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 27, 335-340 (1983)  Book Review  STEPHEN GROSSBERG. Studies of Mind and Brain. Boston, Mass.: Reidel, 1982. Pp. xvii + 662. $59.50 (h), $23.93 (p).  Reviewed by ROBERT HECHT-NIELSEN  The author is Director of the Center for Adaptive Systems, and Professor of Mathematics, Psychology, and Biomedical  Engineering, Boston University. The author's primary research interest is the development of a comprehensive theory of mind  and brain at the functional psychological and neurobiological levels.  The reviewer is with the Electronic Systems Group of TRW, Inc. in San Diego, CA. He received a Ph.D. in Mathematics from  Arizona State University in 1974. In 1983 he served as Cochair of the ASU Conference on Neural Modeling. His major research  interest is application of the information processing principles of neural modeling to engineering, which was the theme of his  latest, 1983, SPIE Proceedings paper "Neural Analog Processing."  I. OVERVIEW  It is rare in any field for the work of one person to encompass the range of topics Stephen Grossberg has investigated over  the last 25 years. If his fundamental theories about the dynamics of the mind were in the mainstream of a single discipline,  his name would probably be a household word. However, as Robert S. Cohen and Marx W. Wartofsky (Editors of the Boston Studies  in the Philosophy of Science Series, of which this book is Vol. 70) state in their Editorial Preface: "Stephen Grossberg's  studies ... lie at the intersection of psychology, neurophysiology, and mathematics." This strong interdisciplinary flavor,  along with the notorious compartmentalization of psychology and neuroscience, has combined to limit the understanding and  appreciation of his work. This book promises to help remedy this situation by bringing Grossberg's best expository papers  together in one place. Until now, these papers were scattered in publications ranging from Psychological Review to the Journal  of Mathematical Analysis and Applications.  The book consists of a collection of 13 papers by the author. Each paper (chapter) is preceded by a Preface that identifies  the main themes of the chapter and connects its content with the other chapters in the book. The papers are preceded by the  author's introduction, which gives a description of his methodology and the chronology of his scientific work. At the end of  the book is a bibliography listing all of Grossberg's significant publications through early 1982.  The subject of this book is an emerging coherent theory of mind and brain. Gaining familiarity with any theory during its  creation is challenging. The inter335  0022-2496/83 $3.00  Copyright ''c) 1983 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  336 BOOK REVIEW  disciplinary nature of Grossberg's theory adds additional challenges. Thus, the reader must expect to invest several hours if  a usable increment of learning is to be attained. The chapters of the book divide naturally into three categories on the basis  of how much of the theory the uninitiated reader can expect to extract on a first careful reading. The chapters of the first  category contain the clearest and most easily assimilated elements of the theory. The chapters of the second category are  slightly more difficult but contain deeper insights into specific aspects of the theory. The third category consists of the  remaining chapters of the book. The chapters are now reviewed by category.  11. CHAPTERS 3, 1, 13, AND 12  The best place to begin reading this book (after carefully reading the Editorial Preface and Introduction) is Chapter 3.  Chapter 3 is a long (89 pp.) 1974 book chapter entitled "Classical and Instrumental Learning by Neural Networks." Better than  any other chapter, Chapter 3 illustrates Grossberg's method. The chapter begins by considering the psychological facts of  classical conditioning as applied to serial list learning. From these facts a mathematical notation is developed that  describes the list learning process in terms of a directed graph consisting of nodes that represent the items in the list and  directed paths between the nodes that represent the temporal ordering of the items. Because of the psychological fact that the  representation of an item in the mind is activated or deactivated gradually (i.e., not instantaneously) by the presentation of  withdrawal of an item, Grossberg suggests that the level of activation xi(t) of the node representing list item i be governed  by  xi(t) = -axi(t) + Ci(t),  where a is a positive constant specifying the time constant of the response of the node and Qt) is the total external input to  the node. Qt) can be thought of as the sum of the factors (such as sensory input and expectation) that would act as evidence  for the presence of list item i.  By arguing that the practicing of a serial list should cause the presence of one item to initiate an expectation of the  imminent presentation of the next item, Grossberg suggests that the directed paths between nodes should be conduits for the  transmission of signals from one node to the next. He further argues that the law of influence of one node (i) on a successor  node (j) should be the addition to C.;(t) of a term containing xi(t) weighted by a factor z(t). Grossberg establishes that a  plausible law for governing the connection weights zij(t) is  4(t) = -yzij(t) + 6xi(t - r) xi(t), (2)  where y, 6, and r are positive constants specifying, respectively, the rate at which forgetting will take place as a function  of disuse, the rate at which correlation  BOOK REVIEW 337  (Grossberg's continuous version of Hebbian) learning will occur, and the propagation time delay of signals between node i and  node j. Finally, based upon considerations of noise suppression and the avoidance of irrelevant learning, the complete forms  of Eqs. (1) and (2) are given by  -axi(t) +a '~' Zki[xk(t - r) -T] + + Ci(t) (3) k#i  4(t)=-yzil(t)+6[xi(t-r)_T[+ xj(t), (4)  where a, fl, y, 6, and r are positive constants, T is a positive threshold value introduced to suppress noise, and [u ] + =  max {0, u }. Equations (3) and (4), taken together, describe the dynamics of this "psychological network." Is this a neural  model? Grossberg argues convincingly that it must be, in some sense. Are the nodes neurons? No, they cannot be-they are too  far removed from the simple temporal dynamics of single neurons. So, Grossberg calls them populations. A population is a  collection of neurons that together carry out the complex processing implied by Eqs. (3) and (4). If this seems circular at  first, the impression quickly fades as Grossberg uses this basic directed graph network to explain phenomenon not used in its  construction. The biological characteristics of the nodes become clearer as the chapter unfolds. They begin, more and more, to  look like what other authors call cortical columns and thalamic glomeruli (the model applies to both).  After the introductory sections, Grossberg then goes on in Chapter 3 to explain two of the theory's most important principles:  the outstar and the avalanche. These principles, which follow from Eqs. (3) and (4), explain how arbitrary spatial and  space-time (spatiotemporal) patterns can be learned by practice and later recalled or replayed by these networks. After  completing Section V (avalanches) the reader is advised to stop and go on to Chapter 1. Most of the rest of Chapter 3 is  presented (in a clearer form) in Chapter 13.  Chapter 1 is a 1980 paper entitled "How does a brain build a cognitive code?" This is the most up-to-date review of  Grossberg's work in the book. This chapter is very well written. The main text has almost no mathematics. Five appendixes  provide the relevant mathematical theories in a highly condensed form. Having been introduced to Grossberg's method in Chapter  3, the reader can glean an excellent toplevel view of the theory ca. 1980 from Chapter 1. However, the progress made in the  six intervening years makes it difficult to see how Eq. (3) of Chapter 3 is replaced by  xi =-Axi -+ (B -xi) ~, IkCki - (xi + D) `, IkEki  k=1 k=1  in Chapter 1. This is the difficulty with a collection of papers that describe an evolving theory; each paper gives a time  slice of a portion of the theory, but no comprehensive description of its evolution is provided. Thus, the reader should view  Chapter 3 strictly as an introduction to Grossberg's method. Chapter 1 then should  338 BOOK REVIEW  be used to provide a true introduction to the theory. The evolutionary path (which is only of historical interest) that led  from Eq. (3) to Eq. (5) can then be ignored. Chapter 13 (a 1978 book chapter entitled "A Theory of Human Memory") complements  Chapter 1 by providing expanded discussions of many of the same issues. The primary focus of Chapter 13 is to show that a  relatively simple model can qualitatively account for a number of familiar learning and behavioral facts, some of which are  paradoxical relative to other, less detailed, theories. For example, Grossberg gives a detailed example of how the breakdown  of a smooth flowing sequence of expected sensory inputs by the sudden appearance of an unexpected input causes nonspecific  cortical arousal and parallel template search for a matching item in memory. In this example, as in several others, one will  find parallel discussions of the issue in both Chapters 1 and 13. It is useful to read both together, using Chapter 13 as  background for the crisper presentation of Chapter 1.  Chapter 12 (a 1976 paper entitled "Adaptive Pattern Classification and Universal Recoding...") provides valuable technical  details for the reading of Chapters 1 and 13. This paper (second in a series of three that appeared that year) is pregnant  with first-rate insights into how patterns can be normalized in parallel, how the tuning of a local feature detector must have  global consequences, and how memory is protected from continual inappropriate retuning by the constant barrage of signals  impinging upon it. This chapter is, for me, the most exhilarating of the book. In 50 pages, Grossberg shows how interacting  two-dimensional arrays of dumb processing elements can carry out learning and recall for spatiotemporal patterns, stable  feature detector tuning, contrast and edge enhancement, parallel memory search, and recognition of patterns in noise in a  manner exquisitely reminiscent of brain function. This is material that must become widely understood.  CHAPTERS 6, 8, 9, AND 10  Chapters 6, 8, 9, and 10 provide deeper insights into the details of the theory. They provide additional background for a more  complete understanding of Chapters 1 and 13.  Chapter 6 is a 1975 paper entitled "A Neural Model of Attention, Reinforcement, and Discrimination Learning." This chapter has  a strong psychological flavor. It examines the behavioral consequences of some simple schemes of interconnection between  two-dimensional fields of populations. The arguments are deep and require considerable work to follow, but the results are  powerful. Many unexplained and paradoxical phenomenon such as the rebound from fear to relief, the activation of arousal by  unexpected events, and the process of habituation are shown to be consequences of a single coherent theory.  Chapter 8 is a 1973 article entitled "Contour Enhancement, Short Term Memory, and Constancies in Reverberating Neural  Networks." This chapter provides a detailed technical argument deriving the network equations of Chapter 1 (such as Eq. (5))  from simple psychological observations, much as Eq. (3) is derived in Chapter 3.  BOOK REVIEW 339  Although the issue is not discussed, the reasons why it is reasonable to replace the threshold and delay of Eq. (3) with the  on-center off-surround self-regulation (with arousal) and local short-term memory reverberation of Eq. (5) and the associated  equations of Chapter 1 can be seen. This further illustrates the evolutionary growth of the theory.  Chapter 9 (a 1980 paper entitled "Biological Competition") and Chapter 10 (a 1978 paper entitled "Competition, Decision, and  Consensus") discuss the critical issue of competition. Chapter 9 takes a very broad view, whereas Chapter 10 is more directed  toward Grossberg's theory. Competition is a key element of the theory. For example, in a two-dimensional array (of feature  detector populations) that has its total activity normalized by on-center off-surround lateral inhibition, each population  competes with all the others for the state of high activity. The winners at any given time are those populations most nearly  tuned to the spatial pattern currently being presented. Only the winners (the ones in a state of high activation) get to  retune their interconnection weights (per Eqs. (2) and (4) and their evolutes). This protects the other detectors from having  their pattern receptivity changed inadvertently, while allowing the appropriate detectors to better match the average of the  set of patterns that they are maximally sensitive to. This extremely powerful idea is what I call the Principle of Contrast  and Choice. It was discovered by Grossberg back in the 1960s and has been used in various equivalent and subordinate forms by  many others since without proper attribution (probably because of independent rediscovery).  IV. THE REMAINDER  The other five chapters of the book are;  Chapter 2. "Some Physiological and Biochemical Consequences of Psychological Postulates," 1968  Chapter 4. "Pattern Learning by Functional-Differential Neural Networks with Arbitrary Path Weights," 1972  Chapter 5. "A Neural Theory of Punishment and Avoidance. II. Quantitative Theory," 1972  Chapter 7. "Neural Expectation...," 1972  Chapter 11. "Behavioral Contrast in Short Term Memory...," 1978.  These chapters all contain interesting work. However, they are not as central to the understanding of the theory as those  reviewed above.  V. CONCLUSIONS  Since Grossberg's theory is the only comprehensive and coherent brain theory extant (incomplete as it is), this is obviously  the definitive book on the subject. While  340 BOOK REVIEW  it is by no means a textbook, it does provide the motivated reader with a sufficiently tutorial set of material to allow an  initial understanding of the theory to be attained. Even the casual reader who only goes through parts of Chapters 3, 1, and  12 (in, say, 4 or 5 hours) can learn impressive things. However, the reader bent on instant gratification will come away  empty. I suspect that this characteristic of Grossberg's work can help account for the embarrassing ignorance of it that one  occasionally encounters in individuals who clearly can and should understand it,  For everyone interested in how brains work, this book is highly recommended.  Printed in Belgium