10.1016/0022-2496(83)90031-7
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 27, III-117 (1983)  Book Review  Multiple Criteria, Multiple Models  MILAN ZELENY. Multiple Criteria Decision Making. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1982.  Reviewed by JOEL HUBER  Milan Zeleny is a Professor at the Martino School of Business, Fordham University. He received his Ph.D. in Operations  Research from the University of Rochester, and he has taught at Columbia University, the Copenhagen School of Economics, and  the European Institute for Advanced Studies in Management in Brussels. His research interests include operations research,  mathematical programming, and decision analysis of complex multicriteria problems.  The reviewer is Associate Professor at the Fuqua School of Business Duke University. He obtained his Ph.D. in Marketing from  the University of Pennsylvania in 1974. His primary research interests are marketing and consumer choice models.  Consider the class of choice problems in which alternatives differ with respect to largely incommensurable criteria. These  problems can be broken into two parts. First a valuation stage, determining the relative ordering on various mixes of  criteria, and second, an optimization stage, finding the choice that results in the best mix. Multiple Criteria Decision  Making is concerned with both of these problems with emphasis being on the first stage: valuation.  This orientation derives from a multidisciplinary focus that Zeleny brings to the field of decision making. He is trained in  operations research and decision sciences, a field that is primarily concerned with helping others make good decisions on the  basis of known information. Zeleny is, however, a self-professed maverick in that field. His unique perspective merges an  iconoclastic view of how decision sciences should be conducted with a healthy knowledge of empirical choice research stemming  from a variety of disciplines. As in other cases of disciplinary cross-fertilization, the offspring may not belong clearly to  any species and thus may have a low survival probability. The result is, however, rich in ideas that may prove valuable in a  number of fields.  If the book is multidisciplinary in its sources, it is multicriterial in its objectives. The volume is at once a plea to  management scientists to change the way they help others make decisions, a text for emerging members of that field, and an  exposition of a new model of decision making. Since these represent three conflicting objectives, it is appropriate to examine  the degree to which the book succeeds at each. It soon becomes clear that one of the major themes of the book-that of  preserving the 111  0022-2496/83 53.00  Copyright 0 1983 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  112 BOOK REVIEWS  tension between conflicting objectives-succeeds only too well in this case. Indeed, this tension between these objectives  becomes one of the major strengths and weaknesses of the book.  OBJECTIVE 1 : A REORIENTATION IN MANAGEMENT SCIENCE METHODS  Of the three objectives, the theme that resonates throughout is that optimization is best done by keeping the various criteria  separate rather than forcing them into a onedimensional objective function. Suppose one has a number of criteria (Ai), each of  which is a function of one's input variables or  Ai =fi(X1 I X21 .., X,,).  The optimization problem is, in principle, trivial if one can define an objective function  G(A 1, A,-, A  so that one can maximize G with respect to the X's.  Zeleny argues quite coherently that defining the G function is the crucial part of decision making. He does this by giving a  number of examples where the multiple objectives are irreducible except by arbitrary flat. Then he argues that analysis should  proceed to reduce the problem as much as possible before collapsing to a onedimensional objective function. This has two  beneficial purposes. First, it may be possible to simplify the problem by eliminating items which would be dominated  regardless of the weighting scheme. A simpler decision may then be made on a reduced set of options and thus permit the  decision maker to come to terms better with the fundamental conflict of objectives. A second, perhaps more important, reason  advocated for keeping objectives separated is to keep pressure on the decision maker to resolve the problem completely. That  is, by focusing on the conflicts inherent in the problem, a new way to structure the problem may emerge so that the problem  ceases to exist. To use Zeleny's phrase, the conflict "dissolves." By contrast, mechanical optimization by linear programming  may divert attention from such creative solutions.  The idea that differing objectives should be kept in a multidimensional configuration as long as possible may seem to be so  obvious that it is not worth mention, let alone function as one of the primary themes of a book. But the task of linear  programming is made much more difficult if one must work with a range of objective functions rather than just one. To make  this task easier, the book reviews both goal and compromise programming-both of which effectively produce the locus of optimal  solutions given relatively weak constraints on the objective function (e.g., dG/dA, > 0 for all i, or a specific goal  hierarchy).  BOOK REVIEWS 113  The reaction of those in operations regearch/management science to Zeleny's orientation is also of interest. In an article in  Interfaces, (largely reproduced in the book) Zeleny writes:  Thus, the supreme problem of optimization theory, mostly neglected or avoided in the past, is: design optimal systems, do not  merely "optimize" given systems. (Interfaces p. 101)  The article then goes on to show the way problems can be lessened by changing constraints into objective functions and  restructuring the problem. It may have been due to Zeleny's pugnacious manner of presentation, but the article in Interfaces  inspired a large number of rebuttals (see Vol. 12, April 1982, p. 107). The thrust of these letters is that a good linear  programmer would have done what Zeleny suggests and that an integral part of setting up a problem is defining its structure.  It seems, however, that these objections miss Zeleny's point. It is easy to see, after the fact, that restructuring of the  problem leads to benefits and that a clever programmer would consider the whole range of possible structures. However, in  standard linear programming texts there is certainly less emphasis on such structuring than there is on algorithmic  procedures. Thus, in that field, there is arguably a greater need for focus on structuring than on optimization per se.  To summarize then, as an attempt to change the methods by which operations researchers ply their trade, Zeleny advocates a  greater emphasis on the inherent conflict among objectives and on different ways of structuring the problem that might reduce  or come to terms with the conflict. While this orientation may make the task of the decision scientist somewhat more  difficult, the emphasis on inherent value conflict may lead to global solutions that otherwise would have been overlooked.  OBJECTIVE 2: A TEXT FOR EMERGING MANAGEMENT SCIENTISTS  The book is also intended for use in the classroom. In the foreword it is described as a companion text for a course in  classical decision making. The sections on linear, goal, and compromise programming could easily fit into a standard  management science text. The programming steps are worked through with careful and elaborate detail. This detail is useful  both as a guide for those who would wish to use the algorithms and as a clear illustration of the differences among the  techniques. Further, there are sets of intriguing questions at the end of each chapter. These are good questions, expanding  the concepts raised in the chapter rather than simply reinforcing them.  Although as a text it appears to be quite elementary, its use would be likely to be most successful once students are  thoroughly familiar with classical linear programming and decision analysis. The book derives much of its power from the  differences between Zeleny's solutions and more conventional ones. Thus, a lack of thorough grounding in such conventional  methods may make it difficult for a student to appreciate the cleverness of Zeleny's solutions. Perhaps even worse, the lack of  114 BOOK REVIEWS  such grounding may lead the student to believe that the solutions given in the book reflect mainstream management science  thinking and application, when, by almost any measure, they do not.  A problem in using the book in a course derives from Zeleny's combative writing style. The style is intentional, challenging  the reader to a Socratic dialogue. It is likely that the technique works well when the instructor substantially agrees with  Zeleny. A problem arises when such agreement is lacking. Then, instead of dialogue, the classroom discussion is likely to turn  into an intellectual rout, with Zeleny being the loser. Students might then justifiably ask why the text was assigned, given  that the ideas were to be discarded. Thus, it is important that the instructor teaching from the volume either substantially  agree with it or be willing to take a strong devil's advocate posture.  In short, the combativeness that works so well in inspiring a strong reaction to Zeleny's plea for a change in management  science practices, becomes problematic in some teaching contexts. These problems may call for a change in teaching style, but  if successful, that change could produce a thoughtful and rewarding classroom experience.  OBJECTIVE 3: THE THEORY OF THE DISPLACED IDEAL  One of the major innovations in Zeleny's volume is the theory of the displaced ideal. The central idea is that one evaluates  alternatives by comparison with a hypothetical object which has the most preferred levels on all attributes. Assume there are  m feasible alternatives each of which may be thought of as comprising a vector of attributes. For alternative k this is  k k k _ (x, , x2,..., xn)  The ideal is then that hypothetical alternative that has the most preferred level on all attributes of the m items in the set,  or  x* _ (x* x* x*)  The substantive part of the theory is then:  Alternatives that are closer to the ideal are preferred to those that are farther away. To be as close as possible to the  perceived ideal is the rationale of human choice. (p. 156)  The ideal is displaced, or rather displaceable, in that it varies depending on the choice set. Notice that this definition of  an ideal is strongly dependent on the relevant set of alternatives, rather than being independent of the set as in most vector  or ideal point models.  So far so good. Zeleny has presented a conceptual model which if operationalized can be evaluated either from a normative or a  descriptive perspective. Unfortunately,  BOOK REVIEWS  Zeleny's next step is to permit rather extreme variability in operationalizing the model. First, distance across dimensions is  permitted to vary within the entire family of Minkowski p-metrics. Second, the concept of distance within dimension is  permitted to vary by the imposition of fuzzy set theory that defines the various categories of perceptual distances. Finally,  the closeness to the ideal on each dimension is permitted to have weight reflecting different attention levels for each  attribute. Thus the resultant model, while intriguing in its conceptualization, is sufficiently variable in its  operationalization to raise doubts whether any evidence could show it to be either counterfactual or counter-normative.  It turns out, however, that there are some consistent predictions from the model, dealing with the effect of adding new  alternatives to a set, which have both empirical and normative support. Consider two alternatives, A and B, defined on two  dimensions, where these dimensions have been coded so that more on each dimension is always preferred. Figure 1 gives the  position of the Zeleny ideal given that only A and B are in the set and its new location with the addition of a new point C.  Zeleny argues that different positionings of C may reverse preferences between A and B.  The Zeleny theory of the displaced ideal thus suggests a form of context effect whereby the addition of an alternative has the  effect of drawing choices towards itself. There is some empirical evidence that such a phenomenon may be occurring with  choices. In our work (Huber, Payne, and Puto 1982), additions of dominated alternatives in the region of point C tend to  increase the absolute probability of choosing B. This increase in the probability of choosing B is disturbing because it  results in a violation of regularity-the notion that one cannot increase the probability of choosing an item by adding  alternatives to the set.  The results of our work on dominated alternatives are not accountable under Zeleny's theory since these alternatives, being  equal or worse than the other on all dimensions, have no effect on the displaced ideal. However, in Huber and Puto (1983) we  have observed the same violations of regularity with nondominated alternatives in the region of C. These results are  consistent with Zeleny's theory.  Dimension 2  I**  C0______________  New Ideal Due to Adding C  g e_________9 I* Initial Ideal  A j  Dimension 1  FIG. I. The effect of adding an alternative on the Zeleny ideal  116) BOOK REVIEWS  Moreover, the explanations given by respondents indicate that their decisions may follow from quite rational  heuristics-heuristics which could also serve to justify the displaced ideal as a normative model. The crucial assumption in  giving weight to irrelevant alternatives is that their existence in the set is not arbitrary or random. One reasonable  assumption is to suppose the set is market-based; that is, the set is composed of items that are purchased by others. Then the  existence of extreme items may provide information as to one's own reaction to the items. For example, the addition of a very  high mileage automobile might rationally lower one's satisfaction with automobiles having moderate mileage. The fact that  others choose the item and presumably find it satisfactory provides prior evidence that the decision maker also will find it  and similar items satisfactory. A second reasonable justification for shifting one's preference towards a new alternative  focuses on the possible regret once the wisdom of the decision is known. If the maximum regret is the difference between the  utility of the item chosen and that which turns out to be best, then under general assumptions adding item C results in a  choice set where item B minimizes the maximum regret of the decision. Thus choosing the moderate item provides a way to reduce  one's risk exposure in making the decision.  The foregoing analysis, while it may be consistent with, and provide justification for, the theory of the displaced ideal as  Zeleny proposes it, does not go far to support it. Indeed the kinds of optimizations and iterations required by the Zeleny's  theory are clearly beyond the capabilities of unaided humans. It may be that the purpose of his model is not to be proven or  disproven so much as to provoke thought and controversy. Further, a model is useful if it relates difficult or confusing  aspects of choice to a well-known process. While the theory of the displaced ideal may appear at first to have arisen out of  Zeleny's fertile imagination, it turns out to be closely related to the area of compromise programming, detailed in Chapter 10  of the book. Those familiar with that methodology would then find the theory of the displaced ideal to be (1) familiar, (2)  good for generating testable conclusions, and (3) having substantially more rational justification.  A desirable byproduct of the book is the clear example of how various backgrounds produce differences in terms of what counts  as an explanation for a phenomenon. Those familiar with linear programming may find many of Zeleny's explanations quite lucid,  while those who are not may find them arbitrary and ill defined. Thus, the volume may be best suited for those who already  have a strong familiarity with various kinds of linear optimization techniques or are willing to make an investment in them.  One final point about this book. While most observers would probably agree that actual decision making is marked by  inconsistency and vagueness, few would feel that decision modeling ought to be that way. Indeed most of our decision models  attempt to overcome these very limitations. Zeleny appears to be saying that modeling itself should be variable and adaptable.  In certain contexts this might be considered strong and pessimistic medicine, but Zeleny's optimism with respect to the  process (as opposed to the outcome) renders this approach less counter-intuitive than one might first suppose. Indeed, those  trained in mathematical psychology who are  BOOK REVIEWS 117  willing to temporarily suspend the need for strictly defined and verifiable models are likely to find the richness of thought  in Zeleny's text well worth the intellectual journey.  REFERENCES  HUBER, J., PAYNE, J. W., AND PUTO, C. Adding asymmetrically dominated alternatives: Violations of regularity and the  similarity hypothesis, Journal of Consumer Research 1982, 9, 90-98.  HUBER, J., AND PUTO, C. Market boundaries and product choice: Illustrating attraction and substitution effects, Journal of  Consumer Research 1983, 10.  ZELENY, M. On the squandering of resources and profits via linear programming, Interfaces, 11, 101-107.  ZELENY, M. Multiple criteria decision making, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1982.