10.1016/0022-2496(83)90034-2
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 27, 370-405 (1983)  "Impossible Figures" and Interpretations of Polyhedral Figures  ERIC TEROUANNE  Universite Paul Valerv, Montpellier, France  The concept "impossible figure" is analyzed by formalizing the interpretations of a polyhedral figure by an observer, and  defining several types of inconsistency in such interpretations. Tests for these inconsistencies are developed using simple  graph theory, and a sufficient condition is established for the feasibility of an interpretation. Finally, techniques are  derived for the automatic construction of usual or unusual multibar figures.  INTRODUCTION  A "Polyhedral Figure" is a two-dimensional drawing interpreted by an observer as the representation of a virtual  three-dimensional scene composed exclusively of objects with planar faces. It is well known, particularly since the Penrose  tribar (1958) and the drawings of Escher (1971) and Anna (1970), that such an interpretation process can lead the observer to  mutually incompatible conclusions and cause him to qualify the drawing as "impossible." The first mathematical formalization  of such drawings was done by Huffman (1971, 1977), who provided a characterization of a wide class of "impossibilities." The  present work is indebted to Huffman for the idea of analyzing a drawing in terms of depth-ordering between planes, and for the  notions of cyclic inequality and tp-point. Similar problems are dealt with, in connection with frameworks studies, by Whiteley  (1982). A somewhat more computational approach can be found in Sugihara (1982).  The premise for the present work, already discussed in Terouanne (1980), is that a drawing cannot be impossible by itself: the  impossibility, if any, concerns the realization of a scene, in accordance with a given interpretation of the drawing. In such  a case, we will say that this interpretation is "inconsistent." Thus we intend to introduce the interpretation of a polyhedral  figure as the central notion, and to formalize this interpretation rather than the figure itself. We will introduce a simple  mathematical language to express these notions, and derive sufficient conditions for the feasibility of an interpretation.  The first section contains a review and a system of notation pertaining to "join spaces" (after Prenowitz, 1961, Prenowitz and  Jantosciak, 1979), geometrical  Requests for reprints should be sent to Eric Terouanne, UER VII, Universite Paul Valery, B. P. 5043, 34032 Montpellier CEDEX,  France.  370  0022-2496/83 $3.00  Copyright 1983 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  INTERPRETATION OF POLYHEDRAL FIGURES 371  structures which will be used in Section 2 as a model for the notions of "polyhedral scene" and "polyhedral image." In Section  3 we introduce the central notion of "interpretation of a polyhedral figure," and with each interpretation we associate a  family of relations, called "orderings," for the presumed faces of the virtual scene. Many classic "impossible figures" are  thus revealed to be locally inconsistent interpretations in the sense defined in Section 4. We also discuss the connection  between the present study and the method developed by Huffman (1977). Section 5 introduces the notion of the "comprehensive  consistency" of an interpretation, which allows us to describe new classes of "impossibility" and to state in Section 6 a  sufficiency condition for the feasibility of an interpretation. In Section 7, limiting ourselves to  TABLE I  The Main Definitions and Results, with Their Relationships  Polyhedral Scene Definition 2.1  Observer Definition 2.2  Polyhedral Figure Definition 3.1  Polyhedral Image Definition 2.4  Interpretation Definition 3.2  Ordering of the planes in the scene space Definition 2.5  Adjacency graph of an interpretation Definition 3.3  Ordering Graph at a point, relative to an interpretation Definition 4.1  Comprehensive Consistency Definition 5.2  480/27/4-3  372  ERIC TEROUANNE  multibar figures, we show how one can easily construct a large variety of usual or unusual figures in the sense of Terouanne  (1980).  In a first reading, one can pass over Section 1, which is rather technical, except for the notions of "join" and "extension"  which are illustrated in Fig. 1. The relations between the most essential notions and results are indicated in Table 1.  1. GEOMETRICAL REVIEW AND NOTATIONS  In this section, we will introduce the system and notation of "join geometry," as developed by Prenowitz (1961) and Prenowitz  and Jantosciak (1979). This language, although unusual, proves to be of straightforward use when formalizing the processes by  which an observer of a polyhedral scene can produce an image of it, or the processes by which an observer of a polyhedral  scene can interpret it. For a complete introduction to join geometry, the reader is referred to Prenowitz and Jantosciak  (1979), hereafter, PJ.  The basic terms of join geometry are "points" and "join" (PJ 2-3). Points are the elements of an arbitrary set E, and join is  an operation, denoted as a product, which associates with any two points of E a nonempty subset of E. This operation must  fulfill the properties of commutativity (MN = NM), associativity (M(NP) = (MN) P), and idempotence (MM = M).  The simplest example of a join system consist of a Euclidean plane as E and the operation which associates with any two points  M and N of E the open segment MN (Fig. la).  A second operation, "extension," is then defined in the join system and denoted as a quotient. When we speak of the extension  of M from N, we mean that the join of N and any point in the extension MIN contains M. Thus (PJ 4 - 2):  MIN = (P E E/M E PN).  For example, in the case of the Euclidean plane with the open segment as join, the extension of M from N is the open half-line  issuing from M and extending the segment MN (Fig. la).  a  M/N M MN N N/M  c  FIG. l. Join and extension operations (a) on the Euclidean line, (b) in an open half-sphere. and (c) in an open convex part of  the Euclidean plane.  INTERPRETATION OF POLYHEDRAL FIGURES 373  The operations of join and extension are defined for the parts of E by union. The join geometries used in the present paper  will satisfy some additional properties, permitting them to share many of the properties of Euclidean geometry:  DEFINITION 1.1. A "join geometry" or "join space" (PJ 5-1) is a set E endowed with a join operation which satisfies for any M,  N, P, Q E E,  (J 1) Existence law, MN * 0.  (J2) Commutative law, MN = NM.  (J3) Associative law, M(NP) = (MN) P.  (J4) Idempotence law, MM =M.  (J5) Existence law, Mf N :t- 0.  (J6) Four-term transposition law, MIN n P/Q :?~- 0 ~> MQ n NP :f PJ. (J7) Idempotence law, M/M = M.  DEFINITION 1.2. A part P of a join space E is "convex" if MN c P, VM, N E P (PJ 2-9). It is "open" if MIN n P :f- 0, VM, N E P  (PJ 4-15). It is "linear" if MN c P and MIN c P, VM, N E P (PJ 6-2). Every part X of E generates, by closure for the  operations join and extension, a linear part (X) of E, called the linear hull of X (PJ 6-8). A "line" (or "plane") of E is a  linear set generated by any two (or three) different (or non-colinear) points. A "hyperplane" of E is a nonempty proper  maximal linear subset of E (PJ 6-18).  DEFINITION 1.3. A join geometry is an "ordered join geometry (or space)" (PJ 12-1) if it verifies:  O (Order Postulate) If M, N, and P are distinct points of a line, then MCNPorNEMPorPEMN.  The order postulate is necessary in order to provide our geometries with such properties as: for any two distinct points M, N  of an ordered join space, there is a unique line that contains M and N, namely, (M, N) (PJ 12-2), and a partition of this line  is given by (M, N) = MIN U M U MN U N U N/M (PJ 12-3).  Of course, the Euclidean join system is an ordered join geometry. Another example, useful for our present purpose, is the  following: Let E be an open half-sphere with center 0 (Fig. I b). For any M # N C E, consider the principal half-circle (M, N)  that is the intersection of E with the plane determined by M, N, and 0. Then take the open arc determined by M and N on (M, N)  as MN.  If P is an open convex part of a join space E, the restriction to P of the join operation in E furnishes P with a structure of  join space, the extension of M from N in P being the intersection of MIN with P (Fig. lc).  Finally, we introduce the notion of the "dissection of an ordered join space by a family of hyperplanes." Let H be a  hyperplane of E, and M, N two points. We say that M and N are "on the same side with respect to H" if either M and N belong to  374 ERIC TEROUANNE  H, or M (~ H, N Q_~ H, and MN r1 H = 0. This is an equivalence relation in E, with exactly three equivalence classes, namely,  H itself and two proper opposite halfspaces (PJ 12-33).  DEFINITION 1.4. Let _-~V be a set of hyperplanes of an ordered join space E. The dissection E/,41' of E by is the quotient of  E by the equivalence relation R,~?,: (M, N) E R;r if and only if M and N are on the same side of H for every H in For  instance, in Fig. lc, P is a two-dimensional join space, merged with the Euclidean plane. Its hyperplanes are "lines" such as  the two which intersect at point K. The dissection of P by these two lines is a partition of nine elements: K itself, the four  half-lines which it determines, and the four open surfaces they delineate in P.  2. POLYHEDRAL SCENE AND POLYHEDRAL IMAGE  Using join spaces, we now develop a model for the production of a polyhedral image from a polyhedral scene by a  draftsman-observer. Then, following Huffman's idea, and with a necessary assumption, we introduce the notion of the "ordering  of the scene's planes at one point in the image," and derive certain results which will be used in the rest of the paper.  DEFINITION 2.1. A "polyhedral scene" is a set of objects with planar faces in a three-dimensional Euclidean space E. We call  every plane of fE which supports a face of the scene, a "plane of the scene," and every intersection of two planes of the  scene, a "line of the scene."  DEFINITION 2.2. An "observer" of a polyhedral scene is a point O in the space E, and an open convex cone, the "visual cone,"  with the summit 0. We call every halfline originating from 0 and contained in the visual cone a "ray." The set V of rays is in  a bijective correspondence with the set of visual rays of the observer. But contrary to a visual ray, none of our rays will  stop at the surface of the objects, much like Xrays.  DEFINITION 2.3. The "support" on which the observer erects a polyhedral image is a convex and open part IP of a join space.  Each of the sets E, V, and IP is provided with a structure of ordered join space: E's is its Euclidean structure. The join  operation in V is the one which, with any two rays R and S, associates the set of rays contained in the Euclidean join of R  and S in E. A line in V is the set of rays in V included in a plane passing through O. Finally, the join operation in P  depends on the observer. We suppose in this paper that IP is a part of a Euclidean plane. But one can use other geometries  such as "curvilinear  INTERPRETATION OF POLYHEDRAL FIGURES 375  perspective" (Barre and Flocon, 1968) for a planar image, or the arcs of a portion of a sphere for a retinal image, etc.  DEFINITION 2.4. The "representation-mode" by which the observer-draftsman produces an image from the scene is a bijective  correspondence between the rays in V and the points in IP, which respects the operations of join and extension. If the  observer only represents the visible edges of the scene, a "polyhedral image" is obtained, composed exclusively of segments,  half-lines, and lines in IP.  For example in Fig. 2a, the scene is composed of a case on the ground. The support for the image is a canvas, represented in  Fig. 2b, and the observer establishes a bijection between the points on the canvas and his or her visual rays inside a certain  cone V which contains the scene. The point M' of fP corresponds to ray R of V and thus represents the point M of E, as well as  the point K on the ground.  According to Definition 2.4, if two points M' * N' in IP represent, respectively, the points M and N in E, the points of MN  are in bijection with the points of M'N'. On the other hand it is not certain that every point of N'/M', say, represents a  point of NJM. Take, for example, in Fig. 2, the visual ray T, parallel to the horizontal edges of the case, and the point X in  IP which represents it. X is the common "vanishing point" for all these sides. Specifically, the half-line Nf M in E is  represented by the segment N'X in IP, and not by N'/M' which extends beyond X.  To simplify notation in the arguments which follow, it is convenient to avoid such a situation and to suppose that every line  which supports an edge in the scene is represented by a line in F. This amounts to eliminating certain choices for the  position of 0 in E and for the opening of V. In the case of an orthographic projection, where it is assumed that the visual  rays are parallel, this amounts to supposing that 0 is not on the extension of any edge in the scene.  We will thus suppose for the rest of this paper that he following assumption is valid  FiG. 2. An observer of a polyhedral scene (a) at his easel and (b) the resulting polyhedral image on the canvas.  376 ERIC TEROUANNE  ASSUMPTION. Every plane of the scene cuts every visual ray. It follows that  PROPOSITION 2.1. Every line of the scene which cuts a visual ray, cuts V on a line.  Thus, let _Jq_ be the set of the planes of the scene, and X the set of those lines of the scene which cut V. Each element of X  determines a line in the join structure of V. Let K' denote the set of these lines of V and X" denote the set of the lines in  IP which represent them. X' and ?" determine dissections of V and IP, respectively, and these dissections are in bijective  correspondence.  Every ray R in V, considered as an oriented half-line originating at 0, crosses all the planes of --'7- in a certain order.  For example in Fig. 2 we have  and  A = B = E > D > C along R,  A > B = E = D > C along S,  where P > Q signifies that P is crossed before Q and P = Q signifies that P is crossed at the same point as Q.  DEFINITION 2.5. For every point K in IP, the "ordering of . in K" is the transitive and total binary relation in J'_ which  expresses the order in which the ray R, represented by the point K, crosses the planes in Jr-.  PROPOSITION 2.2. If I and J E IP, the orderings of J'_ in I and J are identical if and only if I and J belong to the same  element in P/X".  Proof. Let R and S E V denote the rays represented by I and J, and let RS = RS U R U S. If A and C are arbitrary planes in  _IJ-, the orderings between A and C in I and J are identical  a R and S cross A and C in the same order  a every ray in RS crosses A and C in the same order either RS c 1' or RS r) l' = 0  either IJ c 1" or IJ r) 1" = Q)  either I and J E 1" or I and J are on the same side of 1" I and J belong to the same element of IP/l". i  For instance, the above argument holds for planes A and C and rays R and S in Fig. 2: take points M' and N' (Fig. 2b) as I and  J. The line l contains the intersection of the floor C with face A. 1' is the line of V consisting in those rays which go  through some point of 1. 1" is the line of P which contains the lower side of the rectangle representing face A in the drawing.  Finally, it is convenient to note the relations between the orderings of two planes A and B in J'_ at two points K and L in fP  and their ordering at a point on KL or on  INTERPRETATION OF POLYHEDRAL FIGURES 377  TABLE II  The Orderings of Two Planes A and B at Every Point of KL as a Function of Their Orderings at K and L  A>B A=B A<B  A>B A>B A>B   A=B A > B A=B A <B  A<B  A<B A<B  Note. Blanks indicate not determined.  K/L. These relations are given in Tables 2 and 3, where the empty places correspond to the cases in which the orderings at K  and L do not suffice to determine the ordering at the point considered. These properties follow from Propositions 2.1 and 2.2,  and from  PROPOSITION 2.3. Let H be a hyperplane of F, and H, and Hz the two halfspaces it determines, M E H, , N E H, and P E H2. Then  MN, MIN, MIP, and NIP are included in H, .  Proof. (i) Suppose IX E MN, X E~ H,. Then either X E H, in which case M E X/N c H, impossible, or X E H2, in which case M and  X are not on the same side of H, which implies that there exists Y E MX rl H. Y * N because Y E MX, N E X f M, and MX r) X/M =  0. Y E MX and X E MN imply Y E MN, and the four points M, X Y, and N belong to the same line (M, N). Then by the order  postulate:  either X E YN c H, impossible,  or Y E NX and then X E YIN c H, impossible,  or N E YX and then X E N/ Y c H, impossible.  (ii) Suppose 3X E MIN, X it:- H, . Then either X E H, and M E XN c H, impossible, or X E HZ and M E XN c HZ by (i), impossible.  TABLE III  The Orderings of Two Planes A and B at Every Point of K/L as a Function of Their Orderings at K and L  A>B A=B A<B  A>B  A>B A>B  A=B A<B A=B A>B  A<B A<B A<B   Note. Blanks indicate not determined.  378 ERIC TEROUANNE  (iii) Suppose 3X E M/P, X Lt H,. Then either X E H, and M E XP c HZ by (i), impossible, or X E H2, and M E XP c H2, impossible.  (iv) Suppose 3X E NIP, X (~ Ht . Then either X E H, and N E PX c H2 by (i), impossible, or X E H2, and N E PX c H2, impossible.  3. POLYHEDRAL FIGURE AND INTERPRETATION  In the preceding section, we have depicted an observer constructing an image of a polyhedral scene. In this section and in the  rest of the article, we will consider the opposite situation: confronted with a planar figure, the observer imagines a  (virtual) polyhedral scene for which this figure could be the image, according to the definitions and the assumption in  Section 2.  DEFINITION 3.1. Let P be an open and convex portion of a Euclidean plane. A "polyhedral figure" supported by IP is a set X of  segments, half-lines, and lines which determine a set H of polygonal areas in P.  For instance, Fig. 3a, except for its labeling and the dotted line, consists of a set Z of 13 segments (including two pairs of  colinear and adjacent ones, such as NP and PQ), which determine a set H of 6 polygonal areas (including the "background").  Clearly, every polyhedral image (see Definition 2.4) is a polyhedral figure. The problem dealt with in this paper is that of  determining under which conditions the converse is true.  DEFINITION 3.2. An "interpretation" of a polyhedral figure (X, 17) supported by P consists of:  c  d  b  A A  FiG. 3. (a) A polyhedral figure with elements of the interpretation given in the text, (b) the adjacency graph of that  interpretation, and (c) and (d) two possible interpretations of another polyhedral figure.  INTERPRETATION OF POLYHEDRAL FIGURES 379  (i) The set .~ of "faces" in the interpretation. Each face F E Jw- is related to a part of ff. If this part is empty, the face  is a "hidden" face.  (ii) The set X of "edges" in the interpretation. Each edge e E R' is related to one or several colinear segments in IP. Each  of these segments either belongs to E or is added by the observer with dots and is then called a "hidden edge."  (iii) A relation .-~P c.~ X X. (F, e) E .M means that e is interpreted as an edge  of F.  (iv) The set -,v/ c -jF-X ,- X -F- of "adjacencies" in the interpretation. (A, e, B) E V means that (A, e) and (B, e) E M and  that the observer has chosen on which side of (e) (the line supporting e, according to Definition 1.2) each of the orderings A  > B and B > A is valid (e.g., by considering convexity or concavity).  (v) The set C c,~ X Z X,JT of "occlusions" in the interpretation. (A, x, B) E C"1 means that x belongs to an edge of A and  that A is assumed to hide B all along x.  (vi) A set -,? of equivalence relations in U. translating possible hypotheses of parallelism, colinearity, or coplanarity.  DEFINITION 3.3. The "adjacency graph" of an interpretation is the (multi)graph in which the vertices are elements of the edges  are elements of 9, with the edge e joining the vertices A and B if and only if (A, e, B) E _V.  Here, for example, is an interpretation of Fig. 3a:  ,J7- _ {A, B, C, D 1, where C is hidden, X _ a,#, y, S, e, ~}, where y is hidden, 4'= {(A, a), (A, l), (A, y), (B, a), (B, e),  (c, a), (c, y), (D, E), (D, a), (D,)},  _ ( (A Q, B), (A, y, C), (B, e, D)) the first being convex and the two others concave, = 1(D, AT, A )1, where NP = NP U P,  _ {a and C are coplanar, /3 and y colinearl.  Figure 3b is the adjacency graph for this interpretation.  We should note that an interpretation does not necessarily name all the elements of the figure nor all those of the potential  scene. For example, we could augment the above interpretation by naming other faces or edges, or by adding the adjacency (D,  6, C), or an occlusion, or the hypothesis B and C coplanar, etc. We could also, of course, diminish this interpretation, or  give a completely different one.  Subsequently it will be convenient to use the following notations (adapted from Huffman 1971) to indicate adjacencies with  their convexity in the figures: If the adjacent faces A and B lie on the same side of their intersection e, so that one of  them hides the other, this is noted by an arrow on e, pointed so that A and B are on its right. If A and B lie on either side  of e, both visible, this is noted by the sign + if the  380 ERIC TEROUANNE  adjacency is convex an - if the adjacency is concave (Figs. 3, 5, etc.). These conventions only apply to those adjacencies in  which at least one face is visible. Certain families of figures have a conventional interpretation which the observer has a  tendency to favor. This is the case with multibar figures, whose interpretation we have already discussed in Terouanne (1980).  The use of "multibar" for such a figure will eventually signify that we are referring to this conventional interpretation.  Fig. 3c is an example. Such a conventional interpretation is always involved, albeit possibly implicit, when a figure is  called "impossible." See, for instance, the multibar Penrose triangle (5e), but also non-multibar figures with an  architectural interpretation like the "impossible staircase" (9a).  Figures 3c and d give two more examples of interpretations: two different and incompatible interpretations of the same figure,  both of which are consistent. In Fig. 3c, the observer imagines an upper view of a "multibar object" built on a plane surface  A. Specifically, he assumes the existence of the five hidden faces (not labeled in the figure) and of the eight hidden edges  of this multibar. Notice that the "bottom" face, opposed to the "top" face B, is interpreted as coplanar with A. In Fig. 3d,  the observer imagines an upper view of a truncated square-based pyramid built on the top B of a square solid. Here again he  assumes five hidden faces and eight hidden edges. The only changes are in the nature of the adjacencies and in the  introduction of the extra face G. Of course it would be inconsistent with such an interpretation to assume that G and A are  merged.  4. LOCAL CONSISTENCY OF AN INTERPRETATION  Every interpretation of a polyhedral figure contains hypotheses about the ordering of certain of its faces. If the figure is  really the image of a polyhedral scene and if the given interpretation complies with this representation, these hypotheses  must have a certain consistency. This is the concept we will develop in this section.  Consider a particular interpretation of a given polyhedral figure: We will associate with every point M on the support IP of  the figure the "ordering graph" relative to the adjacencies and/or the occlusions (rel .V and/or L', for short) at M.  DEFINITION 4.1. The "ordering graph at M relative to the adjacencies" is the graph obtained in the following manner from the  adjacency graph of the interpretation:  (i) If (A, e, B) E ..v' and M E (e), then the edge e is removed from the graph and its vertices are merged.  (ii) If (A, e, B) E ~V and M (8 (e), then the edge e is directed from A toward B (or B toward A) if the interpretation assumes  that A > B (or B < A) is valid on the side of (e) to which M belongs.  INTERPRETATION OF POLYHEDRAL FIGURES  381  Fic. 4. The ordering graphs rel. y and ~' at points (a) K, (b) L, and (c) P of Fig. 3a.  The "ordering graph at M relative to the occlusions" is the graph which contains an edge from A toward B if and only if (A, x,  B) E (' and M E x for a given segment x in the figure.  The "ordering graph rel ._V and " at M"' is the combination of the ordering graphs at M rel .,V and rel (".  Figures 4a and b are examples of ordering graphs rel sa1 at two different points K and L of Fig. 3a, for the interpretation of  this figure given in Section 3. Note that point L is on the extension of edge e. Figure 4c is the ordering graph rel V and ~  at any point of the segment NP in the same interpretation.  A necessary condition for the feasibility of an interpretation is that any ordering relation relative to this interpretation  should be mergeable into an order relation, because every ordering of planes along a ray actually is an order relation.  Typically, if an interpretation yields an ordering relation in which some planes of the virtual scene are assumed to cross a  given ray in a nontransitive way (e.g., A < B < C < A), then one clearly cannot build a scene in accordance with this  interpretation. This is what we shall now define as the "inconsistency of an interpretation."  Any closed succession of edges here will be called a "cycle" of a graph, and a "circuit" of an ordering graph is a cycle of  this graph whose edges are all successively pointed in the same direction.  DEFINITION 4.2. A point M on the support P of a polyhedral figure is a "critical point rel._V (and/or if and only if the  ordering graph at M rel V (and/or(') contains a circuit.  DEFINITION 4.3. An interpretation is "locally consistent (resp. inconsistent)" rel `Y (and/or/") if and only if it allows no  (resp, some) critical point on IF.  Figure 5 gives several simple examples of locally inconsistent interpretations with critical points and ordering graphs at  these points. Figure 5a is interpreted as a multibar figure. This means that a is interpreted as a convex edge between face A  and itself: the adjacency graph has a cycle with a length of 1, and the ordering graph has a circuit with a length of 1 at  every point outside the line (a).  Figures 5b and d (adapted from Huffman 1971, and Clowes 1971) are examples of interpretations whose adjacency graph contains a  cycle with a length of 2; in Fig. 5b, every point situated in one of the two sharp angles formed by (a) and (/l) is critical.  In Fig. 5d (attributed additionally to Turner by Draper 1978) the set of critical points is the strip contained between (a)  and (,Q). In Fig. 5c, the same segment can be inter-  382 ERIC TEROUANNE  a  FIG. 5. Examples of interpretations which are (a)-(h) inconsistent or (i) consistent ref. .V and/or i'. Next to each  inconsistent interpretation is its ordering graph at a critical point, denoted by M on the figure.  preted simultaneously as a convex adjacency (A, a, B) when one covers the right portion of the drawing, and as a concave  adjacency (A, (l, B) when one covers the left portion. Then the ordering graph contains a circuit at every point outside the  line (a) = ~8).  Figure 5e is the famed Penrose tribar (multibar interpretation) whose critical points are those of the triangle formed by the  central edges of the three bars. Figure 5f is an example of a figure which, when interpreted as a truncated pyramid seen from  above, contains a single critical point ref ~V (adapted from Huffman 1977).  The multibar figs. 5h and i are both locally consistent ref -V. They only differ in the order of the occlusion between the two  superposed bars. 5i is locally consistent ref -al and while 5h has a circuit in the ordering graph at M ref sad and r.  Finally, 5g is an example of a multibar figure which is inconsistent only with respect to an occlusion. Similarly, a large  number of classic "impossible figures" are drawings whose "intuitive" interpretation, supposedly common to all observers,  contains a local inconsistency ref V and/or (,'.  The detection of these inconsistencies has already been discussed by Huffman (1977), and our notions of circuit and critical  point contain his notions of "cyclic inequality" and "gyp-point." All the cases of inconsistency in Fig. 5 are detected by  Huffman's procedure. However, the procedure we will propose at the end of this paragraph has a more general scope:  Indeed, the central notion in our system is no longer that of an image representing a scene, but that of an observer  interpreting an image. In particular, it enables us to account for the hidden elements of the potential scene as imagined by  any particular observer, and thus to describe a wider variety of situations. For example, Figs. 6a-c represent three  interpretations of the same figure. The interpretation given in 6a is  INTERPRETATION OF POLYHEDRAL FIGURES 383  FiG. 6. Three interpretations of the same polyhedral figure: (a) and (c) two consistent interpretations whose adjacency graphs  are (d) and (f), respectively. (b) An inconsistent interpretation, M a critical point, and (e) its ordering graph.  consistent rel .sV: its adjacency graph (Fig. 6d) contains only one cycle with a length of 3, whose three edges represent  convergent lines in Fig. 6a, and there is thus no critical point. If we refine the interpretation of the same figure by  introducing a hidden face D (Fig. 6b) and the adjacencies (B, 6, D) and (C, E, D), a new cycle appears in the adjacency graph,  and M is a critical point (Fig. 6e), since the three lines (f3), (S), and (E) are not convergent: this interpretation as a  "truncated pyramid" is thus inconsistent. We could refine the interpretation of the figure yet further by introducing a new  hidden face E, a hidden edge ~, and by replacing the adjacency (C, E, D) by (C, E, E) and (D, ~, E) (Fig. 6c, f). M is no  longer critical and the interpretation is once again locally consistent, as we can verify with the technique described below.  We will see in the following paragraphs that this new language also provides a simple means of producing a large variety of  figures having various types of inconsistency (Sect. 5) and above all allows us to propose a comprehensive notion of  consistency which resolves some problems raised by Huffman's work (Sect. 6).  First, we shall develop the technique for detecting the local consistency or inconsistency of a given interpretation.  DEFINITION 4.4. Let ~r' be a cycle in the adjacency graph of an interpretation of a figure on the support P. The "critical  part" associated with V is the set of points M on IP for which W becomes a circuit in the ordering graph at M rel V.  For example, the critical part associated with the one-edge cycle of Fig. 5a consists of all the points of P except those on  the line (a). The critical part associated with the cycle (a, /l, y) of Fig. 5e is the interior of the triangle formed by a,  (l, and y.  PROPOSITION 4.1. The edges belonging to a cycle ~', in the adjacency graph of an interpretation of a polyhedral figure  determine a set E of lines on the support P. Ever v line e E E determines a dissection of fP into two half-spaces. Then the  critical part associated with 96' is the combination of two disjoint (possibly empty) convex parts of P, namely,  X(~)=Upe~Ue eeE eeE  384 ERIC TEROUANNE  and  X,(~) = U Pe eEE  U e, eEE  where for every e E E, P_e is one of the half-spaces in the dissection P/e, Pe is the opposite half-space, and Pe = Pe U e.  Proof. Let us choose an arbitrary direction around W. For any adjacency (A, e, B) involved in W, where e is supported by the  line e E E, let P, be that element of IP/e, at any point of which the orientation of (A, e, B) in the ordering graph is the  chosen one. Then every critical point, if any, in the ordering graph of which 4becomes a circuit in the chosen direction  belongs to ne,E 'Fe  Let M be such a critical point, E, = {e E E/M e e }, and E' = E - E,. En, is nonempty, or else W would not yield a circuit at  M. Hence, we have M E nlIE tf Pe n neEEMe e x( P).  Reciprocally, let N E X(F). EN = {eEE/N E Pe } is nonempty, and for any (A, e, B) E W in which (e) E EN, the corresponding  edge in the ordering graph at N is oriented in the chosen direction. Thus W becomes a circuit (whose edges are the elements of  E) in the ordering graph at N, which is therefore critical.  The same result holds for x'( W) and for the opposite direction around W if Pe is replaced by Pe (e E E). _ X( W) and X'( P)  are disjoint by construction. They are convex because n,Et. Pe is convex and nee, e, if nonempty, is an extremal set of the  latter.  Now we can derive a procedure for checking whether a given interpretation is locally consistent or not:  (i) List all the cycles in the adjacency graph of the interpretation.  (ii) For every cycle e, check whether X(9!-) and X'(W) are empty or not.  (iii) The interpretation is consistent rel . V if and only if all the critical parts constructed in (ii) are empty.  A similar procedure is easily adapted to the testing of a possible inconsistency rel or rel ~V and ('.  For example, Fig. 7 offers an interpretation for the Cesari pentabar restricted to the central edges: its adjacency graph is  thus a single cycle with a length of 5. The lines supporting these edges have been oriented for the convenience of the  demonstration: to make a circuit from the cycle P, running in a clockwise direction, we must situate ourselves in the  following half-planes: P,, to the left of (a), Pa to the left of (/3), Pyto the right of (y), PS to the left of (8), and PE to  the right of (e). This intersection is empty. So is the intersection of the opposing half-planes. This interpretation is thus  locally consistent rel ../.  INTERPRETATION OF POLYHEDRAL FIGURES 385 b  FIG. 7. (a) The Cesari pentabar and (b) a circuit associated with an empty critical part.  5. COMPREHENSIVE CONSISTENCY OF AN INTERPRETATION  Certain locally consistent interpretations of polyhedral figures can turn out to be infeasible, and we need more involved  arguments than those developed in Section 4 to prove their inconsistency. The Penrose "impossible staircase" (Fig. 8) is an  example: the staircase interpretation of the figure has no critical point rel ._y and ". This is basically due to the  parallelism between edges: Consider, for instance, the cycle, in the adjacency graph, associated with the sequence of the  eight successive "stairs." Every "stair" (e.g., between Y and Z) consists in a sequence of two parallel adjacencies, one  convex (a) and one concave (8). And the reader can easily check that the only means to orient the edges a and /3 in the same  direction in the ordering graph at N rel ..V is to put the point N between the lines (a) and ~6): then Y > Y > Z holds. But it  is obviously impossible to find a point N in the intersection of all such bands associated with the eight stairs. Similarly,  the interpretations given in Figs. 9a, b (due to Huffman, 1971, 1977) are locally consistent but infeasible.  In order to deal with such inconsistencies, we first need an extension of the notion of ordering relations:  DEFINITION 5.1. The "comprehensive ordering relations" of an interpretation of a polyhedal figure at every point of its  support P are obtained from the ordering relations rel and /' at each point by alternatively applying the two following  procedures:  (1) Closure of the operations of join and extension: For any A, B E . ,~'-, let us denote the set {A < B, A = B, A > B ~ of  the possible orderings between A and B at a point as ((A, B). Then for every pair M, N E P in which the intersections of ('(A,  B) with the current ordering graphs at M and N are nonempty, we determine, according to Tables 2 and 3, which elements of  I"(A, B), if any, should be added to the ordering relations at every point of MN, MIN, and N/M. A special case of this  procedure arises when A and B are assumed to be parallel: in this case, if an element of ("(A, B) belongs to the ordering  graph at a given point of P, it is added to the ordering graphs at every point of P. This amounts to applying the rules of  Tables 2  386 ERIC TEROUANNE  and 3 to point M and the "infinitely remote" points of P at which we assume A = B is true.  (2) Transitivity: For every M E (P and every triplet A, B, C C ,,jw", if A < B < C at M then add A < C at M.  For any point M E IP, regardless of its ordering relation rel ~V and ~-`, the graph has a finite number of vertices and a  limited number of edges. If at any step in the procedure the graph is modified, its number of vertices can only lessen and its  number of edges can only increase, while the latter has the same upper limit, or a lesser one. Thus, the ordering graph at a  given point can only change a finite number of times. Moreover, any change in the ordering graph at a given point is a result  of a finite number of applications of procedures (1) and (2), because the potentially involved faces and the orderings between  the faces are of a finite number. Finally, we can restrict ourselves to a finite number of classes of points by Proposition  2.2. Thus, the construction of the comprehensive ordering relations stabilizes at the end of a finite number (presumably  small) of repetitions of the two procedures.  DEFINITION 5.2. A point M on P is a "comprehensively critical point" if and only if the comprehensive ordering graph at M  contains a circuit. An interpretation is "comprehensively consistent" if and only if it admits no comprehensively critical  point.  We shall eventually use "critical point" and "consistency," for short, and simply write "A > B at M" instead of "A > B belongs  to the comprehensive ordering relation at M."  We can now demonstrate the comprehensive inconsistency of Figs. 8 and 9a, b. In Fig. 8, we have clarified the "common sense"  interpretation of the drawing as a representation of a staircase. For instance, the areas X, Y, Z are interpreted as the  "horizontal" parts of three subsequent stairs. Hence X, Y and Z are assumed to be parallel. The segment a is interpreted as  the convex edge of one stair, and P as the concave edge between this stair and the immediately "lower" one. Point M belongs to  a segment along which the stair X is assumed to occlude the stair Y, etc. The result of such an interpretation is that, for  instance,  01  d  Fzc. 8. (a) The Penrose impossible staircase and portions of the ordering graphs at (c) M and (b) N rel. -V and ~, and (d) of  the comprehensive ordering graph at any point.  INTERPRETATION OF POLYHEDRAL FIGURES 387  The ordering relation at M rel (~' contains X > Y (Fig. 8c).  The ordering relation at N rel V contains Y > V and V > Z (Fig. 8b).  It follows that the comprehensive ordering relation at any point of P contains X > Y and Y > Z. The same argument works for  every "stair" of the interpretation, thus providing us with a circuit at every point (Fig. 8d). It is worth noting that this  interpretation is locally consistent rel V and , and that only a comprehensive reasoning can detect its inconsistency.  The drawing in Fig. 9a is interpreted here as a set of two ached parallelepipeds. For instance, (A, a, B) is interpreted here  as a convex adjacency and (B, KL, C) as an occlusion. It follows that A > B > C belongs to the comprehensive ordering relation  at M. Similarly, A > E > C at P rel V and C' implies A > C at P. Finally, C > D > A at N rel ~~/ and (' implies C > A at N.  But N belongs to the join of M and N so that A > C at N. Thus N is a critical point.  When interpreting Fig. 9b, our observer imagines a truncated pyramid, each side of which has a protrusion hiding the next side  (it could be explained by hidden edges as in the bottom left corner). For instance (A, OK, C) is an occlusion and (A, OJ, B)  and (B, OH, C) are convex adjacencies. Thus the ordering relations rel -V and  yield:  A=B=C at 0, (1)  A > C at every point of OK (2)  and   A > B = C at every point of OH. (3)  It follows that the comprehensive ordering relations contain, respectively   A < C at any point of O/K by (1) and (2), (4)  A > C at any point of OH by (3) and by transitivity,   and finally, by (4) and (5), (5)  A < C at every point of (O/K)/OH, such as at M.   6  FIG. 9. Locally consistent but comprehensively inconsistent interpretations.  480/27ja-a  388 ERIC TEROUANNE b  FIG. 10. (a) Comprehensively inconsistent and (b) consistent "truncated pyramids."  The symmetry of the figure allows the same reasoning for each pair of successive sides, and we obtain,  A < C < D < E < A at M, which is critical.  In both cases of Fig. 9, we prove the inconsistency by analyzing two planes (A and C) whose intersection is neither defined in  the interpretation nor constructible from it. On the other hand, in the next example the inconsistency arises from the  abundancy of determinations for this intersection. In a case such as this, we can restrict ourselves to analyzing the equality  A = B (and no longer A < B or A > B) in the ordering relations:  Let us interpret Fig. 10a as a top view of a truncated pyramid. Edges ~, ,u, v, and represent the intersections of faces A, B,  C, and D with the hidden face E. Contrary to Fig. 5f, edges a, /l, y, and 6 converge and the interpretation is locally  consistent rel  From A = E rel .sa/ at every point of A, it follows that A = E at every point of (A). Similarly, A = F along (A'). Hence E = F  at M = (A) r1 The same argument works for N and for the intersection of (u) and ~u'). Clearly, these three points are not  colinear. Now, if E = F is true at some points of IP, it is true at any point of the linear subspace generated by these  points. It follows that E = F is true at every point of IP. But F > D > E rel _V at K, for instance, and this proves the  inconsistency.  Such an example suggestes a simple means for drawing figures whose "natural" interpretation is inconsistent. It is worth  noting that a similar "inconsistent truncated pyramid" cannot be constructed over a triangular base (Fig. 10b) because  Desargue's theorem implies that the intersection of edges u and u' is colinear with points M and N.  (). FEASIBILITY OF AN INTERPRETATION  As we saw in Section 5, the comprehensive ordering procedure sometimes permits the construction of the intersections of some  pairs or triplets of faces of the interpretation. If we were able to build a 3-D realization of the interpretation, these  lines and points would be the projections of the actual intersections of the planes supporting the corresponding faces of the  scene. Moreover, we could determine such  INTERPRETATION OF POLYHEDRAL FIGURES 389  intersections in the scene space, and hence their projections in the figure plane, for any pair or triplet of faces. Thus a  desirable property for an interpretation is the following:  DEFINITION 6.1. An interpretation is "completable" when it is comprehensively consistent and the comprehensive ordering  procedure permits the construction of the line (or point) intersection of any pair (or triplet) oits faces.  Clearly, an interpretation is completable if and only if the comprehensive ordering relation at any point is a total  transitive relation without circuit. An example of a completable interpretation is that of Fig. 6c: the comprehensive ordering  procedure permits the construction of the point B r1 C n D = (f) n (6), and that of C 0 D by joining this point with C (1 D (1  E at the upper right vertex of the figure (dotted line). The reader is invited to construct the lines B fl E and D (1 E and  the points B rl C r1 E and B n E r1 D. Other completable interpretations of the same figure are shown in Fig. 6a, or the union  of these two interpretations, or their combination with the interpretation of the "base of the pyramid" and of the yet  uninterpreted visible edges. Additional examples are given in Section 7, Figs. 19 and 20.  We shall demonstrate how, at least in the most general case, any completable interpretation is feasible in the following sense:  DEFINITION 6.2. An interpretation of a polyhedral figure is "feasible" when there exist a polyhedral scene and an observer 0  (in the 3-D Euclidean space), and a bijective correspondence between the faces of the interpretation and a set of faces of the  scene, so that the ordering of any two faces of the interpretation at an arbitrary point of the figure coincides with that of  the corresponding faces of the scene along the corresponding ray.  The demonstration of the feasibility of an interpretation proceeds from the following idea: assume that the scene exists and  that the figure is its projection on the support IP of one of its faces, Fo say. Then the figure has been obtained by making  every vertex of the scene to slide along the ray it belongs to, from its actual position in the 3-D space to the intersection  point of this ray with P. Conversely, we choose an arbitrary vertex M on the figure, i.e., the common intersection of the  paired adjacencies between three faces, all different from Fo. And we associate with M a point M' :~4- M in the ray which goes  through M. We shall prove (Theorem 6.1) that this suffices for a unique determination of all the elements of the scene: as we  pull the vertex M' out of the projection plane up to its assigned place, we raise with it all the lines of intersection, while  every vertex not belonging to Fo slides along its own ray.  For the sake of simplicity, in the following demonstrations we shall assume that the 3-D space of the potential scene is  endowed with a cartesian coordinate system whose first two axes lie in the support IP of the figure. We also assume that all  the rays are parallel to the third axis, the observer being infinitely remote in the positive direction. Thus the ordering  between two points of a given ray can be defined as the ordering between their respective third coordinates.  390 ERIC TSROUANNE  For every point N E P and for every two planes Pi, IPA of the scene space, we shall denote by 0,(P,, IPA) the ordering between  Pi and IPA along the ray going through N: it takes the value ">" (resp. "<" or "") if the ray crosses F, before (resp. after  or at the same point as) Pi. Similarly for every numbers u, v E P, O(u, v) will denote the ordering between u and v. These  notations can be extended to families of more than two planes or numbers. Now if PP2, ..., Pk are planes of the scene space  associated with the affine functions f, f2,...,fk, i.e., if Pi is the set of points M= (x,, y,, z.ti,) which fulfill zM = f  (xm, ym,) (1 < i < k), we have  ON(P I , P2 ,..., Pk) = O(f I (XI , YN)l f2 ('CN , YN ),...1 fk (X N 1 YN) )'  Now a proof of the feasibility of an interpretation amounts to determining the equations of the planes supporting the faces of  a polyhedral scene which fulfills the conditions of Definition 6.2. If a completable interpretation involves less than four  faces, its feasibility is immediately determinable. Such is also the case if all the faces are assumed to be parallel. Hence  we shall assume from now on that every interpretation involves at least four faces and one edge. This leaves us with two  families of interpretations, distinguished by the following notion:  DEFINITION 6.3. A "tetrahedron of an interpretation" is a set of faces F,, FF2, F3 E .~7 for which there exists a unique  (possibly infinitely remote) point M E F at which F, = F2 = F3 :f- F, holds.  The point to be stressed in the following results is that as long as an interpretation involves at least one tetrahedron, its  completability is a sufficient condition for its feasibility (Theorem 6.1). An additional metric property is only needed where  all the paired intersections of the faces are parallel or concurrent (Theorem 6.3). We shall first deal with the general case,  THEOREM 6.1. Every completable interpretation which involves at least one tetrahedron is feasible.  Proof. We consider the case in which there exist Fo, FF2, F3 E. and M E IP with M the only point at which Fo -t F, = F2 = F3  holds. Since the interpretation is completable, M is the intersection of the lines F, rl F2, F, r1 F3, and F2 r1 F3 in IP, and  none of the lines Fo r1 F1, Fp f1 F2, F, rl F3 contains M (Fig. 11 a).  Denote by M' the point of the scene space whose projection on 1P is M and whose ordinate zM, is +1 if F, = F2 = F3 > Fo at M,  or -1 otherwise. For each i=1, 2, 3 there exists a single affine function f (x, y) verifying: f (x, y) = 0 a (x, y) E Fo n F,,  and fi(xm, ym,) = z,,. In the particular case where F, and Fo are parallel, we take f (x, y) = zM, for every (x, y). The  equation z = f (x, y) defines a plane IP, of the scene space, which contains the point M' and cuts fP along F, rl F, (i = 1,  2, 3).  The ordering ON(P,, P,) along the ray going through an arbitrary point N E fP coincides with the ordering O(f,(N), f (N)),  where for the sake of brevity we write f(N) for the value f (xN, yN) of the ordinate of the intersection of IP, with the ray  INTERPRETATION OF POLYHEDRAL FIGURES 391  b  FIGURE II  through N. In particular, the line Fi r) Fj is the projection of the intersection P; r1 Pj (1 < i <j<, 3) (Fig. I la).  In order to prove that we can associate the faces Fo, FF2, and F3 with the Planes IP. = P, P1 IPZ, and P3, respectively, it  suffices to prove that for any point N E Po the ordering ON(F,, F, , F,, F3) between these four faces at N rel our  interpretation coincides with the ordering 0(0,f (N), fz(N), f ,(N)) = ON(PI, IPI, IPZ, P3 ). Suppose the line (MN) intersects  the line Fo r1 F; at a point T; (i = 1, 2, 3) (Fig. I la). Then for every i = 1, 2  3, we can associate with N a point N, in IPA, defined by: xN, = xN, yN. = y and z,, = f (xN, yN). The points M', N, and Tj  belong to the same line in (P;, and this line intersects the line (M N) (dashes in Fig. l I a) at Ti. Since MM' and NN; are  two parallel rays, we have  NN; T; N  MM' T; M  Assume, for instance, MM' = +1 (i.e., F, = FZ = F3 > Fo at M). Then NN; =f(N) is the algebraic quotient of the lengths T;N and  T;M. Thus we have, in the case of our figure, 0 <f(N) < fz(N) < f (N). But the interpretation yields F, = Fz = F3 > Fo at M  and Fo = F, at T,, which imply F, < FQ at TZ E T,/M. Then F, < FZ = Fo at TZ and F, = FZ at M imply F, < FZ at N E MT,. We can  prove with similar arguments that Fo < F, < FZ < F3 at N rel our interpretation. Hence ON(P;) and ON(FI) coincide. As the  point N is moved across (Po, both orderings change in the same way at each crossing of any of the lines F; (1 F; (0 < i < j <  3). Thus the orderings coincide at any point of IP u .  Now suppose _ {F,, F.., Fk_, } cJ7- is a set of faces of the interpretation, and 3po, [p], ...1P.-I) is a set of  associated planes of the scene space, so that O,v(FO, F, ,..., Fk_,) and ON(IPO, IP, ,..., Pk_,) coincide for every N E 1Po (k  > 4). If  _ . the interpretation is feasible. If not, let Fk E Ji~_ - ~/. There exists at least one pair of faces among {F, , FZ, F3 },  (F, , Fz) say, for which Fk n F, and Fk n FZ are two distinct concurrent lines in IPo (Fig. 1lb). These lines are the  projections of two intersecting lines in P, and Pz, respectively, and they determine a unique plane Pk in the scene space. Let  z =fk(x, y) be the equation of IPk. We shall first prove that  392 ERIC TEROUANNE  the orderings between (Pk, IPand P2, on the one hand, and Fk, Fand F2, on the other hand, coincide at every point of Po.  Consider a point K of IPfl which belongs to Fk r) F2 and not to Fk n F, . Then OK(IPk, Pd = O(fk(K),fi(K)) = O(f2(K)J1(K)) =  OK(IP21 P0 = Ox(F2, F,) = OK(Fk, F,). Moreover, O,(IPkI P,) and O,(Fk, F,) coincide for every point J of Fk n Fsince fk(J)  =f,(J) and Fk = F, at J. Now, the order between the values of two affine functions at three aligned points obey the rules of  Tables 2 and 3 as well as the ordering between two faces of the interpretation. Then, since Fk n F, and Fk n F2 generate IP,  by the operations of join and extension, it follows that ON(Pk, IP,) and ON(Fk, F,) coincide for every N E IPo. The same  argument holds for ON(Pk, F2) and ON(Fk, F2).  It remains to be proven that the ordering between the new plane IPk and any other plane Ph E,9 - {IPP2} coincides at any N E  IPo with ON(Fk, Fh).  If Fk and Fh are parallel in our interpretation, we have for every K E Fk n F; (IE { I, 2 }), OK(Fk, Fh)=OK(Fi,  Fh)=O(fi(K),fh(K))=O(fk(K),fh(K))=OK(Pk+ ph)The same is true for every N E Po by join or extension.  Finally, suppose Fk and Fh are not parallel, and Fk n Fh cuts Fi n Fk at the (possibly infinitely remote) point H; (i = 1, 2)  (Fig. I I b). Let H; be the point of IPk whose projection is H; (i = 1, 2). Since fh(Hi) =f(Hi) =fk(Hi), H; belongs to IPh n  Pk (i = 1, 2). Thus Fh n Fk = (H, , H2) is the projection of (H;, Hz) = IPh n IPk. Moreover, if K E Fk n Fi\Hi, O1(pk, Ph) =  O(f,(K),fh(K)) _ O(f (K), fh(K)) = OK(Fi, Fh) = OK(Fk, Fh) (i=1,2). It follows (by join and extension) that ON(Pk, Ph) and  ON(Fk, Fh) coincide at every point N E F,. Thus fk can be added to _~/ and the proof is complete.  We shall now deal with the special case of completable interpretations which do not possess a tetrahedron. The metric  properties involved in their study are basically those of some classical notions of projective geometry (like the biratio),  and some of them can be found, at least in parts, in the literature. They derive from a theorem developed by Menelaus, a  first-century Greek mathematician (Coxeter, 1961):  THEOREM OF MENELAUs. Let ABC be a triangle, and X, Y, Z points on the lines supporting the sides AB, BC_, and CA, respectively  (Fig. 12a). Then X, Y, Z are collinear if and only if (XA 1XB)(YB_1 YC)(ZC1ZA) = 1.  This theorem will permit us to introduce the notion of the "triratio" of a sequence of six concurrent or parallel lines. This  notion is related to that of the biratio of a sequence of four colinear points  AB CD  [A, B, C,D]=--. BC DA  It proceeds from the following preliminary results:  LEMMA 6.1. Let DD2, D3, Da be four distinct lines in a plane. Then the D; are  INTERPRETATION OF POLYHEDRAL FIGURES 393  a  c  d  FIGURE 12  all concurrent, or all parallel, if and only if the biratio [A,, Az, A3, A, I is the same for every family (A ;) of collinear  points in which A; E Di (1 < i < 4).  Proof. Let us first assume that the Di are four concurrent lines (Fig. 12b), with 0 as their common intersection, and let S  and S' be two lines intersecting each Di at Ai and Bi, respectively (1 < i < 4). If S and S' are parallel, the result  immediately follows from Thales' theorem which implies here,  A;AJ OAI. OAJ  - ' Vi,jC 11, 2, 3,4}. BiBJ OBi OBJ  In order to prove the result in the case where S and S' are not parallel, let us first consider three concurrent lines D, D',  and D", and two arbitrary secants S and S' in which 0 = D rl D' rl D" :t- M = S rl S' (Fig. 12c). D, D', and D" intersect S at  A, B, and C, and S' at A', B', and C', respectively. Then applying Menelaus' theorem to the triangle BMB' and the points C,  C', and 0 we obtain  CB C'M OB' - =1  CM C'B' OB  Similarly, with the triangle BMB' and the points A, A' and O:  Thus  AB A'M OB'  AM A'B' OB  CB C'M 4-B- A -'M  CM C'B' AM A'B'  394 ERIC TEROUANNE or  AB [A'B' AM C'M  BC B'C' CM A'M ' (6) Now consider our four concurrent lines Di (Fig. 12b) and let us rewrite (6) after  replacing (D, D', D") by (DD2, D3) and (D3, DD,) successively:  and  A,A2 B,B2 _ A,M B3M A2A31 B,B3 A,M B,M  A3A, lB3B, - A3M B,M  A,A, J B,B, AM B3M  The product of the right portions of these two equalities is 1, which completes the direct proof (the same argument holds if  the Di are all parallel).  Conversely, let us assume that the biratio [AA2, A3, A,] has the same value for any family of collinear points (A ;) in  which Ai E D; (1 < i < 4). This value cannot be 0 since the D; are distinct. If the D; are not all concurrent or all parallel,  there exist two of them, D, and D2 say, which intersect at a point 0 out of each of the other lines, D, or D, (Fig. 12a). Then  consider a family (A ;) in which A,= A2 = 0: its biratio is null, which is contradictory.  The common value of the biratios of all the families (A,) of collinear points fulfilling A, E D; is called the biratio of the  family of lines (D;) and denoted by [DD2, D3, D,]. A well-known particular case of such families is that of harmonic  divisions, in which the value of the biratio is -1.  We shall eventually use this generalisation of Lemma 6.1:  THEOREM 6.2. Let (D;) (1 < i < 2n) be a family of distinct lines in a plane (n > 2). Then the D; are all concurrent, or all  parallel, if and only if the quantity  AIA2 A3Aa )( .X A2n-IA2n A2A3 AaAs A2,A1  has the same value for every family (A ;) of collinear points in which Ai E Di for every i = 1,..., 2n. This quantity is  denoted by [DD2,..., D2n].  Proof. The result is true for n = 2 (Lemma 6.1). For n > 2 we have  A,A2 A3A, X ...X A2n-lAn A2A, AaAs A2nA1  = A,A2 AA X  A2n-3A2n-2 A2n-2A1 A2n-1A2n  A,A, AaAs A2n-2A1 A2n-2A2n-I A2nA1 _ [DD2,..., D2n-2][D1, D2n-2n D2n-19 D2n],  which completes the direct proof by induction.  INTERPRETATION OF POLYHEDRAL FIGURES 395  Conversely, if the quantity [DD2,..., D2n] does not depend on the choice of a particular family (A;) of collinear points A;  E D;, the same argument as in Lemma 6.1 proves that the lines (D,) are all parallel or all concurrent.  DEFINITION 6.4. For any family (D) (1 < i < 6) of all parallel or all concurrent lines in a plane, we shall call "triratio of  the (D)" the quantity [DD2, DDD5, D6] defined by Theorem 6.2.  THEOREM 6.3. If the paired intersections of the faces of a completable interpretation are all parallel or all concurrent, this  interpretation is feasible if and only if for any Fo, F, , F2, F3 E .~ the triratio of the family (Fp n F, , Fp n F3 , Fo n  F2, FZ n F3, FZ n FF3 n F,) of lines of P is -1.  Proof. The necessity of the condition proceeds from Menelaus' theorem: if there exists a scene which verifies the conditions  of Definition 6.2, let 1Po, IPP2, IP3 be four planes of the scene whose paired intersections are all parallel or all  concurrent lines, and let IL be an arbitrary plane parallel to the rays and not parallel to any of the P;. The lines IL n  IP, intersect by pairs at six points: A = lL n IPo n IPB=ILnPonP3, C=Ln[PonP2, D=LLnp2np3, E=ILnp2nPand F = IL n P3 n !P,  (Fig. 13). No more than one of these points can be infinitely remote if IL n IP; and IL n IPA are parallel for a given pair i  :f-j. Let A' to F' be the projections of A to F on IP along the rays: these points are the intersections of IL n IP with Fo n  F, , Fo n F3 , Fo n F2, F2 n F,, F2 n F, , and F3 n F, , respectively. The triratio of these lines is  A'B' C'D' E'F'  B'C' D'E' F'A'  FIGURE 13  396 ERIC TEROUANNE  which by Thales' theorem is equal to  AB CD EF BC DE FA  which, by applying Menelaus' theorem to the triangle ACE and the points B, D, and F, is equal to -1.  Now let us prove the sufficiency. If all the faces but one have a common line intersection or are parallel, the feasibility is  easily proved by the same argument used for the interpretation involving only three faces. Hence we assume that there exist  three faces Fo, Fand FZ with a single common point 0 (which can be infinitely remote if the Fi n F; are parallel). Consider  an arbitrary secant S in fP which crosses Fo n F,, F, n F2, and F2 n Fo at A, B, and C, respectively (Fig. 14a). Let zo = +1  if F, =F2 > Fo at B, or -1 otherwise, and let B' be the point of the scene space whose projection is B and whose ordinate is  zo (Fig. 14b). B' belongs to the plane IL which contains all the rays going through S. Let IP, (resp. P2) be the plane which  contains B' and Fo n F, (resp. Fo r) F2). If Fk E _F_ - IF,, F,, F2 }, let D, E, and F denote the intersections of S with Fo n  Fk, F, n Fk, and F2 n Fk, respectively (no more than one of the points A to F can be infinitely remote). Finally, let E'  (resp. F') denote the point of IP, n IL (resp. P2 n IL) whose projection is E (resp. F). We have  AD CF' B'E' AD CF BE  DC F'B' E'A DC FB EA  = [FonFonFk,FanF2,F2r)Fk,F2nFknF,]=-1.  Hence, by Menelaus' theorem, the points D, E', and F' are collinear. Let IPk be the plane which contains E', F', and Fp n Fk.  Finally, let Po = IP. We have associated with each face F; of the interpretation a plane Pi of the scene space. It remains to  be proven that for every F,,:* Fthe ordering ON(Fm, F at an arbitrary point N of IP coincides with the ordering O,(P.,  IPn) along the ray R going through N (we assume N E S) (Fig. 14c). Let x be the ordinate of the point H' = IL n P ,n n Fl,,  and H its projection on (P. For each i = m, n, let Ki = R n IP, and Gi = IL n IP n Pi (one of the G; can be infinitely remote  if P,//1P)(Fig. 14c).  a  b  c  INTERPRETATION OF POLYHEDRAL FIGURES 397  Let us first establish the ordering ON(P,,,, IP as a function of x and N,  ON(P.IPn)=0(NKNK=0(xG.N'X G ,, ~. m G, ,H  let us turn to the ordering O(F F. Let J' = IL rl IP n IP, (if J' is infinitely remote we take J' = L rl IP r) PZ),  and let J be its projection on P. Let f be the function which expresses the ordinate of any point of IL n IP : f (Gm)=O and  f(H')=x.  We assume x > 0. Then either J' and H' are on the same side of S, or not. In the first case, f (J') > 0 and H' E J'/G U  J'G,,, which implies H E JIG, U JG,. IP = IP, > IPfl at J implies F, > Fo at J and since F = F, at J, F > Fo at J. Then  F = Fo at GnF > Fo at J, and H E JIG,, U JG imply F > F,, at H.  In the alternative case, where J' and H' are not on the same side of S, f (J') < 0 and H' E G/J', which implies H E G/J.  IP = (P, < IPo at J implies F, < Fo at J and since F = F, at J, F < Fo at J. Then F = FQ at G,,, F < Fo at J, and H  E GIJ imply F > Fo at H.  The same argument works for Finstead of Fm and we obtain: x > 0 => F _ F> Fo at H. Then F = F> Fp at H and F = Fo  at Gm and F= Fo at Gimply  G E H/GU HGc> F> Fo at G c> F> F at G <::> Fn > Fn at any N E H/G  and  G E GH <a Fo > Fat G c> F,n > Fat G ca F > Fat any N E HG,n U G/H.  Thus F > Fat N <::> (G E HIGU HGand N E H/G) or  (G E GH and N E HG U G/H) p GN > -G- G H GH  a IP > Pat N, by (2).  Moreover, since F = Fat N a N = H a IP  = IPat N, both orderings concide at every N E S. The symmetrical result holds  when x < 0, thus completing the proof.  For instance, the self-evident interpretation of Fig. 15 in terms of imbricated cardboards with parallel intersections is not  feasible: the triratio ](a), (d), (b), (c), (e), (f)] is not -1. This fact can be checked by considering what should be the  intersections a' to e' of the lines (a) to (e) with an arbitrary plane: the point f' = a'e' rl c'd' should be the intersection  of this plane with the line (f), which clearly is not true.  398 ERIC TEROUANNE  FiG. 15. Application of the "triratio rule": the "imbricated cardboards" interpretation of this figure is not feasible.  7. APPLICATIONS: CONSTRUCTION OF USUAL AND UNUSUAL MULTIBAR FIGURES  One of the goals of the first mathematical works about multibar figures (Cowan 1974, 1977) was the automatic production of a  variety of "impossible figures," called "unusual multibar figures" in Terouanne (1980). In this section we shall see how the  ordering process allows such a production.  The conventional interpretation of a multibar figure involves a great number of elements, including hidden faces and  assumptions of parallelism. This is why we will distinguish several types of unusual figures according to which elements of  the interpretation are the cause of the inconsistency.  We shall denote any edge of a multibar figure by a Roman letter if it lies along a bar, and by a Greek letter if it is a fold  at a corner (see Terouanne 1980 for definitions, and Fig. 16 for examples). Any hidden element is denoted by the same letter  as the opposite visible one, with a prime added.  DEFINITION 7.1. A "band" of a multibar figure is a cycle of its adjacency graph whose edges are folds. A visible face is  called a "principal face" if and only if it belongs to at least two bars. A central visible edge of a bar is called a  "principal edge" if ans only if its lies between two principal faces. A "plane figure" possesses only one principal face and  no principal edge. A nonplane figure possesses the same number of principal edges and principal faces, which produce the  "principal cycle" of its adjacency graph.  The reader is referred to Terouanne (1980) for a presentation of plane figures and principal elements (called "plane  components"), for a calculus of their number, and for a geometric study of bands.  INTERPRETATION OF POLYHEDRAL FIGURES 399  For example, the principal circuit of Fig. 15a is A - e - A, and its single band is  A-y'-C'-a'-B-a'-A'-y-C-#-B'-a-A.  We distinguish the following cases of unusual multibar figures.  Case 1. The principal circuit is "inconsistent," i.e., it possesses a critical point rel . Here are some immediate examples:  A figure which possesses a principal circuit with a length of 1 is always inconsistent (e.g., Fig. 16a). If it possesses two  principal faces, its principal cycle is consistent if and only if the two principal edges are colinear and their orderings are  identical: Fig. 16b is consistent, 16c and 16d are not. In order for a multibar figure to possess three principal faces and  for its principal cycle to be consistent, the three principal edges a, b, and c must be merged (Fig. 16e), parallel (Fig.  16f), or concurrent (Fig. 16g).  Case 2. A band is inconsistent.  The same rules as for the principal cycle apply here: Fig. 16c has a band (A, a, A ) with a length of 1, and so it is  obviously inconsistent. Figures 16h and i possess inconsistent bands with lengths of 2, etc.  Case 3. The inconsistent cycle is neither the principal one nor a band. For instance, Fig. 16f has an inconsistent circuit A -  a - D - Q - C - a - A which contains two folds and one principal edge.  c  FIG. 16. Usual and unusual multibar figures.  400 ERIC TEROUANNE  Fig. 17. Two unusual multibar figures with the same critical part.  Case 4. We have already seen (Figs. 5g, h) unusual multibar figures whose inconsistency is attributable to occlusions.  It is worth noting that the same mathematical argument proves the inconsistency of Figs. 17a and 17b, where the intuitive  "impossibility" is obvious for the one and not for the other. As a matter of fact, the left tribar looks feasible to most  people while the right one is adapted from the Penrose tribar, which is easily perceived as infeasible.  Of course, the four cases listed above do not take all possible unusual figures into account. Specifically, they only refer to  local consistency. But we can use them to construct multibar figures with chosen properties. Here, for example, is the  procedure for the automatic production of unusual figures of the first type. An illustration of this procedure is given in  Fig. 18.  (i) Choose the number n of corners and the number k of principal faces (n >, 3 and 1 < k < n). In our example we took n = 6  and k = 4.  (ii) Draw the outline of the figure, i.e., a polygon with n sides and n vertices (the heavy lines in Fig. 18a).  (iii) Choose the k sides of the polygon which will constitute the principal edges e.., ek (e, to e4 in Fig. 18a). We will  denote the principal cycle by A, - e, - AZ - eZ - -- Ak - ek, where A, (1 < i < k) are the principal faces (Fig. 18b).  (iv) Choose one element of P/ { (e, ),..., (e,) j as a critical part (the quadrangle marked by an x in Fig. 18a).  (v) Choose a circuit direction around the principal cycle (the clockwise direction in Fig. 18b).  (vi) For each principal face A;, determine on which side of e; it lies, according to the ordering of (Ai, e;, A;+,) chosen in  (v) and to the position of the critical part with respect to (e;) (faces A, to A4 in Fig. 18c).  (vii) For each nonprincipal central edge, arbitrarily choose on which side the corresponding nonprincipal face of the bar lies  (faces A s and A e in Fig. 18c).  INTERPRETATION OF POLYHEDRAL FIGURES 401  a  c  b  FIG. 18. Construction of an unusual multibar figure.  (viii) Determine the type of each corner, among the four possible ones (see Cowan, 1974; Terouanne, 1980): it is uniquely  specified by the preceding choices.  (ix) All that remains to be done is to choose the exact angles between the folds and the central edges, and the occlusion  ordering at each crossing of two bars. These choices are arbitrary and irrelevant to our present purpose. Nevertheless, they  have been chosen in our example (Fig. 18d) so that the resulting drawing could evoke some familiar, albeit distorted, multibar  Similarly, we can construct a multibar figure with a consistent principal cycle. For this, we need the following result:  PROPOSITION 7.1. Let (d;),<;<k be a family of lines in plane IP. There exists a family (P;), <;<k of half-planes Pi E IP/di  for which, with the notations of Proposition 4.1,  nPi1nd;=0 and nP;Ind;=0 (8)  c r r  if and only if (di) does not furill any of the following conditions: (i) k = 1, or  (ii) k = 2 and d, zt d2, or  (iii) k > 3, n; d; = 0 and there exists one line, d, say, where nip, di ~ 0.  Proof. (i) if k= 1, VP, E IP/d,, P,\d, =P, 0.  (ii) if k = 2, either d, = d2, or di//d2, or d, rl dZ is a point.  402 ERIC TEROUANNE  _ In the first case, let us take for P, any element of IP/d, and for P2 the opposite one: P, rl P2 = Pi r^1 PZ = d, n d2 and  (8) is verified.  If d, rl d2 is a point, regardless of the choice of P, and P2, their intersection is a nonempty plane sector and Ps rl P, is  the opposite one. Hence (8) cannot be fulfilled. Finally, if d,//d2 (d, :Ad,), let us call P' the half-plane of P/d, which  contains d2, and P2 the half-plane _ of fP/d2 which contains d, . If we take P; = Pi (or_ _ P! = P') (i = 1, 2), then P, r1 P2  (or P, r'1 P2) is the nonempty closed band determined by d, and d2, and (8) is _not fulfilled_. If we take P; = P' and P2 =p2  (or P, = P' and P2 = P2) then P, r1 P2 =J5, (or P2) and (8) is not fulfilled.  (iii) if k > 3, ni d; = Q), and M E ni$, di, then there exists a half-plane P, E IP/d, for which M E PM. Furthermore,  regardless of the choice of Pi E IP/di  (i =* 1), we have m E { +_ it, Pi\1 1i di and m E S li#, P;\I li di. Then if we choose PM as P., n i Pi\n, di contains M and  if we choose PM asp, , n i P; \n i di contains M. Thus (8) cannot be fulfilled.  Now let us consider the alternative case, where  n di = 0 for every I c (d,, d,,..., dk }, 111 > k - 1. d;E!  Either the di are all parallel or not.  If the d; are all parallel, there are three of them, dd2, and d3 say, all different and among which d3 lies between d, and  d2 (because if this property does not hold, all the di are merged except, at most, one, and there are k - 1 of them whose  intersection is nonempty). Then let P, be the element of IP/d, which contains neither d2 nor d3, P2 be the element of P/d2  which contains d,-and _d3, and P3 be the element of IP/d3 which contains d2 . Then P, (1 P2 r1 P3 = Pi n P' l'1 P3 = 0 and (8)  holds for any choice of the other half-planes.  If the di are not all parallel, there is a subset J of D, maximal for inclusion, in which I Id,EJ di is a point. This set  verifies 1 < I JI < k- 1. Let us consider two elements of D\J, for instance, d, and d2. Let M= nd.EJdi, and let us choose as  P, the element of (P/d, which contains M, and as P2 the element of IP/d2 which does not contain M. For any choice of the Pi (i  :f- 1, 2), we have  mPi c n f, = {M} and n P,, c n Pj = {M}, i>2 dfc-J i>2 djEJ  but M ~t- P, n J52 and M E~ P; (1 Pz. Thus (8) is verified. /  Hence, the procedure for constructing a multibar figure with a consistent principal cycle is:  (i') to (iii') as in (i) to (iii) above.  (iv') choose a family P, of half-planes having the property (8) of Proposition 7.1.  (v') to (viii') as in (v) to (viii) above.  (ix') the choice of crossing orders and of the exact orientation of the folds is  INTERPRETATION OF POLYHEDRAL FIGURES 403  FIG. 19. A feasible multibar figure whose six corners are the same as those of the Penrose tribar.  irrelevant to the consistency of the principal cycle but can be treated separately to ensure the consistency or inconsistency  rel c~ or rel bands. For the crossing of two bars, it is necessary to calculate the ordering graph rel .sad at the crossing  point and to choose the crossing order so that the occlusion produces or does not produce a circuit, as desired. It is not  always possible to ensure the consistency of bands.  As an example, Fig. 19 has been constructed so that its principal circuit is consistent: any critical point would be on the  same side (either right or left) of the six oriented principal edges, which is clearly impossible. The crossing orders of the  bars have been chosen so that the ordering graphs rel .SV and C."' at the crossing points have no circuit. Finally, the  directions of the folds have been chosen so that the twelve intersections of pairs of visible faces meet in triplets, thus  ensuring the consistency of the bands, the comprehensive consistency, and the completability of the figure. As a matter of  fact, it is feasible.  A last example of a completable interpretation is that of the Cesari pentabar (Fig. 20a): for the sake of simplicity we shall  first limit our interpretation to the five visible faces. The central edges of the five bars are convex adjacencies between  certain pairs of these faces. The other pairs of faces intersect along the visible folds at each corner, except for faces A  and D. We include in our interpretation the assumption that the visible fold a is parallel to D. Therefore, from point M= (a)  r1 (e) we can plot the intersection aof A and D. Then the ten lines of the figures ((a) to (e) and (a to (e)) represent  the paired intersections of the planes of the five faces (A to E) of the interpretation. Each of the points from M to R is  common to three lines, and represents the intersection of three of these planes. The comprehensive consistency and the  completability of our interpretation arise from the fact that the remaining triplets of lines actually intersect at five new  points (S to K~ so that the figure generates the well-known Desargue configuration of ten points and ten lines. Any little  variation in the orientation of one segment (a, say) in the figure could  480/27/4-5  404 ERIC TEROUANNE  a b  FIG. 20. (a) Completable C6sari pentabar, (b) a noncompletable variant of it, and (c) the Desargue multibar.  eliminate this property and therefore make the interpretation inconsistent: in Fig. 20b, the point T is critical.  The same arguments, with a rather more complicated drawing, could prove the completability of the multibar interpretation of  Fig. 20a, including its hidden faces. As a matter of fact, the Cesari pentabar is feasible, even if it is not easily perceived  as such. It can be merged with the multibar version of the Desargue configuration (Fig. 20c).  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  It is pleasure to ackowledge here the numerous and helpful comments made by several referees on earlier versions of this  paper. I especially thank Professor A. A. J. Marley, Editor, for his particular attention and patience in this matter. I am  also indebted to the members of the European Mathematical Psychology Group, for their kind attention and useful suggestions,  and to J. P. Olivier and J. Goodfellow for helpful discussions.  REFERENCES  ANNO, M. (1970). Strange pictures. Tokyo: Fukuikan Shoten, 1968; French ed: Jeux de constructions. Paris: 1'6cole des loisirs.  BARRE, A., & Fr,000N, A. (1968). La perspective curviligne. Paris: Flammarion.  CLOWES, M. B. (1971). On seeing things. Artificial intelligence, 2, 79-112.  INTERPRETATION OF POLYHEDRAL FIGURES 405  COWAN, T. M. (1974). The theory of braids and the analysis of impossible figures. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 11,  190-212.  COWAN, T. M. (1977). Supplementary report: Braids, side segments, and impossible figures. Journal of Mathematical Psychology,  16, 254-260.  COWAN, T. M. (1977). Organizing the properties of impossible figures. Perception, 6, 41-56. COXETER, H. S. M. (196i).  Introduction to geometry. New York: Wiley.  DRAPER, S. W. (1978). The Penrose triangle and a family of related figures. Perception, 7, 283-296. ESCHER, M. C. (1971). The  world of M. C. Escher. New York: Abrams.  HUFFMAN, D. A. (1971). Impossible objects as nonsense sentences. In B. Metzler and D. Michie (Eds.), Machine intelligence  (Vol. 6, pp. 295-323). New York: Halsted.  HUFFMAN, D. A. (1977). Realizable configurations of lines in pictures of polyhedra. In E. W. Elcock and D. Michie (Eds.),  Machine intelligence (Vol. 8, pp. 493-509). New York: Halsted.  HUFFMAN, D. A. (1977). A duality concept for the analysis of polyhedral scenes. In E. W. Elcock and D. Michie (Eds.), Machine  intelligence. (Vol. 8, pp. 475-492). New York: Halsted.  PENROSE, L. S., & PENROSE, R. (1958). Impossible object: A special type of illusions. British Journal of Psychology, 49, 31-33.  PRENOWITZ, W. (1961). A contemporary approach to classical geometry. American Mathematical Monthly, 68, I-67.  PRENOWITZ, W., & JANTOSCIAK, J. (1979). Join geometries; A theory of convex sets and linear geometry. New York:  Springer-Verlag.  SUGIHARA, K. (1982). Classification of impossible objects. Perception, 11, 65-74.  TEROUANNE, E. (1980). On a class of "impossible" figures: A new language for a new analysis. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 22, 24-47.  WHITELEY, W. (1982). Motions and stresses of projected polyhedra. Topologie Structurale, 7, 13-37.  RECEIVED: February 25, 1983