10.1016/0022-2496(83)90044-5
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 27, 216-228 (1983)  Book Review  Putting Your Theory Where Your Machine Is: Computer Implementation of Syntactic Theory  TERRY WINOGRAD. Language as a Cognitive Process, Vol. 1, Syntax. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1983. Pp. xiv + 640. $29.95.  Reviewed by RICHARD MILLWARD AND CELIA MILLWARD  T. Winograd is Professor of Computer Science at Stanford University. He received his Ph.D. at Massachusetts Institute of  Technology in 1971, and his Ph.D. thesis was published under the title Understanding Natural Language (Cognitive Psychology,  1972, 3). His primary research interest is natural language understanding by computers. He is currently working on a companion  volume on semantics, and a book with F. C. Flores entitled "Understanding Computers and Cognition."  C. Millward is Professor of English at Boston University and R. Millward is Professor of Psychology and Cognitive Science at  Brown University. R. Millward's primary research interests are human concepts: how they are learned and used, with a major  focus on how visual information is coded propositionally. C. Millward is involved in the history of English language and  English grammar, having recently revised her Handbook for Writers, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1983.  There are two kinds of reviewers: expert and user. The expert reviewer is one who knows as much as the book's author; the user  reviewer is the one for whom the book was written. The expert reviewer is particularly appropriate for books that present a  new theme or approach to a subject, since it is the originality and accuracy of the material that must be judged. The user  reviewer is appropriate for a book summarizing a field with the intent of organizing the material for the reader. Terry  Winograd's Language as a Cognitive Process: Syntax (LCP) is not an original thesis, but rather a text. Hence this review is by  potential consumers of the book as a text, one a computer-oriented psychologist and the other an English-oriented linguist,  but neither of them expert in Winograd's specific area.  Despite the early brush with linguistic theory as it related to the theory of automata in the three Chomsky-Miller articles  (Luce, Bush, & Galanter, 1963), mathematical psychologists have virtually ignored natural language. Three exceptions  predictably all concern learning, a major area of interest in much of psychology until  Requests for reprints should be sent to R. B. Millward, Center for Cognitive Science, Box 1191, Brown University, Providence,  RI 02912.  216  0022-2496/83 53.00  Copyright .c) 1983 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  BOOK REVIEW 217  recently. The three are theoretically diverse: Wexler and Culicover (1980) follow the abstract formalism of Chomsky's Aspects  of the Theory of Syntax (1965) and develop the conditions necessary for a learning acquisition device to learn a generative  grammar. The second is Suppes' (1970) application of stimulus-sampling theory to the first one- to three-word sentences of  children. In sharp contrast to Wexler and Culicover's highly speculative approach, Suppes' efforts have focused on explaining  empirical data. The third approach has no roots in early mathematical psychology, although it is highly reminiscent of the  long tradition of large systems as portrayed by Hull, Skinner, and Estes. Instead, John Anderson's theory of language learning  (1981) derives from work in artificial intelligence (AI), and in particular emphasizes production systems. The present-day  mathematical psychologist may find the idea of learning based on production systems very appealing because there is a great  deal of related activity in psychology: short-term memory models based on Newell's PSG; work in problem-solving by Newell,  Greeno, Simon, and Anderson; and Klahr and Wallace's work on children's cognition. Anderson's approach to language learning in  his ACT theory is therefore likely to be of most interest to psychologists, and to mathematical psychologists in particular.  Further, he is concerned with how well the theory fits data, a criterion explicitly rejected by formalists of the Chomsky  persuasion as being measures only of performance and not of competence.  Most mathematical psychologists have ignored the problems of parsing. Yet, given the early articles by Miller and Chomsky, it  seems in hindsight to be a natural area of research for them. Nonetheless, aside from the exceptions just mentioned, no papers  have appeared in Journal of Mathematical Psychology on the psychological processes involved in parsing a sentence.  Chomsky set the stage for a new approach to the formal study of syntax, but his theoretical position was alien to work in  mathematical psychology. Mathematical psychology is concerned with formal models of data analysis; its presuppositions are  based in stimulus-response (S-R) psychology. Chomsky successfully demonstrated the general inadequacy of the finite  assumptions of S-R (Markovian) models. He also denied the relevancy of independent observations about language performance and  insisted on the privilege of introspective data for building a competence theory of language. Neither assumption was  acceptable to mathematical psychologists; so, despite the formalism of Chomsky's approach, modellers in psychology did not  greet it with any detectable enthusiasm. One can still see this dichotomy in Suppes' review (1983) of the Wexler and Culicover  book and in the Wexler (1978) and Anderson (1980) exchange. Furthermore, the early failures of transformational theory to  predict reaction-time data were a blow to continued reasearch in this area (Miller & McKeon, 1964; Clifton, Kurcz, & Jenkins,  1965; Clifton & Odom, 1966). But these are reasons related specifically to transformational grammar and not sufficient  justification for the neglect of the entire area of syntax. ATNs are also formal, yet amenable to experimentation (cf. Kaplan,  1972). Although linguistics has been ignored in mathematical psychology, enough is now known of syntax to allow us to make  theoretical models of how it is used in understanding language and then to test  218 BOOK REVIEW  these models against data. Such an enterprise would fit well into the tradition of mathematical psychology.  What has all of this to do with Winograd's LCP? Well, if our evaluation of the book is correct, a great deal. First, much of  the controversy concerning syntax derives from a rigid adherence to a single program in the study of languageChomsky's  generative approach. After 25 years, the approach has been weighed and found wanting, and numerous schisms have arisen.  Second, a large part of the controversy results from a deplorable ignorance of language at all levels, but particularly  syntax, which has been the focus of so much theoretical debate. This ignorance leads to an underestimation of the complexity  of what we do when we understand language. Winograd's book provides a broad review of linguistic theory which does not  oversimplify or adhere dogmatically to a single point of view. The book is intended as a training text for linguists and AI  researchers; he does not present a new theory. He does not even present new data. For linguists, the material is designed to  explain how AI has approached the problem of making a computer understand syntax. For the AI researcher, the purpose is to  outline the essentials of English syntax and the different approaches that have been taken to its study.  LCP offers the psychologist a good review of a variety of linguistic theories, a chapter outlining English structures, careful  explanations of the techniques used for implementing different algorithms for parsing, and an overview of what has been  accomplished in the study of syntax over the past 10-20 years. All of these are useful to a psychologist interested in the  parsing of natural language or the learning of syntax. The requirements of different algorithms with respect to memory and  processing resources can be understood only when these algorithms are carefully worked out. Seeing how this is done on a  computer can be extremely illuminating. On the other hand, Winograd does not present a psychological theory of language  parsing and has little to say about the psychological relevance of AI theories. That is where psychologists must come in.  Considering Winograd's most recent work (Flores & Winograd, Understanding Computers and Cognition, forthcoming), this book may  be a surprise. As we have said, no new theories or developments are presented. In fact, Winograd ends the Preface with these  words:  At the moment there is a gap-what I say in these newer writings does not mesh smoothly with what is presented here. I believe  that in the long run the technical material presented in these volumes will retain its usefulness, but that it will fit in new  ways into our interpretation of language as a human phenomenon.  Another fact about the book which seems out of character for the creator of the first truly integrated language-understanding  program, SHRDLU, - is that the book treats only syntax, although another volume on meaning is promised. But this adherence to  the traditional separation of syntax and semantics also fits into the primarily pedagogical purpose of the text. Trying to  combine both syntax and semantics would require a significant reorientation of the subject matter to be covered. (Of course,  if one accepts the arguments against trying to write  BOOK REVIEW 219  understanding programs in two stages-i.e., separating syntax from semantics, or even worrying much about syntax at all-one  might worry about a whole book dedicated to syntax alone.)  Chapter 1. Winograd lays out the presuppositions of his approach in Chapter 1, "Viewing Language as a Knowledge-Based  Process." Viewing language as a cognitive process differs from structuralist or generative approaches by emphasizing a  computational paradigm. The goal is to delineate "the knowledge a person must have to speak and understand a language and how  the mind is organized to make use of this knowledge in communication" (p. 1). The presentation uses the metaphor of a  stored-program digital computer with basic theoretical concepts of program and data. In this first chapter, Winograd sketchily  diagrams information-processing flow charts for "cooperative communication," "processing done by the language user," a  "stratified model of language comprehension," etc. However, the rest of the book deals very little with psychological  processes involved in language comprehension or production; the book is not a psycholinguistics treatise in any sense,  although not incompatible with one. On the other hand, it does overtly contrast with both the generative and structuralist  paradigms.  In the computational paradigm, the proper domain of study is the structure of knowledge possessed by an individual who uses a  language ... this knowledge can be understood as formal rules concerning structure of symbols [and] the structure of language  is derived from the structure of the processes.  All this is in contrast to the competence-performance distinction of the generative approach. There is no attempt in the  computational paradigm to separate language from other faculties. On the contrary, the basic idea is that language requires  the same cognitive processes as cognition in general. Winograd thus equates "cognitive processing" and "computational  processing." The computational paradigm differs from the structuralist tradition, which is primarily interested in describing  language, in its concern for the human and machine processes used to generate and produce language.  If the work does not adhere to either the generative or structuralist approach and is not really psychological, then what is  left? Artificial intelligence is the major focus. How can a machine be made to understand language and what work has been done  to accomplish this goal? But, emphatically, LCP is not just a book about AI systems. Rather, it is a summary of syntactic  theories and their relevance to the goal of making a computer understand language. The emphasis is on the usefulness of  different algorithms and data structures, not on the particular programs that have been produced. Thus, for example, SHRDLU is  hardly mentioned. Transformational, context-free, ATN, and systemic grammars are presented in some detail. LCP is a book about  syntax for the AI researcher and a book about Al for the linguist. For psychologists, it is an extensive review of the  knowledge we must possess if we are to parse sentences and a detailed presentation of the various algorithms suggested for how  this might be done.  Winograd acknowledges the military and business interests that have supported  480/27/2-8  220  BOOK REVIEW  much linguistic research since World War II. Machine translation and Chomsky's work on formal syntax, ARPA's support for  speech-understanding systems, business support for text-processing, and medical interests in knowledge engineering have all  given an impetus to the study of language. Thus, his review of syntax is biased by the goals of this heavily applied research,  partly because the field has been so biased, partly because of his own computational biases, and partly because he is  interested in studies of language understanding by machines. This leads to an admitted neglect of the social aspects of  language, the evocative aspects of language, and any historical material. But Winograd is not narrow or doctrinaire in his  feelings about what is important in language, and one gets the impression that these other aspects of language are somewhat  reluctantly omitted.  Chapter 2 and Appendix A. Chapter 2, "Word Patterns and Word Classes," lays the foundation for later discussions. It covers  the basic computational concepts of pattern matching, transitional networks, parallel processing, and backtracking. In doing  this, it is natural to introduce the linguistic concepts of words, classes of words, and dictionaries. The traditional English  word classes are described so that transition networks can be discussed in terms of categories rather than individual words.  To present these notions in a formal way, Winograd introduces a descriptive language (DL), which is formally defined in  Appendix A, "Language for Describing Objects and Procedures." Since a good portion of the remainder of the book depends on  describing classes and objects, procedures, predicates, and entities defined by these concepts, the DL language is fairly  useful. The DL formalism is defined by means of a hypothetical example of a university course description-though a linguistic  example probably would have been more enlightening and to the point. Part of the justification of DL is that a computer  compiler eventually will be built to interpret it. No attempt is made to do so in this book, however, and the project appears  rather ambitious. The use of DL allows Winograd to present much of his discussion in a uniform notation which is not assumed  to be familiar to the reader. On the other hand, the task of turning a DL description into a programming language (LISP, for  example) is not discussed at all. For computer scientists, this is not a major problem because they know LISP. But the book is  not going to help linguists or psychologists unfamiliar with LISP understand existing programs or implement an algorithm into  an existing programming language. If students are expected to construct an actual AI system, then this next step is necessary.  Winograd's defense would probably be that the DL descriptions are clearer, and that the next step can be done in many ways, so  need not be described in a book about the knowledge required to parse sentences.  To an extent, DL is useful and a space-saver since the interrelations of complex concepts can be neatly handled. Often,  however, there is too much detail, and the DL tables seem to overly complicate what is actually rather simple. A second  problem is that DL is used to describe only context-free and ATN grammars. The two long chapters on transformational grammar  and systemic grammar and the appendix giving an outline of English do not employ the DL system at all. Nor does the chapter on  computer systems for natural language. Thus one wonders about the  BOOK REVIEW 221  justification for devoting over 50 pages in Appendix A to DL in order to help explain 145 pages, and then not using it for 300  other pages-particularly since the applications of DL in these 145 pages were so clear that even the linguist reviewer had no  trouble following them without referring to Appendix A. The DL formalism does not appear to be general enough to describe  syntactic theory. It is hard to second-guess an author on such matters, but some high-level LISP functions, carefully defined,  might have worked just as well for the context-free and ATN chapters.  Chapter 3. One of the problems faced by anyone trying to understand how computers are made to understand language is that most  articles in the field assume a familiarity with the field and its jargon. Most papers simply say what the authors did and why.  But there is a lore to the field of language understanding that is not easily picked up from such articles. Even elementary  books like Charniak and Wilk's Computational Semantics (1976) are vague about computational implementations and simply do not  provide detailed background. Winograd's approach is to start with basics-in both programming and language (syntax).  Chapter 3, "Context-Free Grammars and Parsing," goes a step beyond the pattern matching discussed in Chapter 2. Terminology is  another problem to be overcome: Structural linguists talk about immediate-constituent grammars, programming language designers  about Backus Normal Form, and generative syntacticians about the more general class of phrase-structure grammars. Here also  Winograd is to be commended on his completeness.  Although context-free grammars are inadequate for natural languages, they represent an easy class of grammars for which to  develop algorithms. Winograd presents techniques for matching a set of context-free rules to a sample language. Top-down and  bottom-up procedures, and parallel and serial processing with backtracking mechanisms are carefully spelled out. The final  section describes an active-chart parser that combines top-down and bottom-up procedures in a way that does only what is  relevant and does nothing more than once.  Chapter 3 also discusses linguistic issues that enter into parsing even when dealing with context-free grammars. Of most  importance is how the high-level constituents of a language should be represented. Three kinds of structures are discussed,  corresponding roughly to dependency grammars (e.g., Schank's conceptual dependency), immediate constituent grammars (e.g.,  phrase-structure rules), and slot-andfiller grammars (e.g., ATN grammars).  Most of the examples Winograd discusses are of recognition algorithmsprocedures to say "yes" or "no" to the grammaticality of  an input string. Although he mentions how extra syntactic facts can be carried along, he does not elaborate much on this  aspect of parsing. Many will find this omission frustrating, even downright perverse. The issue really centers on whether  there is a separate mental model for syntax. If there is, then we can try to describe it independently of a structural  analysis, but if not, then the only reason for parsing is to build some structure which can interface with semantics. Yes-no  decisions about the grammaticality of a sentence are virtually useless in the latter case.  222 BOOK REVIEW  Chapter 4 and Appendix C. Chapter 4, "Transformational Grammar," presents a brief history of the rationale for  transformational grammar and of the reasons for dissatisfaction with phrase-structure grammars (e.g., awkwardness of dealing  with discontinuous structures and agreement, inability to show relationships between similar sentences with variant word  orders, etc.). It then spells out the basic transformational model, including optional and obligatory transformations, and  refinements in the standard theory. The distinction between competence and performance is discussed briefly, as well as other  central questions in transformational theory such as criteria of adequacy for syntactic theories, language universals, the  relation of syntax to meaning, the relationship between syntactic theories and cognitive processes, and the problem of  defining grammaticality.  Appendix C, "Current Directions in Transformational Grammar," is what its title implies, an extension and updating of the  material presented in Chapter 4. Indeed, one wonders why it was placed in an appendix and not incorporated into Chapter 4. It  describes what are essentially refinements, elaborations, and extensions of the standard theory, including the extended  standard theory and the more recent trace theory, as well as such drastic revisions of the standard theory as generative  semantics and phrase-structure grammars (the latter eliminating transformations entirely). Newer structures and formal  conventions and rules are also summarized.  Winograd ultimately rejects transformational theory as a basis for research in artificial intelligence, primarily because of  the different, more pragmatic aims of AI. However, he is to be commended for his even-handed description of transformational  theory-objective treatments of the subject are hard to come by. The chapter, together with Appendix C, could be recommended  independently of the rest of the book as a lucid but succinct introduction to what transformational grammar is all about.  Chapter 5 and Appendix D. Transformational grammar was to a large extent an outgrowth of early machine translation failures.  It was realized that a more complete description of syntax was necessary if one were to translate from one language to  another. Chomsky's abstract and formal approach was seen as a promising means for meeting this need. However, in his efforts  to describe the "competence" of a language user, the primary source of Chomsky's data was introspection, a privileged source  of insight about language. Unfortunately, this competence theory was particularly ill-conceived to account for how one parses  a sentence in order to understand it. A surface-structure tree must be created before applying reverse transformations. To do  this, one needs a grammar of the surface structure-which begins to sound like the problem with which the parser started. Then,  given surface structure, inverse transformations must be selected, a highly ambiguous process. These difficulties have  essentially ruled out parsing with transformations.  Workers in AI, on the other hand, needed language-understanding programs, and parsing was of prime importance. The most  successful approach was an extension of context-free grammars. This approach, called augmented transition network grammar  HOOK REVIEW 223  (ATN), is the dominant approach in the field today. (Its major rivals are semantic parsers, a topic for another book.)  Winograd presents a very thorough description of ATN grammars. Not only is Chapter 5, "Augmented Transition Network Grammars,"  devoted to their development, but Appendix D, "An ATN Grammar for English," contains a fairly complete ATN. Abstractly, ATNs  are not very difficult to understand. In detail, they are rather complex. The first step is to start with a context-free  grammar and write it as a set of recursive transition networks. This gives an RTN, another way of specifying a context-free  grammar. Next, registers are added so that there are conditions associated with the choice of arcs to be taken. In addition,  each arc or network adds to the registers by specifying roles or features. This augmentation makes the RTN an ATN, which is  equivalent to a Turing machine and is capable of parsing type 0 languages. In practice, however, there are limitations placed  on the number and type of features and roles, thus constraining the power of the parser greatly.  One reason for psychologists to be particularly interested in ATNs is that ATNs have been the source of several psychological  studies of how people parse sentences. Kaplan (1975) and Wanner and Maratsos (1978), for example, have provided some evidence  that humans obey some of the rules of grammar in a way that suggests a parallelism between ATNs and the human parsing  mechanism. John Anderson (1976) has taken an ATN as the basic structure to have ACT simulate. However, the fit between the ATN  model and human performance is not an easy one to measure because the ATN approach does not specify the specific  implementations which are needed to test it as a theory.  A major difficulty, of course, lies in separating the syntactic parser from the process of deciphering phonology and  interpreting meaning. That we have separate routines for different phrases, hold registers for information used later, etc.,  seems reasonable enough at some level of description. However, it is not incontrovertible. Fodor and Frazier's (1980) two-part  parser (the sausage machine) and Marcus' (1980) deterministic parser present possible alternatives.  Chapter 6. Chapter 6, "Feature and Function Grammars," is the longest in the book and subsumes in one chapter a variety of  different formulations that have in common an emphasis on choice and functional roles in language. The first four sections of  the chapter are devoted to a description of systemic grammar, the most thoroughly developed of all such approaches, but  perhaps not as familiar as it should be in the United States (it was developed in England by M. A. K. Halliday and his  associates). As Winograd points out, the focus of systemic grammar is on the social function of language rather than the  cognitive processes that underlie it.  Systemic grammar would not seem, at first glance, an especially promising approach for use in AI and computer parsing. Its  heavy emphasis on prosody is simply not applicable to Winograd's restriction to the written language. Further, systemic  grammar, while certainly aware of the desirability of precision, does not insist on it at every step, again a problem for  computer application. Nevertheless, its  224 BOOK REVIEW  very flexibility may make it more adaptable for AI work than other seemingly more rigorous approaches. It is certainly  compatible with the goals of semantic analysis. And its notions of delicacy and theme seem promising for stylistic analysis;  it is the only important approach today that could gracefully incorporate connotational as well as denotational meaning.  Section 6.5 introduces and describes case grammar, not so much a full-fledged grammatical theory in its own right as an  attempt to formalize certain kinds of grammatical-semantic relationships neglected by other approaches (e.g., the relationship  between This belt ties in the back vs I tie this belt in the back or We had the cold beef for lunch vs We had the boss for  lunch vs We had the small dining room for lunch). This attempt to penetrate beneath the surface case system of Englishlimited  to two cases for nouns and three for personal pronouns-is attractive in many ways, but contains the potential dangers of  overlapping cases and of proliferating ad absurdum the number of possible cases. As Winograd notes, the basic rationale behind  case grammar can be incorporated into most of the other approaches described in the book.  The final sections of Chapter 6 describe other types of functional grammars, including lexical-functional grammars,  generalized phrase-structure grammars, and definite-clause grammar. None of these latter types has been sufficiently well  developed to allow for extensive application, but Winograd clearly feels that the functional approach in general is a  promising one.  Appendix B. Appendix B, "An Outline of English Syntax," is, unfortunately, a bit of a disappointment. First, terminology is  not consistent with the rest of the book, or even with traditional grammar. For example, clause is used to include any  construction including a verbal, finite or nonfinite, and with or without a subject. The omission of the category of phrase  both ignores a useful distinction and confuses the reader, especially since phrase is widely used in other parts of the book  to refer to, among other things, constructions that do not contain both a subject and its finite verb. Other terms remain  undefined. For example, dative appears as a topic heading (p. 492), but is not defined; in fact, it does not even appear in  the Index of Syntactic Terms that follows Appendix B. Winograd himself certainly cannot be blamed for the inconsistencies and  contradictions in terminology among the various grammarians and schools of grammar, but in a text like this he does owe it to  his readers to provide some kind of "table of equivalents" to allow them to compare and contrast the various approaches.  Lapses abound. True, as Leonard Bloomfield supposedly said, "all grammars leak." Most human users are sufficiently absorbent  to soak up the resulting dampness. But leaks in grammars designed for use with computers are more serious because, as it has  also been said, "computers do what you tell them to, not what you want them to." And Winograd's stated purpose for including  this outline is to  produce a general guide that would be useful to someone concerned with producing a formal system covering a wide range of  syntactic phenomena. This might be someone creating a  BOOK REVIEW 225  computer program to parse or understand English inputs, someone developing a new syntactic formalism within the generative  paradigm, or a student who wants to master an existing formalism by trying it out on difficult examples.  Some of the oversights in Winograd's Outline are minor and would not necessarily disrupt a formal system. For example, he says  that the term perfective is traditionally used for "tenses" formed with the auxiliary have. In traditional grammar, perfective  refers to aspect, not tense. Indeed, the term he intends here, perfect, means almost the opposite of perfective.  More serious are overgeneralizations or omissions that, if included in a formal system, would lead to rejection of perfectly  grammatical utterances or acceptance of ungrammatical ones. Only a sampling of the many such lapses are cited here.  1. Neither Preposed-WH (p. 475) nor WH-Nominal accounts for grammatical utterances like "How sweet of you to come!" or "What a  miserable day!"  2. In a burst of normative advice, Winograd states (p. 481), "In order to avoid a dangling preposition, the entire PP can be  moved to the front and the relativizer embedded." However, this cannot be done with some constructions, in particular some  passives and infinitives. How does one embed the PP in clauses like "I don't like houseplants that are hard to take care of or  "This is a matter to be thought about carefully"?  3. On p. 484, p. 536, and elsewhere, he states that modals are not marked for tense. If this rule were strictly followed, one  would presumably accept as grammatical "Today I can see Mt. Hood" but reject as ungrammatical-or at least as not meaning past  tense-"Yesterday I could see Mt. Hood." Further, as Quirk, Greenbaum, Leech, and Svartvik (1972; one of Winograd's references)  point out, all the past tense forms are used with verbs of reporting in the past tense: "He said the guests would be late,"  etc.  4. Mental process verbs do not always take the simple present tense (p. 500): "I'm thinking of moving to the Yukon"; "You're  forgetting your manners"; "He was delighting his audience with his Reagan impersonations."  5. The -self form in "Einstein himself couldn't have done it" is not a strange reflexive, but rather an intensive pronoun with  a very different syntax and meaning.  6. The counterfactual subjunctive (pp. 488-489) does not appear with a binder if inversion occurs: "Were I in your position...  ."  7. While (p. 533) is not "only a binder"; it is also a noun ("Wait a while'"; "a long while ago"; "worth your while") and a  verb ("while away the hours").  8. Go (p. 539) is nominalized in a number of quasi-idiomatic expressions: "have a go at it"; "make a go of it"; "always on the  go"; "give me a go"; etc.  9. If one defines an affix as an element that cannot appear as a word in its own right (p. 545), then one excludes at least  the following from the list of English affixes: ful(l), -less, -like; super-, out-, over-, under-, counter-.  10. Even though qualified, the statement "In general, the word class of the  226 BOOK REVIEW  compound is that of its last element" is too sweeping by far; there are a number of large and productive classes of compounds  that do not fit this pattern. Among compound nouns are the types represented by president-elect, hearsay, lowdown, deafmute,  once-over, giveaway, outbreak, godsend, and know-it-all. Among compound adjectives are the types sing-song, head-on, noonday,  lightweight, off-color, and hitand-run. Most verbal compounds do have a verb as the second element, but even here there is the  adjective + noun type represented by cold-shoulder, blue-pencil, strongarm, and short-change.  These points may seem mere nit-picking quibbles, and to an extent that is exactly what they are. But it is just such  nit-picking trivia that a truly usable machine grammar must be able to account for if it is to handle natural language;  fortunately or unfortunately, the writing of native users of English is not like that of first-grade primers or introductory  texts in English as a second language.  Noble attempt though the Outline of English may be, most instructors would probably prefer to assign a traditional grammar  such as Quirk et al. (1972) and see the space devoted to Appendix B filled with a complete glossary including all the  technical terms used in the book. This is especially crucial because even students with a fairly strong linguistics background  may be confused by such things as the use of the term genitive in one section of the book and possessive in another. These  same students will probably be baffled by the undefined use of terms like Boolean logic and hash tables. And students with a  weak background in either traditional or contemporary grammar will be totally lost by the proliferation of terms, not to  mention the variant terms for the same phenomenon.  Chapter 7. Winograd's goal for Chapter 7, "Computational Systems for Natural Language Parsing," is to provide a framework for  understanding the details of systems described in the literature. He correctly notes that original research papers are  unsatisfactory because they focus on unique features, ignore common ideas, and, in an attempt to describe a whole system, mix  implementation details and general principles in a confusing way. Fifty-two systems are listed at the beginning of the  chapter, but individual systems receive varying degrees of discussion. The list starts with the Harvard Syntactic Analyzer  (1962) and ends with eight recent systems (1981). The systems vary in purpose: machine translations, question answering,  database retrieval, text analysis, text generation, theory development, and language learning. Most importantly, however, they  vary in design. Winograd considers seven design issues in evaluating these systems.  Completeness refers to the extent to which a system attempts a full parse or only a partial parse. This usually depends on the  role of semantics as well as on the goal of the system. Basic framework refers to the theoretical underpinning of the system,  a breakdown which Winograd uses in his detailed discussion of the systems at the end of the chapter. The form of assigned  structure characterizes the output of the system-surface structure, deep structure, semantic structure (case grammar, query  language), or some arbitrary structure. Ambiguity and search involves such algorithmic issues as backtracking, determinism,  and parallel processing. Syntactic  BOOK REVIEW 227  coverage evaluates the completeness of the syntax used (e.g., Does the system require a precise match of the input to the  syntax? How complex can embedding become? How well is quantification handled? Are idioms allowed? Does the system attempt to  handle conjunction, ellipsis, and comparison?). Domain specificity relates to the extent to which the system is tailored to a  specific sublanguage. All systems are limited to some extent by vocabulary, of course, but, in addition, special restrictions  in the syntactic forms and semantics can be included in the system to take advantage of the special language of the limited  domain. Finally, Winograd considers the system engineering issue. Because complex language-understanding systems are never  satisfactory, their efficiency and the ease of using them, changing them, and expanding them are practically very important.  These seven questions of design involve subtle qualitative issues useful in evaluating language-understanding programs.  Winograd does not, however, follow through by using them explicitly in his later review of the systems.  The main portion of Chapter 7 summarizes some of the most successful systems representing six basic theoretical approaches:  (1) augmented phrase-structure grammars, (2) transformationally based systems, (3) chart-rewrite systems, (4) ATNbased  systems, (5) pattern-matching systems, and (6) situation-action parsers. Winograd's description of these systems is not  intended to be complete; rather, he mentions only what is special about each system in terms of the design criteria. The  synopses would be useful to someone trying to decide what systems to study or read about, although they are too brief to be of  much practical or even pedagogical use. Chapter 7 is, in a sense, out of line with the main theme of the book; if Winograd is,  as he seems to be, very fond of appendices, Chapter 7 is a good candidate.  As a textbook LCP ranks fairly high. Winograd's style is open and clear; even if one disagrees with him, one can at least  understand what he is saying-a situation by no means universal with either linguistics or computer science texts. Winograd  understands that an example or two is often worth several paragraphs of abstract definition, and for the most part he uses  examples copiously and well. Each chapter ends with a helpful bibliography of suggested further readings.  Because LCP is intended as a textbook, the end-of-chapter exercises are both expected and helpful (although suggested answers  to at least some of them would be appreciated by most users). The exercises vary widely in difficulty and orientation: A few  are trivial, others probably too hard for any student. Some are overtly designed for the computer-science student; some for  the linguist. Some are mechanical and applied; others theoretical and speculative.  The appendixes are less successful. As was noted earlier, Appendix A probably could have been dispensed with entirely, and  Appendix B has many shortcomings. Appendix C might better be included in Chapter 4. Space saved on appendixes could be used  for a full-fledged glossary encompassing all the technical terms from both linguistics and computer science.  The book as a physical object is sturdy and should withstand heavy use. The format is attractive, and the table of contents is  easy to use, although the index is inadequate. Typographical errors are fewer than, alas, we have come to expect these  228 BOOK REVIEW  days; we noticed errors only on pages 12, 76, 306, 311, 405, and 486; none of them causes more than momentary confusion.  In sum, Winograd has completed a task so difficult that most of us would shrink from the very thought of undertaking it.  Whether he has been completely successful is another question. Probably neither the computer science student nor the  linguistics student will learn enough from the book even to approach proficiency in the other field. But the linguists should  get a feeling for the capabilities and the limitations of existing machine parsers and for the problems of writing programs to  parse natural language. Conversely, even though Winograd usually unrealistically assumes an extensive knowledge both of  traditional grammar and of more recent approaches to syntax on the part of computer scientists, they will get a feeling for  the tremendous intricacies of English syntax and the pitfalls that await even the most cautious researchers. We look forward  eagerly to his proposed volume on semantics.  REFERENCES  ANDERSON, J. R. Language, memory, and thought. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1976.  ANDERSON, J. R. On the merits of ACT and information-processing psychology: A response to Wexler's review. Cognition, 1980, 8,  73-88.  ANDERSON, J. R. A theory of language acquisition based on general learning principles. In Proceedings, 7th International Joint  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 1981. Pp. 97-103.  CHARNIAK, E., & WILKS, Y. (Eds.) Computational semantics: An introduction to artificial intelligence and natural language  comprehension. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1976.  CHOMSKY, N. Aspects of the theory of syntax. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1965.  CLIFTON, C., KURCZ, L, & JENKINS, J. J. Grammatical relations as determinants of sentence similarity. Journal of Verbal  Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1965, 4, 112-117.  CLIFTON, C., & ODOM, P. Similarity relations among certain English sentence constructions. Psychological Monographs, 1966, 80.  FODOR, J. D., & FRAZIER, L. Is the human parsing mechanism an ATN? Cognition, 1980, 8, 417-459. KAPLAN, R. M. Augmented  transition networks as psychological models of sentence comprehension. Artificial Intelligence, 1972, 3, 77-100.  KAPLAN, R. M. On process models for sentence analyses. In D. A. Norman, D. E. Rumelhart, & the LNR Research Group,  Explorations in cognition. San Francisco: Freeman, 1975. Pp. 117-135. LUCE, R. D., BUSH, R. R., & GALANTER, E. (Eds.).  Handbook of mathematical psychology, Vol. II. New York: Wiley, 1963. Chaps. 11-13.  MARCUS, M. P. Theory of syntactic recognition for natural language. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1980.  MILLER, G. A., & MCKEON, K. A chronometric study of some relations between sentences. Quarterly Journal of Experimental  Psychology, 1964, 16, 297-308.  QUIRK, R., GREENBAUM, S., LEECH, G., & SVARTVIK, J. A grammar of contemporary English. London: Longman, 1972.  SUPPES, P. Probabilistic grammars for natural languages. Synthese, 1970, 22, 95-116. SUPPES, P. Language learning in the  limit. Contemporary Psychology, 1983, 28, 5-6. WANNER, E., & MARATSOS, M. An ATN approach to comprehension. In M. Halle, J. W.  Bresnan, & G. A. Miller (Eds.), Linguistic theory and psychological reality. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1978. Pp. 119-161.  WEXLER, K. A review of John R. Anderson's Language, memory, and thought. Cognition, 1978, 6. 327-351.  WEXLER, K., & CULICOVER, P. Formal principles of language acquisition. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1980.