10.1016/0022-2496(83)90011-1
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 27, 277-297 (1983)  A Biased Random Walk Model for Two Choice Reaction Times  F. GREGORY ASHBY  Ohio State University  This paper generalizes Stone's (1960, Psychometrika 25, 251-260) random walk model of two choice response times (RTs) that is  based on the sequential probability ratio test (SPRT) and that predicts equal correct and incorrect RTs to the same response.  The generalized version allows a bias of the type found in signal detection theory to enter directly into the accumulation  process so that ambivalent evidence may be seen as slightly favoring one alternative. The resulting biased SPRT model can  predict any relation between correct and incorrect mean RTs. In particular, unlike the special symmetric case of Link and  Heath's (1975, Psychometrika 40, 77-105) relative judgment theory (RJT), the biased SPRT model can predict that correct mean  RTs are faster for one response but slower for the other. The biased SPRT model, the classical SPRT model, and the symmetric  RJT model are all fit to the data of an RT deadline experiment reported by Green and Luce (1973, Attention and performance,  New York: Academic Press) and it is shown that, of the three, the biased SPRT model provides the best account. Finally, a  method for incorporating the same sort of bias into RJT models is sketched out.  The two alternative forced choice task is a friendly workhorse in many areas of experimental psychology. In this paradigm two  stimuli or two stimulus classes are each associated with a unique response. The subject's task is to emit the appropriate  response when presented with a stimulus. Depending on the nature of the stimuli and the responses, this task can be used to  study recognition, discrimination, preference, and a host of other phenomena.  While there are many models predicting response probabilities or reaction times (RTs) in these tasks, our theoretical  understanding of the psychological processes involved can be improved by considering both of these dependent variables  simultaneously. One important class of models possessing enough structure to predict both accuracy and latency results are  random walk models. These models assume that evidence in favor of the two responses is accumulated gradually over time until  the evidence favoring one over the other exceeds some preset criterion, at which time the favored response is emitted.  Part of this work was completed while I was visiting Harvard University as a National Science Foundation Postdoctoral Fellow.  I am grateful to W. K. Estes for the opportunity the year provided. I also wish to thank Steve Link, Duncan Luce, Dick  Swensson, and Jim Townsend for their helpful comments. Requests for reprints should be sent to F. Gregory Ashby, Human  Performance Center, The Ohio State University, 404B West 17th Avenue, Columbus, Ohio 43210.  277  0022-2496/83 $3.00  Copyright O 1983 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  278 F. GREGORY ASHBY  Analytically, this set of assumptions describes a random walk in time with two thresholds or absorbing barriers, one  associated with each response alternative. At the moment of stimulus presentation the walk is at the origin but it then moves  back and forth between the barriers as the stimulus is repeatedly sampled and evidence is collected for the two responses.  Eventually the walk crosses one of the two barriers and a response is given.  Probably the first rigorous random walk model of choice reaction time was proposed by Stone in 1960 and was based on the  sequential probability ratio test (SPRT) of Wald (1947). The model was later elaborated by Edwards (1965) and Laming (1968).  It is based on the assumption that the subject makes optimal use of the information available by minimizing mean response time  for any given error probability. The model never achieved a great degree of popularity, probably because it predicts, that for  each response, correct RT (distribution) equals incorrect RT (Stone, 1960); a result very rarely empirically encountered  (although see Green, Smith, & von Gierke, 1983).  Link and Heath (1975) developed a class of random walk models based on what they call relative judgment theory (RJT), which is  quite different in formulation from the SPRT model. The most general model of this class has too many free parameters to be  directly tested (but see Link, 1978) and so Link (Link & Heath, 1975; Link, 1975) studied one model from the RJT family  possessing a symmetry property; that is, that given barriers at A and -B, the drift toward A when the stimulus is S,, equals  the drift toward -B when the stimulus is SB. Link and Heath (1975) showed that this model can predict correct RT to be either  greater than, equal to, or less than incorrect RT to the same response and therefore to be more general than the SPRT model on  this prediction.  By building on the results of Thomas (1975), however, Swensson and Green (1977) showed that the SPRT model is not a special  case of the symmetric RJT model. Instead the two models intersect but neither contains the other. Nevertheless, this finding  did not really renew interest in the SPRT model, because (a) the SPRT model still predicted that correct and incorrect RTs to  the same response were equal; (b) no important predictions were found on which the SPRT model was more general that the  symmetric RJT model; and (c) unlike the symmetric RJT model, no obvious way to generalize the SPRT model was known.  This paper presents a simple generalization of the SPRT model that is no longer constrained to predict equal correct and  incorrect mean RTs to the same response. In fact, unlike the symmetric RJT model, the generalized SPRT model can predict any  mean RT ordering. After the model is developed, I will show that it provides a superior account of the data from an RT  deadline experiment reported by Green and Luce (1973), than either the symmetric RJT model or the classical SPRT model. In the  last major section, a method for similarly generalizing the symmetric RJT model is sketched out.  BIASED RANDOM WALK MODEL 279  RANDOM WALK MODELS OF TWO CHOICE RTS  The SPRT and all RJT random walk models assume that for each time interval of length dt during which stimulus S1 (i =A, B) is  presented, a value y; is registered somewhere along a psychological continuum. Exposure to stimulus S; for a time interval of  length n - dt will therefore generate a set of n psychological values assumed to be drawn from some distribution f(y)  characterizing the stimulus.  Both models assume that the psychological values are subjected to some transformation xj = h(y,) and that this value  determines whether the walk moves toward the RA or the RB barrier. Thus, xj is the size of the jth step and so the position of  the unconstrained walk (i.e., in which no absorptions occur) at time n - dt is given by  n  W,= V Xf. j=1  Because the y; are assumed to be independent, identically distributed random variables, and because the xj are simple  functions of the y;, the xf are also independent and identically distributed, with density function g;(x).  Link and Heath (1975) demonstrated that the predictions of random walk models depend heavily on certain parameters of the step  size moment generating function (MGF),  00  M;(B) = J -00 exp(-9x) g;(x) dx.  They identified three important parameters associated with each MGF, which are illustrated in Fig. 1. First, the mean of the  step size distribution pi is equal to minus the slope of the tangent to M;(B) at 0=0. Second, the parameter 6; is defined as  the second root of the equation M;(B) = 1, where, of course, the first root is 0 = 0. The third important parameter yi is a  measure of symmetry and is defined as the slope of the tangent to M;(B) at 0 = 0, divided by the mean ,u;. Thus,  dM;(6)/d81 e=a; = yip;.  Note that yz = 1 if M1(0) is symmetric, if the MGF is skewed right yi < 1 and if the skew is to the left yi > 1.  The sampling process is assumed to continue until the walk first crosses one of the two barriers; that is, until wn > A or  until wn < -B. In the first case response RA is given and in the second, RB. The behavior of the walk is completely determined  by the step size MGFs, MA(0) and MB(B), and the distance to the two barriers, A and B. The SPRT and the RJT models differ  fundamentally in the details of the assumed transformation xj = h(yj).  The SPRT Random Walk Model  The SPRT model assumes that, through experience with a stimulus, a subject becomes familiar with the distribution of its  sensory representation. The forced choice  FIG. 1. An example of a step size moment generating function (MGF).  task facing the subject then reduces to the problem of determining from which distribution a set of n random samples was drawn.  The SPRT model assumes that for each observed psychological value, the subject solves this problem by calculating the log  likelihood ratio between the two stimulus alternatives, i.e.,  xi = h(y;) = 1n [ fA(yj)IfR(yj)1.  Swensson and Green (1977) showed that under this transformation the step size MGFs satisfy MR(B) = MA (6 + 1), and thus they  are related by a simple translation. They also showed that a random walk model predicts equal correct and incorrect RTs to the  same response if and only if the two step size MGFs differ by a translation, thus explaining why all SPRT models make this  unfortunate prediction.  The SPRT model has four free parameters in any single experimental condition, ,u,, yA, and of course, the distances to the two  response barriers, A and B. To see that ,u, and yA completely describe the two step size MGFs, note that ,u. = -YAIJA, YR =  IIYA, and OA =-O$= 1.  The RJT Random Walk Model  The RJT random walk models assume the subject solves the decision problem by first constructing a psychological referent and  then by comparing the sampled  BIASED RANDOM WALK MODEL 281  psychological values to the referent value. If the sampled value is larger than the referent, the walk is moved up, if it is  smaller the walk is moved down. The referent is assumed to be variable, and so changes from sample to sample. More explicitly,  call the value of the referent on the jth sample y,j. Then the RJT models assume the subject calculates the difference  xi-h(y;)=y;-yrj  and then moves the walk up or down by this amount.  This process does not require the subject to have complete knowledge of the psychological stimulus distributions f,(y)  andf,(y). However, to predict better than chance performance, it is necessary that the walk tends to drift up when stimulus SA  is presented (i.e.,,u, > 0) and to drift down when stimulus SB is presented. In the RJT models, this requires the mean of the  referent distribution to lie between the means of the SA and the SB distributions, therefore requiring the subject to have at  least some familiarity with fA(y) and fB(y).  It is important to point out, however, that with the exception of this minor restriction, relative judgment theory is  exceedingly general in the sense that for any stationary random walk model there will always exist some RJT model generating  equivalent predictions in any given experimental situation. This means that no single experiment can discriminate between the  biased SPRT model that I will develop below and the general class of RJT models. It may be possible to do so over a course of  experiments (see Townsend & Ashby, 1983), but even this may be problematical.  The added assumption of symmetry, which generates an RJT model that is easily tested, states that the drift toward A when the  stimulus in SA equals the drift toward -B when the stimulus is SB. In terms of the step size densities, this assumption is  equivalent to g,(x)=gA(-x). It is fairly easy to show that symmetry implies a similar relationship between the step size MGFs,  namely, that MB(0)=MA(-0). Thus, like the densities, the two MGFs are mirror images and therefore ,uB = 'UA, 0, = -0A, and ya  = yB. Because we can arbitrarily set BA = 1, the model has four free parameters (u,, yA, A, and B); the same number as the  SPRT model.  Mirror image MGFs are related by a translation only if they are symmetric and thus the symmetric RJT model may not predict  equal correct and incorrect RTs to the same response. Let T;; be the conditional mean RT of response R; when the stimulus is  S;. Link and Heath (1975) showed that the mean RTs predicted by their symmetric model are related by  TAI - TAB = (A/P1)I(YA - 1)/YA I  and  TBB - TBA = (BAUA)I(YA - 1VYAI  These relationships are consistent with the Swensson and Green (1977) result because if yA = I and the MGFs are symmetric (and  thus related by a shift) the differences are zero. If yA > 1 the differences are positive and if YA < 1 they are negative.  480/27/3-4  282 F. GREGORY ASHBY  Note, however, that both differences must have the same sign; that is, they are either both negative or both positive (or both  zero). Thus the symmetric model cannot account for data in which correct RTs are faster for one response and incorrect RTs are  faster for the other. Data of this nature, although not common, have been reported. For instance, Snodgrass, Luce, and  Galanter (1967), Carterette, Friedman, and Cosmides (1965) and Green and Luce (1973) have all reported mean RT orderings of  the form  TAA < TAB < TBA < TBB I  where the stimuli were renamed to aid comparison. Thus when responding R,, subjects were faster when correct, but when  responding RBI incorrect responses were faster. Data of this nature are very difficult for most choice RT models to predict,  certainly this includes the classical SPRT model as well as the symmetric RJT model. The following generalized SPRT model,  however, easily predicts orderings of this type.  GENERALIZING THE SPRT MODEL  The primary assumption of the SPRT model is that the observer transforms the original psychological continuum by the mapping x  = h(y) = In[f,(y)/f8(y)l. This mapping is assumed to be completely subject controlled. Wald and Wolfowitz (1948) showed that  if the barriers are equally distant the transformation is optimal in the sense that for any given error probabilities, mean RT  is minimized. The model assumes that the subject discovers this optimality through experience. The data disagree. Human  subjects apparently do not always apply this transformation to the psychological axis (see, e.g., Link & Heath, 1975).  Assumptions of optimality play an important role in many areas of experimental psychology. For example, within the theory of  signal detection, the notion of an ideal or optimal observer is fundamental. Even so, by allowing response bias, signal  detection theory is able to account for certain types of nonoptimal performance. For example, in the normal, equal variance  signal detection model, response accuracy is maximized if the criterion is set midway between the means of the noise and  signal plus noise distributions; that is, where the likelihood ratio equals one. A likelihood ratio greater than one elicits a  "yes" response and a likelihood ratio less than one, a "no" response. A response bias and nonoptimal performance results if  the criterion is set anywhere else. In such cases, evidence statistically favoring one response actually elicits the other.  The SPRT model is structurally very similar to the unbiased signal detection model. If we force the subject to make a response  after only one sample is taken, then the two are equivalent. In both, a sample is taken and the likelihood ratio is computed.  Response RA is given if the result is greater than one, or equivalently if the log likelihood is greater than zero. If the  likelihood ratio is less than one, response RB is given.  BIASED RANDOM WALK MODEL 283  Because of this analogy and the success of signal detection theory, it seems natural to allow the information accrual process  of the SPRT model the same biasing mechanisms found in signal detection theory. Thus, for example, a bias toward RA could mean  that ambivalent evidence (i.e., in which the likelihood ratio equals one) pushes the walk toward the RA barrier, just as in  signal detection theory a bias toward RA elicits an RA response on trials when the evidence is ambivalent. Because it affects  each individual sample, however, this kind of bias will have fundmentally different effects than are caused by placing the  barriers at different distances from the origin, which currently is the only structure available for introducing bias into  random walk models.  When formalizing this kind oPa biasing mechanism it may prove fruitful to follow the development of classical signal detection  theory. Thus, suppose that instead of basing the decision process on the conditional densities fly I S;), the subject instead  utilizes the posterior probabilities P(SI I y). Given the sensory value yj, assume the system computes the probability that  stimulus SA was presented and compares this value with the probability that SB was presented (via a likelihood ratio).  If the posterior probabilities are chosen, then the fh step size becomes  xj = h(yj) = In [P(SA I yj)IP(SB I yj)[.  Using Bayes' theorem, this expression can be rewritten as (see e.g., Laming, 1973)  x. __ In fyj I SA) P(SA)lf(yj) _ In [ P(SA)f(yj I SA) ,  [PYi I SB) P(SB)1AYj) I P(SB)Ayj I SB) l  and thus the ratio of stimulus presentation probabilities becomes an internal biasing constant. No bias exists when P(SA) =  P(SB) and the model reduces to the classical SPRT case. When Stimulus SA is more likely to be presented, there is a bias  toward response RA because a sample yielding ambivalent evidence still causes the walk to move toward the RA barrier.  Similarly the walk is biased toward RB when stimulus SB is more likely to be presented.  Because humans notoriously underestimate large probabilities and overestimate small ones (e.g., Lee, 1971), we cannot expect  such an internal bias to exactly equal the ratio of objective stimulus presentation probabilities. Rather it should be less  extreme. To be completely general, and again following the lead of signal detection theory, let the internal biasing constant  be a free parameter k. Thus, in this biased SPRT model the step size variable  xj h(yj)=In{kIf,(yj)lfB(yj))~'  Note that the parameter k is inversely related to the likelihood ratio criterion # in signal detection theory because a large  k and a small ,# represent a bias toward R.4 but a small k and a large # represent a bias toward RB.  Traditionally, stimulus presentation probability has been thought to affect the starting point of a random walk or  equivalently the distance to the two barriers A and  284 F. GREGORY ASHBY  B (Link, 1975; Laming, 1968) but not the accumulation process itself. In the biased SPRT model, however, different kinds of  bias are produced when stimulus and response parameters are manipulated. Response parameters (e.g., payoffs) are more likely  to affect response barrier placements (i.e., the values of A and B), whereas stimulus presentation probabilities may sometimes  affect the accumulation process itself. There seems to be no good reason, at this point at least, to expect the same sorts of  bias to result from such different experimental manipulations.  We have now seen that an internal biasing mechanism can be produced if the subject uses the posterior probabilities when  computing the log likelihood ratio. Of course, there.are other transformations the subject may adopt. For example, suppose Vj1  is the value the subject attaches to moving the walk toward the barrier associated with response Rj when stimulus S; is  presented. Such values may be affected by experimenter imposed payoffs for accuracy as well as for speed. For example, if  subjects are rewarded for fast RA responses, any move toward the RR barrier can only slow RA responses and so may be  associated with a disutility.  If we assume that subjects are interested in maximizing the expected value associated with each sample then it is fairly easy  to show that the step size variable will equal (e.g., Green & Swets, 1966)  xj = h(Yj) = In (VAA - VBA) p(SA) .f(Yi I SA) (VBB - VA.) p(SB) f(Yi I SB)  If the Vji are parameters set by the subject, then this model is mathematically equivalent to the biased SPRT model with  biasing constant k. It does carry a more complicated interpretation of k, however, since the bias can now vary with stimulus  as well as response parameters.  An Alternative Interpretation  There is another interpretation of the multiplicative constant k that leads to a completely different notion of processing. To  see this, not that the general transformation xj = h(yj) can be rewritten as  xj = In{k[fA(Yj)1f.(Yj)J) =In [fA(Yj)1fB(Yj)l + In(k)  and therefore the position of the unconstrained walk at time n - dt is  n n  Wn = x.- ~] In[fA(Yj)/JB(Yj)J + n In(k). j=1 j=1  The model postulates that another sample is taken if  -B<Wn<A,  BIASED RANDOM WALK MODEL 285  or equivalently if  This decision rule is equivalent to one in which another sample is taken if  n  -B - n ln(k) < <~ In [fA(y;)/fa(Y;)] < A - n In(k).  Under this alternative interpretation the walk behaves as in the classical SPRT case but the decision boundaries are linear  functions of n, both with slope -In(k).  If k = 1, the slope is zero and, as it should, the model reduces to the classical SPRT case. If k > 1 the slope is negative  and if k < 1, the slope is positive. An example with k > l is illustrated in Fig. 2. The example represents a bias toward  response RA, even if A =B, because as n increases the RA barrier moves closer to the origin and the RB barrier moves farther  away.  Although no single set of data can be found that discriminates this model from the biased SPRT model in which k is interpreted  as the ratio of stimulus presentation probabilities, it may nevertheless be possible to test between the two alternatives with  data from several experimental conditions. This will be possible, however, only under the assumption that response barrier  parameters are unaffected by experimental manipulation of stimulus characteristics. If this is true, then varying stimulus  presentation probability should cause a systematic change in the estimated value of k if the first interpretation is correct  but not if the second one is.  Generating Predictions from the Biased SPRT Model  The biased SPRT model has one more parameter than the classical SPRT model; namely, the biasing constant k. To generate  predictions from the model, we need to  A  _B  FiG. 2. An alternative interpretation of the biased SPRT model in which the barriers are linear functions of time with slope  -in k.  286 F. GREGORY ASHBY  examine its step size MGFs. The following theorem establishes the relationship between MA(e) and MB(e) in the biased SPRT  model.  THEOREM 1. In the biased SPRT random walk model, the step size MGFs, MA(B) and M,(6), are related by  MB (6) = kMA(0 + 1).  Proof. Let 1(y) =fA(y)/f,(y). Then the step size variable is x = h(y) =1n [kl(y)] and so  '0  MB) = f 00 exp[-Bh(y)] f,(y) dy  = f ~ exp{-91n[kl(y)]} fB(y) dy  00  =  f exp{ln[kl(y)]-e}fB(y)dy  =f' k-B[l(y)]-BfB(y)dy  - cc =k f' k-(e+i)[l(y)]-ce+i>l(y)fB(y)dy J _00  =k f' exp{ln[kl(y)]-(a+>>}f,(y)dy -00  =k f ' exp-(e+ 1)ln[kl(y)])fA(y)dy  - CIO  = kMA(B + 1).  The two MGFs are not only related by a shift but in addition one is a multiple of the other. Two examples of such MGFs are  given in Fig. 3. The top panel illustrates a bias toward response RA (i.e., k > 1) and the bottom panel illustrates a bias  toward RB (i.e., k < 1). Notice that simple translations result only in the unbiased case of k = 1 (i.e., the classical SPRT  case) and thus the biased SPRT model does not, in general, predict equal correct and incorrect RTs to the same response. It  therefore may be viewed as a serious alternative to the RJT models.  Unfortunately, even with this theorem, some distributional assumptions are necessary to derive exact predictions from the  model. This is because the condition MB(B) = kMA(B + 1) is not restrictive enough to relate the various parameters of the two  MGFs. To illustrate the type of predictions the model can make, assume the psychological stimulus distributions f,(y) and  f,(y) are normal with means mA and MB, respectively, and with common variance a'. For convenience, write  BIASED RANDOM WALK MODEL 287  I GA  k < L0  FIG. 3. Two examples of pairs of step size MGFs predicted by the biased SPRT model. The top panel represents a bias toward  response R., (i.e., k > 1) and the bottom panel represents a bias toward response R(i.e., k < 1).  f(y) = N(mi, az). The next result states the relationship between the parameters of the step size MGFs under these assumptions.  LEMMA 1. Assume the psychological stimulus values have densities f, (y) = N(MA, a') andf,(y) = N(m,, a'). Then the biased SPRT  model predicts that the step size densities are  g, (x) = N(d + In k, 2d)  and  ga(x) = N(-d + In k, 2d),  288 F. GREGORY ASHBY  where d = (m, - MB)2/(2Q2). Therefore the parameters of the step size MGFs are related by  ,uA=d+Ink, ,uB=-d+Ink, BA = 1 + (1/d) In k, 0, = - 1 + (1/d) In k, YA=YB= 1.  Derivation. Under the conditions of the lemma  x = ln(k[fA(y)/fB(y)] }  _ (MA - MB)/o2 ] y - (ma - M82 )/(2C2) + In k.  Now because x is a linear function of y, it is normally distributed. The step size means and variances can be obtained in a  straightforward fashion. Given the density functions g,(x) and g,(x), the step size MGFs are easily found to be  M4(B) = exp{B[dB - (d + In k)] }  and  MB(B) = exp(B[dB - (-d + In k)] }.  The MGF parameter relationships are easily obtained from these expressions.  Thus, in the biased SPRT model, if the distributions of the psychological stimulus representations are normal with equal  variance, then the step size variables will also be normal with equal variance. Also, because YA = YB = 1, the step size MGFs  are each symmetric. Even so, as long as k * 1, they will not be simple translations and thus this special case of the biased  SPRT model does not predict equal correct and incorrect RTs to the same response. Note also that the model has four free  parameters, d, k, A, and B, the same number as the classical SPRT model and the symmetric RJT model. Given these parameter  relationships, the predicted mean RTs and response probabilities are quickly derived.  LEMMA 2. If the psychological stimulus distributions are normal with equal variance then the biased SPRT model predicts,  _ A +B 2 +B Ink TA A d +Ink [ 1 + e(A+B)kcA+evd _ I ] - d +Ink [ 1 + e~ I  _ A+B 2 B  TAB -d +Ink [ l + e-cA+B>k(A+B)rd _ I I - -d +Ink [ 1 + e_  _ A+B 2 A 2 TBA d +Ink [ I + e(A+B)k(A+B)ld - I ] + d +Ink [ I + e~Ald -  _ A+B [2 J A 2  TBB -d + In k 1 + e-cA+B>k(A+B)ia - I + -d + In k 1 + eAk-Aia  + to,  -I J + to, 1~ + to, -1J + to,  BIASED RANDOM WALK MODEL 289  where to is the mean time of all residual processes (e.g., motor time). The model predicts that the error probabilities are  e-BkBld _ 1  P(RA I SB) = e-BkBld - eAk-Ald 5  I _ e-Ak-Aid p(RB I SA) =eRkRid _ e-Ak-Aid*  Derivation. These predictions can be obtained by substituting the parameter relationships of Lemma 1 into Eqs. 11-13 of Link  and Heath (1975).  One of the first questions we might ask of this model, is what mean RT orderings it can predict. The cumbersome equations of  Lemma 2 make this question a difficult one to answer analytically. Therefore a computer search of the prediction space of this  biased SPRT model was performed. It turns out that, like the symmetric RJT model, the biased SPRT model can predict that  correct RTs are either faster or slower than errors on the same response. That is, the model can predict that  or it can predict  T4A < TAB and TBB < TB.4 (2)  TA A > TAB and TBB > TBA (3)      In addition, unlike the symmetric RJT model, the biased SPRT model easily predicts troublesome mean RT orderings of the form  T4A < TAB < TBA < TBB  such as found by Snodgrass et al. (1967), Carterette et al. (1965), and Green and Luce (1973). Thus, with respect to ordinal  mean RT predictions, the biased SPRT model is more general than the symmetric RJT model. On the other hand, this does not mean  that the biased SPRT model is more general than all RJT models. As previously mentioned, there exists an RJT model that is  equivalent to the biased SPRT model in any given experimental setting. The focus in this paper, however, is on the SPRT model  because it has generally been thought to be more restricted than the RJT models.  An Empirical Application  One factor common to both the Snodgrass et al. and the Carterette et al. studies, was that stimulus presentation probability  was one of the manipulated independent variables. It was also indirectly manipulated in the Green and Luce (1973) study. I  argued above that an asymmetry in these probabilities could cause the biasing constant k to be either unusually large or  small. It may be that so many choice RT models have trouble predicting mean RT orderings of this type because they are  symptomatic of a fundamentally different kind of bias, a bias in the accumulation process itself.  290 F. GREGORY ASHBY  There are, of course, many studies that manipulated stimulus presentation probability. Not all of these report incorrect mean  RTs and of the ones that do, not all report orderings of the Eq. (4) type. This fact does not falsify the biased SPRT model,  however, because it is able to predict a variety of mean RT orderings (e.g., Eqs. (2), (3), or (4)), even when k :f- 1.  Just because the biased SPRT model can predict mean RT orderings of the Eq. (4) type does not necessarily mean it will provide  a better account of data from such an experiment than will, say, the symmetric RJT model. To compare the performance of the  biased SPRT model, the classical SPRT model, and the symmetric RJT model, all three were fit to the data of Green and Luce  (1973) using the chi-square minimization routine STEPIT (Chandler, 1965).  This experiment involved a YES-NO signal detection task with deadlines imposed upon response time.' One stimulus was white  Gaussian noise having a spectrum level of 40 dB. The other stimulus consisted of a 1000 Hz tone embedded in the noise at a  level 20 dB above the noise power density (10 log PIN,). On every trial, each of three subjects was instructed to respond  before an RT deadline. They were moderately penalized for exceeding the deadline but in addition, they were heavily penalized  for anticipating the stimulus. Response time deadlines of 250, 300, 400, 500, 600, 800, 1000, 1500, and 2000 msec were used.  The experiment was divided into blocks of 250 trials. During each block only one deadline was in effect.  An important feature of this experiment is that stimuli were response terminated. Because of this, sensory information should  have been fairly constant throughout processing and so the assumption of stationarity (i.e., that ,u does not change between  stimulus presentation and absorption) made by all random walk models considered in this paper, is reasonable.  The mean RTs and the error proportions averaged across subjects are summarized in Table 1 (adopted from Link, 1978). The  stimuli and responses were renamed to facilitate comparison with our earlier results. Stimulus SA represents signal plus noise  and RA, the response "yes," while SB represents noise and RB, the response "no."  Note first that for the longer deadlines, the mean RTs exhibit the same sort of crossover as in Eq. (4). For all deadlines  longer than 600 msec, correct RA responses are faster than incorrect RA responses but correct RB responses are slower than  incorrect RB responses. Therefore, neither the classical SPRT model nor the symmetric RJT model can account for the ordinal  mean RT results of this experiment.  Second, note that there are a total of 54 degrees of freedom in this data; four mean RTs and two error proportions for each of  the 9 deadlines. The biased SPRT model has 29 free parameters in this application. The parameters A, B, and k were allowed to  vary with response deadline (making 27), whereas the signal strength parameter d  ' Green and Luce (1973) reported the results of a second experiment in which a deadline was imposed only on signal trials. I  chose not to fit the models to the data of this unusual yet interesting experiment because some of the cells contained very  few observations. For example, six of the mean RTs summarizing this experiment were estimated from an average of 10 or fewer  trials per subject (two were estimated from an average of two trials).  BIASED RANDOM WALK MODEL 291  TABLE 1 Data from Experiment of Green and Luce (1973)  Deadline P(SA) RTAA RTAB i TBB RTBA P PBA       .AB   2000 .468 921 1030 952 889 .08 .09  1500 .504 764 869 781 772 .09 .11  1000 .514 638 702 654 647 .12 .17  800 .517 477 479 495 474 .19 .24  600 .483 434 426 455 427 .23 .32  500 .513 345 327 367 345 .37 .36  400 .533 293 277 312 288 .45 .40  300 .492 189 184 186 180 .57 .42  250 .505 151 150 155 158 .57 .44  Note. P.,B = P(RA I SB).  and the base time parameter tp were held constant across all experimental conditions. The parameters A and B were allowed to  vary because it was thought that subjects adapt to a response deadline, in part, by moving the barriers close enough to the  origin to ensure that an acceptable RT results (e.g., Link, 1978). Depending on our interpretation, the biasing constant k may  also be affected by differing speed instructions, and so it too was allowed to vary across conditions. Also suggesting that k  might vary is the fact that stimulus presentation probability varied slightly with response deadline. The parameter d was held  constant because the stimulus characteristics were invariant throughout the experiment.  The classical SPRT model and the symmetric RJT model each have 21 free parameters; 18 response barrier parameters (A and B for  each of the 9 deadlines), two stimulus parameters (,u and y), and one base time parameter.  Notice that it is possible for the classical SPRT model to outperform the biased SPRT model under these conditions. This is  because the biased model assumes the psychological stimulus values are normally distributed whereas the classical SPRT model  makes no distributional assumptions. Of course, if the normality assumption is correct, the classical model is just a special  case of this biased SPRT model and so cannot outperform it. Thus a better fit by the classical SPRT model is strong evidence  that the normality assumption is violated.  The biased SPRT model provided the best fit to this data (Yz = 90), followed by the classical SPRT model (XZ = 99) and the  symmetric RJT model (X` = 103). Statistical significance cannot be ascertained here because the chi-square statistic is not  meaningful with ratio scale data (e.g., see Pfanzagl, 1968) and so the chi-square goodness of fit test cannot be applied to  RTs. Minimum chi-square can be used as a relative measure of fit to compare models, however, since transformation from one  time scale to another (e.g., msec to sec) will not change the ratio of two chi-square values.  The predictions of the best fitting biased SPRT model are given in Table 2. A comparison with Table 1 indicates that the model  very accurately predicts the  292 F. GREGORY ASHBY  TABLE 2  Predictions of the Biased SPRT Model that Best Fit the Data of Green and Luce (1973)  Deadline RTAA RTAB RTBB RT,,, PAB PBA  2000 952 1020 949 884 .09 .09  1500 813 849 794 759 .12 .12  1000 681 686 645 640 .14 .17  800 489 480 476 484 .20 .23  600 432 413 414 433 .20 .29  500 325 317 337 345 .30 .29  400 288 277 300 250 .36 .32  300 181 181 181 181 .56 .42  250 181 181 181 181 .57 .44  response probabilities. Note also that for the three longest deadlines it correctly predicts that RTAA < RTAB and RTBB > RTBA.  It is important to realize that this ability is not dependent on the number of free parameters the model possesses. Allowing  the stimulus parameters in the symmetric RJT model and in the classical SPRT model to vary from deadline to deadline will  increase the number of parameters in these models to above 29 but it still does not allow them to make this prediction. That  the biased SPRT model is not constrained to predict this sort of mean RT crossover is illustrated by its predictions in the  400 msec deadline condition. There it predicts  RTAA > RT AB and RT BB > RT BA .  The model, therefore, appears to have more flexibility than either the symmetric RJT  model or the classical SPRT model.  TABLE 3  Parameter Estimates of the Biased SPRT Model that Best Fit the Data of Green and Luce (1973)  Deadline A B k  2000 2.43 2.17 1.0002  1500 2.11 1.89 1.0002  1000 1.80 1.61 1.00004  800 1.31 1.28 0.9999  600 1.14 1.15 0.9995  500 0.80 0.97 0.999  400 0.93 0.51 1.003  300 0.04 0.06 0.993  250 0 0 -  Note. d = 0.002, to = 181.    BIASED RANDOM WALK MODEL 293  Table 3 lists the parameter estimates of the best fitting biased SPRT model. Note first that the to estimate significantly  exceeds each of the mean RTs in the 250 msec deadline condition. Similar estimates were obtained for the classical SPRT model  (tio = 177) and for the symmetric RJT model (t"o = 178), thus suggesting that a deadline of 250 msec was short enough to cause  subjects to alter one of their base time processes (e.g., response selection). This hypothesis is reinforced by the fact that  for this condition, (a) the parameter estimates (again for all three models) indicate no comparative difference (i.e., A + B =  0); and (b) accuracy is at chance levels. Thus in the 250 msec deadline condition, the evidence indicates that upon detecting  any stimulus, subjects immediately initiate a random response. The processes required to select a response in this type of  simple RT task are different from those required in a choice RT task and so it is not surprising that the to estimates  exceeded the mean RTs from the 250 msec deadline condition. One consequence, however, is that the overall chi-square value is  inflated for all three models (by at least 14 in each case). In other words, substantially better fits would have been  obtained by adding an extra base time parameter for the 250 msec condition.  Second, note that as expected, the estimated total comparative difference, A + B, decreases as the deadline becomes shorter.  Thus subjects do seem to adapt to increasing time pressure by moving the barriers in toward the origin.  Third, note that the estimates of k are close but not equal to 1.0. Table 2 indicates that they are different enough from 1.0  to have an appreciable affect on mean RT (since if k = 1.0 the model predicts RT;,, = VT i, for i =A, B). This, together with  the fact that A B indicates that at least two fundamentally different kinds of bias may be operating in these data.  A closer inspection of Table 3 reveals that in every case but one (the 800 msec condition), the two kinds of bias operate in  opposition. Whenever the barrier placements are biased toward response RB (i.e., A > B), the bias measured by the parameter k  favors the RA response (i.e., k > 1) and vice versa. On the other hand, k does not appear to be as closely related to stimulus  presentation probability. Thus, in this application at least, k appears to be a decision parameter and not a sensory  parameter. The regularity in Table 3, therefore, favors the Fig. 2 interpretation of k in which the response barriers are  linear functions of time with slope -In k (or the Eq. (1) interpretation).  Using this interpretation a clearer picture of the events occurring on a single trial can be drawn. For example, consider any  one of the three longest deadlines. Because A is greater than B, subjects are initially biased toward responding RB (or "no"  in this experiment). This situation is illustrated in Fig. 4. As processing continues, the R., barrier is moved in toward the  origin and the RB barrier is moved farther away (because k > 1.0). Thus the bias toward responding RB decreases. At time n,  the two barriers are equidistant from the origin and the subject is unbiased. As the deadline draws even nearer, the bias  shifts and response R,, becomes favored. When the deadline is finally reached at time nZ, the bias toward RA is at its  greatest.  Link (1978) used this same data to test a general version of RJT that assumes only that 0, = -9A = 0. Thus the MGFs of this  class of models need not be symmetric. In  294 F. GREGORY ASHBY A  A  W  FiG. 4. One interpretation of the events occurring on a single trial in one of the longer deadline conditions of the Green and  Luce (1973) experiment.  fact, the two step size means may be completely unrelated. This class of models contains the symmetric RJT model and the  classical SPRT model as special cases but does not contain the biased SPRT model.  The class of models that Link studied has too many free parameters to be fit directly to the Green and Luce (1973) data (i.e.,  as it is summarized in Table 1), and so a direct comparison with the biased SPRT model cannot be made. Link (1978) was able to  show, however, that every model of this class predicts a linear relationship between the overall expected RT in each deadline  condition (i.e., the weighted mean of the four mean RTs in each row of Table 1) and a fairly complex function of the  parameters, B, A, and B. Link found the empirical relationship to be remarkably linear and so to support this general class of  models. While the linear trend in the Green and Luce data is clear cut, the power of this test is unknown. For instance, it  may be that some random walk models in which 0, $ -BB also predict linear or near linear functions, and so Link's (1978)  results cannot be used to falsify the biased SPRT model (or any other model).  On the other hand, neither do the relatively good fits of the biased SPRT model falsify relative judgment theory. As already  noted, for any given deadline condition, there exists an RJT model giving equivalent predictions to the biased SPRT model.  Even so, as of now, the biased SPRT model has an advantage over such RJT models, because it specifies exact and testable mean  RT and accuracy predictions.  The next and penultimate section of this paper sketches out a generalization of the symmetric RJT model that allows it the  same sort of internal bias postulated by the biased SPRT model.  GENERALIZING THE RJT MODELS  In a similar but somewhat looser fashion, the RJT models can also be related to signal detection theory. When the likelihood  ratio is monotonically increasing in the sensory variable and a decision is made after only one sample is taken, as in signal  BIASED RANDOM WALK MODEL 295  detection theory, then responding RA whenever the likelihood ratio is large is equivalent to responding RA whenever the  sensory variable is large (e.g., Green & Swets, 1966). The SPRT and RJT models differ precisely in which of these two  variables they propose subjects base their decisions on. SPRT models, of course, assume subjects compute likelihood ratios.  RJT models assume subjects base decisions directly on the magnitude of the sensory variable. In a certain sense then, the  referent in relative judgment theory plays a role similar to the criterion X, in signal detection theory. Sensory values  greater than the referent favor RA responses and sensory values less than the referent favor RB. The fact that RJT assumes a  variable referent is not significant since signal detection theory models with a variable criterion have been proposed  (Tanner, 1961).  Because of this relationship to signal detection theory it might be expected that a condition necessary (but not sufficient)  for RJT and SPRT models to be equivalent is that the step size likelihood ratio is monotonic in the step size variable x. This  is in fact the case. It is fairly easy to show that an RJT model will be equivalent to the biased SPRT model if its step size  likelihood ratio  1(x) = g, (x)lga(x) = exlk,  which is, of course, increasing in x since k is always positive. Because of the variable referent, however, this relationship  does not necessarily extend to the sensory likelihood ratio, f,(y)lfs(y).  If the step size likelihood ratio is not monotonic in x then the RJT models are not optimal. Even so, we may still wish to  allow the model the same kind of bias that occurs with nonoptimal placement of the criterion is signal detection theory. In  the most general RJT models this kind of bias is permitted since the mean of the referent distribution may not lie midway  between the means of the two psychological stimulus distributions. Even so, to make clear the effects of such a bias, consider  RJT models in which a constant, say In k, is added to every step size xj. Thus, after the jth sample the walk is incremented by  h(yj)=yj -yInk=xj +Ink.  In the symmetric RJT model u, = -,u, and so no internal bias exists. When the constant In k is added to each xj several  different interpretations of the resulting model are possible. Of course, one is that the referent distribution is shifted to  the left by an amount In k. Thus if k > 1, a sample midway between the means of the two psychological stimulus distributions,  f, (y) and fa(y), will tend to cause the walk to be incremented by a positive amount and so will favor RA responses. Note that  this alternative destroys the property of symmetry that characterizes this model.  Another possibility, which we considered in connection with the SPRT model, is that Link and Heath's notion of symmetry holds  but that the decision boundaries are linear functions of the sample size n with slope -In k.  This is the situation illustrated in Fig. 2. In this model the subject's sensory system  296) F. GREGORY ASHBY  possesses the symmetry property but for one reason or another the subject changes response criteria over time; simultaneously  relaxing one and tightening the other. How can specific predictions be generated from this class of RJT models? Fortunately,  because symmetry implies ga(x) = g,(-x), it is possible to derive a result analogous to Theorem 1.  THEOREM 2. If the decision boundaries are linear with slope -In k, then the step size MGFs, MA(B) and M,(6), predicted by  symmetric RJT models, are related by  MB (e) = k-zeMA(-B).  Proof. As noted above, this model is equivalent to one assuming that after each sample the walk is incremented by an amount x  + In k, where x = y - y,. Therefore  00  MB(B) =f exp[-B(x + In k) (x) dx  =f exp[-B(x + In k)]f,(-x) dx  a  =f exp[-B(-z + In k)]fn(z) dz  = exp(-29 In k) f a, expIO(z + In k)] fA(z) dz - cc  = k-21MA(-9).  The effect of the biasing constant k is similar in both the SPRT models and the symmetric RJT models. In both cases a  multiplicative factor is entered into the equation relating the step size MGFs. The difference is that in the SPRT models this  factor is a constant while in the RJT models it is a function of e. The meaningful consequences of this difference however,  remains for now, an open problem.  CONCLUSIONS  In 1975 Link and Heath developed a very large and general class of random walk models of two choice RT. Their symmetric  version was clearly seen as one member of this class. In contrast, the only other well-developed random walk model, Stone's  SPRT model, stood alone. It was not originally developed within the framework of a more general theory. Consequently, when  enough data was found that it was unable to predict, the SPRT model and its basic theoretical approach were discarded.  The SPRT model, like many in psychophysics, is based on an assumption of optimality. However, optimal models that have been  truly successful very specifically postulate nonoptimal mechanisms through which the human observer filters the optimal  processes or decisions. No such mechanism exists in the classical SPRT case.  BIASED RANDOM WALK MODEL 297  The biased SPRT model developed above generalizes the classical SPRT model by incorporating a bias of the type found in signal  detection theory. The resulting model assumes that the subject may slightly misinterpret the value of the likelihood ratio on  each sample. This generalization serves two aims. First, it greatly broadens the class of SPRT based models, thus making them  a more viable alternative to the RJT models. Second, it provides a mechanism through which the SPRT optimality assumption is  lost. Whether this is the correct mechanism is, of course, an empirical question.  REFERENCES  CARTERETTE, E. C., FRIEDMAN, M. P., & COSMIDES, R. (1965). Reaction-time distributions in the detection of weak signals in  noise. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 38, 531-542. CHANDLER, J. P. (1965). Subroutine STEPIT: An algorithm that  finds the values of the parameters which minimize a given continuous function. Quantum Chemistry Program Exchange, Indiana  University, Bloomington.  EDWARDS, W. (1965). Optimal strategies for seeking information: Models for statistics, choice reaction time, and human  information processing. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 2, 213-329. GREEN, D. M., & LUCE, R. D. (1973). Speed-accuracy  tradeoff in auditory detection. In S. Kornblum (Ed.), Attention and performance (Vol. IV). New York: Academic Press.  GREEN, D. M., SMITH, A. F., & VON GIERKE, S. M. (1983). Choice reaction time with a random foreperiod. Perception and  Psychophysics, 34, 195-208.  GREEN, D. M., & SWETS, J. (1966). Signal detection theory and psychophysics. New York: Wiley. LAMING, D. (1968). Information  theory of choice reaction times. New York: Academic Press. LAMING, D. (1973). Mathematical psychology. New York: Academic  Press.  LEE, W. (1971). Decision theory and human behavior. New York: Wiley.  LINK, S. W. (1975). The relative judgment theory of two choice response times, Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 12, 114-135.  LINK, S. W. (1978). The relative judgment theory analysis of response time deadline experiments. In N. J. Castellan, Jr. & F.  Restle (Eds.), Cognitive theory (Vol. 3). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  LINK, S. W., & HEATH, R. A. (1975). A sequential theory of psychological discrimination. Psychometrika, 40, 77-105.  PFANZAGL, J. (1968). Theory of measurement. New York: Wiley.  SNODGRASS, J. G., LUCE, R. D., & GALANTER, E. (1967). Some experiments on simple and choice reaction time. Journal of  experimental Psychology. 75, 1-17.  STONE, M. (1960). Model for choice-reaction time. Psychometrika, 25, 251-260.  SWENSSON, R. G., & GREEN, D. M. (1977). On the relations between random walk models for twochoice response times. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 15, 282-291.  TANNER, W. P., JR. (1961). Physiological implications of psychophysical data. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 89,  752-765.  THOMAS, E. A. C. (1975). A note on the sequential probability ratio test. Psychometrika, 40, 107--111. TOWNSEND, J. T., &  ASHBY, F. G. (1983). Stochastic modeling of elementary psychological processes. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press.  WALD, A. (1947). Sequential analysis. New York: Wiley.  WALD, A., & WOLFOWITZ, J. (1948). Optimum character of the sequential probability ratio test. Annals of Mathematical  Statistics, 19, 326-339.  RECEIVED: July 14, 1983  480/27/3-5