10.1016/0022-2496(83)90030-5
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 2'7, 107-110 (1983)  Book Review  DAVID MARK. Vision. A Computational Investigation into the Human Representation and Processing of Visual Information. San  Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1982.pp. xvi + 397.  Reviewed by H. B. BARLOW  The author of this book was Associate Professor of Psychology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and closely  associated with the Artificial Intelligence Laboratory there, until his untimely death in November 1980. Dr. Marr did his  undergraduate and graduate studies at the University of Cambridge, where he received his Ph.D. degree in neurophysiology. In  the five years before his death, his major research interests were in testing his theories of vision by the methods of  artificial intelligence.  The reviewer is Royal Society Research Professor of Physiology at the University of Cambridge. He has been doing experiments  on vision for 38 years and has published papers on topics ranging from the susceptibility of the eye to magnetic fields to its  sensitivity to comb-filtered spectra. Professor Barlow is Coeditor, with J. Mollon, of The Senses. Cambridge Texts in the  Physiological Sciences, Vol. 3, 1982.  This is a most unusual book. The topic it deals with has been the subject of particularly intensive research over the last few  years and has been thoroughly worked over, yet the author manages to present a new and original way of looking at the whole  problem of vision. David Marr had done no work in the field ten years ago, but he brought to bear on it an original mind, well  trained in mathematics, and one with a singular aptitude for making sense of a mass of material that was not too easy to  assimilate. He had the lawyer's ability to tell a connected story and in addition he found, or created, a lawyer's brief,  namely, the case for the approach to vision given in the subtitle of the book: "A computational investigation into the human  representation and processing of visual information."  First a note about the author. David Marr was born in 1945 and read mathematics at Cambridge between 1963 and 1966. He did  exceptionally well but preferred to do a Ph.D. in neurophysiology under Giles Brindley rather than continue in mathematics.  This resulted in a theory of the cerebellum which, although it was not very warmly received by experimentalists in that field,  was notable for the fact that it made functional sense of a large mass of anatomical, clinical, and experimental material.  This was followed by a theory of cerebral cortex, and by some attempts to get involved in experimental tests of his theories.  These tests were not very fruitful, but he fortunately became interested in vision and realised that the methods of artificial  intelligence could be used to test his ideas. This led him to MIT, where he spent five years of incredibly fruitful  collaboration with Grimson, Hildreth, Horn, 107  0022-2496/83 $3.00  Copyright ~E! 1983 by Academic Press, Inc.  480/27,/1-8 All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  108 BOOK REVIEWS  Nishihara, Palm, Poggio, Richards, Stevens, Ullman, and others. The book is based on the work of these years, which were  tragically ended by his death from leukemia in November 1980. It was a remarkable feat for David Marr to complete the book  while he was intermittently under forms of treatment that are notorious for their debilitating and depressing effects, and an  even more remarkable feat for him to have made such a success of it. Some of this success is no doubt due to his devoted  colleagues who saw it through the press, but the book does not give the impression of being unfinished in any way: it is a  complete work that is well argued and carries a positive message.  It is the approach of the book that is new and original rather than any particular discovery, method, or computational  technique. The book has much detail, but the methods he advocates, such as the use of DOG'S (differences of gaussians), edge  masks of a range of sizes, or generalised cones for describing objects, turn out in most cases to have been originated by  others; to his credit Marr has taken considerable trouble to find to whom they should be attributed. The use of zerocrossings,  and the stereopsis algorithms developed with Poggio, are perhaps the technical feats most definitely attributable to him, but  recent evidence does not altogether support the idea that natural vision utilises the same methods. Thus the claim to  distinction of the book cannot really be based on the particular detailed methods and discoveries described in it. But Marr  has a brilliant capacity to take a baffling problem and break it down into simple, comprehensible steps. In this book he does  this both for the overall problem of visual simulation by computers, and he also lays out a path for us to follow through the  complexities of visual perception.  In the first part of the book he recounts how he came to the conclusion (at the same time as Poggio) that much work on vision  was hampered by failing to define the "computational theory" that was involved. In general terms, this theory shows how to  derive properties of the real world from images of it. Because the images by themselves are usually insufficient, the key to  the theory often lies in identifying valid assumptions about the real world that form additional constraints enabling the job  to be done. One feels that Marr's greatest delight is in the identification of these constraints, and the demonstration that  they suffice, together with measurable properties of the image, to allow logical deductions about the real world. One example,  from the work of Ullman, is the "rigidity assumption." If one views a complex pattern of moving points one should not be able  to say much about what caused it, because the rotation, translation, and deformation of an almost infinite variety of objects  would be capable of causing the particular pattern one saw. But if one excludes the possibility of deformation by assuming  that the points are on a rigid body, then the view of a small number of moving points suffices to determine their disposition  in 3 dimensions, the axis of rotation, and the direction of translation of the rigid body. The interesting thing is that one  does immediately make this interpretation when presented with the appropriate view of moving points, and the conclusion must  be that the visual system automatically makes the assumption of rigidity. This is not of course entirely new: one can easily  knock down a toddler standing on a fixed floor by suddenly displacing linearly the walls of an enclosure  BOOK REVIEWS 109  within which he is standing, for his balancing reflexes incorporate the "assumption" that the objects he sees out of the  corners of his eyes are fixed and will not suddenly and treacherously start moving. Thus the idea of using such assumptions is  not new, but Marr successfully points to other assumptions that he thinks make the computation of stereo depth possible, or  the interpretation of three-dimensional forms from 2-D images. I am not sure he is right about all of them, but that is  relatively unimportant; what is new and interesting is his argument that one must look at the logical difficulties involved in  seeing what is where in the world around us.  Computational theory is only the first, hitherto most neglected, step in his approach to the computer simulation of vision.  The other two are concerned first with the algorithms and representations used to realise the computation, and then with the  description of the actual hardware involved. I am not sure the distinctions between these steps are clear or useful. Is a  complex program that is coded in ROM part of the hardware or is it part of the software performing the algorithms or carrying  the representation? And what about the programs in our brains coded as patterns of connections between nerve cells? But much  of his discussion is illuminating, especially when he talks about representations for making certain properties explicit. He  seems to have a way of thinking about these problems that leads to interesting notions, but he has not quite succeeded, I  feel, in describing what his way is, except by example.  Marr's originality is nowhere better displayed than in his postulation of intermediate stages in the representation of visual  information and this is where he leads us along a path through visual perception. The proposed sequence is roughly as follows:  (a) convolution with DOG's of various sizes, (b) computation of zerocrossings of the DOG outputs, (c) detection of alignments  of zero-crossings from different DOGs to assert the presence of edges of various sharpnesses and signs, and (d) the  combination of items of the foregoing representations, including "blobs" and "endings," to assert the presence of various  forms of clusters of input events. The results of (c) and (d) form what he picturesquely calls the primal sketch, a term that  surely deserves to enter the language of perceptual psychologists. The next two stages are the formation of the 2 1-D sketch,  which is the surface of all the objects seen in the visual field. The coordinate system includes the depth from the observer,  but is still observer-centred, while the next stage is to convert to a coordinate system based on salient properties of the  objects seen; for instance, the limb of an animal is thought of as a generalised cone, and its representation would consist of  the axis of the cone, together with information specifying changes of cross section along its length. Again, this idea may not  be right, but it fills a vacuum: I would have flung my hands up in horror at the idea of trying to specify how horses and the  like might be represented in our minds or in a computer's memory, but now I at least have the notions of objectcentred  coordinate systems and generalized cones to hang my thoughts on.  There are many details open to criticism in the book, and my personal opinion is that even such an initially promising idea as  that of using zero-crossings as potentional markers may turn out to be too simple. I am also worried by the difficulty of  proof in the aspects of vision particularly emphasized in this book. How do we know  110 BOOK REVIEWS  if a particular computational theory is right? The subject seems to me at a point comparable to that at which Leonardo da  Vinci and other early enthusiasts could say "Birds fly, therefore flying is possibly," before the science of fluid dynamics  had defined conceptually the forces on an aerofoil and taught us what quantities should be measured. But psychologists,  physiologists, and engineers designing visionlike devices will all benefit greatly when this next step is accomplished, and  this book is certainly an important step in that direction.  One enthusiastic reviewer of this book described Marr as a genius comparable with Helmholtz, but I think that is wrong. As  well as his innumerable particular discoveries Helmholtz was also a generalist contributing to the great conservation laws  that were the foundation of nineteenth century physics; if there are similar generalizations to be made about perceptual  processes, Marr has not made them. Instead I think he should be likened to Huxley, the champion and expositor of evolution.  For Marr, the role of Darwin is perhaps shared by the MIT group he joined and gave life to, and it is the path that they are  pursuing that he so successfully champions and presents in this book. Few who read it will agree with all of it, but of these  who are seriously interested fewer still will remain uninfluenced by it.