10.1016/0022-2496(83)90038-x
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 27, 461-471 (1983)  Book Review  VLADIMIR A. LEFEBVRE, Algebra of Conscience. Boston, Mass.: Reidel, 1982.  Reviewed by JAMES T. TOWNSEND  The author is a Research Psychologist at the School of Social Sciences, University of California, Irvine. He obtained his  Ph.D. in Psychology in 1971 from Moscow State University. Prior to coming to the United States, he was a research Scientist at  the Central Mathematical Economics Institute of the Academy of Sciences, Moscow. His major research interests are formal  models of human thought and ethical cognition.  The reviewer is a Professor of Psychology at Purdue University. His research interests center on questions of model  equivalence, diversity, and testability, particularly in the areas of information processing, pattern recognition, and memory  search. He has just published, with F. Gregory Ashby, Stochastic modeling of elementary psychological processes (Cambridge  Univ. Press, New York, 19831.  Lefebvre begins with the idea of two distinct ethical systems. The first is based on the principle, to be made precise below,  that compromise of good and evil is evil. Equivalently in the theory, confrontation of good and evil is good. We will call  this System W; it founds the ethical structure of the Western World (the "first system" in Lefebvre's terminology). The second  ethical system follows the converse principle that compromise of good and evil is good, that is, confrontation of good and  evil is evil. This we will call System S; it is the base of the Soviet ethical structure (the second system of Lefebvre).  There are two overriding themes developed in the book. One is simply the working out of theorems emanating from the  definitions, axioms, and either of the above principles. The other is the attempt to persuade the reader that not only do the  above principles, and by extension the various themes, describe real, if ideal people, but that System W really does represent  the ethical norm of the present Western Society whereas System S represents that of the Soviet Union.  Lefebvre intends far more than an amusing logical game here. Not only does he feel that two types of systems pretty much  exhaust those found in the world today, he comes close to claiming outright that the set of the two may be virtual cultural  imperatives. That is, a society may come to have one or the other, but not both and not something else. It is made clear from  the outset that these do stand for the ideal and that a country or an individual may possess each in some degree in real life,  but one or the other principle dominates.  My plan is to offer the reader a tour of the central underpinnings of the structure 461  0022-2496/83 $3.00  Copyright Oc 1983 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  462 BOOK REVIEWS  as well as certain of the discoveries, bypassing by necessity the axiomatic details. Occasional questions and problems in  addition to exceptional or captivating results will arise along the way. Although the itinerary is short, I believe it will  aid the person wishing to read the book in addition to proffering a fairly decent idea of what the book is about to those with  less time. Nevertheless, the reader looking for a quick overall evaluation may skip to the Discussion. It should also be  mentioned that there is certain thought provoking material in the book that simply cannot be covered in a review of this type.  An example is the analogy, developed in an appendix, between the present theory and some principles of quantum mechanics.  SOME BEGINNING ELEMENTS  Let us begin by developing a little of the logic behind Lefebvre's rather ingenious and novel calculus. Consider the formula a  ' where "a" is a variable with a = 1 or 0, and W is a formula involving "a" and possibly another variable "b", the partner of  "a". The "a" term here represents the environmental input to the individual or alternatively what he really is and is called  the root and W is the inner world, which itself may be multileveled in exponents. The inner world possesses various levels of  selfreflection in "a" (himself) and his partner "b". When 0 or I is substituted for each of the variables (which may be "a"  and/or "b") in W then W will equal 0 or I also. The simplest 2-level structure is a  Now, aW is given an interpretation by the author in ordinary predicate calculus as W - a; that is, W implies a. We may then  rewrite this in terms of Boolean algebra using an overbar as negation and + as nonexclusive "or", a w = W + a. W will be a  further formula, perhaps a single term as "a" or "b".  Already we have a small result. If we interpret a = I as "good" and a = 0 as "evil" then letting a = 0, we find that a= d +  a = 1 + 0 = l. Lefebvre sees this as meaning that evil aware of evil becomes good.  Next we note that if "a" in the W part of a" equals the root "a", then the individual is said to have a correct image of  himself. (This will be made a bit more specific below.)  More generally, when an interaction with another person is brought into play, the general formula can be expressed as aA *B by  setting W = A * B. "A" is the higher order reflective world of "a" himself whereas "B" is "a"'s internal picture of his  partner "b" as well as the way that "a" believes that the "b" internal reflective world is. The "*" denotes the interaction of  "a" and "b" as "a" sees it; we return to it shortly. The complete situation including the objective interaction as well as "b"  and "F's internal world, is expressed as aA1*B1 * bAZ*BZ. However, much emphasis is on the internal world of an individual as  in aA *B. The sign of interaction, "*", is either "+" denoting disjunction as seen above or ".", logical conjunction (or  equivalently Boolean multiplication).  We now arrive at the foundational axiom of the entire theory: "+" is interpreted as confrontation in System W (the Western  Christian Society) but as compromise in  BOOK REVIEWS 463  System S (Soviet society). Just the reverse is true for ".", which means compromise in System W and confrontation in System S.  All societal effects of good and evil within Lefebvre's theory emanate from this axiom.  Now let us examine a + b and a - b. In System W, confrontation of good and evil is good and compromise of good and evil is  evil so we set + = confrontation and . = compromise for then, if say, a = 1 and b = 0, 1 + 0 = 1 (i.e., confrontation of good  and evil is good) but 1 - 0 = 0 (compromise of good and evil is evil). In System S exactly the converse assignment is made: +  = compromise and - = confrontation.  Consequently System S yields exactly the opposite result: compomise of good and evil is good (1 + 0 = 1) and confrontation of  good and evil is evil (1 - 0 = 0). It is rather fascinating to watch how this axiom ultimately winds into the seemingly  paradoxical prediction that ethical status is high in System S (the Soviet) when one sees oneself in confrontation with an  adversary whereas the contrary holds in System W (the Western).  Note that the earlier statement we analyzed, "evil aware of evil becomes good," is true for either system because  exponentiation and implication have the same meaning in both systems. The same is true for certain other primitive Boolean  expressions in their ethical interpretation. Another example is 0 + 0 = 0 which signifies that evil in confrontation with evil  is evil in System W and evil in compromise with evil is evil in System S.  Now let us run through what appear to me to be some of the most significant results. Along the way, assumptions and other  facets that appear a little hard to swallow will be mentioned. The order of treatment below corresponds roughly to the order  of topics in the book starting at about Chapter 5 but it is not entirely so.  FORMULATION OF ETHICAL STATUS  As prefaced above, when the "a" and "b" are replaced in the formula by values of 1 or 0, the resultant value is always a 1,  representing "good," or 0, representing "evil." Thus, if a w = 1 the individual overall, based on his internal world in league  with the value of "a", is good and vice versa if the overall value is 0. The same is obviously true when values are  substituted for "a" and "b" in b w. Furthermore, an overall interactional situation may be evaluated because aw, * bWZ will  also be 0 or 1 when specific values for "a" and "b" are implemented in the formula.  A frequent strategy in the calculus is to assume some proportion of times that, say "a", takes on the value 1 and the  remainder of the times it assumes the value 0 and then to average the ethical status of the individual cases to arrive at an  overall status; this is easily extended to combinations of values of "a" and "b". An early result is that a two-tier  individual with a correct image of himself always has a higher status than an individual with an incorrect image of himself,  as in the simplest instance, ais higher in status than a  480/27/4-9  464 BOOK REVIEWS  DOUBTS, GUILT, CONDEMNATION, AND ETHICAL STATUS  Not only individuals and situations can be evaluated but also internal reflective worlds. We therefore concentrate on aA *B  and in particular A * B. To investigate doubts, we require a third level. Assume we observe a person in System W. We find that  in, say aA *B = a+bb "a" sees himself as being in conflict with "b" (recall that "+" means confrontation in System W), he  sees himself correctly, but doubts his selfimage as given by the "a-on the third level. Incidentally, note that he imagines  that "b" has a true image of himself (i.e., b). Doubt is always signified by a difference in the self-image in the second and  third levels. As an example, observe aA *&. If A * B = a+s - b, we learn that "a" does not doubt his own good or evil but he  doubts his image of b as well as whether he is correct in his image of the interaction (i.e., as being confrontational or  compromising).  We next are told that if the overall status of A, obtained by substituting 0's and 1's consistently for "a" and "b", is A = 0  then "a" feels guilty, which is the same as saying that guilt is equivalent to seeing evil in oneself. When B = 0 in a' ',  16a" is said to condemn his partner. If A * B = 0, "a" views the situation as being bad or evil, or feels suffering. One  finding of interest is that for an arbitrary formula with a third level, doubts always lead to increased guilt; that is, the  frequency of times that A = 0 increases on the average.  In any case, the resulting structure is then used to study how and with what frequency an evil intention, as given by the root  "a" in aA *B being equal to 0, can be transformed into good by various combinations of values of "a", "b", and * in the  general formula aA *B. It is assumed for this purpose that "a" always has a correct image of himself. As an aside, there seem  to be several places in the book where a simplification of this type is made without informing the reader whether it makes any  difference in the conclusions.  As another parenthetical remark, it is interesting to observe that even guilt can depend on whether "b" is seen as evil or  good, even if "a" doubts his own view of "b"! Thus, consider the formula a+s+b where "a" doubts only whether "b" is good or  evil and a = 0. If, in fact b = 0 then it follows that "a" feels guilty, A = 0, but if b = 1 then "a" feels no guilt. Of  course, in studying average frequencies that A = 0 with or without doubt, the value of "b" in A averages out.  To proceed along the main track, the author deduces the following important consequences: (1) Feeling guilty is more  characteristic of an individual in System W than in System S. (2) The simultaneous appearance of feeling guilty and  condemnation is a necessary condition for transforming evil into good in W, but in S, either is sufficient. (3) Absence of  doubts prevents transformation of evil into good in System W but not in S. (4) In System W, if "a" doubts his own self-image  and has a bad intention (the root a = 0) he always feels guilty; not so in the Soviet system. (5) Individuals with no doubts  never feel guilty in System S but sometimes do in the Western system.  I must say that I do not feel completely comfortable with certain aspects of the guilt analysis. For instance, it seems,  intuitively, that if an individual has evil intent,  BOOK REVIEWS 4615  sees himself as being bad, and has no doubts about it, he should be more prone to guilt; but this is false in the present  theory.  A further intriguing result presented in Chapter 8 is that in System W, when in conflict, doubts about the correctness of  one's image of one's adversary enhance one's status, but in the Soviet system, that diminishes a person's status.  APPLICATIONS OF THE THEORY TO SOVIET AND WESTERN LITERATURE  There are two primary ways in which the author has so far sought to test his concepts. One is by experimental means where  people of Soviet birth or western culture are asked to fill out questionnaires designed to pit predictions of System S against  System W. This approach will be dealt with further below. The other has been to analyze certain literature, in the main  fiction, legends, or propaganda. The legendary material has largely been used to suggest origins of the two ethical systems,  which we see again further along. In the present work, the author analyzes and compares Shakespeare's "Hamlet" with  prototypical post-communist revolutionary propaganda novels.  In the analysis, Hamlet is portrayed as possessing doubts concerning himself and his adversary, Claudius. The doubts about  himself are presumably expressed in the renowned "to be or not to be" soliloquy, despite the actual authenticity of Hamlet's  suspicions. Claudius, on the other hand, is viewed by Lefebvre as having incorrect images of himself and of Hamlet and of  doubting the correctness of those images. Within the frame of System W, Hamlet possesses the higher status but they are equal  in the confines of System S. Similar points are made in the Soviet literature comparison.  These conclusions are adduced as positive evidence for the theory. I have some grave reservations about attempting to map the  filigree of subtleties of Shakespeare's greatest tragedy into the binary platform of the present theory. Moreover, even the  particular binary dimensions of the theory are not necessarily those of which Shakespeare conceived or indeed perforce make  contact with the theoretical structure. In perusing a number of critical commentaries on "Hamlet," some did indeed emphasize  the lack of action on Hamlet's part. However, the presumed reasons for his lethargy are disputed and it is not at all certain  that it may be projected into a doubt about his images of himself and of Claudius. Thus, although Hamlet may have doubted his  images, those doubts may have little or nothing to do with the philosophical content of the play. It is further not clear that  Hamlet doubts his own ethical goodness.  The picture of Claudius is in some ways even more murky. I would have thought before reading the present book that Claudius  correctly perceived Hamlet, maybe correctly evaluated himself, but was rueful about his lack of morality and distrustful of  Hamlet. For instance, a little more than halfway through the play, Claudius embarks on a monologue wherein he castigates  himself for his evilness ("Oh, my offense is rank, it smells to heaven; it hath the primal eldest curse upon't, a brother's  466 BOOK REVIEWS  murder...") and even attempts to pray for salvation. However, his thoughts apparently are dissonant with his words so that the  effort fails. This seems to contradict Lefebvre's conclusion that Claudius has an incorrect image of himself or even that he  doubts it.  Although I have not read the particular Soviet inspired literature to which the author refers, I have read similar such work.  Lefebvre's claims seem much more cogent here. However, in contrast to most of Shakespeare's plots and characterizations, this  type of Soviet example appears almost comic strip in nature. It seems likely that simple binary moral dispositions may be much  more obvious there than in exceedingly deep dramas. Possibly there exist books or plays in Western society that are more  patent in their representation of normative ethical status, and which might better serve the author's goal.  An exposition relating to Dostoevski's "Crime and Punishment" is pursued later in the book. It is more cogent than the  "Hamlet" sojourn but still a little strained.  EXPERIMENTAL TESTS OF THE THEORY  A series of experiments was run to test predictions of the theory. I felt much more comfortable here. A subject was given a  questionnaire about two individuals in conflict with one another; the pair are well known political figures. Either the  relation of ethical priority is given in the statement or the subject has to give his estimate of the ethical priority of one  of the two interactants. After the subject has given an overall judgment about the ethical priority, he is asked a series of  questions in order to determine a unique structure which intends to represent the situation as viewed by the subject.  The theory predicts that the overall judgment will be consistent with the ethical status computed from the theory if the  correct variant, of the two systems, is employed to interpret the subject's answers. A sample question pair is the following:  (1) Did Mr. Kennedy have any doubt about the correctness of his evaluation of himself? (2) Did Mr. Nixon have any doubt about  the correctness of his evaluation of himself?  As can be seen, the subject's responses can be used to either assign the same value in how, say, Nixon, sees himself and how  he believes he sees himself or the opposite value. The first response indicates no doubt whereas the latter does indicate  doubt.  The results were statistically in favor of the W system describing Americans and comparable experiments run on Soviet emigres  strongly supported the hypothesis that their ethical predisposition agreed with System S; a pleasing outcome.  MAXIMIZING ONE'S ETHICAL SELF-IMAGE IN THE COUNTERPOSED SYSTEMS  Lefebvre proposes that a person may be able to choose the interaction sign in the third level and that by doing so he attempts  to maximize the ethical status of his self-  BOOK REVIEWS 467  image. It follows from the theory that an individual will maximize his ethical status by letting "Y" = ".". Because "-" means  compromise in System W but confrontation in System S, the implication is that a Westerner will maximize his self-image by  choosing compromise but a Soviet will do so by opting for confrontation.  Let us depict how this seemingly counterintuitive result comes about. Consider the term as*n in the formula a.b*b and first  let "*"="  +" be confrontation in System W but compromise in System S. The various combinations of values of "a" and "b" or aa+b yield  11+ 1, 00+0= 1, 11+1 = 1, 00+1 =0. Now because each of these cases is presumed to occur with equal frequency, the average  status for "*" =,4 +" is 3/4. Similar computations show that a'* b = 1.  Therefore, the overall status is higher if one utilizes "." rather than "+" in one's third level, which seems to be the level  of conscious choice in Lefebvre's scheme.  A possible nit to pick here is that one might wonder why an "ideal" individual in a society might not always see himself as a  = 1 and his adversary as b = 0. In this case we have  as+b = 1 1+0 - 1  and  aa.b- 11.0- 1;  that is, confrontation and compromise then confer equal status on the typical selfrighteous nationalist.  There follows in the book some discussion of events at the fourth level (i.e., exponent) but I find it difficult to take this  degree of supposed abstraction on the part of an individual very seriously. It might be of more interest in the theory of  automata.  FEELINGS AND SACRIFICES  A subsequent investigation explores the consequences of assuming that the individual might be able to maximize his ethical  status as compared with minimizing his suffering, or his feelings of guilt. It turns out that guilt and ethical status (in the  person's image) are complementary to one another but that suffering is monotonically related to ethical status. For example, a  W system person will on the average, by choosing a mode of compromise in his image instead of confrontation, increase his  ethical status, decrease his feelings of guilt, and increase his suffering. The opposite occurs for a person of the S system.  Another neat result here is the proof that a perfect individual cannot consider himself perfect. A perfect person is one with  maximum ethical status. Considering oneself perfect is equivalent to considering one's image of oneself as attaining maximal  ethical status. Because he is viewed as being able to manipulate certain signs that relate to this image, if he does so in a  way that gives himself minimal guilt, he will not reach the true highest ethical status.  468 BOOK REVIEWS  ON SAINTS, HEROES, PHILISTINES, AND DISSEMBLERS  The tract becomes even more exciting and potentially controversial at this point. The metastructure age+is analyzed where  the underbars mean that the letter is a variable, i.e., a = a or d and so on. By substituting 0 or 1 in all possible  combinations for a = a or d, etc., where it is assumed that these values occur with equal frequency, we may calculate the  ethical status of individuals characterized as special prototypes. Thus a saint is said to be characterized by the formNotice  that in the W system, this type of individual seeks compromise but thinks he should seek confrontation. The reasoning here  becomes a little strained at times, but it might go something like this: The person actually decides to seek compromise which  tends to increase suffering in system W, presumably because in our system, it is natural and ideal to want confrontation of  good and evil (of course, it appears somewhat foggy here because b could in general be either 0 (evil) or 1 (good)) and yet he  chooses to compromise. Alternatively, as Lefebvre treats this topic here, there is an emphasis on when maximal suffering,  guilt, etc., occur, rather than a stress on the values of the variables "a" and "b". Further observe that the saint also is  destined to cringe under the burden of guilt because of the doubt expressed in the different symbols on the second and third  levels. Possibly he views himself (or his image of himself?) as being in conflict with the other person.  One bothersome point is that it is unexplained as to why the sacrificial behavior is always in the same direction as the moral  code of the society and vice versa. One of the most frequent aspects of a saint, almost to the point of being part of the  common definition, is that of sacrificing against the standard code of a society.  In any event, the saint, hero, philistine, and dissembler are analyzed and it is learned among other things that a saint has  the highest status and also the highest suffering and guilt and so forth. This and other results are important in what follows.  WHEN SAINTS AND SINNERS GET TOGETHER ...  The structures leading to the four prototypical ethical characters mentioned in the preceding section are now brought into  dynamic interactions. There are two major cases:  (1) An individual establishes his relationships with his partner by himself.  (2) An individual's partner establishes the relationships.  The first case is termed active, the second passive. The mean ethical status can be computed assuming that with probability p  he is active and 1 - p he is passive with respect to his partner and thus weighting the two pertinent ethical statuses. An  implicit assumption is that an individual always imposes on his partner the structure he chooses for himself. Why this should  necessarily be true is not adequately defended.  BOOK REVIEWS 469  Recall that a saint labors under maximal guilt as well as suffering. A philistine is one who tends to decrease suffering but  can have high guilt; the small degree of suffering implies a low ethical status. A hero minimizes his feelings of guilt but  not his feelings of suffering. Finally, a dissembler minimizes feelings of both suffering and guilt. It works out that a  society made up of only dissemblers has a mean situational status of .81 while one of heroes has status .61. Contrarily, the  mean ethical individual status of people in a hero society is, of course, higher than one of dissemblers. This untoward  finding may suggest that dissemblers can make a society work more smoothly (although that is probably not an actual logical  result of the theory); or perhaps situations are really more ethical somehow on the average.  IDEOLOGY, MORALITY, AND POLITICAL ORGANIZATION  Several propositions are now advanced relating to how the W vs the S system may have arisen in a sociopolitical fashion from  certain moral and religious precepts. One pivotal idea is that the Christian ideal is based on prohibition of evil but Soviet  ideology is based on declaration of good. For example, Lefebvre claims there is a great deal of difference between "do not  lie" and "be truthful." This, I believe, cannot be substantiated at the level of two-valued logic. However, it may be that  this and other conclusions drawn in this chapter might have some psychological validity, in that perhaps how people interpret  the above two commands or exhortations may indeed differ.  The author conjectures that the New Testament forms a normative theory of personality whereas the Old Testament contains the  fundamental postulates of moral human behavior (e.g., the Ten Commandments). It is postulated that the Old Testament leads to  a negative evaluation of a compromise between good and evil and the New Testament to compromise between people. That is, this  is hopefully the foundation of System W. In contrast, the "Moral Code of a Builder of Communism" in Soviet ideology emphasizes  what a person should do rather than what he should not do as in System W. Also, it clearly stresses confrontation with  adversaries of communism.  Ultimately, Lefebvre draws the fascinating conclusion that (1) in the society where ethical System W is realized, the greater  the ability for self-organization and unity the higher the ethical status of its members; and (2) in the society where ethical  System S is realized, the greater the ability for self-organization and unity the lower the ethical status of its members.  ETHICALLY NONMEASURABLE SITUATIONS  Lefebvre attempts to generalize previous developments to the case of interaction of an arbitrary number of individuals. It  turns out that the situations in general are not mappable into the Boolean algebra representing the ethical structures of  Lefebvre's  470 BOOK REVIEWS  theory. He refers to such situations as ethically nonmeasurable. Basically, for four or more individuals it appears that we  can measure, in terms of the theory, the ethical status of individuals but not situations. The author sees this as an analogy  to the decidability problem in logic, in the sense that there may exist correctly formulated and true propositions which are  not provable within a particular logical system. I am not sure this particular analogy can be pushed too far, but the possible  ramifications of the nonmeasurable development for sociopolitical theory are provocative.  SUBSTANTIATING NONEMPIRICAL AND PRIMITIVE Axioms  AND A SHORT EXCURSION INTO MYTHOLOGY  Certain axioms which are not immediately subject to empirical test and which do not necessarily seem particularly intuitive  have untoward consequences if they are removed or altered. For example, it is shown that interpreting ab as b - a i.e., as  logical implication, yields the only algebra which leads to (1) an individual with a correct image of himself has a higher  ethical status than one who does not and (2) an individual who possesses doubts about the correctness of his (correct) image  of himself has higher ethical status than one who has no such doubts. As another example, consider the axiom: "The  confrontation of good and good as well as the compromise of good and good is good." Again, unpleasant consequences erupt if  this axiom is altered.  In a final chapter it is suggested that System S existed in Europe in pre-Christian times by analyzing a plot from an ancient  legend of Greenland. We are led to believe that Christianity nurtured the growth of the W system, but the inception of the  Soviet reign brought with it a recursion into the ancient S ideology.  DISCUSSION AND EVALUATION  This book was beguilingly easy in a way. The more I read and pondered, the more questions I had, at least up to a point.  Although I now believe I have a pretty good feel for the theory, I must confess I do not think I have it quite all in my  grasp. In one sense, the theory is, of course, completely axiomatic; one may churn out theorem after theorem. What was not  always self-evident was the linking of the terms and operations in the theory to the real-world concepts. There is no doubt in  my mind that the author knows precisely what he is talking about and feels that the correspondence between real-world concepts  and the theoretical structure is perfectly defined. But to the reader, there is occasionally a sense of the slippery and  cloudy. Some of the language seems a little rich for a theory based on binary concepts. Much of the fog is dispelled by heavy  concentration and rethinking but I still am convinced that further effort on the part of Lefebvre to sharpen the treatment on  these dimensions will be rewarding.  To move to the overall impact, I believe this theory to be a quite profound  HOOK REVIEWS 471  contribution to the study of phenomenology of internal feeling and reflection especially with reference to ethical systems.  There have certainly been previous attempts to formulate mathematical descriptions of ethical principles or of human social  interactions embedded in differing political systems. However, I so far have not been able to find anything quite like the  present theory. Lefebvre's calculus is ingenious, based on self-reflection and using an extended Boolean algebra and a clever  exponentiation technique. The theorems are deep and highly absorbing in psychological, philosophical, and sociopolitical  senses. Because all springs from a binary valued foundation, there is often great elegance and parsimony in the theory.  Another admirable facet of the work is the author's emphasis on empirical tests, through direct experiment, as well as  analysis of literature, legend, and potentially other varieties of documents. The heavy empirical thrust is still quite rare  in this type of endeavor.  Not to say that all is perfect. Aside from the problems raised in earlier sections, most trivial, some more substantive, there  are certain other difficulties or lacunae. For instance, it was not always clear how the author made his decisions in  development of the theoretical structure. Some critical assumptions have received either empirical support or theoretical  justification. Other choices, such as associating the various levels of the exponent with certain psychological functions, are  not always so obvious. In one sense, he is not obligated to provide such explication; if the theory works then that is that.  However, it would be reassuring to know that alternative paths are impossible, unproductive or the like.  All in all, I would be surprised if this work did not provoke a good deal of discussion and even controversy, not only at the  academic level but within certain governmental and international sociopolitical circles, for some years to come. I also  envision stimulating extensions of the theory by its author as well as challenging theoretical conceptions from other scholars.