10.1016/0022-2496(83)90032-9
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 27, 118-119 (1983)  Book Review  STEPHEN GROSSBERG (Ed.). Mathematical Psychology and Psychophysiology. Providence, R.I.: Amer. Math. Soc., 1981. AMS-SIAM  Symposium Series, Vol. 13.  Reviewed by ALWYN C. SCOTT  The editor of this book is Professor of Mathematics, Psychology, and Biomedical Engineering at Boston University. He received  his Ph.D. in 1967 from Rockefeller University and he was with the Department of Applied Mathematics at the Massachusetts  Institute of Technology prior to his current position. His primary research interests are psychological and  psychophysiological theories of complex behavior, and dynamical systems in biology. He has recently published a selected  collection of his papers (Studies of Mind and Brain, Reidel, Dordrecht, 1982).  The reviewer is Chairman of the Center for Nonlinear Studies at the Los Alamos National Laboratory, and is currently visiting  the Laboratory of Applied Mathematical Physics. Technical University of Denmark. His primary research interests are nonlinear  dynamics and nerve propagation. He is the author of Neurophysics (Wiley, New York, 1976).  Although the term "mathematical psychology" often implies the use of statistical methods to deal with highly variable  experiments on the minds of human subjects, there is another meaning. The brain is an immensely complex dynamical system which  somehow manages to work and, doing so, piques our curiosity. Since mathematics has played such a fundamental role in the  understanding of other dynamical systems as diverse as atoms, the solar system, and the weather, there is reason to suppose  that the Queen of Science may also have something to say to the psychologist.  Active research based on this supposition continues and no one has been more active than the editor of Mathematical Psychology  and Psychophysiology, Professor Stephen Grossberg. In his preface he states that "Understanding the mind and its neural  substrates has long been one of the most challenging and important scientific problems confronting humanity" to which I agree  completely, and further that "Experimental and theoretical progress in this area has recently accelerated to the point that  our knowledge of brain process is undergoing a revolutionary transformation." To the latter assertion I have some  reservations. The brain is a hard nut to crack. Although we have made some progress (no longer can a physicist or  mathematician or engineer wander casually into the field of neuroscience and make interesting comments; the wheel has been  invented several times and everyone in the field knows it), we are a long way from understanding. It is not yet clear which  aspects of mental dynamics are amenable to psychophysiological experiments-not  Reprints may be obtained from the author at the Laboratory of Applied Mathematical Physics, The Technical University of  Denmark, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark.  0022-2496/83 $3.00  Copyright OC 1983 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  BOOK REVIEWS 119  because the brain is fundamentally mystical (I do not believe that for a moment) but because certain traits, as Freud knew,  are individual.  Having said this, let me emphasize that Professor Grossberg's book gives an excellent current picture of the kinds of things  that are going on in mathematical psychology today. Again quoting from the preface:  The articles include contributions to a variety of topics and employ a variety of mathematical tools to explicate these  topics. The topics include studies of development, perception, learning, cognition, information processing, psychophysiology,  and measurement. Their mathematical substrates include algebraic, stochastic, and dynamical system models and theorems.  Despite this diversity, the reader can discover an underlying coherence among the papers. Various concepts and formal laws  reoccur in several different subjects. Distinct mathematical tools often probe different levels of the same underlying  physical mechanisms.  N. Graham describes the Fourier approach to spatial vision. G. Iverson and M. Pavel discuss an invariance law in  psychoacoustics W. Freeman considers psychophysiological substrates of olfactory coding. D. Willshaw and C. von der Malsburg  review a model of retinotectal development.  G. Carpenter analyzes the signal patterns of normal and abnormal nerve cells. S. Geman describes theorems concerning the  approximation of stochastic differential equations by deterministic differential equations, and uses these theorems to analyze  models of pattern learning and discrimination. S. Grossberg's first article discusses adaptive resonances and competitive  dynamics in developmental, perceptual, and cognitive examples, and introduces a new explanation of how depth, brightness,  spatial frequency, and filling-in visual computations are related. S. Grossberg's second article analyzes schedule  interactions and behavioral contrast as examples of psychophysiological principles.  M. F. Norman's first article discusses some relationships between fitness and genetic mechanisms in a sociobiological context.  His second article describes a stochastic limit theorem whose proof is psychologically motivated. R. D. Luce and L. Narens  review a number of recent results in measurement theory. D. Noreen discusses the psychology and economics of choice. G.  Sperling describes models of binocular vision. D. Vorberg analyzes reaction time data using serial self-terminating memory  search models.  I would like to see more concerning the relation between recently developing concepts of chaos in dynamical systems and mental  activities, but in a sense it is there just below the dura mater of Carpenter's chapter which should be carefully studied by  all serious students of neuroscience. And I would like to see more explicit recognition of Donald Hebb's germinal contribution  to the field. But these are minor points. Stephen Grossberg and the other contributors to Mathematical Ps vchology and  Psychophysiology have put together a valuable book which should be available to all who work in this area.  Printed in Belgium