10.1016/0022-2496(84)90028-2
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 28, 215-222 (1984)  Book Review  Faithful Account of a Stewardship  PHILIP N. JOHNSON-LAIRD. Mental Models: Towards a Cognitive Science of Language, Inference, and Consciousness. Cambridge,  Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press, 1983, pp. xiii + 513. $27.50.  Reviewed by JOHN MACNAMARA  The author is Assistant Director of the Medical Research Council Applied Psychology Unit, Cambridge, England. He obtained his  Ph.D. at University College, London, and prior to his current position was Professor of Experimental Psychology at Sussex  University. He was a Visiting Member of the Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, in 1971 and a Sloan Fellow in Cognitive  Science at Stanford in 1980. His primary research interests are language, thinking, music, and consciousness, and he wrote  Language and Perception with G. A. Miller Harvard Univ. Press, 19761.  The reviewer is Professor of Psychology at McGill University. His primary research interests are language learning in children  and the foundations of cognition. He recently published Names for Things [Bradford Books/MIT Press, 19821. c 1984 Academic  Press, Inc.  Sometime in the 1960s psychologists began to fancy that computers would prove important in formulating theories of mental  processes. Johnson-Laird, who gained his Ph.D. in 1967, was young enough to be a native speaker, one of the first in fact, of  the new theoretical language. A quarter of a century later he is one of the leading informants on the language and indeed a  substantial contributor to it. The appearance of Mental Models, then, is an important event in cognitive science, the  interdisciplinary field that has formed under the shadow of the computer. It is an authoritative source on achievements and it  is honest enough and sensitive enough to reveal the limitations.  The scope of the book is immense. After a general argument for using the computer in constructing theories of mind, there are  five chapters, the best in the book, on reasoning. They are followed, after an interlude on imagery, by four chapters on how  we understand words and sentences of natural languages. Then there are two very long chapters on how we deal with the syntax  of sentences. The book is rounded off by a chapter on the understanding of discourse (connected sentences), a chapter on the  nature of mental models, and a chapter on consciousness. There is an extensive bibliography and separate name and subject  indexes. Everywhere JohnsonLaird displays detailed technical knowledge but the book does not expect of the reader much prior  technical expertise. Johnson-Laird writes clearly and introduces the notions and language that he employs in a manner that  even the beginner, if serious, 215  0022-2496/84 $3.00  Copyright 2, 1984 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  216 BOOK REVIEW  can follow. And the topics introduced are both fascinating and dazzlingly varied: Turing machines, computability, effective  procedures, recursive functions, psychologism, Montague semantics, automatic parsers, realism, consciousness, and on and on.  It is something like a general education in automata theory, in cognitive psychology, and in the philosophy of mind to work  through the book.  INFERENCE  The central idea of the book is that in reasoning and in following sentences and discourse we construct mental models. There  is something very attractive here. It is well known that the introduction of Euler circles and Venn diagrams made the solution  of syllogisms easier. It seemed as if the model on paper was an external aid for what the mind tends to do internally.  Johnson-Laird, however, leaves Euler and Venn far behind and adopts a more flexible model. The idea is simply illustrated.  Take this syllogism in the first form:  All artists are beekeepers  All beekeepers are chemists  .'. All artists are chemists  Let a stand for artists; b for beekeepers; c for chemists. Now represent the premises as  a=6 and b =c  a=6 b =c  (b) (c)  (b) (c)  The expression a = b represents an artist who is a beekeeper, and the lone (b)'s represent possible beekeepers who are not  artists. The combination of the two models is  a=b=c a=b=c b =c 6=c (c)  If we take identity as transitive, inspection readily shows that all of the artists are chemists. Johnson-Laird has convincing  evidence that such models can handle the data that have been collected about the relative difficulty of various syllogism  forms,  BOOK REVIEW 217  and handle them in a way that no other theory can. Models are equally effective in handling the data on three-term relations.  All this amounts to a valuable contribution to the psychology of inference.  Johnson-Laird, though, sees these models and the procedures that construct and evaluate them as replacing "mental logic." He  is at pains to exorcise mental logic, which he sees as his chief antagonist. It is not clear, though, what mental logic is. He  cites Inhelder and Piaget (1958, p. 305) for the view that the mental logic that guides our propositional reasoning "is  nothing more than the propositional calculus itself." One possibility is that he is attributing to Inhelder and Piaget the  view that the mental capacity consists of something like the set of formal expressions of the calculus that one might find in  a textbook of logic. If that is right, it is unfair to Inhelder and Piaget who on the same page state that their subjects'  reasoning was linked to the patterns of ordinary language, and further that their subjects were always dealing with  interpreted expressions. He might be attributing to them the view that the inferences their subjects drew were in conformity  with the formal calculus, and that I think would be right. Inhelder and Piaget claim their subjects' inferences "correspond to  the operations in the propositional system" (p. 305). These operations "can be formulated" in a certain algebra (p. 305). But  then, matters of style apart, their position seems identical to Johnson-Laird's own. He does not dispute the soundness of the  standard calculus.  The style, however, turns out to be important and turns out to count against Johnson-Laird as we shall see if we turn back to  the model used in solving the syllogism. The general conclusion follows only if the reasoner appreciates that the particular  model stands for an infinity of cases. On its own the model cannot justify the universal conclusion. This is very well brought  out by Evert Beth (1967, Chap. 4) in a celebrated paper on the logic of geometrical proofs. He noted that one needs to draw a  particular triangle when proving that a triangle's internal angles sum to two right angles. Yet the conclusion stands for an  infinity of triangles. He argues that the logic of the proof treats the particular triangle used as an arbitrarily chosen one,  and that the proof should not depend on any properties peculiar to it. A similar argument could be made in connection with  Johnson-Laird's syllogistic models. But that means that his procedures that set up a particular model and evaluate it cannot  be the whole story. While the model is psychologically useful it must be supplemented with something. But what? One has a  suspicion that what is needed is something that applies the first-order predicate logic, with identity. But this would seem to  be a mental logic. In other words Johnson-Laird does not seem to have identified anything to throw out that he does not need.  The truly creative element in his work puts one in mind of all the writing on the need for diagrams when working on  mathematical problems ever since Plato wrote the Meno. Johnson-Laird can fairly claim to have demonstrated that in the absence  of visible diagrams mental ones can play the same essential role. In addition he has given us good ideas about the content and  structure of such mental diagrams.  Much of the writing is against the idea that the logic of logicians has much to do with "spontaneous inferences" or "the  deductions of everyday life." The author points  218 BOOK REVIEW  out that such reasoning is often fallacious. True, but he does not adequately explore the possibility that the logicians'  logic expresses a competence theory for part of our inferential capacities. If logic were taken as competence, then mistakes  would be attributed to performance factors. The position would need careful elaboration, but it is a very natural suggestion  seeing that Johnson-Laird is calling certain actual inferences fallacious. Presumably those subjects who drew them could also  be convinced that they were fallacious. Exactly what one would expect if logicians' logic expressed the competence that these  subjects were struggling to apply. Further, how do logicians hit upon the logics they do but by consulting and sifting logical  intuition? When pushed, this must go back to a psychologically "real" logic. Johnson-Laird argues that all can be explained by  means of mental models of the sort we have seen (pp. 141-142); but we now know that that is simply not true.  Against the idea of a mental logic he rightly points out that there are many variations of the same logic and wonders which of  them would be the mental one. The answer would, of course, have to be empirical. But the existence of differing formulations  of the same logic (e.g., axiomatic as opposed to natural deduction rules) is no argument against a mental logic.  With a good deal more force he points out that there can be infinitely many modal logics though there cannot be infinitely  many mental logics. The abundance, however, might be attributed to lack of stable intuitions in the area, in which case there  would be no competence theory of modal intuitions. Or, it might be that the differences among sets of axiom schemata and among  accessibility relations are appropriate for different interpretations of the modal connectives. The suggestion is inspired by  Lemmon (1959) and, if correct, would lead to the conclusion that there are many distinct competences in the area. One could,  of course, propose yet other logics with the connectives necessary and possible in them, but if they did not correspond to  some intuitively grounded interpretations, those logics would be otiose, merely formal extensions of the intuitively based  modal logics.  One other argument that Johnson-Laird advances against mental logic looks more impressive than it really is. He points out  that everyday reasoning often involves quantification over sets, for example, generalizations over numbers. It follows that  everyday reasoning sometimes has recourse to higher-order predicate calculi (higher than first order), and such calculi are  incomplete:  That is to say, there is no way to formalize the calculus so that all valid inferences are deriveable within it. If there can  be no formal logic that captures all the valid deductions, then a fortiori there can be no mental logic that does either...  This failure is a final and decisive blow to the doctrine of mental logic. (pp. 140-141)  But in fact no such conclusion follows. Why should a logic be complete simply by being mental? Even if it had to be, the  result cited would say nothing against there being a mental propositional logic and a mental first-order predicate logic,  since those logics are complete. To say a logic is incomplete is merely to say that there are some valid sentences in the  relevant language that cannot be proved within it. From a psychological point of view this merely means that our ability to  know the truth-  BOOK REVIEW 219  functional tautologies of a language cannot, in some instances, be identified with the resources of the language and its  inferential devices. This says nothing about whether or not that language and its inferential resources are somehow realized  in minds. Johnson-Laird's case here seems to be an evident non sequitur.  SEMANTICS  Mental models seem equally useful in the understanding of sentences and discourse. Johnson-Laird proposes that the  interpretation of a sentence involves the construction of an appropriate mental model. The model in fact "represents the  significance" of the sentence (p. 246). The model plays its part, too, in establishing truth conditions: "A discourse is true  if it has at least one mental model that satisfies its truth conditions that can be embedded in the model corresponding to the  world" (p. 247). This embedding is further spelled out: "The individuals represented in the mental model occur in the real  world with the same properties and the same relations holding between them" (p. 441). Embedding is facilitated by a "principle  of structural identity: The structures of mental models are identical to the structures of the states of affairs ... that the  models represent" (p. 419).  Johnson-Laird argues convincingly that his mental-model approach to semantics is superior to other psychological theories. He  points out that theories that consist either in the decomposition of lexical items into sets of semantic features or in the  elicitation of a sector of a semantic network of the type that originates with Quillian (1967, 1968) have great difficulty in  explaining the relation between a sentence and its truth conditions. He makes a similar remark about theories that explain the  logical connections between words (e.g., woman and human) by means of meaning postulates. He argues that a psychological  theory (e.g., Fodor, Fodor, & Garrett, 1975) that rests on meaning postulates is incomplete because it, too, gives no account  of truth conditions. He argues further that all three theories just mentioned are deficient because they separate the process  of grasping "semantic properties and relations" from those that "mediate reference" (p. 232). I am not sure about this last  point but it certainly merits careful attention.  How does Johnson-Laird's own theory fare? Despite protestations, it seems to me that it is quite incapable of accounting for  reference and hence for truth conditions. In understanding the sentence Ronald Reagan is in the White House I may construct  mental models of Reagan and the White House with one inside the other. Yet such a model is no part of the truth conditions of  the sentence. Its truth conditions have all to do with the real Reagan and the real White House. Johnson-Laird would agree, of  course, but argue that his theory takes full account of it. He can point to his principle of structural identity and his  definition of truth for sentences-a sentence is true if "the individuals represented in the mental model occur in the real  world with the same properties and the same relations holding between them" (p. 441). Admittedly this definition is given as  "only a first approximation," but it is repeated several times throughout the book and never in fact bettered.  220 BOOK REVIEW  The crux for Johnson-Laird is this: How does a procedure effect that a mental model is a mental model of Ronald Reagan? There  are two sections in Chapter 15 in which we might expect to find an answer. The first, "How do mental models represent the  world?," says a lot about bees and bacteria, for whom Johnson-Laird does not claim intentional states. The section establishes  no more than that knowledge must depend on some form of representation, which must in fact be capable of representing reality.  The second section, "What processes construct and interpret mental models?," simply fails to come to grips with the issue I am  raising. While there are some remarks about perception and intentionality, the book does not make any serious effort to  resolve the problem at all. This is a serious defect. With Barwise and Perry (1983, p. 272) 1 feel that it undermines the  basic idea on which theories such as Johnson-Laird's rests. It leaves open the possibility that there is no effective  procedure that can handle referring. This would not in the least disturb the role claimed for mental models. It would probably  mean that referring was incomprehensible to us and would have to be taken as a cognitive primitive. It would also suggest that  the role of mental models is relatively superficial. It does not account for human ability to interpret symbols whether in  connection with reasoning or in understanding speech. I am saying here nothing that Fodor (1978) has not said previously.  Though I am adding that the inadequacies in procedural semantics he pointed to have not been remedied. The problem can be  illustrated in connection with the sentence we have been considering. Johnson-Laird specifies no procedures that make one  element in the mental model represent Reagan, that make another represent the White House, and that make one element's being  inside the other in the model represent a spatial relation between Reagan and the White House. This, if correct, is a  fundamental and all pervasive flaw in the theory presented.  It is interesting to compare Johnson-Laird's models with the superficially similar models that Barwise and Perry (1983)  propose. Barwise and Perry's models are abstract set-theoretic entities; Johnson-Laird's are not abstract. Barwise and Perry  propose to relate their models to real world situations by means of a carefully spelled out system of "connections" and  "anchorings"; nothing connects Johnson-Laird's models to actual situations. Barwise and Perry do not claim that semantics can  be carried out by the sorts of procedures that we know how to program in a computer; Johnson-Laird stakes his theory on the  claim that it can, but fails to even suggest how.  In order to succeed Johnson-Laird has to "naturalize" the basic semantic notion of referring. That is, he has to reduce our  ability to refer to nonintentional notions, such as physical causation. In my view no one has succeeded in glimpsing how this  might be done, though several scholars have made serious attempts-notably Field (1977), Dretske (1981), and Stalnaker (in  preparation). The list does not, I fear, include Johnson-Laird in Mental Structures. I might add that the specially difficult  cases to handle within a naturalised theory of reference are numbers and kinds. The theoretician who persuades us that  reference can be naturalised will probably have to allay any metaphysical suspicions that the numbers and the kinds exist  outside space and time and hence are causally inert.  BOOK REVIEW  221  The problem of numbers crops up in a much simpler way in Mental Models. Johnson-Laird squarely confronts the fact that our  finite minds cannot construct models of the infinite or even of situations with say 10,000 individuals in them. His first  solution is to go for "illustrative subsets" as models (p. 440). The idea is the same as that of the mathematician who uses  dots to indicate that the series continues, e.g., 1, 2, 3,..., n. He recognizes that this is sketchy, and while he has other  ideas his final stance is something of a cop-out:  There is accordingly a distinction between naive or intuitive reasoning, which is directly based on mental models, and  mathematical reasoning, which relies on other mechanisms. It is not my task in this book to account for mathematical  reasoning.... (p. 444)  No reason for the distinction is offered except the difficulty of handling mathematical reasoning inside the theory. Just as  the professional work of logicians must be grounded in everyday inference, that of mathematicians must be grounded in everyday  use of numbers. The mathematician and layman do not seem to have different concepts of number or truth or inference.  Johnson-Laird's move here is just not good enough. Interestingly, however, he does appeal to intuitionism in mathematics as  the psychologically fruitful line to follow. He is surely right in this, though the mathematical difficulties are not  inconsiderable. Nonetheless he fails to suggest how mental models fit in with intuitionist work. The intuitionist position  mitigates the metaphysical scruples to which I alluded, but it does nothing for the problem of constructing models of large  numbers of individuals. And yet insight into structure always seems to be gained from examining particular cases, so there  ought to be a role for models in mathematical thought.  PARSING  The two long chapters on parsing I found tedious and wondered about their place in the book. We do not seem to form conscious  models of sentence structures in the way that we do when we are puzzling about, say, problems in three-term relations. Unless  we are grammarians in our grammatical phases we seem not to advert to syntax at all. Of course it is quite possible that in  processing sentences we unconsciously form syntactic models of their structure. The main reason for including these chapters  seems to have been the good prospects of having procedural parsers. Johnson-Laird seems to have been intent on showing the  prowess of AI approaches and it must also be admitted that he has considerable command of the literature on the subject. I  may, however, have missed the point of this section because for one thing he denies the autonomy of syntactic and semantic  processes (p. 334). He allows autonomy in competence as Chomsky proposes, but claims that in performance the processes  interact. The issues here are conceptually murky and empirical evidence is scanty, so I shall not follow his argument. I  mention the matter, partly for the interest of readers who are familiar with Fodor (1983), and partly because attributing a  role in parsing to semantics may help to explain the long excursus on parsing. Semantics is after all the home ground for the  models with which the book deals.  222 BOOK REVIEW  CONCLUSION  The book ends with a procedural essay on consciousness. Johnson-Laird seems well aware of the obstacles. His basic suggestion  is to account for consciousness by having models of processing that embody models of their own operations (p. 474). Owing to  the general weakness of the book's semantic theory this remark casts no light on the obscure subject of consciousness.  I was surprised, granted the inadequacy of the book's semantic theory, that Johnson-Laird did not opt for methodological  solipsism; for that, as Fodor (1981, Chap. 9) points out, is the natural stance for one so committed to the procedural  approach. I had expected to see methodological solipsism defended and extended. In fact it is probably the only strategy that  would have saved the book from the extensive foundational problems to which I have drawn attention. There are, in my view,  equally grave foundational problems for methodological solipsism, but they are different. Perhaps it was this realization that  prevented Johnson-Laird from pursuing that solution to his problems.  Mental Models is a brave, imaginative, and rewarding book. Reviewers, unlike sundials, tend to mark the dark and  unsatisfactory moments. Besides, while the inadequacies are big and deep, the space they occupy is not proportional. The bulk  of the book is taken up with good and sometimes delightful theorizing. Whole bodies of literature are encompassed and made to  yield their flashes of insight. The very weaknesses themselves are highly instructive, for they are weaknesses in the  procedural approach as worked out to date and not in Johnson-Laird's presentation of it. Mental Models is the most  comprehensive and most authoritative survey of cognitive science that I have seen. It is a fine book and unlikely to be  swiftly superceded.  REFERENCES  BARWISE, J., & PERRY, J. (1983). Situations and attritudes. Bradford/MIT Press. BETH, E. W. (1967). Aspects of modern logic.  Dordrecht: Reidel.  DRETSKE, F. 1. (1981). Knowledge and the flow of information. Cambridge: Bradford/MIT Press. FIELD, H. H. (1977). Logic,  meaning, and conceptual role. Journal of Philosophy, 74, 379-403. FODOR, J. A. (1978). Tom Swift and his procedural  grandmother. Cognition, 6, 229-247.  FODOR, J. A. (1981). Representations: Philosophical essays on the foundations of cognitive science. Cambridge: Bradford/MIT  Press.  FODOR, J. A. (1983). The modularity of mind. Cambridge: Bradford/MIT Press.  FODOR, J. A., FODOR, J. D., & GARRETT, M. (1975). The psychological unreality of semantic representations. Linguistic Inquiry,  6, 515-531.  INHELDER, B., & PIAGET, J. (1958). The growth of logical thinking from childhood to adolescence. New York: Basic Books.  LEMMON, E. J. (1959). Is there one correct system of modal logic? Proceedings of the Aristotelean Society, Suppl. 23.  QUILLIAN, R. M. (1967). Word concepts: A theory and simulation of some basic semantic capabilities. Behavioural Science, 12,  410-430.  QUILLIAN, R. M. (1968). Semantic memory. In M. Minsky (Ed.), Semantic information processing (pp. 216-270). Cambridge: MIT  Press.  STALNAKER, R. Propositions. Department of Philosophy, Cornell University, In preparation.  Printed in Belgium