10.1016/0022-2496(84)90005-1
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 28, 351-356 (1984)  Book Review  M. L. DAVISON, Multidimensional Scaling. New York: Wiley, 1983. ix + 242 pp. $25.95.  Reviewed by SHARON L. WEINBERG  The author is a Professor of Educational Psychology at the University of Minnesota. He obtained his Ph. D. in 1974 at the  University of Illinois. His main research interests are psychological scaling and psychometric theory, and he has been cited  as an outstanding young researcher by the National Academy of Education and Division 5 of the American Psychological  Association.  The reviewer is a Professor of Educational Statistics at New York University. Her primary research interests are multivariate  analysis, resampling methods (the Bootstrap and Jackknife), and occupational structure and job choice. She published, with K.  P. Goldberg, Basic Statistics for Education and the Behavioral Sciences, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1979.  As befits a rapidly emerging area, several full-length books devoted to a treatment of multidimensional scaling have been  published within the last six years. These include Multidimensional Scaling by Kruskal and Wish (1978); Introduction to  Multidimensional Scaling by Schiffman, Reynolds, and Young (1981); The User's Guide to Multidimensional Scaling by Coxon  (1982); Key Texts on Multidimensional Scaling edited by Davies and Coxon (1982); and the book under review, Multidimensional  Scaling, by Davison (1983). With the exception of Davies and Coxon's book of readings, the books preceding Davison's are  designed primarily for the multidimensional scaling (MDS) user and have a strong emphasis on application. While concerned with  application, Davison's preface suggests a more comprehensive goal -an integration of both application and theory under one  cover. As there is a need for such a textbook, I was disappointed to find that Davison's book does not fully live up to its  promise.  While there are many reasons for this, the overriding one appears to be the author's failure to integrate and organize his  material into a coherent whole. Materials are merely presented as so many separate items, without integration. As a result,  presentations tend to be fragmentary, to lack depth, and at times to contradict each other.  For the purposes of his book, Davison defines MDS as a "set of multivariate statistical methods for estimating the parameters  in and assessing the fit of various spatial distance models for proximity data" (p. 2). The audience for whom the book  Send requests for reprints to Professor S. L. Weinberg, Program of Educational Statistics, New York University, 933 Shimkin  Hall, 50 West 4th St., New York, NY 10003.  351  0022-2496/84 $3.00  Copyright 1984 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  352 BOOK REVIEW  is intended "is presumed to have a sophisticated user's knowledge of the statistical techniques commonly used in the  behavioral and social sciences up to and including multiple regression" (p. viii). From a technical viewpoint, Davison's book  appears to be at the correct level for its audience. Proofs and algorithm descriptions are included in the book, but they are  placed in asterisked sections within each chapter, thus enabling the less mathematically sophisticated student to skip over  this more technical material without loss of continuity. The inclusion in the book of proofs and algorithm descriptions is one  of the book's strengths. Detailed algorithm descriptions [available also in Coxon (1982), Schiffman et al. (1981), and Kruskal  (1977), for example] are valuable in facilitating an understanding of the MDS techniques, and at the same time in removing the  mystery often associated with them.  From a broader perspective, topics that are covered in the book are those that are consistent with Davison's working  definition of MDS. Chapter 1 is introductory. Chapter 2 covers matrix concepts relevant to MDS techniques. Chapter 3 covers  different experimental methods that are appropriate to studies that use MDS. Chapters 4 through 7 cover a variety of MDS  techniques, including Torgerson's metric method, nonmetric group methods, individual difference model methods, and preference  model methods. Chapter 8 describes how one might use independently collected attribute data to corroborate the interpretations  of dimensions derived from an MDS analysis as well as how one might assess the congruence between two stimulus configurations  based on different MDS analyses. Chapter 9, the final chapter, discusses the relationship between MDS and other methods of  data analysis including Thurstone's unidimensional scaling by the method of paired comparisons, hierarchical cluster analysis,  and factor analysis. With the exception of Chapter 9, all chapters include end-of-chapter problem sets with answers that  reflect the major points made in each chapter.  Davison has adequately sampled topics from the content domain defined by his working definition of MDS. He has not, however,  taken care to bring these materials together to form a cohesive whole. What appears to be missing are much needed reflections  and insights to give the'book depth and clarity, and to help tie discussions of application and theory together. In addition,  the relevance of certain aspects of MDS is left out or not fully explained.  To begin with, the discussion in Chapter 1 of the relationship between the psychological concept of dissimilarity and the  geometric concept of distance is not complete. Rather than drawing the reader's attention to the important point that  property-preserving transformations may be performed on dissimilarity data to make them more closely conform to the distance  model and its axioms, Davison's discussion emphasizes how well dissimilarity data satisfy the metric axioms without  transformation. Defining dissimilarity data as quantitative empirical observations on object pairs, he writes: "Since  Euclidean distances must satisfy the axioms, then dissimilarity data that-satisfy the Euclidean distance model in Eq. (1.5)  should also satisfy the axioms" (p. 4). While Davison does present (on page 5) one commonly used transformation, one of the  additive constant transformation schemes discussed in Torgerson (1958), his emphasis is still clearly on testing the distance  model for  BOOK REVIEW 353  dissimilarity data. In taking this approach, Davison does not properly acknowledge the importance of property-preserving  transformations in relating dissimilarities to distances. Indeed, one of the purposes of nonmetric MDS is to determine whether  ordinal data can be transformed or rescaled into quantities which are capable of being represented in a Euclidean space of  small dimensionality, the transformation of the data being one of the key elements of the process. Moreover, since the  measurement properties of the data themselves are important, determining as they do the type of transformation that may be  applied legitimately to the data, Stevens' (1946) level of measurement typology should also have been included in the  discussion of Chapter 1. With his treatment of the metric axioms and their relationship to dissimilarity data, Davison has  opted for presenting in Chapter 1 a more narrow view of scaling, one that does not provide the reader with a cohesive  framework or context within which the various MDS techniques may be organized and understood.  Unfortunately, Davison's treatment of many topics displays a similar lack of concern for the need to bring materials together  to form a cohesive framework. In his treatment of the INDSCAL method of analysis, for example, care is taken to include the  mathematical details of the method including the weighted Euclidean distance formula, the equation for each subject's  coordinate matrix and its matrix analog, the scalar product matrices and how they are computed, and fit measures. What is  missing is an integration of these details and an overview of the method itself. Although touched on in a few isolated  sentences scattered throughout the chapter, answers to such basic questions as Why was INDSCAL developed? What are the reasons  for using it? What can be gained by using INDSCAL as opposed to other methods of scaling? do not appear to be sufficiently  addressed. Moreover, perhaps because Davison appears to be concerned primarily with the component parts of the analysis,  seemingly contradictory statements appear in the text making the presentation confusing. On page 127, Davison writes:  "Interpreting the solution is a large task when an individual differences model is employed because one must develop an  interpretation of both the group stimulus space, whose matrix representation is X, and the subject space, whose matrix  representation is YV." On page 131, he comments that: "The popularity of the weighted Euclidean model stems, in part, from the  fact that weighted Euclidean solutions are more easily intepreted than are those derived from other methods for which a  subsequent rotation may be necessary." By emphasizing two different, but related, aspects of the model (its subject weights,  on the one hand, and its dimensional uniqueness, on the other), without tying the two together in a cohesive way, the reader  is left to wonder whether the task of interpreting a solution under INDSCAL is easier or more involved. Actually, in response  to Davison's comment on page 127, an interpretation of the subject space is not always necessary or desirable. Only when  additional subject variables are measured does one normally become concerned with an interpretation of the subject space. By  stating that "one must develop" such interpretations, Davison gives an overly simplified and distorted view of interpreting  the subject space within an INDSCAL analysis.  354 BOOK REVIEW  On other occasions as well Davison oversimplifies material by presenting it in prescription format. On page 52, for example,  Davison writes: "Since conditional probability matrices are seldom if ever symmetric, the researcher must devise some method  for deriving a symmetric matrix of proximities from the asymmetric, conditional probability matrix." Given the recent  increased awareness of the psychological importance of nonsymmetries in proximities data, and the recent proliferation of  models for dealing with nonsymmetrical data (see Carroll & Arabie, 1980, for references), Davison's strong advice to students  is an oversimplification of the true situation. While he later comments that "important information can be lost" (p. 52) by  symmetrizing the data, he does not offer the reader a way to deal with the problem, other than ignoring it.  In covering some of the basic issues of scaling (e.g., rotation, local minima problems, degeneracies, and convergence),  presentations often tend to be confusing, and at times, inaccurate. In the first discussion of rotation that appears in the  text, the author correctly brings attention to the importance of finding an interpretable rotation in the MDS process. Davison  writes that if the original solution is not interpretable, "either an objective rotation or a hand rotation must be employed  to obtain an interpretable representation of the configuration" (p. 66). Davison next discusses objective rotation in the  context of the simple structure criterion, and in a puzzling reversal of theme, writes: "Such rotations are seldom used in MDS  because, to this author's knowledge, there is no reason to believe that naturally occurring stimuli would satisfy this  criterion. Nor is there any reason to believe that rotation to such a criterion will yield a more interpretable solution" (p.  66). Davison may be attempting by this reversal to warn the reader that objective rotations will not automatically detect  structure in a configuration, but he has chosen a confusing way to do so. Perhaps a more fruitful approach would have been to  present an overview of the limitations of interpretation via methods of rotation, prior to his discussion of objective  rotations. In failing to provide this framework, the discussion becomes unnecessarily confusing and difficult to follow.  Davison describes the local minimum problem as that "of ensuring that the user's solution corresponds to the global minimum of  the fit measure, not some local minimum" (p. 100). While this is an accurate description of the problem, it is not complete  enough. Kruskal and Wish (1978), in describing this same problem, make use of a very fine analogy. In their analogy,  minimization is likened to having a blindfolded parachutist, who is dropped from a high-flying airplane onto a rolling terrain  with hills and valleys, look for the lowest point of the terrain (the global minimum). The local minimum problem means getting  trapped in the bottom of an irregularity in the terrain (the local minimum). It is unfortunate that this type of full  description is too often lacking in Davison's book. In a related point Davison correctly notes that algorithms using rational  starts are usually less prone to local minimum problems than those using single nonrational starts. Several authors including  Arabie (1973, 1978), Coxon (1982), and Harshman (1984; see also Harshman, Ladefoged, & Goldstein, 1977) have recommended the  use of a multiple start approach to deal with the local minimum problem. Only Arabie's, the most  BOOK REVIEW 355  conservative of them, is mentioned in this text. Commenting on the Arabie procedure, Davison displays a somewhat inconsistent  view as he writes: "At this time, the multiple start approach seems expensive, time consuming, and largely untested in any  systematic way. However, with particularly difficult kinds of data, it may be a prudent approach" (p. 100).  With respect to degeneracies, Davison notes that they "are readily spotted," and that "often a solution in a higher  dimensionality circumvents the problem" (p. 102). It is not true that a solution in a higher dimensionality will circumvent  the problem. Simply stated, a k-dimensional solution is a special case of a (k + 1)-dimensional solution given the same set of  data. Hence, if a degenerate solution is a possible solution in the k-dimensional case, it would have to be a possible  solution in the (k + 1)-dimensional case as well. In problem 1 on page 117 at the end of Chapter 5, Davison presents a set of  data in which the one-dimensional solution is degenerate, but the two-dimensional solution is claimed not to be. The  apparently good twodimensional solution shown in the book may be either (i) a local minimum, (ii) a "saddle point" (a point  where the gradient is zero but the Hessian matrix has both positive and negative eigenvalues), or (iii) simply a point where  the gradient is extremely small but not zero (J. B. Kruskal, personal communication, 1984). In addition to presenting this  point of confusion regarding degeneracies, the author provides insufficient guidance to the reader as to how to spot  degeneracies readily. Missing, among other things, is advice on how to use the scatter (or "Shepard") diagram (showing  distances versus proximities) for obtaining important diagnostic information.  With respect to lack of convergence, Davison writes: "When lack of convergence occurs, the user can solve again using more  iterations" (p. 102). While this is true, an often better approach is to solve again with the obtained final configuration  from the first run as the starting configuration for the second run.  While the book does provide worked-out examples, in the opinion of this reviewer these are not sufficiently adequate to  illustrate the processes involved in using the MDS techniques. For the most part, the examples have two-dimensional solutions,  strong elbows, near perfect fit values, and conclusions that are often trite. A fruitful way of integrating some of the  material in the book might have been to analyze one set of data using a variety of techniques discussed in the text. Schiffman  et al. successfully employ this technique.  In summary, Davison's book includes a set of topics that would be appropriate for an introductory graduate level course in  multidimensional scaling. Unfortunately, however, the book has serious flaws. On many different levels, Davison's book can be  described as a collection of component parts without overview or perspective. Since there is no reference to an elucidating  taxonomy such as that suggested by Carroll and Arabie (1980) for organizing the field of multidimensional scaling, the reader  does not get a sense of where the spatial distance models discussed by Davison fit into the field as a whole. On another  level, since different MDS methods and related issues such as dimensionality, interpretation, etc., are treated with the same  lack of concern for the whole, the reader can easily become confused in following the  356 BOOK REVIEW  collection of parts presented. While worthwhile in its aim, Davison's book appears to be seriously lacking in some of the  major ingredients necessary to good instructional material and does not come close to meeting its potential.  REFERENCES  ARABIE, P. (1973). Concerning Monte Carlo evaluations on nonmetric multidimensional scaling algorithms. Psychometrika, 38,  607-608.  ARABIE, P. (1978). Random versus rational strategies for initial configurations in nonmetric multidimensional scaling.  Psychometrika, 43, 111-113, 119.  CARROLL, J. D., & ARABIE, P. (1980). Multidimensional scaling. In M. R. Rosenzweig and L. W. Porter (Eds.), Annual review of  psychology (Vol. 31, pp. 607-649). Palo Alto, Calif.: Annual Reviews. COXON, A. (1982). The user's guide to multidimensional  scaling. Exeter, N.H.: Heinemann.  DAVIES, P., & COXON, A. (1982). Key texts on multidimensional scaling. Exeter, N.H.: Heinemann. HARSHMAN, R. A. (1984). A  catalog of diagnostics for use with three-mode factor analysis and multidimensional scaling. In H. G. Law, C. W. Snyder, Jr.,  J. A. Hattie, & R. P. McDonald (Eds.), Research methods for multimode data analysis. New York: Praeger.  HARSHII~AN, R. A., LADEFOGED, P., & GOLDSTEIN, L. (1977). Factor analysis otongue shapes. Journal of the Acoustical Society  of America, 62, 693-707.  KRUSKAL, J. B. (1977). Multidimensional scaling and other methods for discovering structure. In K. Enstein, A. Ralston, & H.  S. Wilf (Eds.), Statistical methods for digital computers (Vol. III). New York: Wiley.  KRUSKAL, J. B., & WISH, M. (1978). Multidimensional scaling. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage. SCHIFFMAN, S. S., REYNOLDS, M. L., &  YOUNG, F. W. (1981). Introduction to multidimensional scaling. New York: Academic Press.  STEVENS, S. S. (1946). On the theory of scales of measurement. Science, 103, 677-680. TORGERSON, W. S. (1958). Theory and  methods of scaling. New York: Wiley.