10.1016/0022-2496(84)90024-5
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 28, 160-178 (1984)  A Maximum Likelihood Hierarchical Disaggregate Model for Predicting Choices of Individuals  DENNIS H. GENSCH AND JOSEPH A. SVESTKA  The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee  The absence of operational disaggregate lexicographic decision models and Tversky's observation that choice behavior is often  inconsistent, hierarchical, and context dependent motivate the development of a maximum likelihood hierarchical (MLH) choice  model. This new disaggregate choice model requires few assumptions and accommodates the three aspects of choice behavior noted  by A. Tversky (1972, Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 9, 341-367). The model has its foundation in a prototype model  developed by the authors. Unlike the deterministic prototype, however, MLH is a probabilistic model which generates maximum  likelihood estimators of the aggregate "cutoff values." The model is formulated as a concave programming problem whose  solutions are therefore globally optimal. Finally, the model is applied to data from three separate studies where it is  demonstrated to have superior performance over the prototype model in its predictive performance. c 1984 Academic Press, Inc.  INTRODUCTION  The ability of attribute choice models to predict future choice distributions and provide diagnostic information which enables  the researcher to better understand the behavioral process underlying the choices makes attribute choice models a topic of  interest to wide range disciplines. Attribute choice models come with diverse structural forms, purposes, and underlying  assumptions. However, most of the current attribute choice models, such as regression, logit, probit, LINMAP, and conjoint,  all have structural forms which assume that the decision maker evaluates the attributes simultaneously. An alternate form has  been suggested in which the decision maker considers the attributes of the alternatives sequentially. Models with this  structure are called lexicographic or hierarchical models. Researchers such as Newell and Simon (1972), Russ (1971), and  Tversky (1975) indicate that for many problems choice behavior appears to be both hierarchically structured and context  dependent. While no one takes issue with the concept that the lexicographic structure is closer to the actual choice process  by which most individuals make choices than is the simultaneous compensatory structure, lexicographic models are seldom used  in practice. One reason for this lack of implementation may be that most applied researchers are concerned with how groups of  individuals will choose, while most of  Address reprint requests to Joseph A. Svestka, Associate Professor, Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, College  of Engineering and Applied Science, The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, P. O. Box 784, Milwaukee, WI 53201.  0022-2496/84 $3.00  Copyright cc 1984 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  160  MLH CHOICE MODEL 161  the current lexicographic models are models for the individual and do not provide estimates of population parameters.  The model presented here, which is called MLH for Maximum Likelihood Hierarchical, is a disaggregate hierarchical model. It is  distinct from the current individual lexicographic models in that it computes both population parameter estimates and  individual predictions. MLH is designed for the choice situation in which the choice is based upon an evaluation of attributes  relative to a given set of alternatives. Each individual uses his or her own hierarchy to order the attributes for evaluation.  Just as in the individual lexicographic models, MLH is designed for the choice situation in which the salient attributes are  common to all the alternatives. MLH is not intended for those situations in which the salient attributes are unique to single  alternatives or specific subsets of the alternatives in the choice set. Tversky (1972) and Tversky and Sattath (1979) have  postulated elimination-by-aspect and preference three models designed to deal with this latter type of choice situation.  HIARC, a deterministic prototype model of this same general class as MLH, was developed by the authors while working on a  study for the U.S. Department of Transportation (Gensch & Svestka, 1979). Because the prototype was a deterministic model,  estimates of population parameters were very sensitive to sampling error. Furthermore, individual level probabilities were not  obtained. In contrast, MLH, being a probabilistic model, is less sensitive to sampling error and provides individual  probabilities. Further, it deals with maximizing the predictive accuracy which is affected by the dual criteria of retention  (not eliminating the chosen alternative) and discrimination (the elimination of all but one alternative from the choice set).  In the following sections other hierarchical models which appear in the literature will be discussed in relation to MLH. MLH  will then be derived in terms of its behavioral assumptions, and finally MLH will be applied to data sets from three different  choice situations to demonstrate its computational efficiency, predictive accuracy, and its ability to generate useful  diagnostic information.  HIERARCHICAL MODELS  Two multiattribute hierarchical decision models other than MLH have been described in the literature. The first is the  reformulation of the elimination by aspects (EBA) model to a hierarchical sequence of decisions, called preference trees by  Tversky and Sattath (1979). The second model is the sequential application of a generalized extreme value model to a hierarchy  of decisions. This model is called generalized extreme value model by McFadden et al. (1978).  Consider the EBA/preference tree model. In this case, the decision process consists of a sequence of conditional decisions.  For example, the decision maker first decides whether to eat meat or seafood, and subsequently to eat cod or lobster, having  already made the first decision to eat seafood. Here the relevant attributes of the  162 GENSCH AND SVESTKA  alternatives are dichotomous; either the alternative possesses the attribute or not. As each attribute is specified in the  sequence the set of alternatives is reviewed and those alternatives not possessing this attribute are eliminated. This  elimination by aspect (attribute) continues until only one alternative remains. Obviously, an attribute (such as cost or  price) possessed by all alternatives has no influence on the choice process because it never eliminates an alternative.  However, common attributes are often possessed by the alternatives by various degrees or levels. By dichotomozing an  intervally scaled variable at a specific "cut-off" point on the scale, the preference tree approach can meaningfully consider  a common attribute. For example, all the items on a menu have a price. Suppose the price attribute is dichotomized into meals  costing S 10 or less and meals costing over $10. In theory it is assumed that the respondent views meals costing $ 10 or less  as all being relatively equivalent; but he views those costing over S 10 as expensive, and he uses the $10 value as a  "cut-off" value in deciding which alternatives are acceptable relative to price. The model builder must a priori know the  critical values on each intervally scaled variable for each individual respondent in order to specify the model. How the model  builder obtains this information and other data needed for practical implementation has yet to be addressed. Tversky and  Sattath clearly recognize in their preference tree article (1979) that their model is at the development stage and that  considerable work must be done before this approach can have practical applications, particularly at the disaggregate level.  "In this article we do not develop a comprehensive solution to the construction, estimation, and evaluation problems" (Tversky  & Sattath, 1979, p. 554).  In its present form the EBA/preference tree approach is most suited for choice situations in which the key attributes are  dichotomous and unique to subsets of alternatives. Furthermore, this model is most appropriate for the study of an individual  and that particular individual's future behavior. Since different individuals may possess different hierarchical structures,  this causes a difficulty if one is to amalgamate the trees of individuals into a disaggregate model. Further, the model has  operational difficulties since the hierarchical structure of the sequence of conditional decisions and cut points must be  known a priori.  The generalized extreme value (GEV) model is a generalization of the multinomial logit to take into account non-independence  of alternatives. (McFadden et al., 1978). In order to avoid the independence of irrelevant alternatives assumption of the  logit model, the GEV model assumes the utilities of the alternatives to have nonindependent extreme value distributions. Thus  the GEV model draws on the rich theoretical background of the random utility approach (Luce & Suppes, 1965) while at the same  time avoiding the assumption of independence of irrelevant alternatives which often restricts the practical implementation of  the logit model. The GEV model can be fit to the preference tree approach described above. This specialized version, called  the tree extreme value model, is a conditional logit model. More precisely it is a nested sequence of multinomial logit  models. The decision process follows a prespecifted sequence of conditional decisions. This model is intended for utilization  with groups of individuals, where all individuals employ the same sequence of  MLH CHOICE MODEL 163  decisions. For example, in the selection of the mode of transportation, the decision makers first decide whether to take a  plane or a train to their destination. Next the specific flight or train is selected from the disjoint sets of alternate  flights or trains.  In comparison to both the preference tree model and conditional logit, MLH is designed for use in the case of a single  decision rather than a prespecified sequence of conditional decisions. MLH is designed for groups of individuals and requires,  in addition to the numerical scores of the alternatives with regard to each attribute and the identification of the chosen  alternative, each individuals rank order of importance of the attributes. As in the lexicographic models, all relevant  attributes are assumed to be possessed by all the alternatives. Furthermore, the data from individuals is scaled so that  aggregation may be affected. While the EBA/preference tree approach is designed for individuals, to be employed on the same  individuals, the intended use of MLH is to predict the choices of individuals in the same population but not necessarily those  in the current sample.  Comparing MLH to the conditional logit model, logit is a simultaneous and compensatory model where trade-offs among the  attributes can occur. MLH is, however, a lexicographic approach which by its structure restricts trade-offs between  attributes. As for the conditional sequence of decisions, there is nothing to prevent the substitution of the MLH model for  the logit model to construct a conditional MLH model.  The final point is that while all three models possess a structure which could be called hierarchical, they are fundamentally  different in their form, their underlying assumptions, and their intended use. While the standard logit and MLH models may be  applied to the same choice situation, one or the other may be more appropriate depending upon the circumstances. This latter  point will be discussed further in the next section.  MOTIVATON FOR MLH  MLH is based upon a prototype model called HIARC by its originators, Gensch and Svestka (1979), which was developed for the  U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) as an alternate model for predicting individual transportation model choices. In 1978  DOT initiated a number of studies to improve choice models, and data from the Santa Monica freeway project (1974-1976) (see  Billinehien et al., 1977) was provided. In this study individuals were questioned as to their choice of travel model under  various transportation policy changes. When a high percentage of single occupant vehicle drivers stated they would regularly  use the bus or ride share under a system offering park and ride lots and limited access high speed lanes, over three million  dollars were spent to implement the changes. A post implementation study showed that only 4 % of those questioned actually  employed the transportation mode which they said they would use.  The authors, in analyzing the situation, considered that the alternate transportation mode choices were probably not  frequently made by the respondents. It was further  164 GENSCH AND SVESTKA  assumed that coupled with this lack of experience was little knowledge of the alternatives, their attributes or their  consequences. Hence, the respondents were probably not likely to make tradeoffs among the attributes (as is done in the  simultaneous compensatory type model such as logit).  The authors, therefore, believed that a lexicographic approach probably more closely resembled the actual choice process of  the individuals. However, since only individual lexicographic models were available at that time, the prototype disaggregate  hierarchical (lexicographic) model HIARC was developed. The HIARC model, calibrated on one sample, was able to accurately  predict the actual mode choice of over 60% of the individuals in a hold-out sample. This was as good or better than other  existing disaggregate choice models such as logit.  About that same time, the paper by Tversky and Sattath (1979) appeared introducing the E$A/preference tree approach. In that  paper they discussed three aspects of choice modeling which supports and coincides with the authors' motivation for HIARC and  subsequently MLH. Tversky and Sattath (1979, p. 542) state "an examination of the empirical literature indicates that choice  behavior is often inconsistent, hierarchical and context dependent." (We shall refer to those observations again in the  development of the model.)  The prototype model HIARC, which requires only slightly more information per individual than the generalized extreme value  class of models to be operational, is compatible with many contemporary theories, and avoids the particularly troublesome  assumption of independence of irrelevant alternatives. HIARC is, however, a deterministic single criterion model. While both  HIARC and MLH are based on the same underlying concepts, this theory is expanded to include probabilities with which MLH, a  new model of this same general class, is developed. The probabilistic version is formulated here and can be shown to be a  concave programming problem for which the solution is globally optimal (Gensch & Svestka, 1983).  MLH is a multiattribute model. That is, alternatives are viewed as collections of attributes as opposed to entities. The  selection process involves the evaluation of the relative satisfaction of the alternative, attribute by attribute in  lexicographic order, where this order is defined by the individual's hierarchy of attributes, as in an individual  lexicographic model. Thus, in correspondence with Tversky's observation, the problem structure is assumed to be hierarchical.  As previously noted, there is general theoretical support for the concept of a hierarchical choice process in the  psychological literature. Empirical studies of the choice process indicate that lexicographic models are closer to the process  decision makers actually employ in making decisions (Russ, 1971; Perreault & Russ, 1977; Wright, 1975; Weitz & Wright, 1979).  Individuals seldom actually sum attribute values into a single score for each alternative and then select the alternative with  the highest score, as is implied by the compensatory type models.  The individuals are assumed to be logically consistent in that their choices are compatible with their attribute data. That  is, low satisfaction on all attributes of an alternative implies that the alternative is not selected. To be selected, an  alternative  MLH CHOICE MODEL 165  must possess high satisfaction on at least one attribute, or in some way be consistent with the attribute data. Just as in the  individual lexicographic model, no particular functional form through which the relative satisfactions are determined, is  assumed. The form is allowed to be of any type, linear or nonlinear with single or multiple criteria. These levels are the  realization of a process whose form may vary from individual to individual, whether it be purely economical or not, or whether  it be the result of single or multiple criteria. Since the individual processes are not the subject of study, knowledge of  their exact form is not required in this case.  Before considering Tversky's observation concerning context independence, it should be noted that MLH is a static model. The  process by which the decision is reached is not the subject of study; rather, the final decision is modeled by the responses  of the individuals, just as in the models of regressions, logit, and probit. Hence, the case where the individual revalues the  alternatives on the basis of past experience or new information prior to making his choice is not explicitly represented by  the static models. However, context independence in this static setting implies that any alternative not in the current set is  irrelevant and that the individuals make judgments based on absolute criteria. For individuals to behave in such a manner,  they must have perfect knowledge or complete and error free information. Having anything less allows new information to affect  the decision.  It is interesting to note that the context independent assumption, in addition to being heavily criticized as unrealistic in  the psychological literature, also is in direct conflict with the philosophy of systems theory. The context independence  assumption, in light of contemporary systems theory (Mesarovic, 1964; Ackoff, 1976), is equivalent to the assumption of an  environment free problem. Systems (collections of entities, working interdependently for a common purpose) are viewed as being  imbedded within their environments (spatial, physical, economic, political, social, etc.) which are affected by, and have an  affect upon, each other. The environment is never completely defined, but as parts of the problem are defined, they may be  included as part of the system. This last statement implies that system evolution may take place, which leads us to consider  another aspect of Tversky's observation-inconsistencies.  Models are inconsistent when under the same conditions and assumptions a replication of an experiment yields a different  result. This, in fact, often happens with the application of the logit model to a choice situation. Since the logit model is  based upon absolute judgements (that is, the choice set is assumed to contain all relevant alternatives) the inclusion of a  new "irrelevant" alternative should not have any effect on the situation but in fact often causes individuals to change their  choice in contradiction to the theory. Thus there is an inconsistency of choice under apparently identical circumstances. From  the contemporary systems view, these differences of choice are a result of the evolving environment. That is, there are no  identical circumstances (environments). As the decision environment changes, which it may with the introduction or elimination  of attributes or alternatives, or with the information processing of individuals, decisions made at one point in time are not  necessarily the same as decisions made at another point in time. In HIARC and  480/z8/z-a  166 GENSCH AND SVESTKA  MLH, the process is assumed to be time dependent. Thus, the models are based upon relative rather than absolute judgments. It  is not required, nor is it expected that the same choices will be made before and after the introduction of new information  into the process, or perhaps the reevaluation of the same data. It is assumed, however, that the effect of the environment  changes the system rater slowly so that the results of an application of the models are useful for a reasonable period of time  after which the models must be recalibrated.  MODEL DEVELOPMENT  Like all models MLH is imperfect in that it is incapable of assimilating all aspects of a choice environment, but the model is  at least consistent with that philosophy of choice discussed in the previous section.  In order to develop the MLH model, the concept of "aggregate threshold tolerances" (in some respects a generalization of  cutoff values or cut points in weak lexicographic models) will be presented. MLH in first employed to generate estimates of  statistical parameters for a population. These parameter estimates are subsequently used to predict the choices of other  individuals from the population. Thus in a decision problem it is assumed that there is a population of individuals, each of  which makes decisions according to his own lexicographic model. If it were possible to establish the cut points of the  population and determine the distributions of these cut points (one distribution for each attribute employed in the process)  then the statistical parameters of these distributions could be employed to make statements about the decision process. Since  this is not generally possible, some distribution parameters are estimated via sampling, but the process does not require the  a priori establishment of cut points by individual.  Consider the choice modeling situation where a random sample of individuals {n I n = 1, 2,..., N} from the population are  faced with a finite set of alternatives { j I j = 1, 2,..., J}, where each is evaluated by every individual with respect to a  finite and common set of attributes {i I i = 1, 2,..., I}. Each individual is assumed to possess a hierarchy of these  attributes which they express as inputs to the model as an ascending rank order of the I attributes. These ranks, denoted gi ,  represent the importance rank of attribute i to individual n. Furthermore, each individual is assumed able to quantify their  satisfaction with each alternative j with respect to each attribute in a cardinal number denoted A ~-. Finally, each  individual is assumed logically consistent so that their relative satisfactions A y are compatible with their selected  alternative, denoted j*.  There may be other salient attributes of the process not contained in the set {i t= 1, 2,...,I} and there may be other viable  alternatives not among the offered set of choices { j I j = 1, 2,..., J}. The introduction of such information through an  expansion of the model and a new set of inputs from the individuals may or may not affect a change in the rankings,  satisfactions, or chosen alternative by individuals. Thus the model is based upon relative rather than absolute criteria.  Errors in  MLH CHOICE MODEL 16)7  prediction of the model may be attributed at least in part to the possible inability of the model to represent the process by  the finite and common set of attributes.  In a lexicographic model an individual evaluates the set of alternatives attribute by attribute starting with their most  important or first ranked attribute. Further, the individual is assumed to possess a cut-off value for each attribute, below  which the alternative would be rejected. If more than one alternative remains after consideration of the first ranked  attribute, the remaining alternatives are evaluated relative to the next highest ranked attribute in the individual's  hierarchy and so on until all attributes have been processed and one or more alternatives remain.  Two approaches have been suggested as methods of estimating cut-off values. Einhorn (1970) suggested using a multiple  regression approach to estimate the cut-off values for disjunctive and conjunctive models. Attempts to implement this approach  failed because the variance associated with the estimated cut-off value was so large that the estimates were not statistically  significant. Weitz and Wright (1979) noting that a decade had passed without a successful statistical estimate of cut-off  values, employed a controlled experiment in which the respondent made a choice and then was asked if they used cut-off values  and the level of these cut-off values. The choice data were then statistically analyzed and it was found that respondents'  statements appeared to be very accurate as to whether or not they used cutoffs but were very inaccurate as to the values of  these cut-offs. If individuals really do make decisions using the sequential noncompensatory approach suggested by Tversky,  Simon, and others, the cut-off value recalled from short-term memory by the respondent may apply only to the alternatives  still left in the choice set at the time the cut-off value is determined and used. When this value is regressed over all  alternatives in the choice set the poor statistical fits found by Weitz and Wright may result. On the other hand, Weitz and  Wright's conclusion that individuals are not able to accurately recall the cut-off values they use may also be true. In any  event, the problem of how to estimate the cut-off values is currently unresolved, as is the process for aggregating these  estimates. Both of these issues are addressed by the MLH model.  While it is desirable to establish cut-off values for an individual, MLH does not require their exact value to be known. And,  in fact, one may arrive at a single alternative by employing an infinite variety of "cut-off values" as will be illustrated.  From a purely mathematical point of view, the number of cut points necessary to reduce a finite set of J alternatives to a  single alternative is at least 1 and at most J - 1, where each attribute eliminates at least one alternative. Any additional  attributes and their associated cut points will be either redundant or ineffective in the selection process. Since any of the  redundant or ineffective attributes are not required for the selection, their cut points may be replaced with any real numbers  greater than the original cut points, with no change in the resulting selected alternative. Thus for a given set of  alternatives, the cut point for attribute 5 may be all that is required for one individual, while the cut point for attribute  7 may be all that is required for another.  Since different attributes may affect different individuals the question is, does there exist a set of numerical values which  for a population of individuals has the same  168 GENSCH AND SVESTKA  selection effect as their individual set of cut points? These numerical values which are called aggregate threshold tolerances  are assumed to exist for the population of individuals.' The term threshold tolerances is used to distinguish from cut-off  values or cut points-cut points being one specific set of threshold tolerances for an individual. The term aggregate is used  to connote the fact that the tolerances are averages (not the means) or central tendency measures of statistical distributions.  In order to define these distributions, the individual values must be made compatible. Given two individuals it is unlikely  that even if they have identical hierarchies of attributes, they will have identical cardinal values (or origins and scales)  for their relative satisfactions of the alternatives A '. It is assumed that these numbers A " are nonnegative real numbers or  that they may be complemented and replaced with real numbers which satisfy this condition (so that A7.>,0). If aggregation is  to be affected, the information processed by two or more individuals must be compatible. Hence the standardized individual is  defined as a real number C where j ranges over all the alternatives which have not yet been eliminated. To explain further, at  the beginning of the choice process an individual considers the full set of alternatives denoted An, 0) = { j I j = 1, 2,...,  J}, where n indicates that the set corresponds to the individual n (or the nth individual in the sample) and zero indicates  that the alternative has been evaluated with respect to no attributes. After an individual applies his cut point for the first  ranked attribute to the alternatives, the set of alternatives (which may or may not be reduced) is denoted An, 1). In general,  after the application of the first k ranked attributes, the set is An, k). Thus the individual standardized values, which are  a function of those alternatives still under consideration, are defined as'  n maxMEJ(n,k)(A m) -A  Cij - n maxMEJ(n.k)(A tm)  Of course many other transformations of the numbers A are possible. However, this particular transformation corresponds to our  theory that individuals will rate all the retained alternatives relative to the "best" one remaining. This theory is shared by  Zeleny (1983) in his theory of the displaced ideal. It is clear that the standardized values are limited to the interval [0, 1  ] so that data from two or more individuals is compatible. It may also be observed that once the set An, k) is reduced to a  single alternative the values C,"~ remain fixed. (Note that due to the transformation, smaller values of C7. are more  desirable, indicating the jth alternative is close to the maximum value on attribute i.)  Consider now an individual's set of cut points. These also may be standardized as in the manner of the individual values with  no loss of generality. The standardized  ' Such a set of numerical values is assumed to exist, although a particular MLH model may not contain all the relevant  attributes necessary to represent them.  2 It should be noted that Eq. (1) represents a family of values, one for each level k. However, since the notation is already  too complex and the value of Eq. (1) when I = k ultimately determines the threshold tolerance, an increase in complexity of  the notation would likely add little to the presentation.  MLH CHOICE MODEL 169  individual cut points which also lie in the interval [0, 1 ] are denoted 'C', and are called individual tolerances. As in the  former transformation, smaller means better. It is these standardized individual cut points, r', which constitute the  aformentioned statistical distributions for a population of individuals.  The aggregate threshold tolerances, denoted r;, are central tendency parameters of these distributions which certain special  properties. MLH generates estimates of these parameters, denoted T;, which are called simply aggregate tolerances. The first  property to be discussed is the relation of the aggregate tolerances to the individual standardized values and the remaining  sets of alternatives.  Initially an individual n evaluates the set of alternatives with respect to his first ranked attribute i (i.e., g" = 1). It is  possible that of the original set of alternatives J(n, 0) = { j I =1, 2,..., J}, one or more alternatives will be eliminated.  An alternative will be eliminated if the individual's tolerance (standardized cut point), r" is less than the individual's  (standardized) value for the alternative with respect to that attribute. That is, alternative j will be eliminated if r" < C  and not eliminated if r! >, C7.. The set of remaining alternatives now consists of all those alternatives which were in the  set initially (i.e., j E J(n, 0)) and which were not eliminated by the first ranked attribute. Thus the set J(n, 1) is  mathematically defined as  J(n, 1)= jjjT"-C>>0; g"= I,jGJ(n,0)~ (2a)  or, in general, after evaluation by the first k ranked attributes  J(n, k) = { j I r" - C > 0; g" = k, j E J(n, k - 1) }, (2b) .1 1  where k may assume any of the values 1 to I, where I is the number of attributes. Consider now the definition of these sets  (2) where the individual tolerances r; are replaced by estimates of the distribution parameters, ri. The application of the  parameter estimates T; to the individual data will simulate the evaluation process for a set of individuals, and the  definition of the resulting sets of alternatives remaining (specifically the set resulting from an application of all the  attributes for each of the individuals).  There are two aspects of these individual sets to be considered. The first aspect which is called retention is the property  that an individual retain his selected alternative after applying the aggregate tolerance estimates to his data. The second  aspect, called discrimination, is the elimination of alternatives. If all but one alternative is eliminated and only the  chosen alternative is retained, perfect prediction is realized. Of course the application of an individual's own true  tolerances to his own data will result in perfect prediction, but MLH can only approximate the actual process. Thus, an  application of MLH may cause some individuals to retain more than one alternative, one of which may or may not be the chosen  alternative.  Since the only thing which can be controlled in the model is the value of the parameter estimates T;, the remaining special  properties of these estimates are identified. That is, the performance of the aggregate tolerance estimates T; should be as  close to the collective performance of the individual tolerances as possible, or  170 GENSCH AND SVESTKA  equivalently the estimates should cause each individual to approach perfect prediction. Perfect prediction implies two  conditions are met. Retention of the chosen alternative has occurred and all but one alternative has been eliminated (perfect  discrimination has occurred). But these two conditions are interacting since perfect discrimination may be affected at the  price of rentention, and perfect retention may be attained by zero discrimination.  In the next section a mathematical representation of this problem, which addresses the simultaneous maximization of retention  and discrimination, will be developed. This mathematical model generates aggregate tolerance estimates considering both  aspects implied by perfect prediction.  MLH FORMULATION  Since MLH is a probabilistic model, the concept of individual probabilities is developed first. It is clear by Eqs. (1) and  (2) that those individuals whose standardized values C7. are less than or equal to the aggregate tolerances on all attributes  retain their choice. Let X,, be a random variable associated with individual n with probabilities P(Xn = 1) =Pn and P(Xn = 0)  = 1 -p,, where Xn = 1 if the individual retains his choice and Xn = 0 if not. Then the probability function of the Bernoulli  random variable Xn is  P(xn)=Pn1 -Pn)1-x~  if xn = 0, 1,  = 0 otherwise.  Consider now the determination of these individual "retention" probabilities pn. Let  r =z;-C if r;>Q>0,  = 0 otherwise.  Note that variables r . are positive only if the individual retains the alternative; it must be retained with regard to the  first attribute (i = 1) and the second attribute (i = 2) and the third attribute, etc. Therefore, the mathematical equivalent  of this "logic" statement is a product of such terms.  Hence, define the variable v! as  v; _ H r = H max(r; - C7.; 0), (5)  where v! is positive if and only if rfj is positive for every i. Finally, defining vi , one for each element of the set of J  alternatives and taking the sum un,  J  un = Y vj . (6) j=1  MLH CHOICE MODEL 171  Finally, define the individual retention probabilities as pn, where j* denotes the individual's chosen alternative.'  when un > 0,  = 0 otherwise  This definition of the probabilities is conceptually correct since they are nonnegative real numbers whose sum (over the set  of alternatives) is unity, and when perfect prediction occurs, the probability assumes the value of one. Furthermore, their  behavior corresponds to what one would expect in the case of a discriminating attribute; as C7. approaches r; (as an attribute  value approaches the corresponding cut point) for at least one attribute, the probability of retaining the alternative  decreases.  In MLH the objective to be maximized is the likelihood function which for this problem is  N L(r1, rZ,..., r,) _ F1 pn"(I -pn)1 x". n=1  Essentially, the maximum likelihood estimators of the parameters z1, rz,...I r, (in this case TTZ,..., T,) will maximize the  probability of occurrence of the sample results. Since the variables xn = 0 or 1, it is clear that the maximal value of Eq.  (8) is unity, this value occurring at a point where the probability function is unity for all individuals. However, this is  the condition for maximum discrimination.  The complete formulation of MLH is now stated, where the pn are defined by Eq. (7).  N (9)  maximize L(T1, T2,..., T,) = 1 I pn"(I -P"),-X"   n=1   subject to   0<T,<1 i=1,...,I (10)  C(i n maxmEJ(n,k)(A m) -fl   _ (11)  - i, k = 1,..., I; j = 1,..., J; n = 1,..., N;   max.EJ(n,k)(A n   I%)   where   J(n, k) = { j I T; - C = - (12)  1i > 0; gn I k; j C J(n, k 1) }   for k = 1,..., I and J(n, 0) = { j = 1, 2,..., J}  This problem can be shown to be a concave programming problem whose solution is therefore globally optimal (Gensch & Svestka,  1983).  ' We take here the axiomatic approach and assume that the probabilities take Luce's choice axiom form given in Eq. (7). We  have found this form to be plausible and logically consistent with our theory as well as having exhibited good computational  results.  172 GENSCH AND SVESTKA  EMPIRICAL RESULTS  In this section, MLH and the prototype model HIARC are applied to three different data sets. Their computational ef1ficiency  is discussed, and their predictive performance compared. Finally, sample diagnostics from MLH are presented and discussed.  The three data sets analyzed are the data from the DOT study mentioned earlier in this paper, the data from an industrial  marketing study, and the data from an agriculture study.  The DOT study consisted of responses from some 2000 randomly selected users of the Santa Monica freeway. With around 90% of  the rush hour traffic consisting of single occupant autos, the goal of the study was to derive policies which would result in  multiple occupant ridership. The randomly selected users were offered the alternative of either continuing to drive their  individual cars, or ride share or take the bus where the latter 2 travel modes included exclusive access to high speed lanes  and other privileges. Each user was asked to rate the relative importance of 16 travel mode attributes on a 7-point scale, and  submit their rank order of importance of the attributes. A follow-up survey was taken to determine the actual travel mode  alternative actually selected.  The industrial marketing survey was conducted by a nationally known market research firm for a major supplier of the  electrical equipment (transformers, generators, switchgear, etc.) purchased by electrical utility companies. Respondents were  key decision makers at the various utilities. The purposes of the survey was to identify the product features and supplier  services most salient in the choice of suppliers by various segments of utility buyers. Each respondent was asked to rate the  relative importance of 21 product and service attributes in determining the purchase of a specific type of electrical  equipment. The respondent also provided his current perception of each supplier known to him using a poor to good scale on  each of the attributes per supplier. Line continuums provided a linear scale from 1 to 50 on each of the above respondents'  judgments. Other sections of the questionnaire included demographics of the firm and customers' interest in some specific new  product concepts. The response to the mail questionnaire was over 40%. A follow-up phone check of nonrespondents failed to  detect any significant nonresponse bias.  In the agriculture data set developed for the U.S. Department of Agriculture, a sample of 400 Iowa farmers identified their  favorite cooperative retail outlet and their favorite independent retail outlet. They rate each outlet in terms of 24  attributes and provided an importance ranking of the attributes relative to how important the particular attribute is in  determining at which retail outlet they would purchase their fertilizer. Farmers indicated at which retail outlet they made  their major fertilizer purchase during the given year. The attributes were factor analyzed so as to reduce the  multicollinearity in the data set. By observing the attribute loadings on the independent factors and the average importance  ranking of the attribute, 8 relatively independent and important attributes were selected as the independent variables for the  choice modeling. (See Gensch (1983) for details of how the attribute space was  MLH CHOICE MODEL 173  reduced.) The 400 observations were then randomly split into calibration and prediction (hold out) samples. This process was  done three times.  Since the data from all three studies were processed by computer coded representations of both the prototype and MLH models,  it is appropriate to briefly discuss some of the computational aspects of the models. HIARC, the prototype model, was  formulated as a nonlinear programming (NLP) problem in the form of an outside penalty function and solved by a quasi-Newton  type algorithm. The MLH model was also formulated as an outside penalty type NLP problem but was solved by an implementation  of Powell's conjugate directions algorithm. Both algorithms were coded in ASCII Fortran and run on the Sperry 1100  multiprocessor system at UWM. Average computation time for the calibration runs, which are the most time consuming, was 11 min  and 27 s (11:27) with a range of 1:12 to 17:51. The average time for a prediction run was 1 s with a range of 1 to 2 s. These  times are quite reasonable considering the very large number of data entries per data set which are iteratively processed and  are comparable to processing times of the simultaneous compensatory models such as logit codes. We now consider the predictive  performance of the models.  In this section predictive accuracy refers to perfect prediction or the number of individuals in a hold-out sample who, after  the application of a set of calibration tolerances (which were previously generated by an independent set of individuals),  retain exactly one alternative where the alternative retained is the chosen alternative. Discrimination refers to the number  of alternatives which are eliminated for a set of individuals. For example, if 10 individuals each have 2 alternatives in  their choice set and the model eliminates 10 of the 20 total alternatives leaving exactly one alternative for each individual,  100% or perfect discrimination would have occurred. Now MLH will attain perfect discrimination in a calibration run, but the  application of the tolerances generated from a calibration sample and applied to a totally independent holdout sample  generally results in less than perfect performance.  Table 1 contains a summary of the predictive and discriminant performance of both models on subsets of data taken from all  three studies. It should be noted that MLH performance dominates that of HIARC in both discrimination and prediction in all  cases except for the prediction of sample 2 in the two alternative cases where MLH predicted 125 correctly and HIARC 127. It  should be also noted that while discrimination was generally not perfect, the worst case was 93% in Table lc. which  corresponded to 17 of the 100 individuals retaining multiple alternatives in both cases. Clearly, both models predict well in  comparison to pure chance in which case the entries in the mean rows for prediction of Tables la, b, and c should be compared  to 50, 33, and 25 %, respectively.  Both models provide the user with a large array of diagnostic information not common to the simultaneous models. The attribute  aggregate tolerances and their variances are given as well as the mean ranks of the attributes. Those attributes which are  most salient in the decision process tend to be ones with a high average importance ranking (indicating the attribute is one  of the first considered by most individuals) and has a low average aggregate tolerance (indicating a very  174 GENSCH AND SVESTKA TABLE 1  Holdout sample % Discrimination % Prediction  Number Size MLH HIARC MLH HIARC  (a) Agriculture Study: 2 Alternatives, 8 Attributes   1 150 97.33 78.00 88.00 73.33  2 150 98.00 45.00 83.33 84.66  3 101 100.00 82.17 87.13 74.26  Mean 98.44 69.39 86.15 77.19  (b) DOT Study: 3 Alternatives, 10 Attributes   1 100 99.00 64.00 64.00 51.00  2 100 94.50 54.00 46.00 33.00  Mean 96.75 59.00 55.00 42.00  (c) Industrial Marketing Study: 4 Alternatives, 16 Attributes   1 10 93.00 62.00 46.00 37.00  2 100 93.00 57.00 52.00 40.00  Mean 93.00 59.50 49.00 38.50  discriminating attribute). Only the alternative with the highest rating on this attribute and the alternatives with attribute  scores very close to the highest value will be retained. MLH also computes the individual and aggregate probabilities of  retention and summary statistics on the performance of a given set of tolerances in terms of discrimination, retention, and  prediction. MLH also generates a report stating the number of alternatives correctly and incorrectly eliminated on the first,  second, and subsequent passes (each pass corresponding to the individual's rank of the attributes) of the model, and a report  which lists the number of alternatives correctly and incorrectly eliminated by the attributes. Such information is helpful in  determining the effective number of attributes necessary to reduce the set of alternatives to the selected alternative and the  most salient attributes, respectively.  Table 2 contains a sample of the diagnostic information generated by the MLH model-namely the attribute discrimination report  from the agriculture study data (sample 3). An examination of column 2 of Table 2 shows that attributes 1, 2, and 8 do most of  the elimination with 80% of all the alternatives eliminated. Also observe that in a comparison of column 3 to column 2, these  attributes are correct in their elimination, respectively, 100, 90.9, and 81 % of the time. Thus, the tolerances 1, 2, and 8  would be considered good predictors and their corresponding attributes the most salient. Conversely, attribute 4, with 10.89%  elimination but with only 64% correct, or attributes 3, 5, and 6 which eliminate no alternatives at all would be considered  the least salient. These presumptions are substantiated by the fact that the tolerances for attributes l, 2, and 8 are  relatively small with small variances while the tolerances for attributes 3 and 5 are either large or have large variances or  both. It is  MLH CHOICE MODEL 175  TABLE 2 Attribute Discrimination Agriculture Study  Attribute No. alternatives No. correctly % of total  No. eliminated eliminated eliminated  1 36 36 35.64  2 22 20 21.78  3 0 0 0  4 11 7 10.89  5 0 0 0  6 0 0 0  7 11 8 10.89  8 21 17 20.79  also interesting to note that the first three mean ranked attributes are in order 8, 1, 2, and 4, which do nearly 90% of the  elimination. The 90% figure is an indication that, on the average, the information contained by the individual's first four  ranked attributes is enough to predict the individual's choice.  SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS  The MLH model is derived on the basis of relative rather than absolute judgments. Thus, the apparent difficulty of  inconsistent behavior under "apparently identical circumstances" is tenable since it is virtually impossible to ever duplicate  the circumstances. Alternatives, attributes, and decision objectives changes with time and the decision processes of different  choice makers. This view is in consonance with contemporary systems theory, where the system is always considered to be  interacting with its environment.  The model is hierarchical; that is, the data are processed sequentially in accordance with each respondent's prespecified  attribute importance rankings. This type of processing is presumed by many to more closely approximate the actual thought  process than the linear additive or other simultaneous models which convert the attribute data into a single real number by a  real function of an assumed form.  The MLH model is applicable to the same situation that the regression and logit models are applicable. However, since the MLH  model gives information on individual performance it may be of particular value in certain cases. Furthermore, it is  postulated that MLH may be better suited than the current models if the individuals are not trading off attributes.  The MLH model generates maximum likelihood estimates of the population parameters, which when applied to data from three  separate studies were shown to be superior to the prototype model in their ability to predict individual choices. The MLH  model offers a large and totally different set of useful diagnostic information in relation to the current simultaneous choice  models. Identification of which attributes  176 GENSCH AND SVESTKA  are good or poor predictors, and statistical information on how many ranked attributes are effectively employed by individuals  to reduce the set of alternatives to their choice, is given. Such information can be important in the determination of salient  attributes and the generation of new viable alternatives. Finally, the performance and probabilistic basis of the MLH model  make it superior to the prototype.  DIRECTIONS FOR FURTHER DEVELOPMENT  The disaggregate probabilistic hierarchical choice model presented in this article serves as the basis for additional  development by the authors and hopefully others. Two broad areas of further development are envisioned. First, empirical  applications of MLH and a comparison of results with existing choice models ought to be investigated. Since the EBA/preference  tree approach is designed to handle noncommon attributes and MLH is designed to handle common intervally scaled attributes, it  is clear the models are designed for very different problem structures. Thus, a direct comparison of predictive accuracy on  the same data set between MLH and a preference tree model is not feasible or meaningful. However, most of the choice models  that estimate individual probabilities by a function that treats the attributes simultaneously in a compensatory framework use  the same intervally scaled attribute data as MLH. Thus, one can compare an approach such as logit to the hierarchical  noncompensatory structure assumed by MLH. Using the same procedure by which HIARC was compared to logit (Gensch & Svestka,  1979), we have compared MLH and logit. Under the assumption that the alternative with the highest individual probability is  the respondent's predicted chosen alternative, MLH correctly predicted 163 of the 250 (65.2%) of the holdout sample. This  compares to 144 out of 250 (57.6%) for logit. This results is not surprising since, as was previously reported, HIARC did  slightly better than logit on this particular data set and, as this article reports, MLH is a substantial improvement on  HIARC. This result is not to be generalized to other data sets. It is our belief that certain individuals making certain  decisions are more likely to use a hierarchical model than a simultaneous compensatory model and vice versa. Therefore, the  really interesting empirical work will be to test hypotheses concerning the conditions under which a particular choice model  structure is more appropriate than another for a set of decision makers. It is our belief that most populations of decision  makers contain members using different choice structures. Can we find variables such as the individual's knowledge of the  problem area, frequency of making this decision, and demographics that will enable the researcher to a priori segment a  population into various choice modeling structures, thereby increasing the predictive accuracy and at the same time making the  diagnostic information on the attribute structure more revealing of the underlying behavioral processes involved?  Another possible segmentation scheme that should be empirically investigated is the grouping of respondents by similar  attribute importance hierachies. This should increase the discrimination (eliminate more alternatives in a holdout sample).  MLH CHOICE MODEL 177  A second major thrust of empirical work will be the evaluation of model modifications. By use of weighting schemes cut points  could be made a function of the importance level of the attribute. How do models which have wide tolerances on highest ranked  attributes and tight tolerances on less important attributes predict relative to models which reverse this pattern? Cut points  could also be influenced by the demographic characteristics of the respondent or situational context of the decision.  Hopefully by subjecting the various hypotheses to empirical testing, on more than one data set, theory on the role of the  hierarchical process in measuring and understanding choice patterns will emerge.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  This research was supported in part by a grant from the National Science Foundation, Contract 8023430. We are also indebted to  the journal editor and the referees for their insight, comments, and constructive criticism. They clearly invested  considerable effort in their reviews which enabled us to make significant improvements in our paper.  REFERENCES  ACKOFF. R. L. (1976). Redesigning the future, a systems approach to societal problems. New York: Wiley.  BILLHEIMER, J., BULLEMER, R., & FRATESSA, C. (1977). The Santa Monica freeway diamond lanes, volume I: summary. Springfield,  Va: National Technical Information Service.  EINHORN, H. J. _ (1970). The use of nonlinear, noncompensatory models in decision making. Psychological Bulletin, 73 (3),  221-230.  GENSCH, DENNIS (1983). Iowa coperative fertilizer retail outlets: Farmers' attitudes and perceptions (Agriculture Cooperative  Service Research Report 29. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture.  GENSCH, D., & SVESTKA, J. (1979). An exact hierarchical algorithm for determining aggregate statistics from individual choice  data. Management Science, 25 (10), 939-952.  GENSCH, D., & SVESTKA, J. (1983). Proof of concavity for the maximum likelihood hierarchical choice model (Working Paper  83-04). School of Business, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee.  LUCE, R. D., & SUPPES, P. (1965). Preference, utility, and subjective probability. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, & E. Galantar  (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical psychology (Vol. III). pp. 249-344). New York: Wiley.  MCFADDEN, D. (1974). Conditional logic analysis of qualitative choice behavior. In P. Zarembka (Ed.), Frontiers in  econometrics. New York: Academic Press.  MCFADDEN, D., TALVITIE, A., COSSLETT, S., HASAN, I., JOHNSON, M., REID, F., & TRAIN, K. (1978). Demand model estimation and  validation. Institute of Transportation Studies, Urban Travel Demand Forecasting Project Final Report (Vol. 5). University of  California, Berkeley.  MESAROVIC, M. D. (ED.), (1964). Views on general systems theory. New York: Wiley.  NEWELL, A., & SIMON, H. A. (1972). Human problem solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Russ, F. A. (1971). Consumer  evaluation of alternative product models. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Carnegie-Mellon University.  PERREAULT, W. D., & Russ, F. A., (1977). Comparing Multiattribute Evaluation Process Models. Behavioral Science, 3, 162-174.  TVERSKY, A. (1972). Choice by elimination. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 9, 341-367.  178 GENSCH AND SVESTKA  TVERSKY, A. (1975). A critique of expected utility theory: Descriptive and normative considerations. Erkenntis, 9, 163-173.  TVERSKY, A., & SATTAATH, S. (1979). Preference trees. Psychological Review, 86 (6), 542-573. WEITz, B., & WRIGHT P. (1979).  Retrospective self-insight on factors considered in product evaluation. Journal of Consumer Research, 6, 280-294.  WRIGHT. P. (1975). Consumer choice strategies: Simplifying vs optimizing. Journal of Marketing Research, 12, 60.67.  ZELENY, M. (1982). Multiple criteria decision making. New York: McGraw-Hill.  RECEIVED: December 10, 1982