10.1016/0022-2496(84)90023-3
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 28, 121-159 (1984  A Model of Fixed Activation Time Scheduling  DAVID BIRCH  University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign  A model for the fixed activation time scheduling of events is presented. Activation time is defined as the time needed for an  event to regain dominance in the stream of events measured from the point in time at which it lost dominance. The fixed  activation time scheduling rule states that some event must be ongoing at all times, that an ongoing event will continue until  interrupted by another event, that every event has a predetermined activation time and that fulfilling the activation time  requirement is the necessary and sufficient condition for an event to interrupt an ongoing event. The last condition sets this  rule apart from those employed in quequeing theory since it does not allow events to be completed or queues to form.  Derivations from the model concerning the dynamic organization of the stream of events, written in terms of the frequency and  duration of events and the transitions between pairs of events, are given. Special attention is paid to issues that arise in  deciding on the coding of events. It is suggested that the fixed activation time scheduling rule will apply to a wide variety  of settings, environmental and behavioral, and this is illustrated by a detailed application of the model to observations on  c~ 1984 Academic Press, Inc.  1. INTRODUCTION  Many environments faced by human beings are structured by the scheduling of events. Most of these environments are  characterized by complex schedules composed of interrelated component schedules of different types; consider, for example, the  working environment of a modern automated system in which a supervisor-monitor faces recurring demands from a variety of tasks  (Sheridan & Johannsen, 1976; Morgan, 1981). Behavior, also, is often scheduled, sometimes in response to scheduled  environments but at other times apparently as a consequence of internal processes not obviously related to environmental  events (Staddon & Simmelhag, 1971; Timberlake & Allison, 1974).  The position taken in the theoretical developments to follow is that progress toward understanding how complex schedules  operate, whether in regard to environments or behavior, will be enhanced by the investigation of simple idealized schedules  that either approximate complex schedules or appear as components in them. One such schedule, called a fixed activation time  schedule, has been chosen for study here. We shall begin by describing the system responsible for the scheduling, go  The research was supported in part by Contract DAAG29-83-K-0138 with the U.S. Army Research Office. Requests for reprints  should be sent to David Birch, Department of Psychology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 603 E. Daniel, Champaign,  Illinois 61820.  0022-2496/84 $3.00  Copyright C 1984 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  122 DAVID BIRCH  on to develop a model of that system and end with an application of the model to a set of behavioral observations.  2. A FIXED ACTIVATION-TIME SCHEDULE  Consider a closed system composed of K events EE2,..., E, in which the onset of each event is governed by a predetermined  activation time, defined as the interval between the termination of the event and its recurrence. In the system under  consideration an event begins with the completion of its activation time and continues until another event completes its  activation time and supplants it. The same rule holds for a conjunction of events, defined as the set of events that complete  their activation times together. When set in motion, these processes result in a scheduling of the events through time.  The scheduling rule just described is not among the 113 scheduling rules listed and described by Panenalkar and Iskarder  (1977) in the context of the assignment of jobs to machines in a production system. The reason, most likely, is that the  problems addressed by scheduling rules designed for the manufacturing process revolve around the question of how best to  handle queueing. At its most fundamental level fixed activation time scheduling does not permit queueing. The very nature of  the phenomena under consideration requires that a newly arriving event automatically displaces the presently ongoing event. At  another level, however, problems of queueing do arise and must be dealt with, namely during a time period that a conjunction  of incompatible events is ongoing.  Fixed activation time scheduling is not proposed as an optimizing solution (the most common reason for formulating scheduling  rules in the face of queueing), but rather as a succinct way of describing certain dynamic systems. It can be found to  operate, at least approximately, in a wide variety of settings. For example, managers of athletic teams forced to operate with  limited rosters place players on inactive lists for fixed periods of time and reactivate them according to schedule, thereby  sending other players to inactive lists for their fixed periods of time. A hockey coach who wants as fresh a player as  possible in action at each position at all times would keep a player on the ice only until his replacement had recuperated on  the bench. This procedure would result in a form of fixed activation time scheduling since the completion of recuperation time  for a player would be the condition for that player to replace his teammate in the game. The same kind of system can be seen  to hold for certain methods of granting vacations or leaves of absence, for rotating the chairmanship of committees, and for  the numerous situations in which individuals must report to a central office on a regular basis.  A good example of the fixed activation time scheduling of an environment is found in the following idealized work setting of a  supervisor-monitor located at a node in an information transmitting organization. This person receives updated information  about the state of the system from several sources, processes each type of information and sends the result on to the next  level in the organization. Queueing does not occur because each new input of information from a source renders the present  information  FIXED ACTIVATION TIME SCHEDULING MODEL 123  from that source obsolete and requires a new assessment of the state of the system in terms of that source. More concretely,  think of several individuals reporting to a supervisor. Upon arrival each presents a report and is available to work with the  supervisor until the arrival of the next reporting person. At that point the individual on the scene is given a new  information gathering assignment by the supervisor and sent off. In this example the activation times would be identified with  the times set for information gathering and an event as an individual available to work with the supervisor. A consequence of  this system is that there would always be at least one individual with current information available to the supervisor and at  least one in the process of gathering new information. The times allowed for gathering new information would be fixed for each  individual but the time during which each individual worked with the supervisor would be variable.  To the extent that the schedule governing the information inputs to the supervisor dictates the behavior of the supervisor the  same rule will describe both sets of events. Environmental and behavioral scheduling, however, need not be externally imposed  since explicit self-imposed scheduling, as in planning, can also occur. And beyond this is the possibility that free behavior,  unconstrained by explicit scheduling, is nonetheless governed implicitly by a scheduling process in which activities surface  in the stream of behavior as a consequence of the completion of their activation times. The most challenging aspect of  attempting to understand free behavior is that it is not possible to tie specific behaviors to specific environmental events  and that, in fact, a stream of activities is found under conditions of an apparently constant environment. In a later section,  data based on observations of free behavior made by Timberlake (1969) will be analyzed in terms of fixed activation time  scheduling.  By modelling, we can obtain a description of the ever changing sequence of events that follows from the scheduling process. In  the hockey example we achieve an overall description of the operation of the coach's system of substitution. For the  supervisor subjected to explicity imposed scheduling we achieve a description of the complex, dynamic environment in which  that individual is living. In the case of behavior unconstrained by explicit environmental scheduling the model provides a way  of determining the extent to which even free behavior is organized according to these principles of scheduling.  3. THE MODEL  A simple example of the way in which the model works is contained in Table 1. Let El, EZ , E3 , and E, be the events scheduled  with activation times of a, = 3, a, = 7, a3 = 9, and a, = 11, respectively, and let time in the protocol be measured in  discrete units (e.g., in sec) and counted by integers. Assume arbitrarily that, at the beginning of the interval of  observation, E, has just replaced E, as the ongoing event. This means that E, begins the interval of observation with its full  activation time of 7 time units but that E3 and E, begin with residual activation times, say 3 and 1 time units, respectively.  124 DAVID BIRCH  TABLE 1  Segment of a Domain of Scheduled Events Generated by the Model for Events EEZ, Eand E, with Activation Times a, = 3, az =  7, a3 = 9, a4 = 11  Time E, Residual Activation Times" E4 Ongoing Event Duration   E, E3     0 * 7 3 1 E, 1  1 3 6 2 * E4 2  3 1 4 * 11 E3 1  4 * 3 9 10 E, 3  7 3 * 6 7 E2 3  10  7 3 4 E, 3  13 3 4 * 1 E3 1  14 2 3 9 * E4 2  16 * 1 7 11 E, 1  17 3 * 6 10 E, 3  20  7 3 7 E, 3  23 3 4  4 E, 3  26  1 9 1 E, 1  27 3 * 8 * E2.4 3  30  7 5 11 E, 5  35 3 2  6 E3   The ongoing event is marked by an asterisk.  Table 1 shows how a sequence of events is generated as the activation times for the four events are reduced over time. The  first column of Table 1 records the successive clock readings for the event changes and the next four columns specify the  currently ongoing event (marked by an asterisk) and the residual activation times for the other events. The next to the last  column shows the sequence of events and the last column the duration of each event each time it was present.  The event sequence presented in Table 1 is terminated after 35 time units but this protocol is sufficient to illustrate that  the model, built upon fixed activation times for events, is capable of producing considerable complexity and variability. The  protocol also includes, at clock reading 27, a conjunction of EZ and E4 whose activation times have terminated together. The  consequences of a conjunction, what it might imply and how it might appear to the eye, can be expected to depend on the nature  of the events. Incompatible events in conjunction pose a conflict whereas events that are compatible can occur together. In  either case the outcome could be a compromise or emergent event. In the derivations to follow, conjunctions will be included  as specifiable states without any attempt, initially, to relate these states to observable data. If the process used in Table  1 is continued to time point 539, the pattern present at the beginning of the event sequence will be found to recur. Such  loops are characteristic of fixed activation time scheduling; the totality of such loops constitute the domain defined by a  scheduling rule.  FIXED ACTIVATION TIME SCHEDULING MODEL 125  Analysis of the Scheduling of K Events  The process illustrated in Table 1 is based on a scheduling rule with four parts: (1) At any moment in time some event, or  conjunction of events, must be ongoing. (2) Each event, or conjunction of events, continues until supplanted by another event,  or by a conjunction of other events. (3) Each event has a predetermined activation time. (4) Fulfilling the activation time  requirement is the necessary and sufficient condition for an event to supplant an ongoing event.  Under this rule each event is considered to be in one of two mutually exclusive states at each point in time, either ongoing  (i.e., active) or not ongoing (i.e., dormant). Thus, the protocol for a single event observed across time would show  alternating intervals in which the event was "on" and "off" and the same would be true for each event individually in a  K-event stream. The complete protocol for the stream of K events is achieved by meshing together the K individual streams each  of which is of the on--off form.  Condition (1) imposed under the fixed activation time scheduling rule prohibits all events from being dormant at the same  time, thereby disallowing empty spaces in the protocol of active events. Condition (2) establishes fixed activation time  scheduling as a pure interruption model derived out of a process of changing dominance relations among events under conditions  where no event is ever completed. Such a system stands in contrast with the pure completion models of queueing theory in which  an ongoing event (e.g., a job on a machine) must be completed before the next event can take over. It shares some  characteristics with queueing models that include preempting rules but these models remain oriented to events that can be  completed (Conway, Maxwell & Miller, 1967).  Conditions (3) and (4) set the priorities by which events displace one another. The activation time for an event is at full  value when the event, or the conjunction of events of which it is a member, is replaced in the stream and, when the activation  time runs down to zero, the event resurfaces. Condition (3) requires that the activation time for an event be fixed and not  result from a stochastic process, though this alternative version of the model should also be investigated. By fixing the  activation times for events, the effects due to the operation of the scheduling rule itself can be isolated. It is of interest  in this regard that fixed activation times yield both variable on-times and variable off-times for events. The reasons for  this will be taken up as the details of the model are developed. Condition (4) extends condition (2) by identifying the  activation time for an event with the time required for that event to regain dominance.  In principle, the fixed activation time scheduling rule can be used with an infinite number of events and with time treated as  a continuous variable; we shall, however, consider only a finite number of events and treat time as a discrete variable. The  major reason for doing so is that in those circumstances where the model might be expected to apply the data will almost  surely be in a finite event-discrete time form, whether it is a dynamic environment or a stream of behavior that is under  study. The time units used will be dictated by the subject matter and will reflect the time scale  126 DAVID BIRCH  believed to be appropriate to the processes under investigation. In modelling such processes, it seems best to match the time  scale of the model to that of the subject matter.  Developing methods for matching theoretical protocols to observed protocols across time is a very important long term goal for  the analysis of event sequences (Sankoff & Kruskal, 1983); a more immediate goal is the derivation of equations that relate  summary characteristics of event sequences, such as the frequency and duration of events, to the activation time parameters of  the model. We begin with  Frequency. Theoretically, for a finite number of events and with time specified in discrete units the number of times an event  occurs in the domain defined by a particular set of activation times is equal to the number of different configurations of  residual activation times for the other events that are permissible at the time the event becomes ongoing. It will be  convenient to refer to these configurations of residual activation times as starting patterns.  The number of starting patterns possible for any given event out of a set of K events (EE2,..., EK) with activation times a,  < a2 < ... < aK, respectively, can be represented by the appropriate section of a K-dimensional orthogonal polyhedron which  has as the lengths of its sides the activation times for the K events. Two restrictions on this polyhedron are imposed to  arrive at the appropriate section: (1) because some event, or conjunction of events, must be ongoing at all times, the  original polyhedron must be reduced to one of at most K - 1 dimensions; and (2) because a starting pattern is defined at the  point in time when an event change takes place, at least one event must have a residual activation time equal to its full  value.  Figure 1 depicts the appropriate section of the 4-dimensional orthogonal polyhedron for activity E, using the example  presented in Table 1. The complete set of starting patterns for E, is contained in the front, left, and top slices of a  3dimensional orthogonal polyhedron with width, height, and depth of 7, 9, and 11 units, respectively. The resulting count of  the occurrences of E, is  N(E.) = (7)(9)(11) - (6)(8)(10) = 213.  The number of different starting patterns possible for E, for a domain of K events is easily determined by extending and  generalizing the example shown in Fig. 1. Since E, is ongoing, the polyhedron of interest is of K - 1 dimensions with (a2) ...  (a,) cells, out of which (a2 - 1) ... (a,{ - 1) cells represent starting patterns that are not permissible because they fail  to include at least one event for which the residual activation time is at full value. Therefore, the total number of  different starting patterns for E, , which is the same as the total number of occurrences of E, in the domain, is given by  N(E 1) = (a 2) ... (aK) - (a 2 - 1) ... (aK - l)'  FIXED ACTIVATION TIME SCHEDULING MODEL 127 1  E3  7 6----2 1  E2  FIG. 1. Frequency of event E, specified in terms of the activation times for events EZ, Eand E, for the example of fixed  activation-time scheduling given in Table 1.  For some purposes this expression is more conveniently written as  N(Ei)=H(ak)- H(ak-1) a, a, - 1 '  where j7 (ak) stands for the product of the K activation times and F1 (ak - 1) for the product of the K activation times each  reduced by one.  The equations for N(E,), N(E3),..., N(E,) are derivable by the procedure used for N(E,). In each case the number of different  starting patterns is given by the section of the K-dimensional orthogonal polyhedron that remains after the cells associated  with the ongoing event and the nonpermissible starting patterns are removed. The result, written for any event i (i = 1,  2,..., K), is  N(EI) = H (ak) - H (ak - 1) . (2) ai ai - 1  The numbers of conjunctions of the different types can be determined by the same procedure. The presence of a conjunction of  E, and E2, denoted as E,.2, requires that the activation times for E, and E2 have terminated together. Assume that this  conjunction persists until one of the events E3, E.., E, or one of the conjunctions E3,, through E3.,,...,X replaces it.  Then N(E,,2) is given by the (K-2)-dimensional orthogonal polyhedron with (a3) ... (aK) cells of which (a3 - 1) ... (a, - 1)  do not  128 DAVID BIRCH  provide permissible starting patterns because they do not include at least one event with an activation time at its full  value. This results in  N(Ei,2)=(a3)...(a. -(a3-1) ... (a,-1)  or  (ak) _ H (ak - 1)  N(E~'2) __ F1 (a,)(a2) (a, - 1)(a2- 1)'  and in general for any two events, i:,6 j,  N(Ei.j) = f-I (ak) - fJ (ak - 1)  (ai)(ai) (ai- 1)(aj - 1) .  The set of higher order conjunctions is composed of all combinations of the K events taken three, four, up to and including K  - 1 at a time and the equations specifying the numbers of the various conjunctions continue the form already established by  which the equation for each conjunction is written in terms of the activation times for the events not in the conjunction. For  example, the frequency of the conjunction of EE2, and E3 is  N(Ei,2.3) = (a4) ... (aK) - (a4 - 1) ... (aK - 1)  and that of the conjunction of all events except E, (i.e., the conjunction of E2, E3,..., EK) is  N(E2.3_.,K) = a, - (a, - 1) = 1.  The sum of the complete set of frequencies for the K events and their conjunctions defines the total frequency N for a domain.  The quantity N designates the size of the domain defined by the scheduling process for K events by counting all the  occurrences of events and conjunctions in which each starting pattern is unique. It is in the nature of this process that  every configuration of residual activation times in the event sequence is preceded and followed by its own unique pair of  configurations of residual activation times. Since the process results in loops, as was illustrated in the context of Table l,  not all possible configurations of residual activation times or starting patterns are necessarily attained for any given  starting pattern. Because every residual activation time configuration is an element of one and only one loop, however, the  complete set of residual activation time configurations for any domain, including the complete set of starting patterns, can  be obtained by aggregating.  To determine the sum N, the total frequency of all single events and event conjunctions in the domain, look first at the sum  of the first terms of the complete set of frequency equations. This sum, when grouped suitably, produces an expression made up  of the sum of the K activation times taken singly plus the sums of the products of all possible combinations of the K  activation times taken 2, 3, 4, through  FIXED ACTIVATION TIME SCHEDULING MODEL 129  K - 1 at a time, an expression that simplifies to (a, + 1) ... (ax + 1) - (a,) (aK) - 1. An expression of the same form,  differing only in that each aa2,..., a, is replaced by its corresponding (a, - 1), (a2 - 1), ..., (a, - 1), can be written  for the sum of the second terms across all the equations. Subtracting the second of these two expressions from the first yields  N=(a,+1)...(a,+1)-2(a,)...(aK)+ (a,-1) ...(aK-1). (a)  The number of transitions between all pairs of events for the domain can also be determined by counting the appropriate  starting patterns. The derivations, however, are cumbersome so only the results will be presented here. Details of the  derivations are in Appendix A.  The transition frequency from E, to E2 is found to be  N(E, E2) = (a3 - 1) ... (aK - 1)  and the same form of equation holds for all the transition frequencies. For any two events, Ei and Ej, the transition  frequency from E; to Ej for the domain defined by the activation times a, < a2 < ... < aK is  N(EiEj) = F1 (ak - 1) (a, - 1)(a; - 1)  Transition frequencies from events to conjunctions, and vice versa, continue this form of equation. For example, the number of  transitions from E, to the conjunction E2,3 is N(E,E2,3) = (a, - 1) ... (aK - 1) or, using the alternative notation,  11(ak-1)  N(EI E2,3) _ (al - 1)(a2 - 1)(a3 - 1) .  Symmetry in the expected transition frequencies between pairs of events and their conjunctions can be observed in these  equations. This characteristic holds for all transitions and should prove very helpful in evaluating the fit of the model to  data and in identifying specific aspects of the model that are responsible for misfits when they occur.  Duration. Appendix A contains the derivations of equations that relate the time characteristics of event scheduling to the  activation times. The resulting expressions are quite simple. The total duration of any event defined for the domain specified  by the activation times a, < a2 < ... < arc is equal to the product of the activation times for all the other events. Thus,  the total duration of E, is T(E,) = (a2) ... (a,), or  T(EI) _ Haak)  130 DAVID BIRCH  and, in general, we can write  T(E;) = HQak) (6)  Similarly, the total duration of any conjunction is found to be the product of the activation times for all the events not  involved in the conjunction.  The sum of the total durations for all events and all conjunctions is the total duration for the domain and has the value  T= (a, +1) ... (ax+1)-(a,) ...(a,)-1.  4. ISSUES OF FIXED ACTIVATION TIMES, COMBINING  CLASSES AND CONJUNCTIONS  The model for fixed activation time scheduling as presented so far begins with a specified set of events each of which is  governed by an activation time with a fixed value. The requirement of fixed activation times, however, is likely to be  unrealistic for many situations where the model might be of use and it would be helpful if this requirement could be  eliminated or at least weakened. One way to do this is to conceive of the activation times that enter into the model as the  average or summary of a set of variable individual activation times. This is the line of thinking that will now be developed.  Variable activation times for an event could be introduced into the model by treating each activation time as a random  variable and proceeding with standard statistical methods. Variability introduced in this way would lack a rationale from  within the model itself; it would be externally imposed. Another possibility would be to maintain fixed activation times but  to make their values conditional on the ongoing event or conjunction of events. This would generalize the model and allow for  nonsymmetric transition frequencies between events but it would introduce a great deal of complexity in the model and require  that additional parameter values be determined from data. It seems preferable at this stage in the development of the model to  use unconditional fixed activation times to establish a uniform referent for evaluating the model. The most attractive  alternative, because it appeals to the processes of the model itself as the source of variability, is to view events as  potentially divisible into independent subunits each of which has its own fixed activation time. This forces consideration of  levels of analysis of events and raises the question of how the classical problems of combining classes of events are to be  dealt with by the model (Bush, Mosteller, & Thompson, 1954; Sternberg, 1963). It is to this alternative that we now turn.  Out of the set of K events EE2,..., Ex select a subset of size J and treat this subset as a single composite event Ec so  that the subset events retain their individual functioning in the model but are not distinguished in the coding of the events.  We are interested in discovering the relationship between the activation time for E, (i.e., ac)  FIXED ACTIVATION TIME SCHEDULING MODEL 131  and the activation times for the events in the subset defining Ec. We will seek this relationship using the total durations  for events, rather than their frequencies, because the total duration of Ec is the sum of the durations of the subset events  and this is not the case for frequencies.  It is not possible to proceed with the derivation without first deciding how conjunctions of events are to be handled,  something for which there can be no single rule since the nature of the events matters. We will investigate two quite  different interpretations of conjunctions in the model, both of which can be illustrated using the supervisor-monitor example  from the Introduction.  Let us assume in the example that it is more important for the supervisor to have updated information of one type over another  so that different individuals operate under different deadlines for reporting, that is, they have different activation times.  The system operates so that at least one person is always available to work with the supervisor, remaining there until one or  more other individuals return to report. A conjunction of events occurs whenever two or more individuals arrive at the same  The simplest situation is one in which conjunctions of events do not produce conflict; that is, the events are compatible with  each other. For example, no conflict arises if the supervisor is able to work simultaneously with more than one reporting  person. If, however, that is not the case, conflict results. There are many ways in which such conflicts might be resolved  (e.g., as instances of a queueing problem) but we will assume that when a conjunction occurs the conflict is resolved to favor  the individual with the most important information and therefore the shortest deadline. Thus, the two cases we shall consider  are: (1) events are compatible and conjunctions result in the simultaneous occurrence of the conjoined events and (2) events  are incompatible so that conjunctions result in conflict and the conflicts are resolved in favor of the event with the  shortest activation time.  Appendix B presents the derivations of the equations appropriate to both cases. In the first, and simpler, case of compatible  events the total duration of an event in the domain is given by the sum of the durations of all occurrences of the event  whether singly or conjoined with other events. In the second case, the events must be ordered with respect to their activation  times and the total duration of each event occurring singly must be augumented by the sum of the durations of the conjunctions  of that event with all events of longer activation times in all possible combinations.  Compatible Events  In the reference domain of K events the equations for the total durations of the events (Appendix B) are  T(E,) - n (ak + 1) -1, T(E2) = II (ak + 1) _ 1,..., T(EK) = n (ak + 1) _ 1. a,+1 aZ+1 at+1  Let a subset of J events from this domain be denoted as {E,} and the total duration for these J events as T((E,}) =11 (ak +  1)[Y-k,=, (11(ak + 1))J -J.  132 DAVID BIRCH  The product F1 (ak + 1) is taken over all K events and it will be helpful to partition this value into two components that  reflect the partition of the K events into those contained in the subset {EJ} and those not so contained, {EK_J}. This  partition will be written as  Mak+ 1) [H (ak+ 1)]L H (ak+ 1)J. kEJ kEK-J  The sum of the total durations for the K events gives  1 1 1  T=H(ak+1) + +  La1 +1 a2+1 ...+aK +  d -K  =H(ak+1) [ Y_ kEK  or  T = [H (ak+ 1)1 LkeK-J (ak+ 1)J [ Y_ kEK  or  T _ [H(ak+ 1)1[ H (ak+ 1)J  kEJ LLL krK-J  Y f/ 1 Il 1  keJ \ ak + 1) + kEK-J ` ak + 1 ) ] - K.  In the derived domain in which the composite event Ec replaces {E}, we shall require that all events, and their activation  times, not in {EJ} be the same in the two domains. Thus, we seek the relationship between ac, the activation time for Ec in  the derived domain, and the activation times for the subset of events {EJ} in the reference domain under the constraint that  the activation times for all other events have identical values in the two domains. The equations for the total durations of  the events in the derived domain can be written  (ac + 1) 1 1kEK-J (ak + 1)  Tc(E2) (ac + 1) 1 1k.K-J (ak + 1) - 1  _   aZ + 1   Tc(E c) (ac + 1) 1 1kEK-J (ak + 1) 1 '  = -   ac + 1   (ac + 1) 1 1k.K-J (ak + 1)  FIXED ACTIVATION TIME SCHEDULING MODEL 133  and by summation  Tc = [(ac + 1)] [ H (ak + 1)J kEK-J  X I ( I ~+ V ( 1 ~~-K+J-1.  ac + I keK-J ak + 1  The total durations, T and Tc, are not the same in the two domains making it undesirable to relate total event durations  across the domains in terms of absolute time. A natural way to form a correspondence between domains is to require equal  relative total durations for each event; that is, to set T(E1)IT=Tc(E1)/Tc, etc. It is readily seen that this is unwieldy to  work with because of the additive constants but examination of the resulting expressions reveals that the additive constants  are very small in relation to the remaining terms in the expressions in each case. Therefore, we will drop them to simplify  the derivation by allowing the following equalities to establish the correspondence between the reference and derived domains:  [1 1keJ (ak + I)] [1 1k.K-J (ak + 1)](11(al + I)) L1 1kEJ (ak +')I I1 1kEK-J (ak + I)] [Lk.J (11(ak + I)) + Y-krK-J (11(ak  +'))I  _ RaC +_ I)1[Flk.K-J (ak+ 1)](1/(al + 1))  RaC + 1 A J 1keK-J (ak + 1)] [(11(ac + I )) + Yk..-J (11(ak + I ))~  [1 1k,J (ak + I)] T1kEK-J (ak + I)] [YkEJ (I1(ak + I))] t1 1k,J (ak + I )1 [1 1k.K-J (ak + 1)] [LkEJ (11(ak + 1)) + Ek.K-J  (11(ak + I))]  _ [(ac + I)][FIkEK-J (ak + 1)](1/(ac + 1))  1(ac+ I)J[11k.K-J(ak+ 1)][(1/(ac+ 1))+L.rkEK-J(11(ak+ I))J  [1 1k.J (ak + I ) ] [1 1k.K-J (ak + I) ](I1(aK + I )) I1 1k.J (ak + I )][1 1k.K-J (ak + I )1 [Ek.J (11(ak + I )) + Ek.K-J  (11(ak + 0)]  _ [(ac + I )][Hk.K-J (ak + I)1(11(aK + 1))  [(ac + I)][1 1k.K-J (ak + I)] [(1/(ac + I)) +Y~kEK-J (11(ak + I))]  ,  Examination shows that each of the K - J + 1 equalities is satisfied if and only if (1/(ac + 1)) = Ek.J (11(ak + 1)); that is,  if the reciprocal of the activation time plus one for the composite event is equal to the sum of the reciprocals of the  activation times, each plus one, for the J events in the subset that defines the composite event. This relationship can be  thought of as a statement about the way in which the rate of a composite event is related to the rates of its constituent  events since the reciprocal of an activation time for an event is a rate measure for that event.  480/28/2-z  134 DAVID BIRCH  Thus, when events are compatible, they can be combined into composites. This, in turn, means that an event can be viewed as  the aggregation of constituent subunits and that the activation time for an event can be thought of as a summary of the  activation times for the subunits defining the event. What is a single activation time at one level of analysis can be related  to a set of differing activation times at a more molecular level of analysis.  Incompatible Events  No single rule for combining subunit activation times into a composite activation time exists for incompatible events. Not  only can the different ways of resolving the conflicts that arise from the conjunction of events be expected to result in  different rules but, even with the form of conflict resolution set, activation time combination rules can change depending on  which events are combined. Nevertheless, quite good approximations are possible; for example, when conflicts are resolved  inversely according to activation times, the approximation 1/ac = Lksr (1/ak) serves well.  For EE2,..., E, with activation times a, < a2 < < a,, respectively, the aggregation of E, and E, yields  +- +  ac- (a, a2) (a, a,  as an exact solution. The derivation proceeds in a fashion similar to that given for compatible events and uses the equations  of Appendix B. It is straightforward to extend the derivation to a composite of EE2, and E3 with the result  1 _ 1 1 1 1 la 1 1  ac - \a, + a2 + a3 ) + (a,a2 + a 3 + a2a) + ( a,a2a)  and to see the generalized form taken by the combination rule. This form, however, holds only so long as the composite  includes E,, the event with the shortest activation time, and without exception, those events with progressively increasing  activation times (e.g., EE2 or EE2, E3 or EE2, E3, E4, etc.).  Other composites generate other combination rules. For example, if E, and E3 are aggregated into Ec and evaluated against E,  for both the reference and derived domains, the result is  ac - (a, a3 + 1 ) (a2 + 1)(a3 + 1) .  When the same aggregating is carried out but evaluated against E, for both domains we obtain  ac- (a, a3) a, a, _ (a2+ 1)a) .  FIXED ACTIVATION TIME SCHEDULING MODEL 135  The reason that different rules can result can be found in the different dominance relations that activation times have in the  resolution of conflicts depending on whether they are a part of a composite or functioning in isolation.  In every case, however, the combination rule is approximated by 1/a, _ Ek.J (1/ak). This approximation is arrived at by  dropping all terms except those in the first parenthesis (i.e., by dropping the higher order terms) and by ignoring the  occasional incrementing of an activation time by one time unit. Clearly, the approximation is better the larger the values of  the activation times for the events entering into the composite.  Thus, even with incompatible events it is possible to view an event as the aggregation of constituent subunits with an  activation time composed out of the subunit activation times. This finding is important in two ways. First, it identifies a  source of variability in the stream of events that is intrinsic to the model. Despite fixed and unconditional activation times  both the durations and the dormant periods for events can be expected to be variable, the former because of the operation of  the scheduling rule and the latter because of the coding of composite events. Second, it provides an opening wedge into the  problem of determining empirically the appropriate specification of events in the stream because it implies that, if events  are correctly specified, they can be formed into composite events whose properties in the stream are completely predictable  from a knowledge of the activation times of the constituent subunit events. Events that are incorrectly specified, from the  standpoint of fixed activation time scheduling, will fail when used to make predictions about composite events. Thus, it  becomes possible to use the model to discover better and poorer units of analysis for data sets collected on a stream of  events.  5. APPLICATION OF THE MODEL: AN EXAMPLE  It was suggested in the Introduction that the model might find applications in several settings and in regard to different  kinds of observations. In some circumstances it might be used to characterize a complex, dynamic environment and, in others,  observations of behavior taken over time. As an example of the latter kind of application we shall use the model to analyze  part of an extensive set of data collected by Timberlake (1969).  Timberlake studied the general activity of the laboratory rat under conditions that come exceptionally close to what can be  described as a constant environment:  The observation space was a modified Grason-Stadler "Rat Station" Model E3125-A100, measuring 11 i X 9; X 7'-, in. with a  floor of iz in. stainless steel bars, 1 in. apart. The shorter sides and the top of the cage were made of clear plexiglass.  One long wall was made of aluminum. The other long wall, containing the bar and food cup, was removed and replaced with a  piece of e in. galvanized tin containing two 1 i in. diameter holes, the centers of which were equally spaced from each other  and the side walls. These holes were covered on the outside of the wall by galvanized tin covers. Unless the experimental  procedure called for the holes to be opened, the covers were held firmly in place by masking tape on the outside of the cage.  136 DAVID BIRCH  The observation space was located in a Grason-Stadler sound proofed chest Model E3125A-300, containing a 6 in. circular  viewing window covered by fine screening and a sheet of red plastic. Illumination of the cage was provided by a standard 7Z W,  110 V cage light shaded with a piece of stiff white paper and located at the back of the cage. The usual location at the front  of the cage was found to cause glare on the viewing window. The illumination level at the brightest point of the source was 55  fL. Masking noise was provided by an exhaust fan attached to the chest and a room air conditioner.  During observation the room lights were off and darkening shades placed on the windows so that E cast no shadow on the  observation window. A wooden carrying cage with individual 4 X 5 X 5 in. compartments and a wire mesh top was used to store  temporarily the S's in the experimental room (Timberlake, 1969, pp. 15-16)  These constant environmental conditions are important to the application of the model because they suggest that the focus of  the analysis should be on the organization of the behaviors without reference to changing environmental stimuli and they make  it plausible that activation times are approximately fixed, as set forth in the model. Behavioral organization is the subject  of a great deal of study outside of psychology, in ethology particularly (Toates, 1980), and some comparisons of the fixed  activation time scheduling model with other theoretical approaches will be made after the Timberlake data have been considered.  Timberlake observed the animals individually under a variety of constant environment conditions and during each 10-min  observation period recorded the stream of behavior using a coding system composed of 10 mutually exclusive and exhaustive  behvior categories:  The coding categories were establish in pilot studies by watching the behavior of individual Ss in the observation cage. Notes  were made of Ss' behavior and a preliminary coding scheme was developed with the restrictions (a) that it be continuously  applicable to Ss' behavior and (b) that the coding of a particular category of behavior not be unduly influenced by the E's  momentary mistakes and/or reaction time.  This problem of accommodating a continuous coding scheme to human fallibility and information processing limitations was  reasonably well solved by instructing the computer to ignore any indicated behavior which occupied less than a second of real  time. This solution meant that no short duration behavior could be recorded except as it was consistently part of some larger  duration coded behavior. A second simplification was to reduce the number of coding categories to 10, a step influenced  considerably by the availability of a 10-station coding apparatus. Though obviously in no sense a magic number of categories,  10 seemed to be fairly adequate to a description of the Ss' solitary behavior in this environment. (Timberlake, 1969, pp.  19-20)  Table 2, adapted from Timberlake (1969), presents the descriptions of the 10 behavior categories grouped into three classes:  exploration, grooming, and pausing. Timberlake began his study by observing each of 8 animals for 20 sessions, 10  min/day for each of 20 days, under standard, reference conditions. These conditions are those described earlier for the  observation space when the side wall holes were covered and they provide an empty, barren cage to the animals. All analyses to  follow are carried out separately for each animal using data pooled over the last 5 of the initial 20 days, a period during  which behavior was quite stable from day to day for all animals.  FIXED ACTIVATION TIME SCHEDULING MODEL 137  TABLE 2 Behavior Coding Categories Grouped by Classes  Exploration Class 1 Pointing  2 Locomotor sniffing  3 Rearing  4 Selective exploration  5 Nudging  Sniffing the air with the nose greater than I in. from the environment. Typically the head is moving and the angle of its long  axis is greater than horizontal. Except for the head, the body is motionless.  Whisker and side movements (sniffing) accompanied by locomotion and/or continuous head movement. The nose of the animal must  be within ; in. of the environment. Any locomotor activity not obviously accompanied by sniffing (a limited amount in a small  environment) is coded here.  Sniffing accompanied by elevation of the front paws of the animal off the floor. The animal most frequently supports itself  against the wall. While rearing it may engage in any one of the other investigatory behaviors, but in the present scheme all  are coded as rearing.  Sniffing accompanied by rapid small amplitude oscillation of the head, the end of the nose, and the whiskers at approximately  right angles to the environment. The nose must be very close to the environment. Licking and biting the environment are  included in this category. Sniffing accompanied by large movements of the sides and pressing of the nose and/or front paws  against the environment. This occurs primarily in corners, between the floor bars and where movement can be obtained in the  environment.  Grooming Class  6 Face and front paw grooming  7 Hind foot grooming  8 Ventral grooming 9 Dorsal grooming  Licking or biting the paws and moving them over the snout and the back of the ears.  Licking or biting the feet or tail, scratching the fur of the neck, back or side with the hind feet.  Licking or biting the stomach, chest and genitals.  Licking or biting the front legs (except the paws), the sides and the back.  10 Pausing  The animal stands, sits or lies relatively motionless with little whisker movement and no side movements above the basic  breathing rate. Frequently the animal may sigh and make chewing motions or move its ears.  The expectations about Timberlake's data derived from the model are based on the equations given in Appendix B. These  equations, once activation time values have been assigned, hold for the domain defined uniquely by the configuration of the  activation time values. Any set of data, on the other hand, can only be considered to arise from a segment of a domain.  Because no sampling theory for fixed activation time scheduling has yet been constructed, the observed values will be used as  if they were domain values in evaluating the model. Justification for this procedure is based on the day to day stability of  the data and on our earlier argument that activation times should be interpreted as averages or summaries involving  variability arising from several different sources, including environments that do not remain constant and coding categories  that are composites.  138  DAVID BIRCH  The first step in applying the model is to identify the events of the model with the activities coded by Timberlake. Thus, the  domain consists of 10 activities, each with its own activation time. Since Timberlake coded behavior into mutually exclusive  and exhaustive categories, the events of the model are incompatible with one another and their conjunctions are conflicts.  The resolution of conflicts hypothesized in this application of the model is that presented earlier in the discussion of the  conjunction of incompatible events, namely, in each conflict the event with the shortest activation time wins. The  psychological justification for this hypothesis (Atkinson & Birch, 1970; Birch, 1968, 1972) is that activation times for  activities are inversely related to the strength of instigation for the activities and, when a conflict among activities  occurs, it is the most strongly instigated activity in the conflict that dominates.  Determination of Activation Times and Predictions of Relative Frequency and Average Duration  Table 3 contains the total duration in seconds for each of the 10 activities for each of 8 animals, and the corresponding  activation times, also in seconds, calculated from  TABLE 3  Observed Total Duration, T(E), for Eight Animals Engaged in Ten Behaviors (Timberlake, 1969) and the Calculated Values of the  Activation Times, a, for Each Behavior  Animal  1 Exploratory 5 Behavior Grooming 9 Pause    2 3 4  6 7 8  10  01 T(E) 18 320 393 543 136 203 177 144 208 696  a 1197 70 58 43 159 109 123 151 107 34  02 T(E) 109 173 346 231 41 250 163 229 199 1151  a 182 116 61 90 484 84 123 90 102 19  03 T(E) 144 221 219 230 20 255 164` 114 176 1311  a 132 89 89 87 946 79 117 166 110 16  04 T(E) 198 195 272 130 151 43 97 126 156 1438  a 127 128 93 188 163 563 250 193 159 18  05 T(E) 80 263 275 487 94 129 267 105 198 989  a 285 89 87 50 244 179 89 219, 117 25  06 T(E) 69 190 132 222 27 337 130 72 385 1233  a 361 133 191 115 921 76 193 347 68 21  07 T(E) 141 355 385 214 122 110 72 33 106 1382  a 183 74 69 121 211 233 353 769 241 19  08 T(E) 165 187 218 230 57 73 45 0 23 1735  a 132 117 101 97 378 296 478 - 935 13  Note. Total duration and activation times are in seconds.  FIXED ACTIVATION TIME SCHEDULING MODEL 139  these data by the methods derived in Appendix B. The data reported are those collected by Timberlake (1969) pooled over five  10-min sessions for Days 16-20 during which the standard conditions were present and behavior from day to day appeared stable.  Most notable in Table 3, perhaps, is the considerable degree of individual differences shown, though all animals spent most  time in the Pausing activity.  As pointed out in the previous section, there is no sampling theory for the fixed activation time scheduling model available  for linking empirical observations to parameters in the domain. The linkage adopted for the present analysis is pragmatic and  direct, namely, the observed measures of time and frequency are used as if they were domain measures. The question of the  goodness of the fit of the model then becomes one of determining whether the various time and frequencies measures relate to  each other in the ways that the model says they should.  The fixed activation time scheduling model provides equations for both time and frequency and the two sets of equations are  written exclusively in terms of the activation times for the events. This imposes well-defined constraints on the  relationships to be expected between these two types of measures. Observations of time and frequency for the stream of events,  in contrast, impose only one constraint, namely, that the total duration of an event must be greater than or equal to the  frequency of that event. This contraint arises because an event must be ongoing for at least one time unit for it to be  recorded at all, beyond that any relation between time and frequency is possible.  According to the model, the durations and the frequencies of events should be in the same rank order across events, since it  is easily shown for any two events, E; and EP that if T(E;) > T(Ej) then N(E;) > N(Ej). That this rank order relationship  tends to hold for the Timberlake data can be seen in Fig. 2 where for each of the eight animals the observed relative  frequency for each activity is plotted. The activities are ordered on the abscissa according to decreasing total duration and  the overall negative slopes are apparent for all animals.  In the evaluations of the model to follow, time data were used to determine activation time values which were then inserted  into equations for frequency to yield various predicted values. The specific procedure used to calculate activation time  values and to predict frequencies is given in Appendix B. Each predicted frequency was divided by the value for N, the total  frequency in the domain, calculated from Eq. (4). The result is the set of predicted relative frequencies plotted in Fig. 2.  Statistical evaluation of the fit of the predicted relative frequencies to those observed poses something of a problem. At the  heart of the problem is the fact that the process proposed in the model is not one used in conventional statistical theory. It  is of no help in deciding upon the adequacy of the model to ask the likelihood that the observed frequencies could have arisen  by chance from, for example, a multinomial process with the predicted frequencies as parameters. The fixed activation time  scheduling model is not based on a multinomial process.  Nonparametric procedures which avoid problems about processes that may be implicit in the assumptions underlying parametric  statistical tests have been proposed.  140 DAVID BIRCH  U  d 0.20 J  0.30  T  V C d J  O d 0.10  030  FIG. 2. Observed and predicted relative frequencies of the ten activities, Pausing (P), Exploring (E), and Grooming (G),  described in Table 2 as a function of the activities arranged in decreasing order of total durations for the eight animals in  the Timberlake (1969) study.  0.40  040  0.30  0.20  0.10  P Ej Ep E, El Ey G6 G6 G? G6  AUwdy ACIwity  P Ee Es Ez EI G6 Ey G? G9  FIXED ACTIVATION TIME SCHEDULING MODEL 141  For example, Hubert and Baker (1978), Hubert (1979), and Baker and Hubert (1981) have developed new methods for comparing two  sociometric matrices and for analyzing cross-classifications that do not depend on the multinomial process but rather rely on  combinatorial inference models. Such methods, which could be applied to this situation, do not, however, satisfy the condition  that the data evaluation procedures grow out of the process proposed to govern the generation of the data and so fail to  provide the specific tests required. New methods and new sampling statistics, derived out of the processes proposed in the  model, need to be developed (Birch, 1983).  Some idea of the fit between the predicted and observed relative frequencies can be gained from the standard deviations of the  differences between the two for individual animals. These standard deviations range from 0.017 for animal 03 to 0.033 for  animal 06, values which suggest a satisfactory overall fit for even the most poorly fit animal. (The product moment  correlations between the observed and predicted relative frequencies range between 0.92 and 0.98.) The distributions of the  differences between the observed and predicted relative frequencies in standard score form tend to be symmetric for all the  animals and when a single distribution is constructed by aggregating over the animals, the result is very close to normal.  Not only the relative frequencies but also the average durations for the activities provide information about the fit of the  model to the Timberlake data. Comparisons of predicted and observed values can be made at two levels, first, in terms of the  overall average duration for a domain, and, second, using the average durations for the individual activities.  Each domain is specified by its configuration of activation times and domains differ in regard to their total frequency, N, as  given in Eq. (4), and their total duration, T as defined by Eq. (7). Once activation time values have been determined from a  particular set of data, it is possible to calculate values for T and N and for the overall average duration, TIN, for the  domain. This value can be compared to the overall observed average duration calculated as the total time in the interval of  observation divided by the total frequency of events observed. The two sets of overall average durations for the eight animals  are presented in Table 4. It is immediately apparent that, for each of the animals, the value predicted from the activation  times is greater than that calculated directly. It is not possible to determine exactly what is responsible for this  consistent difference but one possibility is that conjunctions of events, which contribute heavily to the frequency count for  a domain, are not being handled correctly. On the other hand, the agreement is quite good for animal 03 with a discrepancy of  0.6 sec; it is worst for animal 06 which has a 3.0 sec difference.  At the second level of comparison it can be shown that the average durations for activities, as well as the relative  frequencies, are predicted to be in the same rank order as the total durations for the activities. This follows because, in  the model, duration declines faster than frequency across events which are ordered according to increasing activation times.  This prediction provides the basis for a fairly demanding test of the model since it is one concerning the rates of change of  duration and frequency in relation to activation times. The extent to which the model succeeds can  142 DAVID BIRCH  TABLE 4  Observed and Predicted Overall Average Durations, TIN, for the Eight Animals in the Timberlake (1969) Study  Animal Overall Average Duration  Observed Predicted  01 8.8 9.9  02 8.7 9.6  03 9.2 9.8  04 10.5 13.1  05 9.3 10.6  06 9.6 12.6  07 10.7 12.7  08 12.5 14.6  Note. Entries are in seconds.  be seen in Fig. 3. It is apparent that the overall trend for each animal is negative, as predicted, but much of that effect is  due to the points at the extremes.  When specific predictions for each activity are made, also plotted in Fig. 3, and compared to the observed values the  correspondence is reasonably good (standard deviations range from 1.53 sec for animal 05 to 2.50 sec for animal 02). The  predicted values summarize the trend in the observed values quite well but there does appear to be a degree of systematic  misfit in that the extremes of the predicted values rather consistently fall short of the extremes of the observed.  It should be noted that the predicted average durations plotted in Fig. 3 include a coefficient that adjusts for the  discrepancies found between the two estimates of the overall average durations (Table 4). Specifically, it is expected from  the model that T(Ei)/N(Ei) = t(Ei)/n(Ei), where the values on the left side of the equality are calculated from the activation  times and those on the right side directly from the observed values. But this equality can only be expected to hold if the two  sides refer to the same domain; that is, if the overall average durations for the two are the same. Since this is not the  case, the expectation from the model was rewritten as  T(Ei)/T _ t(Ei)/t N(Ei)/N n(E,)/n  which leads to [T(Ei)/N(Ei)] [N/T] [t/n ], the expression used for making the predictions.  The Organization of the Stream of Behavior  Organization of the observed stream of behavior will be looked at using the transition frequencies between activities. First,  the observed organization will be  20  N O C  0 0  5 10 v  0 v a' S  0  P E3 EZ Eo  20  15  10  5  0~ P . Ea  Activity Activity  E, ES G'6 G9 G, GB  E, E, E, G, E, G, G9  FIG. 3. Observed and predicted average durations of the ten activities, Pausing (P), Exploring (E), and Grooming (G),  described in Table 2 as a function of the activities arranged in decreasing order of total durations for the eight animals in  the Timberlake (1969) study.  144 DAVID BIRCH  described; second, that portion of the observed organization that can be attributed to the organization specified by the model  will be identified; and, third, aspects of the observed organization not represented in the model will be noted. We begin with  a description of the observed organization.  Table 5 contains both the observed and predicted relative frequencies of transitions between all pairs of behaviors pooled  over the eight animals, normalized over the whole matrix, and expressed in terms of the rate/ 1000 tallies. This was  accomplished for the observed transitions by summing the frequencies over the eight animals, dividing by the total of 2326  tallies and multiplying by 1000. The predicted values were arrived at by using the equations of the model (see Appendix B) in  conjunction  TABLE 5  Observed and Predicted Relative Frequencies of Transition between Pairs of Behaviors (Rows to Columns) for the Eight Animals  Pooled from the Timberlake (1969) Study  1 2 Exploratory 4 5 Behavior Grooming 9 Pause    3   6 7 8  10  1 - 8 4 5 0 1 2 3 1 48  - (4) (5) (4) (2) (3) (2) (2) (3) (27)  2 1 - 28 27 12 4 3 1 5 52  (4) - (11) (12) (3) (7) (5) (4) (7) (48)  3 3 19 - 21 8 6 4 1 1 47  (5) (11) - (13) (4) (8) (6) (5) (8) (56)  4 2 34 23 - 11 7 6 3 3 46  (4) (12) (13) - (4) (8) (7) (5) (9) (54)  5 0 9 9 10 - 1 3 0 0 12  (2) (3) (4) (4) - (2) (2) (1) (2) (16)  6 1 3 1 5 0 - 3 9 35 18  (3) (7) (8) (8) (2) -- (4) (3) (6) (35)  7 2 6 2 7 1 6 - 1 3 21  (2) (5) (6) (7) (2) (4) - (3) (5) (27)  8 1 3 1 4 0 6 2 - 7 15  (2) (4) (5) (5) (1) (3) (3) - (3) (20)  9 2 7 3 2 0 15 8 11 - 22  (3) (7) (8) (9) (2) (6) (5) (3) - (35)  10 59 46 32 51 9 28 21 11 15   (27) (48) (56) (54) (16) (35) (27) (20) (35)   Note. Both the observed and predicted relative frequencies are normalized over the whole matrix and entered as a rate per  thousand of the 2326 tallies. Observed values appear first with predicted values just below in parentheses.  FIXED ACTIVATION TIME SCHEDULING MODEL 145  with the total frequencies for each animal to obtain predicted transition frequencies for each animal; these frequencies were  then pooled and converted to rate/ 1000 tallies, once again on the basis of 2326 tallies.  The organization we seek for the observed transition values of Table 5 can be pictured by a directed graph in which pairs of  behaviors are connected according to the numbers of transitions that occur between them. This suggests beginning with the  largest observed entry in Table 5 and proceeding in order to the smaller values. When this is done, it becomes apparent that  transitions are, in general, most frequent between behavior 10, pausing, and the other behaviors, implying that pausing is  serving as a hub in the organization of the behaviors. Second, paths tend to exist among exploratory behaviors and among  grooming behaviors but not between exploratory and grooming behaviors. These characteristics can be seen in the organization  of the observed values diagrammed in Fig. 4.  In Fig. 4 the arrowheads indicate the directions of the transitions represented, connecting lines without arrowheads signify  transitions in both directions, and lines which do not terminate at a single behavior but at a cluster of behaviors replace  what would be the complete set of lines to all the separate behaviors in the cluster. Figure 4 depicts the observed  organization of the ten behaviors at the point where 94% of the raw sum of squares of the 90 observed entries of Table 5 has  been encompassed. The total raw sum of squares is 28,851 and 94% of the total is accounted for by the 25 transitions with  rates of 12 or more per thousand tallies.  A comparable analysis of the predicted entries of Table 5 results in the organization labelled Predicted in Fig. 4. The model  predicts equal frequencies for the two directions of transition between pairs of behaviors so only lines without arrowheads  can appear in the diagram.' The predicted organization of Fig. 4 is shown at the point where 94% of the total raw sum of  squares of 28,292 is included.  Observed Predicted  ~4  ~2 i 3 2 -,3 10  FIG. 4. Diagrammatic representations of the organization of the ten activities coded by Timberlake (1969) as identified in  Table 2 based on the transition frequencies between pairs of activities. Connecting lines without arrowheads denote  transitions that are equally strong in the two directions; a line with an arrowhead shows the predominent direction of  transition for an asymmetric pair of activities.  The prediction of symmetry in the relative frequency transition matrix, when the entries are normalized over the whole matrix,  comes from Eq. (5) which shows the predicted number of transitions between any two activities to be the same in the two  directions of transition.  146 DAVID BIRCH  All rates of 11 or more per thousand tallies are included as are 24 of the 90 possible transitions.  Certain similarities in the predicted and observed organization of the activities stand out. Both are centered around pausing  as a hub and both tend to separate out a cluster of exploratory behaviors that appear to be closely interrelated. In this  sense portions of the organization of the stream of behavior as observed are accounted for directly by the model. Most  important, the organization derived from the model is based on activation times for the behaviors that are fixed and  completely independent of each other. Thus, the hub shape and the clustering of exploratory behaviors characterizing both the  observed and the predicted transition frequencies need not be attributed to special family properties of these particular  behaviors but can be interpreted as the product of an implicit scheduling process.  It is informative to state this finding quantitatively. The total, raw sum of squares of the observed entries in Table 5 is  28,851 in rate/1000 tallies. The sum of the squares of the differences between the observed and predicted entries in the table  is 6303. This constitutes a 78% reduction in the raw sum of squares attributable to the predictions of the model. (The product  moment correlation between the observed and predicted values of Table 5 is 0.82 which gives an rz = 0.67.) The 22 % of the raw  sum of squares still unaccounted for contains the misfits of the model to the data and points to special relationships among  behaviors that require further study.  In setting out to identify those aspects of the stream of behavior that can be accounted for by the fixed activation time  scheduling model from those that are left unaccounted for, it is helpful to distinguish the structure of a single activity  from the organization of several activities across time. The structure of an activity refers to the descriptive  characteristics of that activity when it is occurring. Thus, we might want to identify eating a meal as an activity and define  its structure in terms of its component behaviors, perhaps even including drinking a beverage and conversing with a companion.  The organization of the stream of activities, on the other hand, refers to the way in which each particular activity (e.g.,  eating a meal) relates to all other activities (e.g., taking a walk, working, reading, etc.) across time. It is proposed that  fixed activation time scheduling is appropriate for describing the organization of activities but not necessarily for  describing the structure of any particular activity.  The difference between the structure of an activity and the organization of activities is nicely illustrated using an example  given by Toates.  Consider an animal deprived of food and water which has started eating. After a period of eating it switches to drinking. What  determines when this switch occurs? Perhaps one's first guess would be that there is competition for dominance between hunger  and thirst. As the animal ingests food so hunger decreases and thirst increases until the strength of thirst can oust hunger  from dominance. Indeed, animals do sometimes switch activities by precisely such a process, but it would be wrong to assume  that this is always the case. (Toates, 1980, pp. 27-28)  Toates goes on to argue that changing from one activity to another can also arise as a consequence of time sharing by which  the activity with the dominant motivation  FIXED ACTIVATION TIME SCHEDULING MODEL 147  controls the occurrence of other, incompatible activities with lesser motivation. Thus, it might be that with eating as the  dominant activity, drinking and conversing are allowed to occur. This way of talking about activities permits Toates to point  out that behaviors may have nondominant motivation and nevertheless occur, not because they have overcome the activity with  the dominant motivation but because the dominant activity allows these behaviors to occur.  It is the switching of activities according to dominance relations that is the concern of the fixed activation time scheduling  model. Time sharing, as described by Toates, is directed to the description of the structure of the dominant activity. What is  observed in the stream of behavior can be expected to be a mixture of both the organization and structures of activities,  making the decision about suitable categories for coding an exceedingly difficult one.  That the fixed activation time scheduling model encompasses quantitatively as much of the Timberlake data as it does suggests  that important aspects of the overall organization of these activities are being captured by the model. The misfits, for  example in the transition matrix, begin to expose the model's limitations. The model could be made to fit better if activation  times conditional on the ongoing activity were introduced but it would be at the cost of using more of the data to solve for  the parameter values. On the other hand, these misfits may be indicating that structural not organizational principles are  called for at this point.  6. DISCUSSION  The most distinctive features of fixed activation scheduling are that each event remains ongoing until replaced by another  event and that the necessary and sufficient condition for an event to replace an ongoing event is that its activation time has  been completed. Together these characteristics specify a pure interruption scheduling model in which events are never  completed and queueing cannot occur except at a secondary level, that is when the interruption is by a conjunction of events.  The result is a model that applies to the dynamic organization of a variety of types of environmental and behavioral events.  For example, fixed activation time scheduling of environmental events can be found, at least approximately, in the work  settings faced by supervisors of automated systems who must process information from several sources on a predetermined basis.  The model provides ways to describe succinctly the dynamic aspects of such environments, to define indices of their complexity  and to assist in answering questions about the most effective ways to schedule different types of work and to maximize the  benefits of scheduled rests.  As illustrated with the Timberlake data, the model is also useful as a framework for understanding the stream of free  behavior. Here the model serves the dual purpose of representing certain important aspects of the behavioral organization of  the stream  148 DAVID BIRCH  and of serving as a kind of null hypothesis for identifying characteristics of the stream that are unaccounted for by a  particular version of the model.  In its most conservative form the model relies on a single parameter for each event, an activation time that is fixed and  independent of the ongoing event. This constraint leads to the expectation that the matrix containing the frequencies of  transitions between pairs of events will be symmetric. Observed asymmetries in this matrix would bring into question the  unconditional nature of activation times and encourage consideration of a hypothesis of activation times which, although  fixed, are conditional on the ongoing event.  The theoretical investigation of how composite events are handled by the model showed that for unconditional fixed activation  times the reciprocal of the activation time for a composite event is approximately equal to the sum of the reciprocals of the  activation times for the constituent events in the composite. This finding has important conceptual and methodological  implications. Conceptually, it means that the explanation for variable dormant periods for events could be that composite  events have been coded rather than that activation times are inherently variable. Methodologically, it means that it is  possible to discover empirically how best to identify events according to the model. This is because the quantitative  characteristics of composite events in the stream can be completely accounted for in terms of the constituent events if these  events are correctly identified. A procedure based on this relationship could be particularly helpful in analyses of free  behavior where the structures of activities and their dynamic organization are likely to be confounded in the coding of the  data.  Real life schedules of events, environmental and behavioral, are complex but may be found to be decomposable into a limited  number of component schedules or approximated satisfactorily by simple schedules. Perhaps most urgently in need of solution is  the problem of how to identify the sources of variability associated with complex schedules. Rigidly planned environments may  include deliberately introduced and well-specified variable activation times in which case the model can be made to give exact  solutions. In other situations, especially those for which the model is used to help discover instances of scheduling, new  methods for separating out unsystematic variation from the variability expected from the scheduling process itself and from  the coding of composite events need to be developed.  APPENDIX A: TIME CHARACTERISTICS OF THE MODEL  The following derivations of the total durations of events include derivations of the number of transitions between all pairs  of events. All derivations hold for the domain of K events defined by the set of activation times a, < a2 < ... < aK. Two  concepts, residual activation time and starting pattern, are central to the derivations. The residual activation time for an  event is the time remaining until the event regains dominance; the starting pattern for an event is the configuration of  residual activation times for the other events at the time the reference event becomes ongoing. Every  FIXED ACTIVATION TIME SCHEDULING MODEL 149  starting pattern specifies, by the smallest residual activation time in that starting pattern, both the time that must pass  before the next change of events and what the next event is. The combination of these two pieces of information is sufficient  to determine the total duration of each event singly and of the conjunctions of events.  Consider first the duration of E, prior to a change to E2. For E2 to replace an ongoing E, it is necessary that the residual  activation time for E2, rt(E2), be less than all other residual activation times rt(E3), rt(E4),..., rt(E,), in the starting  pattern that was present when E, became ongoing. The range of rt(E,) is from 1 through a2 and the number of different starting  patterns for each of these values of rt(E,) such that rt(E2) < rt(E3), rt(E4),..., rt(E,) can be determined using the  expressions  rt(E2)  I (a3 - 1)(a4 - 1) ...(aK - 1) - (a3 - 2)(a4 - 2) ... (a. - 2),  2 (a3-2)(a4-2) ... (aK-2)-(a3-3)(a4-3) ... (aK-3),  3 (a3-3)(a4-3) ... (aK-3)-(a3-4)(a4-4) ... (aK-4),  a2 - I [a3 - (a2 - 1)] [a4 - (a2 - 1)] ... (aK - (a2 - 1)] - (a3 - a2)(a4 - a2) ... (aK - a2),  a2 (a3 - a2)(a4 - a2) ... (aK - a2).  Each of these expressions counts the appropriate cells of a (K - 2)-dimensional orthogonal polyhedron. For E, ongoing and  rt(E2) = 1, in order for E2 to replace E, it is necessary that rt(E3), rt(E4),..., rt(EK) all be 2 or greater. There are a3 -  1 such values for E3, a4 - 1 for E4, etc., and as a consequence the polyhedron of interest contains (a3 - 1)(a4 - 1) ... (aK -  1) cells of which (a3 - 2)(a4 - 2) ... (aK - 2) are not permissible because they fail to include at least one activity at its  full residual activation time. Similarly, for rt(E2) = 2 the polyhedron of interest has (a3 - 2)(a4 - 2) ... (aK - 2) - (a3 -  3)(a4 - 3) ... (aK - 3) cells with starting patterns that lead to E2 because rt(E3), rt(E4)".., rt(EK) must all be 3 or  greater. By letting rt(E2) take on all values from 1 to a2 and by noting that if rt(E2) = a2 the condition that at least one  residual activation time be at full value is met, the number of changes from E, to E2 in the domain defined by a, < a2 < ... <  aK is determined for each value of rt(E2) as shown. These expressions are useful in two ways: First, their sum is the total  frequency for the transition E, to E2 in the domain and, second, the product given by the value of each rt(E,) times its  associated frequency is the total duration of E, for each of the values of rt(E2). The sum of these products is the total  duration of E, in the domain, given that E2 is the next event.  It is easily seen that the total number of transitions from E, to E2 is  N(E, E2) = (a3 - 1)(a4 - 1) ... (a. - 1). (A 1)  In addition, the total duration of E, just prior to a change to E2, T(E,/E,E2), is found from the sum  480/28/2-3  150 DAVID BIRCH  [(a3  - 1)(a4 - 1) ... (ax - 1)](1) - [(a3 - 2)(a4 - 2) ... (aK - 2)](1)  + E(a3 - 2)(a4 - 2) ... (ax - 2)](2) - [(a3 - 3)(a4 - 3) ... (aK - 3)](2) + L(a3 - 3)(a4 - 3) ... (aK - 3)](3) - [(a3 - 4)(a4  - 4) ... (aK - 4)](3)  + [a3 - (a2 - 1)] [a4 - (a2 - 1)] ... [ax - (a2 - 1)J(a2 - 1) - [(a3-a2)(a4-a2)... (ax-a2A(a2- 1)  + [(a3 - a2)(a4 - a2) ... (aK - a2)](a2)'  This sum simplifies greatly when it is noted that the coefficient of the right-hand term on each line is one less than that of  the left-hand term on the next line so that  T(E,/E, E2) = 1(a3 - 1)(a4 - 1) ... (arc - I)] + 1(a3 - 2)(a4 - 2) ... (a. - 2)) + ...  + [(a3 - a2)(a4 - a2) ... (a. - a2)]. (A2)  Examination of the expression that led to Eq. (Al) reveals that the same argument can be made for the number of transitions  from E, to E3, N(E,E3). The only difference is that, with a, < a2 < ... < aK, E3 can replace E, if and only if rt(E3) is in  the range from 1 through a2 - 1 in the starting pattern present when E, became ongoing since if rt(E3) > a2 it must be that  rt(E2) < rt(E3) and E3 cannot occur. The number of starting patterns for 1 < rt(E3) < a2 that result in transitions from E, to  E3 are  rt(E3) (a2-1)(a4-1)...(a.-1)-(a2-2)(a4-2) ... (a.-2),  1   2 (a2-2)(a4-2) ... (a.-2)-(a2-3)(a4-3) ... (a.-3),  3 (a2-3)(aa-3) ... (aK-3)-(a2-4)(a4-4) ... (aK-4),  a2-2 1a2-(a2-2)] [a4-(a2-2)] ... [arc-(a2-2)]  - -  - [a2 - (a2 - 1f [a4 - (a2 - 1)] ... [ax (a2 1)],  1a2 -  a2 - 1 - -  - (a2 - 1)] [a,, - (a2 1)] ...[aK (a2 14  Note that for rt(E3) = a2 - 1 it is necessary that rt(E2) = a2 if E3 is to replace E, so the requirement that the residual  activation time of at least one event be at full strength in every starting pattern is met automatically. The sum of these  expressions gives  N(EIE3) = (a2 - 1)(a4 - 1) ... (ax - 1).  The form of this equation is the same as that for N(E, EZ) and that same form can be seen to hold also for N(EIE4),  N(E1ES),..., N(E,EK).  FIXED ACTIVATION TIME SCHEDULING MODEL 151  Similarly, the form of the equation for the total duration of E, just prior to E3 is as in Eq. (A2), although there are a2 - 1  rather than a2 terms present in the sum because E2 must be ruled out, so that  T(E,IE,E3) = J(a2- 1)(a4- 1) ... (aK- 1)1  + [(a2 - 2)(a4 - 2) ... (aK - 2)) + ...  + [a2-(a2-1)] [a4-(a2- 1)] ... [aK-(a2- 1)]. (A3)  Next we look at the number of times that E, is replaced by conjunctions of events and the total duration of E, contingent on a  transition from E, to a conjunction. The argument proceeds as before with the special condition that the residual activation  times for the events in the conjunction are locked together. Thus, for example, the number of transitions from E, to the  conjunction E2,3, N(E,E2,3), is obtained from the expressions  rt(E2) = rt(E3)  1 (a4 - 1)(as - 1) ... (aK - 1) - (a4 - 2)(as - 2) ... (ax - 2)  2 (a4-2)(as-2) ... (aK-2)-(a4-3)(as-3) ... (aK-3),  a2 - 1 1a4 - (a2 - 1)fas - (a2 - 1)] ... [aK - (a2 - (a,, - a2)(a5 - a2) ... (aK - a2),  a2 (a4 - a2)(as - a2) ... (aK - a2),  which sum to  N(E.E2,3) = (a4 - 1)(as - 1) ... (aK - 1). (A4)  The equations for all the remaining transition frequencies from E, to conjunctions can now be written since the process that  generates the equations remains the same. The key to the uniformity of the process is that every conjunction, no matter how  many events are involved, itself functions as an event.  It also follows that the total duration of E, just prior to the occurrence of the conjunction E2,3 is  T(EIIE2.3) = [(a,, - 1)(as - 1) ... (ax - 1)] + [(a, - 2)(as - 2) ... (a. - 2)] + ...  + I (a,, - a2)(as - a2) ... (ax - a2A (AS)  and all the other duration equations have the same form. The only special point to note is that all equations for transitions  from E, to conjunctions which include EZ have one more term, the term in which a2 is subtracted from the other activation  times, than the equations for the other transitions. This is because rt(EZ) = a2 is permissible for a transition to a  conjunction including E2 but not for the other conjunctions which must have residual activation times less than a2 to rule out  E2.  152 DAVID BIRCH  It is now possible to recover N(E,) as the sum of the number of transitions from E, to the other events and the conjunctions.  To do this, note that every equation but one is written as the product of the activation times, each reduced by one, of all  events not involved in the transition. The exception is the transition from E, to the most complex conjunction E2.3,...,K  which can occur in only one way; namely, when the residual activation times for events E2, E3,..., E, are all at a2. The  complete set of equations when summed can be simplified to  [(a2-1)+ll[(a3-1)+11...[(aK-1)+1I -(a2-1)(a3-1) ... (a,-1)  or  (a2)(a3) ... (aK)-(a2- 1)(a3- 1) ... (aK- 1)  which is Eq. (1).  Also directly obtainable now is the equation for the total duration of E, . This is given by the sum of T(E,/E,E2) through  T(E,/E,E2,3_.,K). All of these expressions except T(E,/E,E2,3,...,K), which can occur in only one way and with a value equal  to a2, have a common form in which the first term is the product of activation times, each of which is reduced by one, the  second the product of activation times each of which is reduced by two, and so on through the term which is composed of the  product of activation times reduced by the value a2 - 1. For the set of transitions out of E, that do not involve E2 these a2  - 1 terms constitute the expressions for the duration of E, but for the transitions out of E, that do involve E2 each  expression has an additional term which is the product of activation times reduced by the value of a2. Examples of these two  types of expressions appear in Eqs. (A3) and (A2), respectively.  Collecting together the first term of each expression results in the following:  T(E,/E.E2) (a3- 1)(a4- 1) ... (aK- 1),  T(E,IE,E3) (a2 - 1)(a4 - 1) ... (aK - 1)  T(E,IE,EK) (a2 - 1)(a3 - 1) ... (aK-~ -  T(E,1E,E2.3) (a4 - 1) ... (aK - 1)  T(E,IE1EK-1,K) (a2 - 1) ... (aK -   - 2 1),  T(E,IEIE2.3,...,K-1) (a.- 1),  T(E,IEIE3,4_.,K) (a2- 1).  FIXED ACTIVATION TIME SCHEDULING MODEL 153  The sum of these expressions can be simplified to  [(a2 - 1) + 1][(a3 - 1) + 1] ... [(a. - 1) + 1] - (a2 - 1)(a3 - 1) ...(aK - 1) - 1.  The array and the sum for the first term are prototypes for the arrays and sums of all the other terms and the sum of these  sums is  [(a2 - 1) + 1][(a3 - 1) + 1]... [(aK - 1) + 1] - (a2 - 1)(a3 - 1) ... (aK - 1) - 1  + [(a2-2)+ 1][(a3-2)+ 1] ... [(aK-2)+ 1]  - (a2 - 2)(a3 - 2) ... (a, - 2) - 1  + [a2 - (a2 - 2) + 1][a3 - (a2 - 2) + 1] ...[aK - (a2 - 2) + 1] - [a2 - (a2 - 2)] [a3 - (a2 - 2)] ... [aK - (a2 - 2)] - 1  +[a2-(a2-1)+1][a3-(a2-1)+1] ... [aK-(a2-1)+1] - [a2 - (a2 - 1)] [a3 - (a2 - 1)] ... [aK - (a2 - 1)] - 1,  which, because of the cancellation of terms, reduces to  [(a2 - 1) + 1][(a3 - 1) + 1] ... [(aK - 1) + 1]  - [a2 - (a2 - 1)] [a3 - (a2 - 1)] ... [aK - (a2 - 1)] - (a2 - 1).  The additional terms required because E2 is involved in the transition out of E, produce  T(E,IE,E2) (a3 - a2)(a4 - a2) ... (aK - a2),  T(E,IEIE2,3) (a4 - a2) ... (a. - a2),  T(E,IE,E2,K) (a3 - a2) ... (aK-1 - a2), T(EIIEIE2,3,...,K-1) (aK-a2),  T(EI1E,E2,4,....K) (a3 - a2), T(EIIE,E2,3,...,K) all  with the sum  [(a3-a2)+1][(a4-a2)+1] ... [(aK-a2)+1]-1+a2,  154 DAVID BIRCH Adding this sum to the earlier sum of sums yields  T(E,)= [(az- 1) + I][(a3- 1) + 1] ... [(a.- 1) + 1] -[az-(a,-I)][a3-(a2-1 )] ... [aK-(a2-1)]-(a2-1) + [(a3-az)+ I][(aa-a2)+ 1]  ... I(aK-az)+ 1] - I +a2  or  T(E,) = (az)(a3) ... (arc). (A6)  The argument just made for T(E,) can be made for T(EZ), T(E3),.- T(EK) and for all the conjunctions. In every case the total  duration of an event, or a conjunction, is determined by the product of the activation times for all the other events or for  all the events not involved in the conjunction. The sum of the durations across all events and all conjunctions is the total  duration of the domain defined by the activation times a, <a, < ... < aK and by the constraint that every permissible starting  pattern be included once and only once. This value is  T=(a,+1)(az+1) ... (a.+1)-(a,)(a2) ...(aK)-1. (A7)  APPENDIX B: Two SPECIAL CASES OF THE MODEL  For a domain of K events with activation times a, < az < ... < aK the number of occurrences of any event E; is  N(E;)= F1 (ak) - F1 a(ak 1 1) , Eq. (2),  and the total duration of E; is  T(Ei) = (ak) , Eq. (b).  a;  One special case of the model to be developed is that in which all events are compatible and the other is for mutually  incompatible events. In the second case conjunctions of events give rise to conflicts and the special assumption to be made is  that conflicts are resolved immediately in favor of the event in the conflict with the smaller (smallest) activation time even  as the configuration of events in the conflict remains dominant until supplanted. This way of dealing with conflicts maps both  the duration and the frequency of conflicts directly into the duration and frequency of the K events. The result is that new  equations are needed for the frequency and total duration of events but not for the total frequency (N) or total duration (T)  for the domain.  FIXED ACTIVATION TIME SCHEDULING MODEL 155  Compatible Events  The number of conjunctions that include E, , all of which count as occurrences of E,' is given by the number of combinations  of E, with E2,..., EK taken 1, 2,..., K - 1 at a time weighted by the frequency with which each combination occurs; namely,  [(a,+1)...(aK+l)-a2...aK-I]-Ja2 ... ax-(a,-1) ... (a,-1)-II  which is (a2 + 1) ... (a, + 1) - 2a2 ... aK + (a2 - 1) ... (aK - 1) or  H (ak + 1) 2 H (ak) + F1 (ak - 1) a, + 1 a, a, - 1  When this expression is added to N(E,), the result is the new frequency  11(ak+1) -11(ak), (B1) a, + 1 a,  The equations for the number of conjunctions that include E2, E3, ..., and EK have the  same form and permit writing the frequency for any of the K events, Ei, as  N(Et) - H (ak +l) - H (ak) ai + I ai  (B2)  In similar fashion, aggregating the durations for each event to include the occurrence of the event singly, and in all  possible conjunctions weighted by the total duration in each case, yields  7,(Ei) _ H (ak + 1) - 1 a,+ 1  (B3)  as the equation for the total duration of any event Ei.  Incompatible Events  Under the rule that each conflict is resolved in favor of the event with the smallest activation time, the frequency and total  duration for E, include the occurrence of E, singly and in all possible conjuctions with other events since a, < a2 < ... <  aK. Thus, Eqs. (B2) and (B3) are appropriate to E,.  The frequency of E2 is the sum of the frequency of E2 singly plus the frequencies of all event conjunctions involving E2  except those that also include E, . This number is given by the count of the conflicts including E2 minus those including both  E, and E2 or  H (ak + 1) _ 2 H (ak) + H (ak - 1) a2 + 1 a2 a2- 1  ~ [ ri(ak+1) -11 -`II(ak)-1J  (a, + 1)(a2 + 1) a,a '2  156 DAVID BIRCH which, when added to N(EZ), results in  1V(Ez) - a, H (ak + 1) _ (a, - 1) F1 (ak) . (a, + 1)(a2 + 1) a,a2  Expressions for the frequencies of the remaining activities can be determined in the same way and are  10 3) _ (a,-1)(a2-1)H(ak)  3) = (a,+ 1)(a2+ 1)(a3+ 1) a,a,a3 '  N(EK) _ H (ak) _ H (ak -  1) .  aK aK _ 1  Note that ]V(EK) = N(EK) since no conflicts are resolved in favor of EK and that the  expression for 1V, the total frequency for the domain, is unchanged (i.e., Eq. (4)). Similarly, aggregating total durations of  conflicts classified according to the event in the configuration with the smallest activation time results in the new values  T(E,)= H (ak+ 1) a,+1  T{EZ) = a, F1 (ak + 1) (a, + 1)(a2 + 1)'  T(E3)- a,a2H(ak+1) (a, + 1)(a2 + 1)(a3 + 1)  (B4)  T(EK-1) - (aK + 1) F1 (ak)  aK_IaK  T(EK) - " (ak) aK  As in the case of frequency, T(EK) = T(EK) and the total duration for the domain, T, is as presented in Eq. (A7).  A few numerical examples convince us that the new transition frequencies are symmetric and take the form  j1(ak+1) N(E, E2) = (a, + 1)(a2 + 1) ,  N(E a2H(ak+1) ,E3) = (a, + 1)(a2 + 1)(a3 + 1) '  FIXED ACTIVATION TIME SCHEDULING MODEL 157  N(E aza3 H (ak + 1)  , E,) _ (a, + 1)(az + 1)(a3 + 1)(a, + 1)'  N(EIEK) = H (ak) a a '  and  (a, - 1) H (ak + 1) N(EzE3) _ (a, + 1)(az + 1)(a3 + 1) ,  (a, - 1)(a3) F1 (ak + 1) N(EzEa) _ (a, + 1)(az + 1)(a3 + 1)(a, + 1)'  Id(EzEK)= (a, - 1) H (ak) a,azaK ,  and  1V(E3E,)= (a. -1)(az-1)H(ak+1) (a, + 1)(az + 1)(a3 + 1)(a, + 1)'  tV(E (a, - 1)(az - 1)(aa) H (ak + 1)  3E5) _ (a, + 1)(az + 1)(a3 + 1)(a, + 1)(a, + 1) '  The model, which requires that only one parameter value for each event be determined from a data set, provides many more  observational equations than unknown parameter values. This allows some equations to be used with data to solve for the  parameter values and leaves other equations available for generating predictions about the data. In particular, it allows time  to be used as the basis for predictions about frequency as follows: Note that  T(E,) + 1 az + 1 T(E2) a3 + 1  T(Ez) a, ' T(E3) az  T(EK ,) aK + 1 T(EK) _ aK_~  (BS)  This means that with the total duration data in hand the activation times a2,..., a. are  easily found once a, is determined. Furthermore, one equation between aK and a, ,  _ T(E,)+I T-T(E,)  aK - a,  T(EK) T(EK)  158 DAVID BIRCH  is obtained when the successive substitutions in Eqs. (B5) are made and a second when it is observed that  These two equation yield  a,= T - T(EI) (B6)  N(E, )  as a way to obtain a numerical value for a, . This value of a, , it should be noted, is just the average "off time" for E, in  the domain.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  I wish to express my deep appreciation to William Timberlake for allowing me to draw upon his very special data set and to  Leann Lipps Birch for her valuable criticisms and suggestions on earlier drafts of this paper.  REFERENCES  ATKINSON, J. W., & BIRCH, D. (1970). The dynamics of action. New York: Wiley.  BAKER, F. B., & HUBERT, L. J. (1981). The analysis of social interaction data: A nonparametric technique. Sociological Methods  & Research, 9, 339-361.  BIRCH, D. (1972). Measuring the stream of activity. Michigan mathematical psychology publications, MMPP 72-2. Ann Arbor:  University of Michigan.  BIRCH, D. (1983). On distinguishing theories about behavior from theories about behavioral data. American Journal of  Psychology, 96, 289-290.  BIRCH, D. (1968). Shift in activity and the concept of persisting tendency. In K. W. Spence & J. T. Spence (Eds.), The  psychology of learning and motivation: Advances in research and theory (Vol. II). New York: Academic Press.  BUSH R. R., MOSTELLER, F., & THOMPSON, G. L. (1954). A formal structure for multiple-choice situations. In R. M. Thrall, C. H.  Coombs, & R. L. Davis (Eds.), Decision processes. New York: Wiley.  CONWAY, R. W., MAXWELL, W. L., & MILLER, L. W. (1967). Theory of Scheduling. Reading, Mass., Addison-Wesley.  HUBERT, L. J. (1979). Matching models in the analysis of cross-classifications. Psychometrika, 44, 21-41.  HUBERT, L. J., & BAKER, F. B. (1978). Evaluating the conformity of sociometric measurements. Psychometrika, 43, 31-41.  MORGAN, B. B. (1981). Stess-related effects in the assessment of synthetic-work performance. In G. Galvendy & M. J. Smith  (Eds.), Machine pacing and occupational stress. London: Taylor & Francis. PANWALKAR, S. S., & ISKANDER, W. (1977). A survey of  scheduling rules. Operations Research, 25, 45-61.  FIXED ACTIVATION TIME SCHEDULING MODEL 159  SANKOFF, D., & KRUSKAL, J. B. (Eds.) (1983). Time warps, string edits and macromolecules: The theory and practice of sequence  comparison. Reading, Mass. Addison-Wesley.  SHERIDAN, T. B., & JOHANNSEN, G. (Eds.) (1976). Monitoring behavior and supervisor control. New York: Plenum Press.  STADDON, J. E. R., & SIMMELHAG, V. L. (1971). The "superstition" experiment: A reexamination of its implications for the  principles of adaptive behavior. Psychological Review, 78, 3-43.  STERNBERG, S. (1963). Stochastic learning theory. In Luce, R. D., Bush, R. R., & Galanter, E. (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical  psychology, II, Chaps. 9-14. New York: Wiley.  TIMBERLAKE, W. (1969). Continuous coding of general activity in the rat during exposure to a constant environment and to  stimulus change. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Michigan. TIMBERLAKE, W., & ALLISON, J. (1974). Response  deprivation: An empirical approach to instrumental performance. Psychological Review, 81, 146-164.  TOATEs, F. M. (1980). Animal behavior -A systems approach. New York: Wiley.  RECEIVED: January 31, 1984