10.1016/0022-2496(84)90014-2
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 28, 479-484 (1984)  Book Review  J6ZEF KOZIELECKI. Psychological Decision Theory  [Translated by Boguslaw A. Jankowski ]. Dordrecht, Holland: Reidel, 1981. Pp. 419 $54.50.  Reviewed by LOLA L. LOPES  The Author is Professor of Psychology at the University of Warsaw where he is associated with the Decision Making Research  Unit of the Institute of Psychology. His major research interests are decision making, thinking and problem solving, conflict  and game theory, and personality theories. He has published several books including Conflict, game theory and psychology, PNW,  Warsaw, 1970 [Polish] and The Psychological Theory of Self-Knowledge, 1981 [Polish].  The reviewer is an Associate Professor of Psychology at the University of Wisconsin, Madison. Her primary research interests  are decision making under risk, procedural models of judgment, and conceptions of rationality.  Those who have hungered for a truly psychological decision theory will find the table of contents of Jozef Kozielecki's  Psychological Decision Theory to be mouthwatering. Among the rich offerings are a chapter that compares rational and  psychological decision theory, another that characterizes the decision maker as an information processing system, two more  that describe the task space and the internal representation of risky tasks, and still others that summarize relevant  literatures ranging from mainstream theories of utility and subjective probability to more peripheral areas such as  personality, group decision making, and applications of psychological decision theory. Who among us could resist such  tantalizing subheadings as "the nature of goals," "hesitation and variability of decisions," "superficial and deep  uncertainty," "cold knowledge and warm knowledge," and "the epistemic problem as a decision sequence"?  Unfortunately, Kozielecki's book suffers from a failing that afflicts some overly ambitious restaurants: the menu promises  more than the kitchen can deliver. The fault is not entirely with the author. Although psychological decision theory has been  in the making for roughly thirty years, various factors ranging from the historical to the sociological to the aesthetic have,  at the very least, impeded the development of genuinely psychological approaches to the allied topics of judgment, choice, and  decision making.  Address reprint requests to Lola L. Lopes, Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706.  479  0022-2496/84 $3.00  Copyright 1984 by Academic Press, Inc.  480/28/4-9 All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  480  BOOK REVIEW  Psychological Decision Theory appears as Volume 24 of the Theory and Decision Library published by Reidel. The book is a  revised and translated edition of a book originally published in Polish in 1975. As might be expected, the English is not  perfect, particularly in matters of usage. But it is sufficiently clear that the motivated reader will have no difficulty in  understanding what is said. There are, however, confusions and inconsistencies in the substance of the book that cannot easily  be attributed to problems in translation. These flaws are far more serious and, in my opinion, greatly limit the usefulness of  the book.  Kozielecki describes his book as a "synthesized survey" (p. vii). Of the more than 350 papers listed in the bibliography,  about 20% are in a foreign language, usually Polish. The remaining 80% are in English. Some of these are well-known papers,  representing the mainstream in psychological decision theory. Others are less wellknown papers, sometimes in manuscript or  technical report form. This particular, and sometimes peculiar, selection of papers probably results from the difficulties of  communication between scientists in Eastern Europe and their counterparts in Western Europe and the United States. That the  book exists at all, in fact, is a testament to the existence and value of informal linkages among scientists such as The List,  which is a network of decision researchers, Kozielecki among them, that was for many years coordinated by Sarah Lichtenstein  of Decision Research in Eugene, Oregon, and that is now being overseen by Ola Svenson at University of Stockholm.  A survey of this sort could, in principle, serve either of two functions. One would be to introduce Western readers to the  kinds of decision research done in Eastern Europe. This was, for me, the major benefit of reading the book. Among the several  topics that interested me most were a statistical study of people's preferences in a Polish lottery game (pp. 133-137), an  application of Bayesian inference to the problem of establishing paternity in courts of law (pp. 219-222), and scattered  references to praxiology, a largely Polish discipline concerned with the study of efficient action. However, the book was not  intended as a tutorial for Western readers, so descriptions of Eastern work are relatively rare and seldom complete enough to  be useful scientifically.  The second potential function would be as a textbook for students of psychological decision making. Certainly, the field is in  need of lucid and comprehensive texts for both the graduate and the undergraduate levels. But Kozielecki's book will not, in  my view, fill the bill. Part of the problem is price. At $54.50, the book is out of the realm of possibility for undergraduate  courses, and for graduate courses could be justified only if the book were top rate. Sadly, this is so far from being the case  that I cannot recommend the book for classroom use.  The book's shortcomings as a text fall into three categories, the first of which is a matter of tone. Kozielecki is wildly  enthusiastic about his subject matter, leading him on occasion to breathless flights of hyperbole such as the following:  "Along with utility, subjective probability ranks among the fundamental concepts of modern psychology. Their role in this  science can be compared to that of supply and demand in economics, or of mass and energy in physics" (p. 116); "All in all, it  cannot be  BOOK REVIEW 481  denied that decision psychologists have contributed more evidence on the structure of tasks than any other psychologists" (p.  47); "I would go so far as to compare [the significance of the von Neumann and Morgenstern utility theory] in psychology with  the role of quantum theory in modern physics" (p. 78); "Decision psychologists seem to have brought to light more evidence on  the human operational system than any other group of investigators; their achievements are comparable with those of the  psycholinguists and the Piaget school" (p. 375). Would it were so, we might find these contributions covered, however briefly,  in introductory psychology books. This, however, seems to be a mark of distinction the field has yet to achieve.  A second kind of problem is stylistic. The author has high regard, frequently expressed, for precision and sophistication in  theorizing. This admiration is reflected in numerous attempts to describe inherently vague systems and phenomena formally. The  results are, for the most part, empty. For example, in the chapter on personality and risky decisions, Kozielecki defines  personality to be "a regulatory system composed of a set of individual traits and a set of relations obtaining between them"  (p. 287). He then introduces the equation:  A = (TR2,..., R,),  in which A represents the system, T, is the set of personality traits, and the Rs are the relations between them. The symbol A  is used once each on the following two pages in the phrase "A regulatory system" and not mentioned again. T and R are, once  defined, never referenced.  Similar empty formalism appears in many of the figures and tables. For example, in the chapter on the internal representation  of risky tasks, Kozielecki defines four stages in the making of a decision: (1) the generation of an internal representation  of a task, (2) valuation of possible consequences, (3) prediction of events which codetermine consequences, and (4) choice of  a risky alternative. This description is accompanied by a diagram in which a big box encloses four smaller boxes that  represent the four stages. Input arrows abut the "representation" box; output arrows exit the "choice" box; and doubleheaded  arrows connect each of the six possible pairs of "stage" boxes. What, if anything, the diagram is supposed to convey I cannot  guess, except possibly that everything influences and is influenced by everything else.  It is, perhaps, nit-picking to complain about formalism that is merely empty and not, on the face of it, incorrect. After all,  knowledgable readers can quickly identify and pass over such fluff. But student readers are another matter, and it seems poor  pedagogy to encourage the view that notational systems, flow diagrams, and other formal devices are merely for show.  The third and most serious kind of problem is substantive, reflecting a view of the field that is often idiosyncratic and  sometimes simply wrong. Some lapses are, granted, relatively minor as when, in the chapter on theories of utility, Kozielecki  describes von Neumann and Morgenstern's utility theory as "normative rather than descriptive..." (p. 72) and later states that  the theory "defines the optimal strategy... for choosing among the alternatives in conditions of risk" (p. 76). Although this  view  482 BOOK REVIEW  of von Neumann and Morgenstern's theory is widely shared, it is mistaken. The credit (or blame, as the case may be) for  ascribing normative status to the theory must lie with others, notably Savage and Marschak.  Some errors are, however, fundamental. For example, in the same chapter Kozielecki discusses methods for measuring utility. He  begins by suggesting that the utility of outcomes, such as sandwiches, might be described as a power function of the number of  sandwiches. From this he moves to consideration of the von Neumann and Morgenstern axioms and describes how they provide a  basis for utility measurement. Of this he says, "...von Neumann and Morgenstern have demonstrated that utility can be measured  on an interval scale; this proved the truth of an idea cherished by investigators over several generations" (p. 78). Finally,  he returns to the notion of power functions and describes how psychophysical methods such as magnitude estimation can be used  to measure utility.  The juxtaposition of these two approaches to utility measurement confuses two distinct meanings of utility. The classical  notion formulated by Bernoulli concerned the subjective value of certain outcomes-ducats, sandwiches, or whatever. In this  view, utility refers to the quantity of subjective "good" contained by the outcome in question. Von Neumann and Morgenstern's  utility, however, does not refer necessarily to a real subjective quantity, nor does their method give a way to measure  utility for certain outcomes. What von Neumann and Morgenstern showed is that if a person's preferences for lotteries satisfy  certain axioms, then it is possible to represent these preferences with a utility function. Thus, a von Neumann and  Morgenstern utility function does not cause preferences for one lottery or another; it summarizes them. Subtle though this  distinction may seem to the uninitiated, it has been, and continues to be, important theoretically and ought not to be  confused.  Trouble spots such as these are, unfortunately, not restricted to technical topics. For example, the chapter on group decision  making gives extensive play to the nowdiscredited "risky shift" phenomenon, of which Kozielecki says "The bulk of the  evidence... makes it abundantly clear that the group shows a stronger risk-taking tendency than its individual members"  (p.320). Those who have followed the literature in social psychology will know that this is no longer the consensus view.  Contrary to what was once believed, groups do not appear to be more risk-seeking than their members. Instead, to the extent  that "shifts" of any kind occur in groups, they reflect a "polarization" phenomenon in which groups that initially favor a  risky option become more risk-seeking and groups that initially favor a conservative option become more conservative. In fact,  so notorious is the risky shift among social psychologists that it has served as a case study of an experimental paradigm  whose uncritical acceptance by researchers led to the generation of masses of useless research (Cartwright, 1973).  PRODUCTS AND PROMISES  Up to this point, I have treated Psychological Decision Theory as a product, one that might be chosen for use as a graduate  text. The criticisms I have made of the  BOOK REVIEW  483  book, and the reasons why I would reject it personally for that use, are specific to the book and, in most cases, are tied to  viewpoints and expository decisions for which the author bears responsibility. But it would be unfair to leave matters here,  without speaking to the issue of the book that Kozielecki envisioned.  When I first read the book's table of contents, it promised a feast. There, in one volume, was the course I always hoped to  teach, but never really managed to pull off. Whatever unsatisfied cravings I now feel are not due to technical shortcomings in  the exposition, nor are they due to any lack of imagination or insight on the part of the author. On the contrary, it is  because of Kozielecki's ambitious attempt at synthesizing the current state of our knowledge in psychological decision theory  that I see how little knowledge there is, and wonder why.  What makes for good science, anyway? This is a deep question, perhaps best left to the philosophers and historians of science.  But one factor seems uniform in all the successful sciences, and in all the successful subfields within psychology. That is an  intense and respectful interest in the phenomena that the science seeks to explain. Put plainly, the point seems so obvious as  to be trivial, but if it is trivial, then what are the phenomena that motivated early research in psychological decision  theory? I can think of none. Instead, what seems to have happened is that sophisticated normative theories from economics and  statistics inspired the interest and respect that ordinarily are accorded to subject matter, causing psychological decision  theory to develop not as the means for explaining real decisional phenomena, but rather as a vehicle for exploring theories  whose attractions were aesthetic, not empirical.  It is conventional these days for decision researchers to point out that whereas once the field was mired in normative theory,  today the emphasis is descriptive. There is a little truth in this. But despite the fact that most decision researchers  recognize the narrowness and questionable generality of research stemming from normative models, they continue to place high  value on theoretical sophistication. As Kozielecki puts it, "Whereas psychological decision theory is relatively young,... it  has reached a fairly advanced level of scientific maturity... [covering] much ground in the formalization and verification of  its findings. This has been possible in part owing to the frequent use of modelling as a means of constructing axiomatic  theories" (p. 371). Perhaps I am unduly pessimistic, but it does not seem likely that major changes are likely to occur in  either the data we collect or the theories we construct until there is recognition that youthfulness and sophistication are  ordinarily contraries, and that, for the time being, the former may preclude the latter.  Human beings often underestimate the complexity of their own cognitive processes. Take language for example. Most people  watching films like 2001: A Space Odyssey or Star Wars take for granted that machines like HAL or C3PO might, in some  notso-distant future, converse fluently and naturally in English. Even computer scientists once believed that machine  translation would be a straightforward problem, easily solvable with little more than table-lookup. Today, of course, we know  better, but only from hard experience. Language is incredibly complex and it cannot be understood independently from all the  rest of the cognitive apparatus.  It does not seem to me that the human decision making system is any less complex  484 BOOK REVIEW  than language or any less bound up with other cognitive processes. Consider what it would take to have a computer that could  make reasonable decisions over the vast domain in which human beings function. All of us know someone to whom we would  delegate important decisions if the need arose. We would count on them to have values similar to ours, to judge uncertainties  as we might, to choose appropriately among competing goals, and above all, to use common sense. Could any currently  practicable machine fill that role; do we know anywhere near enough prescriptively or descriptively to write the program? I  think clearly not, but the worst of it is that many psychologists working in the field seem to have no conception of how big  the problem is and how small the domain to which our current theories apply.  Whatever weaknesses Kozielecki's book may have, it shows what the field might aspire to. The outline is there. The right  questions have been asked. Nothing would please me more than to see the promise become reality.  REFERENCES  CARTWRIGHT, D. (1973). Determinants of scientific progress: The case of research on the risky shift. American Psychologist,  28, 222-231.