10.1016/0022-2496(84)90022-1
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 28, 118-119 (1984)  Book Review  C. H. COOMBS. Psychology and Mathematics. An Essay on Theory. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1983. Pp. 112. $12.50.  Reviewed by A. A. J. MARLEY,  The author is an Emeritus Professor at the University of Michigan. Prior to his retirement, he was the Daniel Katz  Distinguished University Professor of Psychology at that university. He holds degrees from the University of California and  the University of Chicago and has been at Michigan since 1947. He is a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and  a member of the National Academy of Sciences. His primary research interests are the structure of conflict, decision  processes, and choice, scaling, and measurement theory. He has written Theory of data, 1964, and Mathematical psychology: An  elementary introduction, 1970 (with R. M. Dawes and A. Tversky); both books have been reprinted by Mathesis Press, Ann Arbor.  The reviewer is Professor of Psychology at McGill University, where he has been since 1969. Prior to going to McGill, he was a  Fellow of the Miller Institute, University of California at Berkeley, and a Killam Fellow, University of Alberta at Edmonton.  He is currently Editor of the Journal of Mathematical Psychology. His main research interests are probabilistic and  computational models in perception and decision.  Coombs presents a highly readable discussion of the role of mathematics in theory construction in psychology. The presentation  is, by his choice, very selective. The first chapter presents a general discussion of the term "mathematical model," how  models are related to the real world, and the role of models in behavioral science. The final chapter expands on points raised  throughout the book on issues of power and generality of theories, necessary and sufficient conditions in axiomatic systems  and models, and appropriate theory languages in psychology. Each of the other three chapters concentrates on a specific  application. Chapter 11 concerns preference behavior, using the examples of hedonic tone and preferred family size to motivate  a discussion of single peaked preferences, pareto optimality, and efficient sets. Chapter III introduces additive conjoint  measurement, especially the cancellation axiom, as a way to incorporate additive operations into psychology. Chapter IV  discusses probabilistic choice behavior, with an emphasis on stochastic transitivity and the conditions under which one might  expect it to hold-this chapter includes clear presentations of Tversky's additive and additive difference models, Tversky and  Russo's characterization of simple scalability, Luce's choice axiom, and Yellott's multiple copies characterization of the  choice model as a random utility model.  Given the clarity of the author's presentation, it is a pity that he did not choose to expand the coverage to additional  areas, such as learning and psychophysics, where there has also been intimate interaction between theory and data (Coombs  mentions 118  0022-2496/84 $3.00  Copyright n 1984 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  BOOK REVIEWS 119  these areas in passing, giving some starting references). I would also have liked to see some rather more detailed examples on  the cycle of theory construction, empirical test, and further theory construction that Coombs rightly claims to be so  important. Finally, the measurement chapter, with its focus on conjoint measurement in the abstract, seems somewhat out of  place given that the remainder of the book concentrates on specific applications of theories to preference and choice. Better  examples for this chapter might have involved the axiomatization of expected utility, or of the unfolding theory introduced in  the previous chapter, or of multiattribute utility theory (the latter would still have allowed Coombs to discuss conjoint  measurement axioms). It is quite possible that more thought would make it clear that these topics could not be adequately  handled in a brief chapter, but Coombs' demonstrated facility with such exposition in the remainder of the book makes this  unlikely.  The book fits the tradition, common in physics, of presenting (mathematical) theories in a way that is comprehensible to the  non-expert. The book should interest, and be understandable by, any reader who is curious about the role of mathematical  theory construction in psychology. It is particularly suited to students interested in psychology either generally or as a  possible field of study, and (possibly but unlikely) as an adjunct text in a course on mathematical psychology.  The book is a pleasure to read and, at 112 pages, not too expensive in the context of current high prices. I recommend it  highly for what it does, regretting only that it did not do more of the same.  Printed in Belgium