10.1016/0022-2496(84)90002-6
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 28, 282-316 (1984)  The Case of Piaget's Group INRC  EDGAR ASCHER  Universite de Geneve  What is it that distinguishes Piaget's transformations N, R, and C from the rest of the 161 transformations of the 16 binary  propositional operations? Here Piaget's INRC is considered as a subgroup of the group _42 of all automorphisms and dual  automorphisms of the free Boolean algebra with two generators. This group is isomorphic to S4 X CZ. Its elements are given  explicitly. Many other psychologically relevant subgroups of A2 play an important role. They are discussed and their  connections shown. Particular attention is given to involutions, even if the view that they constitute the sole representation  of reversibility is abandoned. Piaget's transformation R turns out not to be the inverse operation of relations. The group of  automorphisms, dual automorphisms, anti-automorphisms of the algebra of binary relations on a finite set is found. A  crystallographic presentation of these groups is given and related work by Bart (Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1971, 5,  539-553), Leresche (Revue Europeenne des Sciences Sociales, 1976, 14, 219-241), and P61ya (The Journal of Symbolic Logic,  1940, 5, 98-103) is discussed. C 1984 Academic Press, Inc.  ALGEBRAIC MODELS  My purpose in this paper is to dispel some misconceptions about Piaget's group INRC and thereby to open the way for a fruitful  use of groups of so-called logical transformations and to model other domains of cognitive activities. The group INRC appears  for the first time in Piaget (1950). Many comments and discussions have appeared since; but much of it is subtly vague, at  best. If one wants to be more precise, it behooves one both to make clear what the group is meant to model and to become aware  of its mathematical environment. This is not to say that the psychological and epistemological problems Piaget wanted to  tackle are in fact mathematical problems. But it is useless, and may indeed be dangerous, to ask of psychology what  mathematics by itself can accomplish. On the other hand, it is clear that one cannot reduce psychology to mathematics. The  psychologist has to select the adequate mathematical structure for his problem. (This, of course, includes the possibility of  deciding not to attempt any mathematical formalization.) But then he must be sufficiently aware of the mathematical  possibilities which can be related to his subject matter. Sparse mathematics may blind one to interesting aspects of  behaviour, adequate mathematics is full of suggestions for experiment. And that is another reason to discuss some of the  various mathematical questions raised by the  Requests for reprints should be sent to Edgar Ascher, Department de physique theorique, Universite de Geneve, CH-1211 Geneva  4, Switzerland.  282  0022-2496/84 $3.00  Copyright 1984 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  PIAGET'S INRC 283  investigation of the role played by the group INRC in the genetic psychology of logical operations. "Our main goal is [to  contribute to] the construction of an adequate mathematical model, wherein one can make deductions and inferences strictly  from the mathematical structure itself, and then emerge from the mathematical structure with interpretation hypothesis..."  (Hoffman, 1980, p. 422).  The mathematical structures we want to discuss belong to algebra (and to its most elementary parts at that). Again this does  not mean that other mathematical structures may not be useful for formalizing problems that arise in genetic psychology. But  Piaget has favoured what he calls "logical formalization": "...logical formalization is absolutely essential every time we can  carry out some formalization;..." (Piaget, 1970, p. 10).  There are, however, at least two styles of logical formalization: the algebraic one and that of the theory of deduction. As  far as Piaget is concerned, it seems correct to say that "... the author, joining the tradition of algebraic logic of Boole,  Peirce, and Schroder, takes an algebraic view of the subject rather than the one of the theory of deduction" (Beth, 1950, p.  259). Within the context of Beth's virulent attack against the "Traite de Logique" (Piaget, 1949), this evocation, of what to  Beth then appeared to be the rear guard of a defeated tradition, was clearly meant to deprecate Piaget's book. Nevertheless,  it remains true that "logical formalization" for Piaget does mean, in the first place, algebraic formalization. Indeed, he  says (Piaget, 1967, p. 269), "In view of the present lack of numerical units in psychology, the usefulness of logical models  consists in providing a possible image of the very operations of the subject, as well as of the operational structures  ("groupings," groups, lattices, etc.) which these operations form between themselves."  What he has in mind then, are qualitative models and not quantitative ones; not the mathematical disciplines related to  psychometrics, but algebra.  In this paper, we shall deal with some algebraic structures of logical operations. Such structures, however, are not related  exclusively to logic. Hence they may be used to characterize patterns of propositional as well as of experimental activity.  One is thus led to the view that they characterize an "algebra of competence" detectable in the patterns of actions of a  person reasoning or solving problems, doing things with propositions or with material objects.  For Piaget, the important algebraic structure that emerges during preadolescence and that explains most of the achieved and  achievable performances is the INRC group.  To understand how this group arises, and what it stands for, we have to consider two among the acquisitions of preadolescence:  the possibility of the child to view a given situation as one among several possible ones and his capacity to move from one of  these possibilities to others related to the situation at hand.  The constitution of the set of possibilities that could be taken into account is a first step. As far as propositions are  concerned, Piaget limits the combinatorial system-as he calls it-to the combinations of propositions present in a free Boolean  algebra (mostly that generated by two propositions). It should be realized that this algebraic structure is the result of a  great number of constraints (axioms) imposed on the inter  480/28/3-5  284 EDGAR ASCHER  propositional operations "and" or "meet," "or" or "join," and "negation" or "complement" (as will be seen in the next  section). These constraints reduce the number of possibilities to a tractable amount and thus render the constitution of the  combinatorial system both possible and useful. The question then arises of when this reduction is achieved and in which order  the several constraints are introduced by the child (in other words, which are the intermediate algebraic structures). This  however is not the subject matter of the present paper. Our problem is at a level above that of the free Boolean algebra,  which we take for granted in this context. Indeed, Piaget not only posits the existence of the combinatorial system of all  possibilities that could be taken into account by the child, but he examines also the means she has to move among these  possibilities and effectively to take into account only those that are appropriate in a given situation. These, in most cases,  do not make up the whole combinatorial system.  The mobility necessary for this is achieved by operations on the combinatorial manifold, that transform its elements among  themselves. At the stage of formal operations, the transformations should be reversible and organized into a structured whole  by associative composition. If we add that each transformation operates on any element of the manifold, then the structured  whole is a group.  The notion of mobility will be made more explicit in the section entitled "Mobility, Orbits, Subgroups." One should also ask  oneself in what order and under which circumstances the highly integrated structure of a group is built up from weaker (and  more complicated) structures, and also whether any of these remain pertinent in some situations even at the stage of formal  operations. These important questions are outside the scope of the present paper. Here the group structure of the  transformations is taken for granted. The concept of reversibility, however, needs some elucidation.  Reversibility has been modeled by the fact that every element g of a group has an inverse g-' such that gg-' = g -'g = e,  where e is the unit element of the group (representing, in our case, the identity transformation, that leaves everything  unchanged). The property of having an inverse has sometimes been interpreted erroneously, by Piaget and others. It is  therefore necessary to discuss this point. Consider the operation J that transforms an element g of a group into its inverse  g-', i.e., Jg = g-'. Let us call J the "inversor." The inversor J acts on the elements of a given group (that may already, as  in our case, be a group of transformations). It is not an element of that group. The inversor has the special property that,  if it is applied twice to an element g, the result is again the same element g. This may be noted JZg = g and expresses simply  the fact that the inverse of the inverse of an element g is again that element g, i.e., (g -')-' =g. In other words, the  square JZ of the inversor J is the identity transformation on the group in question (not belonging to that group).  Transformations whose square, like that of the inversor, is equal to the identity, are called involutions. But on no account  does the fact that the inversor is an involution mean that the reversibility of an operation g (i.e., the existence of an  inverse operation g-') implies that it is an involution (i.e., that gz = e).  The idea that every reversible operation is an involution appears at many places in  PIAGET'S INRC 285  Piaget's writings. In particular Piaget's group INRC is a group that, in addition to the identity element, contains only  involutions, and may be the reason why Piaget has considered INRC to be the group of logical transformations. This becomes  particularly inconvenient, when one supposes that all changes that mark the passage from the stage of concrete operations to  that of formal operations derive from that group considered as representing the "mental structure" or "algebra of competence"  of the preadolescent. Thus, in "The Early Growth of Logic" (Inhelder and Piaget, 1958), the wealth contained in the  psychological experiments has been trimmed to the size of INRC, much to the expense of the basic idea of an algebra of  competence which this book was meant to promote.  Our first task, then, is to show that INRC is by no means the only group of logical transformations that it is meaningful to  consider.  THE GROUP INRC AND THE AUTOMORPHISMS OF FB(2)  Piaget (1972, p. XIV) "became aware of the existence of this group [INRC] within the propositional operations before 1949  (believing, moreover, that they were known), that is at a time when logicians still had not taken any interest in it."  This group, INRC, operates on the sixteen binary propositional operations (BPO) shown in the second column of Table 1. The  operation N is the usual, Boolean, logical negation. "A second operation [R] may be called "reciprocity." We may ... call  reciprocity the transformation that consists in negating the propositions which compose a given binary operation.... But  reciprocity may be defined differently and I called it reciprocity with this second possible meaning in mind. In the case of  the implication p -> q, the reciprocal is q -p. Thus, the reciprocal of an implication results from permuting the two  propositions occurring in the expression at stake" (Piaget, 1950, pp. 144, 145). The first definition is unambiguous, but the  second is equivocal. Consider, e.g., the binary operation p V q. It is equivalent to p' - q. Which are "the two propositions  occurring in the expression"? If we consider them to be p' and q, then we get q --+ p' which is equivalent top' V q'. This  coincides with the result obtained by applying the first definition. This, then, is the meaning intended by Piaget. It is,  however, not less natural to consider p and q as propositions occurring in p V q or q --+ p', and this then remains unchanged  when the second definition is used. The result is an operation, different from Piaget's R, and for which we shall introduce  the sign T. Let us note that both R and T change p -~ q into q -> p. In this paper, the operation T will play a role at least  as important as that of R. The operation C, finally, is defined as the product of N and R : C = NR = RN.  But in fact there are 16! (roughly 2 - 10") 1-1 transformations or permutations of the sixteen BPO, and not only four of them,  since a priori the whole symmetric group S,6, the group of all permutations of 16 items has to be taken into account. The  restriction to 1-1 transformations guarantees "reversibility," since for every such transformation t there exists an inverse  t-'.  However, most of these permutations are not interesting. It seems natural to  286 EDGAR ASCHER  consider the 16 BPO not simply as any 16 items, but to take into account how these BPO are related to each other. If one looks  at the manner in which the 16 BPO can be obtained from two of them by using conjunctions, disjunctions, and negations, then  one is led to consider the BPO as elements of a Boolean algebra, and more precisely, of a free Boolean algebra FB(2) with two  generators. Consequently, one is then led to take into account only those transformations that "respect" this structure, in a  sense which will be made clear presently.  Bart (1971) has imposed quite different conditions on the transformations of the elements of FB(2); the Boolean structure is  not respected (cf. Appendix 3).  Let us recall here what a Boolean algebra is and what is meant by free. We do this in a way which permits easy comparison with  operations on the set of relations we shall define below. Furthermore, making the algebraic ingredients of Boolean algebras  explicit may suggest experiments concerning these features and about the gradual building-up of Boolean algebras from them.  A Boolean algebra  _W = (B, n, V, ', 0,1)  is a set B with two binary operations n (meet) and V (join), one unary operation ' (complement) and two nullary operations  (i.e., special elements) 0 and l. These operations have properties stated and explained below.  (i) First consider .W, = (B, n, 1, 0).  (a) The operation n is associative, i.e., for all elements x, y, z of B,  xn(yAz)=(xAy)Az. (1)  It has a unit element 1; this means  xn 1=x=1 nx (2)  for all x.  Properties (a) and (/j) are usually summarized by saying that .~P, is a monoid. However, this monoid has further properties.  (y) It has a null element 0:   xA0=0 =0Ax. (3)  (8) It is commutative:   xAy=yAx. (4)  (e) It is idempotent:   xnx=x (5)  for any element x of B.  PIAGET'S INRC 287  (ii) -Wv = (B, V, 0, 1) is a monoid (unit element 0) with null element 1, that is furthermore commutative and idempotent.  (iii) The operation '   is characterized by   (a) (x')' = x, (6)  (f3) xnx'=O,xVx'=1. (7)  (iv) The operations n and V are linked in many ways.   (a) Absorption:   xA(xVy)=x=xV (xAy), (8)  and  (,a) Left distributivity (right distributivity then follows from commutativity):  xA(yVz)=(xAy)V(xAz), (9)  xV (yAz)=(xVy)A(xVz), (10)  (y) De Morgan equalities   (x Ay)' =x' V y', (11)  (x V y)' = x' n y', (12)  1' = 0, (13)  0' = 1, (13')  as a consequence of (6).  We may also say that, (11), (12), (13), and (6) express the fact that ' is an isomorphism of the monoids '!VA and ,Wv.  A Boolean algebra is free on n generators if it contains exactly all different elements that can be formed from the n  generators by performing the operations n, V, and '.  If we then consider the 16 BPO as elements of the free Boolean algebra FB(2) with two generators, it is reasonable to take  into account not simply transformations but only transformations that conserve the Boolean structure, that is Boolean  automorphisms. Such an automorphism 0 is a one-to-one mapping of the set B onto itself such that  O(x n y) = Ox n Oy, (14)  O(x V y) = Ox V Oy, (15)  O(X1) = (Ox)', (16)  00 =0, 01=1. (17)  288 EDGAR ASCHER  This limitation to automorphisms turns out to be altogether too drastic, since the transformations N and C, as defined and  used by Piaget, are not automorphisms; they do not, for instance, conserve the special elements 0 and 1, as would be required  by (17). Indeed Piaget defines N as being exactly the operation '. Hence, comparison of (13), (13'), and (17) shows that N is  not an automorphism; and neither is C, since C = RN = NR. It will be easy to get hold of these and similar elements once the  automorphisms have been found.  It is not difficult to find the automorphisms of a Boolean algebra. One has to take into account the fact that every finite  Boolean algebra is isomorphic to the Boolean algebra of all subsets of a finite set; the operations are the union and the  intersection of sets, the set theoretic complement, the void set, and the original set (e.g., Kurosh 1963, p. 189). If the set  has n elements, the corresponding Boolean algebra will be noted B(n). It has 2" elements. A free Boolean algebra with n  generators FB(n) has 2' (with p = 2") elements and is isomorphic to B(2"). In the case of the 16 BPO we have n = 2: FB(2) -  B(4).  The set of all automorphisms of a Boolean algebra is a group under function composition. (A group is a monoid in which all  elements have an inverse.) The group of all automorphisms of a finite Boolean algebra B(n) can be obtained from, and is  isomorphic to, the symmetric group S", the group of all permutations of the n elements of the corresponding set. More  precisely, it is a subgroup of the group SP (p = 2") of all permutations of the 2" elements of B(n). In particular, the  automorphism group .V2 of FB(2) is a subgroup of S,6 isomorphic to S4 and has 24 elements. For the subsequent discussions, we  need to know how these transformations operate on the 16 elements of FB(2). It is also worthwhile to understand how to obtain  them. We therefore introduce a short notation for each of the elements of FB(2). We derive it from the notation for the binary  propositional operations introduced by Lukasiewicz (Bocheriski, 1959, p. 11). He writes, for instance, Apq for p V q and Kpq  for p A q. We denote the corresponding elements of FB(2) by a and k, respectively, and thus obtain the notation contained in  Table 1. Furthermore, to each element we associate (column 3) a subset of a set of four elements, whose elements are  designated by the same letters as the four elements k, 1, m, and x. This establishes an isomorphism between FB(2) and the  subsets of the set {k, l, m, x} in which there corresponds to each subset the element of BL(2) that is the disjunction of the  elements of the subset. Thus, for instance, {k, l, m} corresponds to k V 1 V m = a.  We now introduce the diagram of a finite Boolean algebra (often called its lattice). We say that an element x (different from  y) covers y if  (i) x V y = x and  (ii) there is no other element z such that  XVz=x, zVy=z.  Now connecting every element by an ascending line exactly to all elements that cover it, we obtain a diagram of a finite  Boolean algebra. Figure 1 shows the lattice of  PIAGET'S INRC 289  TABLE 1 Notations and Generators for the Free Boolean Algebra FB(2)  (i, h)  (i, e) (e, h)  v 1 {k,1, m, x} 1 1  a pVq {k,1,ml iVe' e'Vh  b pVq' {k,1,x} iVe eVh'  c p'Vq fk,m,x} i'Ve eVh  d p' V q' 11, m, x } i' V e' e' V h'  i p Jk,11 i e"h  h q {k, m} i"e h  e p-q{k, x} e e  J pwgb {1, m} e' e'  g q' {1, x} iwe h'  ./' P' {m, x} i' ewh  k pnq {k} iAe eAh  1 p n q' {1} i A e' e' n h'  m p' A q { m } i' A e' e' A h  x P' A q, IX l i' n e e n h'  0 0  0 0  Note. For columns 4 and 5 see under the heading "Relations."   a p-q=(pnq)V (p'Aq'). b pwq=(pAq')V (p' A q).  FB(2) thus obtained. Given such a lattice, joins and meets of any two elements can easily be found. The join (meet) of two  elements is the element at which the ascending (descending) lines starting from these elements meet.  To obtain from the group S, of permutations of the four elements k, 1, m and x, the isomorphic subgroup V2 of S,6, one simply  has to find how the elements of S, transform the subsets of {k, l, m, x}. Take, for instance, the transformation (kx) (lm)  that exchanges first l and m, and then k and x. This transformation induces, for  FIG. 1. Lattice of FB(2).  290 EDGAR ASCHER  example, a transformation of the set {k, l} into the set J m, x}, that is (according to Table 1), of the element i into the  element f; the set {k, l, x} is transformed into {k, m, x}, that is, b is transformed into c-and so on. We thus find that  (kx)(1m) E S, induces  (kx)(Im)(ad)(bc)(if)(hg)(e)(j)(v)(o) E S,6.  It may be seen that this is Piaget's transformation R, e.g., in (Piaget, 1972, p. 254). This way, we obtain the whole group  .Vz of automorphisms of FB(2) shown in Table 2. The elements of V, are represented as products of cycles. The cycles are  applied to the elements of FB(2) from right to left. A cycle (Ikxm), for instance, transforms 1 into k, k into x, x into m,  and m into l: (Ikxm) = (Ik) (kx)(xm).  A permutation X is said to have order n, if performed n times it gives the identity permutation I (X" = I). The group V2  contains elements of orders two, three, and four. The 24 elements are divided into five groups; these are conjugate classes of  S, defined and used below. We have not indicated how the automorphisms transform the  TABLE 2  Group V2 of Automorphisms of FB(2)  Sa Extended to S,6 Generators  (k)(1)(m)(x) (a)(b)(c)(d) (i)(h)(e)(j)(g)(f)   (mx)(k)(I) (ab)(c)(d) (he)(ig)(i)(f) UTU= VP  (Ix)(k)(m) (ac)(b)(d) (ie)Uf)(h)(g) U  (kx)(1)(m) (ad)(b)(c) (ig)(hf )(e)(j) VUV = TR  (lm)(k)(x) (bc)(a)(d) (ih)(gf )(e)(j) T  (km)(1)(x) (bd)(a)(c) (ij)(ef )(h)(g) TVT= UQ  (kl)(m)(x) (cd)(a)(b) (hj)(eg)(i)(f) V  (kl)(mx) (ab)(cd) (hg)(ej)(i)(f ) UTUV = P  (km)(lx) (ac)(bd) (if)(ej)(h)(g) VUVT= Q  (kx)(lm) (ad)(bc) (if)(hg)(e)(j) TVTU=R  (lxm)(k) (abc)(d) (ieh)(igf) TU  (kxm)(1) (abd)(c) (igj)(hef ) TUVT  (Imx)(k) (acb)(d) (ihe)(jgf) UT  (Ikx)(m) (acd)(b) (ieg)(jhf) UV  (kmx)(1) (adb)(c) (Ug)(ehf) TVUT  (1kx)(m) (adc)(b) (ige)(jjh) VU  (Ikm)(x) (bcd)(a) (ihi)(efg) TV  (Imk)(x) (bdc)(a) (ijh)(egf) VT  (lkxm) (abcd) (iefj)(hg) TUV= UP= RU  (lxmk) (abdc) (iglh)(ej) VTU=TQ=PT  (Imkx) (acbd) (jheg)Qf) UVT=VR=QV  (lkmx) (acdb) (ihfg)(ej) UTV = QT= TP  (Ixkm) (adbc) (jgeh)(if ) TVU=RV= VQ  (lmxk) (adcb) (ijfe)(hg) VUT=PU= UR  PIAGET'S INRC 291  elements v and o. According to (17) they remain unchanged. Thus, (v) (o) should be added to each automorphism.  Some of these automorphisms have been given special symbols (P, Q, R, U, T, V). They are involutions (there are three other  involutions in .~Z). Involutions are transformations X of order two: XZ =I.  Such transformations are equal to their inverse: X=X-'. Piaget calls them also "reciprocities."  The important role played by involutions in the formalization of Piaget's psychology and epistemology has been stressed by  several authors (see, e.g., Wermus, 1972). But the groups of transformations considered were always groups consisting of  involutions (i.e., Boolean groups). The group -~0'2 contains 13 such groups and -4f, relevant to the discussion of the  transformations of the BPO (cf., subsequent section) contains 48 of them, of which 25 are isomorphic to INRC. Thus, INRC has  no special status a priori as a group of logical transformations.  It has often been considered, that inversible operations are represented by involutions. However, "this `strong' view of  reversibility is derived not from extensive empirical examinations of reversibility behaviors but rather from a consideration  of the reversibility indicated in the INRC group" (Bart, 1971, p. 542). As discussed in the first section, this view probably  arises from a misinterpretation of the fact that the "inversor" is an involution.  It is clear that transformations of orders higher than two play a role in the functioning of intelligence. In such cases,  reversibility simply corresponds to the existence of an inverse transformation, that however need not be equal to the original  one.  Nevertheless, giving up the strong view of reversibility, the exclusive privilege of involutions to represent reversibility,  does not mean abandoning involutions altogether. They still play an important role in the groups underlying a person's  intellectual (and other) activities. The group sae, of automorphisms of FB(2) is a good illustration of what may happen. This  group is not a group of involutions, but a group generated by involutions, the three involutions U, T, and V for instance.  That is, every element of .sae, can be written as a product of these three elements (generators), as shown in the column  "generators" of Table 2. It can be seen there that no element is the product of more than four factors.  A more complicated structure than that of Boolean groups arises because the generating involutions do not commute.  Noncommutativity and the appearance of higher order (i.e., noninvolutive) operations are probably closely related genetically.  Now, noncommutativity is certainly a basic experience in the growth of intelligence. Below, in the discussion of subgroups, we  shall find a typical example of noncommutativity.  Involutive generators of .sae, other than U, T, and V may be selected. Some of these selections will be discussed below.  Depending on the choice of generators, some automorphisms appear more complicated than others, since they are represented as  products of many factors. Such a notational complication may reveal psychological complexity. One may even require that it be  so; that is, that the generators be selected  292 EDGAR ASCHER  in such a way that the genetically simple appears as simply generated. There is, of course, also the possibility of choosing  as generators elements other than involutions. The possibilities are numerous, and to point this out is all we can do here.  The algebraic model must be adapted to actual experience.  We conclude this section by remarking that, quite generally, the group of automorphisms of the free Boolean algebra FB(n) with  n generators is isomorphic to Sp (p = 2n) and that it is generated by 2" - 1 involutions. It is also useful to know that it  may be viewed as a group of crystallographic transformations of a (2" - 1)dimensional crystal. In the case we are mainly  interested in (n = 2), the crystal is an ordinary 3-dimensional cubic crystal. More about the crystallographic representation  may be found in Appendix 1.  DUAL AUTOMORPHISMS  Piaget's transformations N and C are not automorphisms of FB(2), but dual automorphisms (d-automorphisms for short), that is,  transformations that fulfil the following conditions:  W(x n y) ='Px V T'y, (18)  'P(x V y) = Wx AYfy, (19)  'P(x') = (WX)' (20)  Y/0 = 1, Y'1 = 0. (21)  We may now say that Eqs. (11), (12), and (13) express the fact that ' is a dautomorphism. Furthermore, we note that Piaget's  transformation N, the Boolean negation, is the operation '  thus, it is indeed a d-automorphism. It has the further property of commuting with all automorphisms; equations (16) and (22)  give together  (x) = No (# (23)  It is important to note that the product of an automorphism and a d-automorphism is a d-automorphism. Piaget's C, which is  equal to RN, is an example. Furthermore, as it is easy to convince oneself, the product of two d-automorphisms is an  automorphism. (The d-automorphisms do not form a group.) It follows that in a group containing automorphisms and  d-automorphisms, there is the same number of both of them; the order of such a group is necessarily even. We shall call such a  group, a group of "mixed automorphisms". As we shall see, the d-automorphisms of such a group are not necessarily those  obtained through multiplication by N of its  PIAGET'S INRC 293  automorphisms. In other words, a group of mixed automorphisms is not always a "direct product" of its subgroup of  automorphisms by the group {I, N}.  If among the d-automorphisms of a group of mixed automorphisms, there is one involution, say X, that commutes with all  automorphisms, then the group is a direct product of its subgroup of automorphisms with the group of order two generated by  that element. Equation (23) shows N is such an element. Therefore, the group ..A of all mixed automorphisms of FB(2) is the  direct product of .Vz and the group (N) generated by N; it is isomorphic to S, X CZ:  =.V2 X (N) ~ S, X Cz. (24)  In other words, each d-automorphism is the product of an automorphism with N. (But in a subgroup of -A2 these automorphisms  may be absent.) The action of N is known from (22); thus, all d-automorphisms can be computed by multiplication of  permutations. The result is shown in Table 3.  Since m' was generated by three involutions, it follows from the construction, that  TABLE 3  Dual Automorphisms of FB(2)  Elements of S,6 Generators  (ax)(bm)(cl)(dk) (if)(hg)(ej) N  (am)(bx)(cl)(dk) (if )(hj)(eg) VP  (a1)(bm)(cx)(dk) (j)(hg)(ef) U= UN  (ak)(bm)(cl)(dx) (ih)(fg)(ej) Tk  (ax)(bl)(cm)(dk) (ig) (hf ) (ej) T = TN  (ax)(bk)(cl)(dm) (ie)(jf )(hg) UQ  (ax)(bm)(ck)(dl) (f)(he)(Jg) V = VN  (am)(bx)(ck)(dl) (if )(h)(e)(j)(g) P'=PN  (al)(bx)(ck)(dm) (hg)(i)(e)(j)(f ) Q = QN  (ak)(bl)(cm)(dx) (ej)(i)(h)(g)(f) k=RN=C  (amcxhl)(A) WOO) TUN  (amdxbk)(el) (ihjfge) TUVTN  (albxcm)(dk) (igejhj) UTN  (aldxck)(bm) (ijgfeh) UVN  (akbxdm)(cl) (iegrjh) TVUTN  (akcdk1)(bm) (ihefgj) VUN  (bldmck)(ax) (igffhe) TVN  (bkcmdl)(ax) (iehfjg) VTN  (amck)(bldx) (jfe)(h)(g) TUVN=kU  (amd1)(bkcx) (ihfg)(e)(j) VTUN=PT  (albk)(cmdx) (ehjg)(1)(f) UVTN=QV  (aldm)(bxck) (ig(h)(e)(j) UTVN=TP  (akbl)(cxdm) (egjh)(i)(f) TVUN= VQ  (akcm)(bxdl) (iefj)(h)(g) VUTN= OR  294 EDGAR ASCHER  is generated by four of them, U, T, V, and N, for example. However, we shall see that it can be generated by three involutions  only, and in a given context this will appear as a natural way of generation.  The 24 d-automorphisms form five conjugate classes of S4 X C2. Note that there is a class of elements of order six. Again, we  have not indicated the action of the dautomorphisms on v and on o. According to (21), v and o are exchanged in all cases.  Thus, (vo) should be added to each d-automorphism.  Generally, the group ,A of all mixed automorphisms of FB(n) is given by  --fn = -Vn X ~N) - Sy X C2 (25)  (with p = 2"). It can be generated by 2" - 1 involutions.  We have thus found a group -.f2 of 48 elements operating on FB(2). For various reasons it may be tempting to want to deal with  smaller and simpler groups. However, reasons for doing so have to be advanced, at least tentatively. The restriction must not  simply be obtained through unawareness of other possibilities or by decree. In the following two sections, we seek for  criteria permitting to restrict the group ..f2 to some of its subgroups.  MOBILITY, ORBITS, SUBGROUPS  In this section we discuss various subgroups of the group of mixed automorphisms ,,f2 and introduce a convenient way of  describing how they operate on FB(2).  First we want to illustrate the role played by such groups in experimental situations. It will be best to quote from "The  Psychology of the Child" (Inhelder and Piaget, 1969, p. 139), where we find a convenient illustration. "Let us take as an  example the implication p -+ q, and let us imagine ... [that] a child between 12 and 15 ... observes a moving object that  keeps starting and stopping.... He notices that the stops seem to be accompanied by the lighting of an electric bulb. The  first hypothesis he will make is ... p -+ q (light implies stop). There is only one way to confirm the hypothesis, and this is  to find out whether the bulb ever lights up without the object stopping or p n q' [=N(p-+ q)].... But he may also wonder  whether the light instead of causing the stop is caused by it or q -4 p (now the reciprocal [R (p - q) ] of p - q). To confirm  q -4 p (stop implies light), he looks for the opposite case which would disconfirm it; that is, does the object ever stop  without the light going on? This case, p' n q, is the inverse [N(p-+q)] of p-+ q. It is at the same time a correlative  [C(p-+q)] of p-+q. Inhelder and Piaget describe here a set of four elements of FB(2) that are transformed among themselves by the group INRC,  i.e., what technically is called an orbit of that group on FB(2). This orbit, then, is the set ]b, c,1, m}. The other orbits  of INRC are {a, d, k, x}, {i, f }, {h, g}, {e, j} and {o, v }. Orbits containing four elements are termed "quaternes" by  Piaget (1950) and "squares of quaternality" by Gottschalk (1953).  PIAGET'S INRC 295  In experimental situations one observes orbits, the subsets of those among the possibilities of the combinatorial manifold,  that are effectively taken into account by a person in a given situation. From the orbits one may infer the group that  generates them. The orbits are the expression of the mobility embodied in the group of transformations, acting on the  combinatorial system. "Thus, without knowing any logical formula or the formal criteria for a mathematical "group"..., the  pre-adolescent of 12 to 15 is capable of manipulating transformations according to the four possibilities I, N, R, and C."  (Inhelder & Piaget, 1969, p. 140.)  The "quaterne" {b, c,1, m} seems to accompany the use of the implication in experimental situations. It is therefore  noteworthy that there are four other subgroups of.-*f besides INRC (G4) that have this same orbit, as may be seen in Table 4,  where the orbits on FB(2) of all the subgroups of-,f2 discussed in this section may be found.  Note that even the largest group .,f2 has more than one orbit. Groups of permutations that have a single orbit are termed  "transitive." It is not clear whether transitivity should be considered as an advantage or rather as a handicap. According to  the interpretation of orbits proposed here, transitivity would mean that a person would actually take into account all  possibilities of the combinatorial manifold. (For another view of transitivity, see Appendix 3.) Anyhow, the groups and -V,,  are not transitive on FB(n), so that a structure-preserving group cannot be transitive, and a transitive group cannot be  structure preserving.  Before discussing subgroups of -ef2 and their orbits, let us summarize the view of mobility of thought that has been advanced  here. There are two aspects to it. (i) The mobility provided by the combinatorial system of all possibilities that could be  taken into account: this system is the outcome not only of new freedom acquired but also of constraints that limit the  possibilities to a tractable amount. (ii) Transformations that operate on the combinatorial manifold and that are not specific  to elements of  TABLE 4  Orbits of Groups of Mixed Automorphisms  G, GZ G, Gn GQ G, G, G, G, G, G,  {abcd I k1mxl{ihejgf } {abcd I klmxl{ihgf Ijejl {abcd I klmx}{if }{hg}{ejl lad I kx}{bc I lmllihgf ){e jj} lab I kl}{cd j  mx}{il{ f }{hgl{ejl {ac j kml{bd I lx}{if l{ej}{h}{g} {ad j kx}jbc I millif }{hg}{e}{jl  {a kl{bcIIml{djx)jihl{fg}{ejjj {adjkx}{bl1l{cl m}{igl{hf}{ejj} {a jx}{d jkl{bc I lm}lih Igfl{eljl {ad I kx}{bc I Im}{if I  hg}{e Ijl  la I xllb I ml{c l 1l{dl k}{i if }{h Igl{elljl  Note. Under the subgroups of automorphisms of these groups, some of the orbits split into two orbits. The splitting is  indicated by a vertical line. The orbit {v I o} has been omitted in all cases.  296 EDGAR ASCHER  the manifold but apply equally to all of them and form a group: the group, however, is restricted by the requirement of  preserving some or all of the structure that has been used in the construction of the combinatorial system. As a result, the  group, although its transformations are defined everywhere on the system, does not necessarily provide the means of  transforming an element of the system into any other element.  To distinguish subgroups of we shall now examine how they act on the two generators of FB(2). There are several possibilities  of choosing these generators, essentially three possibilities, since with each generator its complement also occurs. We have  thus the three systems of generators,  {p, q} or {i,hI  1p,p H q} or {i, e}  {p-q,q} or {e,h}.  The group V, of all automorphisms (and, a fortiori, the group -f2) exchanges the systems of generators. The automorphisms U  and V, for instance, transform the pair {i, h } into {e, h } and {i, e' }, respectively. It seems reasonable, therefore, to  investigate those transformations that do not change one chosen system of generators into another. As for the choice of the  system, it appears most natural to take { p, q } (the "standard generator system"). We are thus selecting now those  transformations contained in Tables 2 and 3 that permute the elements i, h, f, and g only among themselves (and, by the way,  do the same to the remaining 12 elements of FB(2)). We find the 16 transformations detailed in the second and third column of  Table 5.  TABLE 5  Automorphisms and d-Automorphisms that Preserve the Generator System {p, q}  Permutations Generators Crystallographic   Interpretation  (p)(q)(p')(q') I k =c 1 Mx  (pp')(q)(q') Q P 2,, m,   _    (gq')(p)(p') TQT=P Q=TPT 2~ my  (pp')(gq') QTQT=RN 2X 1  (pq)(p'q') T TR mB 2,  (pq')(qp') QTQ=PTP _ _ TN m, 2,  (pgpIq') QT PT 4X 4z  (pq'p'q) TQ TP 4x 4X  Note. The crystallographic interpretation is presented  in  Appendix 1.  QTQT=PTPT=R. QTQ = PTP = TR.  PIAGET'S INRC 297  The 16 elements form a subgroup G, of..fz ; they make up the invariance group of the generator system { p, q }. However, they  act on the generators p and q only in eight distinguishable ways, as shown in the first column of Table 5. For each  automorphism, there is a d-automorphism, that acts in the same way on the set { p, q, p', q' j, but differs, of _course, in  its action on the remaining elements of FB(2). The d-automorphism C = R = RN, for instance, reduces to the identity  transformation when restricted to the above set. Thus, any_ automorphism and the dautomorphism resulting from it by  multiplication with R have the same effect on the generator system { p, q }. The action of G, is the same as that of its  subgroup of automorphisms G, (second column of Table 5) or, indeed, as that of the three other subgroups of G, that are  isomorphic to it; all are isomorphic to D,. We shall refer to G, and G,' as "restricted groups" of, respectively, mixed  automorphisms and automorphisms of FB(2). The_ whole group G, is generated by multiplying the elements of D, by N (or by R =  C). The structure of G, is thus that of a direct product  G, - D, X CZ. (26)  Recall that the dihedral group D(n > 3) is a group of 2n elements that is isomorphic to the group of symmetries of a regular  polygone of n sides. It is not commutative and is generated by two involutions x and y obeying the defining equations  xz =Y2 = (XY)n = I.  (27)  For n = 2 the equations also define a group, the commutative group D2. Piaget's INRC is isomorphic to D2. Groups isomorphic to  Dz can be found in many situations and DZ has been given various names, of which "Klein's four-group," or simply "four-group"  are found most frequently.  The fact that x and y do not commute for n # 2 is shown most clearly by  xY = (YX)n-1 (28)  an immediate consequence of (27). In columns two and three of Table 5, we have displayed the involutions Q and T (and also P  and T) as generators of a subgroup isomorphic to D,. Equation (27) here specializes to  TQ = (QT)' (29)  and this shows how the noncommutativity comes about. The operations of exchanging the two generators p and q (by T) and that  of exchanging p with its complement p' (by Q) (i.e., negating one of the generators) do not commute. The automorphism P that  negates (complements) the other generator q, does not commute with T either. This may exemplify one of the most primitive  experiences of noncommutativity: exchanging the two members of an ordered pair (this is an involution) and doing something to  one member are operations that do not commute, and  298 EDGAR ASCHER  performing one after the other results in an operation that is not an involution, even though one starts with two involutions.  It may be interesting to investigate early experiences of noncommutativity. The four subgroups of G, isomorphic to D,  mentioned above are _the groups generated by (for instance) Q and TN, Q and T, .P and TN, and finally P and T. Let us use the  last group to illustrate the fact already mentioned, namely, that a group of mixed automorphisms is not necessarily the direct  product of its subgroup of automorphisms with the group (N) generated by the Boolean negation N. In our group, there are four  automorphisms 1, TPTP, T, and PTP; the d-automorphisms P = PN, TPT, PT, and TP are not obtained by multiplying by N the  automorphisms of the group (i.e., the transformations P, TPT, PT, and TP do not belong to the group in question).  It is plausible to think that the restricted groups G, and G, represent the mobility of thought that a person of the formal  stage (i.e., a nonspecialized person) may attain. However, in the gradual building-up of competence, sub-groups certainly play  an important role. We now proceed to discuss some of them.  We have already met with the group  G9= {I, R}=(R)  (30)  generated by R. It is the subgroup that leaves p and q as well as their complements unchanged.  Studying Table 5, we can characterize some other subgroups of G, . The group that fixes the generator p (as well asp') and the  one that fixes q and q' are, respectively,  Gp = {I, P; R, Q) = (P) X (R) (31)  GQ = {I, Q; R, P} = (Q) X (R). (32)  The group GP is generated by P and R, GQ by Q and R. The elements listed after the semicolon are d-automorphisms. The  generators are exchanged (and their complements also) by  GS = {I, T; R, TR} = (T) X (R). (33)  The two generators are changed into their complements by  G, = {I, R; R, N} = (R) X (k). (34)  This is Piaget's INRC. All these groups are isomorphic to Klein's four group DZ, but the last two deserve a special status  because of their simple action on both generators. They also have in common Piaget's "quaterne," the orbit {b, c,1, m}. Two  further groups, isomorphic to D2, that have such an orbit are  G, = {I, T; N, T} = (T) X (T)  and  G, = {I, R; T, RT} = (R) X (T).  PIAGET'S INRC 299  Note that the permutations R and T play similar roles in these four groups-for example, G, is the "T-analogue" of Piaget's  INRC. In the last section on relations, we shall see that T not R, as Piaget thought, corresponds to the operation of  conversion of a relation.  Generators are fixed or exchanged with their complements by  G2= GP VG4={I,P,Q,R;N,P,Q,R}= (P)X(Q)X(N). (35)  Note that G2 is not the set-theoretic union (this would not be a group), but the group generated by the groups in question.  Finally, the group that exchanges generators and also their complements or changes generators into complements is  G3 = G4 V GS = {I, R, T, TR; N, R, TN, TR } = (R) X (T) X (N). (36)  We shall meet this group when discussing structure preserving transformations of relations. It is also the largest group  having Piaget's "quaterne" as orbit. Both the groups G2 and G3 are isomorphic to D2 X C2 = C2 X C2 X C2.  How these groups are related, is shown in the lattice of Fig. 2 of subgroups of the group of mixed automorphisms ..f2. It is a  sublattice of the lattice of all subgroups of .,e, The groups on the right are groups of mixed automorphisms, those on the  left are automorphisms. The five groups having an orbit {b, c, l, m} are boxed. Among them is Piaget's G4. The lines linking a  group to a supergroup (above) and a subgroup (below) may also suggest pathways for the gradual building-up of these  transformation groups during the development of intelligence.  All the subgroups of `'of2 and of .V2 discussed so far concern the generator system {i, h}. The corresponding subgroups for  the systems {i, e} and {e, h} are obtained in the following way. The automorphism U (VP) exchanges i and e (h and e); the  FIG. 2. Lattice of subgroups of _,#~2.  480/28/3-6  300 EDGAR ASCHER  subgroups fixing the generator system {e, h~ ({i, e}) are conjugates by U (VP) of the subgroups fixing { i, e}. Recall that  the conjugate of a subgroup G of ..f, by an element x E.t'z is the set xGx-' =I xgx-':g E G}. Another similar construction  will be of interest. The set Cg = {xgx-' : x E G ~ of all elements conjugate to a given element g, is termed the conjugate  class of g. Conjugate classes are either disjoint or coincide. Tables 3, 4, and 5 display this partition into conjugate  classes.  If x is not in G, then the group xGx-' may be different from G or equal to G. It is equal when G is a normal (self-conjugate)  subgroup, otherwise it is different. In the lattice of Fig. 2, the normal subgroups are placed in circles. These groups are  common to the three generator systems. The only case not obvious from the beginning is that of the group GZ = (P) X (Q) X (N),  and of its subgroup of automorphisms G'. These groups fix the generators or exchange them with their conjugates in any  generator system.  A word of caution is needed for the groups GS and its subgroup of automorphisms G' that exchange the generators and also their  complements. They have six conjugates and not only three like the other non-normal subgroups. One should add to the subgroups  already considered the subgroup G6 that exchanges a generator with the complement of the other:  G6={I,TR;R,T}=(TR)X (C).  The pair (G5, G6) is transformed by conjugation into the pairs corresponding to the other generator systems.  With the help of the crystallographic translations of Appendix 1, all these groups may be visualized as transformations of a  cube. The change of generator system, particularly, becomes easy to grasp.  In addition to the gradual building-up of the restricted group G, and, ultimately, perhaps the (unrestricted) group -4f2  suggested by the lattice of Fig. 2, one may also wish to consider the successive construction of ., , _e, ,..., or the  corresponding restricted groups. Bart (1971), for instance, has suggested that a person's capacity for combining propositions  may be measured by the number n of generators of FB(n), or more adequately, by the number of generators of the group operating  on FB(n). Bart's construction of that group will be discussed in Appendix 3. If we take the group,./,',',, the number of  generators increases as 2" so that, when progressing from n to n + 1, we have to add 2" new generators. The same occurs in the  case of Bart's group fi", although the structure of his groups is quite different. In Appendix 2, we present Polya's  construction (1937, 1940) of the restricted group of automorphisms of FB(n). The situation improves radically. The number of  generators is n; at each step, we have to add one more generator.  RELATIONS AND THEIR STRUCTURE PRESERVING TRANSFORMATIONS  For Piaget the group INRC is the synthesis of two kinds of reversibility, and of the two domains where the two reversibilities  N and R originate. The one, N, corresponds  PIAGET'S INRC 301  to the taking of complements in the domain of classes and, at the stage of formal operations, becomes Boolean complementation  (or negation). The other domain is that of binary relations and the operation is that of inversion (or conversion) of binary  relations. Piaget thought that R is the operation that brings about conversion.  In this section we shall argue that T and not R corresponds to conversion; we shall examine the "algebra of relations" as  being a synthesis of the Boolean structure (of which N is characteristic) and of the "Peircean" structure of relations to  which T pertains; and we shall determine the structure-preserving, reversible transformations of the algebra of relations.  First, however, let us illustrate some notions concerning binary relations. In connection with Fig. 1 we have already  introduced a binary relation, the relation K "covers." We see in Fig. 1, e.g., that a covers h or, aKh; and only a covers h.  The converse binary relation K is "is covered by." We see that h is covered by a, hKa. It is clear that hKa is true if and  only if aKh is true:  hKa H aKh. (37)  However, not only h, but also i and j are covered by h. A binary relation S is symmetric if "y is in the relation S to z"  implies "z is in the relation S to y" and vice versa:  YSz H ZSy.  In view of (37), one may say that a symmetric relation is "self-converse," i.e., conversion leaves a symmetric relation  unchanged.  Piaget (1972, p. 339) maintains "... that the reciprocity R corresponds to the inverse operation ... of relations (and to the  permutation of the ... implication between propositions)." He also asserts that "the binary operations include only one  transformation by permutation (that transforms p -* q into q -+ p ] and vice versa ..., namely, q - p =R(p-> q)" (Piaget,  Without any further restriction, there are, of course, 14! such transformations. If, however, we take into account only  automorphisms of FB(2), then Table 2 shows that there are two of them which transform p -4 q into q -4 p and vice versa, that  is, c into b, namely Piaget's R and the automorphism which we have labelled T. There is no d-automorphism that does the job.  In fact, it is T that corresponds to the operation of conversion of a relation. This is plausible, since conversion leaves  symmetric relations unchanged and since T is the automorphism that fixes the eight symmetric elements of FB(2), namely, {v, a,  d, e, j, k, x, o}.  Presently, we shall elaborate this assertion and qualify it. But first we have to recall the algebraic structure of relations  on a set of elements. Detailed information may be found, for instance, in Tarski (1941) and in Jonnson and Tarski (1951 and  1952).  On the set A of binary relations on a finite set, it is possible to define Boolean (or absolute) operations: two binary  operations A and V (meet and join), one unary  302 EDGAR ASCHER  operation ' (complement) and two special relations 0 and 1 (null relation and universal relation) such that the algebra  .W = (A, A, V, ', 0, 1)  is a Boolean algebra, the "Boolean algebra of relations." The binary relations on a set B of m elements may be interpreted as  subsets of the set B X B with mz elements. (Finer distinctions are possible and necessary in other contexts.) Then the  operations meet, join, and complement of .# simply are the set-theoretic operations of intersection, union, and complement.  Thus, the algebra .Ie(m) of binary relations defined on a set of m elements is isomorphic to a Boolean algebra B(m2) with 29  (q = m2) elements. On the other hand, the free Boolean algebra FB(n) of n-ary propositional operations is, as we know,  isomorphic to B(2"). Putting n = 2p, we find the cases in which the Boolean algebra of relations is isomorphic to a free  Boolean algebra (of propositional operations):  -5e(21) - FB(2p),  i.e., the Boolean algebra of relations on a set of 2elements is isomorphic to the free Boolean algebra with 2p generators.  Thus, the relations 9(2) on a set of two elements are isomorphic to FB(2); _,~0(3) is not isomorphic to any free Boolean  algebra, in particular not to FB(3), but .W(4) is isomorphic to FB(4), .W(8) to FB(6), and so on.  So far, the-Boolean-algebra of relations has not provided us with any means of reducing the number of automorphisms (and  d-automorphisms) which should be taken into account. However, operations other than the Boolean operations can be defined on  the set of binary relations.  These operations are termed Peircean or relative operations by Tarski. There are two binary operations, the multiplication -  and the addition +, one unary operation, the conversion ~, and two special relations, the identity relation E and the  diversity relation J, in addition to complementation and to the relations 0 and 1 of the Boolean structure that play a role  also in the Peircean structure. More precisely, we can say that this structure, the Peircean algebra of relations is given by  _' = (A, -, +, -, ', E, J, 0, 1),  where the operations have the special properties indicated below.  (i) A. = (A, -, E, 0) is a monoid (unit element E) with null element 0.  (ii) A+ = (A, +, J, 1) is a monoid (unit element J) with null element 1. (Note: addition, like multiplication, of relations is  not commutative !)  (iii) The unary operation v is characterized by:  (X)__=X, (38)  (X . Y)v= Y. X, (39)  (X+ Y)-= Y+ X, (40)  PIAGET'S INRC 303  i.e., y is an idempotent anti-automorphism (a-automorphism) of each of the monoids A. and A + . ("Anti-," because the order of  the elements is inversed. )  (iv) The unary operation ', in addition to its Boolean properties, obeys identities of the De Morgan type:  (X . Y)' = X' + Y', (41)  (X + Y)' = X' . Y', (42)  i.e., ' is an isomorphism of the monoids A. and A+* By analogy with the Boolean case, we say also that ' is a d-automorphism  of _,?. Moreover, the Boolean and the Peircean structures are linked by the distributivity (right and left) of - with respect  to V and by the distributivity (right and left) of + with respect to A.  Again, if a relation is interpreted as a subset, then the following set-theoretic interpretation of the Peircean operations  can be given:  -(y, z) E X - Y means that there exists an element u such that (y, u) E X and (u, z) E Y;  -(y, z) E X + Y means that for all u one has either (y, u) E X or (u, z) E Y or both;  -(y, z) E X means that (z, y) E X.  Furthermore:  -(y, z) E X' means the we have not (y, z) E X.  We write from now on N for '. The next step is to establish carefully that one can write T for  We now substantiate and make more precise our claim that the converse of a relation X is the relation TX and that it cannot be  RX. We shall first say what is meant by symmetric BPO. A BPO, i.e., an element of FB(2), is symmetric if it is left unchanged  by the exchange of the two generators chosen to express the elements of FB(2). This definition obviously depends on the choice  of generators-and not only on what we have termed the generator system. Thus, for what may justifiably be called the "standard  generators," viz. (p, q) in that order, the eight symmetric BPO are {v, a, d, e, j, k, x, o} the "standard symmetric BPO." It  is the automorphism T that leaves this set invariant elementwise. These are the symmetric BPO also for the generators (q, p),  (p', q'), and (q', p'). The choices (p, q`), (q', p), (P ', q), and (q, p'), single out the BPO {v, b, c, e, j,1, m, o} as  symmetric, and the automorphism TR fixes each of these. Similarly, the two other generator systems give rise to two sets of  symmetric BPO. (Cf. columns 4 and 5 of Table 1.) This becomes almost obvious in the crystallographic representation of  Appendix 1.  As we apply the transformations of -4F2 to the 16 BPO, the standard generators successively transform into each of the 24  possible generator pairs, the set of standard symmetric BPO is successively transformed into each of the six sets of symmetric  BPO, and the subgroups that fix the symmetric BPO are transformed at  304 EDGAR ASCHER  the same time. If a transformation rG..'2 transforms a symmetric BPO, say s into rs and if the transformation 0 fixes s (Os =  s), then obviously, ror' (the conjugate of 0 by r) fixes 'is. Thus, as r varies over the groupthe automorphism T that fixes  the standard symmetric BPO, is transformed successively into all elements of its conjugate class. Tables 2 and 3 are divided  into conjugate classes. As can be seen, Piaget's R does not belong to the conjugate class of T. Thus, it cannot be, for any  choice of generators, the transformation that fixes the symmetric BPO and transforms the others into their symmetric  counterpart.  There remains to transfer these findings from the free Boolean algebra of the 16 BPO to the isomorphic algebra of binary  relations on a set of two elements. To this end, we remark that the choice of an ordered pair of generators-(p, q) in our  caseenables us to regard the elements of FB(2) as Boolean functions. Let 2 be the set 11, 0 } and 2 this set ordered by o < 1.  A Boolean function is a function on the nfold direct product 2 X ... X 2 (domain) to 2 (codomain):   2 X ... X 2-.  We write 22' ' ' 2 (with n times 2 in the exponent) for the set of all n-ary Boolean functions.  It is now possible to identify elements of FB(n) with such functions. For instance a E FB(2) is identified with the function  that has the value 0 at the ordered pair (0, 0) and the value 1 for the other three pairs (because p V q is false when both p  and q are false, and true in the other three cases). Similarly, the value of m E 222 at (0, 1) is 1 and it is 0 at the other  arguments. This establishes an isomorphism  FB(2) - 222. (43)  We shall use the same symbols for the elements of FB(2) and the corresponding ones of 2Z2.  In the preceding section, we had chosen a generator system and then found the invariance group G, of that system. It is clear  that, essentially, what we have found there is the group of mixed automorphisms of the Boolean functions 222. The subgroup of  automorphisms is isomorphic to the automorphisms of the domain of these functions, i.e., of the direct product 2 X 2; this  group is isomorphic to D4, the dautomorphisms are obtained by adjoining to these the (only) d-automorphism of the codomain 2.  Remember, however, that the isomorphism (43) is based on the choice of a definite pair of generators: the standard pair (p,  q). It may, therefore, be termed the "standard isomorphism." But if, for instance, we choose the generators (p, e), then it  would be the element p V q' that corresponds to the Boolean function a, and p' n q' would correspond to m.  Exactly in the same way, i.e., by a choice of generators of FB(n), it is possible to establish an isomorphism  PB(n), 22...2. (44)  PIAGET'S INRC 305  The next step is to provide an isomorphism  222 -,~e(2). (45)  A convenient way is to identify the Boolean function defined by  E 222  with the relation  (y, z) E 0 if and only if 0(y, z) = 1  (i.e., to consider the Boolean function as the characteristic function of a subset). This establishes a one-to-one mapping  between 222 and _,#(2). We shall use the same symbols for the elements thus related. By the same token, the automorphisms of  FB(2) now represent isomorphisms between FB(2) and .W(2); the standard isomorphism corresponds to the identity automorphism.  We have defined what is meant by symmetric BPO. It is clear that this definition carries over to binary Boolean functions and  to binary relations. A binary Boolean function 0 is symmetric if, for any y, z E 2,  0(_, y) = 0(y, Z).  A binary relation 0 is symmetric if, for any y, z,  (z, y) E 0 implies (y, z) E 0.  This shows: (i) that with the standard isomorphism, it is T that leaves symmetric relations invariant, and (ii) that the  operation v may be identified with the transformation T:  Concerning the role of automorphisms, our previous discussion of symmetric BPO carries over too. In any case, the  transformation that leaves invariant a symmetric relation, must belong to the conjugate class of T; therefore, it cannot be R.  Furthermore, from (39), (40), and (46), we know already that T is not an automorphism of the Peircean structure; it is an  anti-automorphism of _'. Which, then, of the Boolean automorphisms are also Peircean ones?  The only automorphisms with respect to the Peircean structure of relations on a finite set come from renumberings of the  elements of the set. Thus, the Peircean automorphisms of .9'(n) form the group S,, of all permutations of n objects. For  .,'(2), this is the group of the order two; the automorphism itself is easily recognized as Piaget's R, in case the standard  isomorphism is chosen. For any choice of isomorphism, this automorphism is an element of the conjugate class of R, which is  {P, Q, R). Thus, R does not correspond to the "inverse operation of relations," but is the only Peircean automorphism of  5'(2), in addition, of course, to the identity.  If we take into account the Boolean and the Peircean structure of relations, we have  ,~P =(A,A,V,-, +, N,T,0, 1, E, J)  306 EDGAR ASCHER  the "algebra of relations." We are interested in the structure-preserving transformations of .M. We have met four types of  transformations.  (i) Transformations that are automorphisms of ,P and of .i'. We have seen that R is an automorphism of _!i9(2) and of .1'(2).  Such transformations will be termed automorphisms of M.  (ii) Transformations that are d-automorphisms of _~# and of _1?, for instance, N and RN = R are d-automorphisms of .8(2) and  of .?(2). They are the dautomorphisms of .M.  (iii) Transformations that are automorphisms of _1? and a-automorphisms of ~. Since the binary operations of _W are  commutative, there are no a-automorphisms of -,W. We call these the a-automorphisms of .M. Example: T and TR.  (iv) Transformations that are d-automorphisms of .W but are dual aautomorphisms with respect to 5 These are the  da-automorphisms of .511. The transformations TN and TR are da-automorphisms of M(2):  TN(r - s) = TNs + TNr. (47)  It is easily seen that T and N-in addition to commuting one with the other-also commute with all automorphisms of ,?(n).  Furthermore, T and N cannot be obtained by any renumbering. Thus, the group '~ of all automorphisms, d-automorphisms,  aautomorphisms, and da-automorphisms of M(n) is a direct product  '~n = Sn X (T) X (N) - Sn X D, (48)  where DZ is generated by T and N. In particular,  -z = (R) X (T) X (N), (49)  a group we have already met as G} in the preceding section (on subgroups).  Any subgroup L of '?n that contains automorphisms, a-automorphisms, dautomorphisms, and da-automorphisms, contains the same  number of each sort. The order of such a group is a multiple of four. In general, however, such groups are not direct products  of the subgroup of automorphisms L' with DZ; but always  L(L' = DZ (50)  (i.e., L is an extension of L' with DZ). Of course, also  ,IS.=' DZ. (51)  In conclusion, a group isomorphic to DZ does appear in quite an essential way whenever one considers structure preserving  transformations of algebras of relations. This group, however, is not INRC but {I, T; N, TN}.  PIAGET'S INRC 307  CONCLUDING REMARKS  We have discussed in some detail some of the questions concerning transformations of propositional operations. It is, of  course, impossible to be complete within the limits of a paper, even in such a limited field. But whatever the coverage may  be, care of details is necessary and rewarding; the link with experiment is at this level and at this price. Here we were  specially interested in the gradual building-up of groups of structure preserving transformations from involutions, and in the  manner by which transformations other than involutions come about through this process. The paper should also illustrate the  kind of reflection that could be important in modeling the algebra of competence.  APPENDIX 1 : CRYSTALLOGRAPHIC REPRESENTATION OF -,e"  In this appendix, we advance a representation of -4f2 as a group of all spatial transformations of a cube. Our purpose is not  simply to present a curiosity, nor is it only to provide a convenient way of visualizing logical transformations as spatial  ones. The isomorphism between _e2 and the symmetries of a cube raises the question of a possible correlation (possibly  delayed) between the utilization of a group of logical transformations and the mastery of an isomorphic group of spatial  transformations. Therefore knowledge of such transformations seems appropriate.  The facts are the following. The group -4r" of mixed automorphisms of the free Boolean algebra with n generators FB(n) is  isomorphic to the symmetry group of a (2" - 1)-dimensional crystal. In the case of FB(2), the Boolean algebra of the sixteen  BPO, the crystal is an ordinary, that is, 3-dimensional, crystal. The group -.,f2 is then the group of all spatial symmetries  of a cube. (In crystallographic notation .,112-m3m, V2-43m.)  Therefore, it is easy to represent the elements of -4f2 by spatial transformations. We only need to place the elements of  FB(2) suitably on the eight vertices and the six centers of the faces of a cube, e.g., as shown in Fig. 3. This is the  configuration of the face-centered cube, well known to crystallographers. Two of the 16 BPO are missing,  FIG. 3. Cubic symmetry of binary propositional operations.  308 EDGAR ASCHER  viz. the tautology v and the antilogy o. These elements undergo only two transformations: either they remain unchanged (under  automorphisms) or they are exchanged (by d-automorphisms).  To each element of .,e16'Z there corresponds now a symmetry operation of the cube, as shown in Table 6. The elements of .~f,  are given by the products found in the column "Generators" of Tables 2 and 3, the transformations of the cube by their  international crystallographic symbol to which subscripts have been added that specify their orientation. The position of  these symmetry elements with respect to the cube, is shown in Fig. 4; the meaning of the symbols is explained in the following  remarks.  Let us first observe that the transformation N (already termed "inverse" by Piaget) corresponds to inversion 1 through the  centre O of the cube. All axes of Fig. 4 contain O. Three of them, x, y, and z, pass through the centers of opposite faces.  About these axes there are rotations by 180(such as, 2X), rotations by 90(4X), or by 270(4x). Furthermore, these  transformations combined with the inversion i also  TABLE 6  Crystallographic Interpretation of ,2 as mim  43m    I 1 N i  VP ME VP 2,  U MD UN 2,  TR MA TR 2,  T MB TN_ 2,  UQ me UQ 2,  V ME VN 2E  P 2z P m~  Q 2, Q my  R 2, R Mx  TU 3, TUN 3b  TUVT 3 z TUVTN 3 5  UT 3a UTN 3  UV 30 UVN 3,  TVUT 3 TVUTN 3  VU 3a VUN 30  TV 3. 2 TVN 3~  VT 3a VTN 3a  UP 45', RU 4Y  TQ 3 _ 3  S  Z  VR 4z QV 4z  QT 4x TP_ 4x  RV 43 VQ 4z'  PU 4, UR 4Y  PIAGET'S INRC 309  FIG. 4. Symmetry elements of the cube.  occur. The combination 2x 1 is shortened as mx; it represents reflexion through a plane, a mirror, perpendicular to the x axis  (and passing through O). The combination 4x 1 is written 4x and is termed a rotatory inversion.  Four axes, a, a, y, and S, pass through the vertices of the cube. Around these axes there are rotations by _120(3a) and by  240(3s) as well as the corresponding rotatory inversions (3a, 3s = 3a).  Positive and negative rotations about these two families of axes are distinguished; therefore they are fitted with one  arrowhead. There are, however, six axes, A, B, C, D, E, and F, fitted with two arrowheads around which only rotations of 180 (2A) and reflexions (m,) through planes perpendicular to them (and passing through O) occur.  Remember now that the standard symmetric B PO are { v, a, d, e, j, k, x, o }. Except for v and o, which are not represented in  the figure, they are situated in the plane corresponding to MB, and, of course, they are left unchanged by reflexion in that  plane, that is by T = mB. The symmetric BPO with respect to the generators (p, q') are located in the plane corresponding to  mA and are fixed by mA = TR. These planes intersect in the x axis (the A axis and the B axis are perpendicular to the x axis).  The x axis Ox is distinctive of the generator system { p, q } to which the generators (p, q) and (p, q') belong. The group G,  preserving this sytem, detailed in Table 5, singles out the x axis; it is the symmetry group of a square prism, with the  square perpendicular to the x axis (G, -_ 4x1mmm, G,' - 4x2ym). The other two generator systems correspond to the other two  directions parallel to the edges of the cube: Ii, e} to Oy and {e, h} to OZ.  Many other features discussed in the paper may be read off from the Figs. 3 and 4. We cannot detail them all. Let us just  mention the following. Not only the action of an element r of -,af2 on the BPO may easily be found from Fig. 3, but also the  conjugate by r of an element 0 of _e, that is Oro-'. It is obtained by performing on Fig. 4 the geometric transformation  corresponding to r. For instance, 3' m, 3 a ' = ME and indeed performing a rotation of 120around the axis 6 takes the C-axis  to the place of the E-axis. This is easier to do than to compute directly (TU)(UP)(UT).  310 EDGAR ASCHER  APPENDIX 2: MORE ABOUT THE "RESTRICTED GROUPS"  The group G,, the restricted group of automorphisms of the section on subgroups, a group isomorphic to Dhas already been  found by Polya (1937 and 1940). He posed and solved a logical problem whose origin he traces to Jevons. The first step towards  the solution, the only one in which we are interested here, is to find the "hypercubic" groups Kformed by the operations of  permuting and/or complementing the n variables of n-ary Boolean functions. The 2" possible values of the argument of such a  function can be placed on the vertices of a hypercube, that is a cube in n dimensions. For n = 2 this is a square; for n = 3  it is the ordinary cube as shown in Fig. 5. Note that this utilization of the cube is different from that in Appendix 1.  The structure of Khas been determined by Polya as "wreath product" of the group of two elements C2 by the group Sof all  permutations of n objects. This wreath product is a semi-direct product of C2 X ... X C2 (n-times) by S  (CZ X "' X CZ) X S (52)  where an element s of Sacts on C2 X ... X C2 by permuting the n generators of the n copies of C2. Therefore, Polya (1937)  uses the pictorial expression "CZ-wreath around S,,."  The group Khas n! 2" elements. For unary, binary, and ternary Boolean functions we have the following isomorphisms  K, - C2 (53)  K2 - D4 - G; (54)  K3 - S, X C2. (55)  Thus K31 the group of automorphisms of the ternary Boolean functions 22 X Z X 2' which is also the restricted group of  automorphisms of FB(3), is isomorphic to the group of all mixed automorphisms of the binary propositional operations FB(2).  Therefore, we should be able to read the transformations of Tables 2 and 3 as giving all- transformations of commuting and/or  complementing the three standard generators, say p, q, and r, of FB(3). (There are of course many other choices.) This is  indeed easily done. We restrict the transformations in question to the set I i, f, h, g, e, j } and we identify these elements  with p, q', q, q', r, and r', respectively. Note, however, that in our former interpretation as elements of FB(2), the  elements e and j were not independent of i, f, h, and g; now as generators of FB(3), they are independent, of course. Placed  at the centres of the faces of the cube (as in Fig. 5), they form a 3-dimensional octahedron; in general we find an  n-dimensional octahedron.  Let us now examine how the restricted groups may be successively built up as we  PIAGET'S INRC 311 010  000  100  101  FIG. 5. The restricted group K, of automorphisms of FB(3).  add one generator at a time to a free Boolean algebra. For _n = 1 we have as single generator of K, = CZ the permutation (pp')  which we note P:  (56)  (Inspection of Tables 2 and 3 shows that there_ are eight elements of ,,e2 which contain (pp') = (if ). The reason for the  choice of P will become clear, presently.) For n = 2 we add as second generator of  KZ = (Cz X CZ) X SZ  the element  T = (P4) (P'4') (57)  the generator of SZ; it permutes the two selected generators of FB(2). (In fact there are two elements of-,f2 that contain  these permutations.) We then find  TPT= Q = (44'). (58)  For   K3= (CZXCZXCZ)XS3,   we have to add a generator that, together with T generates S3, We can take   U= (pr)(p'r'). (59)  Then   UPU=R = (rr'), (60)  and so on for higher values of n. Thus the number of generators of the group Kof restricted automorphisms of FB(n) is n.  Incidentally, we have thus generated (as mentioned_ in the section on dual automorphisms), .,e2 - S4 X CZ by the three  involutions P, T, and U. However, thus  312 EDGAR ASCHER  generated, some apparently simple operations get complicated expressions. For instance,  N = PTPUfUT. (61)  Such complicated generation should be avoided, unless it reflects genetical complexities.  More recently, Leresche (1978) set out to determine "the complete group of binary fpropositional] operations." By binary  operations he understands the 10 (out of 16) binary operations, that actually depend on two arguments, p and q. In our  notation, these are the 10 elements of the set {a, b, c, d, e, j, k, l, m, x} =L.  From the preceding it is not quite clear, however, what kind of transformations should be selected out of the 10! candidates  since the set L has no structure. Indeed, it is not closed under meet and/or join. If then, to remedy, one adds the elements v  and o, the distributivity equations (9) and (10) do not hold in general, and complementation is not unique. The set in  question, even augmented, is not a Boolean algebra and, a fortiori, not a Boolean subalgebra of FB(2).  The way out is to say that one is interested only in those transformations belonging to -..fz that transform the elements of L  among themselves. Consequently, these transformations transform the remaining 6 elements of FB(2) among themselves. Since the  elements v and o always keep apart, this amounts to looking for those transformations of .,a2 that permute the four elements  i, h, g, and f among themselves. But this is exactly the program that in the section on subgroups led to the group G, of Table  5, whose subgroup of automorphisms G, is the group KZ already found by Polya. However, the "complete group of transformations"  found by Leresche, in his otherwise correct paper, is only the Boolean subgroup GZ of G, , whose elements are given in (35).  What is missing is the transformation T that exchanges the two generators. Similarly, for ternary propositional operations, he  finds a Boolean group of order 16 instead of K3 X CZ =_ S4 X DZ which is of order 96.  APPENDIX 3: BART'S GENERALIZATION MODEL  In an interesting paper, Bart (1971) has chosen another way to restrict the abundance of the symmetric group S,6. He requires  two things of the transformation group:  (i) Every element of the group should be an involution. Such groups are sometimes termed Boolean groups.  (ii) The group should be a regular permutation group. A group G of permutations on a set S is transitive if for any x, y E S  there exists an element a E G, such that ax = y, i.e., G has a single orbit on S. Such a group is regular, if no element of  it, except, of course, the unit element leaves any elements of S unchanged. If S is finite then the number of elements of a  regular group G (the order of G) equals  PIAGET'S INRC 313  the number of elements of S (the degree of G). A commutative and transitive group of permutations is regular.  Taken separately, the two conditions are not very restrictive; there are many subgroups of S,6 that fulfil them. But taken  together, do they seriously limit the possibilities? Bart's procedure for obtaining his group seems rather natural. It may be  formulated as follows:  From the elements FB(2), one forms a ring by defining addition by  x + y = xwy, (62)  and multiplication by xy = x n y. (This is Stone's construction.)  (ii) With this addition, the elements of FB(n) constitute a Boolean group Hn with unit element the zero, 0 of FB(n). (This is  why the group is termed Boolean.) Further it has by construction the right number of elements, namely 2p (p = 2").  (iii) A natural way to define the action 01 of an element ~ of Hn on an element  x of FB(n) is to define   0c(x) = ~ + x. (63)  Due to the group properties of Hn, the set   On = J0c: ~ E Kn ) (64)  is a regular Boolean group of transformations of FB(n), and   010, = 01+ (65)  The dual construction of a Boolean ring by   x+'y=x-y, x.y=XVY (66)  gives rise to transformations 0' defined by   01'(x)=x+'y. (67)  The group obtained this way is again On, because   = 01,, (68)  where ~' is the complement, in FB(n), of ~.  Bart's group 02 is shown in Table 7. It will be noticed that I = 0. and N = 0are the only elements of .,, that are also  elements of 02 However, for n > 1, On is not the only regular Boolean transformation group of the elements of FB(n) - On is not a normal  subgroup of SQ, where q (q=2 p=2n) is the number of elements of FB(n); the elements of 0, do not form a complete conjugate  class of Sq. (For n = 2, they belong to a class with roughly two million  314  EDGAR ASCHER  TABLE 7 Bart's Group of Transformations of BL(2)  wd  v a b c d i h e j g f k 1 m x 0  (vo)(ax)(bm)(cl)(dk)(f)(hg)(ej) (vx)(ao)(bf)(cg)(de)(im)(hl)(jk) (vm)(af)(bo)(cj)(dh)(ix)(el)(gk)  (vl)(ag)(bj)(co)(di)(hx)(em)(jk) (vk)(ae)(bh)(ci)(do)(jx)(gm)(fl) (vf )(am)(bx)(cd)(io)(hj)(eg)(kl)  (vg)(al)(bd)(cx)(ij)(ho)(ef )(km) (vj)(ad)(bl)(cm)(ig)(hf )(eo)(kx) (ve)(ak)(bc)(dx)(ih)(jo)(gf )(lm) (vh)(ac)(bk)(dm)(ie)(jf  )(go)(lx) (vi)(ab)(ck)(dl)(he)(jg)(fo)(mx) (vd)(aj)(bg)(cf )(io(hm)(ex)(ko) (vc)(ah)(be)(df )(ik)(jm)(gx)(lo)  (vb)(ai)(ce)(dg)(hk)(jl)(fx)(mo)  (va)(bi)(ch)(dj)(ek)(gl)(fm)(xo) (v)(a)(b)(c)(d)(i)(h)(e)(j)(g)(f )(k)(l)(m)(x)(0).  elements.) All the (numerous) subgroups of SQ conjugate to 0,, are regular Boolean transformation groups of the elements of  FB(n). (Furthermore, they arise from commutative binary operations on the set of elements of FB(n), in the same way 0arises  from the operation w in (64).)  We have now shown how to obtain a great number of regular Boolean transformations on the set of n-ary propositional  operations. It has, however, been argued in the text, that if we model reversibility in cognitive activity by operations a  having an inverse a-' (as understood in group theory), the further requirement that a-t=a, termed the "strong view of  reversibility" (Bart, 1971, p. 542) is too strong. If involutions play a role, then the experience of their possible  noncommutativity leading to higher order operations is necessary for later stages of cognitive activity. As regards  transitivity, Piaget was conscious of the fact that INRC is not transitive, and was not at all bothered by it. Quite to the  contrary, transitivity as well seems to be too strong a condition. Indeed, according to the interpretation of orbits proposed  in this paper, transitivity would mean that a person would go through all the elements of the combinatorial manifold, which  for logical operations at the stage of formal thought is taken by Piaget to be FB(n) without bothering too much about the  value of n.  Bart's basic postulate is precisely "that an individual may be characterized by FB(n), where n is the maximal number of  factors for which he can generate all the possible combinations. Thus, for an individual FB(n) would be an indicant of the  level of formal operational capacity and would state the maximal number of factors n for which the individual can generate all  the possible combinations" (Bart, 1971, p. 540).  PIAGET'S INRC 315  It is then natural for him to require that the set [17J of 2" generators of the group 0" acting on FB(n) should "form an  inclusion chain  Hi CI72c...CH"...n  (Bart, 1971, p. 545). Note, however, that at each step 2" generators are added. A further feature, which Bart emphasizes in  discussing an example from Inhelder and Piaget (1958), is that "with the proposed formal thought model ... the formal  transformation that allows an individual to consider a proposition of the form q -, r after considering a proposition of the  form p -+ r can be designed."  We want to point out, that both these features are present already in Polya's groups Kn (and a fortiori in,.*f"). Progressing  from FB(n) to FB(n + 1) by adding one new generator Pn+1, to then old ones {p,: 1 < i < n}, we have simply to add one generator  Sn+1= (PIPn+I)(P11Pn+l)(P2)(Pz) "' (Pn)(Pn)  to the n old ones. Furthermore, one sees from (57) that K3 contains the transformation needed to transform p -+ r into q -- r, namely,  T(p -+ r) = (q -+ r).  We therefore think that the groups KX C2 are very convenient for the description of formal operations.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  This work was supported by the Fonds National Suisse de la recherche scientifeque (project 1.345-0.81). I have profited from  discussion with Gil Henriques and I enjoy the hospitality of the Department of Theoretical Physics of the University of  Geneva, Switzerland. Furthermore, I want to thank a referee for a careful reading of the manuscript and numerous valuable  suggestions.  REFERENCES  BART, W. B. A generalization of Piaget's logical-mathematical model for the stage of formal operations. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 1971, 5, 539-553.  BETH, E. W. A propos d'un "Traite de logique." Methodos, 1950, 2, 258-264. BOCHENSKI, J. M. A precis of mathematical logic.  Dordrecht-Holland: D. Reidel, 1959. GOTTSCHALK, W. H. The theory of quaternality. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 1953, 18,  193-196. HOFFMAN, W. C. Mathematical models of Piagetian Psychology. In S. Mogdil & C. Mogdil (Eds.),  Towards a theory of psychological development. Windsor, Berks.: NFER Publ. Co., 1980. INHELDER, B, & PIAGET, J. The growth of  logical thinking. New York: Basic Books, 1958. INHELDER, B. & PIAGET, J. The psychology of the child. New York: Basic Books,  1969. J6NNSGN, B. AND TARSKI, A. Boolean algebra with operators, Parts I and II. American Journal of Mathematics, 1951, 73,  891-939; 1952, 74, 127-167.  KUROSH, A. G. General algebra. New York: Chelsea, 1963.  LERESCHE, G. INRC et groupes de transformations des operations logiques. Revue Europeenne des Sciences Sociales, 1976, 14,  219-241.  480/28/3-7  316  EDGAR ASCHER  PIAGET, J. Traite de logique. Essai de logistique operatoire. Paris: A. Colin, 1949.  PIAGET, J. La reversibilite de la pensee et les operations logiques. Bulletin de la Societe frangaise de Philosophie, 1950,  44, 137-156.  PIAGET, J. Essai sur les transformations des operations logiques. Paris: Presses Univ. France, 1952. PIAGET, J. Logique  formelle et psychologie genetique. In P. Fraisse, F. Bresson, & J.-M. Favarge (Eds.), Les mod&es et la formalisation du  comportement. Paris: Editions du Centre National de Recherche Scientifique, 1967. Pp. 269-276.  PIAGET, J. Genetic Epistemology. New York: Columbia Univ. Press, 1970.  PIAGET, J. Essai de Logique Operatoire. 2nd ed. of Piaget (1949), by J.-B. Grize. Paris: Dunod, 1972. P6LYA, G.  Kombinatorische Anzahlbestimmung fiir Gruppen, Graphen and chemische Verbindungen. Acta Mathematica, 1937, 68, 145-254.  P6LYA, G. Sur les types des propositions composees. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 1940, 5, 98-103. TARSKI, A. On the calculus  of relations. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 1941, 6, 73-89.  WERMUS, H. Les transformations involutives (r6ciprocites) des propositions logiques. Archives de Psychologie, 1971, 41,  153-171.  RECEIVED: June 1, 1983