10.1016/0022-2496(85)90022-7
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 29, 122-127 (1985)  Book Review  THOMAS D. WICKENS, Models for Behavior: Stochastic Processes in Psychology. San Francisco: Freeman, 1982. Hardback, pp. 384.  $28.00. Paperback, pp. 353. $16.00.  Reviewed bI, WILLIAM H. BATCHELDER AND JOHN P. BOYD  The author is a professor in the Department of Psychology, University of California at Los Angeles. He received his Ph.D. in  psychology at Brown University in 1969 and he has published a number of substantive and methodological papers in mathematical  learning theory as well as other fields of mathematical psychology.  Both reviewers are professors in the Mathematical Social Science Group in the School of Social Sciences, University of  California, Irvine. William Batchelder received his Ph.D. in psychology from Stanford University in 1966. He served as Editor  of the Journal of Mathematical Psychology from 1975-1979, and he has published papers in mathematical learning theory and  measurement. John Boyd received his Ph.D. in communication sciences at the University of Michigan in 1966. He has published  papers dealing with formal kinship systems, social networks, and measurement.  The title of the book is somewhat misleading in that it deals in depth only with stochastic modeling of phenomena in learning  and memory with absorbing, finite state, discrete trial Markov chains. Some of the later chapters enlarge the scope by  discussing more general Markov processes; however, large areas of stochastic modeling in psychology such as probability  learning, choice theory, reaction time, neural models, etc., are not covered in any depth. It is unfortunate that such a book  was not available in the 60's when the area covered was more popular; however, on the principle that truth is timeless, the  presence of a book detailing the methodology involved in using finite state Markov learning models is a welcome addition to  the psychological literature.  The book is composed of ten chapters and four lengthy mathematical appendices. The chapters have problems for the student and  solutions are provided. It is available in hardback and paperback editions, and the printing and mathematics is of high  quality and pleasing to the eye. The book is relatively free of errors; however, in the interest of potential users, we will  discuss several of the more salient ones in the review.  Requests for reprints should be sent to Dr. William H. Batchelder, School of Social Sciences, University of California Irvine,  Irvine, California 92717.  122  0022-2496/85 $3.00  Copyright 1985 by Academic Press. Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  BOOK REVIEWS 123  Chapters two through seven constitute 60 % of the chapter pages and really constitute the main focus of the book. Most of the  75 pages of mathematical appendices support this material. The intended audience would seem to be a pool of experimental  psychology graduate students with some mathematics aptitude but little background in the relevant subjects of calculus,  mathematical statistics, and linear algebra. The pool is further specialized to students who wish to understand in detail and  model psychological phenomena in the softer areas of learning and memory with discrete trial, finite state, absorbing Markov  chain models. By the 1980's one can easily doubt that this pool of students exists in but small numbers_  Wickens intentionally presents only sparse references to the vast literature on this subject, choosing instead to emphasize  methodology rather than substance. Of the psychological references he does present, about 60% are from 1964-1969, when this  specialized trend in modeling was popular. The lack of many post 1969 references does not reflect poor scholarship on the  author's part, because relatively few papers in this area have been published since that period, and we believe this reflects  the fact that this form of psychological modeling has been on the wane. Nevertheless, Wickens might have provided a  comprehensive compendium of references in this area which would have strengthened the book. For example, it seems odd that the  relevant but much more advanced text by Frank Norman entitled Markov Processes and Learning Models (Norman, 1972) is not even  mentioned.  Compounding the problem of a limited audience, Wickens couches Chapters 2-7 in the language of learning theory (states of  knowledge, stimulus, response, pairedassociate learning, etc. ), and this seems a bit unfortunate because stochastic modeling  of this sort has been and is being used in other fields of social science such as sociology and geography and the specialized  language may turn away readers who could otherwise profit from the book.  Nevertheless, the coverage of this material is excellent from a methodological and psychological perspective, and from this  perspective the coverage is far more comprehensive and usable than found in any of the five or so mathematical psychology  texts or any other source. It is worth noting that all of the models in this area can be viewed as special cases of finite  state probabilistic automata (Paz, 1971), and Wickens does have a passing reference on p. 39 (throughout we refer to the  paperback edition) to the more general framework. Further, few users of this modeling approach-and Wickens is an exception  (see Larkin and Wickens, 1980)-have bothered to learn and utilize the extensive results in this field. With a bit more  ambition, Wickens might have developed his material in the wider framework of probabilistic automata and perhaps have provided  a greater basis for some resurgence of interest in modeling of this sort.  Particularly valuable are Chapters 4-7. Chapter 4 presents general matrix methods for deriving various summary data statistics  from finite state Markov models which specialize and extend some of the general matrix methods for working with Markov chains  developed in Kemeny and Snell's book Finite Markov Chains (initially written in 1960). The change of basis with rectangular  matrices is interesting (pp. 86-87) but is not explained fully either here or in Appendix C,  124 BOOK REVIEWS  which instead presents the usual concept of basis change within the same space using square matrices. Perhaps a discussion of  subspaces and embedding into larger spaces would have clarified the presentation.  Chapter 5 is a nice practical guide to parameter estimation for finite state Markov learning models. The rudiments of  classical parameter estimation are presented; however, no effort to utilize more recent developments like Bayesian estimation  is provided. The explicit mention of further references such as Bishop, Feinberg, and Hollands' (1975) excellent book would  have helped round out the discussion. Particularly valuable are the discussion and examples of the nature of likelihood  surfaces as well as some practical tips involving numerical methods for finding the maxima or minima of functions of several  variables. Anyone who has hiked in the mountains with a topographic map will find joy in Figs. 5.6 and 5.7.  Chapter 6 concerns testing a model and how to compare two nested models on relative fit. This chapter is nicely dovetailed  with Chapter 5 and the relationship between minimum chi-squared and maximum likelihood estimation procedures and their  associated asymptotic chi-square tests are clearly explained and illustrated with good examples.  Chapter 7 goes into the identifiability problems with Markov models initiated by the work of Jim Greeno and Ted Steiner. It is  a good practical discussion of identification problems and ways of circumventing them. The discussion of vector space  representations (Sect. 7.2) is a good addition and directs the reader to the excellent recent article on the subject by Larkin  and Wickens (1980).  Chapters 8, 9, and 10 represent a rather sudden shift of emphasis. On the surface, they seem natural because the restrictions  to absorbing states, a finite state space, and discrete time are relaxed successively in these three chapters. However, the  style of presentation is quite different than in the earlier chapters, and it approaches the level of traditional  presentations of this material in the standard stochastic processes texts like those of Feller (1968) and Parzen (1962). In  particular, the psychological emphasis characterizing the first seven chapters is almost totally absent, and little emphasis  is placed on how data are collected and fit with these models. This material could have been couched in psychological settings  as there are a number of psychological based models that utilize this machinery.  Most of the material in Chapters 8-10 is well presented; however, several typos mar the presentation of generating functions  such as Eq. 9.21 which should read  P(z) =ABkl(1 -Bz),  Eq. 9.25 which should read  6T=P1)+P'(1)[I -p'(1)],  and the second summation in the second line of the last equation on p. 214 should start with i = 1 not i = 0. Further,  probabilistic generating functions are required by Feller (1968) to converge in some interval, and this is the thrust of  Wickens' boundedness property in Section 9.4 (pp. 211-212). However, Padulo and Arbib (1974)  BOOK REVIEWS 125  treat them as formal power series where convergence is irrelevant. Problem 9.7 cannot be solved without the formal version  since the series p, = a + bt is not absolutely bounded for b o 0.  Another problem worth mentioning is that the definition of "periodic" (p. 173) is too casual, and it would have been better  reserved as an intuitive explanation for the formal definition of the period of a state, namely, the greatest common divisor  of the set of integers, {n: pk,k(n) > 0} (Parzen, 1962, p. 255).  On balance, Chapters 8-10 do not completely satisfy the goal of covering stochastic processes in psychology-as the book's  title indicates. Nevertheless, they do provide a springboard to more comprehensive stochastic process texts, where,  unfortunately, psychological applications are almost totally absent.  The appendices are generally helpful and well written. More specifically, we would recommend Appendix A on probability theory,  C on linear algebra, and D on calculus to psychology students for a number of quantitative courses. Appendix B on difference  equations, however, is not written with the same degree of clarity as the others. In Appendix C it might have been useful to  point out that almost any computer facility has subroutines available in "scientific libraries": (e.g., IMSL) that can quickly  find eigenvalues and eigenvectors for even very large matrices. So, it is really feasible to use these concepts. Appendix C  also contains an instructive error in Eq. C.26. Let  A = CE D).  Wickens states, incorrectly, that "In order for A ` to exist, both C and F must be nonsingular." Then he gives the correct  formula.  X -C-'DY A-I =( -F-'EX Y ),  where X = (C - DF -'E) -' and Y = (F - EC -'D) -'. The correct statement would add the conditions that X and Y be nonsingular  and the qualification "exist by this formula." For example, if  A =C0 1), 1 0 '  A-' exists, but not by this formula, and if  then A ` does not exist, even though C and F are nonsingular.  The chapter problems are well motivated and serve well to supplement the text.  126 BOOK REVIEWS  However, a few of the solutions have typos that may prove confusing to the student. For example, 5.10d, 6.1, 6.3, 7.2 have  incorrect solutions and the data value in 6.1 should be i=0.0746.  When the work with finite state Markov models was popular, people wrote as if they were discovering basic theory about  learning and memory processes. As soon as the emphasis in experimental psychology shifted from classical learning and memory  to more cognitive approaches for more complex situations, few scientists retained the belief that the finite state models were  appropriate as basic theory. Hence, we think, the basis for a reduced interest in this class of models was set.  Nowadays, the classical paradigms of learning and memory are used not for basic research on human cognition, but instead they  are used as paradigms to study other subjects such as neurophysiological mechanisms, the effects of drugs and alcohol, and the  aging process. Unfortunately, most researchers in these areas have fallen back to the use of substantively neutral statistical  procedures centering on ANOVA and multivariate analyses of directly observable behaviors. This trend is unfortunate because,  as Wickens points out in a number of places, estimating and testing latent parameters of a psychologically based statistical  model is a deeper and more revealing way to analyze data from the classical learning and memory paradigms. Finite state Markov  models can be invaluable in this effort, and it seems to us, if some researchers had relaxed their goal of seeking  comprehensive basic theory, there would have continued to be more productive applications of these models. We feel that such  developments could now greatly increase the quality of behavioral studies in such areas as psychobiology, neuropharamacology,  and gerontology. There is still time for more of these developments; however, methodological researchers will have to adopt  more of a psychometrics perspective than a basic science perspective if such efforts are to succeed on a large scale. We hope  that Wickens' book will contribute greatly to such an effort.  In the spring quarter of 1983, the reviewers taught a joint seminar using Wickens' book. The seminar had seven active and  motivated students, and the experience of all was uniformally positive. We hope to repeat the experience in a future year;  however, the student demand at Irvine would not allow the course to be a yearly affair. Perhaps more than anything else we  could say, the success of this course attests to the quality and value of Wickens' book.  REFERENCES  BISHOP, Y. M. M., FEINBERG, S. E., & HOLLAND, P. W. (1975). Discrete multivariate analysis: Theory and practice. Cambridge,  Mass.: MIT Press.  FELLER, W. (1968). In introduction to probability theory and its applications (Vol. 1, 3rd ed.). New York: Wiley.  KEMENY, J. G., AND SNELL, J. L. (1960). Finite Markov chains. Princeton, N.J.: Van Nostrand. (Reprinted: New York:  Springer-Verlag, 1976).  LARKIN, J. H., AND WICKENS, T. D. (1980). Population states and eigenstructure: A simplifying view of Markov learning models.  Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 22, 176-208.  BOOK REVIEWS 127  NORMAN, M. F. (1972). Markov processes and learning models. New York: Academic Press. PADULO, L., AND ARBIB, M. (1974). System  theory. Philadelphia: Saunders.  PARZEN, E. (1962). Stochastic processes. San Francisco: Holden-Day.  PAZ, A. (1971). Introduction to probabilistic automata. New York: Academic Press.  RECEIVED: September 28, 1984  480;29,'1-9