10.1016/0022-2496(85)90023-9
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 29, 128-132 (1985  Book Review Reasonable Methods for Aggregating Preferences  STEVEN .I. BRAMS AND PETER C. FISHBURN. Approval Voting. Boston: Birkhauser, 1983. Pp. xix + 198. $24.95. (paperback edition  available)  Reviewed by BERNARD GROFMAN  Steven Brams is Professor of Politics at New York University. Best known for his work in applications of game theory to  international relations and electoral strategy, his previous books include Game Theory and Politics, 1975, Paradoxes in  Politics, 1976, The Presidential Election Game, 1978, and Biblical Games, 1980.  Peter Fishburn holds a research appointment at AT&T Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, New Jersey. A distinguished contributor to  the literatures on utility theory and social choice, with an extensive list of publications in these areas, his previous books  include Decision and Value Theory, 1964, Utility Theory for Decision-Making, 1970, Mathematics of Decision Theory, 1972, The  Theory of Social Choice, 1973, and The Foundations of Expected Utility, 1982.  The reviewer is Professor of Political Science and Social Psychology, University of California, Irvine. He is a specialist in  issues of representation and reapportionment and has written on a variety of topics dealing with collective decision-making.  His most recent co-edited books are Information Pooling and Group Decision-Making, 1985, and Electoral Laws and Their  Political Consequences, 1985.  1. METHODS  Approval voting is a mechanism for aggregating individual preferences to pick one alternative (or candidate) from among  several mutually exclusive options. In approval voting, unlike ordinary plurality elections, voters are not restricted to  voting for a single candidate. Instead, each voter can vote for as many candidates as he or she wishes. The candidate with the  most votes wins. The candidates for whom the voter votes can be thought of as those whom he/she "approves of." Although this  interpretation is not essential to understanding the basic mechanics of approval voting, the candidate with the most  "approval" votes is presumably also the candidate "acceptable to the most voters" (p. xi).  Approval voting is the most recent in a long line of election "reforms." These reforms have included the secret ballot,  proposals for various forms of proportional representation, at-large elections, nonpartisan elections, runoff primaries, and,  most recently, attempts to abolish runoff primaries and reduce or eliminate the use of at  Requests for reprints should be sent to Bernard Grofman, Political Science and Social Psychology, University of California,  Irvine, CA 92664.  0022-2496/85 $3.00  Copyright C 1985 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  128  BOOK REVIEWS 129  large elections. As this list may suggest, what constitutes a "reform" and, indeed, what are the problems with existing  procedures which need to be corrected are matters about which there has never been consensus. Approval voting, independently  invented over several years by a number of authors, may become a major electoral innovation of the coming decades. Brains, for  example, has lobbied for its adoption in U.S. Presidential primaries and has hailed it as the "election reform of the 20th  century."  Most U.S. elections are conducted in single-member districts under plurality (first-past-the-post) rules. This form of  election is, worldwide, a rarity. Only Great Britain and some of her former colonies use plurality elections. Elsewhere  legislative elections are most commonly conducted in multimember districts under some form of list proportional representation  (PR) (Rae, 1972), in which voters vote for political parties and parties are allocated seats proportional to the number of  voters who supported their slate. In elections to pick a single individual (e.g., President, or mayor, or the like), the  schemes which approval voting is intended to supplant are simple plurality on the one hand, and runoff procedures on the  other. In the most common form of the majority runoff, if no alternative receives a majority of the votes cast, the top two  alternatives are paired in a subsequent head-on-head contest. (In Europe this is known as the double-ballot system.)','  2. CHOOSING AMONG ELECTION METHODS  In choosing among election methods, a variety of criteria of evaluation have been put forward. Most of these criteria are  "formal"; i.e., they look to structural features of the aggregation process. Some evaluative criteria focus on consequences  for political parties and campaign practices, while others deal with the probable effect of election procedures on voter  behavior (e.g., to what extent do voters have incentives to misrepresent their true preferences in the ballots they cast, and  even more generally, how easy is it for a voter to determine his or her "optimal" strategy).  Among the formal criteria are criteria such as monotonicity and consistency. Monotonicity requires that if a voting method  chooses an alternative x and nothing  ' Other runoff variants include a 40%, rather than majority, vote requirement for the initial election, and procedures which  take more than two candidates into the runoff.  'In some Australian single-member-district elections, voters are asked to indicate their rank order preferences among  candidates. If no candidate receives a majority, the candidate with the fewest first place votes is eliminated and the votes  of its supporters reallocated to the next listed (feasible) preference. This process continues until one candidate receives a  majority. This election method, known variously as the alternative vote and the majority-preferential ballot, is, of course,  in principle, identical in its effects to a majority runoff except that it does not ever require two separate elections to be  held. It, too, has from time to time been proposed as a reform to American plurality election procedures. In practice, the  alternative vote and majority runoff may not yield identical effects because (a) the initial electorate and that for a  majority runoff may not be identical; (b) campaigning may take place between the initial election and the runoff and this may  change some votes; (c) the decision of candidates to enter the race may be affected by expectations about the potential costs  of a runoff campaign.  130 BOOK REVIEW  changes except that some voters place x higher in the preference ordering than before, then x should still be chosen by that  voting method. Consistency requires that, if we divide voters into two subsets, if, for a given voting method, an alternative  is chosen by both subsets, then it should be chosen by the combined set of voters. Plurality and approval voting satisfy these  two criteria. The majority runoff satisfies neither. An example in which the majority runoff fails to satisfy monotonicity  (taken from Straffin, 1980, p. 24) is given below.  Number of voters 6 5 4 2  n=17 a c b b  b a c a  c b a c  In this example, a will win; yet, if the last two voters change their preferences in favor of alternative a so as to shift  from a bac ordering to an abc ordering, then c will be chosen. We leave to the reader the devising of an example to show that  majority runoff also fails to satisfy consistency. Failure to satisfy the monotonicity criteria, in particular, seems a grave  defect, and it has been asserted to be a fatal flaw in a voting method (Doron and Kronick, 1977; Riker, 1982). However, we do  not believe the mere fact that examples can be given in which some particular axiom is violated is ipso facto sufficient to  rule out a given voting method from consideration, since the circumstances which give rise to the examples may be unlikely to  occur in real world elections. Nonetheless, in terms of criteria commonly held to be desirable for election systems to  satisfy, approval voting scores better than its two chief competitors.  Perhaps the single most important formal criterion for elections choice is the Condorcet criterion, which requires that the  candidate be chosen, if any, who is preferred by a majority in pairwise votes to all other candidates. One of the strongest  selling points of approval voting is that, when voter preferences are dichotomous (i.e., voters make no finer distinctions  among candidates than to rank some as acceptable and others as unacceptable), approval voting guarantees the choice of the  Condorcet (majority) winner. Moreover, when voter preferences are dichotomous, every voter has a dominant strategy-to vote for  all the candidates he/she finds acceptable. This means that for dichotomous preferences, approval voting is strategy proof  i.e., it never makes sense for a voter to vote other than sincerely in accord with his/her preferences. Brams and Fishburn  regard strategyproofness as one of approval voting's most desirable features, since it means that voters can, by behaving  "naturally" (i.e., sincerely) also be behaving optimally. In general, for plurality, sincere voting may not be optimal. In a  three-way race, for example, the candidate whom one most prefers may have little chance and it will be desirable to vote  "strategically" for your second choice.  When voters are not limited to dichotomous preference (and such a restriction is certainly a very strong one), then approval  voting loses some, though certainly not  BOOK REVIEW 131  all, of its most desirable properties. With nondichotomous preferences, strategic calculations reenter (Niemi, 1984), and  choice of a Condorcet winner is no longer a certainty; but approval voting is the nonranked system with the highest  probability of giving rise to a Condorcet winner through sincere voting, and it is far better than plurality in that regard.  Brains and Fishburn prove a variety of results which show that, when the circumstances are such that approval voting results  in an outcome which seems inappropriate, the plurality method or the various runoff methods will in general do no better.  3. DISCUSSION  Brains and Fishburn assert (p. xii) that "every practicable voting system suffers certain deficiencies." I concur. Is approval  voting the best there is? Yes and No. For certain purposes, e.g., picking a restaurant or a convention site which will be  acceptable to the most people in a group, my enthusiasm is unequivocal: I cannot imagine a better social choice mechanism. For  general elections to a single office, at least in the United States, I believe that two-party politics by and large provides  us with a two-candidate election in which approval voting is irrelevant.3 As for the use of approval voting in multicandidate  elections like primaries, Brains and Fishburn see approval voting as the solution to the problem of multicandidate primaries.  I believe the verdict is still out on this important question.  Although Brains and Fishburn have, via exit polls, generated sample approval ballots for actual Presidential primaries, we  cannot be sure the result of such polls reflects what would happen in a campaign conducted under approval voting where  candidates might urge supporters to follow particular ballot strategies. Also, some primaries are in effect run under  proportional representation rules, not as winnertake-all elections. Brains and Fishburn have not, to the best of my knowledge,  considered the properties of approval voting in such a context. On the positive side, approval voting will certainly increase  the likelihood of the Condorcet winner being chosen, if there is one, compared to plurality; and approval voting also makes it  possible for voters to signal a very rough form of relative intensity of preference (by distinguishing between the approved  and the disapproved candidates) in a way that plurality and majority runoff methods do not. On the negative side, when choices  are important ones, in practice approval voting is apt to be a confusing system for voters because it requires them to choose  among the (2' - 2) possible ballots they might cast, and not just among the possible single candidates they might vote for  under plurality. Indeed, even if voters confine themselves to sincere strategies, there will, in general, be m - 1 possible  sincere strategies open to them (consisting of voting for one's first choice, one's first two choices, etc.) under approval  voting and only one sincere strategy under plurality. Also, as Niemi (1984) has shown, even when voters confine themselves to  sincere ballots, questions of strategic calculation  ' The Washington-Daley-Byrne race in Chicago was an exception; other exceptions occur in New York State which has a Liberal, a  Conservative, and a Right to Life party.  132 BOOK REVIEW  remain very important. Finally, once we move beyond approval voting's formal properties and look at the political implications  of its use in primaries, then the consequences for party cohesion, campaign strategy, and candidate proliferation are not all  clear.  My mixed feelings about approval voting as an election reform do not affect my very positive regard for Approval Voting as a  book. Approval Voting is an unusual book in a number of ways. It is one of a handful of books to make a sustained policy  argument through the use of abstract mathematical reasoning and deserves commendation for that reason alone. Moreover, unlike  most social choice theorists, Brams and Fishburn are willing to get their feet wet with data. Chapters of the book deal  intelligently with reconstructing probable voter preference orderings and outcomes under different election systems in a New  York senatorial election, the 1980 Presidential contest, and the 1976 majority leader election in the U.S. House of  Representatives. Brams and Fishburn also make a consistent and thorough-going attempt to be realistic in their modeling. For  example one chapter deals with the different probable effects of polling information on voter choices under approval voting as  compared to plurality or runoff systems. Scholars interested in social choice, decision theory, or scaling theory will find  this book of considerable interest, regardless of what their ultimate judgment may be as to the importance of approval voting  as an electoral innovation.'  REFERENCES  DORON, G. & KRONICK, R. (1977, May). Single transferable vote: An example of a perverse social choice function. American  Journal of Political Science 21 (2).  NIEMI, R. G. (1984, December). The problem of strategic behavior under approval voting. American Political Science Review 78  (4).  RAE, D. (1972). The political consequences of electoral laws, 2nd ed. New Haven: Yale Univ. Press. RIKER, W. (1982).  Liberalism against populism: A confrontation between the theory of democracy and the theory of social choice. San Francisco:  Freeman.  STRAFFIN, P. Topics in the theory of voting. Boston: Birkhauser.  'Note added in proof. For a recent exchange of views see Arrington, T. S., & Brenner, S. (1984). Another look at approval  voting. Polity 17, 118-124; and Brams, S. J., & Fishburn, P. C. (1984). A careful look at "Another look at approval voting."  Polity 17, 135-143. Also, see the forthcoming exchange between Brains and Fishburn and Niemi in the September 1985 issue of  American Political Science Review in which Brams and Fishburn take issue with many of Niemi's criticisms.