10.1016/0022-2496(85)90005-7
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 29, 443-473 (1985)  How Many Parameters Can a Model Have and Still Be Testable?  DONALD BAMBER  VA Medical Center, St. Cloud, Minnesota  AND  JAN P. H. VAN SANTENt  New York University  A standard rule of thumb states that a model has too many parameters to be testable if and only if it has at least as many  parameters as empirically observable quantities. We argue that when one asks whether a model has too many parameters to be  testable, one implicitly refers to a particular type of testability, which we call quantitative testability. A model is  defined to be quantitatively testable if the model's predictions have zero probability of being correct by chance. Next, we  propose a new rule of thumb, based on the rank of the Jacobian matrix of a model (i.e., the matrix of partial derivatives of  the function that maps the model's parameter values onto predicted experimental outcomes). According to this rule, a model is  quantitatively testable if and only if the rank of the Jacobian matrix is less than the number of observables. (The rank of  his matrix can be found with standard computer algorithms.) Using Sard's theorem, we prove that the proposed new rule of thumb  is correct provided that certain "smoothness" conditions are satisfied. We also discuss the relation between quantitative  testability and reparameterization, identiffability, and goodness-of-fit testing. 1985 Academic Press, Inc.  I. INTRODUCTION  During model construction, often the issue comes up whether the model has "too many parameters to be testable."' This is an  important question, because an incorrect assessment of a model's testability may result in the abandonment of a sound model.  This can happen in either of two ways. If it is concluded that a model has "too many parameters to be testable," one may feel  that the model is worthless and abandon it immediately. Alternatively, one may attempt to reduce the number  * Present address: Human Factors Department-Code 71, Navy Personnel Research and Development Center, San Diego, CA 92152.  t Present address: AT&T Bell Laboratories, Summit, NJ 07901.  ' One can also ask whether a model has "too many parameters" to be possible to estimate. We discuss this question of parameter  identifiability in Section VI.  443  0022-2496/85 $3.00  Copyright 1985 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  444 BAMBER AND VAN SANTEN  of parameters by adding assumptions to the model. For example, certain parameters may be set equal to each other while other  parameters may be set equal to zero. When this modified model is empirically tested, it may be incompatible with the data  because of these additional assumptions, even though the original model might have been compatible.  Thus, assessment of a model's testability is a preliminary screening device for judging the model's usefulness. It does not  provide everything one wants to know about a model. In particular, knowing that a model is testable does not tell one how to  test it. However, knowing whether a model is testable does help one decide whether to work more at figuring out how to test  it. Thus, assessment of a model's testability helps one decide whether to (a) continue working with the model, (b) modify the  model, or (c) abandon it. In addition, the particular type of testability that we will define is a prerequisite for commonly  used goodness-of-fit tests.  When one says that a model has "too many parameters to be testable," one is implicitly referring to a particular type of  testability, which we shall call quantitative testability. In this paper, we present a new method for assessing whether or not  a model is quantitatively testable. Moreover, we show that the commonly used assessment method based upon counting parameters  and observations is invalid.  Quantitative Testability  We give the reader here an intuitive feel for the concept of quantitative testability. A precise definition is presented in  Section II. Consider an experiment and a model that applies to the experiment. The experiment measures the values of n  quantities. Consider the point in Euclidean n-space, R", whose coordinates are these n quantities' true values (which may  differ from their measured values). This point is called the true outcome of the experiment. Any point in R" that could  logically be the true outcome of the experiment is called a potential outcome. The set of all potential outcomes of an  experiment is called the outcome space and is denoted O. The set of all potential outcomes that are consistent with the model  is called the prediction range and is denoted P. Thus, P c O c R".  The defining condition for testability (i.e., falsifiability) is that, in a given experiment, there exist potential outcomes  that are inconsistent with the model. Formally, there must exist some y E O - P.  We distinguish between two degrees of testability, qualitative and quantitative, that may be loosely differentiated as  follows. Qualitatively testable models make inexact predictions, whereas quantitatively testable models make exact  predictions. Put otherwise: If the model's prediction range P is defined exclusively by inequalities (that do not imply  equalities), then the model is qualitatively testable. If P involves at least one equality, then the model is quantitatively  testable. For example, suppose three observations y,, y2, and y3 are made in an experiment. If the model predicts that y3 = y,  + y2, then it is quantitatively testable; however, if the model predicts that y3 1< y, + y2, then it is qualitatively testable.  A further way to differentiate between qualitatively and quantitatively testable models is by looking at the "volume" of the  model's prediction range P. If P is a  TESTABILITY 445  solid portion of O, that fills "volume," then the model is qualitatively testable. However, if P is an infinitesimally thin  film in O that has zero "volume," then the model is quantitatively testable.  A final way to differentiate between the two is by probability statements. Suppose Y is a random vector that can be  characterized by a probability density on O. If P(YEP)=O, then the model is quantitatively testable. If P(YEP)>O, then the  model is qualitatively testable. In other words, suppose one performs an experiment with outcome space O to test a model with  prediction range P. A computer is programmed to run the experiment and report the outcome, but due to a programming error, the  computer reports a randomly selected point in O rather than the true outcome. How likely is it that the computer will report a  point in P and thus lead one to conclude that the model has been confirmed? If P is so small that the probability of this  happening is zero, then the model is quantitatively testable.  An example of a quantitatively testable model is provided by Luce's (1959) Choice Model applied to a pair comparison situation  in which a subject has to decide, for each pair of objects, which of the two is more preferable. Let M;j denote the  probability with which the subject prefers object i over object j. Thus, 0 < M;j < 1. Assume that M;, = 0.5 and Mij =1- Mji.  Hence, when there are N objects, O is [0, 1 ] ^'(^' -')/2, i.e., O is the set of the above-diagonal entries of N x N matrices  [M;j] whose elements are between 0 and 1. According to the Choice Model, there exist scale values v,, ..., vN such that  M;=VJ(vi+vj). It can be shown that the existence of this scale implies that P is defined by equalities. Specifically, P  consists of those matrices in O where, for all i < k < j, Mtj/(1 - M;j) = [MtkM -Mik)][Mkjl(1 -Mkj)] An example of a qualitatively testable "model" is given by the property of strong stochastic transitivity, which states that  if Mik and Mkj > 0.5, then M,j > Mik and Mij > Mkj .  Assessing Whether a Model Has "Too Many Parameters"  Important as it is to know whether a model is quantitatively testable, it has typically been assumed that the assessment of  quantitative testability is trivial. Indeed, common opinion holds that all one has to do is to apply the following rule:  COUNTING RULE. Count, first, the number of "independent" parameters in the model and, second, the number of "independent"  quantities measured in the experiment. The model is quantitatively testable if and only if the latter exceeds the former.  In the above, the number of "independent" quantities in a possibly larger set is the size of the smallest subset that  determines the entire set. To be precise, consider m variables x, ,..., x. Let A c R' consist of all allowable combinations  of x,,..., x. Given some k < m, and Some i, ,..., ik, where 11< i, < ... < ik < m, a coordinatedeleting function is a  function from R' to Rk that maps (x,,..., x) onto (x;,,..., xik). Then, the number of "independent" variables is defined as  the smallest value of k for which there exists a coordinate-deleting function that is 1-1 when restricted to  446 BAMBER AND VAN SANTEN  A. For example, consider a model that has m parameters that may take on any values subject to the constraint that they always  sum to one (i.e., A is the subset of R' given by { (x, ,..., xm) I x, + - - - + x,= 1 I). This model has only m - 1  "independent" parameters, for we may take k = m -1, i, ,..., ik =1,..., m -1, and let the coordinate-deleting function map (x,  ,..., x xm) to (x, ,..., xm This function is 1-1 when restricted to A.  However, as we shall see in this article, the matter of determining whether a model is testable is substantially more  complicated than the counting rule. Briefly, the complication is the following. For each possible combination of parameter  values, the model predicts an outcome of the experiment. Now, this correspondence between parameter values and predicted  outcomes need not be one-to-one. If the correspondence is infinitely many-to-one, then the set P of predicted outcomes may be  much smaller than if the correspondence were one-to-one. In fact, the correspondence may map the set of possible parameter  values onto a set P that has zero probability measure even when there are more "independent" parameters than "independent"  quantities observed in the experiment.  Goal  The goal of this paper is to investigate how a model's testability depends on properties of (a) the set of possible parameter  values and (b) the equations that define the model. More specifically, our goal is to provide a criterion for quantitative  testability that is relatively easy to apply (although not quite as easy as the Counting Rule). The criterion we develop can  be applied mechanically to most models using standard computer programs.  This brings us to the outline of the present paper. First, we provide a rigorous definition of quantitative testability.  Second, we show that the Counting Rule is incorrect-generally, it is too conservative (i.e., falsely categorizes models as not  being quantitatively testable). Third, we provide our criterion for assessing quantitative testability. Fourth, we discuss a  slightly modified version of quantitative testability, which is concerned with imprecision of empirical measurement. When  measurement imprecision is taken into account, the Counting Rule can be too liberal as well as too conservative. Finally, we  discuss relations between quantitative testability, parameter identifiability, reparameterization, and statistical tests of  goodness-of-fit.  Remark. This paper is concerned with experiments of the finite-dimensional type only. By "finite-dimensional" the following is  meant. Suppose that there exist a finite number n of quantities whose true values are to be measured. An experiment that  measures these n quantities (to a greater or lesser accuracy) is finite-dimensional. For example, an experiment that measures  the probability of each of n events is finite dimensional. On the other hand, an experiment that measures the cumulative  distribution function of a continuous random variable X is not finitedimensional. In such an experiment, the experimenter  wants to know the values of an infinite number of quantities. Specifically, for each real number a, the experimen-  TESTABILITY 447  ter wants to know P(X <a). Note that, with a sufficiently large but finite sample size, this infinite set of quantities can be  measured to any degree of accuracy (Rao, 1973, Sect. 6f.1). Thus, it is not sample size but number of quantities to be  measured that determines whether an experiment is finite-dimensional.  In practice, potentially infinite-dimensional experiments are frequently converted to finite-dimensional experiments. For  example, in a reaction-time experiment, the data are often reduced to the mean and variance, or to the parameters that  characterize an assumed family of cumulative distribution functions. In this paper, we limit ourselves to finite-dimensional  experiments.  II. QUANTITATIVE TESTABILITY DEFINED  Models  A model, in the most general sense of the word, can be tested in a variety of experiments. In fact, one often constructs a  model in the absence of any notion of how to test it. However, once one has decided on an experiment, one deals with a  specific version of the model, namely, the model as applied to the particular experiment. In what follows, we use the term  "model" in this narrow sense of experiment-specific model.  Consider an experiment where n observable quantities are measured. These quantities' true values (as distinct from their  measured values) define a point in R" which is called the true outcome of the experiment. (For example, in experiments in  which we observe relative frequencies of events, the true outcome consists of the underlying probabilities, not the observed  relative frequencies.) Any point in R" that could logically be the true outcome is called a potential outcome; the set of all  potential outcomes is called the outcome space and is denoted O.  Suppose that a model that applies to this experiment has m parameters. Then, any combination of parameter values may be  represented as a point in R'. Let the set of all possible parameter value combinations be termed the parameter domain and let  it be denoted D. The parameter domain may be a proper subset of R'. For example, if the parameters represent the probability  of each of m mutually exclusive and exhaustive events, then the parameter domain consists of all points in R' whose  coordinates are non-negative and sum to one.  For each possible combination of parameter values, the model predicts the true value of the n quantities to be measured. In  effect, the model specifies a function (called the prediction function) that maps possible parameter combinations onto  predicted experimental outcomes.' A point in the outcome space is consistent with  2 Prediction functions should not be confused with theoretical relations. The former are tied to a particular experiment; the  latter are not. An example will make this clearer. Suppose we have a theory of springs that states that the length y of a  spring is a linear function of the weight w suspended from the spring. Thus y=x,+wx2, where x, and x2 are parameters. This is  an example of a theoretical relation. In an experiment, weights (w) of 1, 2, and 3 kg are suspended from the spring and the  its length is measured. Then, the prediction function for this experiment is Px,, x2) = (x, + x2, x, +2x2, x, + 3x2). We shall  not deal with theoretical relations in this paper.  448 BAMBER AND VAN SANTEN  the model if and only if it lies in the range of the prediction function, i.e., the image of the parameter domain under the  prediction function. We call the range of the prediction function the prediction range and denote it by P.  The above considerations are summarized by the following formal definition:  DEFINITION 1. (D, f, O) is a model if D c R', O c R", and f D -> O. In this definition, we call D the parameter domain, f the  prediction function, and O the outcome space. The prediction range P is defined as f[D].  Before using these definitions (which, by the way, are unrelated to the meaning of model in formal logic), we give a few  illustrations.  EXAMPLES 2. (a) Consider, again, Luce's (1959) Choice Model. With N objects, the parameters are the scale values v,,..., VN.  Hence, m = N and D = (R+ )^'. As discussed earlier, O = [0, 1 ] N(N -'v2. The prediction function f maps each (VI 1-, VN) e D  onto the above-diagonal elements of the N x N matrix [v~-(v; + v;)].  (b) Suppose that, in testing Estes' (1959) Small Element Model, the experimenter reduces the data to learning curves. That is,  the raw data, which consist of error-success strings, are transformed into curves that indicate for each trial the probability  of a correct response. Let N be the number of trials, then the number of observables n = N, and O = [0, 1 ] N. Since there are  only two parameters (a learning parameter c and a guessing parameter g) that both range between 0 and l, m = 2 and the  parameter domain D is [0, 1 ] z. The prediction function may be written in the form f(c, g) = [f, (c, g),..., fN(c, g) ],  where each f (c, g) is the predicted probability correct on trial i and equals 1- (1- g)(1- c)`-1.  (c) In Factor Analysis, with r respondents and v variables, the number of outcomes n = rv and O=R ". With q factors (q < r -1,  v), the parameters may be represented by the r x q matrix S= [S,k] of respondents' factor scores, the q x v matrix L = [Lk;]  of variables' factor loadings, and the r x v matrix M= [Mr;] of variables' intercepts (r identical rows). Hence, the number of  parameters m = rq + qv + v and D=R 'q + qv +  The prediction function f maps matrix triples (S, L, M) e D onto the r x v  matrix SL + M. Consequently, P = f [D ] is the set of all r x v matrices that have the property that if one subtracts from  each element the corresponding column mean, the resulting matrix has rank q or less. (The rank of a matrix H is the number of  linearly independent columns (or, equivalently, rows) in the matrix and is denoted p(H).)  Quantitative Testability  We now define quantitative testability. The starting point for our definition of quantitative testability is our desire that  there should be zero probability that a point randomly sampled from the outcome space O will lie in P. Of course, a definition  of quantitative testability must define this concept in a way that is independent of the sampling distribution on O.  Fortunately, it is known that any  TESTABILITY 449  measurable set that has Lebesgue measure zero also has a sampling probability of zero provided that the sampling distribution  can be characterized by a density function. (All commonly used continuous probability distributions can be characterized by  density functions.)  Roughly speaking, Lebesgue measure corresponds to line length in the onedimensional case, to area in the two-dimensional case,  to volume in the threedimensional case, etc.  We define weak and strong forms of quantitative testability, the difference between which we shall elucidate below.  Weak Quantitative Testability  DEFINITION 3. A model (D, f, O) is weakly quantitatively testable (WQT)3 if (1) A(O) > 0 and (2) A(P) = 0. Here, A(A) denotes  the Lebesgue measure of a Lebesguemeasurable set A c R".  Note the requirement that O cannot have measure zero. The reason for this requirement is that, without it, the definition  could sometimes be vacuous: If ~(O) = 0, then A(P) = 0 for any P c O, even if P = O. To illustrate, consider an experiment  with N mutually exclusive and exhaustive response categories, in which the quantities to be measured are response  probabilities. Let y; denote the probability of a response in the ith category. Then O is {(y...... y')IEN, y;=1, and yi >, 0  }. The measure of O in RN is zero; in fact, O is a subset of an (N-1)dimensional flat. Then, P would also have measure zero  even if P were the same as O and the model, thus, would not even be qualitatively testable. However, we can resolve this  difficulty by transforming O into O' as follows: Map each (y,,..., yN) E 0,=R"'t0(Y1,...,YN-1)EO'cR` sothat  O'={(y1,...,YN-1)1Y_Ni Yr51,and y; >, 0 }. Then O' has positive measure in RN-1, and no model for which P' = O' would be  quantitatively testable.  Strong Quantitative Testability  In real life, tests of models are complicated by the existence of measurement error. While in this paper we are not concerned  with statistical issues, there is one measurement-error issue that needs to be addressed for our concept of testability to be  a reasonable "screening device" for models. In particular, we have tacitly assumed that if the true outcome t of an experiment  is not in P, then, by measuring t with sufficient accuracy, we can ultimately determine that t lies outside of P.  Surprisingly, there are situations where, no matter how accurately t is measured, it cannot be demonstrated that t lies  outside of P.  EXAMPLE 4 (Lissajous figure). Let (D, f, O) be a model where D = R, O = [ -1, 1 ] 2 (-- Rz, and f (x,) = (sin x, , sin 9x,),  where 9 is an irrational constant.  ' The abbreviations WQT and SQT will be used both as adjectival and as noun phrases. Thus, WQT can mean either weakly  quantitatively testable or weak quantitative testability.  450 BAMBER AND VAN SANTEN  It follows readily from Theorem 9 later in this paper that this model is WQT. However, it is shown in Appendix A that the  model's prediction range is dense in the experiment's outcome space. What does this mean? Suppose that it is known that the  true outcome t of the experiment lies within distance a of the measured outcome y. Then, no matter how small a is, there are  points of P that are within distance a of y. Thus, no matter how small the measurement error a, it can never be demonstrated  that t lies outside P. I.e., if the mode is false, it can never be proven So.  The above example shows that measurement error (no matter how small) can render some WQT models untestable. This situation  provides a rationale for defining a new and stronger form of quantitative testability which does not allow models to be  rendered untestable by small measurement errors. We do this as follows. First, for reasons that will soon be evident, we  define a model's apparent prediction range as Cl(P) n O, where CI(P) denotes the (topological) closure of P. Then, we define  strong quantitative testability by substituting the apparent for the actual prediction range in the WQT definition.  DEFINITION 5. A model (D, f, O) is strongly quantitatively testable (SQT) (see footnote 3) if (1) A(O)>0 and (2) .1(Cl(P)n0)=0.  We give now a more detailed rationale for the use of Cl(P) n O in this definition. Let y denote a confidence level (e.g.,  0.95). An event will be said to usually occur if its probability is at least y. For the sake of simplicity, suppose that  measurement error operates as follows. For fixed y, any experiment can be characterized by an imprecision level a > 0. Let t  and y be the true and measured outcomes, respectively. Then y is usually a point in R" such that I y - t I < a. (Here, I y - t  I denotes the Euclidean length of the vector y - t.) The imprecision level a can be made arbitrarily small' by devoting more  resources to the experiment (e.g., by building more precise equipment or by increasing the size of random samples). Thus, for  any J3 > 0, the experiment can be conducted with imprecision a where 0 < a <, J3.  Suppose the following model-testing strategy is adopted. In an experiment with imprecision level a, the model is accepted  whenever the measured value y of the outcome is less than distance a from any point ~ E P; otherwise the model is rejected.  A point p E O is said to appear to be in P if, given that the true outcome is p, the model will usually be accepted no matter  how small the experimental imprecision is. It is evident that, if in fact p E P, then p will appear to be in P. What is not so  evident is that some points outside of P can also appear to be in P. It will now be shown that the set of points in O that  appear to be in P is Cl(P) n O.  Suppose p E CI(P) n O. If p is the true outcome and y the measured outcome and a the imprecision, then usually a - I y - p I >  0. So, since p is in the closure of P,  In some quantum mechanical experiments, Heisenberg's uncertainty principle prevents such unlimited accuracy from being  achieved.  TESTABILITY 451  there usually exists some C E P such that I p - ~I < a - I y - p1. Hence, I y - ~I  I y - p I + I p - I < a, usually. Thus, no matter how small a is, the model will usually be accepted.  Suppose p is not in CI(P) n O. Since p is not in the closure of P, there exists some /3 > 0 such that I p - ~I > /3 for all (  E P. So, if p is the true outcome and if the experiment has imprecision X3/2 or less, then the model will usually be rejected.  This result explains why we call CI(P) n O the apparent prediction range and, thus, provides a rationale for the previously  given definition of SQT. Note that the Lissajous figure in Example 4 is not SQT since its apparent prediction range is all of  O.  Remark. If a model (D, f, O) is SQT and if O is closed, then P is nowhere dense in R". (Proof: if P were not nowhere dense,  then CI(P) = CI(P) n O would have a non-empty interior and, hence, A(CI(P) n O) > 0.) The converse does not hold. A model with  P nowhere dense need not be SQT since P could have positive Lebesgue measure (Gelbaum and Olmsted, 1964, Chap. 8, Example 4).  111. WHY WE CANNOT COUNT PARAMETERS  Note that the Lissajous-figure model (Example 4) violates the Counting Rule. Since the model has two independent observable  quantities but only one parameter, it should be quantitatively testable according to the Counting Rule. However, in a real  experiment, this model would be rendered completely untestable by the imprecision of measurement.  In this example, the Counting Rule fails by being too liberal; it falsely classifies an untestable model as being  quantitatively testable. However, this is an unusual type of failure for the Counting Rule. Its typical failure is to be too  conservative; i.e., to falsely classify quantitatively testable models as being not quantitatively testable. We now present an  example of this type of failure.  Elsewhere (Bamber and van Santen, 1980; in preparation; and van Santen and Bamber, 1981), we have discussed a class of models  that share the assumption that perception is mediated by a finite number of internal states. We call these models discrete  state models. Also in other areas, such as psychophysics [e.g., low- and high-threshold models (Swets, Tanner, and Birdsall,  1961; Luce, 1963a, 1963b; Krantz, 1969)], and attention research (Sperling, 1983), discrete state models are common. For many  discrete state models, the Counting Rule is conservative in the sense of falsely indicating that they are not quantitatively  testable. To illustrate this conservativeness of the Counting Rule, we discuss the simplest of the discrete state models,  namely, the Threshold Model. This model includes the low- and highthreshold models as special cases.  ExAMPLE 6 (The Threshold Model). Consider a psychophysical experiment where, on each trial, the subject is presented with one  of three possible stimuli: (a) a  452 BAMBER AND VAN SANTEN  strong signal, (b) a weak signal, or (c) no signal at all. To each stimulus, the subject responds with one of three possible  ratings (a) confident that a signal was presented, (b) unsure, or (c) confident that no signal was presented.  According to the Threshold Model, presentation of one of the three stimuli stochastically causes the subject to enter either a  "detect" state D or a "non-detect" state ND. The subject's confidence rating is stochastically determined by his internal  state. Thus, the conditional probability of the subject responding with rating r given stimulus s is  P(rIs)=P(DIs)P(rID)+P(NDIs)P(rI ND). (1)  There is one such equation for each combination of three stimuli and three ratings, a total of nine equations.  These nine versions of Eq. (1) may be summarized by a simple matrix equation. Let C denote the 3 x 3 matrix of conditional  probabilities P(r I s) with each row representing a different stimulus s and each column representing a different rating r.  Let A denote the 3 x 2 matrix where each row represents a different stimulus s and contains P(D I s) on the left and P(ND I s)  on the right. Let B denote the 2 x 3 matrix where each column represents a different rating r and contains P(rI D) on the top  and P(r I ND) on the bottom. Then, the nine versions of Eq. (1) can be summarized by the matrix equation  C=AB.  Matrices A and B contain the model's parameters. Matrix C contains the predicted values of the conditional probabilities  observed in the experiment. Of course, the matrices A, B, and C must all be probability matrices, i.e., all matrix entries  must be non-negative and the sum of each row must be one. (Some writers use the term row stochastic to denote probability  matrices.) Other than requiring that they be probability matrices, we place no restrictions on the parameter matrices A and B.  The Threshold Model makes the following prediction. Since A and B have two columns and two rows, respectively, their ranks are  two or less. Since C is their product, its rank cannot be more than theirs. Thus, the Threshold Model predicts that the rank  of C will be two or less.  This prediction is falsifiable since not all 3 x 3 probability matrices have rank two or less. In fact, most 3 x 3 probability  matrices have rank three. This leads one to suspect that the Threshold Model is not merely testable, but is quantitatively  testable. Indeed, it can be shown, using Theorem 17 from later in this paper, that the Threshold Model is SQT.  An interesting aspect of the Threshold Model is that, despite its quantitative testability, its parameters cannot be uniquely  estimated. To see this, suppose C is any 3 x 3 probability matrix that is consistent with the threshold model. In general,  there will not be a unique pair of 3 x 2 and 2 x 3 probability matrices A and B  TESTABILITY 453  whose product is C. For suppose that A and B are such a pair. Then it can easily be shown that generally there are  (uncountably) many 2 x 2 nonsingular probability matrices O which have the property that A * = AO -' and B* = OB are  probability matrices. Obviously, A *B* = AO -'OB = AB = C.  It will now be shown that the Counting Rule gives the wrong result for the Threshold Model. The matrix C is 3 x 3 and, so,  contains 9 observable quantities. However, the entries in each row must sum to one; so, only 3(3 - 1) or 6 of these  observables are "independent." Similarly, A contains 3(2 -1) or 3 "independent" parameters, and B contains another 2(3 - 1) or  4. So, the total number of "independent" parameters 3 + 4 = 7 is greater than the number of "independent" observables 6. Thus,  according to the Counting Rule, the Threshold Model should not be quantitatively testable. However, we have just seen that, in  fact, it is SQT. Thus, the Counting Rule is overly conservative in this case.  The same situation occurs in most other discrete state models studied by Bamber and van Santen (1980; in preparation).  Moreover, this situation is, of course, not confined to Discrete State models. For example, in Luce's (1959) Choice Model, the  Counting Rule is also too conservative. As discussed in Example 2, the number of parameters equals N the number of objects.  Moreover, the parameters are all "independent" since no proper subset of them determines the entire set. The number of  "independent" observable quantities is N(N- 1)/2. Hence, when N= 3, the number of "independent" parameters N and the number of  "independent" observables N(N- 1)/2 both equal 3, so that, according to the Counting Rule, the model should not be testable.  However, it is easy to show that for N=3, the Choice Model is SQT. (In this case, the reason why the models is quantitatively  testable is intuitively obvious: Since v,/(v; + v;) = av;l(av; + avj) for any non-zero a, we can always eliminate one  parameter from the model by arbitrarily setting v,N = 1, so that we have only N- 1 = 2 parameters left.)  We conclude that the Counting Rule can give wrong answers that are too conservative. This leaves two options. First, one may  attempt to modify the Counting Rule, by applying it to a model only after one has made certain changes in the model that  reduce the number of "independent" parameters while leaving P intact (i.e., a reparameterization; see Sect. VI). This was  demonstrated above in the case of the Choice Model, but not in the case of the Threshold Model; in fact, in the latter case it  is quite difficult to find a way to make the appropriate changes. Second, one may develop an entirely new rule for assessing  quantitative testability. This is what we have done.  IV. A NEW CRITERION FOR WEAK QUANTITATIVE TESTABILITY  The main conclusion from the preceding section is that a model can be WQT (i.e., its prediction range P can have measure zero)  even when there are as many or more "independent" parameters than "independent" observables. Apparently, the  480/29,/4-7  454 BAMBER AND VAN SANTEN  measure of P depends in some manner on properties of the prediction function f What is the central mathematical principle that  underlies this dependency?  Relevance of the Jacobian Matrix  The central mathematical principle is that the Jacobian matrix of the prediction function should have rank smaller than the  number n of independent observable quantities. The prediction function's Jacobian matrix is constructed as follows. For any  point x in the model's parameter domain D, we may write  x = (XI ,...I x1Y1  f(x) = [.f (x),..., f"(x)]'.  (The functions f ,..., f" are called the scalar components of f.) The Jacobian matrix of f evaluated at xE D is the n x m  matrix of partial derivatives  JXof= Caf,(xlax;]  In other words, the value of the entry in column i and row j is 7f (x/ax;. We shall attempt to give the reader some  intuition for the role of this matrix's rank. Suppose that f is differentiable at x Consider the function a: R' -> R"  defined by  a(x) = f(x+JXv[x-x. (3)  Note that, in this equation, a (x) and f(x are n x 1 vectors, x and xare m x 1 vectors, and J_zof is an n x m-matrix. Near  the point x the function a is an approximation to the function f (Flett, 1966, Sect. 10.4). The range of a is the flat  obtained by (a) taking the linear subspace spanned by the column vectors of the Jacobian matrix and (b) translating this  subspace by f(x. Now, the range of a has measure zero in R" if and only if its dimension-which, of course, equals the  Jacobian matrix rank p(JXof)-is less than n. Thus, if p(J_,of) < n, then f is approximated near xby a function whose range  has measure zero. Naturally, this leads one to suspect that, if p(JXf) < n, for all x E D, then the range P of f will have  measure zero.  Indeed, this turns out to be true provided that f is sufficiently "smooth." "Smoothness" is here defined in terms of  differentiability. Specifically, a function f is said to be C9 at a point xin its domain if all qth order partial  derivatives of each of the scalar components of f exist in a neighborhood of xand are continuous at x A function is said  to be Cq if it is Cq at each point in its domain. The larger the value of q for which a function is C9, the "smoother" the  function is. (Clearly, if a function is Cq and if p is a positive integer less than q, then the function is also CP.)  The above definitions imply that a function can be C`' at xonly if xis an interior point of the function's domain; hence,  a function can be Cq only if its domain is open. The restriction of a CQ-function to an open subset of its domain is also CQ.  TESTABILITY 455  Sard's Theorems  We now formalize these intuitive notions. Sard (1942) proved a number of theorems that provide the critical link between the  measure of P and properties of D, f, and O. For convenience, we state here the relevant theorems from Sard (1942). Sard's  theorems deal with sets in R" having "M-dimensional measure" zero. We shall not define this measure here. Suffice it to say  that, if a subset of R" has M-dimensional zero and M S n, then the subset has Lebesgue measure zero.  We shall use the following notation. If f is differentiable on an open set S, let  S~={xjxESandt~p(J.Yf)<r}.  LEMMA 7 (Theorem 7.1 in Sard, 1942). Let r < n < m. Suppose S is a region (i.e., connected open subset) of R' and f'. S -+ R"  is Cy for some q >, (m - r)/(n - r). Then f [S;] has n-dimensional measure zero in R".  LEMMA 8 (Theorem 4.1 in Sard, 1942). Let n > m. Suppose S is a region of R' and f S -4 R" is C'. Then f [So -' ] has  m-dimensional measure zero in R".  The First Main Result: the WQT Theorem  These two Lemmas allow us to prove the following central theorem.  THEOREM 9 (WQT Theorem). Suppose S is an open subset of R"' and the function f maps S into R". Suppose D c S and that (D, f,  O) is a model, where ti(O) > 0. Let r = max,,, D p(J,f). If r < n and if f is Cy on S for some q >, max { 1, (m - r)/(n - r)  }, then the model is WQT.  Proof. Obviously, f [D] c f [So]. It will be shown that the latter and, hence, the former has Lebesgue measure zero.  Case 1. S is connected. This case is treated as three subcases. In each subcase, f [So] is seen to have Lebesgue measure zero.  Subcase (la). (m > n). Now, f [So] = f [So] U ... v f [S;]. Apply Lemma 7 to each term on the right.  Subcase (1 b). (m=n). Apply Lemma 8.  Subcase (lc). (m<n). Convert this to Subcase (1 b) by defining the function F. S x R"-"' - R" such that F(x, C) = f(x) for all  x e S and i; E R"-"'.  Case 2. S is not connected. For any x E S, there exists an open ball B such that x E B c S. Thus, S may be covered by an  uncountable set of open balls. By the Lindelof theorem (Kelley, 1955, pp. 49-50), a countable subset of these open balls  covers S. Applying Case 1 to each such open ball B, it is seen that f [D n B] has measure zero. Since f [D] is the union of a  countable number of such f [D n B], it follows that f [D] has measure zero. Q.E.D.  456 BAMBER AND VAN SANTEN  The WQT Theorem states that, for sufficiently smooth functions f, we can assess whether a model is WQT by determining whether  the rank of the Jacobian matrix is everywhere less than the dimension of the space containing O. This is our new criterion for  WQT. Before we further discuss issues concerning the practical use of this criterion, we comment on a few mathematical aspects  of this theorem.  Comments on the WQT Theorem  Our first comment concerns independence of both observations and parameters. Recall that, in the Counting Rule, one counts  only "independent" observations and only "independent" parameters. The WQT Theorem contains similar independence requirements  albeit in disguised forms. The requirement that ~(O) > 0 is a type of independence requirement for, if some observable  quantities were (smooth) functions of the remaining observable quantities, then one would have A(O) = 0. Thus, it may be  necessary to transform some models (as discussed after Definition 3) to guarantee that A(O) > 0. Likewise, the requirement  that the prediction function be Cy is (among other things) a type of independence requirement. If one parameter were a  function of the remaining parameters, then it would be impossible to vary that parameter while holding the remaining  parameters constant. Hence, partial derivatives with respect to that parameter would be undefined and, consequently, the  prediction function would not be CQ. In such cases, it is necessary to reparameterize the model in order to apply the WQT  Theorem. For example, suppose the parameters must always sum to one: x1 + - - - + x = 1. Then x can be eliminated as a  parameter by expressing the prediction function in the form  f(x1,...,xM_i, I-xl- ... -xm_1).  Our second comment is that the smoothness (i.e., Cy) requirement cannot be dropped from the WQT Theorem. Sard (1942, p. 890)  and Gelbaum and Olmsted (1964, Chap. 10, Example 8) give examples showing this. Note that f is required to be Cy at every  point of S, not just the points of D.  The third comment is that, since, like any other n x m matrix, p(J.rf) S min{n, m ), a model is always WQT when m < n,  provided that f is C'. This establishes that, for models whose prediction function is C' (on S), and for which m < n, the  Counting Rule leads to the correct conclusion that the model is WQT. Of course, Example 6 shows that the Counting Rule can  give the wrong result when m > n.  The fourth comment concerns the question of whether the reverse of the WQT Theorem is true. Is it true that a model for which  maxXE, p(JXf) equals n is necessarily not WQT? The following proposition asserts that this is indeed the case, provided that f  is C' at least one interior point where the Jacobian matrix has rank n (This is a far weaker requirement than the requirement  that f be CQ everywhere in an open set S containing D.)  PROPOSITION 10. Let (D, f0) be a model with O c R". Suppose that D contains an interior point xsuch that (a) f is C' at x and (b) the Jacobian matrix has rank n at x Then the model is not WQT.  TESTABILITY 457  Proof. According to (10.11.1 Corollary 3) of Flett (1966), there exists an open  set U (x' c- U c D) such that f [U] is open in R". Hence, A(f [U]) > 0. Q.E.D.  Finding the Maximum Rank of the Jacobian Matrix  To apply the WQT Theorem, it is necessary to show for the model under consideration that the maximum rank r of the Jacobian  matrix is less than n. Since this matrix is n x m, r < n, m; so, if m < n-i.e., there are fewer parameters than observable  quantities-it follows trivially that r < n. However, in the case where m > n, which is of focal interest for this paper, it is  not so trivial to verify whether r < n.  One possible approach is to prove a theorem that asserts an upper bound for the rank of the Jacobian matrix. However, since  our methods are targeted for a quick screening of a model under development, this approach is not pragmatic.  Fortunately, a much simpler approach is possible for a large class of models. These are models whose prediction functions are  analytic. Under these circumstances, the Jacobian matrix has maximum rank almost everywhere in D and has submaximum rank  almost nowhere. Consequently, the maximum rank may be found by randomly selecting a point in D, calculating the rank at that  point, and assuming that that rank is the maximum. Although it is theoretically possible for this procedure to give an  incorrect value for the maximum, the probability of this happening is zero. The precise details are given in the following  theorem which is proven in Appendix B.  THEOREM B.5. Suppose S is a connected open subset of R' and the analytic function f maps S into R". Suppose D c S and A(D) >  0. Let X be a random point in D whose distribution P is generated by a probability density function on D. Then,  P[P(Jxf)=mav p(JXf)] = 1.  Appendix B also shows that, if the Jacobian matrix has maximum rank at a point x, then it will also have maximum rank at all  points that lie near x (i.e., in a neighborhood of x). Thus, rounding off the coordinates of the random point X by a small  amount will not cause an error in determining the maximum rank.  Analytic functions are extremely smooth; in fact, analytic functions are Cy for all positive integers q (Dieudonne, 1960,  Result 9.3.6). Thus, if a model's prediction function is analytic, it necessarily satisfies the smoothness requirement of the  WQT Theorem.  When a model's prediction function is analytic and certain other conditions are met, the following algorithm may be used to  determine whether the model is WQT. This algorithm is justified by the WQT Theorem, Proposition 10, and Theorem B.5.  RANDOM-POINT ALGORITHM (WQT Version). Conditions. Suppose S is a connected open subset of R' and the analytic function f maps  S into R". Suppose D c S and 0 c R" and (D, f, O) is a model. Suppose D and 0 have positive  458 BAMBER AND VAN SANTEN  Lebesgue measure in R'" and R", respectively. Actions. Sample a random point X from a distribution generated by a probability  density function on D. Calculate the Jacobian matrix rank p(Jxf) at X. Conclusions. (a) If p(Jxf) < n, then one may be 100  percent confident that the model is WQT. (b) If p(Jxf) = n and if X is an interior point of D, then the model is definitely  Later, it will be shown how to add further conditions to the Random Point Algorithm so that it may also be used to determine  whether models are SQT rather than merely WQT.  To apply the Random Point Algorithm with a given model, it is necessary to (a) recognize whether the model's prediction  function is analytic, (b) recognize whether A(D) > 0 and A(O) > 0, and (c) calculate the rank of the Jacobian matrix at a  point. These three steps will now be considered in turn.  Recognizing Analytic Functions  Dieudonne (1960, Sect. 9.3) gives a formal definition of analytic functions. Roughly speaking, a function from an open subset  of R"into R" is analytic if, at every point, it can be locally expressed as the sum of an absolutely convergent power series  in x,,..., x,(i.e., the coordinates of R'"). This formal definition does not provide easy means of recognizing analytic  functions. Fortunately, the following facts enable one to recognize a wide variety of analytic functions: (a) A vectorvalued  function is analytic if and only if each of its scalar-valued component function is analytic. (b) Common analytic functions of  one variable include polynomials, exponential and logarithmic functions, power functions, and the standard trigonometric  functions and their inverses. (c) Whenever defined, the sum, difference, product, ratio, and composition of analytic functions  is analytic. (d) Polynomials of more than one variable are analytic. (e) All partial derivatives of analytic functions are  analytic. (f) The integral of an analytic function of one variable is analytic. (g) If a function of one real variable can be  extended to an invertible analytic function of one complex variable, then its inverse is analytic (Hoffman, 1975, Chap. 5,  Theorem 20).  It is clear from the above facts that analytic prediction functions are very common in the models that one encounters.  Recognizing whether D and O Have Positive Lebesgue Measure  To show that a set has positive Lebesgue measure, one shows, first, that the set is Lebesgue measurable, and, second, that the  measure is not zero.  In practice, one not need worry about Lebesgue measurability of D and O. Virtually any set one is liable to construct will be  Lebesgue measurable. The known methods for constructing sets that are not Lebesgue measurable are exotic and utilize the axiom  of choice. To demonstrate that a set's measure is not zero, it suffices to show that the set contains a nonempty open set.  TESTABILITY 459  Finding the Rank of the Jacobian Matrix  The calculation of the Jacobian matrix at a given point can be accomplished by a variety of both analytic and numerical  methods. Once this matrix has been obtained, its rank can be evaluated most conveniently using a computer program that  performs the singular value decomposition (Stewart, 1973, pp. 317-318). Specifically, a matrix's rank equals the number of its  nonzero singular values. The EISPACK and UNPACK packages of computer programs contain subroutines for performing this  decomposition. Moreover, Nash (1979, pp. 30-31) provides a decomposition algorithm suitable for use on microcomputers.  When using a computer to determine the rank of a matrix, one needs to be concerned with round-off error. In order to represent  each matrix element with a fixed number of memory bits, the computer will round off each matrix element (The amount by which a  computer internally rounds off numbers may be determined using an algorithm described by Malcolm (1972) and Nash (1979, pp.  4-6).) Fortunately, the singular value decomposition is numerically stable. When a matrix is perturbed (by rounding it off,  for example), its singular values are perturbed less than the matrix itself (Lawson and Hanson, 1974, p.25; Stewart, 1973, pp.  321-322). Thus, after the singular values of a matrix have been computed, one can determine which singular values are  definitely nonzero and which ones are so close to zero that they are in all likelihood perturbations of true zeros.  Maximum Jacobian Matrix Rank for Some Models  We conclude this section by giving a few examples of models and the ranks of their Jacobian matrices. Examples 11 (a) and (b)  serve to demonstrate that the weak quantitative testability of rather forbidding-looking models can be assessed without great  difficulty, and that, in addition, seemingly slight changes in f (in this case, the change of an exponent of - 2 into an  exponent of 2) may have a impact on the measure of P that could no be anticipated by cursory inspection of the models'  formulae. Example (c) gives the rank of the Threshold Model (Example 6).  EXAMPLES 11. (a) Let D = (R+ )2, O=R 2, and let  f(x, , x2) = (2 log x, - log x2, x2 [x, +x212] -2 ).  It can be shown that maxXE D P(JXf) = I - (b) Let D=(R+)2, O=R 2, and let  f(x1, x2) = (2 log x, -log x2, x2EX1 +x2~2~2).  It can be shown that maxi E D P(JXf) = 2.  (c) The Threshold Model (Example 6). It can be shown that (see Bamber and van Santen, 1980; in preparation) maxXE D P(JXf) =  5. Since the number of independently observable quantities is 6, it follows from Theorem 9 that the model is WQT.  46)0 BAMBER AND VAN SANTEN  V. CONDITIONS FOR STRONG QUANTITATIVE TESTABILITY  The WQT Theorem states conditions that guarantee that a model is WQT. In this section, we present what we shall call SQT  conditions, i.e., conditions which, if added to those of the WQT Theorem, guarantee that a model is SQT.  Preliminaries  One of the properties of the Lissajous figure (Example 4) that causes P to be dense in O, with the consequence that the model  is not SQT, is that O is bounded whereas D is not. Thus, P consists of a curve of infinite length that has to be fitted in the  bounded square O, and thus "passes near" every point in this square. While it is obvious that boundedness of O in conjunction  with unboundedness of D is not sufficient by itself to cause a model not to be SQT (e.g., consider the Lissajous figure with  rational 9), we surmised that the requirement that a model have a bounded parameter domain could be a SQT condition. It turns  out that, together with one more condition, this condition indeed is a SQT condition. The following within-within condition is  a generalization of this idea.  DEFINITION 12. A model (D, f, O) is said to be within-within or satisfy the within-within condition if and only if for each #  > 0 there exists an a > 0 having the following property: If ye f(D) and IyI < f, then there exists an xeD such that IxI 5 a  and f(x) = y. As before, I I denotes the Euclidean norm (i.e., length) of the enclosed vector.  If a model is within-within, then, for any bounded set B c f [D ], there exists a bounded set A c f -'[B] c D such that f [A]  = B (Note that, although A is bounded, f -'[B] may be unbounded.)  One can verify that the Lissajous figure indeed does not satisfy the within-within condition.  The following proposition provides some easy methods for verifying that a model satisfies the within-within condition.  PROPOSITION 13. Suppose D c R' and f- D -+ O c R", then statement (a) implies statement (b) implies statement (c), where:  (a) D is bounded.  (b) If {x;} is a sequence of points in D and if 1x;l -* oo then I f(x;)l -->  (c) The model (D, f, O) satisfies the within-within condition.  Proof. (a) -+ (b). Suppose D is bounded. Then (b) is trivially true.  not-(c) --+ not-(b). Suppose (c) is not true. Then there exists a /3 > 0 such that, for every a > 0, there exists a ya e f [D]  such that I y < /l, but there is no x e D such that ~xJ < a and f(x) = yx. Choose xa such that f(x = ya. Then Ixa1 > a.  TESTABILITY 461  Now, for a=1, 2, 3,..., consider the sequence Ix,, 1. Then Ixj -+ oc but If(xI = Iy,,I < 1l. Hence (b) does not hold. Q.E.D.  Note that the statements (a), (b), and (c) of Proposition 13 are not equivalent. Obviously, (b) does not imply (a). A trivial  example of a model (D, f, O) that satisfies (c) but not (b) is: D = R2, O = R', and f (x,, x2) = xl .  We shall now prove that, roughly speaking, a WQT model satisfying the withinwithin condition (and one additional assumption)  is SQT.  DEFINITION 14. Suppose (D, f, O) is a model. Define the set D * by letting x E D * if and only if there exists a sequence NJ,  where (a) each x; E D, (b) x; --> x, and (c) for some y E O, f(x;) -> y. [Obviously, D c D* c CI(D).]  DEFINITION 15. Suppose (D, f O) is a model. Then a *-extension of (D, f O) is a model (D*, h, O) such that h(x) = f(x) for all  xeD. This *-extension is said to be continuous if h is continuous on D*.  A continuous *-extension of (D, f, O) need not exist, but if it does exist, it is unique.  LEMMA 16. Let (D, f, O) be a model which (a) is within-within and (b) has a continuous *-extension. Then (D, f O) is SQT if  and only if its continuous *-extension is WQT.  Proof. Let (D*, h, O) denote the continuous *-extension. It will be shown that Cl(f [D]) n O = h [D * ]. From this, the lemma  follows.  Suppose x E D*. Let x; -> x, where each x; E D and f(x;) - y E O. Since h is continuous on D*, f(x;) = h(x,) -> h(x). Thus,  h(x) E Cl(f [D] ). Moreover, h(x) =yG0. So, h[D*]cCl(f[D]) n0.  Suppose y E Cl(f [D]) n O. Then, there exists a sequence {y;} such that y; --> y, where each y; E f [D]. Since this sequence  converges, it is bounded. Since (D, f, O) is within-within, there exists a bounded sequence {x;} such that, for each i, f (x;)  = yr where x; E D. Since {x;) is bounded, it contains a convergent subsequence {x;.}. Let x denote the limit of this  subsequence. Then, x E D*. Since h is continuous on D*, h(xj) -h(x). Since it is already known that h(xy) = f(x,) = y; -->  y, it follows that y=h(x). Hence, yeh[D*]. So Cl(f[D])nOch[D*]. Q.E.D.  The Second Main Result. the SQT Theorem  THEOREM 17 (SQT Theorem). (a) Suppose S is an open subset of R' and the function f maps S into R". Suppose that D c S and that  (D, f, O) is a model where A(O) > 0. Let  r = max p(Jxf). xED  If r < n and if f is C9 on S for some q > max { 1, (m - r)l(n - r) }, then the model is  462 BAMBER AND VAN SANTEN  WQT. (b) If, in addition to the above, (D, f, O) is within-within and D* c S, then the model is SQT.  Proof. Part (a) is merely a restatement of the WQT Theorem. To prove (b), let  r* = max p(J_,,f). xc-D*  Obviously, r* >, r. It will now be shown that r* < r. Suppose x E D*. Since f is continuously differentiable at x, there  exists a neighborhood M of x such that p(Jxf) < p(J,,f) for all w E M (Flett, 1966, p. 412, third paragraph). Since x E D* c  CI(D), some of these w e M must lie in D. Hence, for all x E D*, p(J,f) < r. Hence, r* < r and, so, r*=r. Since f is C" on  S7)D*, the model (D*, f, O) is a continuous *-extension of (D, f, O). By Theorem 9, (D*, f, O) is WQT. Then, by Lemma 16 (D,  f, O) is SQT.  Q.E.D.  Comments on the SQT Theorem  Consider the model (a) (D, f O). If O is not closed, it may be easier to work with the model (b) [D, f C1(O)] rather than with  model (a). Thus, if C1(O)-O has Lebesgue measure zero, then model (a) is SQT if and only if model (b) is SQT. Model (b) is  easier to work with because it is easier to characterize the set D* for model (b) than for model (a). For model (b), xc-D* if  and only if, for some sequence {x; I of points in D, x; --x and the sequence { f(x;) } is bounded.  The SQT Theorem contains two requirements not found in the WQT Theorem, namely, that D* c S and that the model be  within-within. Now, any model can be reparameterized so that it has a bounded parameter domain and, hence, by Proposition 13,  is within-within. (This may be accomplished by replacing the old parameters x, ,..., xm with the new parameters wk = exp xk/(1  + exp xk) so that 0 < wk < 1 (k =1,..., m).) However, we know from the Lissajous model (Example 4) that there exist models  which satisfy the WQT Theorem but which are not SQT. This shows, then, that the D * c S requirement cannot be dropped from the  SQT Theorem.  The Random-Point Algorithm discussed earlier is a procedure for determining whether a point is WQT. By adding the conditions  that D* c S and that the model be within-within, this procedure may also be used to determine whether a model is SQT.  The Threshold Model discussed in Example 6 satisfies the SQT conditions stated in Theorem 17. We may take S = R' (the model  has 7 independent parameters). Thus, D * c S. The parameters of this model are all conditional probabilities and, thus, lie  between zero and one. Hence, the model's parameter domain is bounded and, so, by Proposition 13, this model is within-within.  (In fact, it can be shown that this model satisfies the within-within condition even after it has been modified by dropping  the restriction that the parameters lie between zero and one.) Thus, the model is not only WQT but also SQT.  Our SQT conditions are sufficient but not necessary. To see that they are not  TESTABILITY  463  necessary, consider the following trivial example. Let (D, f, O) be a model, where D = (1, oo) c R', O=R 2, and f(x) = (1/x,  l/x). This model is obviously SQT, because P= {(YI, y2) 10 < y, = y2 < 1 } is a line segment in Euclidean two-space. However,  it is not within-within because, although f[D] is bounded, there is not bounded A c D such that f [A] = f [D].  Thus, there do exist SQT models that cannot be shown to be SQT by the SQT Theorem. However, a reparameterization will  sometimes make a model susceptible to the theorem. In the above example, we can reparameterize as follows: D = (0, 1) c R', O  = R2, and f(x) = (x, x).  Since our SQT conditions are sufficient but not necessary, it might be useful to search for SQT conditions different from  those we have presented. Consider the following generalized monotonicity condition that would require that each scalar  component of f(x) have a finite number of zero-crossings of the first partial derivative with respect to each component of x,  holding the other components of x constant. We speculate that this condition is an SQT condition.  It is difficult to construct examples of models that are WQT but not SQT. Hence, if one can prove that a model is WQT but  cannot prove that it is SQT, it seems reasonable to nevertheless assume the model is SQT.  VI. SOME REMAINING ISSUES  In this section, we discuss how the notion of quantitative testability and our criteria for assessing quantitative testability  are related to reparameterizations, identifiability, and degrees of freedom.  Quantitative Testability and Reparameterizations  DEFINITION 18. A model (D', f', O') is a reparameterization of another model (D, f, O) if the two models have the same  observation space and the same prediction range, i.e., if 0'= O and f '[D'] = f [D].  In the above definition, the parameter domains D and D' need not have the same number of parameters. Thus, it is possible that  D c R'" and D' c: R" where m :A m'. The relevance of reparameterizations for assessing quantitative testability is the  following. One might conjecture that a model is WQT if and only if it has a reparameterization with fewer parameters than  independently observable quantities. We call this conjecture the Modified Counting Rule.  Take literally, this conjecture is false. Unless the reparameterization's domain is required to have a nonempty interior, the  prediction function is required to be "smooth," and A(O) is required to be non-zero, counterexamples to the conjecture can be  constructed. With the addition of these requirements, the conjecture might be correct; but we do not know.  What we do know is that, even if some form of it is correct, the Modified Counting Rule is not a practical method for  assessing whether a model is WQT. To  464 BAMBER AND VAN SANTEN  show that a model is WQT using the Modified Counting Rule, one must find an appropriate reparameterization. However, failure  to find such a reparameterization does not prove that it does not exist. Perhaps, one has not been clever enough in searching  for a reparameterization.  For example, Bamber and van Santen (1980; in preparation) found that a general class of discrete-state models can be  reparameterized in a manner consistent with the Modified Counting Rule. However, the reparameterization is rather tricky. We  had worked with this class of models for a few years before we discovered the reparameterization. In the meantime, we had long  known, from considering their Jacobian matrices, under which conditions the models are WQT.  In contrast to the Modified Counting Rule, the WQT Theorem and the SQT Theorem provide a practical, straightforward method of  determining that a model is WQT or SQT. Provided that the model's prediction function is analytic, this method may be applied  mechanically using a computer.  Quantitative Testability and Identifability  DEFINITION 19. A model (D, f O) is identifiable if its prediction function is oneto-one.  In other words, a model is identifiable if, given any experimental outcome y consistent with the model (i.e., y e P), the  values of the model's parameters are uniquely determined.  There is no relationship between identifiability and testability. On the one hand, a model is testable if there is at least  one y E O such that y O f [D]; however, f does not have to be one-to-one. On the other hand, a model is identifiable if for  any y E f [D] there is a unique x e D such that y = f (x); however, f [D ] may be equal to O. Thus, it is neither true that  testability implies identifiability, nor vice versa. In fact, it is not even true that quantitative testability implies  identifiability: many discrete-state models (Bamber and van Santen, 1980; in preparation), including the Threshold Model, are  quantitatively testable but not identifiable.  The following proposition shows that, roughly speaking, a model is not identifiable if the rank of its Jacobian matrix is  everywhere less than the number of its parameters. This result also casts light on the difference between quantitative  testability and identifiability. In the former case, the Jacobian matrix rank is compared with n, in the latter case with m.  The Threshold Model, for example, has more parameters than the rank of its Jacobian matrix and, as discussed earlier, is not  identifiable.  PROPOSITION 20. Let S be an open set in R' and let f S -+ R" be C'. Let D c S consist of a nonempty open set plus none, some,  or all of its boundary points, and let O z )f [D]. If p(Jxf) < m everywhere in D, then the model (D, f O) is not identifiable.  Proof. Let r denote the Jacobian matrix's maximum rank within the interior of  TESTABILITY 465  D. Select an interior point xwhere this rank is attained. Then D contains an open neighborhood M of xin which the Jacobian  matrix has everywhere rank at least r (Flett, 1966, p.412, third paragraph). Hence, the Jacobian matrix has rank r everywhere  in M. Hence, by the Rank Theorem (Flett, 1966, 10.14.3 Corollary), there exists an open neighborhood V * of xsuch that V * c  D and f -' [ { f (x') } ] n V * is homeomorphic with an open set in R-'. This shows, since m > r, that uncountably many  points in V* c D map onto f(x. Q.E.D.  Identifability and the Counting Rule  While there is no relationship between identifiability and testability, there is a relationship between identifiability and  the performance of the Counting Rule. The next proposition shows, roughly speaking, that the Counting Rule is valid for  identifiable models.  PROPOSITION 21. Let S, D, f, and O be as in Proposition 20 and let .1(O) > 0. Suppose the model (D, f, O) is identifiable.  Then the model is WQT if and only if m < n.  Proof. Let r be as in the proof of Proposition 20. The argument of the SQT Theorem shows that r is also the maximum rank over  all of D. Since the Jacobian matrix is n x m, r < n, m. Since the model is identifiable, it follows from Proposition 20 that r  = m. Hence, either (a) m = r < n or (b) m = r = n. If (a), then the model is WQT by the WQT Theorem. If (b), then there exists  an interior point xof D at which the Jacobian matrix has rank r = n. Then, by Proposition 10, the model is not WQT. Q.E.D.  This result helps explain scientists' apparent satisfaction with the Counting Rule. The majority of models that scientists  have worked with are either identifiable or have been reparameterized so that they are. Moreover, these models typically  satisfy the "smoothness" requirements of Proposition 21. Thus, within this class of models, the Counting Rule correctly  assesses whether a model is WQT.  The problem with the Counting Rule is that it can give an incorrect assessment of testability for an important class of  models, namely, nonidentifiable models.  Two Roles of Models: Estimating Parameters versus Testing Assumptions  Frequently, one sets up a model because one wants to estimate parameters that measure important aspects of psychological  processes. For example, in signal detection theory, the parameter d' measures perceptual accuracy in a way that is unaffected  by response bias.  In a different use of models, however, the parameters are of secondary importance and the assumptions of the model are  central, because they represent a psychological theory. One's primary interest is in empirically determining whether this  theory is correct. Whether the model's parameters are identifiable is not relevant, as long the model is testable. An example  is provided by measurement axioms in  466 BAMBER AND VAN SANTEN  axiomatic measurement (Krantz, Luce, Suppes, and Tversky, 1971). Although one could, in principle, estimate the parameters or  scale values (up to some degree of uniqueness), the principal interest in, say, additive conjoint measurement is in whether  additivity holds. This can be assessed without estimating parameters. In the context of finite state confusion models (van  Santen and Bamber, 1981) the assumption of strict sequentiality and restrictions on the number of internal states express  interesting psychological hypotheses that also can be tested without estimating parameters. Another way of viewing the role of  testable, non-identifiable, models is by realizing that a testable, non-identifiable, model may be a generalization of several  identifiable models. In this case, rejection of the general model can be quite informative. For example, if we can reject the  Threshold Model, then we can reject both the low- and high-threshold models as well.  Rank of the Jacobian Matrix and Degrees of Freedom: A General Goodness-of-fit Test  Bamber and van Santen (unpublished) have developed a general goodness-of-fit test for finite-dimensional models. This test is  related to Hotelling's TZ test and has an asymptotic x2-distribution. Significantly, the degrees of freedom are given by n -  rmax,where rmax is the maximum rank of the Jacobian matrix. Thus, the rank of the Jacobian matrix is of importance not only  for assessing weak and strong quantitative testability, but also for goodness-of-fit testing. The test extends standard  results (e.g., Cramer, 1946, Sect. 30.3; Birch, 1964) in two ways. First, it does not require that the Jacobian matrix have  full-column rank (i.e., rank equal to the number of parameters). Second, it applies to non-multinomial random vectors. Here,  we state the main results; the proofs may be found in the original paper.  Let Y,,..., Yk be k independently, identically distributed (i.i.d.) n x 1 random vectors. Let  1 k Mk =k Y, Yi  and  1 k  Sk= Y, [Y,-Mk][Yi-Mk]' k-1 ;=,  denote the sample mean and sample covariance matrix.  The theorem requires some conditions that are different from those underlying the WQT Theorem. The most important of these is  the following. Suppose xo e D c R' and f D -+ R". Suppose that, for every neighborhood N of xo, there exists a neighborhood Q  of f(xo) such that  f[D]nQc f[DnN].  Then f is said to be self-contained at xo. Roughly speaking, this condition says that,  TESTABILITY 467  if ye f(D) is near f(xo), then at least one point in f_I({y}) is near xo. Note that the Lissajous-figure model (Example 4)  does not meet this condition.  The self-containment condition is a generalized version of Birch's (1964) Condition B. Birch employed that condition to  correct a serious flaw in Cramer's (1946, Sect. 30.3) theorem on multinomial goodness-of-fit testing.  We can now test the hypothesis that p[=E(Y;)] e f [D] as follows.  THEOREM 22. Let (D, f, O) be a model where D c R' and O c R". Suppose the i.i.d. random vectors Y,--, Yk have nonsingular  covariance matrix E' and mean p. Suppose that there exists some interior point xo of D such that p= f(xo), f is both  continuously differentiable and self-contained at xo, and p(Jxf) has a local maximum at xo. Then, as k -> oo,  inf k- [Mk-f(x)I' SkI[Mk-f(x)] XED  is asymptotically X' distributed with n - p(J_YO f) degrees of freedom.  Remarks. First, the X' distribution with zero degrees of freedom is the distribution of a random variable that equals zero  with probability one. Second, if Sk is nonsingular, then so is 1. Conversely, if E is nonsingular, then limk - ~, P(Sk is  nonsingular) = 1. Third, note that the goodness-of-fit statistic is minimum Hotelling's T'. Fourth, the theorem assumes that f  is continuously differentiable at xo and that p(Jxf) has a local maximum at xo. This implies that p(Jxf) is locally constant  about xo (Flett, 1966, p. 412, third paragraph). Fifth, Appendix B shows that, if D is open and connected and if f is  analytic, then p(Jxf) is at its global maximum at almost every point in D.  We now state a theorem that specifically applies to multinomial situations. It is essentially a corollary to the previous  theorem.  THEOREM 23. Let (D, f, O) be a model where D c R' and O c R". Let fi(x) denote the jth component of the vector  f(x). Suppose that, for all x e D, y n=, f .(x) = 1 and f (x) > 0 for j = 1,..., n. Let AI,..., Abe n random events, with  non-zero probabilities P(A,),..., P(An). Suppose there is some interior point xo of D such that f(xo) = [P(A,),..., P(A]', f  is both continuously differentiable and selfcontained at xo, and p(JXf) has a local maximum at xo. Suppose that, on each of k  independent trials, exactly one of the random events A,,..., Aoccurs. Let pkj (j = 1,..., n) denote the proportion of k  trials resulting in event Aj. Then, as k -* oo,  n  inf k [Pkj-f(x)]2 xeD j=I Pkj  is asymptotically X' distributed with n - 1 - p(JXo f) degrees of freedom.  Remark. This goodness-of-fit statistic is a minimized, modified X' statistic of the type I (observed-expected)'/observed.  468 BAMBER AND VAN SANTEN  Related Work  Identifiability of Markov learning models. This issue has been studied intensively by many psychologists. Greeno, Millward,  and Merryman (1971) and Larkin and Wickens (1980) presented procedures for reparameterizing a model in a canonical form having  at most as many as and possibly fewer parameters than the original model.  Polson and Huizinga (1974) defined a model to be empirically identifiable if, given the results of an experiment, the maximum  likelihood estimate of the model's parameters is unique. They suggested using empirical identifiability as a diagnostic sign;  they claimed that, if a Markov learning model is not empirically identifiable, then it is most likely not identifiable.  Bayesian parameter estimation. If a model is not identifiable in the sense of having a one-to-one prediction function  (Definition 19), then some or all points in the model's prediction range will be consistent with more than one point in the  parameter domain. In other words, empirical observations will not completely constrain model parameters. Nevertheless,  empirical observations may partially constrain parameters by limiting them to a subset of the parameter domain. Chechile and  Meyer (1976; Chechile, 1977) have proposed Bayesian parameter estimation procedures for use with models that are not  identifiable in the sense of Definition 19. These procedures take advantage of the partial constraint on parameters afforded  by empirical observations. These procedures operate as follows: (a) A prior probability distribution over the points of the  parameter domain is assumed. (b) Using the prior parameter distribution and the empirical observations, a posterior parameter  distribution is calculated. (c) A measure of central tendency of the posterior parameter distribution is taken as the  parameter estimate.  Because these estimation procedures can be applied to models that are not identifiable in the sense of Definition 19, Chechile  (1977) has argued that the concept of model identifiability should be extended. He has proposed a Bayesian concept that  defines identifiability in terms of posterior parameter distributions.  Although Chechile and Meyer's procedure can be applied to models having more parameters than observations, the goal of their  procedures are quite different from the goal of this paper. Chechile and Meyer's procedures are applied to a model which is  assumed to be correct and which may be either testable or untestable. The goal of their procedure is to estimate model  parameters. In contrast, the goal of this paper is to present procedures for determining whether a model is testable.  VII. SUMMARY  We discussed under which conditions a model is testable in the sense that it has a prediction range P with measure zero in the  observation space O. We claim that this type of testability, which we call quantitative testability, formally expresses the  TESTABILITY 469  intuitive notion of testability that people have in mind when they say that a model has sufficiently few parameters to be  testable.  With examples we show that, contrary to common belief, assessing quantitative testability is not a simple matter of comparing  the number of "independent" parameters with the number of "independently" observable quantities (the Counting Rule).  Specifically, models may be quantitatively testable even when they have more "independent" parameters than observable  quantities. The parameters of such models, we point out, are not identifiable.  Reparameterization of a model, in an attempt to reduce the number of "independent" parameters, is not always a workable  approach to assessing quantitative testability. There are two reasons for this. First, not finding the appropriate  reparameterization does not imply that one does not exist. Second, and more important, the measure of P depends not only on  the number of "independent" parameters, but also on properties of the prediction function f. Put in other words, the model's  prediction function may introduce dependencies between the predicted observations that cause the measure of P to be zero, even  when the number of "independent" parameters is equal to or larger than the number of independently observable quantities.  These dependencies may be very difficult to find by trial and error. Our goal was to provide a mechanical procedure for  discovering their existence.  The procedure consists of calculating the rank of a model's Jacobian matrix. Assuming that certain "smoothness" conditions are  met, a model is quantitatively testable if and only if for all possible parameter values, this rank is smaller than the number  of observable quantities. When the model's prediction function is analytic, the maximum rank is attained almost everywhere;  thus, the rank needs to be determined at only one randomly chosen point. This procedure can be performed by standard computer  programs.  We argue that, in the face of measurement error, one wants not only P but also its closure in O to have measure zero. We  discussed conditions under which this occurs.  Finally, we point out that the rank of the Jacobian matrix is of importance not only for determining testability, but also for  determining identifiability and for performing statistical tests of goodness-of-fit.  APPENDIX A  EXAMPLE 4 (Lissajous figure). Let (D, f, O) be a model where D = R, O = [ -1, 1 ] 2 c Rz, and f (x,) = (sin x, , sin 9x,),  where 9 is an irrational constant. This model is WQT but not SQT.  Proof. WQT follows from Theorem 9 (Sect. IV). It will now be shown that f [D] is dense in O, from which (by the definition of  denseness) it follows that A(CI(f [D ]) n O) > 0 and hence that the model is not SQT.  480/29/4-8  470 BAMBER AND VAN SANTEN  Choose any a such that -1 < a < 1. Choose a such that sin a = a. Let D _ { a + 2rtj I j an integer },  L9 = (9j + k I j and k integers }.  Then  f [D = { [a, sin(9oc + 27rx)] I x E L9 }.  Since 9 is irrational, L'9 is dense in the real line (Halmos, 1950, Sect. 16, Theorem C). Hence, f[D is dense in {a} x [-1,  1] and, thus, f[D] is dense in O.  Q.E.D.  APPENDIX B  Proof That the Jacobian Matrix of an Analytic Function Is at Its Maximum Rank Almost Everywhere  The proof uses a number of well-known facts concerning analytic functions. Except where otherwise noted, proofs of these facts  may be found in Sections 9.1-9.4 of Dieudonn6 (1960).  LEMMA B.1. Let f be a real-valued analytic function defined on a nonempty open interval I of R. Let Z = f -'(101). Then either  Z = I or Z has measure zero.  Proof. Either (a) all points in Z are isolated or (b) at least one point of Z is a cluster point of Z. If (a), then each point  of Z may be covered by an open interval that contains no other points of Z. Then, by the Lindel6f theorem (Kelley, 1955, Chap.  1, Theorem 15), Z is countable and, therefore, has measure zero. If (b), let c E Z c I be a cluster point of Z. Then j's  power-series expansion about c must be identically zero everywhere in some interval containing c (Rudin, 1953, Theorem 8.5).  So, by the principle of analytic continuation, f must be identically zero everywhere in I. Q.E.D.  LEMMA B.2. Let f be a real-valued analytic function defined on a nonempty open box B,(i.e., Cartesian product of nonempty  open real intervals) contained in R'". Let Z = f -'(10 1). Then either Z = B,or Z has measure zero.  Proof. Use induction on m. Lemma B.1 shows that the desired result is true for m =1. Assume that it is true for m = 1,..., k.  Consider a (k + 1)-dimensional nonempty open box Bk x I (Bk c R k, I c R) with a real-valued analytic function f defined on  it. Let Z = f -'(f 0 1). Since f is continuous, Z is measurable. For each y e I, let Zy = {x e Bk I f (X, y) = 0 }. Suppose Z  0 Bk x I. Then, for some a e Bk and # e I, floc, #) :A 0. Consider the set I., = {y E Il f(a, y) :A 0}. By Lemma B.1, Icon-  TESTABILITY 471  sists of all of I except for a subset of measure zero. Now, for each y E Ia, a 0 Z, and so, by the induction assumption, Zy  has measure zero. Hence, by Fubini's theorem (Hoffman, 1975, p. 354), Z has measure zero. Q.E.D.  LEMMA B.3. Let f be a real-valued analytic function defined on S, a nonempty open connected subset of R. Let Z = f -'(f 0  1). Then either Z = S or Z has measure zero.  Proof. Suppose Z :j'- S. For each x E S, let BX be an open box such that x E B_, c S and let Z, = Bx n Z. The principle of  analytic continuation implies that, if Zr = BX for some x E S, then Z = S. Hence, for every x, Z_x 0 BX and so, by Lemma B.2,  every Zx has measure zero. By the Lindelof Theorem (Kelley, 1955, Chap. 1, Theorem 15), a countable number of B,'s cover S  and, so, a countable number of ZX's cover Z. Since each Z, has measure zero, so does Z. Q.E.D.  Notation. Suppose f S -+ R", where S is open in R'. Let pmax = max,, E s P(J.xf ), and let Smax = {x I x E S and p(J_xf) =  pmax }.  PROPOSITION B.4. Let S be a nonempty open connected subset of R'. Let f S - R" be an analytic function. Then Smax is open and  S - Smax has Lebesgue measure zero.  Proof. Suppose pmax > 0 as otherwise the theorem is trivially true. Then, S - Smax is the set of all x E S such that every  pmax x pmax submatrix of JXf has a determinant of zero. Since f is an analytic function, so are these determinants. Thus, S  -Smax is the intersection of the zeroes of a finite number of real-valued analytic functions. Since analytic functions are  continuous, S -Smax is closed in S and, so, Smax is open. Moreover, by Lemma B.3, S-Smax either (a) equals S or (b) has  measure zero. Since (a) is precluded by the definition Of Smax, (b) must hold.  Q.E.D.  Remark. If x E Smax, it is an interior point Of Smax. So, if x,od is x rounded off by some sufficiently small amount, then  xround E Smax  THEOREM B.5. Suppose S is a connected open subset of R"' and the analytic function f maps S into R". Suppose D c S and A(D) >  0. Let X be a random point in D whose distribution P is generated by a probability density function on D. Then  P[p(Jxf) = man p(JXf)] = 1. _  Proof. As previously, let r and pmax denote the maximum Jacobian matrix rank over D and over S, respectively. Obviously, r 5  pmax. It will now be shown that r=pm,,. Suppose r<pmax. Then DcS-Smax. So, by Proposition B.4, .1(D)=0. But this contradicts  the assumption that .l(D)>0. Hence, r=pmax. Thus  P[p(Jxf) < r] = P[x E D n (S - Smax)]'  472 BAMBER AND VAN SANTEN  By Proposition B.4, ~(S - Smax) = 0. So, because X's distribution P is generated by a density function on D,  P[xeDn(S-SmaxA =0.  Hence  P[p(Jxf) = r] = 1 - P[p(Jxf) < r] = 1. Q.E.D.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  The first author's work on this paper was supported by Veterans Administration Medical Research funds. The second author was  supported by United States Air Force, Life Sciences Directorate, Grant AFOSR 80-0279. This paper has benefitted from extensive  comments by Consulting Editor William Batchelder. Conversations with Richard Schweickert and James Townsend have helped to  clarify some of the ideas presented in this paper. Also, careful reading by James Harper, and comments by James Neely and  Peter Schoenemann, are appreciated. Morris W. Hirsch and Ralph Carr provided us with proof outlines for Appendix B and Example  4, respectively. Portions of this paper were presented at the Sixteenth Annual Mathematical Psychology Meeting, Boulder,  Colorado, August 11, 1983.  REFERENCES  BAMBER, D., & VAN SANTEN, J. P. H. (1980). Testing discrete state models using conditional probability matrices. Paper  presented at the Thirteenth Annual Mathematical Psychology Meeting, Madison, WI. BAMBER, D., & VAN SANTEN, J. P. H. (in  preparation). Discrete state models.  BAMBER, D., & VAN SANTEN, J. P. H. (unpublished). An asymptotically distribution-free test of the fit of multivariate means to  nonlinear models.  BIRCH, M. W. (1964). A new proof of the Pearson-Fisher theorem. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 35, 817-824.  CHECHILE, R. (1977). Likelihood and posterior identification: Implications for mathematical psychology. British Journal of  Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 30, 177-184.  CHECHILE, R., AND MEYER, D. L. (1976). A Bayesian procedure for separately estimating storage and retrieval components of  forgetting. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 13, 269-295.  CRAMER, H. (1946). Mathematical methods of statistics. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Univ. Press. DIEUDONNE, J. (1960).  Foundations of modern analysis (Also published as Treatise on analysis, Vol. 1). New York: Academic Press.  ESTES, W. K. (1959). Component and pattern models with Markovian interpretations. In R. R. Bush and W. K. Estes (Eds.),  Studies in mathematical learning theory. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Univ. Press. FLETT, T. M. (1966). Mathematical analysis.  New York: McGraw-Hill.  GELBAUM, B. R., & OLMSTED, J. M. H. (1964). Counterexamples in analysis, San Francisco: HoldenDay.  GREENO, J. G., MILLWARD, R. B., AND MERRYMAN, C. T. (1971). Matrix analysis of identifiability of some finite Markov models.  Psychometrika, 36, 389-408.  HALMOS, P. R. (1950). Measure theory. Princeton, N.J.: Van Nostrand.  HOFFMAN, K. (1975). Analysis in Euclidean space. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall. KELLEY, J. L. (1955). General  topology. Princeton, N.J.: Van Nostrand.  KRANTZ, D. H. (1969). Threshold theories of signal detection. Psychological Review, 76, 308-324.  TESTABILITY 473  KRANTZ, D. H., LUCE, R. D., SUPPES, P., & TVERSKY, A. (1971). Foundations of measurement, Vol. I. New York: Academic Press.  LARKIN, J. H., AND WICKENS, T. D. (1980). Population states and eigenstructure: A simplifying view of Markov learning models.  Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 22, 176-208.  LAWSON, C. L., AND HANSON, R. J. (1974). Solving least squares problems. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.  LUCE, R. D. (1959). Individual choice behavior. New York: Wiley.  LUCE, R. D. (1963a). Detection and recognition. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical  psychology, Vol. I. New York: Wiley.  LUCE, R. D. (1963b). A threshold theory for simple detection experiments. Psychological Review, 70, 61-79.  MALCOLM, M. A. (1972). Algorithms to reveal properties of floating-point arithmetic. Communications of the ACM, 15, 949-951.  NASH, J. C. (1979). Compact numerical methods for computers: Linear algebra and function minimisation. New York: Halsted Press.  POLSON, P. G., AND HUIZINGA, D. (1974). Statistical methods for absorbing Markov-chain models for learning: Estimation and  identification. Psychometrika, 39, 3-22.  RAO, C. R. (1973). Linear statistical inference and its applications (2nd ed.). New York: Wiley. RUDIN, W. (1953). Principles  of mathematical analysis. New York: McGraw-Hill.  SARD, A. (1942). The measure of the critical values of differentiable maps. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 48,  883-890.  SPERLING, G. (1983). A unified theory of attention and signal detection, In R. Parasuraman and D. R. Davies (Eds.), Varieties  of attention. New York: Academic Press.  STEWART, G. W. (1973). Introduction to matrix computations. New York: Academic Press.  SWETS, J. A., TANNER, W. P., JR., AND BIRDSALL, T. G. (1961). Decision processes in perception. Psychological Review, 68,  301-340.  VAN SANTEN, J. P. H., AND BAMBER, D. (1981). Finite and infinite state confusion models. Journal of Mathematical Psychology,  24, 101-111.  RECEIVED: August 22, 1983