10.1016/0022-2496(85)90014-8
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 29, 135-174 (1985)  Channels and Stages in Human Information Processing: A Limited Analysis of Theory and Methodology  BARRY H. KANTOWITZ  Purdue University  This article reviews the status of the theoretical construct of capacity. Four basic questions are discussed: (1) What is  capacity? (2) How is capacity measured? (3) Is capacity limited? (4) If so, where is it limited? It is claimed that empirical  answers to these questions have been unsatisfactory due to theoretical and methodological issues that need be resolved. Data  are presented to illustrate such difficulties. The construct of capacity has become more and more vacuous and caution is  required whenever capacity is invoked to explain behavior. These problems can be overcome by careful research and well-defined  models. Capacity can be a soup stone, a millstone, or a touchstone, depending upon how it is used. (0 1985 Academic Press, Inc.  CONTENTS. 1. Capacity: What is it? 2. Capacity: How is it measured? 2.1. Single-response measures of capacity. 2.2.  Double-response measures of capacity. 3. !s capacity limited? 3.1. Channels in information processing research. 3.2. The  limited-capacity channel. 3.3. Variable-allocation models of capacity. 3.4. Performance operating characteristics. 3.5.  Summary. 4. Where is capacity limited? 4.1. What is a stage? 4.2. Capacity and stages. 4.3. Multiple-capacity models. 4.4.  Summary. 5. An experimental demonstration. 5.1. Method. 5.2. Results and discussion. 6. Summary. 6.1. Final comments.  Current models of attention and information processing that invoke channels and stages as key constructs share two closely  related, but, nevertheless, logically distinct, concepts. The first is the assumption that human behavior can be best  understood in terms of a hypothetical informational flow inside the organism (e.g., Broadbent, 1971, p.7); this flow cannot be  directly observed but clever manipulation of experimental conditions allows us to make reasonable inferences about this  postulated flow. The second assumption is that a diagram of this internal flow is not by itself sufficient to explain  behavior, that is, a second concept, that of capacity, must also be included. Some portions of the information flow proceed  satisfactorily without the allocation of capacity but other portions suffer when the  This research was supported by Grant NCC 2-228 from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration; S. G. Hart was the NASA  Technical Officer. This report was written while the author was on sabbatical leave from Purdue University. I acknowledge with  gratitude the efforts of Daniel Kahneman, Beth Kerr, James Knight, Marcy Lansman, Charles Snyder, and James Townsend, who  kindly reviewed an earlier version of this article. Requests for reprints may be sent to Barry H. Kantowitz, Department of  Psychological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907.  135  0022-2496/85 $3.00  Copyright c 1985 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  136 BARRY H. KANTOWITZ  requisite amount of capacity cannot be supplied. While the flow of information within the organism and the allocation of  capacity within the organism may be highly correlated, they are seldom identical.  This paper is primarily concerned with the capacity construct, although as shall be seen, this cannot be discussed without  also remarking upon the flow of information. The basic issue is simply to what extent does the use of the capacity construct  increase our ability to explain behavior. Alas, there is no direct answer to this question and attempts to evaluate the  utility of capacity necessarily raise additional questions.  In this paper attempts to understand and/or explain the basic theoretical nature of the concept or construct of capacity lead  to four basic questions:  1. What is capacity?  2. How is capacity measured?  3. Is capacity limited?  4. If so, where is it limited?  The reader may feel that these questions are rather straightforward requiring only a few empirical results for clarification.  A major purpose of the present paper is to deny this simplistic solution. Instead it is claimed that any resolution of  empirical differences in this area will first depend upon clarification and resolution of theoretical issues not amenable to  direct empirical test. This point will be made salient by reference to existing articles that reach apparently conflicting  conclusions about capacity and by some new experimental results that highlight the source of this difficulty.  CAPACITY: WHAT IS IT?  For a clearer understanding of the psychological meaning of capacity we must start with the seminal work of Broadbent (1958;  1971) who was largely responsible for making psychologists aware of the general issue of capacity as expressed in his  limited-capacity channel model of performance. In reviewing the earlier formulation Broadbent (1971) stated that  ... it was to some extent meaningful to regard the whole nervous system as a single channel, having a limit to the rate at  which it can transmit information; such a limit is usually termed a limit to "capacity" (page 8).  This definition is precise, specifying the system in question (the whole nervous system) and that the limitation is one of  information transmission rate, i.e., bits/time. Broadbent also had the grace and foresight to bracket the term capacity with  quotation marks, indicating his concern for an overly literal interpretation of the concept. It is clear that for Broadbent  (1958; 1971) the concept of capacity has meaning only insofar as it relates to information theory and the communication model  of Shannon (1948). While the term capacity has been used otherwise (e.g.,  CHANNELS AND STAGES 137  Garner, 1962) to indicate a limit in the amount of information transmitted in perceptual discrimination, such usage neglects  the temporal or rate-dependent aspects of a communication channel and is eschewed here.  Later workers found the quantitative concepts of information theory less useful (Garner, 1974) or even useless for  psychologists (Neisser, 1967). While a small vanguard still maintains that information theory is indeed useful (Kantowitz,  1975; Moray & Fitter, 1974), most psychologists have been disappointed with the utility of information theory (e.g., Rosch,  1974). This rejection of information theory has quite interesting implications for the capacity concept. This concept was  retained and amplified even though its original information-theoretic base was cast aside. But in this process capacity became  more ambiguous and amorphous. Broadbent was able to define capacity quite precisely but later workers were not, since they had  rejected the information theory framework which first spawned the concept in a concrete manner. Thus later workers (Kahneman,  1973; Norman & Bobrow, 1975) had to rely upon some implicit meaning or pretheoretical assumption retained from information  theory.  Norman and Bobrow (1975) offered an extensive discussion based upon a dichotomous classification of process limitations into  data-limited and resourcelimited processes. The important concepts of a performance-resource function and a dual-task  operating characteristic will be discussed later. Now we focus upon their definition of a resource-their neologism for  capacity.  Resources are such things as processing effort, the various forms of memory capacity, and communication channels (p. 45).  While this definition lacks the precision of the Broadbent example, it exemplifies current usage because many operational  definitions could be linked to it; indeed the following section discusses operational definitions of capacity in detail. It is  clear that the concept of capacity exists on a higher theoretical level than that of operational definition. The definition  above offers three major concepts-processing effort, memory capacity, communication channels-each of which can be  operationally defined in seveial ways. Yet the definition above implies that a resource is more than any one of this large  number of possible operational definitions.  Townsend (1974) deserves credit for explicitly noting that semantic connotations of the term capacity were often misleading.  Any answer to the question posed in the heading of this section necessarily implies some particular system as a locus for  capacity. Metonomy is a term meaning the substitution of the container for what is contained as in the sentence "The pot is  boiling." Here we are faced with a psychological reverse metonomy with the contents, -capacity-being substituted for the  system containing the capacity. Most authors have tacitly assumed that the system is the entire organism. Townsend (1974,  Table 1) has shown this to be a gross oversimplification since any specification of capacity is meaningless without a  concommitant specification of other system properties. The third major section that considers the question "Is capacity  limited?" will return to this issue.  138 BARRY H. KANTOWITZ  Kahneman (1973) has provided an important book entirely devoted to the topics attention and effort. Yet it is difficult to  find an explicit definition of capacity, although the term appears on virtually every page. The index directs us to attention,  effort, and spare capacity. It is hoped' that the following excerpt conveys the sense of what Kahneman means by these terms:  These observations suggest that the completion of a mental activity requires two types of input to the corresponding  structure: an information input specific to that structure, and a non-specific input, which may be variously labeled "effort,"  "capacity," or "attention." To explain man's limited ability to carry out multiple activities at the same time, a capacity  theory assumes that the total amount of attention which can be deployed at any time is limited (page 9).  This definition does contain one precise clue, that capacity is nonspecific. Nevertheless, a naive reader unversed in the lore  of psychology and unacquainted with the hydraulic analogy, which likens the flow of capacity to the flow of some fluid  (gasoline has been suggested due to its energizing properties), would be hard put to understand exactly what capacity is from  this definition.  Many other imprecise definitions similar to the two cited above can be found in the literature. These two have been singled  out because of the importance of the works that contain them and they are examples of the best efforts at defining capacity.  They clearly reveal some tacit pretheoretical assumptions accepted by most psychologists working with the concept of capacity.  Without these pretheoretical assumptions no one could understand these definitions.  These ambiguities are amplified when the hydraulic analogy is applied to psychological systems that are often less clearly  specified than are water systems. Removing the information-theoretic base of the analogy stretches its credibility even more,  so that heavy emphasis need be placed upon operational definitions of  ' Kahneman (personal communication Feb. 1978) has replied to this as follows: "I am vaguely uneasy about your treatment of my  'non-definition' of capacity. Since no definition was intended, providing a non-definition was no sin. The sentence you quote  summarized an argument for the necessity of assuming a non-specific input which enables the activation of mental  representations by relevant informational inputs. I am not sure you do justice to the argument by presenting the sentence as  an unsatisfactory definition. The argument is this: we don't need to assume a non-specific input to explain the activation of  such structures as retinal cones by lateral-inhibition (or of competition for access to specific structures) or to the  assumption of non-specific enabling inputs, with some limit on the availability of such inputs. Lateral inhibition and  response conflict certainly occur, but there are phenomena of mutual (or asymmetric) interference for which the assumption of  specific interactions is merely an expression of faith. I chose to adopt the notion of an enabling input of limited  availability. The meaning of `capacity' in this context is as clear as is the argument, and if there is anything wrong it must  be that the theoretical model chosen to explain some cases of interference was wrong, not that the concept was vague."  However, since he did not offer any replacement definition, I am unable to find anything better than the quotation cited  above. It is clear that Kahneman is satisfied with a concept of capacity that is "vague but indispensable." The present paper  is based upon a different scientific philosophy that maintains it is better to be precisely wrong than vaguely correct.  Further discussion of this interesting difference in philosophy of science is beyond the scope of this paper, but the reader  should be aware that this point is responsible for much of the disagreement between Kahneman and myself about the role of  capacity in cognitive psychology.  CHANNELS AND STAGES 139  psychological capacity. If these definitions provide converging operations, capacity may still prove an extremely useful  concept in psychology. So we now consider the problems encountered in measuring capacity.  CAPACITY: How IS IT MEASURED?  Most psychologists accept the dictum that anything that exists, exists in some quantity and this quantity can be measured. If  capacity is more than a diaphanous analogy, amounts of capacity must be precisely measured. Psychologists have relied upon two  measurement techniques to establish capacity requirements of different tasks. In single-stimulation paradigms the human must  perform one task that has several levels of difficulty. Changes in capacity demands are inferred either indirectly from  changes in the time needed to perform the task or directly from changes in working rate (Broadbent, 1965). In  double-stimulation paradigms humans must perform two separate tasks simultaneously. Changes in capacity demands are inferred  from observing decrements in secondary-task or both secondary- and primary-task performance.  Single-Response Measures of Capacity  The most common measure of capacity has been lag (Broadbent, 1965) or reaction time. This is the time between the insertion of  a signal into a system such as the human and its eventual emergence from the system in the form of a response. The key  assumption is that tasks requiring greater capacity will traverse the system more slowly than tasks requiring lesser capacity.  It is now well known that reaction time is a linear function of the information present in a set of alternatives (Hick, 1952;  Hyman, 1955; Briggs, 1974). The reciprocal of the slope of this function has often been interpreted as measuring the channel  capacity of the human (Welford, 1960).  Broadbent (1971) has noted that this is not a satisfactory measure of channel capacity since restrictions upon input or output  ends, such as altering S-R compatibility, affect the slope. Indeed with highly practiced subjects and extremely compatible S-R  relationships the slope approaches zero implying that capacity approaches infinity. Thomas (1974) has noted that slope  measures of capacity derived from speed-accuracy operating characteristics may be valid provided certain restrictions are met;  this offers theoretical advantages lacking when the Hick's law slope is used to index capacity. Since a speed-accuracy  operating characteristic relates two dependent variables, this procedure is quite different from using the slope of a Hick's  law function.  It is not too astonishing that an indirect measure such as lag is inadequate as an index of capacity. However, a more direct  measure, working rate (information/ time) appears to be limited not by rate of information but rather by rate of responding  (Broadbent, 1971). These factors led Broadbent (1971) to the following conclusion:  140 BARRY H. KANTOWITZ  All these points make one somewhat doubtful of the value of the original analogy with the speed at which messages could be  perfectly encoded in our limited system (p. 282).  Such warnings, however, have not yet done much to dampen enthusiasm for the practice of inferring capacity from measures of  reaction time. For example, Treisman, Squire, and Green (1974) have interpreted earlier RT data (Treisman & Fearnley, 1971) to  suggest that perceptual processing capacity is limited. (The meaning of a limited capacity system will be deferred until the  following major section; the present example is cited only to demonstrate that RT is still used as a measure of capacity.)  Treisman and Fearnley recorded RT in a digit classification task involving either one or two target items. Reaction time to  pairs was slower than to single items and this increase in lag was taken by Treisman et al. (1974) as supporting a limit on  capacity. A similar position was taken by Ninio and Kahneman (1974) who measured RT in dichotic listening when only a single  response was required on each trial. Increased lag in a divided-attention condition was attributed to the greater capacity  demands of divided versus focused attention. Since change in RT does not always imply an impact on capacity, this  interpretation, while not necessarily incorrect, should be accepted only with great caution. Ideally, lag should not be used  as an index of capacity without strong converging observations.  While the two examples of lag given above are similar to those discussed by Broadbent, a much more sophisticated use of RT  measures of capacity is illustrated in the work of Townsend (1974). The crucial distinction between Townsend's work and that  described above lies in the detailed a priori specification of system architecture that precedes Townsend's inferences about  capacity. Instead of dealing with the capacity of a relatively amorphous system equivalent to the entire human central nervous  system, Townsend specified capacity at some particular level of processing, e.g., the level of an individual element, where an  element is defined as one of the finite inputs to a processing stage. (For now terms like element and stage will be used  somewhat loosely; the last section of this paper attempts to be more precise regarding such concepts.) A specific assumption  about capacity at one level usually implies strong constraints upon capacity at other levels. The level of processing is  related to the number of elements with higher levels involving greater number of elements. Capacity is related to the rate  parameters that specify the speed of processing for individual elements. Thus capacity becomes meaningful and measurable only  when the size of the element is first specified. A simple example illustrates this. Suppose we wish to measure the capacity  required to process the letter A in a perceptual identification stage. If the entire letter is one global element (or  template) different conclusions about capacity would be drawn than if the letter consisted of three elements (or features): a  horizontal line and two oblique lines.  This approach accepts the basic assumption, that operations requiring greater capacity take longer, as necessary but not as  sufficient. Equal protraction of reaction time need not imply that operations require equal capacity. Models with unequal  capacity parameters can easily produce equivalent reaction times by varying  CHANNELS AND STAGES 141  such structural arrangements as the level at which capacity is assigned, parallel vs serial processing, self-terminating vs  exhaustive processing, and independent vs dependent processing (Townsend, 1974). There is no obvious and simple relationship  between capacity and reaction time that holds for all systems when capacity is defined and measured in this precise  mathematical manner.  Double-Response Measures of Capacity  Another paradigm that can be utilized to measure capacity requires the simultaneous performance of at least two independent  tasks. Task independence implies that the qualitative nature of each of the component tasks remains unchanged in the dual-task  environment (see also Garner & Morton, 1969, for a discussion of independence). In particular it is assumed that the component  tasks are not reconstituted into some more molar single task as a result of practice and (hypothetical) operations such as  stimulus and response grouping (Kahneman, 1973; Kantowitz, 1974).  The logic behind this assessment of capacity at first appears straightforward. Assume that performance on the primary task  (i.e., the task arbitrarily defined by the experimenter by instructions or payoff matrix as being most important) remains  constant in both single- and double-task conditions. Then any decrement in secondary-task performance in the dual-task  environment, relative to secondary-task performance by itself, can be attributed to capacity demands of the primary task  provided that structural interference (Kahneman, 1973) is not the cause of the performance decrement. Structural interference  occurs when contradictory or mutually impossible demands are placed upon a single processing system; again we will defer  precise definition of the term "single system." This kind of structural interference is best illustrated by an example: It is  impossible to simultaneously insert the index finger of your right hand into your ear and nose. The astute reader will have  already noticed at least two difficulties with this means of measuring capacity: First, subjects are seldom sufficiently  accommodating to equate primary task performance for single- and dual-task conditions. Second, how can one be sure that  interference is not structural?  Equating primary task performance. Despite payoff matrices, instructions, temporary cessation of the experiment to excoriate  subjects, good intentions, and even practice, it is extremely difficult for subjects to maintain a constant level of  performance on a primary task under both single- and dual-task environments. Indeed the more detail in which performance is  examined (e.g., measuring speed and accuracy), the less likely that constant primary task performance is achieved. It is  difficult for subjects to maintain constant performance in a single task despite great amounts of practice and explicit payoff  matrices; in research dealing with the speed-accuracy tradeoff this difficulty has been formally termed the micro-tradeoff  (Thomas, 1974). In less mathematically oriented research this difficulty is usually called variability and is assumed to be  part of the innate nature of (a) the human, (b) the experimenter's imprecise control of the environment, or both (a) and (b).  142 BARRY H. KANTOWITZ  Since the desired condition of constant primary task performance is often approximated but seldom achieved, some specific  model of primary task performance is usually required so that slight changes (relative to changes in the secondary task) in  primary task performance can be equated. Some common models often used when reaction time and/or response accuracy are  measures of primary task performance include the theory of signal detection and assorted models of speed-accuracy tradeoff. If  the primary task involves tracking, control models are used to derive corrections. All these models introduce post hoc  mathematical or statistical corrections after the data have been obtained. The utility of the correction depends, of course,  upon the validity of the model as applied to the particular experimental situation at hand.  The availability of computers in many psychological laboratories has given us another option in solving this problem in dual-  or multi-task environments. Realtime (or on-line) computer capabilities can interactively shift primary (or secondary, or even  both) task difficulty as a function of dual-task performance. Such a solution was used by Knight and Kantowitz (1974) to  maintain a constant error rate in a double-stimulation speed-accuracy tradeoff paradigm. The minicomputer interactively  shifted the criterion for a FAST response based upon the subject's previous behavior on immediately preceding trials.  While most experimental psychologists have been trained to prefer experimental to statistical control, the choice between  those two solutions should be more than a reflex decision. With well-practiced subjects, it is likely that mathematical models  such as signal detection theory fit nicely and so can be safely and usefully applied. Indeed with well-practiced subjects the  interactive computer technique may backfire since subjects have ample opportunity to discover the algorithm guiding  interactive changes and can use this information to defeat the purpose of the experiment. For example, in the Knight and  Kantowitz (1974) experiment (which used naive unpracticed subjects), experienced subjects might have deliberately slowed their  responses so that the computer would adjust the criterion for FAST responses upwards. Conversely, when naive, unpracticed  subjects are used, their substantial variance often prevents adequate fitting of a precise mathematical model so that on-line  techniques may be preferred. The key point is that instead of relying upon experimental designs that discourage switching  between the dual tasks (Kerr, 1973), the tools are available to experimentally or statistically control and interpret slight  changes in primary task performance. This seems more appropriate than restricting experimental design to those that appear to  offer a sufficiently slight change in primary task performance so that this change may be ignored. Even small changes if  consistent can have large implications (e.g., Pachella, 1974).  Structural interference. The introduction of this section noted that structural interference arises when contradictory demands  are placed upon a single processing system. Kahneman (1973) measures structural interference by the following operations:  CHANNELS AND STAGES 143  Tasks A and B are equated by difficulty or by a physiological measure of effort, when performed singly. If the combination of  Task A with a new Task C is more demanding or difficult than the combination of tasks B and C, this result provides evidence  for interference between A and C beyond what can be explained in terms of attention or capacity. The alternative  interpretation, that Tasks B and C are mutually facilitating, also assumes a structural interaction (page 196).  According to this operational definition, structural interference must be removed before capacity can be measured, i.e.,  structural interference is a confounding factor insofar as concern is upon capacity measurement.  Such a position is eminently reasonable when by structural interference is meant a limitation imposed by the physical  arrangement of an effector or affector unit; this more specific type of structural interference will be termed "physical  interference" in the present article. Examples of physical interference would be the eye's inability to image two stimuli upon  the fovea if the stimuli are sufficiently separated and the hand's inability to simultaneously push a lever up and also push  it down. Physical interference is a rather uninteresting phenomenon and any capacity-like effects that can be attributed to it  are trivial and appropriately regarded as confounding factors. Kahneman's definition of structural interference goes much  beyond physical interference and may prove too severe a restriction upon capacity measurement, i.e., such a broad definition  may throw out the baby and the bath water.  For the moment let us assume that Tasks A and B can be successfully equated and that related difficulties discussed earlier  have been surmounted or at least finessed. Let Task A be pushing a lever UP with the right hand and Task B be pushing the  lever DOWN, also with the right hand. Further assume that both these tasks require equal reaction times and that this finding  satisfies us that they are of equal difficulty. Now let Task C be pushing another lever UP with the left hand. It is more  difficult to combine Tasks B and C than to combine Tasks A and C when reaction time is taken as a measure of task difficulty  (Way & Gottsdanker, 1968). So this combination of tasks satisfied the definition and demonstrates structural interference  above and beyond capacity interference, i.e., the experiment does not prove that capacity limitations account for the relative  inability of subjects to combine Tasks B and C.  Now let us change the situation slightly by presenting the stimuli of Task C but no longer requiring an overt response. It is  still more difficult to combine "nontask" C with Task B than with Task A (Kantowitz, 1973). In this latter situation it  becomes considerably more difficult to dismiss the findings as an unimportant demonstration of structural interference, even  though the operational definition of structural interference is satisfied. One cannot help but ask what "structures" are  interfering with each other. In the Way and Gottsdanker (1968) study, one might be willing to state that some amorphous and  generally unspecified "response structure" accounts for the structural interference. But when no response is required to Task  C, the "structural" aspects of the situation are diminished to so great an extent that the operational definition need be  questioned.  Such a broad operationalization of structural interference precludes by definition  144 BARRY H. KANTOWITZ  any capacity explanation of a wide variety of interesting nontrivial findings. Again the issue reduces to the particular  system involved in the interference. If the system is limited to observable effector units, the definition shrinks down to  physical interference. If, however, the system also includes any and all inferred processing stages, the definition expands to  encompass and eliminate many interesting task combinations.  As if this difficulty were not sufficient by itself to eliminate a broadly defined structural interference as a confounding in  the measurement of capacity, there is yet another perhaps even more serious difficulty with the operational definition cited  above. Again let us ignore the practical difficulties encountered when trying to compare dual-task performance of different  component tasks. The operational definition above strongly implies a reflexivity in dual-task conditions, i.e., if Task A  interferes with Task C then Task C will also interfere with Task A. (While this reflexivity assumption is mentioned here, it  has been a tacit assumption in many studies of dual-task performance.) As Norman and Bobrow (1975) have clearly shown, this  assumption depends upon the location of both component tasks on their performance operating characteristics. Task A and B may  be equal in difficulty as measured by some particular dependent variable or physiological concommitant of behavior and yet  occupy quite different locations on a performance operating characteristic. The addition of Task C will then exhibit different  effects despite the attempt at equating Tasks A and B.  These considerations argue that broadly defined structural interference forces capacity measurement into a Procrustean bed  when structural interference is regarded solely as a confounding factor. The question, raised by Kerr (1973), as to when the  limits of structural interference have been reached cannot be satisfactorily answered when structural interference is broadly  defined as by Kahneman. The empirical solutions offered by Kerr regarding preferred paradigms do not reach the theoretical  issue raised by this operational definition. The theoretical solution proposed here would limit structural interference to  only physical interference, i.e., only physical interference would be regarded as an uninteresting confounding factor.  Specification of the system being studied would determine capacity considerations regardless of structural interference as  defined by Kahneman.  Grouping. The most basic assumption in dual-task (or time-sharing) paradigms is that the two (or more) component tasks remain  independent when performed in concert. Measuring the capacity demanded by a primary task by changes in secondary task  performance implies that two tasks remain separate even though being performed simultaneously. This assumption is not easily  tested empirically. The solution of requiring a third simultaneous task only pushes the problem back a level by offering more  ways (3 to be exact) for two tasks to be combined to say nothing of all three tasks merging. There are at least two ways in  which this independence assumption can be violated. First, the two tasks may be reconstituted into a more molar single task  through stimulus or response grouping (Kahneman, 1973). Second, the two tasks may not be grouped but may nevertheless become  CHANNELS AND STAGES 145  time- or phase-locked so the elements of one component task cannot be completed until a "synchronization pulse" arrives.  The concept of stimulus grouping was used by Welford (1952) to explain findings in the psychological refractory period effect  when the interval separating two successive stimuli was short. Welford believed that processing of the first stimulus was  delayed so that both stimuli could be processed jointly. Later workers extended this idea to allow for the possibility of  response grouping (Borger, 1963), where the first of two responses was delayed. Grouping is still a widely used explanatory  device in the area of double stimulation, although it is often difficult to distinguish between stimulus and response grouping  (Kantowitz, 1974).  It is difficult to find a behavioral index that will clearly identify examples of grouping. One possibility that can be used  when both component tasks are discrete is the interresponse interval (IRI). If IRI is constant then grouping can be inferred.  If the two tasks were independent, considerable trial-to-trial variation in IRI would be expected. Thus, the lack of such  variation has often been taken as evidence for lack of independence between two simultaneous tasks (e.g., Kalsbeek, 1964).  Since the temporal relation between both task components is unchanged, this may be taken as evidence that the two tasks have  been merged into a single molar task. Kahneman (1973, Chap. 9) uses this approach to discredit conclusions contrary to his  variable-capacity model reached by Schvaneveldt (1969). The arguments for and against such an interpretation are complex and  will not be summarized here; the reader is referred to the original sources and to a discussion by Kantowitz (1974). The  relevant difficulty for present purposes is that the same variation in IRI was interpreted by Kahneman as supporting response  grouping and by Schvaneveldt and also by Kantowitz as failing to support grouping. Furthermore, IRI may reasonably be expected  to vary with task complexity so that failure to obtain a constant IRI need not necessarily rule out a grouping explanation. A  constant IRI criterion seems to be a reasonable first-approximation and until a better a priori specification is offered, this  seems to be the best available criterion for discrete task components. Even this conservative definition will not serve for  continuous tasks like tracking. The definition and measurement of response grouping is a major unsolved problem of  considerable theoretical import. Perhaps the spectral analysis techniques of electrical engineering may prove helpful in  measuring grouping.  Synchronization of the two component tasks is a problem closely related to grouping. The idea that basic periodicities in  information processing characterize the human is not new (Craik, 1947; 1948) and has been generally accepted (Fitts, 1964).  The human can be viewed as a sampled-data control system with periodic interruptions of feedback sampling. Studies of  attention have attempted to relate this periodicity to some physiological concommitant such as the alpha rhythm (e.g.,  Kristofferson, 1967) or other evoked potentials (Posner, 1975). However, this general type of time-locked behavior does not  necessarily influence the independence of the two component tasks in the same way as grouping violates the independence  assumption.  A more specific type of synchronization can occur when one component task is  146 BARRY H. KANTOWITZ  experimenter-paced and the other is self-paced. The self-paced task may fall into a fixed phase relation with the  experimenter-paced task. A similar problem can arise when both component tasks are self-paced; in this case one task (usually  the primary task) may temporally dominate the other which must fall into phase. While the spectral analysis techniques of  engineering should prove useful in locating this kind of failure of the independence assumption, little work has been  accomplished by psychologists working with double-response paradigms. Even having both component tasks paced by the  experimenter may not avoid the issue since subjects do not always follow pacing requirements exactly; thus, again one task may  become temporally subsidiary and phase-linked to the other task.  The related problems of grouping and synchronization present serious theoretical difficulties in the analysis of dual-task  paradigms. These problems have been largely ignored in this context but, since they bear directly upon a basic assumption of  time-sharing logic, the independence assumption, solutions must be attempted.  Secondary task variables. In selecting a secondary task the first decision an experimenter need make is between continuous and  discrete tasks. Kerr (1973) has argued that the discrete secondary task is preferable because (a) subjects are more likely to  divert capacity from the primary task when faced with a continuous secondary task, and (b) increases (Welford, 1968) or  decreases (Kahneman, 1973) in overall capacity due to insertion of a secondary task are less likely with a discrete task  occurring on only a proportion of all trials. Although no evidence was given to bolster these contentions, they certainly are  reasonable assertions that merit additional discussion.  A possible rationale behind (a) and (b) above seems to be related to the duration or relative proportion of a trial taken up  by the secondary task. Hence, a continuous secondary task must be performed for a longer time than a discrete task and so is  more likely to divert capacity away from the primary task. Similarly, insertion of a discrete secondary task, especially if  only on a proportion of trials rather than on all trials, is less likely to tamper with capacity than a continuous task  present on every trial since the discrete task is present for a much smaller time. Unhappily this kind of rationale confounds  definitions of capacity based upon time versus those based upon interference, or in Kerr's terminology "time" versus "space."  Space, as used by Kerr, refers to a "widening" of the channel so that more simultaneous tasks can fit into the channel  together and is to be distinguished from an increase in channel capacity due to the rate at which information traverses the  channel. For Kerr, an increase in "space" is similar to parallel processing that adds another channel, except that the  parallel processing occurs in the same (albeit wider) channel. This fuzzy concept perhaps can be made more clear by specific  reference to the hydraulic analogy mentioned earlier in this paper. For Kerr, an increase in "space" would correspond to  replacing a one-inch diameter pipeline with a two-inch pipeline. Allowing the duration of the secondary task to affect  capacity removed from the primary task, illustrates this confounding. Such usage ignores the  CHANNELS AND STAGES 147  distinction between lag and working rate discussed earlier. While space and time are intended as independent theoretical  concepts, any attempts at measuring space often involve coincident measure of time. In this paper I have tried to carefully  distinguish between theoretical definitions (preceding section) of capacity and measurement of capacity. It is possible for  theoretical concepts to have great value even if they cannot be directly measured. An example would be any mathematical model  of behavior where parameters must be estimated all at once. Merely having data does not allow estimation of the particular  parameter of theoretical interest without invoking the entire theoretical model.  However, with amorphous concepts like capacity and space, measurement becomes crucial. The theoretical virtue of space is  largely illusory when measurement is ignored. Thus, on a theoretical basis these reasons for preferring discrete secondary  tasks are not entirely convincing. However, this preference may be valid on an empirical basis if data were obtained to  demonstrate that primary task performance was more likely to remain unchanged when combined with a discrete secondary task.  The difficulty in accomplishing this empirical justification lies in equating discrete and continuous secondary tasks in terms  of capacity requirements. Any attempts to determine capacity demands of a (secondary) task take us immediately back to  theoretical issues concerning the definition and measurement of capacity.  Arguments can also be made supporting the use of continuous secondary tasks. The modal argument states that any momentary  diversion of capacity from the primary task may go undetected if no secondary task must be performed at that moment. This  argument occurs most frequently with paradigms such as dichotic listening where secondary task stimulation may be present  without a requirement for momentary responses to the secondary task. Proponents of discrete secondary tasks in time-sharing  paradigms could counter this argument by claiming that capacity would not be momentarily diverted from the primary task until  occurence of the discrete secondary task, i.e., there is no need to divert capacity when no secondary task is present.  A better argument for continuous tasks might be that the sudden onset of an unpredictable discrete secondary task creates a  momentary disruption that artificially increases the capacity demands of the secondary task. In engineering terminology, this  would be equivalent to adding an impulse function to perturb a system. Impulse functions severely tax systems, often resulting  in distorted transient responses. This possibility could be evaluated by a parametric manipulation of secondary task  characteristics; however, current research has emphasized manipulation of primary task parameters with little attention paid  to systematic study of secondary task characteristics.  Problems in deciding between discrete and continuous secondary tasks can be adroitly evaded by requiring simultaneous  responses to a complex stimulus (e.g., Schvaneveldt, 1969). This paradigm is methodologically equivalent to a psychological  refractory period paradigm with a zero interstimulus interval (ISI). But, as has been previously mentioned, grouping problems  may become more difficult to  148 BARRY H. KANTOWITZ  evaluate with this zero ISI technique. My own preference is for a continuous secondary task since a constant load diminishes  expectancy effects and encourages subjects to maintain a steady-state strategy.' Recently, I have had some success using a  discrete phase-linked (synchronous) secondary task where stimuli for the secondary task occur with a fixed temporal relation  to primary-task stimuli. Nevertheless, I must admit that my preference for a continuous secondary task has not altogether  stopped me from using an asynchronous secondary task, with all its attendant blemishes, when it was expedient (e.g.,  Kantowitz, Hart, and Bortolussi, 1983).  Overlap between primary and secondary tasks. There are always two kinds of possible overlap, time and capacity. While the  logical distinction between the two is simple and clear, discussions based upon measurement of the two overlaps can be  obscured when time is measured so as to make inferences about capacity.  Overlap in time is a consequence most often of the operational requirements of two tasks. Time overlap acquires theoretical  importance only when concern is focused upon the hypothetical processing stages inferred from performance so that serial vs  parallel processing and related issues are raised. Since a detailed discussion of stages is reserved for a later section, now  only molar implications of time overlap will be mentioned. The clearest example of manipulation of time overlap is the  psychological refractory period or double-stimulation paradigm in which two successive stimuli are separated by a brief  temporal interval called the ISI. No processing of the second signal can occur until that signal has been presented. But this  separation in time need not necessarily imply a complete separation in capacity. To make this point salient, a distinction  between momentary capacity demands and expectancy or capacity allocation prior to stimulus onset must be offered. The second  stimulus in a double-stimulation paradigm makes no momentary capacity demands until after the ISI, i.e., until it occurs. But  it is certainly possible that some of the total system capacity is held in reserve or allocated for subsequent processing of  the second signal. (This, of course, is not the only theoretical model possible since all capacity may be devoted to the first  signal until second signal occurrence. In such a model there are only momentary capacity demands.) This allocation decision  occurs prior to a trial and results from instructions, prior experience with the task, etc. To the extent that such a priori  capacity allocation is made, the second signal may share a capacity overlap with the first signal, even though the second has  yet to physically occur.  A more interesting form of capacity overlap occurs when both component tasks  Z A few reviewers have correctly noted that this section is a rather general discussion of the continuous versus discrete task  problem and omits any discussion of partial solutions that have been attempted by researchers. Such a detailed consideration  would be very expensive in terms of journal space. Present discussion is not meant to imply that any particular technique is  necessarily unsuitable since this depends upon the goals of the researcher. The point stressed above is that any general  measurement of capacity that is intended to have implications beyond any specific measurement technique must carefully  consider the theoretical relations among different measurement operations. Researchers who consider a general measure of  capacity "unrealistic" (Kahneman, personal communication) will not be troubled by this difficulty.  CHANNELS AND STAGES 149  compete for momentary capacity. This implies a time overlap between the tasks. But although interest may center about  measurement of momentary capacity requirements, attempts at empirically obtaining such measures often measure an amalgam of  momentary and a priori allocation capacities. Although a clear theoretical distinction can be made between the two types of  capacity, this distinction does not always appear in the operations used to measure capacity. In particular, operations that  might be expected to affect a priori allocation, e.g., the proportion of trials on which a probe secondary task is inserted,  relative payoffs for the two tasks, etc., do not necessarily lead to conclusions about momentary capacity demands of a primary  task. Furthermore, holding such an operation constant in the course of an experiment does not guarantee that conclusions about  momentary capacity are justified. For example, a situation that greatly stressed the importance of the primary task by either  payoff or a low probability of a secondary task, might lead to an erroneous conclusion that the secondary task had no  momentary capacity demand because adding the secondary task did not degrade primary-task performance. All of the  joint-performance decrement might be shifted to the secondary task. Unless the experimenter has the foresight to include a  singlestimulation secondary-task-only control condition, this state of affairs could go unnoticed.  IS CAPACITY LIMITED?  By now it should be quite clear that the answer to the above question is rather intimately related to definition and  measurement of capacity. An algorithmic solution of attempting to answer the question for all combinations of definitions and  types of measurement previously discussed would prove unduly lengthy. Instead the heuristic solution of applying the question  mainly in the context of established models of capacity will be followed. This more limited review is not intended to minimize  the troubles attached to definition and measurement discussed earlier in the paper.  Channels in Information Processing Research  In psychological research, the existence of a channel can only be inferred from some measurement of capacity. Strictly  speaking, the channel concept is then redundant and perhaps even unnecessary. I believe this insight is responsible for  Kahneman's (1973) variable-allocation model of capacity in which any channel or locus of capacity limitation is vehemently  denied. Capacity is the more important concept, since while capacity can exist without precise specification of a channel, a  channel, at least in psychological research, can be inferred only from a measurement of capacity. Of course, a channel can be  defined as, say, the entire central nervous system, but this definition increases our vocabulary rather than our understanding.  Nevertheless, the term "channel" while not strictly necessary does offer a certain convenience and has been often used.  Provided one remembers that a channel is  480;'29,'2-2  150 BARRY H. KANTOWITZ  but a fiction inferred from an analogy (capacity) the term may prove helpful for some. In particular, so long as only a single  molar channel is involved our habits of speech may not lead to undue confusion. But as soon as more than one channel is  invoked, e.g., several parallel channels or independent channels, more care need be exercised with the concept. So long as  channel means single-channel (Welford, 1952), a stage of information processing is clearly a smaller unit than a channel. Once  channel means multichannel, the distinction between a stage and a channel becomes more uncertain. In this paper, by stage is  meant a smaller unit of information processing and this definition will be expanded in the following major section.  The Limited-Capacity Channel  While many psychologists were influenced by communication theory and the single-channel concept (e.g., Muson & Karlin, 1954;  Welford, 1952) the idea was brought to fruition in Broadbent's (1958) classic text, Perception and Communication. This model  is so well known and has engendered so much research that any complete review would require a tome of monumental proportions;  indeed Broadbent (1971) found it necessary to omit or abbreviate some areas covered in detail in his earlier book. The basic  prediction of the model is an interaction with task difficulty, and this interaction can take at least two distinct forms so  that two related but operationally distinct meanings can be given to capacity limitation (Kantowitz & Knight, 1976, 1978b).  The first prediction compares single- and dual-task performance. Performance on the primary task performed alone is compared  to primary-task performance in concert with a simultaneous secondary task. Figure 1 shows predictions of the limitedcapacity  model when two variants, Easy and Difficult, of the primary task are considered. The Difficult task is defined as requiring  greater capacity to achieve better performance. For example, the Easy task might be a Fitts' law tapping task with a large  target while the Difficult task might use a small target. Thus, rate of transmitted information (bits/s) would be greater for  the Difficult task (Kantowitz & Knight, 1976). (Of course, percentage of maximum transmitted information would be greater for  the Easy task. This led Kantowitz & Knight to show better predicted performance for the Easy task in their Figures 1 and 2.  Here discussion is restricted to absolute amount of information transmitted per second so that the present Fig. 1 shows higher  performance for the Difficult task.) This definition of task difficulty is not sufficient to generate the predictions of Fig.  1 without an additional axiom. This axiom was called the Potency Principle by Kantowitz and Knight (1978b): performance  increases monotonically with capacity investment.  The definition of task difficulty and the Potency Principle can now be combined to informally explain the predictions in Fig.  1. (For a more formal explanation see  ' Two possible exceptions to the Potency Principle involve data-limited processes and plateaus in resource-operating  characteristics. The first exception is not related to capacity and the second has been discussed by Norman and Bobrow (1975),  Kantowitz and Knight (1976b), and Roediger, Knight, and Kantowitz (1977).  CHANNELS AND STAGES 151  PRIMARY DUAL TASK TYPE OF TASK  FIG. 1. Predictions of the limited-capacity model when single- and dual-task conditions are compared. There are two levels of  the Primary task (Task-1). Task-1 only represents primary task performance in the absence of a secondary task. Dual-task  represents performance on the primary task when one level of a secondary task is performed simultaneously. (Secondary task  performance is not shown in this figure.) Primary-task performance is measured in absolute units, e.g., bits/s, and is not  scaled, e.g., percent of maximum transmitted information rate.  EPS_y------_e  EASY DIFFICULT SECONDARY TASK-2 PERFORMANCE  FIG. 2. Predictions of the limited-capacity model for dual-task performance. Two levels of the primary task are combined with  two levels of the secondary task.  152 BARRY H. KANTOWITZ  Kantowitz and Knight, 1978b.) When the Easy primary task is combined with a secondary task, total capacity requirements are  either within those of the limitedcapacity model, predicting no performance decrement, or slightly exceed available capacity,  predicting a slight performance decrement. When the Difficult primary task is combined with a secondary task, there is a  greater discrepancy between available capacity and capacity required to perform both tasks simultaneously. Thus, the model  predicts a greater decrement in primary-task performance as compared to the decrement when the Easy variant of the primary  task is used. This interaction between primary-task difficulty and single- versus dual-task conditions is the key prediction  of the limited-capacity single-channel model.  The prediction of Fig. 1 required two levels of the primary task but only one secondary task. By adding a second level of the  secondary task, the predictions of Fig. 2 can be derived. In Fig. 2 primary-task difficulty is plotted for only dual-task  conditions, contrary to Fig. 1 which compares both single- and dual-task performance. However, the logic of the predictions  shown in Fig. 2 is quite similar to the logic behind Fig. 1. As the secondary task becomes more difficult, the predicted  decrement in primary-task performance is greater for the Difficult primary task than for the Easy primary task. This  interaction is the key prediction of the limitedcapacity single-channel model when only dual-task conditions are compared with  (at least) two levels of difficulty for both primary and secondary tasks.  As Kantowitz and Knight previously emphasized, a complete test of the limitedchannel model requires an experiment that can  generate data in the form of both Figs. 1 and 2. An experiment with only one level of the secondary task cannot be used to  generate Fig. 2. Therefore, it is prudent to include at least two levels of both primary and secondary tasks in experiments  that purport to test the limitedcapacity model, as well as other related models with slightly different assumptions about  capacity. While almost all experiments on this topic have been able to generate Fig. 1, several experiments have used only one  level of a secondary task. This neglect has been apparently based upon the assumption that since the logic behind the  predictions of Figs. 1 and 2 is similar, a test of only Fig. 1 will be sufficient.  While it is true that a failure to find an interaction of the form of Fig. 1 does reject the limited-capacity model-provided,  of course, that the tasks are sufficiently difficult to exceed available capacity when combined in the dual-task  conditionempirical confirmation of the interaction portrayed in Fig. 1 is not sufficient evidence to confirm the model. It is  possible to obtain data that conform to the interaction of Fig. 1 yet present additivity in Fig. 2 (e.g., Kantowitz & Knight,  1974, 1976). There is thus both logical and empirical justification for demanding that experiments aimed at evaluating models  that use the capacity construct present sufficient manipulations of independent variables to provide at least two levels of  primary and secondary tasks. Furthermore, researchers must also present statistical analyses that allow the reader to evaluate  the interactions of Figs. 1 and 2 separately. For instance, Allport, Antonis, and Reynolds (1972) did have sufficient  manipulations but failed to analyze the interaction in Fig. 2.  CHANNELS AND STAGES 153  A recent series of experiments (Johnson, Forester, Calderwood, and Weisgerber, 1983) shows that this simple point-using two  levels of secondary task-has not yet been understood by all researchers desirous of testing models of attention and capacity.  In this study, seven related experiments using a secondary probe task were accomplished along with a detailed and extensive  discussion of attention and resource allocation. In these experiments a single auditory tone with unspecified frequency  comprised the secondary task. The experiments manipulated probe temporal location and probe probability. The use of only a  simple RT probe in these experiments call some of the theoretical conclusions into question; indeed, Klapp (1978) has also  warned of the dangers associated with uncritical use of a simple RT probe task. In the interests of brevity, only one example  of a dubious conclusion is discussed.  In the following quotation, the secondary task was a simple RT probe and the primary task a two-choice letter matching task  calling for a "same" or "different" response. A mixed block contained three types of trials: probe-with-letter, letter only,  and probe only (no letter). A blocked no-letter condition refers to a series of probe-only trials. Johnson et al. (1983, p.  634) argued that "dual-task cost is not properly conceptualized as a capacity limitation.... As this applies to the present  experiments, subjects are faced with three response alternatives in the no-letter mixed block condition (the choice RT on the  letter task and the simple RT to the probe), whereas in the no-letter blocked condition the subject is faced with only one  response alternative (the probe response). Thus, it is possible that the dual-task cost (i.e., the performance decrement  relative to single-task control conditions) simply reflects this difference in response uncertainty and that this source of  interference is unrelated to the capacity limitations associated with encoding. Moreover, it may not be necessary to assume  that response uncertainty is unrelated to capacity limitations. It is only necessary to assume that competition present during  response stages operates at a different temporal interval within the trial than does the competition for resources operating  at the encoding stage. This assumption by itself could explain the independence of dual cost and encoding interference."  The argument quoted above follows a discussion that additional resources allocated to the probe task had moved it to a  data-limited region, thus accounting for a finding of no evidence for encoding interference. Without a choice-RT probe task,  this suggestion and the conclusions quoted above cannot be evaluated. There are no data to plot in the form of Fig. 2. Adding  a choice-RT probe would increase probe processing demands and perhaps evidence for interference might have been obtained. Of  course, such speculation is idle. The point is that without the data from a second level of the probe task, one cannot safely  conclude anything about the independence of dual cost and encoding interference. Indeed, the most prudent experimental  manipulation would have been to include not only a two-choice probe task but also a four-choice (or even an eight-choice) task  as well. Given the labor needed to produce seven experiments and deep theoretical conclusions, it seems that the marginal cost  of an additional experiment with at least two levels of probe difficulty is hardly excessive.  154 BARRY H. KANTOWITZ  Variable-Allocation Models of Capacity  The finding that relative performance on two simultaneous tasks can be manipulated so that one task is performed better than  the other regardless of the relative difficulties of the two tasks has caused many psychologists to infer that capacity can be  not only divided or shared between two tasks but can also be allocated. Allocation is most often used to mean a deliberate or  intentional assignment of capacity to a particular task component. Thus, in a dichotic listening task, for example, capacity  can be allocated to the left ear but not to the right. Allocation can also be used to indicate assignment of capacity to some  particular feature of a task. For example, in a dichotic task capacity might be said to be allocated to recognizing digits or  letters of the alphabet regardless of the ear in which they appear. This feature-related use of allocation will not be used  here, unless some specific stage (e.g., digit identification) is also postulated to receive this allocation of capacity.  Allocation policies proposed range from several independent channels (Allport et al., 1972) implying no total limitation in  capacity to variable allocation models in which the "width" of the channel changes with task demands (Moray, 1967). The  variable-allocation model proposed by Moray and by Triggs (1968) has been considerably expanded and generalized by Kahneman  (1973) so that further discussion will be based upon this particular variable-allocation model.  There are two major distinctions that separate Kahneman's variable-allocation model from the limited-channel model. First,  total amount of capacity expands with increasing demand, although at a slower rate. Second, allocation of capacity between  competing demands is explicitly discussed, although allocation policies are very flexible. A third distinction is claimed in  that no bottleneck is specified. However, proponents of limited-channel models have wavered on the locus of capacity  limitation, usually stating that the limitation was in the channel itself. Since no one knows exactly where the channel can be  found, in practice both limited- and variable-allocation models are vague about specifying where capacity is limited. While  limited channel proponents have been embarrassed by relocation of this locus from earlier to later in the channel (e.g.,  Smith, 1967), proponents of the variable-allocation model have attempted to make a virtue of this ambiguity by vehemently  denying the existence of any bottleneck. The issue of locating capacity limitations will be returned to in the following major  section of this paper.  Although capacity is not fixed as in the limited-channel model, tasks still compete for a limited pool of capacity in  Kahneman's variable-allocation model. The size of this pool is determined by task characteristics but once these are fixed,  then so is total available capacity. So in any given situation capacity is still constant.  The allocation policy is potentially of great theoretical importance in the variable-allocation model. However, the concept is  not well developed and except for the statement that tasks demanding high levels of attention or capacity tend to resist  allocation to other tasks, little is stated so that a priori predictions can be made about allocation policy before data is  collected. Kahneman (personal communication) has replied that what is needed is empirical knowledge and I do not  CHANNELS AND STAGES 155  dispute the benefits of more data. However, I doubt that rules of allocation policy can be found only by gathering more data  without additional theoretical effort. For example, one can sweep out a performance operating characteristic (POC) function  (see next section) by varying the payoff associated with each of two simultaneous tasks, but will this tell us a great deal  about allocation policies for other kinds of tasks? Without some theoretical statement linking task taxonomies to capacity,  allocation policies can never be determined empirically without testing all possible task combinations. Kahneman does  distinguish between two kinds of demand: demand, is a necessary condition without which a task cannot be successfully  performed, and demand2 corresponds to requiring capacity in the sense that a mother demands that her child pick up scattered  toys. The relationship between allocation policy and both demand, and demand2 is more implied than explicit. Presumably  voluntary allocation due to instructions and payoff controls demand2. It is not clear if demand, automatically gets priority  in allocation.' A clearer statement of how capacity gets allocated is needed. A step in this direction has been taken by  Norman and Bobrow (1975) in their discussion of performance operating characteristics, the next topic to be considered.  Performance Operating Characteristics  The concept of an operating characteristic is well known in statistics (e.g., Stilson, 1966). Experimental psychologists are  most familiar with a type of operating characteristic associated with the theory of signal detection: the receiver operating  characteristic. Norman and Bobrow (1975) suggested that plotting performance on one component of a timesharing task as a  function of performance of the other component would be a useful way to portray these kinds of data. Such a function was  termed a performance operating characteristic (POC).  The POC is merely another way of displaying data and as such has no more special implications for assessing capacity  limitations than does, say, a bar graph. However, Norman and Bobrow place a special interpretation upon the POC especially  when horizontal or vertical line segments best describe the data. Such segments are said to result from a data-limited process  such that no improvement in performance could be expected regardless of additional allocation of capacity. Hence performance  in these data-limited regions of the POC does not depend upon capacity limitations. By assuming that resources are allocated  from one task to the other the POC function can be used to infer capacity demands of the component tasks. The basic  assumption, termed the principle of complimentarity by Norman and Bobrow, is that a constant amount of capacity is always  divided between the two component tasks so that the sum of capacities allocated to each remains fixed.  While this allocation rule has the great virtue of simplicity and clarity, it directly contradicts the variable-allocation  model of Kahneman previously discussed. Kahneman's model claims that capacity expands with increasing task demands. Thus,  Kahneman's interpretation of a POC function would differ greatly from that  Kahneman (personal communication) has indicated that demand, has no implication for allocation.  156 BARRY H. KANTOWITZ  of Norman and Bobrow. What kinds of experimental outcomes, if any, might distinguish between these two interpretations?  A POC function that was monotonically increasing over part of its range would reject both models. For Norman and Bobrow this  would imply that the sum of resources increased rather than remained constant. At first it might appear that this outcome  could be consistent with Kahneman's model since increasing capacity is postulated. However, for Kahneman capacity increases at  a decreasing rate so that spare capacity always decreases.  A POC function consisting of discontinuous parallel horizontal (or vertical) line segments would at first appear to reject  Norman and Bobrow's model. However, they explicitly allow for cases where increasing resources over a limited region need not  result in a performance increment. Kantowitz and Knight (1976b) have discussed how this feature of the model makes it  difficult to distinguish true datalimited processes from "step-limited" processes. However, a step POC function would not  reject the Norman-Bobrow conceptualization. Since Kahneman posits smoothly accelerating functions with no step discontinuities  in capacity allocation, this outcome would be inconsistent with his model.  Monotonically decreasing POC functions would be predicted by both models. Indeed most empirical studies would be expected to  fall within this category. Thus, it appears that despite a crucial difference in assumptions concerning capacity allocation,  the models can be readily distinguished in the POC space only because one of them posits smooth functions. Allowing  discontinuities in allocation would not represent a major alteration in Kahneman's model and then the models could not be  distinguished on the basis of operating characteristics.  There is one more problem associated with POC functions that may be even more of a hindrance than those just mentioned. This  is the problem of scaling the axes of the POC. If, as is usually the case, different tasks are plotted on the abscissa and  ordinate of the POC function, there is little assurance that equal intervals on each axis correspond to equal amounts of  capacity used. Hence, the anti-diagonal of the POC space may not be interpreted as the locus of equal allocation of capacity.  This further limits the theoretical interpretation of POC functions.  Wickens and his associates (Wickens, 1980; Wickens, Mountford, & Schreinder, 1981) have attempted to avoid this scaling  difficulty by using POCs based upon normalized difference scores. They have claimed that "Normalized difference scores make  the scaling factors and intercepts along both task axes equivalent (Wickens et al., 1981, p. 220)." This is a bold claim that  needs to be backed up by mathematical analysis or simulation based upon classes of performance-resource functions. While it is  possible that the claim is true for certain performanceresource functions, it seems unlikely that this nonlinear scaling  operation will hold for all performance-resource functions. Kantowitz and Weldon (1985) have derived both untreated and  normalized POC functions from three types of underlying performance-resource functions: linear, negatively accelerated  functions and positively accelerated functions. Results were inconsistent with the conclusions drawn by Wickens et al. (1981,  Figs. 3, 4). Of course, there might be some com-  CHANNELS AND STAGES 157  bination of performance-resource functions not tested by Kantowitz and Weldon that might be consistent. However, it appears  that in general scaling POC functions by normalized difference scores is not a valid solution and that, at very least, the  onus of proof lies with those researchers who use such a scaling technique. Scaling by fiat is not an acceptable theoretical  So far the theoretical discussion of POC space has ignored the kinds of empirical complications (changing error rates, etc.)  mentioned earlier. When these additional difficulties are also taken into consideration, it is not clear that strong  theoretical conclusions may be inferred from empirical POC functions. In particular, POC functions do not prove that capacity  is fixed and limited; instead their interpretation is contingent upon some particular assumption about capacity limitation.  Summarv  This section has discussed abstract limitations upon capacity without efforts at localizing such limitations. Of the three  classes of models discussed only the early versions of the limited-capacity model attempted to specify a locus of limitation  and this attempt was not successful. As more and more data were gathered to test the model the locus of limitation got pushed  back from some kind of stimulus filter or analyzer and retreated further into the depths of the organism (Kantowitz, 1974).  The remaining two models deliberately do not try to specify any particular locus of limitation. While this has been claimed as  an advantage of these newer models, skeptics could argue that upon close examination this advantage is based mostly upon  ambiguity.  If the preceding analysis is correct, it appears that discussions of capacity limitations without serious concommitant efforts  to specify precise loci for such limitations are of only limited value. This is unfortunate since it implies that very broad  and general conceptualizations must give way to more specific formulations thus increasing the danger that models will be  partitioned in such a way as to minimize predictions about common content leaving theoreticians with the considerable task of  putting Humpty Dumpty together. Nevertheless, it seems likely that viable attempts based upon capacity as a major theoretical  construct will first have to specify some details of the system architecture. The following section discusses such attempts  with particular reference to stage models of information processing capacity.  WHERE IS CAPACITY LIMITED?  The most common attempts at specifying system architecture have been stage models of information processing where successive  black boxes represent loci for transformations of information flow through the organism. Earlier stage models (Broadbent,  1958; Smith, 1968; Sternberg, 1969) concentrated upon serial processing stages where one transformation must be fully  completed before the next stage can begin operation, but later theorists (Townsend, 1974; Taylor, 1976) have  158 BARRY H. KANTOWITZ  stressed the importance of parallel and hybrid configurations of stages. Nevertheless, proponents of both serial and parallel  models have much in common when their views are contrasted with those of an earlier generation of experimental psychologists  who represented the entire sequence of internal processing stages as a hyphen linking stimulus with response.  What Is a Stage?  Early proponents of stage analysis of reaction time were deliberately vague about the definition of a stage (Smith, 1968;  Sternberg, 1969). Indeed, Sternberg explicitly refused to precisely define a stage and even violated his own informal  definitions in one case by allowing an independent variable to influence the output, as well as the duration, of a stage. This  relaxed approach was certainly defensible, perhaps even wise, at the initial onset of this new theoretical tool, and in no way  diminished the importance of stage analysis. Indeed, more recent theoretical efforts at defining stages (Townsend, 1974;  Taylor, 1976) have tried for greater precision but have achieved it only at the cost of a smaller unit-the element-that is  ambiguously defined.  An element has been defined as the smallest unit of information processing. However, its physical correlate in the external  world can often be observed without the aid of an electron microscope and may range from something relatively large like an  entire word to something smaller like one stroke of a letter. Since the thrust of this paper is on capacity and not stages per  se, I shall not pursue this point and direct the reader to discussions by Townsend (1974) and Taylor (1976). A stage is  defined in terms of processing on the elements. Elements themselves are not stages (subprocesses). For example, Townsend (p.  142) states: "stage i is the state of the system from the completion of the (i -1)th element to the completion of the i th  element." Taylor (1976) never even offers an explicit definition of a stage and is content to deal with definitions of stage  time again based upon processing of elements.  The reader who is accustomed to seeing flow diagrams with stages neatly labeled (e.g., memory-scan mechanism, push-down stack  selector, stimulus normalizer, etc.) may be surprised to realize that the definition of a stage (when indeed it is offered)  has little to do with such fanciful names. These labels are surplus values added by experimenters seeking to improve the  generality of their models. The aptness and utility of such labels remain an empirical issue rather than a theoretical one,  and so will not be pursued here (but see Kantowitz & Knight, 1978a, for one example of a more modest approach to labeling  stages). Note that defining a stage as a system state between completions should reduce the temptation to affix fanciful  labels. Only serial systems with fixed processing orders can be uniquely associated with processing stages of the kind used by  Sternberg. In other stochastic systems (e.g., parallel systems) completions do not occupy a fixed "space" and so cannot be  identified with a locus of processing that suggests a fixed label of the kind used by Sternberg.  Defining a stage only scratches the surface of this theoretical concept since stages  CHANNELS AND STAGES 159  (or more precisely stage times) can never be measured in isolation, removed from possible influences of other stages. For  example, how is the output of a stage communicated to the next stage? Taylor (1976) has noted that while Sternberg's original  analysis called for instantaneous transmission (or at least a very brief impulse), logical possibilities range from this  extreme to a very slow dribbling out of information as a stage commences to operate which is then speeded up as processing  continues. Kantowitz (1969) called this first case all-or-none information exchange and the second case incremental exchange.  Either assumption is viable, and Kantowitz's decision to prefer an incremental model was based upon ancillary considerations.  In particular, additive effects do not guarantee that information exchange is all-or-none.  McClelland (1979) has formulated a cascade model based upon incremental exchange and has carefully described how an  incremental model can explain results that had been previously linked with discrete stage models with all-or-none information  exchange. However, Ashby (1982) has derived an RT probability distribution for the cascade model that allows precise  quantitative predictions. Ashby concluded that the cascade model does not predict the same RT distribution as a discrete-stage  model containing a serial stage with an exponentially distributed duration. Another approach to the incremental versus  all-or-none information exchange has been carried out empirically by Miller (1982) who also concluded that incremental  exchange was likely. But the qualitative nature of his approach precludes formal analysis of the type executed by Ashby. In  the decade and a half since the distinction between incremental and all-or-none information exchange was made by Kantowitz  (1969), this issue has only recently been subjected to empirical and analytic investigation. It is an important problem that  merits the attention of mathematical psychologists during the present decade.  The purpose of this discussion has been to remind the reader that defining a stage requires more than drawing a rectangle and  inserting an auspicious label. In view of recent summaries by Townsend and by Taylor a longer discussion is unnecessary. So  the relationships between stage analysis and capacity can now be treated.  Capacity and Stages  The simplest and most straightforward assumption relating stages and capacity was made by Sternberg (1969): each stage has its  own source of capacity that is independent of all other stages. The great popularity of the additive-factors method shows that  even this simple assumption can be quite fruitful. Nevertheless, more recent efforts have examined alternative assumptions  particularly about capacity allocation to elements, and thus also to stages. These efforts are more in tune with the present  implied argument that capacity, rather than time, is the more useful analogy. Even so, this should not be interpreted as a  blanket rejection of Sternberg's independent capacity stage assumption as being inconsistent with limited-capacity effects  reviewed in preceding sections. If an incremental information exchange is assumed, even unlimited capacity stages can show  limitedcapacity effects in combination when the rate of exchange is limited. This is an  160 BARRY H. KANTOWITZ  extremely complex issue, mathematically as well as psychologically, and I am reluctant to state categorically that even  Sternberg's original formulation with all-ornone exchange and independent stage capacities cannot show limited-channel effects.  Taylor (1976) considers the crucial distinction among stage models to lie along the dimensions of serial-parallel and  exhaustive self-terminating processing. Capacity, while certainly discussed, comes a poor third. The present review shares the  position of Townsend (1974, p. 185) and Townsend and Ashby (1983) and regards capacity as a key dimension. Both Townsend and  Taylor have a concise answer to the question posed at the head of this section: capacity is limited at the level of the  element. Townsend and Ashby (1983) have also stressed capacity limitation at the element level, although their more general  approach can also be addressed to capacity limitation at the subprocess level (see e.g., Chap. 10).  Researchers in the general area of attention may have some difficulty in accepting element designation as a solution to their  problems. First, although they have been able to tolerate ambiguity in finding a molar locus of limitation or attention  bottleneck, ambiguity in the definition of an element may seem less acceptable. Indeed, some might claim that a proposed  solution that merely exchanges one amorphous concept (capacity) for another arcane construct (the element) is rather  unsatisfactory. There are two replies to this criticism. First, the element is potentially far more visible than either  capacity or even a stage of processing. Elements can be mapped to particular stimulus events such as lines, curves, letters,  and words, to mention a few possibilities. Second, as has been explicitly noted by Taylor (1976, pp. 183-185), models differ  as to their sensitivity concerning element identification, with some being totally insensitive, some being parameter  sensitive, and some being prediction sensitive. It is only for this latter case that element identification presents a serious  difficulty, whereas capacity "identification" is a severe problem for all of the general models of capacity previously  discussed.  Second, many would prefer an answer that localized capacity limitations within some particular stage of information  processing. Most researchers are sufficiently sophisticated not to expect a very specific locus (e.g., third stage from the  left), since the number of stages depends upon the number and kind of independent variables manipulated by each experimenter  (see Taylor, 1976, for implications of this for research strategies), they still would like a more global limitation like  stimulus stage or response stage. Indeed, the present author is guilty of this oversimplification (Kantowitz, 1974) by  claiming that response processes are a more important locus of limitation than are stimulus processes. While this may be true  (e.g., I still believe it), it ignores implications of capacity limitations from elements for limitations upon stages.  This point has been stressed by Townsend (1974, Table 1) and merits further emphasis. One can first specify capacity  limitations upon elements as does Townsend and then, with some additional mathematical assumptions about distribution,  elegantly derive capacity of models based upon different configurations of stage properties. The complementary process of  specifying limitations upon stages and  CHANNELS AND STAGES 161  then looking for implications of this at the level of elements has not been seriously pursued since those who view the stage  as the basic unit do not care about elements. However, the stage as a basic unit is not as meaningful as the element. This is  disconcerting for those who are fond of black box diagrams yet dislike the mathematics associated with elements.  Stages versus processes. The difficulty mentioned above arises primarily from the hermetically sealed nature of a stage as  proposed by Sternberg. The stage has its own unique source of capacity and the precise kinds of information transformations  that go on inside the stage are hidden. Recent work by Townsend and Ashby (1983) has substituted the process for the stage. A  process can be thought of as an exploded diagram of a stage.  Hazard functions are used to explain the detailed operation of a process. The advantage of hazard functions is that an  ordering of hazard functions implies an ordering of distribution functions whereas the converse is not true; ordering  distribution functions does not necessarily order hazard functions. This approach is particularly useful for parallel models  where overall hazard functions are combinations of the hazard functions of individual elements. A further advantage of hazard  functions lies in eliminating a common criticism of early mathematical models based upon Poisson distributions. These models  had to claim that a stage that is almost finished processing, completed the same information transformations (none) as a stage  that has just started. The operation of a process based upon hazard functions can be likened to unpeeling successive layers of  an onion as processing continues.  Thus, using processes based upon hazard functions offer many advantages over traditional stage analysts which cannot even  specify the order of serial stages based upon the method of additive factors. Processes permit a much finer grained analysis  of the interaction between capacity, elements, and system architecture. Furthermore, this finer grain is not achieved at the  expense of generality: processes based upon hazard functions can account for serial as well as parallel system architectures.  The important point of this discussion is that the system architecture must be specified in some detail before assumptions  about capacity limitations in general, and their loci in particular, have any meaning. Even if all the world is a stage, this  does not help in finding the stage where capacity is limited, if indeed such a stage exists. Stating that some stage (even a  molar stage such as response processing) has limited capacity has very strong implications for the architecture of the entire  information flow postulated within the organism. Unless this architecture is specified, searching for a locus of limitation is  like looking for the end of a rainbow: fun but not illuminating. There is as yet no methodology for first finding an empirical  capacity limitation and then inferring system architecture. As the preceding sections of this paper have shown, all the  methodologies that seek to determine how capacity is allocated first make assumptions about the structure of the system.  Sternberg and Knoll (1973) attempted something like this: they used an additive-  162 BARRY H. KANTOWITZ  factors methodology to define independent channels in temporal order judgments. Nevertheless, they did not claim that channels  so defined have anything to do with attentional selectivity (p. 637) and issues of capacity.  As has been noted in the preceding section, the formidable problems associated with a rigorous application of stage analysis  to issues of capacity have led some theorists to drop the stage concept entirely, and to conceive of capacity limitations in a  more molar strain. This allows us to ignore system architecture to a large degree, but only at the price of the disadvantages  mentioned earlier in connection with the models of Kahneman (1973) and Norman and Bobrow (1975). It seems preferable to  attempt elucidating system architecture, even if certain configurations cannot be empirically distinguished (Townsend, 1974),  rather than opt for global models that ignore inferred structure. However, it is only fair to admit that valuable insights can  be gained from such molar strategies and perhaps they are better regarded as precursors to some more detailed analysis of  system architecture perhaps based upon processor and hazard functions than as being antithetical to the goals of stage methods  of analysis.  Multiple-Capacity Models  The ultimate theoretical expansion (Navon & Gopher, 1979, Table 2) postulates multiple sources of capacity with multiple  processing facilities (similar to stages or channels) and more than one process able to utilize a processing facility at the  same time. Various caveats about the testability of capacity models raised earlier in this paper-plateaus in POC spaces,  interpretation of empirical POC functions, changes in resource requirements causing a process to migrate into a data-limited  region of the performance-resource function, inadequate combined task difficulty so that channel capacity was not  overloaded-also apply to multiple-resource models.  Furthermore, the multiple-resource model adds so many new wrinkles (and parameters) that falsifiability of the model becomes  almost impossible. One can always add another resource to explain results, or, if fewer rather than more resources are  required to accommodate data, one can add a mysterious concurrency cost to "explain" why certain combinations of task require  more capacity than might be predicted at first blush.  Happily, a recent article that appeared as this paper was being revised (Navon, 1984) allows me to delete several paragraphs  pointing out problems with falsifiability on the grounds that criticism provided by one of the original formulators of the  model is far more convincing than criticism from one who has espoused a competing model. However, while I am in considerable  agreement with many of the points raised by Navon (1984) 1 am grateful to find a theorist who is even more pessimistic about  the capacity construct than am I. It is possible that he has overreacted and thrown out the baby with the soup stone. In  particular, while I accept Navon's criticism as appropriate for multiple-resource models, I am not sure that the concept of  capacity, degenerate and fuzzy as it has become, should also be rejected for models that postulate only a single source or  pool of limited capacity. My limited hopes for the limited capacity construct in the face of the defects noted  CHANNELS AND STAGES 163  by Navon (1984) center about two related constructs: (1) the definition of task difficulty and the implications of the Potency  Principle for observed effects of task difficulty and task complexity, and (2) the possibility of testing both assumptions  about system architecture and capacity when the capacity assumption is uncomplicated by multiple sources of capacity.  Navon (1984), following Kantowitz and Knight (1976a), has correctly distinguished between task difficulty and task complexity  as distinct theoretical concepts. However, his sad conclusion that any operational distinction between manipulations that  affect difficulty versus those that affect complexity requires "a few pinches of faith," while probably correct in the context  of multiple resource models of capacity, is not necessarily true in the context of a single pool of capacity as exemplified in  strict serial (Broadbent, 1958) or hybrid (Kantowitz & Knight, 1976) models of attention.  There are two reasons why I believe that Navon is premature in removing the stone from the soup. First, his definition of task  difficulty as related to the marginal efficiency of resource utilization, while certainly reasonable, is not the only way to  conceptualize the difficulty variable. For example, Kantowitz and Knight (1978b) considered task difficulty along with the  Potency Principle discussed earlier in this paper to imply that difficulty should increase monotonically with the capacity  investment required to achieve specified levels of performance. Thus, a Fitts' law tapping task, where increased task  difficulty results in higher performance (greater rate of transmitted information), cannot fit into the conceptualization of  Navon and Gopher (1979, footnote 1) without being rescaled as a percentage of maximum transmitted rate of information. Such  rescaling creates the ambiguity discussed previously in this paper (see Figs. 1, 2, and accompanying text) regarding the form  of the interaction between task difficulty for primary and secondary tasks: performance appears to be better on the Easy task.  This violates the Potency Principle making it extremely trying to distinguish between manipulations of task difficulty versus  task complexity. However, since the Potency Principle holds only for manipulations of task difficulty-that is, the Potency  Principle is irrelevant for manipulations of task complexity-it is indeed possible to distinguish effects of complexity versus  difficulty provided only a single common pool of capacity is postulated.  With more than one pool of capacity it is extremely hard, and perhaps impossible, to separate effects of difficulty and  complexity since complexity can affect more than one source of capacity. The extra degrees of freedom added to the model by  extra pools of capacity make precise predictions regarding the joint effects of task difficulty and task complexity impossible  to generate without most careful specification of minute details of system architecture.  This brings us to my second objection to discarding the stone just yet. A major point of the present paper is that it is  impossible to evaluate any assumptions about the construct of capacity without simultaneous specification of system  architecture. All models of attention must be applied by showing how capacity assumptions modulate effects of system  structure, or, if you prefer, how effects of system struc-  164 BARRY H. KANTOWITZ  ture modulate assumptions about capacity. Thus, the theoretician can adopt two different tactics in attempting to model the  relationship between internal (postulated) information flow and (postulated) capacity assumptions. He can keep assumptions  about capacity simple and allow increased structural complexity to bear the weight of accounting for data or he can keep  structural assumptions simple and allow capacity assumptions to bear the weight. The ideal of keeping both simple has been  tried (e.g., Sternberg, 1969) but this elegant approach has been grounded on the shoals of data as has been discussed earlier.  So some sort of additional theoretical complexity seems necessary. Multiple-resource models choose the path of increasing the  complexity of capacity assumptions. However, this runs the risk of expanding parameters geometrically by offering the theorist  the temptation of adding additional pools of capacity ad infinitum, much as the hormic psychology of McDougal added instincts  to account for increasing complexity of behavior. Too, even its primary proponent has admitted that this tactic has generated  internal inconsistencies (Navon, 1984).  Perhaps the alternate tactic of modifying system architecture while keeping capacity assumptions simple will work better. Such  an approach has been taken by Townsend (1974), Townsend & Ashby (1983), Kantowitz & Knight (1976a), and Schweickert (1978)  among others. Recent progress in this area has been reviewed by Schweickert and Boggs (1984) in this journal. If necessary,  capacity assumptions can be slightly expanded by dividing processes into a binary classification: those that require capacity  and those that do not. Although I believe that our present empirical techniques are not yet well suited to distinguishing  between processes that require no capacity and processes that require only a little capacity, I still feel that such a  dichotomy is less of a theoretical strain than allowing the number of postulated pools of capacity to expand without limit.  Summary  A stage is difficult to define. Localizing capacity limitations within a stage is meaningful only to the extent that other  stages and their relationships with each other (system architecture) are specified. More recent attempts at stage analysis  focus upon the element as the basic unit of information processing. If an element can be properly identified (Taylor, 1976, p.  183), then capacity limitations can be meaningfully localized at the level of the element, but this still leaves great  flexibility in the arrangement and properties of stages.  AN EXPERIMENTAL DEMONSTRATION  The basic assumption of the double-stimulation methodologies, as well as the stage analysis methodology discussed in preceding  sections, is that the information flow by which some task is accomplished remains invariant when either a secondary task is  added or when levels of independent variables are manipulated to determine factor interactions and additivities. Even stronger  assumptions are often made as  CHANNELS AND STAGES 165  when an experimenter decides a priori that some particular class of manipulation (say, changing stimulus brightness) produces  changes within a particular processing stage (say, stimulus encoding) or does (or does not) demand capacity. There is an  alternative to such a priori assumptions about similarity of information flow for tasks performed under different conditions  or about localization of effects in particular processing stages. This is to examine experimental results with an open mind as  to the nature of processing differences produced by manipulating experimental tasks. The following previously unpublished data  (Snyder & Kantowitz, 1975) illustrate some of the pitfalls discussed earlier in this regard.  Method  Subjects. In each of the two experiments to be presented, 13 different Purdue undergraduate students served to satisfy course  requirements in Introductory Psychology.  Apparatus. In Experiment I, a Psionix 1600 digital-logic system controlled stimulus presentation and recorded reaction times  to the nearest millisec. An IEE in-line display was used to present digits as well as a digit-mask of checkerboard squares. In  Experiment lI an Automatic Data Systems 1800 minicomputer replaced the logic system and a Tektronix display with a more  effective dot-matrix mask replaced the in-line display. In both experiments vocal reaction time was recorded by a microphone  voice key system capable of responding at rates up to 10 Hz. A piano-type response key requiring a static force of 48 gm and a  travel distance of 0.15 cm was used for manual responses.  Procedure. Procedures were the same for both experiments. A digit was visually presented. The vocal response required subjects  to either name the digit (N) or to subtract it from 9 (9 - N); this is a manipulation of task complexity. The manual response  was a simple (probe) reaction requiring subject to depress the response key when a digit appeared. On a random half of each  32-trial block, the digit was obscured by a mask. In dual-task conditions subjects performed both verbal and manual responses  simultaneously. In single-task conditions, only a verbal or a manual response was required. Digit sets consisted of the digits  1-2, 1-4, and 1-8 with each digit appearing equiprobably within the 3 digit sets. Thus, there were 6 verbal-task conditions (3  digit sets X 2 verbal transformations) that could be performed either alone or in concert with a manual response. Adding a  single stimulation manual-response only condition created a total of 13 experimental treatments with order of testing  determined by a 13 x 13 Latin square.  Results and Discussion  Except for the effectiveness of the mask, results were identical for both experiments and so will be discussed together.  Figure 3 shows verbal and manual RT for correct responses for dual-task conditions. Single-task simple manual RT is listed at  the bottom of the figure.  480/29/2-3  166 BARRY H. KANTOWITZ  9-N ,  800  K 700  4 600 m  w 500  600  J  < 500  > 9-N Z 400  2 4 8  NUMBER OF ALT. NUMBER OF ALT  800  700  J  <  600  W  > 500  H  Q 700 MASKED m / NO MASK W 600 r~  >  H J Z <  500  MASKED  400 NO MASK  NUMBER OF ALT NUMBER OF ALT.  A  MANUAL ONLY: NO MASK= 256 MASKED = 259  Fla. 3. Verbal and manual reaction times for Experiments I (A) and II (B).  For verbal RT all three independent variables yielded significant effects (at the 0.05 level or better) as well as a  significant interaction of Task X Number. Previous studies (both probe RT and additive factors) have indicated that masking  (stimulus degradation) affects a different processing stage than that influenced either by number of alternatives or task  complexity, whereas these latter two share a common stage. So present results are entirely compatible with this interpretation.  For manual RT there were significant effects of Mask, Task, and a marginal effect (p < 0.10) of Number and a marginal  interaction between Task and Number. These data can be best summarized by noting how faithfully the manual RT mirrors the  verbal choice RT.  Since according to additive-factors logic, Task and Number affect a common stage we should expect elevated probe RT for these  since response selection has been widely believed to demand capacity (Hyman, 1953; Sternberg, 1969, among many others).  Indeed, such are present results. However, since the Mask variable by additive-factors logic affects a different (encoding)  stage that does not require  CHANNELS AND STAGES 167  900 r 600 ~ 9-N  a aoo     m  a soo  cc 700 2 4 8 Z 40  W  Q 300  600     NUMBER OF ALT    F F   0=    Q 900MASKED  600  m Q   800y NO MASK  500  W Q   >    700   400  N 9-N    TASK    F  F   cc  cc   900 MASKED j 600  ~    D: 800  Z 500  ~-~-~NO MASK 2   700   400  2 4 8    NUMBER OF ALT    2 4 8  NUMBER OF ALT.  N 9-N  TASK  2 4  NUMBER OF AL  ---ENO MASK  MASKED  B  MANUAL ONLY: NO MASK= 268 MASKED = 300  FIG. 3.-Continued.  capacity according to probe methodology (Posner & Boies, 1971), Mask manual RT should not be elevated relative to the  Mask-only control condition. But it is! How can this be? We know from additive-factors methodology that there is a separate  encoding stage and we know from probe methodology that it requires no capacity. Yet two experiments yield identical results,  suggesting that this dilemma arises from faulty logic rather than unreliable data.  The logical flaw is the tacit assumption that a stimulus variable (Mask) affects only a stimulus (encoding) processing stage  in single- and dual-task conditions. But another plausible explanation can be offered.' Suppose that a degraded stimulus  requires more time to be encoded than a clear stimulus. Then a response would have to be withheld until such encoding was  completed. This requires a kind of response inhibition, that I have previously termed "response interdiction" (Kan  s Actually several plausible alternatives exist with grouping being an obvious candidate. These are not discussed since the  purpose of presenting these data is to illustrate a methodological difficulty rather than to provide an empirical solution to  a content problem.  168 BARRY H. KANTOWITZ  towitz, 1974). Response interdiction can generalize to more than one effector mechanism. So on this basis we might expect  manual RT to also be delayed. This is indeed the outcome shown in Fig. 3: anything that delayed verbal RT also delayed manual  RT.  More generally, there has been a change in the processing operations underlying the verbal task, as a result of degrading the  stimulus digit. An extra step, that might be fancifully termed "inhibit response until degradation is removed," has been added  to the information flow. This in turn influenced manual RT. According to this argument, a stimulus variable has indirectly  influenced manual RT via a response process, rather than by capacity demands of stimulus identification.  So, it may be dangerous to assume that independent variables influence only those stages we know a priori they should. We have  no guarantees that what looks like the same task always induces the same information flow within the organism. Methodology is  never a substitute for thought. Any methodology is only as good as the thoughtful assumptions it carries with it.  SUMMARY  The detailed arguments strewn throughout this paper may have produced an unfortunate side effect: hiding the forest in the  foliage of the trees. This section attempts to remedy that problem by providing a concise overview of the paths taken. The  major point of this article is simple: theoretical and methodological aspects of the concept are inextricably intertwined.  Figure 4 shows this intimate relationship between theory and methodology. Topics of a primarily theoretical nature are  represented as dotted boxes while solid boxes denote topics that are primarily methodological. Each box represents an earlier  topic discussed in this article. Figure 4 shows how these topics are related.  We start at the top of Fig. 4 with the theoretical question that engendered this article: What is capacity? This question is  answered in two ways. First, by evaluating methodologies that attempt to measure capacity and second by reviewing models that  attempt to create consistent frameworks to explain sets of empirical findings.  Capacity is measured in psychological research by either single- or doublestimulation techniques. Each technique offers its  own set of pitfalls. The failure to distinguish between lag and working rate has plagued several single-stimulation studies.  Even more important, single-stimulation techniques cannot go far without having to consider structural assumptions that are  theoretical rather than methodological.  Double-stimulation techniques are more complicated and so must deal with several problems in methodology: structural  interference, equating primary task performance, grouping, synchronization, and overlap between primary and secondary tasks.  This last problem leads immediately to theoretical considerations regarding a distinction between overlap in time and overlap  in capacity or "space."  CHANNELS AND STAGES  169  i CAPACITY: I What is it? I  CAPACITY: Haw is it measured?  SINGLE-STIMULATION TECHNIQUES  DOUBLE-STIMULATION TECHNIQUES  Lag  I Structural Assumptions I  Structural Interference  PROBLEMS IN METHODOLOGY  Equating Primary Task Performance  Grouping  Synchronization  Self Paced  j TIME l j CAPACITY  I Momentary ~~ A priori  I Demand- I I Allocation I  ^Channels I Limited Variable I Multiple I POC  versus I I Capacityl I Allocation ( ( Capacity I Methods  ( Stages - I I -Models-, IModel - i ( Models  y J- Z  1 Stage / ( Potency Task Difficulty Scalingi  versus 1 Principle I versus  Process) Task Complexity  )I SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE  j Parallel j i Serial i Hybrid  FiG. 4. Summary flow chart. Theoretical issues are represented by dotted boxes and methodological issues by solid boxes.  Fixed Paced  Overlap between Primary and Secondary Tasks  170 BARRY H. KANTOWITZ  Overlap in capacity is further complicated by the theoretical distinction between momentary demand and a priori allocation of  capacity.  On a theoretical level, four types of models have been considered: the distinction between a channel and a stage of  information processing, limited-capacity models, the variable allocation model, and multiple-resource models. POC methods are  drawn alongside this list of models because historically many researchers have incorrectly considered the POC function to be a  model in its own right. Actually, Norman and Bobrow (1975) proposed a methodology rather than a formal model. Different POC  functions can be generated by different models. Furthermore, when different tasks are plotted on the POC axes, severe problems  of interpretation occur due to the theoretical issue of scaling.  As a result of considering alternative models, new theoretical issues arise that in some instances may be more important than  the particular controversies among models that generated these new issues. Just as stages can be seen as an evolutionary  response to the ambiguities associated with channels, so too can processes be viewed as the next step beyond stages. Just as  stages allowed us to make theoretical statements about the locus of effects within a channel, so do processes and hazard  functions allow us to peer into the operations within a stage.  On a more molar level, the distinction between task difficulty and task complexity, previously ignored or at best viewed as a  methodological manipulation of independent variables, becomes salient as a theoretical issue that transcends specific models.  Similarly, the Potency Principle, which was a tacit assumption of the early limited-capacity models, takes on greater  importance when it is made visible by its relationship to the theoretical distinction between task difficulty and task  complexity.  Finally, the concept of a system architecture, rises above the local issues of whether processing is serial or parallel. As we  gain more experience with both the mathematics and the empirical results in this area, the old dichotomy between serial and  parallel processing gives way to a broader view that regards both types of processing as legitimate forms of system  architecture rather than black-or-white alternatives to each other. This integrated theoretical view stresses the importance  of elements and processes further emphasizing the need for specific assumptions that relate capacity and system architecture.  Thus, Fig. 4 reflects a dynamic evolution of theory and methodology. The earliest notions of limited capacity were tied to  information theory and so implied a methodology for measuring capacity in rate of transmitted information. The link between  theory and methodology was clear. Later models of capacity by and large abandoned the information metric, and so created a gap  between theory and methodology. This gap accounts for much of the complexity represented in Fig. 4 because for a time, theory  and methodology were no longer tightly joined. That gap is now closing as new developments in models, particularly the concept  of a process and the theoretical distinction between task difficulty and task complexity, clarify relevant points of  methodology. The job is not yet done and it would be foolhardy to claim that now we understand what capacity is. But I hope  CHANNELS AND STAGES 171  more than two decades of research about capacity convinces the reader that theory and methodology must develop  contemporaneously so that the next two decades of research can avoid the kinds of problems discussed in this paper.  Final Comments  In the preceding pages I have tried to evaluate the utility of the construct of capacity, and have freely criticized the  manner in which some investigators and theorists have rendered the concept progressively more vague and ill-defined. Since it  is nihilistic, and perhaps craven as well, to proffer criticism without taking a position oneself, I use this section to state  my own views about capacity. While my opinions have already been tacitly expressed, some reviewers suggested that a cohesive  summary would be beneficial.  First, while I have suggested that the concept be pruned, this is far removed from eliminating it entirely. Capacity has been  used wisely by such investigators as Broadbent (1958, 1971) and Townsend (1974; Townsend & Ashby, 1978, 1983). Psychology is  not the only social science to have multiple uses for capacity (see Winston, 1977, for a discussion of capacity in economics)  and these can be successfully pared.  Ultimately, the utility of any theoretical concept hinges upon its ability to aid prediction of behavior. Since this paper has  focused attention upon the unobservable concept of capacity, rather than upon observable behavior, some readers may have  incorrectly inferred that I regard capacity as more important than behavior. For example, my discussion of POC functions  (plots of behavior) centered about the difficulties of using them to distinguish among competing views of capacity. But the  complementary process is equally applicable in that such discussion can also be regarded as an examination of the predictions  of capacity models about POC functions. I regard this latter point of view as more important.  My main point has been that the current trends toward a more ambiguous concept of capacity can and should be combatted by more  conscientious search for converging operations conjoined with sagacious modeling. This is why I spent so many pages upon the  various methodologies such as single and double response measures of capacity available to the researcher. I hope this paper  encourages researchers to turn away from a single technique, be it probe methodology or the method of additive factors, and  instead to expand the generality of their conclusions by using alternate methodologies as converging operations. It is my  belief that a general concept of capacity that is applicable to a wide variety of experimental situations can be best achieved  by seeking a wide variety of converging operations, and not by allowing the precision of the concept to lapse in order to  expand its scope. Well-intentioned efforts at integrating the large amounts of published data in the area of attention have  led to such a diffusion of the capacity concept that it is becoming rather difficult to devise empirical tests that can  distinguish among these broadened conceptions.  One example of this problem can be seen in the concept of an automatic process (Kantowitz & Knight, 1978a). Is a process  automatic if it proceeds without  172 BARRY H. KANTOWITZ  demanding capacity, if it cannot be voluntarily inhibited, if it is controlled by a "motor program," if its variance does not  increase when performed concurrently with other tasks? All of these definitions (and more) have been seriously proposed and  investigated. Yet any investigation of automatic processes must consider many of the difficulties previously discussed in  regard to capacity.  These problems can be surmounted by planning research with converging operations in mind. Capacity, carefully defined,  carefully measured by converging operations, and carefully localized in a specific system architecture, can help us predict  and explain behavior. Capacity can be a soup stone, a millstone, or a touchstone, depending upon how it is used.  REFERENCES  ALLPORT, D. A., & REYNOLDS, P. (1972). On the division of attention. A disproof of the single channel hypothesis. Quarterly  Journal of Experimental Psychology, 24, 225-235.  ASHBY, F. G. (1982). Deriving exact predictions from the cascade model. Psychological Review, 89, 599-607.  BORGER, R. (1963). The refractory period and serial choice-reactions. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 15, 1-12.  BRIGGS, G. E. (1974). On the predictor variable for choice reaction time. Memory & Cognition, 2, 575-580.  BROADBENT, D. E. (1958). Perception and communication. London: Pergamon.  BROADBENT, D. E. (1965). Application of information theory and decision theory to human perception and reaction. In N. Wiener  & J.P. Schade (Eds.), Cybernetics of the nervous system, Amsterdam, Elsevier.  BROADBENT, D. E. (1971). Decision and stress. London: Academic Press.  CRAIK, K. J. W. (1947). Theory of the human operator in control systems. I. The operator as an engineering system. British  Journal of Psychology, 38, 56-61.  CRAIK, K. J. W. (1948). Theory of the human operator in control systems. 11. Man as an element in a control system. British  Journal of Psychology, 38, 142-148.  FITTS, P. M. (1964). Perceptual-motor skill learning. In A. W. Melton (Ed.), Categories of human learning. New York: Academic  Press.  GARNER, W. R. (1962). Uncertainty and structure as psychological concepts. New York: Wiley. GARNER, W. R. (1974). The  processing of information and structure. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. GARNER, W. R., & MORTON, J. (1969). Perceptual independence.  Definitions models and experimental paradigms. Psychological Bulletin, 72, 233-259.  HICKS, W. E. (1952). On the rate of gain of information. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 4, 11-26.  HYMAN, R. (1953). Stimulus information as a determinant of reaction time. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 45, 188-196.  JOHNSON, P. J., FORESTER, J. A., CALDERWOOD, R., & WEISGERBER, S. A. (1983). Resource allocation and the attentional demands  of letter encoding. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 112, 616-638.  KAHNEMAN, D. (1973). Attention and effort. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.  KALSBEEK, J. W. H. (1964). On the measurement of deterioration in performance caused by distraction stress. Ergonomics, 7,  187-195.  KANTOWITZ, B. H. (1969). Double stimulation with varying response information. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 82, 347-352.  CHANNELS AND STAGES  173  KANTOWITZ, H. B. (1973). Response force as an indicant of conflict in double stimulation. Journal of Experimental Psychology,  100, 302-309.  KANTOWITZ, B. H. (1974). Double stimulation. In B. H. Kantowitz (Ed.), Human information processing. Tutorials in performance  and cognition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  KANTOWITZ, B. H. (1975). On the beaten track. Contemporary Psychology, 20, 731-733.  KANTOWITZ, B. H., & KNIGHT, J. L. (1974). Testing tapping timesharing. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 103, 331-336.  KANTOWITZ, B. H., & KNIGHT, J. L. (1976a). Testing tapping timesharing. II. Auditory secondary tasks. Acta Psychologica, 40,  343-362.  KANTOWITZ, B. H., & KNIGHT, J. L. (1976b). On experimenter-limited processes. Psychological Review, 83, 502-507.  KANTOWITZ, B. H., & KNIGHT, J. L. (1978a). Testing tapping timesharing: Attention demands of movement amplitude and target  width. In G. E. Stelmach (Ed.), Information processing in motor learning and control. New York: Academic Press.  KANTOWITZ, B. H., & KNIGHT, J. L. (1978b). When is an easy task difficult and vice versa? Acta Psychologica, 42, 163-170.  KANTOWITZ, B. H., HART, S. G., & BORTOLUSSI, M. R. (1983). Measuring pilot workload in a movingbase simulator. I. Asynchronous  secondary choice-reaction task. Proceeding of the Human Factors Society, 27, 319-322.  KANTOWITZ, B. H., & WELDON, M. (1985). Scaling the axes of performance operating characteristic functions: Caveat emptor.  Human Factors, in press.  KERR, B. (1973). Processing demands during mental operations. Memory & Cognition, 1, 401-412. KLAPP, S. T. (1978). Reaction  time analysis of programmed control. In R. Hutton (Ed.), Exercise and sport science reviews. Santa Barbara, CA: Journal Publ.  KNIGHT, J. L., & KANTOWITZ, B. H. (1974). Speed-accuracy trade-off in double stimulation. Effects on the first response.  Memory & Cognition, 2, 522-532.  MCCLELLAND, J. L. (1979). On the time relations of mental processes: An examination of systems of processes in cascade.  Psychological Review, 86, 287-330.  MILLER, J. (1982). Discrete versus continuous stage models of human information processing: In search of partial output.  Journal of Experimental Psychology, 8, 273-296.  MORAY, N. (1967). Where is capacity limited? Acta Psychologica, 27, 84-92.  MORAY, N., & FITTER, M. A. (1973). Theory and measurement of attention. In S. Kornblum (Ed.), Attention and performance IV.  New York: Academic Press.  MUNSON, W. A., & KARLIN, J. E. (1954). The measurement of human channel transmission characteristics. Journal of the  Acoustical Society of America, 26, 542-553.  NAVON, D. (1984). Resources-A theoretical soup stone? Psychological Review, 91, 216-234.  NAVON, D., & GOPHER, D. (1979). On the economy of the human processing system. Psychological Review, 86, 214-255.  NEISSER, U. (1967). Cognitive psychology. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.  NORMAN, D. A., & BOBROW, D. G. (1975). On data-limited and resource-limited processes. Cognitive Psychology, 7, 44-64.  PACHELLA, R. G. (1974). The interpretation of reaction time in information-processing research. In B. H. Kantowitz (Ed.),  Human information processing. Tutorials in performance and cognition. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.  POSNER, M. 1. (1975). Psychology of attention. In C. Blakemore & M. S. Gazzaniga (Eds.), Handbook of psychobiology. New York:  Academic Press.  POSNER, M. I., & Bows, S. J. (1971). Components of attention. Psychological Review, 78, 391-408. ROEDIGER, H. L., KNIGHT, J.  L., & KANTOWITZ, B. H. (1977). Inferring decay in short-term memory: The issue of capacity. Memory & Cognition, 5, 167-176.  RosCH, E. (1975). Review of W. R. Garner, The processing of information and structure. Contemporary Psychology, 20, 100-102.  SCHVANEVELDT, R. W. (1969). Effects of complexity in simultaneous reaction time tasks. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 81,  289-296.  174 BARRY H. KANTOWITZ  SCHWEICKERT, R. (1978). A critical path generalization of the additive factor method: Analysis of a Stroop task. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 18, 105-139.  SCHWEICKERT, R., & BOGGS, G. J. (1984). Models of central capacity and concurrency. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 28,  223-281.  SHANNON, C. E. (1949). The mathematical theory of communication. In C. E. Shannon & W. Weaver (Eds.), The mathematical theory  of communication. Urbana, IL: Univ. of Illinois Press.  SMITH, E. E. (1968). Choice reaction time. An analysis of the major theoretical positions. Psychological Bulletin, 69, 77-110.  SMITH, M. C. (1967). Theories of the psychological refractory period. Psychological Bulletin, 67, 202-213. SYNDER, C. R. R., &  KANTOWITZ, B. H. (1975). Simple RT delay as a measure of processing load: Caveat emptor. Presented to Midwestern Psychological  Association.  STERNBERG, S. (1969). The discovery of processing stages. Extensions of Donders' method. Acta P.svchologica, 30, 276-315.  STERNBERG, S., & KNOLL, R. L. (1973). The perception of temporal order. Fundamental issues and a general model. In S. Kornblum  (Ed.), Attention and performance IV. New York: Academic Press. TAYLOR, D. A. (1976). Stage analysis of reaction time.  Psychological Bulletin, 83, 161-191.  THOMAS, E. A. C. (1974). The selectivity of preparation. Psychological Review, 81, 442-464. TOWNSEND, J. T. (1974). Issues and  models concerning the processing of a finite number of inputs. In B. H. Kantowitz (Ed.), Human information processing.  Tutorials in performance and cognition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  TOWNSEND, J. T., & ASHBY, F. G. (1983). Stochastic modeling of elementary psychological processes. New York: Cambridge Univ.  Press.  TREISMAN, A. M., & FEARNLEY, S. (1971). Can simultaneous speech stimuli be classified in parallel? Perception & Psychophysics,  10, 1-7.  TREISMAN, A. M., SQUIRE, R., & GREEN, J. (1974). Semantic processing in dichotic listening? A replication. Memory & Cognition,  2, 641-646.  TRIGGS, T. J. (1968). Capaity sharing and speeded reactions to successive signals. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,  University of Michigan.  WAY, T. C., & GOTTSDANKER, R. (1968). Psychological refractoriness with varying differences between tasks. Journal of  Experimental Psychology, 78, 38-45.  WELFORD, A. T. (1968). Fundamentals of skill. London: Methuen.  WELFORD, A. T. (1952). The "psychological refractory period" and the timing of high-speed performance-A review and a theory.  British Journal of Psychology, 43, 2-19.  WICKENS, C. D. (1980). The structure of attentional resources. In R. Nickerson (Ed.), Attention and performance VIII.  Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  WICKENS, C. D., MOUNTFORD, S. J., & SCHREINER, W. (1981). Multiple resources, task-hemispheric integrity, and individual  differences in time-sharing. Human Factors, 23, 211-229.  WINSTON, G. C. (1977). Capacity: An Integrated Micro and Macro Analysis. Proceedings of the American Economic Association, 67,  No. 1, 418-422.  RECEIVED: March 15, 1984