10.1016/0022-2496(85)90013-6
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 29, 360-365 (1985)  Book Review Fresh Views on Old News  W. E. L. GRIMSON. From Images to Surfaces. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1981. Pp. 274. $30.00  Reviewed by ANDREW BLAKE  The author is Assistant Professor of Computer Science at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where his Ph.D. studies formed  the basis of this book.  The reviewer is at the Department of Computer Science, Edinburgh University, where he is a lecturer, an IBM/Royal Society  Research Fellow, and works in computer vision.  Eric Grimson book From Images to Surfaces was published some 4 years ago and has remained an authoritative text on  computational stereo vision. It is clearly written and presented, well illustrated, and enjoyable to read. His computational  approach to vision recalls that of Shimon Ullman in his book The Interpretation of Visual Motion, which precedes Grimson's in  the MIT Press series on artificial intelligence. The computational approach, widely disseminated through David Marr's writing,  concentrates primarily on vision as an information processing task, and only secondarily on mechanisms and their biological  feasibility. The first half of the book addresses the stereo correspondence problem while the second half goes on to develop a  method of explicit reconstruction of visible surfaces.  Grimson's view of stereo correspondence is essentially that of Marr and Poggio (1979 ). Recent research work offers some  challenges to this view, and some examples are given in this review. Grimson works very throughly through the theory's  computational consequences, and includes plenty of examples of the performance of his algorithm on random-dot and natural  images.  Surface reconstruction is the generation of an explicit representation of the visible surface that is consistent with the  depths calculated by stereo correspondence. Stereo correspondence provides depths at points distributed relatively sparsely in  the images. Surface reconstruction attempts to fill in the missing depths. Grimson proposes the "no news is good news"  constraint-that absence of features (zerocrossings) in a given area of an image constrains the shape of the corresponding area  of the visible surface. This deserves some scrutiny. While it is clear that such a constraint should exist, Grimson's  exposition of its consequences seems to be incomplete, as this review attempts to show. Finally the quesion must be raised of  whether the visual system need necessarily reconstruct surfaces explicitly: what would be the purpose of an explicit  representation?  360  0022-2496/85 $3.00  Copyright G 1985 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  BOOK REVIEW 361  STEREO CORRESPONDENCE  Theory  Grimson incorporates a very thorough survey of literature on stereopsis, from psychophysics, physiology, and computational  studies. His theoretical position, largely that of Marr and Poggio (1979), is clearly stated. This section outlines some of  the essential elements and points out some areas where recent work offers a challenge.  The problem is to place points in two stereo images in mutual correspondence. The first step is to search both images for  certain features which can then be compared; the question is, what features should be used? Marr and Poggio settled finally  for zero-crossings of certain non-oriented second-derivative filters. The computational issues here are complex: it is argued  that using zero-crossings of a linear filter facilitates hyperacuity and exhibits performance superior to that of directional  first-derivative operators. But recently there have been successful implementations of directional first-derivative operators  (e.g., Canny, 1983; Nevatia & Babu, 1980). From psychophysics, the work of Wilson and Bergen (1979) provides powerful support  for the use of second-derivative Gaussian filters, and Mayhew and Frisby (1978) provide evidence for the use of non-oriented  filters in human stereopsis. But there are also indications (Mayhew & Frisby, 1981) that stimuli exist for which  zero-crossings of such a filter are not enough. Grimson himself opts to use both orientation and sign as well as position for  matching zero-crossings.  An important issue in stereo correspondence is the elimination of "ghosts"-false matches-which occur when a feature in one  stereo image matches several features in the other image. This potential "local" ambiguity can be removed by applying  additional global constraints. Marr and Poggio proposed two:  1. Restricted disparity range-that when a gaussian filter of width w is used, the stereo disparity should lie in the range  /2 (or at most ).  2. Continuity-stereo disparity values vary smoothly almost everywhere.  Recent work (Baker & Binford, 1981; Mayhew, 1983; Mayhew & Frisby, 1981) suggests that stronger constraints can be derived  from the nature of perspective projection and the tendency of objects to be opaque:  The epipolar constraint-that a feature in one image can only match features in the other image that lie on a certain  "epipolar" line.  Ordering-that the ordering of features along epipolar lines in one image is preserved in the other.  Figural continuity-that along a line-feature, disparity varies continuously.  Calling on these extra constraints allows constraint 1 to be relaxed-the range of allowed disparities can be increased-and  this is compatible with psychophysical results.  Finally, a central point of the theory is that correspondence is sought in several channels, at a variety of resolutions  (scales), following a "coarse-to-fine" strategy.  362 BOOK REVIEW  Disparities in coarse channels are used to control vergence, bringing disparities within the w/2 range for finer channels.  Computationally this appears to be a sensible strategy, but psychophysics shows that human vision is somewhat complex in this  respect (Kidd, Frisby & Mayhew, 1979): both low and high-frequency stimuli drive vergence.  Implementation  Grimson's thorough implementation and testing of stereo theory is impressive and is certainly the high point of his book. He  models not only the correspondence but also control of vergence, and makes very clear the operation of the coarse-tofine  procedure. It seems a little curious that information from coarse channels is not also used, apart from vergence, to generate  local offsets in disparity (whereas vergence can generate only a single global offset).  SURFACE RECONSTRUCTION  The second half of the book, on explicit reconstruction of the visible surface, seems to be less firmly based on a theory of  information processing than was the first half. As explained above, the aim of surface reconstruction is to interpret depths  obtained from stereo correspondence, in terms of the visible surface. The reconstructed surface depth is made consistent  either exactly (interpolation) or nearly (approximation) with stereo depths. It is represented as a fine array of depth  values, specifying distance from the viewer to all points on the visible surface.  Psychophysical support is drawn from perception of random-dot stereograms with sparsely dotted regions, in which the surface  seems to be "filled in" in a way that is consistent with surrounding, densely dotted regions. However, there is some vagueness  about the exact shape of the filled-in part. Moreover, as Grimson points out, there is no unique surface that is consistent  with the depths from stereo. This surely suggests that a depth array, specifying a unique, well-defined surface, may be an  inappropriate representation. In Marr's view, the aim is to create an intermediate visible-surface representation (2zD sketch)  which can be used for matching to volumetric primitives. He does not specify precisely the form the 22D sketch should take,  but it is by no means clear that matching is any easier with a depth array than with raw depths from stereo. And it suffers  from the disadvantage of overcommitment because the visible surface is completely specified.  Grimson attempts to define uniquely the "best" consistent surface. The most elegant aspect of his solution is the observation  that where zero-crossing features are absent, so that no disparity information is available, there is still information to be  gained: their very absence is an indication of "smoothness" of the visible surface. "No news is good news," Grimson says. The  "best" surface is claimed to be the one that minimises a certain mathematical measure of "unsmoothness," the "quadratic  variation." As in the earlier part of the book, Grimson is very thorough in his  BOOK REVIEW 363  mathematical approach to minimising this measure, and in implementation and testing. It is probably the first use, in the  analysis of vision, of "variational calculus." Recently Terzopoulos (1983) has brought even more rigour to surface  reconstruction by this technique.  Two objections are raised here to Grimson's method of interpolation. The first is that it is not viewpoint-invariant (Blake,  1984). As the viewer moves, though information from stereo is unchanged, the reconstructed surface may alter significantly.  Unless all surface normals lie close to the viewing direction (which is unlikely) the surface wobbles appreciably as the  viewer moves. This lack of invariance appears, from the point of view of information processing, to be undesirable. Of course,  it might turn out that biological systems nonetheless exhibit such behaviour.  The second objection concerns Grimson's argument for choosing quadratic variation as the measure of unsmoothness. It tries to  make rigorous the "no news is good news" idea. It comprises two steps, which can be summarised as follows:  1. Absence of zero-crossing features, in a certain area of an image, means that the corresponding area of the visible surface  contains at most one inflection point (CorollaryO.1, p. 123).  a  b  c  INTENSITY  FiG. 1. A surface that generates two zero-crossing features, and has an inflection between them. The intensity profile (a) has  two zero-crossing features. The spatial positions of those features are assumed to have been determined by stereopsis.  Assuming a Lambertian surface and a point source at the viewer, those intensities could have been generated by the surface  profile (b). Grimson's minimisation procedure would interpolate a planar surface (c) between zero-crossing positions. That  would generate a flat intensity profile, not the profile in (a).  364 BOOK REVIEW  2. Minimising the surface's quadratic variation, in that area, minimises the chance of any surface inflections occurring there  (Theorem 1, p. 130).  But these two steps do not quite mesh with one another. The requirement of step 1 is for at most one inflection point. The  minimisation procedure of step 2 strives for no inflection point. One conclusion is that while broadly plausible, the  interpolation scheme does not have a rigorous derivation from the physics of imaging.  Another conclusion is that the minimisation procedure may fail to reconstruct surfaces that have exactly one inflection  between zero-crossings. For example, Fig. 1 shows an intensity profile with two zero-crossing features, and a surface profile  that could have generated those intensities. The surface has exactly one inflection between the zero-crossings. Grimson's  minimisation procedure, however, would generate a planar (and hence inflection-free) surface profile. It seems that the  constraint implicit in Grimson's algorithm is too strong here. But if a weaker constraint were used instead, additional  information would have to be obtained from the intensity profile (in addition, that is, to the information from  zero-crossings).  Grimson concludes his book by pointing out that there is plenty left to investigate: hyperacuity, coarsening of the retinal  mosaic with eccentricity, and treatment of discontinuities. The last of these topics is important and substantial. Grimson's  interpolation scheme essentially treats visible surfaces as smooth, without allowing any "breaks" in them. His very  interesting suggestion is to make use of unmatched features from stereo correspondence as evidence of occlusion, indicating a  break in the visible surface. We can look forward to progress in these areas but, as a final note, the earlier misgiving about  explicit surface reconstruction is reiterated: is a depth array really the right representation of the visible surface, for  use in subsequent visual processing? If not, explicit surface reconstruction may still be useful as a laboratory tool, to  define the surface that is perceived in a sparse stereogram. But a more compact, perhaps less relentlessly quantitative  representation may prove to be more appropriate for 3D visual processing.  REFERENCES  BAKER, H. H., & BINFORD, T. O. (1981). Depth from edge and intensity based stereo. 7th IJCAI Conference, 583.  BLAKE, A. (1984). Reconstructing a visible surface. Proceedings, AAAI Conference, 22-25. CANNY, J. F. (1983). Finding edges  and lines in images. S.M. thesis, MIT, Cambridge, MA.  KIDD, A. L., FRISBY, J. P., & MAYHEW, J. E. W. (1979). Texture contours can facilitate stereopsis by initiating appropriate  vergence eye movements. Nature (London), 280, 829-832.  MARK, D., & PoGGio, T. (1979). A computational theory of stereo vision. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B,  204, 301-328.  MAYHEW, J. E. W. (1983). Stereopsis. In O. Braddick & A. Sleigh, (Eds.), Physical and biological processing of images (Vol.  11), New York/Berlin: Springer-Verlag.  MAYHEW, J. E. W., FRISBY, J. P. (1978). Stereopsis masking in humans is not orientationally tuned. Perception 7, 431-436.  BOOK REVIEW  365  MAYHEW, J. E. W., FRISBY, J. P. (1981). Psychophysical and computational studies towards a theory of human stereopsis,  Artificial Intelligence 17, 349-385.  NEVATIA, R., BC BABU, R. (1980). Linear feature extraction and description Computer Graphic Image Processing 13, 257-269.  TERZOPOULos, D. (1983). The role of constraints and discontinuities in visible-surface reconstruction. 8th IJCAI Conference  1073-1077.  Printed in Belgium