10.1016/0022-2496(85)90015-x
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 29, 175-230 (1985)  The Magical Number Seven and Some Other Features of Category Scaling: Properties of a Model for Absolute Judgment  MICHEL TREISMAN  University of Oxford  A model for absolute judgment is presented. This is derived from a theory of the processes which set and maintain response  criteria (M. Treisman & T. C. Williams, 1984, Psychological Review, 91, 68-111) which has been applied to a number of problems  in psychophysics. A Thurstonian model is assumed as a basis for absolute judgment, and criterion-setting theory is applied to  the criteria in this model. The question is then considered, to what extent can such a model account for the main findings  that have been obtained in category scaling? The range of explanations that the model can provide is investigated by means of  computer simulation. It appears that features such as the upper limit on information transmission as the number of stimuli  increases, the effect of stimulus range on information transmission, the accuracy edge effect, the resolution edge effect, the  central tendency of judgment, stimulus and response dependencies, and related phenomena can be reproduced by simulations of  the model. C- 1985 Academic Press, Inc.  A variety of effects, ranging from capacity limits on information transmission to dependencies on past responses, are shown  when subjects produce absolute judgments. How are such phenomena to be explained? One way in which theory is commonly  developed in psychophysics is to limit consideration to a single finding, and to attempt to frame a precise and parsimonious  model directed only at reproducing that one finding. This strategy has the advantage that it may be possible to produce a  simple and algebraically tractable account, with a minimum number of parameters, for the finding in question. The disadvantage  of this approach is that it may provide us with islands of theory, but with no way of linking the different explanations that  are offered for different phenomena, even though the latter may seem to be related. An alternative approach is to bring  together as many related findings as possible, and to attempt to develop a general theory offering some account of all these  observations. If such a theory can be found, this may be very powerful, at the cost that the theory may need to be more  elaborate and complex than a special purpose theory limited to a particular case. Nevertheless, a more general theory may in  the end prove more parsimonious than a collection of  This work was done while in receipt of support from the Medical Research Council of Great Britain. I thank Andrew Faulkner for  providing the data from which the results shown in Fig. 12 were calculated and Burton S. Rosner for useful comments. Requests  for reprints should be addressed to M. Treisman, Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, South Parks  Road, Oxford OX1 3UD, England.  175  0022-2496/85 $3.00  Copyright 1985 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  176 MICHEL TREISMAN  unrelated special theories. The present study is an attempt to examine whether the main features of absolute judgment may be  accounted for as expressions of mechanisms of sensory processing and response selection of general application to  psychophysical tasks. More specifically, can our understanding of absolute judgment be extended by applying to it a theory of  criterion setting which has been successfully applied to a number of other psychophysical procedures (Treisman, 1984a, 1984b;  Treisman and Faulkner, 1984a, 1984b; Treisman and Williams, 1984)?  Signal detection theory (SDT) provides an example of a general theory which offers accounts of many different paradigms in  sensation and has also been applied to nonsensory domains such as memory (Green & Swets, 1966). SDT provides an account of  psychophysical judgment which distinguishes two stages: first, the initial sensory response to the stimulus; second, a  decision stage in which the response is selected. The most useful accounts of the sensory stage have been provided by  Thurstonian models which assume that the sensory effects of a stimulus are normally distributed on a central dimension. The  model of the decision processes assumes that responses are selected by reference to decision criteria located on the central  dimension. Thurstonian models for absolute judgment make similar assumptions: stimuli generate normal distributions on a  central dimension, and responses are selected by reference to criteria (Thurstone, 1927, 1948). It would simplify  psychophysical theory if the same principles could be shown to account not only for the detailed features of detection and  discrimination, but also for those of absolute judgment.  If we accept that both detection and absolute judgment employ response criteria, the same problem arises in each case: how do  these criteria come to have the values that they have? Signal detection theorists have approached this problem by developing  specifications for an optimal criterion (Birdsall, 1955; Dusoir, 1975; Green & Swets, 1966; Thomas & Legge, 1970; Treisman,  1964c) and it is commonly assumed that subjects approximate some optimum more or less closely. A common feature of optimal  criteria is the assumption that the criterion is permanent and fixed, save for noise. An important extension to this area of  theory was provided by the development of additive learning models, which allow rule-determined shortterm variations in  criteria. These have mainly been applied to simple detection tasks and the criterion adjustments they allow are usually but  not always assumed to be dependent on feedback and error-correcting in nature; that is, the adjustments made are those that  would have made a past error less likely (Dorfman, 1973; Dorfman & Biderman, 1971; Kac, 1962; Kornbrot, Donnelly, & Galanter,  These proposals do not solve the criterion-setting problem. Problems remain. It is useful to have specifications of optimal  criteria. But we also require to identify the processes which calculate and assign values to criteria, and maintain them at  those values. Signals are not detected in the laboratory alone, and the selection and maintenance of criteria in the  laboratory must surely be governed to some extent by the same principles that determine the selection and maintenance of  criteria in daily life.  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 177  But the information available in daily life is far more varied and less systematized than that provided in a controlled  experimental situation: What implications does this have for the nature of criterion setting? How, in normal experience, are  suitable initial values selected for criteria, and how are suitable values preserved from one occasion of use to another,  during what may be long intermissions in which relevant stimulation is not encountered? What general principles should  determine the value of a criterion at a given moment? If such principles can be identified, how will they apply to different  experimental paradigms? What mechanisms produce the criterion adjustments specified by these principles?  An account intended to meet the requirement for a theory of a general character which would offer principles for the setting  and maintenance of sensory criteria (Treisman & Williams, 1984) has been applied to a number of paradigms (Treisman, 1984a,  1984b; Treisman and Faulkner, 1984a, 1984b). The question to be examined here is this: If we take this preexisting theory of  criterion setting, and wed it to a Thurstonian model of absolute judgment, how far does the model so produced generate the  findings obtained with absolute judgment? If such a model is successful, this would not only throw light on absolute judgment,  it would also establish that this procedure and a range of other psychophysical paradigms all rest on the same principles.  The argument will be developed in the following way. Criterion-setting theory, as it has been applied to detection, will first  be summarized. A model of absolute judgment will then be erected on this basis. Some main features of absolute judgment will  be briefly considered. We shall then examine whether the present model in a simple form is capable of reproducing the general  pattern of findings. No attempt to find parameters fitting particular sets of data will be made here.  CRITERION-SETTING THEORY  The theory of criterion setting offers provisional answers to two basic questions: First, what is the rational basis for  setting and maintaining criteria? Second, what processes and mechanisms perform these functions?  To simplify the presentation, we discuss initially only the detection and twochoice identification paradigms; the models for  these paradigms are very similar and employ only one criterion. The SDT model for detection assumes that a normal distribution  of noise effects, with mean zero and standard deviation unity, and a normal distribution of signal effects, with mean d' and  the same standard deviation, are produced on a central decision axis, z. A criterion z. on this axis determines whether the  subject chooses the response YES or the response NO. The model for two-choice identification has two similar distributions,  generated by the two stimuli s, and sZ (say, suprathreshold sound intensities of different magnitudes), and a criterion zc  allows a choice between the responses S, and SZ (see Appendix for nomenclature).  178 MICHEL TREISMAN  The theory assumes that four sets of considerations provide a rationale for criterion setting:  (1) Long-term factors. A subject in a psychophysical experiment has probably had prior experience with the same or analogous  tasks which required him to employ a criterion, and he may have retained a memory of its mean value. He may also have  knowledge of overall parameters of the experimental situation, such as the signal probability and the payoff values, and have  received instructions and other cognitive information. He employs such information to compute a preferred value of the  criterion, which we shall refer to as the reference or initial value, zo. There are a number of alternative prescriptions for  optimal criteria, such as the maximum-expected value criterion or the Neyman-Pearson criterion. But we are not here concerned  with which alternative subjects prefer; these may differ in different tasks. Nor are we here concerned whether the subject  computes the reference value for this criterion by an approximate method or exactly. We assume only that he does compute an  approximation to an ideal criterion, and maintains this value in his or her memory while he or she performs the task.  The general problem of getting the criterion in range may be solved by calculating a reference criterion. But this use of  long-term information requires to be supplemented by short-term processes which are directed to making fine adjustments of the  criterion as the subject's experience of and interaction with the environment changes.  (2) Centering and stabilizing the criterion. The long-term mechanism should place the reference criterion zo in a roughly  appropriate position. But internal noise in the subject, and noise arising in the external world, may both vary from time to  time, causing drifts and variation in the relation of the criterion position to the two sensory distributions. Both  distributions might drift above, or below, their original locations. But the prime imperative for a sensory system is that it  should discriminate. If the criterion comes to lie too far to the left of the origin, with the bulk of both noise and signal  distributions to the right of it, almost all responses will be YES. Or if the criterion is too far to the right almost all  responses will be NO. In either case, responses will convey little or no information, and the organism is not being provided  with a basis for action. It follows that there is need for a mechanism which can operate at short intervals, shifting the  criterion as inputs shift so as to stabilize the criterion in relation to the flux of incoming sensory inputs. If this  stabilization mechanism can ensure that the criterion maintains a position towards the mean of the current sensory inputs,  this will tend to maximise the information transmitted.  (3) Knowledge of the real world. The responses made by a subject have this significance: They represent his best knowledge of  the state of the real world at the time that he makes them. His knowledge of the momentary state of Nature must be  a major determinant of the discriminations the subject wishes to make. He may have used knowledge of the long-term probability  of the signal in calculating the value of the reference criterion. But, for best performance, any information he  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 179  acquires that indicates the occurrence of short-term variations in signal probability should cause corresponding short-term  variations in his criterion. In real life, objects which are present at a given time usually tend to persist in our vicinity  for some time further; or if they are absent, they are absent for periods of substantial duration. Outside the laboratory,  "random trials" are a rare event. The best knowledge we have of the current state of the world is embodied in our most recent  judgments of it. These are given by the last few responses: These were determined by a criterion positioned at the best  location that could be found, and provide a basis for further action. Since this is so, and taking account of the natural  inertia in the environment, if a subject wishes to detect signals that are present, and avoid false alarms if they are not, he  should take a positive response as an indication for momentarily lowering his criterion, and a negative response as evidence  that the should raise it. With such a strategy, his response probability tracks the state of the world. The system which  applies this strategy will be referred to as the tracking mechanism.  (4) Feedback. Indirect information about the accuracy of the response may be provided by a separate channel. The significance  of this is similar to that of the subject's own past responses, and it has similar implications for adjusting the criterion.  Treisman and Williams (1984) discuss ways in which feedback may be employed.  We have described strategies prescribing short-term adjustments to the criterion. We now consider the second major question:  How should such adjustments be made? What we now require is a model for the mechanisms that execute these strategies. Treisman  and Williams (1984) narrowed the possible models down to two that seemed most promising. The first was based on the "additive  learning model" proposed by Kac (1962) and others (Dorfman, 1973; Dorfman & Biderman, 1971; Kornbrot et al., 1981; Thomas,  1973, 1975). This model was developed for detection with feedback (except in a version given by Thomas, 1975): If an error is  made the criterion is adjusted by a quantity d, the shift being in the direction that would make the repetition of that error  less likely; a correct response may produce no adjustment or a smaller one.  Treisman and Williams (1984) considered a modification of this model applicable to detection without feedback: the  "exponential additive learning" (EAL) model. This has the following features. The criterion has a reference value, zo.  Increments or decrements to the value of the criterion are determined by the rules for tracking or stabilization, as  appropriate, and are added directly to the current value of the criterion. If the current criterion z. is not equal in value  to the reference criterion, it decays exponentially towards the reference value.  As an alternative to the additive learning approach, an "independent trace" (IT) model was proposed which has the following  features. There is a reference criterion. An indication for a change in the value of the momentary criterion is stored not as  the corresponding shift in the criterion, as in the additive learning models, but as a separate memory trace, called an  indicator trace. Once created, each such trace  180 MICHEL TREISMAN  ZC  SENSORY DISTRIBUTIONS  ZC  INDEPENDENT TRACE MODEL  Z  Tr (1) 0  _i Tr121 0  INDICATOR TRACES  20 =10 A =OS d =02  0 T, (31  r  Tr 141  r  i1r,  FIG. 1. The exponential additive learning and independent trace models for detection. Changes in criterion are followed over  six trials. The criterion is shown commencing at the reference value zo= 1.0. d=0.5 in each case, and b=0.2 for IT, 0.5 for  EAL. Responses on successive trials are shown descending on the ordinate: 1 for YES and 0 for NO. For the EAL model, each  response produces an immediate shift in the effective criterion, z,. This decays towards z0 at the rate S where this is the  proportion of the divergence lost during a trial. For IT each response generates an independent indicator trace. Each such  trace decays linearly towards 0 at the rate b per trial. At any moment, the effective criterion value zc is given by the sum  of zo and the currently nonzero traces.  decays linearly to zero. At any moment, the effective value of the criterion is calculated as the sum of the criterion  reference value plus the net effect of all existent, nonzero indicator traces.  The two models are illustrated in Fig. 1, the EAL model on the left and the IT model on the right, as applied to tracking. For  each model, changes in criterion are followed for six trials (the responses are shown proceeding downwards on the ordinate, 1  representing YES and 0 representing NO). The starting point is taken to be the reference criterion value zo = 1.0, which is  shown on the decision axis for trial 1, intermediate between a noise distribution with its mean at 0 and a signal distribution  with mean 2.0. Consider the EAL model: On trial 1 a positive response occurs, and in accordance with the tracking rule, this  causes the EAL criterion to  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 181  shift to the left by the quantity d = 0.5. During the interval preceding trial 2, the criterion decays back towards its  reference value at a rate 8 = 0.5 per trial, where S is the proportion of the original difference from zo which is lost. On  trial 2 the response YES (1) is again made, the criterion again shifts to the left by the quantity d, and subsequently again  decays exponentially towards zo. On trial 3 the response is NO (0), the criterion shifts to the right and from there returns  towards zo. And so the adjustments continue.  The IT model, on the right, is more complex. The first response, 1, specifies a shift to the left of absolute magnitude d. It  does this not by a direct action on the criterion but by setting up a response-determined indicator trace TJ 1) of initial  magnitude -d: this trace is shown on the right of the figure, as a deviation of -0.5. At each moment, the effective criterion  is computed as the sum of zo and any current indicator traces. Since zo = 1.0, the effective criterion therefore takes on the  initial value 0.5, as shown in the figure. As the indicator trace decays to zero, at the constant linear rate S = 0.2 per  trial, the effective criterion returns towards zo at the same rate. The second response is also YES (1) and therefore sets up  a second indicator trace T,(2) of initial value -0.5. Now the effective criterion is given by the sum of the reference value  and the current values of both indicator traces (-0.3 and -0.5), and so takes on the value 0.2, from which it decays back  towards the reference value. Since both traces are decaying in the same direction, each at the same rate, the effective  criterion returns towards zo at twice this rate. On the third trial the response is 0, and therefore an indicator trace is set  up of magnitude 0.5, requiring a shift to the right. The effective criterion becomes 1.1. It is now given by the reference  criterion plus the sum of two negative and one positive indicator traces. It follows that for a short period, until T,(1)  reaches zero and disappears, decay moves the effective criterion value away from the reference value, something that cannot  happen with the additive learning model.  The EAL and IT models gave similar fits to data (Treisman & Williams, 1984). Those for the IT model were better, but not  decisively so. Whichever model is more nearly correct, it seems that the other provides a very good approximation to it.  Two main considerations determined our preference for the IT model as a basis for the further development of criterion-setting  theory (Treisman & Williams, 1984). First, two different experimental procedures allowed the decay of the indicator trace to  be assessed directly. In each case linear decay was supported rather than exponential decay. The second consideration is an  important capacity of the IT model, employed in the further development of the theory, but not easily realised with the EAL  model. The IT model allows the criterion to be given by the sum of indicator traces from different sources (tracking,  stabilization, feedback) which decay at different rates and therefore may have different relations to past trials (Treisman &  Faulkner, 1984a; Treisman & Williams, 1984; Treisman, 1984b). This allows more than one process to operate at the same time,  with different determinants and different parameters, so that they may serve different purposes without one process cancelling  out the other. This is possible with the IT model because the information contained in each indicator trace is separately  maintained and decays  480/29/2-4  182 MICHEL TREISMAN  at its own rate. But with the EAL model the identities of shifts induced by different processes are immediately lost by their  summation with the current criterion, and a single decay parameter applies to their sum.  The model for detection or two-choice identification that may be erected on this basis is now briefly described.  The Criterion-Setting Model for Detection and Two-Choice Identification  The models for detection, and two-choice identification, assume that there are two sensory distributions and a criterion. The  criterion-setting system attempts to place the criterion at that position which is optimal at any given moment, and to keep it  there. Criterion setting is performed by a long-term process which selects the reference criterion value, and short-term  mechanisms which modify the criterion by making adjustments from trial to trial. They do this by generating indicator traces.  (1) The reference system. Criterion setting involves two stages. An initial adjustment places the criterion in range, and  further fine adjustments are made as the environment, the sensory system, and past experience change. The long-term process  determines an initial or reference value, zo, in accordance with some definition of optimality, and on the basis of global  parameters of the task, such as signal probability and payoffs. In detection, this process might aim at approximating the  maximum expected value criterion or the Neyman-Pearson criterion, and it would take account of past experience, that is, the  final or mean position of the criterion in previous similar tasks, as well as instructions and other cognitive information.  Once zo has been specified, new information accumulated over a period, or changes in the global parameters, may cause it to be  modified further. But the reference criterion remains substantially constant over short sequences of trials.  (2) Tracking. In normal experience, the succession of stimulations is rarely wholly random. A series of detections probably  means that there really is something out there at the moment, a series of non-detections the reverse. The occurrence of recent  positive or negative judgments is evidence for a currently raised or lowered signal probability, P(s). The more recent the  evidence, the more highly it should be weighted: the external world does change. If there have been recent detections the  criterion should be lowered to facilitate further detections; following recent rejections the criterion should be raised.  Recent decisions determine the indicator traces employed by the tracking strategy. These have the parameters d, for initial  magnitude and 8, for linear decay rate per trial. If we let J= 1 for a positive response and J= -1 for a negative response,  the initial value of the response-determined tracking indicator trace on trial i will be  Tr(i)= -Ji4r. (1)  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 183  A trace will be nonzero for D terms, where  D = int(d,lbr), int(dr/b r) < Ar/b,  =int(dr/br)- 1, int(dr/br)=ddr,  and int(x) is the integral part of x.  Since the most reliable information is the most recent, the response-determined parameters dr and br will usually be  relatively large: although the criterion fluctuations produced by tracking may be relatively marked, they should disappear  fairly quickly.  (3) Stabilization. If the best position for the criterion is not completely certain, incoming sensory information can be used  to ensure that the criterion is not at a position at which no useful degree of discrimination can occur. Thus, if a series of  sensory inputs all lie well above the criterion, this suggests that the criterion is too low in relation to the current  distribution of sensory inputs. Similarly, repeated inputs below the criterion indicate that it is too high. The criterion is  stabilized in relation to the flux of sensory inputs by allowing a sensory input that falls above the criterion to cause a  rise in the criterion, a low input to cause a fall. With suitable parameters, this will tend to position the criterion so that  the probability of YES approximates the probability of NO. Thus, stabilization tends to maximise the information transmitted  by the subject's responses.  If a high input on trial i indicates that the criterion is too low, the weight that information should receive is indicated by  the magnitude of the difference between the sensory input and the effective criterion on that trial, z;-z,(i). Thus  input-criterion differences should determine the magnitudes of successive shifts in a stabilizing strategy. The larger the  sample of sensory indicator traces used to determine the current criterion value, the more reliable will their mean effect be  and the less susceptible to momentary changes in P(s). This favors relatively small values of the sensorily-determined  parameters ds and bs. Then the initial value of the sensorily-determined indicator trace formed on trial i will be  Ts (i)=As(zi-_-Ji)), IZi---C(i)I <Zu  =0, I--i-zC(0I >Zu.  Here ds is a positive constant of proportionality. The positive limit zu serves to exclude inappropriate effects of sensory  inputs lying out of reasonable range for the task.  TS(i) is the value of the sensorily-determined indicator trace when it is formed. As it decays towards 0 at a linear rate 6,  per trial, k trials after its creation the value of the trace formed on trial i will be  Ts(i, k)=max(T,(i)-kbs, 0), Ts(i)>10 =min(T,(i)+kbs,0), T,(i)<0.  As the initial absolute value of the sensory indicator trace varies, the period for  490'29'2-4  184 MICHEL TREISMAN  which it will subsequently affect the criterion varies too. A large input-Criterion difference originating several trials back  may influence a current criterion when a more recent but smaller difference has ceased to be effective.  When tracking and stabilization operate in parallel, their relative effects will depend on their parameters. Usually, we  expect response indicator traces to decay relatively rapidly, but larger samples of more slowly decaying sensory indicator  traces are required for stabilization. It follows that recent trials may produce predominantly positive, more remote trials  predominantly negative dependencies.  (4) Feedback. The effects of feedback may vary with subjects and tasks. If feedback is used it may operate in one of three  ways (Treisman & Williams, 1984). (a) Reliable feedback may provide an alternative to stabilization and the latter is  suppressed. (b) Feedback may select which responses are given weight in tracking, in accordance with a rule such as  T,(i) = -Jid, FBi=Ri  =0, FBi0Ri  where FBi is the feedback on trial i, and Ri the response. (c) Feedback-based tracking may substitute for response-based  tracking. Then feedback-based indicator traces contribute to determining the criterion. These are given by  Tr(i)= -FA r (5)  where F= 1 if feedback indicates that the stimulus was present, F= -1 if the subject is told the stimulus was absent. These  traces decay at the rate 8r.  (5) In the absence of feedback effects, the effective value of the criterion on trial i may be written as the sum of the  reference value and the residual values of response and sensory indicator traces:  i_1 1-1  z,(i)=zo+ Y T,(h, i-h)+ Y. TS(h, i-h). (6)  h=i-D h=1  The extent to which the three processes contribute to the criterion depends on the parameters, d,, 8,, ds, and 6, In tasks in  which long-term factors such as P(s) are well defined, such as well-practised detection against a continuous background of  familiar noise, zo is likely to receive a high weight. Such tasks are likely to demonstrate the features expected of optimal  criteria, such as a fall in criterion with increase in P(s). But in unusual or difficult conditions which make the best value  for zo uncertain, short-term strategies may dominate performance and result in different relations in the data.  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 185  SOME APPLICATIONS OF THE THEORY  Criterion-setting theory can account for a number of findings. It has been applied with some success to both positive  (assimilation) and negative (contrast) sequential dependencies (Treisman & Williams, 1984). The theory can explain how it is  that the overall response probabilities may remain stable in identification experiments despite big shifts in the  probabilities of the stimuli presented (Parducci & Sandusky, 1965). Evidence that stabilization and tracking operate at the  same time, producing effects of opposite direction as functions of past sensory inputs and responses, is discussed by Treisman  and Williams (1984).  Evidence for the present interpretation of feedback has also been reviewed (Treisman & Williams, 1984). For example, a  reanalysis of the two-choice identification data of Tanner, Rauk, and Atkinson (1970) demonstrates that in this paradigm  feedback may suppress the contrast that signals active stabilization. Criterion-setting theory predicts the assimilation at  short lags and contrast at long lags seen in absolute judgment (Ward & Lockhead, 1971) and accounts for the different  magnitudes of these effects when the data are plotted against past stimuli or against past responses, and when feedback is  present or absent. Similarly, an account is given of the increased assimilation and negligible contrast found in magnitude  estimation (Ward, 1973; Jesteadt, Luce & Green, 1977), and of the effects of feedback in mock absolute judgment procedures in  which the stimulus is in fact absent (Ward & Lockhead, 1971; Wagner & Baird, 1981). Lockhead and King (1983) have shown that  ratio judgments for successive stimuli that are in fact identical vary with stimulus magnitude and with the preceding  stimulus: These effects are reproduced by the present theory (Treisman & Williams, 1984; Treisman, 1984b).  Criterion-setting theory has been extended to some cases of adaptation and contingent aftereffects (Treisman, 1984a). It has  served as a basis for a model of magnitude estimation which accounts for the V pattern found when the coefficients of  variation of ratios of successive magnitude estimates are plotted against the corresponding stimulus ratios, and for the  inverted V pattern shown when the correlations between log magnitude estimations are similarly plotted (Jesteadt et al., 1977;  Green, Luce & Duncan, 1977; Treisman, 1984b). The theory has been used to analyse differences between the control of criteria  which determine confidence levels and those which determine choice between categories and to account for a new sequential  effect, the criterion divergence effect (Treisman & Faulkner, 1984a); it can be used to explain an effect of P(s) on the slope  of the receiver operating characteristic in the rating procedure (Treisman & Faulkner, 1984b), leads to predictions concerning  criterion interchange (Treisman & Faulkner, 1985a), and has been applied to the generation of random sequences by human  subjects (Treisman & Faulkner, 1985b).  186 MICHEL TREISMAN  THEORIES AND MODELS  Before we employ criterion-setting theory to develop a model for absolute judgment, it may be useful to make some comments on  the distinction between theories and models. Theory here means a set of hypothetical propositions which specify the nature of  the system underlying certain observations. These propositions are such that in principle logical and mathematical reasoning  can be applied to them so as to derive consequences which may explain observations not yet accounted for, or predict phenomena  not yet observed.  The terms "model" and "theory" are sometimes used interchangeably, or "model" may be used for a numerical structure that  satisfies a theory (Atkinson, Bower, & Crothers, 1965; Yellott, 1977). "Model" will be used here in the more specific sense.  However, the term has been used in a number of senses, of which three in particular should be distinguished.  Theoretically Based Models  The first type of model is essentially a specification or parameterization of an explanatory theory to apply to a particular  situation. Such a model may require the addition of minor and perhaps arbitrary assumptions to allow the general theory to be  brought to bear upon a specific case. Newton's theory of gravity specified a relation between the mass of a body and a type of  force exerted by such bodies on other masses. To employ this theory to predict the courses of the planets, a model of the  solar system must be constructed. That is, the positions and masses (and other parameters) of a finite number of bodies are  specified, and by applying the assumptions of the theory to the resulting mathematical structure, predictions may be derived  about these bodies' relative paths of movement. To match our powers of reasoning to the complexity of the real world, such a  model may require some degree of approximation. Thus we may disregard objects outside the solar system, and treat each planet  as having its mass concentrated at its center, rather than take into account its inhomogeneous structure. Despite such  approximations the model remains an instantiation of the theory. A theoretically based model may be more complex and have more  parameters than an ad hoc model for the same situation, since it is required to be true to the spirit of a theory that must  also be able to provide models for other and different cases.  Analogue Models  In the second type of model, a theory is applied to a system-the model system-which is not that system-the object system-to  which the predictions are to relate. But the theory which describes the model system is isomorphic to, or sufficiently similar  to the theory which pertains to the object system to lead to valid conclusions. The analysis of a game such as Prisoner's  Dilemma in order to specify the consequences of evolutionary competition among relatives (Maynard Smith, 1974; Treisman, 1977,  1981), the use of observations on the behavior of light to  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 187  predict the behavior of electrons, or the use of hypothetical contraptions composed of dashpots and springs to predict the  behavior of the ether provide examples of analogue models.  Calculational Models  In the third type of model neither the system modelled nor the theory applied to it corresponds to the object system and  theory (which is usually unknown). Nevertheless, such a model may be useful over a range of observations because it is found  in practise to give reasonably correct predictions, even though these are arrived at by a process of reasoning which is not  based on knowledge of the true underlying determinants. Such models may have advantages, such as simplicity or giving analytic  solutions, over difficult or undeveloped object theories when predictions are required for practical purposes. Kepler's  epicycles predicted the courses of the planets although this model is not an analogue of the theory of gravitation. Rule of  thumb statements about the relations between the color of an indicator and the acidity of a solution may correctly predict the  behavior of the latter. A model of the effect of advertising on sales might specify an intervening variable, Demand, given by  a specified function of an independent variable such as Advertising Expenditure, and related by another function to observed  Volume of Sales. This simple scheme would in no way represent the many social and psychological mechanisms that enter into the  determination of economic behavior, but it might give easily obtained and sufficiently accurate predictions for practical  purposes.  Calculational models are not infrequent in psychophysics. An example is the use of the logistic function in analysing test  results. Any empirical function which relates observations to independent variables but rests on no theoretical basis whose  validity we would be prepared to argue for can be considered as a model of this sort. Weber's law started life in this case.  Signal detection theory has sometimes been used in this way, that is, applied to data for which the underlying suppositions of  the theory may not hold, for the sake of obtaining easily specified measures. Egan's (1958) initial application of SDT to  memory was described by him as being in the spirit of an exercise.  When the underlying theory is opaque there may seem to be advantages in employing a calculational model. We require of such a  model that it should give accurate predictions and have the minimum number of parameters. Thurstonian models are sometimes  viewed in this light. However, the present paper is concerned with developing a theoretically based model for absolute  judgment, not a calculational model. This will assume that Thurstonian assumptions provide simplified but valid descriptions  of random neural processes, and that processes of criterion adjustment operate. It will attempt to account for the main  features of absolute judgment on this basis.  Some of these findings have previously been given explanations which, considered in isolation, may seem adequate and perhaps  more economical than the model that will be developed below (e.g., Braida & Durlach, 1972; Berliner & Durlach, 1973; Gravetter  & Lockhead, 1973; Lockhead & King, 1983; Luce, Green, & Weber,  188 MICHEL TREISMAN  1976; Ward, 1982). The present approach does not necessarily produce simpler models. It aims at a different sort of parsimony:  to provide a common approach to absolute judgment and to other areas of psychophysics by modelling absolute judgment not on an  ad hoc basis but on the basis of the same theoretical assumptions that are applied elsewhere. Such a unified approach, if  successful, would be parsimonious in terms of theoretical presuppositions.  To assess a theory, we examine its implications. Some implications may follow directly from the general principles of the  theory. Other implications apply to defined situations, and to discover such implications we must derive from the theory  models for those situations. Thus from the general assumptions that stimuli produce quantitative central effects, that these  effects are subject to noise, and that response criteria are used to determine responses, a theoretically based model, such as  Thurstone's case V, can be derived for absolute judgment. (It would also be open to a theorist to deny the general assumptions  but to employ Thurstone's model as a calculational device; the interpretation of the model is not inherent but depends on the  theorist.) To discover the implications of a model we may calculate its consequences for representative or reasonable  parameter values. If the model is analytic, exact calculations may be possible. The model for absolute judgment to be  described below is not analytic, in which respect it resembles, for example, the model of Braida et al. (1984). Such models  may be examined by numerical methods (compare the three-body problem in physics) or by simulation (e.g., McClelland &  Rumelhart, 1981; Treisman, 1975a, 1975b, 1981). In this case, stochastic variability in the model may be represented by a  computer-generated random process, and statistical observations obtained from the simulation. To discover whether the model  presented below is capable in principle of generating data of the form found empirically, we shall explore its capacities in  this way.  A MODEL FOR ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT  The model for absolute judgment that will be presented below is a generalization of the model for detection that was described  above. It has a central scale, with criteria on it maintained by criterion-setting mechanisms: In these respects it resembles  the detection model. These assumptions are extended by adding, first, a specification of the relations between responses, the  central scale, and stimulus intensities; and, second, additional criterion-setting assumptions necessitated by the existence  of more than one criterion.  The model for absolute judgment is based partly on Thurstonian assumptions (Thurstone, 1927), partly on a theory of the  sensory scale previously put forward (Treisman, 1964a, 1964b), and partly on criterion-setting theory (Treisman & Williams,  1984). To what extent does the addition of criterion-setting assumptions extend the explanatory power of the basic Thurstonian  model?  The main assumptions of the model follow:  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 189  (1) If a stimulus of magnitude I; is presented on trial t, it produces a central effect S;,, on a sensory dimension, S. This  effect is a random variable. The sensory effects produced on repeated presentation of the same stimulus are described by a  normal distribution on S, with mean S; and standard deviation as. It is convenient to assume that for all members of the set  of N stimuli in an absolute judgment experiment, 1,,12,.-1;,..., IN, QS may be taken to be constant to a first approximation.  Stimulus intensities are referred to as I,,, where the subscript i refers to intensity and t to trial number. However, I; and  I, may be used when no confusion can result. The decibel value of a stimulus is represented as D;,,= 10log(I,,,/lo), where Io  is a reference level. The central effect of stimulus I;,, on trial t is S,.and the mean effect of stimulus I; is S,.  (2) Values on dimensions S and I are related by a function S; = f (I;) such as  S; = p In I,  where p is a constant (Treisman, 1964a, 1964b).  (3) The reference value for the jth criterion on the central scale S is So.); the current effective value of that criterion on  trial t is S,;(t). (Criteria on S differ from sensory effects on S in that the first subscript for a criterion is always  either 0 or c.) If there are C response categories, corresponding to the responses 1, 2,..., C, there will be C-1 response  criteria on the S dimension. We refer to these as Sc,,(t), S.,Z(t),-., S~J(t),...I SC,c_,(t). If on trial t, S,,, < S,,(t),  the response is "1." If S";(t) 5 5;,, < S.,;+ ,(t) the response is "j+ 1", and if S,,c_,(t) < Si,the response is "C." If C =  N the procedure is known as absolute identification and the responses are the integers 1, 2,..., N.  The model for absolute identification with 10 stimuli and 10 responses is illustrated in Fig. 2 for stimuli spaced at equal  intervals on a linear intensity scale I. S is logarithmically related to I, and therefore the spacing of the mean effects of  the stimuli on S decreases as stimulus magnitude increases. For each stimulus the central distribution on S is normal; the  standard deviation, 6s, is the same for all the distributions. The mean central effect of each stimulus is indicated by a  continuous vertical line, and the central sensory distributions for 1,, 16, and I9 are shown. The reference criterion values  are represented as broken vertical lines which project onto the response scale, R.  (4) Criteria are placed and maintained on the sensory scale by criterionsetting mechanisms. A long-term mechanism determines a  reference component, So,;, for each criterion. In doing this, it takes account of general features of the task, such as the  range of stimulus values and the number of responses, and previous experience. We assume that in absolute judgment the  reference criteria are normally spaced at equal intervals (or in conformity with some other rule) along the S scale in such a  way as to match the range of sensory inputs the subject encounters. That is, during an initial period of exposure to the  stimuli, the system will set reference  190 MICHEL TREISMAN  <Stimulus on trial t >  FIG. 2. A model for absolute judgment. The model is illustrated for 10 stimuli equally spaced on an intensity scale I.  Presentation of stimulus I; produces a corresponding central effect on the sensory scale S. These central effects are normally  distributed with standard deviation 6S, and the mean of the distribution 3; is logarithmically related to I;. Distributions  are shown for three stimuli. The S scale is divided by equally spaced reference criteria, So,;, shown as broken vertical lines  projecting onto the response continuum, R. If the sensory input S;,, falls between the two current criteria, S,Jt) 5 5;,, <  S,,j+t(t), it elicits the response j+ 1:' Stimulus Ig is presented on trial t: the central effect (dotted line) falls between  Sc,s and S,,9 on that trial and thus it evokes the response "9." The distribution of criterion values is shown for S,,,.  criteria in rough conformity to the range of sensory inputs that it sees. In simulations of the model reference criteria are  set in some fixed relation to the means of the end stimuli; this is an approximation only, since in experiments with random  presentations the sensory system cannot normally know which stimuli particular sensory inputs come from, and even less can it  know the mean effects of given stimuli. Equal reference criterion spacing is shown in Fig. 2.  (5) The second criterion-setting process, the tracking mechanism, assumes that a recent response is evidence that a  corresponding stimulus, capable of producing the same or a similar sensory effect, may still be present. This mechanism  produces short-term adjustments by setting up memory traces which store the evidence provided by past responses. These  indicator traces affect the positions of criteria on subsequent trials, until they decay away. Such a trace is referred to by  the symbol T,(e, f; g, h) where the subscript r identifies an indicator trace determined by a previous response; e refers to  the criterion So, which the trace modifies; f refers to the origin of the trace-the criterion Sc, f which was just exceeded by  the sensory input on the trial on which the trace was set up (S., f(g) < Sg < S., f+,(g)); g is the number of the trial on  which the trace was set up; and h is the number of trials that have since elapsed. If h = 0, T, represents the initial  magnitude of the trace.  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 191  CRITERIA INDICATOR TRACES FOR SC,i  TRIAL TRACKING STABILIZING Sol 50.1 G G I  I I  1  i  I I  I I 5;.2 I i I  I I  I I I  3  FIG. 3. The effects of the tracking and stabilization criterion setting processes on two criteria, illustrated for three  trials. The effective values of the two criteria S,,;(t) and Sc,j+,(t) on each trial are shown as continuous vertical bars. On  trial t the criteria commence at their reference values, So.; and So,;,,. The sensory input on each trial is shown as a broken  vertical arrow. This input generates a stabilization indicator trace and the response generates a tracking indicator trace,  for each criterion on the decision axis within a sufficient range. The indicator traces that modify criterion S,(t) are shown  on the right for each trial. They decay linearly. The effective position of criterion Sc.;(t) on each trial is given by the  sum of its reference value and the currently nonzero indicator traces of both types relating to it.  Figure 3 illustrates tracking. The positions of two criteria, Sc.j(t) and Sc,;+I(t), are followed for three trials. The  indicator traces modifying Sc,; on these trials are shown. The sensory input on trial 1, St,, falls between the two criteria  and thus gives rise to the response `j+ 1." This response evokes the creation of a response indicator trace for each  criterion. The tracking strategy favors repetition of the response `j+ 1"; this requires a downwards shift of the criterion  Sc,j(t) and an upwards shift of Sc,j+,. The basis for shifting Sc.j+,(t) upwards is provided by a trace T,(j+ 1, j; 1, 0)  stored in memory (not illustrated). The initial value of this trace is given by the tracking shift parameter dr, and so in  this case T,(j+ 1, j; 1, 0) =4 r.  The response "j+ 1" also requires the criterion Scjt) to shift downwards. The equal but opposite trace set up for this  criterion, Tr(j, j; 1, 0) = -dr, is illustrated, under the heading "Tracking," as a negative deflection generated on trial 1.  (A small latency is assumed in the figure, but this is neglected in the treatment below.)  (6) The passage of time will decrease the relevance of a past decision as a guide to the current state of the world.  Accordingly, the shift indicated by a trace should decrease with time (or trials). How should it decrease? When a hound, hot  on the heels of a hare, loses sight of its prey, it will at first assume that the hare is somewhere around, but hidden, and it  will continue searching. If there is no success, it becomes likely that the prey has escaped, and search may tail off rapidly.  If so,  192 MICHEL TREISMAN  this is the reverse of exponential decay, which is rapid at first, slow later. We assume, as the simplest approximation to the  unknown function, linear decay of the indicator trace. When the trace reaches zero, it ceases to exist. Thus, each trial that  elapses reduces the response indicator trace by the quantity br. After k trials a positive indicator trace is reduced to  max(dr-kbr, 0) and a negative trace has become min( -dr+kbr, 0). The traces in Fig. 3 illustrate linear decay.  (7) These assumptions describe the effects of a response on the bounding criteria lying immediately below and above S;, (where  both these criteria exist): The criteria shift away from the input in opposite directions. But there are further criteria,  lying beyond the bounding criteria on one or both sides, that the tracking mechanism may affect. How does it do so? We might  guess that the response "5" (cf. Fig. 2) shifts all the criteria Sc,, to S,4 to the left on the next trial; or it might shift  the boundary criterion Sc,, only; or it might move Sc,,, and also the other criteria on its left further to the left, but to a  lesser extent. All these are possibilities, but the exact expression (which will be referred to as the "lateral shift  function") which gives the initial shift imposed on a criterion as a function of the remoteness and direction of that  criterion from the input awaits experimental determination. We assume here, as a first approximation, that the response on  trial t induces initial criterion shifts that decrease linearly to zero over a range SR of neighboring criteria. Then,  following the response "j+ 1" the initial indicator trace for the remote criterion S, ;-(j' 0 j, j + 1) is  Tr(j',j;t,0)=-d,Cl-(j-j')/SRI, f1 j,(j-P1SR  =0, (j-P>SR Tjf,j;t,0)=dr[l-U-j-l)/SRI, j'>1j+1,U-j-l)1<SR =0 U-j-1)> SR.  In Fig. 3, the sensory input on trial 2 evokes the response 'I + 2." This input is separated from Sc,j(2) by the intervening  criterion S,,,;+,(2). Accordingly, the response indicator trace generated for the criterion Sc,; is reduced by 1/SR (in the  figure this is taken to be 1/2). Thus in the figure the initial value of the trace set up for criterion j on trial 2, T,(j, j+  1; 2, 0) has half the initial value of the corresponding trace on trial 1, Tr(j, j; 1, 0), set up when Sc.J was a boundary  criterion. On trial 3, the sensory input S;,3 lies to the left of S,j(3): A full-strength trace is produced for S~,;(3) which  now prescribes an upwards shift. If we allow for both decay over trials and attenuation by the lateral shift function, the  value of a trace generated on trial t will come to be, k trials later,  T,(j', j; t, k)=max(T,(j', j;t,0)-kbr,0), j'_j+1  =min(T,(j', j; t, 0)+kbr, 0), j' <1 j  (8) The third criterion-setting process, stabilization, attempts to locate criteria appropriately in relation to the  prevailing flux of sensory inputs. It produces  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 193  independent sensorily-determined indicator traces on each trial t, T,(j', j; t, 0). These are also assumed to decay linearly  to zero, and also add to the reference value to contribute to the effective value of the criterion. Stabilization differs from  tracking in the following respects: (a) It operates on the principle that an excess of relevant sensory inputs to one side of  a criterion is evidence that the criterion is remote from the mean of the sensory flux and should shift towards these inputs.  To effect this, a sensory input that falls to the right of a criterion will set up a trace that causes that criterion to shift  to the right; one falling to the left of the criterion will set up a trace tending to move it to the left. (b) Stabilization  traces may decay more slowly than response indicator traces, so that their sum provides an average of the sensory flux taken  over a longer term, and so is likely to be more stable. (c) The initial magnitude of a stabilization trace is not a fixed  quantity but is a function of the separation on S between the sensory input and the nearest criterion. The initial shift is  the product of a parameter ds and the distance separating the sensory input and the current position of the relevant boundary  criterion.  In Fig. 3, the sensory input on trial 1, Si,,, is intermediate between Sc,;(1) and 5c,;+1(1). It specifies an initial leftward  stabilization shift of magnitude d s(S;,, - S,; + , (1)) for Sc. j +, (1), and an initial rightwards shift of magnitude d  s(Si., - Sc,j(1)) for Scj l ). The stabilization trace for Sc,;(1) is shown on the right in the figure. This trace decays to  zero at the rate as per trial. Similarly, the sensory input on trial 2 specifies an initial rightwards shift of magnitude  ds(Si,2 - Sc,;+,(2)) for S,.;+,(2). The criterion Sc,;(2) is a remote criterion, at one remove from S;,2. Therefore, its  initial magnitude depends both on the magnitude of T, (j+ 1, j+ 1; 2, 0), the initial shift for Sc,;+,(2), and on the lateral  shift function for stabilization. If we assume that this is a linear function decreasing to zero over a range SR, the initial  shift for S,;(2) will be the magnitude of the shift for Sc,;+,(2) reduced in the proportion 1/SR. This trace will also  decrease at the rate bs per trial. Thus, an input S;,, such that Sc,;(t) 5;,, < 5c  ,,;+,(t) will set up a stabilization indicator trace for criterion j whose value k trials later will be  T,(j, j; t, k)=max(ds(S;,,-Sc.i(t))-kas, 0) (10)  where the arguments of Ts refer to the criterion affected by the trace, the source (lower bounding) criterion, the trial of  origin, and the number of trials elapsed. For criterion j + 1 the corresponding trace will be  T,(j+ 1, j; t, k)=min(ds(S,,,-S,;,;+,(t))+kS,, 0). (I1)  For criteria less than j, or greater than j + 1, the initial value of the trace will be a function ("the lateral shift  function") of the trace for j or j+ 1, respectively.  There is not much evidence on the form of lateral shift functions to guide us. The data of Purks, Callahan, Braida, & Durlach  (1980) suggest that shifts decline at large distances. Some interesting observations of Luce et al. (1982) suggest that  criterion shifts may be constant. In each case, these shifts are in directions which correspond to tracking. Unfortunately  they were calculated in terms of previous  194 MICHEL TREISMAN  stimuli, not responses, which reduces their usefulness as guides to the lateral shift functions for tracking.  (9) The effective value of a criterion on a given trial is the sum of its reference value and the currently nonzero response  and sensory indicator traces modifying it. The value of criterion Sc,;(t) on trial t is  t-I t-I  5cjt)=So.,+ Y_ T,(J,f(h);h,t-h)+ TS(J,f(h);h,t-h). (12)  h=1 h=1  To the reference value So,; is added the current values of the indicator traces set up by responses and sensory inputs on past  trials; f (h) is the source criterion (the criterion immediately to the left of the input) on trial h. The equation presents a  weighted combination of the effects of the three mechanisms; the weight attaching to tracking or stabilization will depend on  the magnitudes of dr or ds, respectively.  THE ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT MODEL AND THE SENSORY SCALE  Equation (7) specifies that the central sensory dimension is a logarithmic function of stimulus intensity. This is frequently  assumed and provides a starting point for the model. But the question immediately arises: Can absolute judgment data confirm  or refute a claim of this sort? What can they tell us? We now consider this question.  In the model, when stimuli on a physical intensity scale I are presented to a subject they produce central effects distributed  normally on a sensory scale S. The mean effect of stimulus I; is given by the "sensory function"  (13)  The relation observed between the mean absolute judgment of a given stimulus and the intensity of that stimulus may be written  as the "observed function"  R; = h(I,). (14)  What is the relation between the observed function h and the hypothetical sensory function f? Does h necessarily estimate f,  as is usually assumed?  Before discussing this question, it will be useful to consider the parallel analysis for magnitude estimation. Stevens (1957,  1960) noted that magnitude estimation data can be represented by empirical power functions of the form R = P, where I is  stimulus magnitude and R is the value symbolised by the overt written or spoken response. From this he concluded that a  "psychophysical law" obtained that relates sensation S to the physical stimulus by a power function, S = I". Treisman (1964a,  1964b) argued that this claim was fallacious. If, first, a central measure S is related to I by the sensory function S=f(I),  and, second, the response R is related to S by the "response" function R = g(S), then the observed empirical function  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 195  must be R=h(I)=g[f(I)]. Stevens' conclusion was equivalent to the claim that h =f. But this claim can only be made if we know  specifically that R = S, i.e., that g is the identity function or a linear transformation. But although this assumption was  essential to and implicit in Stevens' argument, it is arbitrary and no explicit justification for it was offered. The most we  can justifiably conclude from observing the relation R = h(I) is that the pair of functions f and g must come from the  (infinite) set of pairs of functions for which g(f ) = h.  To summarise this argument, we assume two relations, S= f(I) and R= g(S). If we write g as the composition of two functions, g  = h(f -' ), then  R=g(S)=h[f-'(S)]=h{f-'[f(f]}=h(I). (15)  Evidently, if we know only that R = h(I), there is no way we can recover both f and g.  A similar error is made in the interpretation of absolute judgment if we assume that here h = f That is, the empirical  function R = h(I) is assumed to be the same function as the sensory function S= f(I), and it is supposed that we can discover  the sensory function by determining the observed function. On this assumption, if R is a log function of I then so must S be.  This assumption is made, for example, by Stevens (1957, 1960) when he attempts to discredit the log functions produced by  category scaling. But, on the basis of the present model, this belief is fallacious: There is no necessary mathematical  connection between the form of the sensory function and that of the observed response function. The form of the observed  FIG. 4. Hypothetical relations between the variables 1, S, and R or R' are shown. (a) S is given by S=f(I) and R by  R=g(S)=h{f-`[f(I)])=h(I). These relations are illustrated for two values of 1, 1; and Ij. (b) A stochastic relation obtains  between S and I. A probability density function on S corresponds to each value of I, such that 9;=f(I). R=g(S); the  corresponding probability density functions on R are shown for I; and I;. (c) R'=int(R) gives the least integral value greater  than or equal to R and is represented by the zigzag line; the dashed lower "envelope" to this line is g(S). The probability  density functions on R become probability histograms on R', and a mean value R; corresponds to I;.  196 MICHEL TREISMAN  response function is determined by a different consideration: the rule for placing the criteria. This will be demonstrated  below by a simplified argument.  Consider Fig. 4a. This shows relations between variables I, S, and R, considered as three mathematical dimensions. I is mapped  onto the dimension S by the function S= f(I); S is mapped onto the dimension R by the function R = g(S). The function g is  also illustrated. As in Eq. (15), this will give R = h(I), and from this relation alone we cannot recover f.  The picture becomes more complex in Fig. 4b. There is now a stochastic relation between S and I. A probability density  distribution on S corresponds to I;, such that S;=f(I;). Again we have R= g(S). It is evident that for reasonable probability  density distributions on S, R = g[ f(I)] = h(I) will be at least a good approximation to the relation between R and I.  In Fig. 4c, R is further transformed by restricting the response dimension to integral values, to give R'=int(R), where int(x)  is here defined as the integral part of the number x plus 1. Then the relation between R' and S will be R'=int[g(S)]. On the  ordinate mean values of R' are shown. The quantization of R introduces additional noise but it is evident that, to an  approximation, R, = h(I; ).  It appears that the additional variability arising from the density distribution on S and the quantization of R does not  transform the function h in any major way (from linear to logarithmic, for example). Thus for Figs. 4a-c we have the overall  relation h = g(f ). It is also the case that from the function R'= h(Ii) we cannot recover f  Figure 4c represents absolute judgment. S; =f(Ii) is the sensory function relating the central scale to the physical stimulus  dimension. The numbers R' are the successive integral-valued responses associated with the criteria which map the continuous  variable S onto discrete response values. These criteria can be considered to be placed at the integral points on a  real-valued faction R = g(S). Then the function we obtain empirically, relating R; and I;, is an approximation to the function  R = g(S) = h(I), where R is the function such that R'= int(R). Our interpretation of the observed function, R'= h(I), rests on  the assumption that the criteria on S map onto R at equal intervals on R.  In the fortunate event that the criteria were in fact equally spaced on S we would then have a linear relation (g) between R  and S: then we could take R' = h(I) = f(I~-the empirical function would duplicate the sensory function and would estimate the  latter. But if the subject places his criteria on S in any other pattern, this conclusion no longer holds. Suppose that the  criteria are unequally spaced on S, then there must be some transformation of S, f (S), such that the images of the criteria  are equally spaced on f'(S)= f'[f(I)]. It is these images that map onto R at equal intervals on R. Thus R is linearly related  to f '(f ). That is, h = f '(f ), to a linear transformation. Evidently f corresponds to g. Thus, however the subject places  his criteria on S, the criteria can be considered as equally spaced in terms of the function R = h(I), and it is this function  h that the data communicate to us: Without prior knowledge of the function f' or g there is no information in the subjects'  responses that can identify f for us.  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 197  Figure 5 shows results of simulations of the model which illustrate the implications of this argument. In each simulation, 16  stimuli were presented in random order. Their intensities were either linearly spaced on I, or logarithmically spaced on I.  Also, either S = I or S =1n I. The criteria were placed on S so that their images would be spaced at equal intervals when  projected onto either I, In I,  6 S=In 1   S    STIMULUS SPACING   LINEAR    l~ o  B  a  5  7  L "I I   i 2    E    0    ,~ 16 - 15 0  ~ SL m  13  30 40 50 6C 7C 10 20 30 40 50 60 70  S= In I LOGARITHMIC  LOGARITHMIC  STIMULUS INTENSITY II)  9  /  FUNCTION OF I ON WHICH CRITERION SPACING IS EQUAL --- LOGARITHMIC - LINEAR  QUADRATIC  FIG. 5. Effects of stimulus spacing, criterion spacing, and sensory function on the observed response functions: simulations  of the absolute judgment model. Sixteen stimuli ranging in value from 11 to 71 on I were used in each case, with possible  responses 1, 2,..., 16. Mean responses (R) are plotted against I. The sensory function is S=1n I for the upper two panels (Qs  =0.06) and S=I for the two lower panels (us= 6). For the two left panels, the stimuli are spaced at equal intervals on the  linear scale I, and for the two right panels they are spaced at equal intervals in terms of In 1. The criteria were positioned  on S in one of three ways, and were invariant. Equal linear spacing on I: If the criteria are mapped onto I (by I =.f - I (S))  their images are equally spaced, with the lowest criterion half a unit above 1, and the highest criterion half a unit below  I16. Equal logarithmic spacing: The images of the criteria on In I are equally spaced, with "internal placement" of the end  criteria. Equal quadratic spacing: The images of the criteria on IZ are equally spaced. There were 50 trials for each stimulus  intensity in each simulation. Curves of the form R = a In I + b (broken line), R = aI + b (continuous line), and R = aIZ + b  (dash-dot line), were fitted to the simulation data in the upper left panel. The identical curves are repeated in the other  three panels. Log criterion spacing: filled circles; linear: empty circles; quadratic: triangles.  198 MICHEL TREISMAN  or IZ (i.e., h is an identity, logarithmic or quadratic function). The central distributions on S were normal with constant  variance. For the present simulation, the criteria were taken to be invariant, with no short-term criterion-setting  adjustments. The 15 criteria So,; were located so that the lowest criterion was half a unit above the mean effect of I, on S,  and the highest criterion was half a unit below the mean for I,6.  However the stimuli are placed on I, and whichever sensory function, S= f(I), is assumed, we see that identical relations  between R and I are obtained, and that these functions h(I) are always the functions on which images of the criteria are  equally spaced. If the criteria are equally spaced in terms of I, we have R = ai+ b in every case. If the criteria are equally  spaced when projected onto In 1, we observe the function R = a In 1 + b, and so on.  Does it follow that absolute judgment data will enable us to conclude nothing about the form of the underlying sensory  function S=f(I)? If we have no information about g, this is so. We can, however, extend the model by adding an additional  assumption whose effect is to define g: We postulate that subjects place their criteria at equal intervals on S. If so, R is a  linear function of S. Then f = h and so is given by the observed function. This assumption, of linear spacing on S, is  convenient, but it must be remembered that any claim about the relation of S to I that we may erect on this basis can be only  as valid as the assumption, and that we have no independent evidence for it.  The assumption that criteria are equally spaced on S will not always be useful nor necessarily appealing. The point is that  there is a trade-off between making assumptions about criterion spacing and making assumptions about f sometimes one,  sometimes the other, may give a simpler result. For example, suppose that absolute judgment experiments have been carried out  on two overlapping stimulus ranges and that, on the equal criterion spacing assumption, we have approximately logarithmic  functions, S = In I, for each range, but with distortions towards the endpoints of the ranges. Further, these distortions are  different for the overlapping stimuli when they lie at the low end of the upper range or at the upper end of the lower range.  If so, it would be simpler to assume that the sensory function is logarithmic and that there are departures from equal  criterion spacing towards the ends of a stimulus range.  We may also note that even if the long-term process places reference criteria at equal intervals on S, it is the mean position  of the effective criterion Sc,;(t) over trials that determines the results. But criterion-setting adjustments may cause mean  criterion positions to differ in spacing from the corresponding reference criterion positions. With some parameters, for  example, tracking adjustments may cause peripheral intercriterion distances to be greater than central intercriterion  distances. In such a case, R would give a distorted picture of S.  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 199  SOME FEATURES OF ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT  We now briefly list some major features of absolute judgment which it would be desirable to bring under the umbrella of a  single explanatory model.  (1) Information transmission as a function of number of stimuli. Pollack (1952) presented tones of different frequency,  equally spaced on a logarithmic frequency scale, in the range 100 to 8000 Hz and found that as the number of stimuli increased  from 2 to 14 the information transmitted by absolute judgments rose at first but then showed little further increase, the  upper limit being about 2.3 bits. Garner (1953) presented sets of 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, or 20 tones for absolute identification of  loudness. The subjects used as many categories for their responses as there were stimuli, and the stimuli always spanned the  range from 15 to 110 dB. His data show that the maximum information transmission increases with the size of the set of stimuli  when the latter is small, and then appears to become constant. Miller (1956) reviewed a number of such studies and noted a  general tendency for information transmission to level off at a value corresponding, roughly, to perfect  m30 0  E Z Z 4 2 170  9[ GUILFORD 111511 8  7~  _ GARNER (1953)  O  m 20~ LUCE et of (1976)  0  0  10 20 00 10 20 30 40  NUMBER OF STIMULI RANGE LIE!  E Z Q 2 F  s Q  2 0 Z  08  w  2  20 07  U  0 05  10  09F WEBER et of 119771  0  04  30 40 50 60 70 80  30 40 50 60 70  SPOT DENSITY STIMULUS INTENSITY (dB)  FIG. 6. Some absolute judgment findings. Upper left panel, information transmission: loudness judgments (Garner, 1953).  Information transmitted as a function of the number of stimuli in the set; in each case the stimuli were distributed over the  same fixed range. Lines fitted by eye. Upper right panel, range effect: loudness judgments (Luce et at., 1976, Subject DM).  Information transmitted is shown for 10 stimuli, equally spaced in dB, as the intensity range over which they are distributed  increases. Line fitted by eye. Lower left panel, category scale: judgments of density of spots in a fixed area (Guilford,  1954). Mean category assignments are plotted against spot density. The curve fitted is the best-fitting logarithmic function  of spot density (R=4.09 In density -9.39). Lower right panel, accuracy edge effect: loudness judgments (Weber et at., 1977,  Subject DR). Proportions of correct responses for each stimulus, in four 5-stimulus absolute identification experiments.  200 MICHEL TREISMAN  discrimination of about seven categories. Further work supporting this conclusion is reviewed by Garner (1962). Data from  Garner (1953) are illustrated in Fig. 6.  (2) Information transmission as a function of stimulus range. Pollack (1952) presented tones spaced at equal logarithmic steps  on the frequency scale, and compared information transmission for ranges in which the lowest stimulus was always 100 Hz and  the highest stimulus varied from 500 to 8000 Hz. He found very little increase in maximum information transmission as the  range was increased. Pollack (1953) added tones at 60 and 14,000 Hz to a range 100 to 8000 Hz and found this produced very  little increase in the maximum information transmitted (from 2.25 to 2.35 bits). Braida and Durlach (1972) have investigated  absolute judgments of loudness of a 1000-Hz tone for a set of 10 intensities, using ranges varying between 2.25 and 54 dB  (their Experiment 4). They found that a measure of "total sensitivity" gave a negatively accelerated curve when plotted  against range, appearing to approach an upper limit. As their measure of sensitivity appeared to be approximately linearly  related to information transmission, except at the lowest levels (see their Figure 8), their result can also be represented by  a plot of information transmission against range, which gives a similar picture. Luce et al., (1976) replicated their  experiment and ontained similarly negatively accelerated curves when information transmitted was plotted against range (see  Fig. 6).  Durlach and Braida (1969) proposed that this limit to information transmission could be explained by the assumption that the  variance of the sensory distributions is proportional to the square of the range. Similarly, Gravetter and Lockhead (1973)  have proposed that response criteria are variable, and that their variances are proportional to the square of the physical  range over which criteria vary. Although these assumptions may go some way to explaining the limits on information  transmission, they require explanation themselves. Luce et al. (1976) criticise them as ad hoc, and Gravetter and Lockhead  (1973) themselves note "we have yet to consider the psychological processes which result in response variability being  proportional to criterial range." (Also see Nosofsky, 1983b.)  (3) The form of category scales. When subjects' mean absolute judgments are plotted against a linear measure of stimulus  intensity, the resulting curve is concave downwards, and different from the curve given by the so-called "direct" scaling  procedures such as magnitude estimation (Galanter & Messick, 1961; Stevens, 1957, 1960; Stevens & Galanter, 1957). In some  cases the judgments approximate a logarithmic function of stimulus intensity; in others the curve is somewhat more flattened.  Galanter and Messick (1961) have shown that in such a case, reanalysis of the data by Thurstone's method of successive  intervals reveals a function logarithmically related to stimulus intensity.  (4) Edge effects. In absolute judgment, subjects frequently give a higher proportion of correct responses to stimuli at the  extremes of the range than to those within the range, and they may show higher values of d at the ends of the range. These  have been called "edge effects" (Durlach & Braida, 1969; Berliner, Durlach, & Braida, 1977) and the edge effect for P(C) has  been studied by Weber, Green,  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 201  and Luce (1977) and by Luce, Nosofsky, Green, and Smith (1982). Some data for proportion correct are illustrated in Fig. 6.  The "resolution edge effect," the edge effect for d' (Durlach & Braida, 1969; Berliner et al., 1977), is a different  phenomenon and will be discussed later.  (5) Sequential and related effects. Some important sequential effects occur in absolute judgment (e.g., Ward & Lockhead,  1971). These have been discussed by Treisman and Williams (1984) and will be treated more fully below.  Various explanations have been offered for the separate findings, but no single theory links them in an integrated way. The  following sections examine whether the present model is capable of producing results of similar form.  SIMULATIONS OF THE MODEL FOR ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT  To examine the general properties of the model it was simulated on a PDP 11/03 computer. Various sets of parameter values were  used for this purpose. The object was not to fit particular data sets at this stage, or to establish that all the data could  be accounted for by a single set of parameters, but to examine the feasibility of the present approach.  In the first simulations to be reported, N stimulus intensities were spaced at equal intervals on a linear stimulus dimension,  the stimulus range varying from 2 to 100 units in different simulations. For each stimulus intensity, its natural logarithm  was taken as the mean of a corresponding normal central distribution on the sensory scale S. On each simulated trial a  stimulus intensity was randomly selected and generated a sensory effect whose value was given by a normal random number from a  distribution centered on the mean effect for that stimulus, with standard deviation as. Except when otherwise stated, the  criterion reference values were equally spaced on S, at an interval U such that the lowest criterion corresponded to the mean  effect of stimulus 1 plus U/2, and the highest criterion to the mean effect of stimulus N, less U/2. This is the spacing in  Fig. 2. At least 50 trials per stimulus intensity were run for each set of parameters. On each trial the following events  occurred: the response criteria were updated; a stimulus intensity was selected by a random procedure; the response was  determined by examining the relation of the sensory effect on that trial to the criteria; sensory and response indicator  traces were then generated in accordance with the model. Indicator traces decayed linearly over trials, and updating of the  criteria at the commencement of each trial was performed by adjusting the indicator traces to allow for decay since the  previous trial and calculating the current value of each criterion as the algebraic sum of its reference value and the  indicator traces relating to it. The stimulus and response on each trial were recorded, and finally measures such as  information transmission were found. Some results for equally spaced stimuli are shown in Fig. 7 for one set of parameters.  A considerable resemblance can be seen between the simulation results in Fig. 7  480/29%2_5  202 MICHEL TREISMAN  _m 4.0 w  3.0  a 02.010 a  z  0   0 12,  0 w z  S 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1  m 30  0  G  N=10  10 20 30 40 - 50 60 70 51 '1_ 51 11G 51 110  STIMULUS R!'FNSITI STIMULUS INTENSITY  FIG. 7. Simulation of the model for absolute judgment. The parameters used were d,=0.02, 5,=0.008, ds=0.30, 6,=0.003, and  vs=0.025. These values refer to the S scale. Lateral shift functions assume a linear decrease in initial adjustment, as in Eq.  (8): SR = 10 criteria for both tracking and stabilization mechanisms. The stimuli were spaced at equal intervals on a linear  scale (I) between the limits I.;. and Imax, and the mean sensory effect of stimulus I, is S; = In I;. Im;= 51 except for the  left lower panel where Im;n = 11. The criteria were equally spaced on the S scale unless otherwise stated. Left upper panel:  information transmitted when Im- -1m;= 60 and N, the number of stimuli, ranges from 2 to 40. Lines fitted by eye. Upper  right panel: information transmitted for N= 10 with (I--I,,,) varying from 2 to 100. The scale on the abscissa, log(1mar/I-n)  is analogous to dB. Left lower panel: mean responses plotted against stimulus intensity; N= 12. Circles: criteria equally  spaced on S; the continuous line shows the best-fitting log function of stimulus intensity. Crosses: reference criteria were  placed exactly intermediate between the mean central effects of successive stimuli. Right lower panel: proportions of correct  responses for each stimulus in sets of 8, 10, or 12.  and the experimental data in Fig. 6. Similar results were obtained with other parameters. The upper left panel shows  transmitted information as a function of the number of stimuli in the stimulus set, when these are equally spaced in the same  fixed range. The curve can be represented as an ascending limb followed by a horizontal limb. The horizontal line would  correspond exactly to the "magical number" 7. The results can of course be made to approach higher or lower limits by varying  os. The simulated points appear to increase slowly, rather than to be stationary at an upper limit. Pollack (1952) offered the  former description for his results, and the data for Garner (1953) shown in Fig. 6 are consistent with that description.  MacRae (1970) has argued that when sampling bias is corrected for, information transmission declines for high numbers of  stimuli. However, the point here is that information transmission in the simulation, calculated without such  N=12  10 20 30 NUMBER OF STIMULI  a E  z 0  10 20 40 60 80 100 RANGE  N=8 N-10 N=12  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 203  correction, parallels experimentally recorded information transmission, also calculated without correction.  The right upper panel shows the effect of range on the information transmitted, for a constant number of stimuli. This curve  may be compared with the experimental data illustrated in Fig. 6.  In the left lower panel the open circles represent mean responses for a run with 12 stimuli, the lowest stimulus value being  Imin = 11, and the range 60. The continuous line is the best fitting log function of stimulus intensity. It compares with the  log functions frequently obtained experimentally. In a second simulation (plotted as crosses), the reference criteria were  spaced not at equal intervals on S, but exactly intermediate between successive stimulus means on S, i.e., S, < So,, < Sz,  with (So,, - S,) = (SZ - S,,,), etc. These results show a straight line relation between mean response and stimulus intensity,  in accordance with the earlier argument: Because these criteria project to approximately equally spaced points on I, we obtain  a linear relation between R and I.  The right lower panel shows the proportion correct for each stimulus in an equally spaced set when N= 8, 10, or 12. The edge  effect for accuracy is seen. The parameters used for Fig. 7 and given in the caption are illustrated by Figs. 2 and 3, with N  = 10 and the stimulus range ImaX - Imin = 60. The standard deviation of the criterion distribution shown in Fig. 2 has the  value obtained in a simulation with the same parameters.  It has sometimes been assumed that criteria are placed exactly intermediate between the means of successive distributions on  the central scale (e.g., Gravetter & Lockhead, 1973; Luce et al., 1976). On the present argument this is an assumption that  should be made with care. One case in which such an assumption may be tenable is that in which stimuli are logarithmically  spaced on L If S = In I, placing criteria intermediate between successive stimuli means on S would be equivalent to equal  spacing on S, an assumption that may be plausible.  The simulations in Fig. 7 are compatible with the main experimental findings given by absolute judgment. If the stimulus range  is fixed, and additional stimuli are interpolated, they will be more closely spaced, the overlap of the distributions on the  central scale will increase, and this will restrict increase in information transferred, determining an asymptote (capacity  limit) for this measure. If the range is increased while the number of stimuli remains fixed, then, for small ranges, the main  effect will be that sensory overlap will be reduced, resulting in an increase in information transmission. At the same time  the criterion variance due to the stabilization mechanism will increase, and this will cause the curve to be negatively  accelerated as a function of range, setting an asymptote to the increase in information transmission.  The "edge effect" for the proportion correct, P(C), illustrated in the lower right panel of Fig. 6 is reproduced in Fig. 7. It  can be attributed to two features of the model as simulated. First, end stimuli are at an advantage (Weber et al., 1977).  Compare a central stimulus with an end stimulus. The sensory effects produced by a central stimulus will give rise to the  correct response only when they lie between  204 MICHEL TREISMAN  the two criteria bounding the corresponding category, and they will generate errors if they lie beyond these criteria on  either side. For example, I6 in Fig. 2 generates a sensory distribution centered on S6. So far as this distribution lies  between Sc,, and Sc,6 it will generate the correct response, but the tails of the distribution lying beyond these criteria in  each direction will generate errors. A stimulus at the end of the range has a distribution which does not encounter a bounding  criterion on its outer side. The distribution with mean S, gives errors only for the tail which lies above S.  ,,, . However far this distribution extends below S,,, it can only elicit the correct response. This effect favors end stimuli.  A second effect when stimuli are linearly spaced on I, as represented in Fig. 2, is that the outer stimulus distributions are  better matched to the positions of the criteria than the inner distributions. For example, the proportion of the distribution  generated by 19 which lies between So,, and So,, in Fig. 2 (the criteria are shown as broken lines) is greater than the  proportion of the distribution generated by 16 that lies between So', and S1,6. Because the criteria are equally spaced on S  but the stimulus intensities are linearly spaced on I, stimuli near the ends of the range will be classified correctly more  often than stimuli near the center. Of course, in many experiments stimulus spacing is logarithmic, creating a situation which  will be examined below.  In the present model, categorization is limited by the sensory variance, as, and by the criterion variance which arises from  the processes of stabilization and tracking. Both increase in as and increase in ds or dr will reduce the information  transmitted. Hypothetically, if us is sufficiently small and a subject can completely suppress tracking and stabilization  (thus suppressing sequential dependencies) and can rely solely on well-established and well-positioned reference criteria,  highly efficient categorization should be possible. Such an extreme may underlie the phenomenon of absolute pitch.  The results in Fig. 7 show general agreement with the data in Fig. 6. But a more detailed analysis of this model would be of  interest. The model has a number of components: To what extent does each component contribute to the results? To examine these  points more closely further simulations were conducted.  These simulations differ in two ways from those above. First, physical stimulus spacing is logarithmic, as is frequent in  experiments. Second, an effort was made to reduce the number of parameters specifying the model to the minimum. Reference  criterion spacing is determined by a simple rule, and a single value of 6s is assumed. We also require dr and br, and ds and  6,, to define the shift magnitudes and decay rates for each adjustment mechanism. To avoid specifying further parameters, the  lateral shift functions were defined in the simplest possible way: The initial shift for each criterion, however remote from  the site of the sensory input, is identical with that for the corresponding boundary criterion. That is, the effect of an  input or response in setting up indicator traces for remote criteria is taken to be identical to its effect on the immediate  bounding criterion on the same side of the sensory input. Then the shifts produced are constant in each direction, and each  mechanism has two parameters only, d and 6. Thus, if N= 10 and the input S, on trial t determines  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 205  the response "5" (i.e., S,,,(t) 5 S, < Sc,5(t)), then the tracking mechanism will prescribe that the criteria S,o to S,., must  all move down by the quantity A,, and the criteria Sc.5 to S,9 must all move up by d,. Similarly, the stabilization mechanism  will prescribe that criteria S.., to Sc,, are all moved up by having added to them the quantity ds(S,-S,,(t)), and that  criteria S,,5 to S,,9 are moved down by having added to them the quantity ds(S,-S,At)). The assumption that the lateral shift  functions are constant is somewhat artificial, and likely to reduce the ability of the model to match the data. But it may be  a useful simplification at this stage of analysis.  INFORMATION TRANSMISSION AS A FUNCTION OF SET SIZE  Figure 8 shows the results of stimulations for varying numbers of stimuli. N ranged from 2 to 40, and in each case the  stimulus intensities extended from 51 to 111 in arbitrary units and were equally spaced on a logarithmic scale of stimulus  intensity. The central scale is S; =1n I;, so that the mean central effects of the stimuli are equally spaced on the central  dimension S. Simulations are shown for different values of the variance of the central distributions (as = 0.02 or 0.04), for  different rules for placing the criteria in relation to the stimulus means (though with criteria equally spaced in all cases),  and with criterion positions invariant (upper panel), or subject to adjustments by the tracking mechanism, the stabilization  mechanism, or both (lower panel). In "internal" criterion placement (labeled INT), the criteria are spaced on S at a constant  interval U such that the lowest criterion, So,,, lies half a unit (U/2) above the mean of the weakest stimulus, and the  highest criterion, S,,,-,, lies half a unit below the mean of the strongest stimulus. In "external" criterion placement (EXT),  the criteria are spaced at a constant interval U such that the lowest criterion lies half a unit below the mean of the weakest  stimulus, and the highest criterion lies half a unit above the mean of the strongest stimulus.  The curves in Fig. 8 share a common feature: As N increases, the information transmitted rises at first and then approaches an  asymptote. This general pattern does not depend on the short-term criterion-setting mechanisms: it is shown when the criteria  are invariant in position. Models for two values of the central standard deviation, os, and two systems of criterion placement  are illustrated as insets, drawn to scale, for N = 4. They show normal distributions corresponding to the four stimuli, and  three equally spaced criteria represented by vertical lines.  A Thurstonian model with invariant criteria and constant distributions of central sensory effects is sufficient to generate  the usual information transmission function (upper panel). "Channel capacity" simply reflects the limit on discrimination  which must result from the fact that as the number of stimuli in a constant range increases, the criteria must be placed  closer together. Thus, the opportunity for discrimination afforded by an increase in the number of response categories is  subver-  206  MICHEL TREISMAN  N 10 H  m  0  E Z a  0 40 r  a F 0 z 3-0  r0  EFFECTS OF VARIANCE  AND CRITERION PLACEMENT  INT EXT  QS =0.02nIn non 1~1H  oS =004 I AA  40  3  2  0  EFFECTS OF CRITERION SETTING MECHANISMS  As Ss 6r Sr  10 0006 - - -- - - 005 002 -- 10 0,006 OOS 002  as= 0.02  CRITERIA INTERNAL PLACEMENT  0  2 4 8 1012 16 20 24 32 40 NUMBER OF STIMULI  FIG. 8. Information transmission. Simulations for N varying from 2 to 40. The stimulus intensities range from In 51 to In 111  in equal steps on a log scale. Information transmitted in bits is plotted against N. The mean central effect of each stimulus  is 3 =1n I;. The central distribution for each stimulus has the same standard deviation as, which is either 0.02 or 0.04.  Two rules for placing the reference criterion values were simulated. In "internal placement" they are positioned at equal  intervals U on the S scale, with the lowest reference criterion So,, placed U/2 units above the mean of stimulus I,, and the  highest criterion SON -I placed U/2 units below ~ `~N. In "external placement" the criteria are again positioned at equal  intervals U but with So,, placed U/2 units below 3`, and SO,N-, placed U/2 units above SN. Upper panel: curves for each  combination of two values of as and two criterion placement rules; no short-term criterion adjustments. Lower panel: curves  for us= 0.02 and internal criterion placement, with tracking, or stabilization, or neither, or both.  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 207  ted by the opportunity for a given stimulus to distribute its central effects over a greater number of response categories.  The information statistic measures this effect. Not surprisingly, the curves in the upper panel show that as as increases, the  asymptotic value of the curve decreases. But central noise is not the only determinant of the asymptote: The information  transmitted depends also on criterion placement. It is greater for the internal placement criterion pattern than for external  placement, except as asymptote is approached. Of course, as the number of stimuli increases, the differences between the  positions of the criteria under the two placement rules decrease and eventually become minor, and so the curves converge. As  the information transmitted is affected both by as and by the pattern of criterion placement, the information measure  confounds two determinants and is by that the less informative. We may draw a parallel with the percentage correct measure in  detection: This depends both on d' and on criterion placement and does not enable us to distinguish between them.  Consequently, SDT measures have come to be preferred to P(C) because they avoid this confounding. Similarly, analyses which  separate out the effects of as and criterion placement should be more useful than measures of information for studying  absolute judgment.  The modifications produced by the short-term criterion adjustment mechanisms are shown in the lower panel. These simulations  assumed the simplest possible lateral shift functions: constant shifts in each direction. Each curve rises toward an  asymptote. If stabilization or tracking or both are added the effect is to increase criterion variance. This reduces the  measure of information transmitted. The shape of the resulting curve depends on the way this additional variance is added.  Tracking adds a component of variance that is independent of N, and accordingly it lowers the asymptote of the curve without  much affecting the initial rise. Stabilization shifts are of large magnitude for wide criterion spacing, but get smaller as  the number of criteria in a fixed range increases. Thus the additional variance produced by this source declines as N  increases. Consequently, it reduces information transmission for small numbers of stimuli but when N is large the curves tend  towards the asymptotes that would obtain in the absence of stabilization.  Why is the capacity of absolute judgment so low compared with the fineness of discrimination observed in threshold  experiments? Why should judgments of stimuli spaced over a range corresponding to hundreds of j.n.d.s transmit information  equivalent to only five to seven alternatives? This would indeed be puzzling if discrimination were limited only by the  central variability, as, of the effects of a stimulus. Although it is possible that there is somewhat less central variability  in the threshold task, because of better adaptation, it is unlikely that this could account for the whole of the difference.  The present model provides another answer: The criterion-setting parameters may differ in the two cases. When responses are  determined by criteria distributed over a range of hundreds of j.n.d.s, the variations in the intensity of the stimulus source  that the tracking mechanism must be able to adjust to are very much greater than when judgments are made in a threshold range.  Accordingly A,, and consequently its contribution to criterion variance, must be considerably greater in absolute judgment. A  parallel argument applies to  208 MICHEL TREISMAN  stabilization. In a detection task, the deviations of the sensory inputs from the detection criterion will be much smaller  than when the average magnitude of such deviations is determined by the distances between absolute judgment criteria [cf. Eqs.  (2), (10), and (11)]. Thus, absolute judgment stabilization will produce much greater indicator traces and correspondingly  higher criterion variance. Increased criterion variance from these sources may account for the surprisingly low capacity limit  of absolute judgment.  THE EFFECTS OF STIMULUS RANGE ON INFORMATION TRANSMISSION AND SENSITIVITY  If the number of stimuli is constant but the range between the weakest and strongest stimuli increases, measures of  transmitted information and of "total sensitivity" (Braida & Durlach, 1972) increase. On the present account these are  different effects and their curves do not necessarily follow the same course. In Fig. 9  STIMULUS RANGE  FiG. 9. Variation in stimulus range with N fixed. Simulations for 10 stimuli. Stimulus range varies from 2 to 100, Im;n = 51.  Criteria are "internally placed" on S, sensory distributions are normal and as= 0.04. Ranges are indicated on the scale  ln(ImaJImin)- Curves of information (bits) and mean d are plotted for the parameter values shown for simulations with tracking  or stabilization or neither or both.  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 209  measures of information transmission and sensitivity are plotted from simulations in which the stimulus range was varied. In  these simulations S = In I, as = 0.04, the reference criteria are equally spaced on S with the lowest reference criterion half  a unit (where the intercriterion interval is one unit) above the mean of the weakest stimulus and the highest criterion half a  unit below the mean of the strongest stimulus, there are 10 stimuli in every case, the weakest stimulus is Imin = 51, and the  stimulus range varies from 2 to 100 units. Ranges are indicated on an abscissa corresponding to In(Imax/Imin). Tracking and  stabilization, when they occur, are defined by the parameters shown in the figure, and lateral shift functions are constant.  The upper panel plots information transmitted and the lower panel plots the mean d: d was found for each pair of successive  stimuli and the mean of these values for the (N-1) successive stimulus pairs is plotted.  When neither tracking nor stabilization is present, the curve for information transmission must be concave downwards, since  the information can never exceed 1092 10 = 3.32, however large the range. But on the same assumptions, d' must increase  without limit as range increases, since the criteria are invariant and a, is constant, but the intervals between successive  stimulus means increase with range. Thus the curves for information transmitted and for mean d' must differ. This is  illustrated by the simulations for fixed criteria (continuous lines) in the upper and lower panels, which are, respectively,  concave downwards and concave upwards. Tracking (broken lines) adds a constant component of criterion variance which lowers  both information and d', but does not change the shapes of the curves significantly. Neither of these cases accords with  Braida and Durlach's (1972) finding that the curves for information and sensitivity are similar in form. But if stabilization  occurs, the curves change. The magnitudes of stabilization shifts increase in proportion to the intercriterion distance as  range increases. Thus, the criterion variance generated by stabilization is a positive function of range. This lowers the  upper limit for information transmission, and it imposes a similar limit on the increase in mean d'. With stabilization the  curves for information and sensitivity (dotted and dash-dot curves) become similar. If there is stabilization, both  information transmitted and mean d' have upper limits and each curve is concave downwards.  EDGE AND Bow EFFECTS  Edge effects obtained by Weber et al. (1977) for the proportion of correct responses to each stimulus, (PC), were illustrated  in Fig. 6: P(C) rises at the edges of the stimulus range. Two edge or bow effects should be distinguished: the accuracy edge  effect for P(C) shown in Fig. 6, and the resolution edge effect, a similar-looking result obtained when d' is calculated for  successive pairs of stimuli (Berliner et al., 1977; Luce et al., 1982; Nosofsky, 1983a; Chase, Bugnacki, Braida, & Durlach,  1983).  MICHEL TREISMAN  08  06  a  04  02  0  0  0  ~s ~S nr dr s As As Ar br s    - - - - 004 y~ 10 0-02 02 014 0-02        0.1 t3- 00 0.051 ai \}~    2.5      W    o a o 0    o . o .    0 0 1.5 0 '   20     I'I~'I~I~lilfl~l!lil III'I'I'I~I~III'LL    S $ 1.0        0-07   b  ry ,OW   g 0 ________________      o-05   6 ?5 o    a    .     . o . o a.   2-0- 0 o. 15 ,    I ~II 'I I~ I! I o   1.   02  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910  STIMULUS INTENSITY (LOG SCALE)  4  FIG. 10. Edge effects. Simulations for 10 stimuli equally spaced on a log scale of stimulus intensity between In 51 and In  111, with S=1n I. Four variations are shown. These differ in the placement of the criteria, and in the presence or absence of  short-term criterion adjustments. In each case an inset shows the relations of the criteria (broken lines) and the mean  central effects of the stimuli (continuous lines). For each model, P(C) is plotted against stimulus intensity on the left, and  a, and d' are plotted on the right: d,,,+, is plotted for each stimulus pair (I,, 12),..., (I9, I,o). A 1000 trials per  stimulus were run in random order. The empty and filled symbols show results for two replications. Upper left panel: The  criteria are invariant; as =0.04. The reference criteria are equally spaced with internal placement. Lower left panel: This  differs only in that successive intercriterion intervals decrease towards the center of the range. Their relative sizes, from  the periphery to the center, are 1/3:1/4:1/5:1/6; followed by a symmetrical increase. So,, lies above 3 at an interval equal  to half the distance from So,, to SO,z, and S,,9 lies a similar interval below 910. Since the criteria are invariant,  criterion variance is zero for both left panels, as shown by the broken line. Upper right panel: The reference criteria were  at the same positions as in the model on the upper left. In addition tracking and stabilization occurred. The parameters are  shown in the figure, and the inset shows the mean positions taken up by the criteria during the simulation. Lower right panel:  This differs only in the spacing of the reference criteria, which was identical with that in the lower left panel.  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 211  Both effects can be derived from the present model, but in different ways. The probability that a given stimulus will evoke a  correct response depends on the proportion of the central distribution corresponding to that stimulus that lies between the  two criteria delimiting the range on the central scale in which inputs generate the corresponding response. Also, as Weber et  al., (1977) have observed, extreme signals can be confused only with interior signals that lie on one side of them. Thus P(C)  reflects criterion placement. "Internal placement" of the end criteria, as illustrated in the inset in the upper left panel of  Fig. 10, favors a high level of correct responses for the two end stimuli. If the criteria are equally spaced, equidistant  between the mean stimulus effects, this will result in a lower but similar level of correct responding for the remaining  stimulus intensities. The simulations in the left and right upper panels of Fig. 10 had equally spaced reference criteria. On  the left the criteria were invariant, on the right short-term adjustments occurred and the resulting mean positions are shown.  With the parameters illustrated, these are similar to the reference values. In each case we see accuracy edge effects in which  P(C) rises for the two external stimuli but there is little further bowing.  The shape of the bow is further modified if the criteria are not equally spaced. The two lower panels in Fig. 10 show  simulations for unequal spacing of the reference criteria. The spacings used are illustrated in the insets. There is internal  placement of the extreme criteria, and the intercriterion intervals decrease from the periphery to the center of the stimulus  range. In each case, this spacing causes an increase in the bowing of the P(C) curve: Both the size of the intercriterion  intervals and the placement of criteria relative to the stimulus distributions become more unfavorable for correct responding  towards the center of the stimulus range.  It seems that the bow can be produced or increased by the occurrence of larger intercriterion intervals at the extremes. In  these simulations, the peripheral reference criteria were placed further apart than the central ones. However, the occurrence  of bowing does not necessarily imply that the reference criteria are located in this way. Even with equal spacing of reference  criteria, it is possible for tracking to displace the mean effective positions of the extreme criteria outwards and so cause  outer intercriterion intervals to be relatively larger. It is of interest that Galanter and Messick (1961) applied Thurstone's  method of successive intervals to absolute judgments made on an 11-point scale, and showed that the intercriterion intervals  were larger at the ends: From the lower end they were, successively, 0.23, 0.16, 0.10, 0.05, 0.05, 0.05, 0.06, 0.07, 0.16.  They also found an increase in discriminal dispersions for the lowest stimuli and possibly for the highest stimuli.  If we calculate d;,;+, for a pair of successive stimulus intensities I; and Ii,,, this index should not depend on the  criterion positions. The value of d;,,+, is given by (S;+, - S;)/Q;, where ai is the value of as for stimulus i. Thus, if the  stimulus means are equally spaced on S, variation in d' will result from variation in as or from the unequal addition of  criterion variance to it. For the simulations in the upper and lower left panels the criteria are invariant; thus a' is zero  for all criteria; also as is constant for all stimuli. Thus there is no basis for systematic variation in d', and we see only  random variation in this index in the left panels. On the right, as is also  212 MICHEL TREISMAN  constant but now stabilization and tracking occur and produce criterion variation. This will combine with U2 to determine d'.  The values of a, for each criterion given by the simulations are plotted in the upper and lower panels on the right: These  curves have the form of an inverted U. Thus the total variance limiting discrimination is greater at the center of the range,  and correspondingly d' should decline towards the center. Somewhat noisy d' bows are indeed produced.  Why do the a,, curves have the inverted U form? If we consider the effects of tracking on a central criterion, such as S,,S,  we note that some sensory inputs will fall above it, and cause it to shift down, and other sensory inputs will fall below it,  and cause it to shift up. These events will occur roughly equally often, and so the effective value of the criterion will  oscillate irregularly up and down, with high variability in its momentary position. But an extreme criterion, such as Sc,,,  will be subject most of the time to the net effect of indicator traces generated by sensory inputs falling above it. These all  tend to shift it downwards, and as old indicator traces decay away they will be replaced by new traces with the same effect;  and only a few traces will specify upwards shifts. Thus there should be much less variation in this criterion. Similar  arguments apply to stabilization, but the contribution of this process to the variation between values of a' for different  criteria was less for the parameters used in the present simulations.  Stabilization with no tracking produced bowing of the P(C) curve but weak effects on v. and consequently no clear d' edge  effects. Tracking unopposed by stabilization produced d' bows, but also tended to produce outwardly directed shifts of the end  criteria so great that the lowest and highest responses were rarely made: This wiped out the P(C) edge effect. Thus, for the  parameters examined here, both mechanisms seem to be necessary to give the best simulations of both edge effects.  The curves in the right lower panel of Fig. 10 show d9,,, considerably greater than d'  1,,. This result was found only with certain parameters: It occurred with ds large and the outer intercriterion intervals  larger than the inner intervals, but the conditions for its production have not been fully explored. However, it seems of  interest to draw attention to it because a possibly related finding is common: A similar asymmetry, higher values of d' at the  highest intensities than at the lowest, can be seen in almost all the bowed d' curves reported by Luce et al. (1982) and  Nosofsky (1983a), and also in the curves obtained by Chase et al. (1983) in their Experiments 1 and 2.  The asymmetry does not arise from an asymmetrical data matrix, but arises because of the way d is calculated. For di.2 the  denominator is determined by the variance of the responses to stimulus I,; for d",o it is determined by the variance for 19.  But there is a relative rise in variability for the end stimuli I, and I,,, in these simulations. This reduces d;,2 but not d9  ,,o. For example, in one simulation di,2 was 1.45, with a,/v, = 0.78, and d9,,o was 1.83, with as/v,, = 1.28. The difference  between u,/Q,, in the two cases reflects greater variability of the underlying distributions corresponding to the responses to  stimuli 1 and 10 than to 2 and 9. In this respect the simulated response matrix was symmetrical. If, instead of d', we  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 213  calculate for stimuli 9 and 10 the measure d9,,o=(S,o-S9)/Q,o, we get d9,,o=1.43 for these data, a value almost identical with  d',,2  THE CENTRAL TENDENCY OF JUDGMENT  Hollingworth (1913) discovered a tendency to overestimate small and underestimate large stimuli which he described as a  tendency to shift judgments towards the median of a series. This effect has been reported for a range of paradigms, though  occasionally the reverse effect, underestimation of small and overestimation of large stimuli, is seen (Guilford, 1954;  Johnson, 1972; Woodworth, 1938; Woodrow, 1951). The effect may manifest as a tendency for the absolute judgment curve to  become sigmoid: k increases slowly at first, then more rapidly, and then more slowly again. Examples of such patterns, at one  or both extremes of the stimulus range, can be seen in Philip (1947), Stevens and Galanter (1957, Figs. 2 and 10), and Marks  (1968, Fig. 1).  On the present account, the central tendency may arise from either or both of two causes: (a) If the criteria at the ends of  the range are displaced sufficiently far outwards, sensory inputs will rarely fall in the intervals corresponding to the  lowest and highest judgment categories and these will be underused; this will cause overestimation of low and underestimation  of high stimuli. (b) Even without such criterion displacement, if variability is sufficiently high, the stimuli at the ends of  the range will attract a disproportionate number of central judgments. This may occur either because a, is high or because of  excessive criterion variance. For example, the upper tail of the lowest sensory distribution, say the S, distribution in Fig.  2, will sometimes fall above Sc,, or above S,,2, etc., giving responses such as "2" and "3," but however extensive the lower  tail of the distribution, this stimulus cannot generate responses less than "1." Thus, the average response is raised.  Similarly, the S, distribution will sometimes give rise to high responses such as "3," "4," or "5," but though it can  erroneously give rise to "1" it cannot generate a response less than this. The effect will be to raise the average judgment  for low stimuli, and reduce it for high stimuli.  The further S, lies below Sc,,, the less the tendency to overestimate I, will be, and the greater the probability that I, is  correctly categorized. Thus, we may predict that the greater the P(C) edge effect is, the less marked the central tendency of  judgment should be.  The simulation in Fig. 11 illustrates these processes. The same parameters apply to each simulation, except for dr. The  stimuli are spaced at logarithmically equal intervals and so their mean central effects (continuous vertical bars) are equally  spaced on S. The reference criterion values are exactly intermediate between the stimulus means.  For d,=0 (stabilization without tracking) the plots in the upper left panel show that the mean criteria (broken vertical  lines) are stabilized at or near their reference values; criterion variance is low; and no central tendency is seen. When d,  is 0.15  N A  N H Z L l7 O  0 m a  10 9  6 5 4 3 2 11  10 9 8 7 6 5I 4 3 2  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 STIMULUS INTENSITY (LOG SCALE)  01 b  0  01  b"  0  10  05 002 01 002 9 8 7  6 5 4 3 2I  10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 6 9 10 STIMULUS INTENSITY (LOG SCALE)  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 CENTRAL SCALE (S)  FIG. 11. Central tendency of judgment. Simulations with d,=0.5, 5,=0.02, 5,=0.1, as =0.02, S= In I, 10 stimulus values  logarithmically spaced from 51 to lll, 100 trials per stimulus intensity, reference criteria halfway between the stimulus  means on the S scale (as shown for d,=0), and d,=0, 0.15, 0.3 or 0.6. The mean central effects of the stimuli are represented  by continuous vertical bars on S, the mean criterion positions as broken lines, and ac is plotted for each criterion. Mean  absolute judgments are plotted against stimulus intensity on a log scale.  n r tit a  z  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 215  (left lower panel), there is a slight increase in cc, the criteria are displaced outwards and the response curve shows a  slight central tendency effect. For d r = 0.3, the outwards displacement of the mean criterion positions is greater, ac has  risen to a higher level, and the central tendency is obvious. For d r = 0.6, the mean positions of the criteria have moved  inwards, though their variance is very high and ensures a marked central tendency. This panel demonstrates that it is not  necessary for the criteria to move outwards to get the central tendency effect. High variability may suffice.  It appears that the central tendency of judgment can arise as a result of shortterm adjustments to criteria. This is not the  only way in which it can arise. Woodrow (1934) obtained the classical pattern of overestimation of short time intervals and  underestimation of long intervals although he employed a different set of subjects to judge each interval in his range; no  subject was exposed to more than one stimulus value. An indifference interval at which the mean judgment did not differ from  the stimulus was obtained at 0.6 s. Fraisse (1948) attempted to reconcile this observation with Hollingworth's hypothesis by  suggesting that although the subjects were not exposed to the full range of intervals in the experiment, they each possessed  an indifference interval determined by the combined effect of the durations "perqus dans toutes les occasions de la vie." If  so, Woodrow's result could be understood as an expression of the long-term processes which set reference criterion values. In  Fraisse's argument, common temporal experiences tend to establish criterion reference values giving little constant error for  an indifference interval which may be similar for different subjects (perhaps because short intervals of the order of less  than a second are those we most commonly process in the course of performing frequent skilled movements such as walking or  grasping and manipulating objects). A tendency to space reference criteria too widely about that point, or simply the high  variability of temporal judgments, may then produce the overestimation of shorter and underestimation of longer intervals.  Ward and Lockhead (1970) have demonstrated that a criterion established at one time may be capable of influencing judgments  made at a later time-in their experiment, after the lapse of a day.  SIMPLE AND COMPLEX SEQUENTIAL EFFECTS IN ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT  Sequential effects, as also certain more complex measures which may be interpreted as products of the same processes, have  been observed in absolute judgment. A number of models which employ the hypothesis that shifts in criterion may underlie  sequential dependencies have been reviewed by Treisman and Williams (1984). Direct demonstrations of shifts in criteria in  absolute judgment have been provided by Purks et al. (1980) and Luce et al. (1982). Shifts in criteria in the rating procedure  have been studied by Treisman and Faulkner (1984a).  If the mean response in absolute judgment, R, is plotted as a function of the stimulus presented on the preceding trial (lag  1), or the trial before that, or at still  216 MICHEL TREISMAN  earlier lags, then characteristic effects of those previous stimuli are seen. There is a positive dependency on the stimulus  presented on the previous trial: if this was weak, the current response tends to be low; if strong, the response tends to be  high. But at longer lags, the relation between the current response and the past stimulus reverses, to give a negative  dependency on past stimuli. If, however, we plot R as a function of the responses made on earlier trials, rather than the  stimuli presented, the picture is modified: The positive dependency on short lags is more marked and the negative dependency  at long lags is less (Ward & Lockhead, 1971).  In Fig. 12 data are shown which illustrate this finding. These data come from a subject run in an unpublished absolute  identification experiment from my laboratory. Eight stimuli were employed. These were 1000-Hz tones presented for 0.5 s at  intensities from 40 to 75 dB spaced at 5-dB intervals. The subject selected  10  _ 08 at 06 04 02 0  SO c- 40 a  0 30 "~ 20 10  Subject AF LOCKHEAD-KING  CORRELATION DIFFERENCES  10   1, 2  z   it o  0 0   z   o 7,8  a   10   40 SO 60 70 80  Stimulus IdE1)  COEFFICIENT STIMULUS DEPENDENCE  OF VARIATION S   ''  1, 2  4      3      6 RESPONSE DEPENDENCE  n  v 12  3   -30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30 1 2 3 4 5 6  Dt - Dt-1(dB) LAD  FIG. 12. Simple and complex sequential effects. Data for one subject for absolute identification with 8 stimuli and 8  responses. Stimuli were 500 ms 1000-Hz sinusoids, spaced at intervals of 5 dB from 40 to 75 dB. Upper left panel: the  correlation between successive responses, r(RR, ,) as a function of D,-D,_,, the decibel difference between the  corresponding stimuli. Lower left panel: the coefficient of variation of exp(R, - R, _ 1) plotted against the corresponding  stimulus difference. Upper right panel: the mean response difference R, - R, 1 for those pairs of trials on which D, = D, _ ,  is plotted against D,. Open symbols (labelled 1, 2): D,_2 was 40 or 45 dB; the best-fitting line is shown (continuous). Filled  symbols (7, 8): D,_Z was 70 or 75 dB; a broken line is fitted. Right middle panel: Stimulus dependence. Overall mean response  plotted for the stimulus presented on a preceding trial, for lags I to 6. Open symbols (1, 2): the stimulus presented n trials  earlier was either 40 or 45 dB. Filled symbols (7, 8): the earlier stimulus was 70 or 75 dB. Right bottom panel: response  dependence. R plotted against lag. Open symbols: preceding response was "1" or "2." Filled symbols: preceding response was "7 or "8."  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 217  his responses from the numbers "1" to "8." Results are shown for 2080 trials. In the right middle panel R is plotted against  lag for the cases in which the stimuli presented at a given lag were either one of the two weakest intensities (1, 2) or else  one of the two strongest intensities (7, 8). The characteristic pattern of stimulus dependence is seen: a positive dependency  at short lags, converting to a negative dependency at long lags. In the right lower panel R is plotted against lag for those  cases in which the responses on past trials were one of the two lowest (1, 2) or one of the two highest (7, 8). There is an  increased positive dependency at short lags, and the negative dependency at long lags is no longer seen.  A more complex measure of sequential dependency was employed by Lockhead and King (1983) in a ratio judgment task related to  magnitude estimation. In their task the subject estimated the intensity of I, (the stimulus presented on trial t) in terms of  the apparent ratio it bore to I,-,. The authors considered the ratio judgments for those pairs of successive trials in the  random sequence in which in fact I,-, was the same intensity as I, (this subset of ratios will be referred to as  "Lockhead-King" ratios; in these cases, of course, I,/I,_, = 1). Two interesting observations emerged: First, these ratios  tend to increase as the intensity of I, increases; and second, they tend to decrease as the intensity of I,-, increases.  Treisman and Williams (1984) ascribed these effects to the criterion-setting processes. If we accept that not only absolute  judgment but also magnitude estimation or ratio judgment employ criteria on the central scale S (Treisman, 1984b) then we  should expect absolute judgment to show a similar sequential dependency. Treisman and Williams (1984) reproduced both effects  in a simulation of absolute judgment.  The data in the upper right panel of Fig. 12 confirm that such effects are shown with absolute judgment. In magnitude  estimation the relation of response magnitude to S may be assumed to be exponential: RME = es (Treisman, 1964a, 1964b). In  absolute judgment, if the criteria are approximately equally spaced on S, responses should be approximately linearly related  to S, i.e., RAJ = S. Therefore, in place of the response ratios plotted by Lockhead and King (1983), response differences (R,  - R, , ) are plotted in Fig. 12. They are plotted against D, for those trials on which D, = D, _ , . The empty circles and  corresponding best-fitting line (the continuous line) labelled 1, 2 represent those cases in which the stimulus at lag 2 was  either 40 or 45 dB, and the filled circles and broken line represent those cases in which D, , was either 70 or 75 dB. The  response differences show an upwards trend as stimulus intensity increases, and superimposed on this, a decrease in their  value for the high values of D, ,. These effects are of the same form as those described by Lockhead and King (1983).  Two features of magnitude estimation noted by Luce and Green and their colleagues have been interpreted as complex sequential  effects by Treisman (1984b). First, if the correlation between the logs of successive magnitude estimates, r(log Rlog R, _ ,  ), is plotted against the corresponding stimulus ratio (D,-D,,_, for the decibel scale) then an inverted V pattern is obtained  (Jesteadt et al., 1977; Green et al., 1980). Second, if the coefficient of variation of the ratios between suc  aao:2s.2 6  218 MICHEL TREISMAN  cessive magnitude estimates C,(R,/R, _ , ) is plotted against the same abscissa then a V pattern is obtained (Green and Luce,  1974; Baird, Green, & Luce, 1980).  These results can be interpreted as consequences of the tracking process (Treisman, 1984b). But if such effects arise in  magnitude estimation from criterion setting on the central scale S, then they should also arise from criterion setting for  absolute judgments, unless the coarser quantization of response in this procedure attenuates them. The upper left panel in  Fig. 12 plots the correlation between successive responses r(Rt, R,-,) against stimulus differences for the present subject.  The inverted V pattern is clearly evident and very similar to that given by magnitude estimation. Ward (1982) has reported  similar results for category scaling data. The coefficient of variation was also calculated for the ratios of exponents of the  R,,J values, and C, [exp(R, - R, -, ) ] is plotted against the stimulus difference scale in the lower left panel. No V pattern  is seen. However, this is not altogether surprising as, presumably because of the coarse quantization of response required by  absolute judgment, the values of Cv are high compared with those usually obtained with magnitude estimation (Baird et al.,  1980), and both in magnitude estimation and cross-modality matching (Baird et al., 1980) and in simulations of these paradigms  (Treisman, 1984b) it is found that as the magnitude of C, increases, the V pattern is attenuated. But while this may partly  explain the absent  0  5-0  0  .- 4 13  a  a 20 V 10  SIMULATION LOCKHEAD-KING   CORRELATION DIFFERENCES    o  05   o     oo Z 1,2     6 o  o 0   o _ f-  z    4' 7, 8   o -m-i  o S '^   -0 5   I COEFFICIENT Stimulus (log scalel    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0  OF VARIATION 5 STIMULUS DEPENDENCE   4   c 5 ESPONSE DEPENDENCE   4 1, 2  -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 1 2 3 4 S 6  STIMULUS DIFFERENCE LAG  2  Fit;. 13. Simulation of the absolute judgment model, for 8 stimuli at equal logarithmic intervals between 51 and 111; S=1nI;  reference criteria intermediate between the stimulus means on S; A,=1.0, 6, = 0.036, d r = 0.2, Sr = 0.08, and us = 0.04.  Correlations, coefficients of variation, Lockhead-King differences, stimulus dependence, and response dependence are plotted  as in Fig. 12.  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 219  V pattern it is not the complete story since, for magnitude estimation, conditions in which the V pattern for C, disappears  also show attenuation of the correlations, whereas here they are high.  Results of a simulation of the present model are plotted in Fig. 13. For the parameters used, the magnitudes of the effects  differ somewhat from those in Fig. 12. But the simulated data in Fig. 13 reproduce the main features of the experimental data  in Fig. 12. The correlations between the responses on successive trials are described by an inverted V curve. Levels of Cv are  high and variable and there is only a slight suggestion of a V pattern. The Lockhead-King differences increase with stimulus  intensity, and they are higher when D, _ z is low than when it is high. The curves for stimulus dependence as a function of  lag show a positive dependency at short lags, with a change to a negative dependency at long lags. The similar curves for  response dependence show a greater short-lag positive dependency and a reduction in the long-lag negative dependency.  DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION  A model for absolute judgment has been presented that specifies the relations between stimulus intensity and a central scale,  and between criteria on that central scale and the response dimension, and that also includes defined long and shortterm  criterion-setting processes. The question examined has been whether such a model can reproduce the general patterns of results  that have been obtained in applications of the absolute judgment paradigm. No attempt was made to fit specific data in the  present article, and a simple version of the model was used. It appears that this model can reproduce some of the main  findings in absolute judgment.  In order to minimise the number of parameters in the simulations, the model was simplified by assuming that the lateral shift  functions are constant. Although minimising the number of parameters may be desirable at this stage in the development of the  theory, there is no reason to suppose that the mechanisms underlying response selection are necessarily simple. It is quite  possible that the lateral shift functions are more complex than has been assumed here; this remains a question for further  research. Such work will also have to examine what ranges of parameter values are able to give the different effects that have  been examined here, and the problem of estimating the parameters of the model from data remains to be investigated. Comparison  of Figs. 7 and 8 for information transmission as a function of number of stimuli, comparison of Figs. 7 and 9 for information  transmission as a function of stimulus range, and comparison of Figs. 7 and 10 for the P(C) edge effect show that considerable  variation in parameters and assumptions is consistent with obtaining these effects, but more investigation is necessary for  the resolution edge effect.  The present model adds to a Thurstonian basis criterion-setting processes that generate criterion variance. How far does the  result differ from a standard  220 MICHEL TREISMAN  w  Z 400  N W K  W 200 O  K W m  0  Z  STABILIZATION  40 4-1 42 43 44 4!5 46 S  4-0 42 44 46 46 50 52  S  Ftc. 14. Criterion distributions. A histogram showing the numbers of occurrences of each criterion value at intervals of 0.01  on S is shown on the left for criterion ScA, as given by a simulation of absolute identification for 8000 trials with 8  stimulus values at equal logarithmic spacing from In 51 to In 111, As= 1.0, 6,=0.02, as =0.04, internal placement of criteria,  no tracking. The normal curve with the same mean and standard deviation as the histogram (mean = 4.32, a = 0.082) is shown as  a broken line. On the right the distribution for the end criterion S,.7 is shown for the same parameters but with tracking  added (d,=0.20, 5,=0.04). The normal distribution with the same mean (4.65) and a (0.194) is shown as a broken line.  Thurstonian model with criterion variance? Some evidence is provided by a record of the trial-by-trial criterion positions  obtained in simulations of the absolute identification model. For each simulation 8000 trials were run and eight stimulus  values used. Two of the resulting distributions of criterion values are shown in Fig. 14. These distributions would not be  easily distinguishable from normal distributions. Thus the present modal is similar to a Thurstonian model with nonzero  criterion variance, though here criterion variances depend systematically on past events and are not necessarily equal.  It has frequently been taken as self-evident that the observed function relating absolute judgments to physical stimulus  intensities must duplicate the relation between the sensory effect of the stimulus and I, S;=f(Ii). The present analysis shows  that this intuition is fallacious: There is no necessary relation between these functions. If the observed relation is R; =  h(I;), it is not necessarily the case that h =f. To derive the conclusion that R = S = f (I) would require that we extend the  model by adding the assumption that the criteria are spaced at equal intervals on S. It may be convenient to make this  assumption, or alternatively to accept unequal intercriterion intervals if this allows a simpler form for S= f(I); a range of  pairs of assumptions relating to criterion spacing and the corresponding value of f is possible.  Durlach and Braida (1969) have presented a Thurstonian model that separated sensitivity from response bias. Kornbrot (1980)  found that the Thurstonian model with equal sensory variances and equal criterion variances gave a good fit to a number of  data sets. This does not exclude the possibility that criterion variance may vary, since such a model was not tested against  the same data. Kornbrot (1980) considers that the inability of the equal variance Thurstonian model to account for edge  effects is a serious flaw.  Luce et al. (1976) attributed capacity limits on information transmission to a rov-  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 221  ing attention band, and Weber et al. (1977) proposed that the edge effect could also be explained by this hypothesis, on the  assumption that the attention band is usually located at the extreme stimuli in the range. However, the attention band  hypothesis meets with a number of difficulties (Treisman, 1984b); in particular, different assumptions may need to be made  about its location to explain different results. In magnitude estimation it is assumed that the attention band is centered on  the last stimulus presented (Green & Luce, 1974); in magnitude production it must be located not at the last physical  intensity presented but at the stimulus which represents the subject's final production on the previous production trial  (Green et al., 1977); and to explain the edge effect it must attach to the extreme stimuli in the range (Weber et al., 1977).  The results in Fig. 8 illustrate an alternative account of capacity limits on information transmission. On the present model,  the "channel capacity" of absolute judgment, Miller's (1956) "magical number seven," depends on the sensory variance, as,  criterion variance, and on the placing of criteria. The information measure confounds these determinants.  If N is constant and the stimulus range is extended, the increase in intercriterion intervals should improve discrimination.  Braida and Durlach (1972) found negatively accelerated curves for both information transmission and total sensitivity, a  summed d' measure, as the stimulus range increased. The present model does not give this result in the absence of short-term  criterion adjustments, or with tracking alone. But if a stabilization process is included, negatively accelerated curves are  obtained for both information transmission and sensitivity. This results because the magnitudes of stabilization adjustments  increase as the sizes of the intercriterion intervals grow larger.  The range effect can be explained by Durlach and Braida's (1969) assumption that Qs is proportional to the square of the range  or by Gravetter and Lockhead's (1973) proposal that response criteria have variances proportional to the square of the range.  If the range effect is considered in isolation, the present account has no obvious advantage over these proposals. But the  present theory has the advantage that it was not devised to explain the range effect: The stabilization hypothesis was  developed to answer a basic theoretical question concerning criteria, and its initial application was to sequential  dependencies (Treisman & Williams, 1984). Thus there is a certain parsimony if it can be used to explain the range effect as  well.  The present model dissociates the edge effect for P(C) and the edge effect for d': The accuracy edge effects derive from  criterion placement and the resolution edge effects derive from differences in the total variance limiting discrimination at  different parts of the stimulus range. Figure 10 illustrated that, in the absence of criterion variance, criterion placement  could cause an accuracy edge effect for P(C), but no bow was seen for d'. When tracking and stabilization were added, the  criterion variance created was relatively greater for central criteria, and consequently d' fell at those positions. For the  cases investigated, it was necessary to include both tracking and stabilization to give satisfactory simulations of both the  accuracy and resolution edge effects.  222 MICHEL TREISMAN  Resolution edge effects have also been attributed to the use of perceptual anchors (Berliner & Durlach, 1973; Weber et al.,  1977), and the greater rise in d' sometimes seen at the high intensity end of the stimulus range to "deviations from Weber's  law" (Chase et al., 1983, p. 280). The perceptual anchor is an old but difficult concept. The term sometimes refers to the  value of a given stimulus. But if the selected stimulus is a member of the experimental range, it is difficult to see how the  system can identify a given anchor. If an end stimulus is supposed to be employed as an anchor, we have the problem that  repeated presentations of the same stimulus will produce a distribution of sensory effects, scattered on S, and not uniquely  identifiable as to their stimulus of origin. If an anchor stimulus is experimentally labelled as such, and the sensory system  refers to the last presentation of that stimulus, the effect should be equivalent to the use of a criterion on S with which is  associated all the variance involved in the sensory processing of a stimulus, giving it the standard deviation as. This has no  advantage over the use of a decision axis criterion, subject to central criterion variance alone. It is possible that if an  anchor stimulus is identified as such and repeatedly presented, its mean effect might be used as a criterion. But this  possibility is restricted at best to those cases in which such a procedure is followed. In absolute identification experiments  the subject is normally exposed to stimuli selected randomly from a set and does not know with any certainty which stimulus a  given sensory input arises from.  Braida et al. (1984) have attempted to develop a clearly specified perceptual anchor model capable of accounting for the  resolution edge effect. In this model anchors may be derived from explicitly identified standard stimuli, from "landmarks" of  the sensory system such as the absolute threshold, or from "sharp gradients in the values of the parameters describing the  stimulus set, or... in the stimulus presentation probabilities." For identification, the basic assumptions are that the  subject employs an upper and lower anchor given by the mean effects of the two end stimuli, with offsets. The two anchors have  variance but are perfectly correlated. The observer codes a sensory input by measuring its distance from each of these anchors  "in noisy discrete steps of finite mean size." The value assigned to the stimulus is a function of these two measures.  Sensitivity is limited by the noise in this measurement process, the sensory noise, and the anchor noise. The model (as is the  case with our model) does not give analytic predictions but is evaluated by numerical methods.  These assumptions can be shown to generate edge effects, as they make the distance measures for stimuli at the middle of the  range more variable than those for stimuli near one or other anchor, but it does not seem likely that they could explain other  phenomena which the criterion-setting approach can also account for, such as the occurrence and patterns of sequential effects.  Weber et al. (1977) investigated an anchor model in which anchors are associated with extreme signals, and judgments  deteriorate as a function of distance from the anchors, although they describe this assumption as "intuitively unsatisfactory  and artificial" (p. 230) and advocate the attention band hypothesis in its place. Some of their findings merit consideration  here. In their Experiment 1, a number of stimulus  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 223  ranges of varying extent were presented during a session. They found better performance near the highest and lowest  intensities used overall and conclude that this "suggests that the anchors are actually located at the most extreme  intensities encountered during the day... even when these intensities are not present in a particular block of trials" (p.  229). The explanation given by the present model for the resolution edge effect, that criterion variance tends to be greater  for central criteria than for end criteria, may be applicable here: Provided the time intervals involved were not too great,  relatively long-lasting effects of stabilization on criterion variance may have persisted from one block of trials to another.  Whether this explanation would work for these data requires more information on the time intervals involved in this  experiment, and the durability of stabilization traces, than is presently available.  Experiments 4b and c of Weber et al. (1977) provide further provocative findings. In each experiment, six stimulus intensities  were used: 30, 33, 60, 63, 90, and 93 dB SPL. In Experiment 4c the stimuli were individually identified by the subjects. The  proportions of correct responses were, for 30 and 33 dB 69%, for 60 and 63 dB 62 %, and for 90 and 93 dB 79 %. There was no  confusion between pairs but there is a marked edge effect. In Experiment 4b a different response set was used: for 30 or 33 dB  "low"; for 60 dB "3"; for 63 dB "4"; for 90 or 93 dB "high." Again there was no confusion between pairs-performance was  perfect for the extreme pairs: for 60 and 63 dB P(C) was 73%.  Even though there was no confusion between pairs, in Experiment 4c the central pair shows an edge effect, and a marked drop in  performance as compared with the same pair in Experiment 4b, from 73 to 62%. Yet, if the end stimuli act as anchors, they were  equally present in both cases.  The criterion-setting model offers the following explanation for these results. First, we note that gross discriminations in  loudness ("faint"-"moderate"-"loud") are frequent in daily life and should be determined by well-established criteria. The  three stimulus pairs used in these experiments are so different that discrimination between the pairs is likely to have  employed gross well-practised criteria requiring little or no stabilization in the experimental sessions. In Experiment 4b,  the only fine criterion employed was that discriminating between 60 and 63 dB. We suppose that it entrained stabilization  determined by inputs from those two stimuli. (The limit z,-cf. Eq. (2)-would exclude effects of more remote inputs.) But in  Experiment 4c, three fine criteria are required-one for each stimulus pair-each requiring stabilization. Provided the lateral  shift function allows adjustments to the end criteria to produce corresponding shifts in the central criterion, this criterion  would be subject to shifts provoked by misalignments of either end criterion, and thus its variance would be increased. A  similar argument would apply to tracking.  The increased variance of the 60-63 criterion in Experiment 4c would explain the reduced performance for this pair. If this  explanation is correct, these experiments demonstrate a half-way stage between the fine performance that may be possible with  a detection or similar paradigm, and the poorer performance characteristic of absolute judgment.  224 MICHEL TREISMAN  Luce et al. (1982) have reported a possibly related observation. They found that a "small step" procedure which constrained  successive stimuli to be selected from the vicinity of the preceding stimulus gave higher, and a "large step" procedure gave  lower values of d than a random ordering of stimuli. Nosofsky (1983a) has obtained related results. The criteria employed in  the "small step" procedure may be analogous to the 60-63 criterion in Experiment 4b above-adjustments made to them on recent  trials may have been determined by their own prior values and not by misalignments of distant criteria, and so their criterion  variance may be less (allowing d' to be higher) than in the "large step" procedure. Another possible factor is that shifts  induced in nearby criteria by a sensory input or response may be less variable than shifts induced in distant criteria. That  is, the lateral shift function may always affect nearby criteria in a similar way, but there may be greater variation in the  shifts prescribed for distant criteria. A judgment made after a small step would then usually depend on criteria that are less  variable than after a large step. Treisman and Faulkner (1984a) have reported evidence that shifts induced in criteria may  differ in their variability under different conditions.  The present model reproduces several types of sequential effects. As did the criterion-setting model for magnitude estimation  (Treisman, 1984b), the model for absolute judgment predicts and the data may show an inverted V pattern for the correlations  between successive responses, when these are plotted against the corresponding stimulus differences. The coefficient of  variation of exp(R, - R, _ , ) showed no V pattern in the data considered here and only a weak pattern in the simulation.  Similar patterns were obtained in both simulation and data for measures of the type obtained by Lockhead and King (1983), for  the sequential dependency of present judgments on past stimuli, and for the sequential effects of past responses.  As the phenomena that the present model can reproduce are not produced in their totality by any other theory, the combination  of criterion-setting processes and Thurstonian assumptions appears to provide a promising basis for exploring absolute  judgment further. This conclusion is based on demonstrations that qualitatively correct results of the right order of  magnitude can be produced, but the model has not been tested by fitting it to specific data sets and estimating parameters.  This important but difficult problem will be considered in a later paper.  Why do criterion-setting parameters have the values that they have? For detection, it is plausible that the criterion  reference value may be determined by some principle of optimality, but it is less easy to derive the set of reference criteria  required in absolute judgment on such a basis. It is simpler to suppose that they are chosen at equal intervals on S, so as to  correspond to the expected range of stimulus inputs. A possible alternative is that the initial values of the absolute  judgment criteria are selected on the basis of past experience so as to make the frequencies of the different responses  similar. Parducci (1965) has produced evidence that there is a tendency for category boundaries to shift so as to equate the  frequencies with which different responses are made. However, reference criteria might be equally spaced, yet such an effect  could be produced by stabilization. Consider a  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 225  hypothetical absolute identification experiment in which the central effects of stimulus intensity 12 fall mainly between the  criteria S,,,1 and Sc,Z, giving the response "2," and the central effects of 13 fall mainly between S,z and S0, giving the  response "3." Suppose the reference criterion values are equally spaced, and stimulus 12 is presented twice as often as 13.  Then, initially, the response "2" will be made approximately twice as often as the response "3." One consequence will be that  criterion S,,Z will twice as often be modified by stabilization indicator traces requiring a shift to the left, as by traces  requiring a shift to the right. Thus its average position will move to the left. This will decrease the interval from S,,, to  Sc,z reducing the proportion of "2" responses-and it will increase the interval from S,,z to Sc,,-increasing the proportion of  "3" responses. These effects would reproduce Parducci's (1965) range-frequency effect.  The values of the short-term parameters d s and d , might be chosen on the basis of past experience so as to produce  stabilization and tracking effects which do not dominate each other and which lie in an acceptable range. If conditions are  stable, 6s should be small so as to allow a relatively large sample of the sensory flux to determine current criterion  positions. The more rapidly the stimuli providing sensory input change, the shorter should be the life of response indicator  traces and therefore the larger br. The relative weight that should be given to long- as against short-term criterion  determinants will vary with the subject's experience of and knowledge about the situation. The sizes of ds and dr determine  the relative weight of short-term adjustments in determining the effective value of the criterion. As these parameters fall  towards zero, the dominance of reference criterion values increases. The effects of feedback on stabilization and tracking  have been discussed by Treisman and Williams (1984).  Differences between individuals may also play a role in determining parameter values. The old debate about the significance of  the "interval of uncertainty" (which corresponds to the interval between the two criteria when three responses are allowed in  a detection or discrimination task (Treisman, 1969)) was concerned with this factor: Angell (1907) noted that, in comparing  the loudness of sounds, some individuals were more likely to express judgments of "like" than others, and this difference  corresponded to "the difference between deliberative and impulsive temperaments"; Thurstone (1948) rejected the interval of  uncertainty as a measure of discrimination, describing it as an "index of some characteristic of temperament... but not of  [the] limen." Similarly, the relative weights given to long- and shortterm factors in absolute judgment might differ for  subjects of different personality.  APPENDIX: NOMENCLATURE  Cv(RR, ,) coefficient of variation of ratios between pairs of successive magnitude estimates made of a given pair of  successive stimulus intensities  226 MICHEL TREISMAN  Ct, [exp(R, - R, _ , ) ] coefficient of variation of ratios between exponents of pairs of successive absolute judgments made  of a given pair of successive stimulus intensities  D the depth of the sequential effect produced by tracking  Di,, 10 log(Ii,,/1o), where 10 is a reference value  d SDT sensitivity parameter  d the absolute magnitude of a criterion adjustment (IT model) dr initial absolute magnitude of a tracking  (response-determined) indicator trace  d s constant multiplying initial value of stabilization indicator trace  S rate of decay (per trial) of an indicator trace  8r rate of decay of a tracking indicator trace  bs rate of decay of a stabilization indicator trace  EAL exponential additive learning model  F F= 1 if feedback indicates stimulus was present, F= -1 if feedback indicates stimulus was absent  FBi feedback on trial i  Ii 't stimulus of intensity i presented on trial t (may be abbreviated to Ii or I, when no confusion will result)  Imax the greatest stimulus intensity in a range  Im;n the lowest stimulus intensity in a range  IT independent trace model  J J= 1 for a positive response and J= -1 for a negative response  N number of stimuli  P(C) proportion of correct reponses  P(S) signal probability  P constant in function relating S and I (Eq. (7))  Ri response on trial i  r(log Rlog R, correlation between logs of successive magnitude estimates made to a given pair of successive stimulus  intensities  r(RRt_,) correlation between successive absolute judgments made to a given pair of successive stimulus intensities  S sensory dimension which functions as decision axis in absolute judgment  SDT signal detection theory  Si mean central effect on S of stimulus Ii  So,; long-term reference value of the jth criterion on the absolute judgment decision axis  SCJt) current effective value on trial t of the jth criterion on S Si" sensory effect on central dimension S of stimulus of  intensity i presented on trial t  a2 criterion variance  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT 227  us standard deviation of sensory distribution on S  Tf(i) feedback based indicator trace set up on trial i  Tr(e, f, g, h) a tracking indicator trace (absolute judgment): r identifies a trace determined by a previous response; e  refers to the criterion Sc,Q that the trace modifies; f refers to the origin of the trace: the criterion S., f which was  exceeded by the sensory input on the trial (g) on which the trace was set up [S, f(g) 5 SA < Sc,.f+ 1(g)]; h is the number of  trials since elapsed  TI(i) initial magnitude of response-determined indicator trace set up by the tracking mechanism on trial i (detection)  (equivalent to T,(i, 0))  Tr(i, k) magnitude of response-determined indicator trace k trials after initiation.  T5(e, f g, h) a stabilization indicator trace (absolute judgment): s identifies a trace determined by a previous sensory  input; e refers to the criterion S, that the trace modifies; f refers to the origin of the trace: the criterion S,,, f which  was exceeded by the sensory input on the trial (g) on which the trace was set up [S,, f(g) S Sg < S, f+, (g)]; h is the number  of trials since elapsed  T.1(i) initial magnitude of sensorily-determined indicator trace set up by the stabilization mechanism on trial i (detection)  (equivalent to T,(i, 0))  TS(i, k) magnitude of sensorily-determined indicator trace k trials after initiation  U interval between criteria on S, in simulations of the model  z central decision axis for detection  zC criterion on the detection decision axis  z~(i) the value of z. on trial i  z~ reference value of detection criterion  zU upper limit to sensory disparities which generate stabilization indicator traces  REFERENCES  ANGELL, F. (1907). On judgments of "like" in discrimination experiments. American Journal of Psychology, 18, 253-260.  ATKINSON, R. C., BOWER, G. H., & CROTHERS, E. J. (1965). An introduction to mathematical learning theory. New York: Wiley.  BAIRD, J. C., GREEN, D. M., & LUCE, R. D. (1980). Variability and sequential effects in cross-modality matching of area and  loudness. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 6, 277-289.  BERLINER, J. E., & DURLAcH, N. I. (1973). A perceptual-anchor model for context coding in intensity perception. Journal of the  Acoustical Society of America, 54, 336.  BERLINER, J. E., DURLACH, N. I., & BRAIDA, L. D. (1977). Intensity perception. VII. Further data on  228  MIC14EL TREISMAN  roving-level discrimination and the resolution and bias edge effects. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 61,  1577-1585.  BIRDSALL, T. G. (1955). The theory of signal detectability. In H. Quastler (Ed.), Information theory in psychology. Glencoe,  11: Free Press.  BRAIDA, L. D., & DURLACH, N. 1. (1972). Intensity perception. II. Resolution in one-interval paradigms. Journal of the  Acoustical Society of America, 51, 483-502.  BRAIDA, L. D., LIM, J. S., BERLINER, J. E., DURLACH, N. L, RABINOWITZ, W. M., & PURKS, S. R. (1984). Intensity perception.  XIII. Perceptual anchor model of context-coding. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 76, 722-731.  CHASE, S., BUGNACKI, P., BRAIDA, L. D. & DURLACH, N. 1. (1983). Intensity perception. XII. Effect of presentation probability  on absolute identification. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 73, 279-284.  DORFMAN, D. D. (1973). The likelihood function of additive learning models: Sufficient conditions for strict log-concavity and  uniqueness of maximum. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 10, 73-85. DORFMANN, D. D., & BIDERMAN, M. (1971). A learning model  for a continuum of sensory states. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 8, 264-284.  DURLACH, N. 1. & BRAIDA, L. D. (1969). Intensity perception. I. Preliminary theory of intensity resolution. Journal of the  Acoustical Society of America, 46, 372-383.  DUSOIR, A. E. (1975). Treatments of bias in detection and recognition models: A review. Perception and Psychophysics, 17,  167-178.  EGAN, J. P. (1958). Recognition memory and the operating characteristic (Technical Note AFCRC-TN58-51 ). Indiana University,  Hearing and Communication Laboratory.  FRAISSE, P. (1948). Les erreurs constantes dans la reproduction de courts intervalles temporels. Archives Psychologiques,  Geneva, 32, 161-176.  GALANTER, E. & MESSICK, S. (1961). The relation between category and magnitude scales of loudness. Psychological Review, 68,  363-372.  GARNER, W. R. (1953). An informational analysis of absolute judgments of loudness. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 46,  373-380.  GARNER, W. R. (1962). Uncertainty and structure as psychological concepts, New York: Wiley. GRAVETTER, F. & LOCKHEAD, G. R.  (1973). Criterial range as a frame of reference for stimulus judgment. Psychological Review, 80, 203-216.  GREEN, D. M., & LUCE, R. D. (1974). Variability of magnitude estimates: A timing theory analysis. Perception and Ps  ychophysics, 15, 291-300.  GREEN, D. M., LUCE, R. D., & DUNCAN, J. E. (1977). Variability and sequential effects in magnitude production and estimation  of auditory intensity. Perception and Psychophysics, 22, 450-456. GREEN, D. M., LUCE, R. D., & SMITH, A. F. (1980). Individual  magnitude estimates for various distributions of signal intensity. Perception and Psychophysics, 27, 483-488.  GREEN, D. M., & SWETS, J. A. (1966). Signal detection theory and psychophysics. New York: Wiley. GUILFORD, J. P. (1954).  Psychometric methods (2nd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.  HOLLAND, M. K. & LOCKHEAD, G. R. (1968). Sequential effects in absolute judgments of loudness. Perception and Psychophysics,  3, 409-414.  HOLLINGWORTH, H. L. (N13). The central tendency of judgment. Archives of Psychology (New York), 4, 44-52.  JESTEADT, W., LUCE, R. D., & GREEN, D. M. (1977). Sequential effects in judgments of loudness. Journal of Experimental  Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 3, 92-104.  JOHNSON, D. M. (1972). Systematic introduction to the psychology of thinking. New York: Harper & Row.  KAC, M. (1962). A note on learning signal detection. IRE Transactions on Information Theory, IT-8, 126-128.  KORNBROT, D. E. (1980). Attention bands: Some implications for categorical judgement. British Journal of Mathematical and  Statistical Psychology, 33, 1-16.  KORNBROT, D. E., DONNELLY, M., & GALANTER, E. (1981). Estimates of utility function parameters  ABSOLUTE JUDGMENT  229  from signal detection experiments. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 7, 441-458.  LOCKHEAD, G. R. & KING, M. C. (1983). A memory model of sequential effects in scaling tasks. Journal of'Experimental  Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 9, 461-473.  LUCE, R. D., GREEN, D. M., & WEBER, D. L. (1976). Attention bands in absolute identification. Perception and Ps ychophysics,  20, 49-54.  LUCE, R. D., NOSOFSKY, R. M., GREEN, D. M., & SMITH, A. F. (1982). The bow and sequential effects in absolute identification.  Perception and Psychophysics, 32, 397-408.  MACRAE, A. W. (1970). Channel capacity in absolute judgment tasks: An artifact of information bias? Psychological Bulletin,  73, 112-121.  MARKS, L. E. (1968 ). Stimulus-range, number of categories, and form of the category-scale. American Journal of Psychology,  81, 467-479.  MAYNARD SMITH, J. (1974). The theory of games and the evolution of animal conflicts. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 47,  209-221.  MCCLELLAND, J. L., & RUMELHART, D. E. (1981). An interactive activation model of context effects in letter perception: Part I.  An account of basic findings. Psychological Review, 88, 375-407.  MILLER, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our capacity for processing information.  Psychological Review, 63, 81-97.  NOSOFSKY, R. M. (1983a). Shifts of attention in the identification and discrimination of intensity. Perception and  Psychophysics, 33, 103-112.  NOSOFSKY, R. M. (1983b). Information integration and the identification of stimulus noise and criteria] noise in absolute  judgment. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 9, 299-309.  PARDUCCI, A. (1965). Category judgment: A range-frequency model. Psychological Review, 72, 407-418. PARDUCCI, A., & SANDUSKY,  A. (1965). Distribution and sequence effects in judgment. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 69, 450-459.  PHILIP, B. R. (1947). Generalization and central tendency in the discrimination of a series of stimuli. Canadian Journal of  Psychology, 1, 196-204.  POLLACK, I. (1952). The information of elementary auditory displays. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 24, 745-749.  POLLACK, I. (1953). The information of elementary auditory displays. 11. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 25,  765-769.  PURKS, S. R., CALLAHAN, D. J., BRAIDA, L. D., & DURLACH, N. 1. (1980). Intensity perception. X. Effect of preceding stimulus  on identification performance. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 67, 634-637.  STEVENS, S. S. (1957). On the psychophysical law. Psychological Review, 64, 153-181. STEVENS, S. S. (1960). The psychophysics  of sensory function. American Scientist, 48, 226-253. STEVENS, S. S., & GALANTER, E. H., (1957). Ratio scales and category  scales for a dozen perceptual con tinua. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 54, 377-411.  TANNER, T. A., RAUK, J. A. & ATKINSON, R. C. (1970). Signal recognition as influenced by information feedback. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 7, 259-274.  THOMAS, E. A. C. (1973). On a class of additive learning models: Error-correcting and probability matching. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 10, 241-264.  THOMAS, E. A. C. (1975). Criterion adjustment and probability matching. Perception and Psychophysics, 18, 158-162.  THOMAS, E. A. C., & LEGGE, D. (1970). Probability matching as a basis for detection and recognition decisions. Psychological  Review, 77, 65-72.  THURSTONE, L. L. (1927). Psychophysical analysis. American Journal of Psychology, 38, 368-389. THURSTONE, L. L. (1948).  Psychophysical methods. In T. G. Andrews (Ed.), Methods of psychology. New York: Wiley.  TREISMAN, M. (1964a). Sensory scaling and the psychophysical law. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 16, 11-22.  230 MICHEL TREISMAN  TREISMAN, M. (1964b). What do sensory scales measure? Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 16, 387-391.  TREISMAN, M. (1964c). The effect of one stimulus on the threshold for another: An application of signal detectability theory.  British Journal of Statistical Psychology, 17, 15-35.  TREISMAN, M. (1969). Measurement of sensory discrimination. In A. R. Meetham and R. A. Hudson (Eds.), Encyclopaedia of  linguistics, information and control. Oxford: Pergamon Press.  TREISMAN, M. (1975a). Predation and the evolution of gregariousness. I. Models for concealment and evasion. Animal Behaviour,  23, 779-800.  TREISMAN, M. (1975b). Predation and the evolution of gregariousness. 11. An economic model for predator-prey interaction.  Animal Behaviour, 23, 801-825.  TREISMAN, M. (1977). The evolutionary restriction of aggression within a species: A game theory analysis. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 16, 167-203.  TREISMAN, M. (1981). Evolutionary limits to the frequency of aggression between related or unrelated conspecifics in diploid  species with simple Mendelian inheritance. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 93, 97-124.  TREISMAN, M. (1984a). Contingent aftereffects and situationally coded criteria. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences  423, 131-141.  TREISMAN, M. (1984b). A theory of criterion setting: An alternative to the attention band and response ratio hypotheses in  magnitude estimation and cross-modality matching. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 113, 442-463.  TREISMAN, M., & FAULKNER, A. (1984a). The setting and maintenance of criteria representing levels of confidence. Journal of  Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 10, 119-139. TREISMAN, M., & FAULKNER, A. (1984b). The effect of  signal probability on the slope of the receiver operating characteristic given by the rating procedure. British Journal of  Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 37, 199-215.  TREISMAN, M., & FAULKNER, A. (1985a). Can decision criteria interchange locations? Some positive evidence. Journal of  Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 11, 187-208. TREISMAN, M., & FAULKNER, A. (1985b). A model for the  generation of random sequences by human subjects. Manuscript in preparation.  TREISMAN, M., & WILLIAMS, T. C. (1984). A theory of criterion setting with an application to sequential dependencies.  Psychological Review, 91, 68-111.  WAGNER, M., & BAIRD, J. C. (1981). A quantitative analysis of sequential effects with numeric stimuli. Perception and  Psychophysics, 29, 359-364.  WARD, L. M. (1973). Repeated magnitude estimations with a variable standard: Sequential effects and other properties.  Perception and Psychophysics, 13, 193-200.  WARD, L. M. (1982). Mixed-modality psychophysical scaling: Sequential dependencies and other properties. Perception and  Psychophysics, 31, 53-62.  WARD, L. M., & LOCKHEAD, G. R. (1970). Sequential effects and memory in category judgments. Journal of Experimental  Psychology, 84, 27-34.  WARD, L. M., & LOCKHEAD, G. R. (1971). Response system processes in absolute judgment. Perception and Psychophysics, 9, 73-78.  WEBER, D. L., GREEN, D. M., & LUCE, R. D. (1977). Effects of practice and distribution of auditory signals on absolute  identification. Perception and Psychophysics, 22, 223-231.  WOODROW, H. (1934). The temporal indifference interval determined by the method of mean error. Journal of Experimental  Psychology, 17, 167-188.  WOODROW, H. (1951). Time perception. In S. S. Stevens (Ed.), Handbook of experimental psychology. New York: Wiley.  WOODWORTH, R. S. (1938). Experimental psychology. New York: Holt.  YELLOTT, J. I. (1977). The relationship between Luce's choice axiom, Thurstone's theory of comparative judgment, and the  double exponential distribution. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 15, 109-144.  RECEIVED: August 25, 1983