10.1016/0022-2496(86)90021-0
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 30, 481-484 (1986)  Book Review Order, Please!  PETER C. FISHBURN. Interval Orders and Interval Graphs. Wiley, New York, 1985. pp. xi + 215. $33.50.  Reviewed b J, MARGARET B. COZZENS  Peter Fishburn is a member of the Mathematical Studies Department of AT&T Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, N. J. He obtained  his Ph. D. from Case Institute of Technology in 1962, and has previously been a Research Professor of Management Science at  Pennsylvania State University, and a Visiting Scientist at the Institute of Advanced Study, Princeton. He has published  extensively in the area of discrete and combinatorial mathematics, including measurement, preference, utility, and voting.  The reviewer, Margaret B. Cozzens, is an Associate Professor of Mathematics at Northeastern Uiversity. Her research interests  include discrete mathematics, particularly applied graph theory and optimization and measurement theory. She has recently  published, with R. Porter, Mathematics and its Application to Business, Social and Life Sciences, 1986, [D. C. Heath &  Co.]. t'' 1986 Academic Press, Inc.  Interval orders and interval graphs have become the basis for considerable research by mathematicians and mathematical  psychologists in the past 25 years. Interest in interval orders has arisen out of their inate theoretical properties as a  class of partial orders, and because of the applications of both interval orders and interval graphs to such diverse areas as  vehicular maintenance, psychological scaling, ecological habitat formation, seriation in archaelogy, etc.  An interval order is an inreflexive relation R an a set X such that for all a, b, c, d E X,  (aRb and cRd) => (aRd or cRb). (1)  An interval graph is a graph G = ( V, E) that contains a loop at each vertex and such that there exists a function f from the  set of vertices to the set of closed intervals on the real line so that for all a, b E V  f(a) nf(b):A Op {a,b} EE. (2)  The relation between interval orders and interval graphs comes from the fact that a graph G = ( V, E) is an interval graph if  and only if there exists an interval order that is an orientation of the edges of the complement of G, denoted G.  Interval orders, although not named such, were first studied by Wiener in 1914. It was not until 1970 and Fishburn's paper on  "just noticeable differences" that interval orders received a great deal of attention. To get an interval order (in this 481  0022-2496/86 $3.00  Copyright `c. 1986 by Academic Press, Inc.  480j30/4-10 All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  482 MARGARET B.COZZENS  context) imagine that for each alternative a that you are considering, you do not know its exact value, but you are able to  estimate a range of possible values given by the interval I,= [1(a), r(a)]. You prefer a to b if and only if you are sure that  the value of a is greater than the value of b, if and only if 1(a) > r(b). If the vertex set of a graph is a set of closed  intervals and there exists an edge if and only if 1(a) > r(b ), then we have a partial order, and any partial order that  arises in this way is an interval order.  Interval graphs were first studied by Hajos in 1957 and Benzer in 1959 in his studies of the linearity of genes. The first  characterization of interval graphs, one in terms of forbidden subgraphs, was given by Lekkerkerker and Boland in 1962, with  later characterizations given by Gilmore and Hoffman in 1964 and Fulkerson and Gross in 1965.  Fishburn takes his own interests as a base and begins the book with the background definitions and notations on ordered sets,  relations and partial orders necessary for his development of interval orders in Chapter II. Since notation in this area is  not standardized it is important that the reader study this introductory chapter carefully.  The study of interval orders in Chapter II begins with the axiomatic definition, as in (1 ), of an interval order. The basic  properties of interval orders are developed, and representation theorems for mapping intervals into the real line are  established. Interval orders are studied as a class of partially ordered sets and weakly ordered sets. Semiorders are studied  as a subclass of interval orders.  Although there is only one interval graph that naturally corresponds to a given interval order, namely the symmetric  complement of the interval order, a number of different interval orders can have the same symmetric complement. Chapter III  studies this relationship, as well as providing most of the usual characterization of interval graphs, including the maximal  clique characterization that is most easily implemented with a computer.  The remainder of the book looks at various aspects of both interval orders and interval graphs and the chapters are related to  each other as the following diagram illustrates:  Interval Orders Interval Graphs III i  Representations VII  Properties Betweenness V VI IV  Types of Intervals (length, size, number of) VIII, Ix  Extremal Problems Y  BOOK REVIEW 483  As is indicated in the diagram, the continuity of the book is interrupted by Chapter IV, the chapter on Betweenness. The main  theorem of this chapter is that there exists an interval order that agrees with a strict Betweenness relation.  Chapters V and VI explore the various parameters of partially ordered sets, such as dimensionality, depth, rank, etc., as  applied to interval orders and the subclass of semiorders. In particular, the Rabinovitch theorem that states that the  dimension of every semiorder is less than or equal to 3 is proved, as well as bounds on the dimension of interval orders are  attained. Open questions regarding the maximum semiorder contained in an interval order, or the maximum indifference graph  contained in an interval graph, are explored and preliminary bounds are given.  From my own personal bias, Chapter VII is the best one in the book. It continues the discussion of representations of interval  orders and semiorders started in Chapter II. As an example of a constructive proof of a representation theorem, Fishburn  proves the Scott-Suppes theorem constructively.  SCOTT-SUPPEs THEOREM. If (X R) is a finite semiorder then there is a real-valued function f such that for all x, y E X  xRyp(f(x)+1)<f(y). (3)  As a method of proving existence theorems for representation of particular types of orders, he uses the method of finding a  solution to a finite set of linear inequalities to show the existence of a representation of a finite interval order for a  given positive length function p. In the context of (3) xRy<:> f(x) +p(x)<f(y).  Fishburn describes how interval orders and comparative probability can be combined to provide a representation of subjective  probability based on intervals rather than point probabilities. This application and the extensions from finite interval  orders (semiorders) to arbitrary intervals orders (semiorders) is particularly well written and interesting.  The remainder of the book is devoted to problems in extremal theory, specifically questions concerning the length of intervals  in a representation of an interval order, the least number of distinct lengths required for a representation of an interval  order, and the largest semiorder contained in an interval order. These chapters require perseverance to get through because of  the technical details needed to describe the material.  It should be clear at this point that I feel that this book is an interesting reference text for anyone working in the theory  of orders or interval graphs. There are no exercises, indicating that the book was not intended to be used as a text for a  course. It could easily be used as supplemental reading for a good many graduate courses, however.  On the negative side, Fishburn omits various topics which one might have wished to see included; in particular, various  extensions of interval graphs and interval orders to higher dimensions. This is particularly frustrating since many open  problems exist concerning extensions to higher dimensions, and applications  484 MARGARET B. COZZENS  abound. Obviously, to cover a significant portion of these topics would have added substantially to the length of the book.  But the book is not that long to begin with that, in the interest of completion, it would have been worth it. Such topics as  boxicity, cubicity, sphericity, frame dimension, rectangular orders, and double semiorders could have at least been referenced.  There are a number of typographical errors in the text, but in general they do not cause any difficulty for the reader,  although the missing edge { c, d } in the graph in Fig. 9.1 is a bit disconcerting. Similarly, certain theorems are stated  (and proved) in perhaps their original form, but not in a way that the reader can fully understand; for example, Theorem 7,  the Ghouila-Houri theorem, that a graph is a comparability graph if and only if every cycle of odd length has a triangular  chord. This theorem is stated correctly if one realizes the author of the theorem intends the word "cycle" to mean a  generalized cycle with repeated edges. For example, the graph K3+p (shown below) has no cycle of odd length other than the  triangle, but it does have what is called a "generalized" cycle of length 9, namely 1-2-3-4-3-5-6-5-2-1, with no triangular  chords. For the reader familiar with this material, this poses no problem, but if a reader is new to the material,  comprehension is difficult.  In conclusion, I recommend this book to anyone interested in the theory of interval orders or interval graphs and with the  background and diligence to put some time into studying it.  K3+p  REFERENCES  1. FALMAGNE, J. C. (1985). Elements of psychophysical theory, Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.  2. ROERTs, F. S. (1976). Discrete mathematical models with applications to social, biological, and environmental problems,  Englewood Cliffs, N. J. Prentice-Hall.