10.1016/0022-2496(86)90018-0
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 30, 416-425 (1986)  A New Version of Bayes' EquationApplications to Plausible Reasoning  R. R. KADESCH  University of Utah  A new version of Bayes' equation is presented which expresses the linear relationship between the posterior probability values  of two propositions. This formulation is made possible by the introduction of a new kind of relevance, a relevance of one  proposition to another which is defined as the difference between conditionals. The new Bayesian equations are used to analyze  Polya's heuristics of plausible reasoning applied to the cases of "examining a consequence," "examining a possible ground,"  "rival or conflicting conjectures," and "circumstantial evidence." The analysis is a simple one because of the linearities  and, in contrast to Polya's heuristics, both terse and quantitative. (D 1986 Academic Press, Inc.  I. INTRODUCTION  Of all the prior work in the analysis of formal thought processes, that of Polya (1954) stands out as the most useful because  of its simplicity and ready applicability in a variety of fields. Polya terms his structure "plausible reasoning." His results  are expressed primarily as syllogisms, each of which provides a guide, or heuristic, for reasoning processes. He makes what he  calls "an attempt" to provide a mathematical foundation for plausible reasoning. His heuristics and his mathematical  descriptions have provided a guide for the present development of a mathematical representation from which more comprehensive  and more explicit analysis of reasoning processes emerge. At the same time this new mathematical representation is  sufficiently simple and straightforward to be readily applicable in a number of fields.  A strong motivation for the present work has been provided by that of Inhelder and Piaget (1958) in formal reasoning. However,  the development here is based on the concept of subjective probability (Kyburg & Smokler, 1964; De Finetti, 1974). Bayesian  analysis has been employed by Suppes (1966) and more recently by Duda, et al. (1976). The new version of Bayes' equation to be  presented will be used in the analysis of Polya's heuristics for plausible reasoning. Polya's heuristics apply to "examining a  consequence," "examining a possible ground," "rival or conflicting conjectures," and "circumstantial evidence."  Requests for reprints may be addressed to R. R. Kadesch, Department of Physics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112.  416  0022-2496/86 $3.00  Copyright (c') 1986 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  BAYES' EQUATION 417  II. A NEW VERSION OF BAYES' EQUATION  Bayes' equation is an expression of a logical relationship between two propositions (A and B) with each equation involving  four of the six probability parameters: P(A), P(B), P(AIB), P(AIB), P(BIA), and P(BIA). Here, the bar, as in A, denotes the  negation of A, and for each P, 0 < P < 1. Bayes' equations in standard form are:  P(AIB)=P(BIA) P(A), P(B)  P(BIA)=P(AIB) P(B), P(A)  P(BIA)P(A) P(AIB)P(B) P(AIB)= P(B) P(BIA)= P(A) ,  Here, P(BIA)= I -P(BIA) and P(AIB)= 1 -P(AIB). In the above, P(A) is the prior probability of proposition A while P(AIB) and  P(AIB) are posterior values, the first of these conditioned on the confirmation of B and the second on the refutation of  proposition B.  It will be highly advantageous to express Bayes' equations in additive rather than in the multiplicative form above. To  accomplish this, new parameters called the relevances, the relevance of A to B and the relevance of B to A, are now defined as  follows:  RAB=P(BIA)-P(BIA),  RBA =P(AIB)-P(AIB).  Note that these are not the same as the relevance ratios appearing in the standard version of Bayes' equation, for example,  P(BIA)/P(B) and P(BIA)/P(B). Employing the new relevance parameters, Bayes' equations can now be rewritten as:  P(AIB)=P(A)+RBAP(B), P(BIA)=P(B)+RABP(A),  P(AIB)=P(A)-RBAP(B), P(BIA)=P(B)-RABP(A).  The two equations at the left are obtained by eliminating P(BIA) from the two standard Bayes' equations for P(AIB) and P(AIB)  and then forming the expression for RBA. The two on the right are obtained in similar fashion. Once again, each equation above  involves four parameters. Knowledge of the priors P(A) and P(B) together with a relevance determines a posterior probability,  either for A or for B. It is not difficult to show that a simple relationship exists between the relevance RBA and its inverse  RAB, with each evaluated for a given pair of priors P(A) and P(B). The relationship is  RBA P(A) P(A) RAB = P(B) P(B).  In addition, we see that either both relevances are positive or both are negative.  4AQ30//4-6  418 R. R. KADESCH  Taken together, the expressions above for P(A I B) and P(A I B) express the colinearity of the three points P(AIB), P(A), and  P(AIB) when these are plotted as a function of b on the interval (0, 1) where b = B = 0, b = P(B), and b = B = 1. The  relevance RBA is the slope of this line and therefore represents the rate of change in the probability of A with respect to  that of B. A second colinearity exists for the inverse probabilities and P(B). Letting P'(B) be a subjectively determined  posterior probability of B, and assuming RBA to be constant, we obtain from  P(AIB)=P(A)-RBAP(13)  the relationship  P(AIB)=P(A)-RBAP'(B)  given that RBA is a constant determined by fixed values for P(A113) and P(AIF3). Since P'(B) may assume any value on the  interval (0, 1), this last equation expresses the posterior, now F(A) instead of either P(AIB) or P(AIR), as a continuous  linear function of P'(B). Taking the difference of these two expressions a new form of Bayes' equation can be written as:  Y(A) -P(A)=RBACP(B)-P(B)7  or more succinctly,  AP(A) = RBAAP(B) ... RBAconstant  also expressing linearity of F(A) as a function of P'(B). In this expression, -P(B),<AP(B),<P(B). Starting with the equations  for P(BIA) and P(BIA) in terms of the relevance RAB, one obtains in similar fashion:  AP(B) = RABAP(A) ... RABconstant  with the condition that RA, remain constant as the prior P(A) is subjectively reassessed becoming the posterior P'(A). RAB is  the slope of the line whose end points are P(131A) and P(BIA).  Bayes' equations as transformed reveal a simple linear relationship between the posterior probabilities of the two  propositions. This linearity occurs when either the relevance RBA remains constant or when RAB is constant. This linearity  will be extremely useful in the application of Bayes' new equations to a variety of circumstances in plausible reasoning  III. APPLICATION TO PLAUSIBLE REASONING  The most immediate application of Bayes' new equations comes in the analysis of Polya's heuristics. A "heuristic" argument is  a "persuasive" argument. The  BAYES' EQUATION  419  application of quantitative methods, however, places these heuristics on a more solid footing.  A. Examining a Consequence  In this category Polya expresses his heuristics primarily in syllogistic form. The logical relationship is A -> B where A is  some conjecture and B is its consequence. The fundamental inductive pattern he describes as:  A-.B B true  A more credible  As with all syllogisms, the statements above the line (the premises) are connected by an "and" relationship, the line itself  can be read as "therefore," or "any reasonable person would conclude that ...," and below the line appears the conclusion. In  addition he presents the following:  A-.B A->B A-+B  B more credible B less credible B credible  A somewhat more credible A less credible A somewhat credible  Under the category of "verification of an improbable consequence" he lists:  A -+ B A --+ B  B quite improbable in itself B quite probable in itself  B true B true  A very much more credible A just a little more credible  To describe verification of an improbable consequence he writes the following heuristics:  "the more unexpected a consequence is, the more weight its verification carries."  "the increase of our confidence in a conjecture due to the verification of one of its consequences varies inversely as the  credibility of the consequence before such verification."  Finally, Polya provides two cases of "qualified inference":  A -> B A -> B  B without A hardly credible B almost certain anyway  B true B true  A very much more credible A very little more credible  420 R. R. KADESCH  To adapt Bayesian analysis to these descriptions one must first recognize that by "credibility" we mean the mean ju of a  subjective probability distribution where 0 < p < 1. The mean M is the quantity symbolized as P in the prior and following  sections. In addition, the language "B quite probable in itself' must be taken to refer to the prior value, P(B). Finally, "B  without A" must refer to the conditional P(BIA).  Bayes' new equation allows one to invoke a single syllogism to replace all eight of the above. The new syllogism is:  A -> B P(A) P(B) RBA (constant) =P(A)/P(B) B more (or less) credible AP(A) = RBAAP(B)  Here, AP(B) is the change (positive or negative) in the credibility of the consequence B brought about by its subjective  reevaluation and AP(A) is the corresponding change (positive or negative) in the credibility of the conjecture A. It is for  this reason that RBA appears here, expressing as it does the relevance of the consequence to the hypothesis. Since the  conclusion is expressed in terms of changes in credibilities, Polya's use of "B true" is unnecessary. Here, the posterior  P'(B) may assume any value on the interval (0, 1).  To employ the new syllogism in the analysis of "examining a possible consequence" one must first translate the relationship "A  -+ B" into Bayesian terminology. Logical implication is a relationship for which the conjunction of A (A  true) with B (B false) does not occur, i.e., P(A - B) = 0. This means that 0<P(AIB)< 1, P(AIB)=0, P(BIA)=1, and 0<P(BIA)< 1,  making RBA= P(AIB)=P(A)/P(B) and P(A) <,P(B).  The new syllogism reveals how much more (or less) credible the conjecture A becomes as the consequenc B becomes more (or less)  credible depending on the specified relevance RBA. It must be recognized that the possible changes in credibility of the  consequence are determined by its prior value, i.e., - P(B) ,< AP(B) 5 P(B ). Inspection of Polya's heuristics reveal them to  be particular instances of the single new syllogism. Closer inspection shows that, in certain cases, a Polya syllogism leads  to a misleading conclusion. For example, his syllogism with premises "A -B," "B quite improbable in itself," and "B true"  has as its conclusion "A very much more credible." This conclusion is invalid when RBA has a small value.  B. Examining a Possible Ground.  Here, in the relationship A -> B, the "ground" is A and the conjecture B. A Polya syllogism describing this situation is:  BAYES' EQUATION 421  A-+B A quite probable (improbable) in itself A false  B very much less (just a little less) credible  In addition he provides the heuristic:  "the more faith we placed in a possible ground of our conjecture, the greater will be the loss of faith in our conjecture when  that possible ground is refuted."  The pattern here is the same as for examining a consequence except that here, the ground is under examination and subject to  revision. If this revision leads to a lowered credibility of the ground (AP(A) negative), the consequence suffers a  corresponding loss in credibility (AP(B) negative), the magnitude of which is determined by the relevance RAB taken to be  constant. The syllogism that applies here is identical in form to the earlier one. It is:  L  A -~ B P(A) P(B) RAB (constant) =P(B)/P(A) A less (or more) credible AP(B)=RA,AP(A)  The increase or decrease in the credibility of the consequence B brought about by a revision in our subjective evaluation of  ground A depends on RAB, the relevance that expresses the influence of A upon B. The limits on AP(B) are determined both by  RAB and the prior value of the probability of the ground P(A). We have P(A)<P(B) and RAB=1-P(BIA)=P(B)/P(A).  C. Successive Examination of a Possible Ground and Its Consequence.  A new situation not discussed by Polya involves the successive examination of a consequence B and its ground A. Typically, one  is interested in an increased credibility of the consequence (AP(B)>O) so that the credibility of the ground is thereby  increased (AP(A)>O). On the other hand, a diminished credibility of the ground (AP(A)<0) will be attended by a loss in  confidence in the consequence (AP(B)<O). These two circumstances tend to negate one another. If first the consequence B is  examined,  AP(A) = RBAAP(B) ... RBA constant.  Let us designate the priors as P(A) and P(B) and the posteriors for the above  422 R. R. KADESCH  change AP(B) as P(A) and P'(B). If the ground is next examined, these posteriors lead to a second set of posteriors P"(A) and  P"(B) using  d'P(B) = RA B A'P(A) ... RA, constant,  where d'P(B) = P"(B) - Y(B) and d'P(A) = P"(A) - F(A).  The relevance here, RA B, is not the same as RAB because of the change introduced at constant RBA in the first step. However,  we can express RA B in terms of RBA as  RAY(B) Y(B) , B= Y(A) P(A) RBA  Recognizing that RBA = RBA by the constancy of RBA in the first step, one obtains:  d' F(B) P(B) RBAA'P(A)  P(B) P(A) Y(A)  Both steps produce overall changes in the priors d"P(A) and d"P(B) which are:  d "P(A) = RBA AP(B) + d'P(A)  d "P(B) = AP(B) + P(B) Y(B) RBAA'P(A)  where P'(B)=P(B)+AP(B) and P'(A)=P(A)+RBAAP(B). Thus the final posteriors are seen as functions of the three specified  parameters P(A), P(B), and RBA along with the subjectively determined changes, first AP(B) then d'P(A). It is to be noted that  successive subjective changes do not commute, that is, if P(A) were first subjectively revised followed by one for P(B), the  final posteriors would not be the same for the same incremental changes. If further pairs of steps of this kind are taken, the  posteriors of A and B approach the conjuction P(A) = 0 and P(B) = 1.  Another possibility in reassessing both the ground and its consequence is that the credibility of each increases with every  step. In this case the posteriors trend toward P(A) = 1 and P(B) = 1. If on the other hand, both credibilities decrease with  each step, the posteriors trend toward P(A) = 0 and P(B) = 0.  D. Rival or Conflicting Conjectures.  Two "conflicting," or incompatible, conjectures are ones for which one or the other or both are false, that is, both cannot be  true. "Rival" conjectures are those for which the probability that both are true is relatively low. The Polya syllogisms for  these two situations are:  A rival of B A incompatible with B  B false (less credible) B false  A a little (very little) more credible A very much more credible  BAYES' EQUATION 423  Heuristics to describe these two situations are:  our confidence in a conjecture can only increase when an incompatible rival conjecture has been exploded."  "the more confidence we placed in an incompatible rival of our conjecture, the greater will be the gain in faith in our  conjecture when that rival is refuted."  To undertake a Bayesian analysis we first recognize that for either rival or conflicting conjectures both RBA and RAB are  negative. For incompatible conjectures only, P(AIB)=0, 0<P(AJB)<1, P(BIA)=0, and 0<P(BJA)<1 making RBA = -P(AIB) and RAB =  -P(BIA). For conflicting (incompatible) conjectures the Bayesian syllogism is:  AvB P(A) < P(B) RBA (constant)= -P(A)/P(B) B less (or more) credible AP(A) = RBAAP(B )  In the first premise the " v " stands for "or." The conclusion is a familiar one, only the premises differ. For rival  conjectures, as compared to incompatible ones, the relevances are both negative but P(A I B) :A 0, P(B I A) 0 0, and P(A) can  be either less than or greater than P(R). The Bayesian syllogism is:  A rival of B  for P(A) < P(B): - P(A)/P(B) < RBA (const.) < 0  [ for P(A) > P(B): -P(A)/P(B) < RBA (const.) < 0] B less (or more) credible  AP(A)=RBAAP(B)  These syllogisms verify the Polya syllogisms and heuristics. The distinction between "rival" and "incompatible" comes in the  ranges of possible values for priors and for relevances as noted above. To consider changes AP(B) brought about by a  reevaluation of P(A), simply interchange A and B in the above.  E. Circumstantial Evidence.  In the case of a circumstance B supporting a conjecture A, a Polya syllogism is as follows:  B with A more credible than B without A B true  A more credible  424 R. R. KADESCH  Polya continues with a heuristic not described by the above. It is:  "the less credible a circumstance appears without a certain conjecture, the more will the proof of that circumstance enhance  the credibility of that conjecture."  For a Bayesian analysis we recognize this pattern to be similar to that for rival conjectures, except here RBA is positive  (for supporting evidence). While there are no restrictions on the priors P(A) and P(B) other than 0 < P < 1, there are bounds  on the relevances determined by the priors. For P(A) < P(B) then 0 < RBA < P(A)/P(B), and for P(A) >, P(B) then 0 < RBA <  P(A)/P(B). The Bayesian syllogism becomes:  Circumstance B supports conjecture A for P(A) P(B): 0 < RBA (const.) < P(A)/P(B) for P(A) P(B): 0 < RBA (const.) < P(A)/P(B) B  more (or less) credible  AP(A) = RBAAP(B)  To compare this to Polya's syllogism and heuristic we must interpret the credibility of "B with A" as P(BIA) and that of "B  without A" as P(BIA). His first premise then becomes P(BIA) > P(BIA), from which RAB > 0. But if RAB > 0 then RBA > 0 also. As  before, the Bayesian expression is more general than Polya's second premise, "B true," for now we may have any increase from  the prior value P(B) up to and including AP(B) =P(B). His conclusion is verified since RBA is a positive slope. The quoted  heuristic also follows directly because, no matter what the value of RBA within its limits, the smaller the prior P(B) the  greater the possible increment AP(B) resulting in a greater possible increase in the credibility of the conjecture.  The distinction between "examining a consequence," where A --> B, and "circumstantial evidence" is an important one. For the  case A -+ B, RBA = P(AI B) since P(A 1 B) = 0. For circumstantial evidence, P(A I B) 0 0 and P(B I A) =1-1 1. For A --> B,  P(A) is less than P(B) while for circumstantial evidence P(A) may be greater than or less than P(B). What these two cases do  share is the positive relevance RBA.  IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION  The key to a Bayesian analysis of Polya's cases of plausible reasoning lies in the reformulation of Bayes' equations in a way  that reveals the linear relationship between the posterior probabilities of the two propositions. This linearity has led to a  simple expression for the change in the probability of one proposition brought about by the subjective reevaluation in the  probability of the other.  It is of interest to note that this same linearity also arises from a particular assumption regarding the nature of subjective  probability assessments. If one  BAYES' EQUATION 425  represents the relationship between propositions A and B by a tetranomial distribution, then P(A) and P(B) become the marginal  means y(A) and /t(B) with variances a2 (A) and Cr2(B) . In this case the two regression lines of the conditional means, P(A I  B = b) and P(B I A = a), are linear. Here, b = 0, 1 /n, 2/n,..., 1 and a = 0, 1/n, 2/n,..., 1 where n is the sample size. The  intersection of these two lines when a and b are plotted against one another is the point p(A), p(B). The tetranomial model of  a bivariate relationship is a good one because it serves as a reminder that all subjective evaluations of probabilities should  be represented by distributions. That is, the probabilities P in the preceding discussions are more aptly described as means y  of these distributions. The same linearities arise in either case.  Future investigations in the analysis of heuristics should treat trivariate relationships among three propositions A, B, and  C. For example, Polya discusses the case of examining several consequences in succession. Here A is a hypothesis and B,,  B,,..., B, are consequences. He states that if A-B,,..., B B1, where B+ , is "very different" from the formerly  verified consequences B 1 ,..., B and B,,  ,  is found to be "true," then A becomes "much more credible." A trivariate relationship is involved here, a relationship that  Polya does not treat directly. A second important example, one that Polya does not discuss, involves two circumstance pointing  toward a particular conjecture. The analog of the conclusion above would be the following heuristic: If the two circumstances  are very different, i.e., negatively relevant to one another, then the confirmation of both increases the credibility of the  conjecture much more than if the circumstances were similar, i.e., positively relevant to one another, and then both found to  be true. Both examples cited would benefit from a Bayesian analysis utilizing appropriate relevance values.  REFERENCES  DE FINETTI, B. (1974). Theory of probability (Vol. I), New York: Wiley.  DUDA, R. O., HART, P. E., & NILSSON, N. J. (1976). Subjective Bayesian methods for rule-based inference systems, Technical  Note 124. Artificial Intelligence Center. Menlo Park, CA: also Proc. 1976 NCC AFIPS Press.  INHELDER, B., AND PIAGET, J. (1958). The growth of logical thinking, New York: Basic Books. KYBURG, H. E., AND SMOKIER, H. E.  (1964). Studies in subjective probability, New York: Wiley. POLYA, G. (1954). Patterns of plausible inference, Mathematics and  plausible reasoning, Vol. II Princeton, N.I.: Princeton Univ. Press.  SUPPES, P. (1966(a)). Probabalistic inference and the concept of total evidence, In P. Suppes and J. Hintikka (Eds.), Aspects  of Inductive Logic, Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 49-65,  SUPPES, P. (1966(0)). A Bayesian approach to the paradoxes of confirmation. In P. Suppes and J. Hintikka (Eds.), Aspects of  Inductive Logic, Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 198-207.  RECEIVED: September 6, 1985