10.1016/0022-2496(86)90045-3
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 30, 85-90 (1986  Book Reviews Wogols, Turgles, and Whimpf and Things  JAMES T. TOWNSEND AND F. GREGORY ASHBY. Stochastic Modeling of Elementary Psychological Processes. New York: Cambridge  University Press, 1983. pp. 500. $67.50 hardcover, $27.50 softcover.  Reviewed by STEPHEN W. LINK  James Townsend is Professor of Psychology at Purdue University. He obtained his Ph. D. at Stanford in 1966, and was at the  University of Hawaii from 1966 to 1968. He is currently Editor of the Journal of Mathematical Psychology and his research  interests are human decision making, judgment and choice, and perception.  F. Gregory Ashby is Associate Professor of Psychology at University of California at Santa Barbara. He obtained his Ph. D. at  Purdue University in 1980, and was an NSF Postdoctoral Fellow at Harvard in 1981. His research interests are also human  decision making, judgment and choice, and perception.  The reviewer is Professor of Psychology at McMaster University. His primary research interests involve stochastic modeling of  mental processes, human judgment and decision making, and mental comparison. Two recent chapters on the relative judgment  theory appear in the Proceedings of the International Congress of Psychology.  Between the covers of this splendid theoretical investigation of psychological processes are Leslie Waugh's remarkable  caricatures of stochastic models. Reminiscent of the elegant illustrations of Harry Clarke, these prologues to each chapter  are peopled by a fantasy population of Wogols, and Turgles, and other visitors from such planets as Mut and Jove. They  contribute a charming levity to a weighty subject and they also introduce the frankly mathematical models of cognitive  processes that are our primary concern.  The purpose of this immense volume is to study dynamic cognitive processes by comparing stochastic models' predictions of  response times and response probabilities to extant experimental findings. The first three chapters (1) motivate the use of  response time as a measure of mental processing; (2) describe cognitive issues in the context of deterministic models of  mental processes; and (3) briefly review mathematical tools used to investigate stochastic models. Then a huge  Send requests for reprints to Dr. Stephen W. Link, Department of Psychology, McMaster University, 1280 Main Street, Hamilton,  Ontario L8S 4K1, Canada.  85  0022-2496/86 $3.00  Copyright (() 1986 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  HC) BOOK REVIEWS  theoretical territory is carved out. First the areas of parallel and serial processes are delineated. The resulting discussion  of analogous cognitive processing models leads us toward analyses of memory and visual search experiments followed by a close  inspection of self-terminating versus exhaustive search strategies. More difficult terrain is reached when mixtures of  state-dependent response time distributions, distribution-free response time predictions, counting processes, and random walks  are encountered.  A volume this broad in concept is a rare find in any science and this one presents to the enthusiastic theorist a reading  project of significance and rigor sufficient to merit detailed study. Getting started will be easier if there is a conceptual  base to aid in understanding a formidable mathematical nomenclature. In this regard, special attention should be devoted to  the technical details of serial and parallel systems, whose study occupies the largest proportion of the book. In a serial  system, operating on only two input elements A and B, the processing order (A, B) or (B, A) is selected in advance, in much  the same way you choose to don your cap before your cloak. In a parallel system both elements undergo processing  simultaneously and the completion order depends upon whichever element happens to be completed first. Once, this familiar  description was perfectly obvious, but now I find that the sample spaces used to define the appropriate probability density  functions are not at all obvious. Considerable explication is necessary to avoid errors in calculations.  As a simple example, imagine the parallel processing of two elements A and B. A natural method of analysis is to consider to  and tB to be the times to process elements A and B, respectively. The joint probability density function is then defined on  the positive quadrant (tl, tB) and the probability that A is processed before B is simply the integral of the joint density  over the to < tB half of the quadrant. The parallel process is yet more complicated because once the first element is  processed the second element can be processed anew. This second round of processing depends upon parameter values that can  change from values used during the first processing phase. Thus, beyond the positive quadrant that represents the completion  time outcomes for two elements undergoing simultaneous processing is still another dimension that represents the completion  time for the element processed last.  A serial process requires a different conception of the joint probability space. First, suppose that element A is processed  before B. This event occurs with an a priori probability, say p, that is unrelated to the joint density of the completion  times for A and B. The element A must be completed before the processing of B may begin and the only concern is about when the  process will finish. The joint density function is defined, then, for only the to < tB half of the (tA, tB) quadrant. With  probability (1-p), B is processed before A and the joint density function is defined only for the tB< to half of the (tA, tB)  quadrant. The two outcome spaces, each half of the positive (tl, tB) quadrant, can be contained in separate planes defined  with respect to a third (completion order) dimension.  These two spaces are clearly different but formal analysis of their properties leads  BOOK REVIEWS 87  to several surprises. One of the most remarkable, given the many bold assertions concerning serial versus parallel processes  often encountered in the recent experimental literature, is that parallel and serial processes can mimic each other in terms  of completion time density functions. According to the authors, when completion times are exponentially distributed, serial  processes are more general than parallel processes. Moreover, given any within-stage independent parallel model it is always  possible to construct a serial model that is its complete equivalent. Therefore, there exist parallel and serial processes  that are indistinguishable in terms of their observable output. It follows that statistics based on completion times can not  distinguish between these two theoretically different processes.  The ready availability of parallel processes that mimic the output of serial processes calls into question certain inferences  about mental processes derived from popular experimental procedures. Consider, for example, the problem of distinguishing  between these two processes by using the following results. Only two elements are to be processed and these elements are  present in one or the other of two visual display positions. The experimenter can arrange that the same element appears in  both positions, (A, A) or (B, B) trials, or that A and B appear once each, an (A, B) or (B, A) trial. The task of the  processing system is to decide whether the element "A" is contained in the visual display. The experimenter's problem is that  only the total processing time can be measured and not the intervening individual element completion times that determine this  total.  For a serial search, once "A" is identified there is no need to continue analyzing the visual display. Intuitively (A, A)  trials will generate fast responses because, regardless of which position is processed first, the element "A" will be  encountered and processing can cease. On (B, B) trials the serial process must be exhaustive because neither element is an "A"  and thus both elements must be processed. On (A, B) or (B, A) trials the serial system may complete processing early when  element "A" happens to be processed first. Otherwise, as in (B, B) trials both elements must be processed. In contrast it  makes no difference to the parallel process in what position the elements occur because both elements begin being processed  simultaneously.  "Obviously" the processing times for the different trial types will provide data that distinguish between the serial and  parallel models. To demonstrate that this intuition is false, let the serial processing time needed to analyze either "A" or  "B" be 100 ms. Then a serial self-terminating process will identify an "A" on (A, A ) trials in 100 ms. The processing time  for a 50-50 mixture of processing orderings on (A, B) and (B, A) trials is 150 ms, and for (B, B) trials it is 200 ms.  Townsend's results show how a parallel (exponential) process can mimic these results in the following way.  A parallel system can process simultaneously two elements at rates vA, and vB,. On (A, A) trials the time to determine that an  "A" is present is the minimum time to analyse either element and this time equals (vA, + vA,) -'. Let vA, =.005, so that the  completion time for an (A, A) trial equals 100 ms. For exponentially distributed completion times and an (A, B) trial the time  to process the first element,  88 BOOK REVIEWS  regardless of which element it is, equals (vAI+vB,)-'. If B is processed first the time to process the second element is vA2  ', but if A is finished first then B is processed in mean time vB2'. Now A is processed before B with probability vA I/(vA I +  vB,) and B is processed before A with probability vBI/(vA, + vB, ). Thus for an (A, B) trial the observable outcome will be a  mixture of these two cases with a resulting average completion time dependent upon the rate for processing the second element.  If vA2 = vB2 = 2vA I = 2vB, then the average completion time for (A, B) trials equals 150 ms. Finally, when considering (B, B)  trials the completion time depends upon the order in which elements are processed and the various rates of processing. In this  case the maximum time to process two elements is easily shown to equal 200 ms.  Thus the two different processing systems are not distinguishable on the basis of orderings of mean response times: a basis  once thought to prove the existence. of a serial process. Even more disturbing to some is the demonstration (p. 68) that these  results can also be due to a serial exhaustive model which, in contrast to a serial self-terminating process, requires that  all elements must be processed.  These systems can be viewed as stochastic queues and their formal properties examined by reference to the vast literature that  now occupies a prominent place in applied probability theory. But, issues unique to the mathematical psychologist's method, of  exposing to view hidden mental processes whose mechanisms are unknown in advance, require an integration of theory and  experimental design not to be found in queuing theory. Furthermore the traditions of psychological modeling place a premium on  detailing relations between the unobservable mechanism and the observable response. Thus the authors are duty bound to  approach the analysis of these systems by examining properties of the probability density functions for the observable  completion times.  As is now commonplace in mathematical modeling the performance of a subject during a single trial is viewed as dependent on  the state of the subject. Given a particular state the probability distribution for an observable response is determined from  the principles of the theory under consideration and the rule of correspondence that relates theoretical outcomes to  observable responses. The data, however, rarely provide a view of a particular state. Rather, the data represent an amalgam of  states which occur with probabilities that are often not under the control of the experimenter. These results are mixtures of  performances where the observed distribution of, say, response times is a probability mixture of state-dependent response time  distributions. This theoretical idea is far removed from the 19th century additive error theory of classical statistics that  seems of minor value for either psychological modeling or the analysis of psychological data.  The reader will find numerous examples of the use of mixtures of distributions throughout the book. The case of (A, B) trials  discussed above is one example. Often, as in probability theory itself, mixtures provide analytical results hard to come by  through other means. In some cases models which postulate the existence of mixtures are easily tested by using newly derived  predictions concerning how mixtures of distributions and their moments behave. Because the authors handle  BOOK REVIEWS 89  these matters with skill it comes as a surprise that Proposition 9.4 (p. 270) which concerns a bimodality property of mixtures  is untrue. The counterargument is easily seen and the authors recently constructed a counterexample to the Proposition.  Techniques for analyzing mixtures of distributions may be a common meeting ground for many readers. Indeed, Chapter 8 is  especially useful in presenting distribution-ordering approaches to testing predictions for various models of serial and  parallel processing. Many of these techniques were presented at scientific meetings and are not available in the published  literature. Yet, as is common in a rapidly expanding field, some more recent work is missing. Methods of correcting data for  guessing, for example, reveal difficulties in some previous applications of the properties of mixtures. Tests for a mixture of  probability density functions are different from tests for a mixture of histograms, which do not obey the same principles as  density functions. Histograms are not density functions and properties that are ascribed to mixtures of density functions may  not exist when the histogram rather than the density function is used to confirm the predicted property. The authors, however,  avoid many difficulties in the analysis of density functions by depending heavily on predictions for the distribution  function. Because of the many applications to parallel and serial processing models, Chapter 8 should be important reading for  cognitive psychologists.  Beyond the confines of finite state mixture theories are theories based on random walks and counting processes (also a random  walk). Random walk theory is especially useful for those concerned about relations between response probability and response  time. In this regard there exists a lengthy history of empirical and theoretical work that I will detail elsewhere. Recently,  Stone's (1960) analysis of a random walk model for choice response time, identical to Wald's (1947) model for sequential  statistical analysis, showed that the response time distribution for a particular response did not depend upon the stimulus  presented! That is right, the response time distribution of response R, to stimulus SR was identical to that for response RA  to stimulus SB. Few experiments ever produced corroborating data and therefore there was no reason to compute, and to my  knowledge no one did compute, response given stimulus conditional response time distributions, or means. Furthermore the  complicated probabilistic arguments that surrounded random walk theory suggested that a simpler theoretical approach might  produce keener insights.  Yet the analysis of many experiments pointed to a sequential model as a likely basis for often observed covariations between  response time and response probability. In response to these concerns Laming (1968) developed a less restricted form model  than Stone's, but it too predicted that mean response time depended upon the response made rather than the stimulus presented.  After rejecting various mixture models as the basis for error performances commonly observed in choice tasks, Link developed a  Thurstonian based psychophysical model that was analyzed as a random walk. The authors follow quite closely the original  mathematical derivations developed in Link and Heath (1975). These derivations provided the first testable relations between  mean response time and response  90 BOOK REVIEWS  probability for this class of models and the first equations for mean choice response times conditioned on the stimulus  presented.  The mathematical device used to analyze a particular theoretical problem may seem of little importance but in the case of the  random walk models the choice was and remains critical. The use of the moment generating function (mgf) as a tool for the  analysis of response time-response probability relations first developed by Link and Heath showed how to use geometric  properties of the mgf to determine predictions of random walk models. This geometric approach was the basis for later advances  by Thomas, Swensson, and Green, Noreen and Burns, and Ashby that revealed new predictions about various sequential theories of  choice. The authors provide a major service by summarizing these recent developments.  This brief trek through an initially formidable terrain, peopled by Woguls and Turgles, and Whimpf and things, brings some  familiarity to the field of stochastic models, but provides only a glimpse at the authors' deep analysis of psychological  processes. Closer examination reveals an area ripe for a future development that can be advanced by uniting theoretical  concepts well known to mathematical psychologists with ideas drawn from such other fields as queuing theory, cryptology, and  artificial intelligence. From this vantage point the authors' scholarship advances the field, provides a strong basis for  graduate and undergraduate instruction, and fosters wide appreciation for the study of mental processes.  REFERENCES  LAMING, D. (1968). Information theory of choice-reaction times. New York: Academic Press.  LINK, S. W., & HEATH, R. A. (1975). A sequential theory of psychological discrimination. Psychometrika, 40, 77-105.  SToNE, M. (1960). Models for choice-reaction time. Psychometrika, 25, 251-260. WALD, A. (1947). Sequential analysis. New York:  Wiley.