10.1016/0022-2496(86)90011-8
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 30, 103-160 (1986)  A Theory of Information Structure I. General Principles*  MICHAEL LEYTON  Harvard Universityt  Current cognitive theories are founded on the processing computer analogy, i.e., that a cognitive system is analogous to a  computer. In contrast to this view, the following paper proposes a content computer analogy which states that cognition is the  attempt to model phenomena as computers.  In fact, the content computer analogy is extended to a content machine analogy, because the term machine is understood as  having two kinds of structure: (1) computational, or algebraic structure, and (2) stability. The paper develops a theory of  the cognitive role of these two factors.  Algebraic structure determines the generative or connective aspects of stimulus sets. However, stability is shown here to  crucially constrain the allowable decomposition and ordering of that generative structure. It is argued that an understanding  of this constraint is important to the study of cognition. The constraint results in (1) a cognized structure of nested  environmental control, and (2) the imposition of a reference frame. It is thereby argued that the concept of reference frame  is strongly related to that of control. A general theory of reference frames is offered. The constraint just described forces  reference frames to be asymmetric-sequential; and it is argued that this explains a number of phenomena in perceptual  organization, categorization, linguistic grammar, and planning structure. C 1986 Academic Press, Inc.  1. INTRODUCTION  1.1. The Computational Component  This series of papers elaborates a view of cognition which differs from the information-processing approach in the following  fundamental way: While both theories are built on a proposed relationship between computers and cognition, the relationships  specified by the two theories are crucially different.  The relationship that is currently of great concern (e.g., Newell & Simon, 1972) will be called the processing computer  analogy. The relationship to be proposed here will be called the content computer analogy. The difference between the two can  be expressed simply like this: The processing computer analogy states that the cognitive system is structured like a computer,  whereas the content computer analogy states that cognitive representations are structured as computers.  * The next article in this series, "A Theory of Information Structure. II. A Theory of Perceptual Organization," will appear  in Volume 30, Number 3, the September 1986 issue of Journal of Mathematical Psychology.  t Requests for reprints should be sent to Michael Leyton, Departments of Psychology and Computer Science, State University of  New York, Buffalo, NY 14260.  103  0022-2496/86 $3.00  Copyright C 1986 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  104 MICHAEL LEPTON  a  FIG. 1. (a) The Process Machine Analogy: The head is equivalent to a machine. This is illustrated by the "=" sign between the  head and the machine in the upper left. The stimuli, on the right, enter the head, or equivalently the machine. (b) The  Content Machine Analogy: The head looks at a set of stimuli (shown on the right), and sees a machine (shown in the cloud above  the head).  To understand this further consider the following three objects: (1) a brain, (2) a computer, and (3) a stimulus set. The two  analogies define two different relationships between these objects, as illustrated in Fig. 1. In the upper diagram, the  processing computer analogy has been represented. Here, the brain is regarded as equivalent to a computer. A stimulus set, the  set of dots on the right, is inputted into the head just as if it were inputted into a computer. Figure lb, however,  represents the content computer analogy. Here, the brain looks at a stimulus set, and what it sees is a computer. Furthermore,  the claim to be made is that the brain cannot help but see stimulus sets, or phenomena, as computers. For I will argue that  this is what it means to extract information from the stimulus set.  Again, one can express the difference between the two analogies using this somewhat over-simplified characterization. In the  information-processing paradigm, there are essentially two components: (a) the information processing system and (b) the  commodity, information, which is being manipulated in that system. The computer is the generally agreed-upon model for the  former. However, the view I will offer here is that the computer is the required model for the latter, the manipulated  commodity.  There are a number of ways that the Content Computer Analogy can be intuitively understood, depending upon ones interests. For  example, as we shall see, the Content Computer Analogy can be regarded as the statement that cognition and planning are  equivalent. That is, planning is not just a high-level cognitive activity, but is the very essence of any cognitive  representation, i.e., on any level of the cognitive system. Again, according to Leyton (1974, 1982), the Content Computer  Analogy can be regarded as stating that cognition and science are equivalent.  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 105  This is because, under the analogy, cognition is regarded as the structuring of empirical data in terms of logical languages.  An explicit formalization of the relation between scientific theories and computation has been worked out by Solomonoff (1964)  who regards a scientific theory as a means by which a data set S can be generated by a program on some suitable Turing  machine. That is, the program is an explanation for S. The amount of information in S is then regarded as the length of the  shortest such program (see also Chaitin, 1966, Kolmogorov, 1968).  It is important to understand that, unlike statistical information theory, which equates the amount of information extracted  from S with the number of possible alternatives to S, the information measure just described equates the information extracted  from S with a specific kind of representation of S, i.e., a representation in terms of a program and a computer. Thus the  Content Computer Analogy is a statement in which the constructs information extraction and representation will be regarded as  equivalent.  1.2. The Stability Component  I have said that the content computer analogy can be regarded as saying that the brain represents anything as a computer. In  other words, the brain structures representations so that they look like computers.  In fact, the content computer analogy is only half of the basic postulate from which the following cognitive theory will be  elaborated. Computers are the embodiment of the notion of computability. However, it will be claimed that cognition attempts  to define also another type of structure: stability`. The stability of a phenomenon will be taken to be its observer-defined  persistence. The theoretical consequences of this added factor will be several. For example, it will be possible to offer a  general theory of reference frames which will be applied to a wide range of phenomena from Gestalt perception to linguistics.  1.3. The Content Machine Analogy  These two forms of structure, computability and stability, are the central concerns of two major contemporary theories of  machines: computer science, which studies computation, and dynamical systems theory, which studies stability. Since machines,  as they are currently investigated, embody these two kinds of structure, and the basic proposal to be made is that cognition  attempts to define these two kinds of structure, it would be more accurate to call the basic proposal, the Content Machine  Analogy:  Relationships between a computational view of information and Shannon information theory are presented in Fine (1973). A  relationship between a stability view of information and Shannon information theory is presented in Footnote 13.  106 MICHAEL LEYTON  CONTENT MACHINE ANALOGY: The cognition of, or extraction of information from, a phenomenon is the description of the  phenomenon as a machine'.  The two disciplines, computer science and dynamical systems theory, rarely communicate with each other, as they have very  different concerns. However, it will be claimed here that, in cognitive representations, their two forms of structure,  computation and stability, mutually constrain each other.  The type of structure which emerges from this mutual constraint will be called a reference frame. This series of papers  attempts to show that the several uses of the term "reference frame" in cognitive psychology are examples of this structure.  For example, it will be argued that Marr-Nishihara shape perception and Roschian categorization are examples of such  structures.  Simultaneously, the mutual constaint of computation and stability will be seen to define any environment as a nested structure  of control. A conclusion of the theory will be that reference frames are nested structures of control.  Finally, in conjunction with the statement of the Content Machine Analogy, the following evaluation principle is offered.  Observe first that some of the alternative descriptions of a particular phenomenon can yield more information than others.  Furthermore, one can assume that the cognitive system attempts to choose those descriptions which have more information than  less. Thus one has, quite simply:  COGNITIVE MAXIMIZATION PRINCIPLE: The cognitive system attempts to produce descriptions which maximize machine structure.  1.4. Information, Reference Frames, and Planning  A central outcome of this series of papers will be the development of a precise equivalence between the notions of  information, reference frame, and planning structure. Let us now briefly sketch how this will be done.  With respect to the notion of reference, an important result which will be incorporated into the following work will be  Rosch's discovery that reference in categories is asymmetric. Rosch (1975) found that natural categories-such as colors, line  orientations, and numbers-have reference point stimuli-such as focal colors, vertical and horizontal lines, and number  multiples of 10-with respect to which the other category members are judged. For example, off-red is referred to red, a  leaning object to the vertical, and 99 to 100. The crucial result is that the reverse references do not usually happen; e.g.,  100 is not referred to 99, etc.  However, now consider the following phenomenon which was demonstrated in a set of experiments I conducted in Leyton (1984a). I  found that, when subjects are  Z It should be understood that these papers are about the structuring of phenomena in human cognition, and not, for example,  in mathematical disciplines. The simplest illustration of this distinction is the theory of categorization or set membership.  Mathematics is based on set theory, where set membership corresponds to the fulfillment of a set of properties. However, Rosch  has shown that, in human cognition, set-membership has a profoundly different structure: it corresponds to graded similarity  to a prototype. In these papers, we are interested only in results of the latter type.  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 107  presented with a rotated parallelogram, they reference it to a non-rotated one, which they then reference to a rectangle,  which they then reference to a square. Figure 15 shows this successive reference sequence. In other words, there is not just  one reference point in a category, but a whole succession of them. How can one explain this phenomenon?  Recall that this paper will attempt to show that, in a cognitive structure, computation and stability mutually constrain each  other. What will be argued is that this mutual constraint causes a reference frame to have a nested structure where, within  each level of the structure, there is a reference point. The sequence of nesting will be denoted by G1 - GZ ... G where each  G; is a level of the structure and e; is the reference point in that level. Thus it will be argued that in the succession  phenomenon, described above, the sequence of shapes results because the cognitive system creates a path through the nested  layers G, G,,..., G,, picking out the reference points e e_ I_., e I, from each successive layer. The series of shapes  are the successive reference points, e;, encountered through the levels.  Remarkaby, one can argue that this phenomenon also occurs in linguistics. It is well known that transformations can be removed  from a sentence only in a particular order [see Akmajian and Heny (1975), for an extensive review]. This, in fact, creates the  same type of layered structure, G, - GZ ... G where each level G; is associated with a particular transformation. The  sequence of sentences (or sentence representations) that results from the removal of the transformations is a path of  reference points through the levels, to the kernel. This phenomenon occurs whether one believes in transformational grammar  (e.g., Chomsky, 1957) or in a rival theory such as relational grammar (e.g., Perlmutter & Postal, 1983).  I will attempt to show that this type of layered asymmetric sequence, G, - G2 ... G is general, i.e., that the many  phenomena, about which cognitive psychologists have used the term reference frame, all have this same underlying structure. It  is in fact, far from obvious that these psychological phenomena have this nested asymmetric reference structure. For example,  consider the square/diamond problem. Mach was the first to demonstrate that if one places a cartesian reference frame over a  square in two different particular orientations, the square looks like a square with one orientation and like a diamond with  the other (Fig. 10). This problem has remained unsolved for almost a century and it clearly rests on the phenomenon of a  cartesian reference frame. In the second paper, I will attempt to show that a cartesian reference frame involves, cognitively,  a quite intricate successive asymmetric-reference structure, G, - GZ ... G and that it is this structure that causes the  square/diamond effect. The theory offered correctly predicts more striking examples than the square/diamond phenomenon and  explains them.  Again, in an entirely different area, a major unsolved problem in Gestalt psychology is to explain what a part or grouping is.  In the second paper, I will attempt to show that a part of grouping is, cognitively, a level in successive asymmetric  reference sequence, i.e., that it is a layer in a reference frame.  Let us now turn away from perception, and look at planning. It is generally acknowledged that planning is hierarchical; i.e.,  that major steps precede finer ones.  108 MICHAEL LEYTON  For example, if one wishes to play the piano, one moves one's entire body across the room to the piano; then one moves one's  arm so that the hands are above the keyboard; and finally, one moves one's fingers on the keys.  What is remarkable is that the standard representation of this motor space is a sequence G 1 - GZ ... G where each component  G; is (1) the motor space of one of the components, and (2) the reference frame for the next component of the sequence (e.g.,  Paul, 1981). That is, the movements in any component are referred to the movements in the previous component of the sequence.  Thus the motor space is structured as a nested asymmetric reference sequence of the exact type I proposed earlier for  phenomena in other cognitive areas such as perception, categorization, and linguistics.  A crucial conceptual result of this is the following: Because it will be argued that a planning hierarchy has the layered  reference structure of the type I describe, one will be able to invert this conclusion and regard all reference frames as  planning hierarchies. For example, because I will argue that, in perception, a Gestalt organization is a nested asymmetric  reference sequence, one can conclude that a Gestalt organization is a planning hierarchy. Even something as simple as a square  will be shown to be structured as a planning hierarchy, and it is this hierarchy that will be shown to be responsible for the  square/diamond effect.  Let us now see how two of the main proposals of the following paper will be put together. (1) The first is the Content Machine  Analogy which states that the extraction of information, from a stimulus set, is the description of that set as a machine. (2)  The second is the proposal that a machine, used as a cognitive description, involves the mutual constraint of computability  and stability, and that this constraint results in a successive asymmetric structure which will be taken to be a reference  frame. Putting these two proposals together, one concludes the following: The Content Machine Analogy forces an equivalence  between the notion of information and reference frame; i.e., under this view, the extraction of information is exactly the  imposition of a reference frame. For example, one extracts the information "a square" when one embeds it in the successive  shape sequence shown in Fig. 15. This embedding will distinguish it from the information "a diamond," which involves a  different embedding.  We have just put together the Content Machine Analogy with the proposal that reference frames are asymmetric-sequential, and  we have thereby derived a proposal concerning the nature of information-extraction, or stimulus definition. If one now puts  these notions together with the claim that planning hierarchies are asymmetricsequential, one obtains this result: The Content  Machine Analogy implies that the extraction of information from a stimulus set is exactly the description of that set as a  planning hierarchy.  This view will lead us to the final main conclusion of these papers: that all cognition is planning. Most importantly, we  should observe that in current cognitive psychology there is a division between perception, i.e., the extraction of a roughly  neutral data base, and planning, a highly goal-directed activity. Under the system to be elaborated in these papers, there is  no such division. At any level of the nervous  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 109  system, all that ever happens is planning. This result is conceptually forced upon us as soon as we realize that a planning  hierarchy has the same structure as the reference frames we find in perception.  2. OVERVIEW  This series of papers is divided into six main parts. Part I (the present paper) develops the general principles of the  structural theory. The next four parts are applications of the general theory to four ascending levels of cognition: (1)  perceptual organization, (2) categorization, (3) linguistic grammar and function, and (4) planning. The final part turns from  the structural theory to a theory of what criteria the cognitve system uses to evaluate and choose between alternative  representations which all conform to the structural theory. Thus, whereas the first five papers examine the realization of the  Content Machine Analogy, the final paper examines the realization of the Cognitive Maximization Principle (end of Sect. 1.3).  A brief overview now follows.  General Theory  The purpose of this first paper is to develop a detailed statement of the Content Machine Analogy. From this analogy the paper  elaborates a system of general proposals that will be tested in the subsequent papers under the specific cognitive areas  examined in those papers.  We begin by investigating the way in which the first of the two forms of structure, computability, can be the structure of a  cognitive representation. The space of programs of a computer forms a highly connected system of the type called an algebraic  structure. From this point onwards, computational aspects will be referred to as algebraic, to emphasize our concern with this  system of connectivity. Part of the basic postulate will state that the cognition of a stimulus set is the description of that  set as the algebraic structure of a machine. One should note here that no mathematical knowledge will be assumed in this paper.  The discussion of algebraic aspects shows that the Content Machine Analogy can be realized in two very different types of  representation. These two types allow us to characterize, in a very precise way, some important dichotomies in cognitive  psychology: (a) One of the dichotomies is that of whether objects are referred to each other symmetrically (as, for example,  in the usual view of similarity) or asymmetrically (as in the examples given at the beginning of Sect. 1.4). (b) A second  dichotomy is whether an object is characterized by a set of properties that are invariant to all its instances (as in the  classical theory of categorization) or by the properties of what is called a prototype instance in Rosch's categorization  theory.  s Principles and Proposals are, in most cases in the text, hypotheses that are open to empirical testing, and will be tested  within the specific cognitive areas of the subsequent papers. The word Principle is chosen when a statement is more weighty  than a Proposal.  110 MICHAEL LEYTON  (c) A third dichotomy is this: A possible implication of Rosch's results (recall the beginning of Sect. 1.4) is that a  stimulus is characterized as a deviation from a referent. For example, one's cognitive representation of off-red seems to be  that offred is a deviation from red. Thus, off-red seems to be represented as its referential relation to red. We shall say,  generally, the reference is explicit in the representation of the stimulus. It will be seen that prominent models of  information structure do not permit this psychological phenomenon to occur.  In relation to these issues, we find that the two alternative types of representation, which realize the Content Machine  Analogy, have the following properties: (1) In the first type, (a) reference is symmetric, (b) objects are defined as  invariants, and (c) reference is non-explicit. (2) In the second type, (a) reference is asymmetric, (b) objects are defined in  a way that accords with the prototype phenomenon, and (c) reference is explicit. It is the algebraic analysis of these two  forms of representation that will allow us to give a clarification of the above dichotomies. We then choose (2) as the basis  of the following theory because, in all the areas to be examined (areas within perceptual organization, categorization,  grammar, and planning), the properties of (1) are violated and the properties of (2) are corroborated.  Having understood the Content Machine Analogy as implying asymmetric and explicit reference, on algebraic (computational)  grounds, we then introduce the phenomenon of sequential asymmetric reference. The claim to be made is that this phenomenon is  explained by stability factors.  Therefore, we then move from algebra and investigate the way in which the second of the two forms of structure, stability,  characterizes aspects of cognitive descriptions. As I said, the stability of a property is taken here to be its defined  persistence. A proposal is offered which is crucial to the theory developed in the series of papers. It will be called the  Cognitive Stability Principle, and it states that the cognitive system attempts to remove instabilities in the order of their  decreasing instability. Let us consider this statement more closely.  I will argue that the cognitive system attempts to define the persistence of each of the behaviors of a machine which  cognition is using as a model for a stimulus set. This causes the machine's behaviors to be partitioned into classes with  respect to persistence; that is, each behavior in a class has the same stability value.  One can in fact put together the behaviors of a class and regard them as the behavioral structure G; of a single component  machine. Thus I will argue that the attempt to define the stability value of each of the behaviors of the machine, G, causes  the machine to be decomposed into a product of component machines G = G, - GZ ... G where any G;, in the sequence, has  greater stability than any G;, to the right of it in the sequence.  The Cognitive Stability Principle then states that, given a machine structure, G, which cognition has taken as the structure  of a representation, the cognitive system attempts to remove, from the representation, the component structures G;, one by  one, in order of decreasing instability (ice., from right to left). Several examples of this will be seen. For instance, in  shape perception, we shall see that the cognitive  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES III  system attempts to remove properties of a figure in a particular sequence. This sequence successively stabilizes the figure.  Hence, for example, one obtains the successive shape reference described earlier. Again, in linguistics, syntax  transformations can be removed from a sentence only in a particular order. A variety of functional data will be used to argue  that this successive transformational removal corresponds to the successive reduction of a type of discourse instability.  Note that it is the Cognitive Stability Principle that will be regarded as producing the successive asymmetric sequence of a  reference frame; i.e., the latter reference sequence will be seen as successive removal of instabilities.  Following from the Cognitive Stability Principle, a crucial proposal is then offered which will be called the Principle of  Nested Control. This states that, given a machine factorization G = G, - GZ ... G into stability levels, the cognitive  system regards any component machine G; as controlling the machines with less stability than itself-that is, all the machines  to the right of it in the sequence. The result is that G is given a structure of nested control. But, of course, because G is  the machine structure imposed by the cognitive system on the environment, the fundamental consequence is that the cognitive  system sees the environment as a nested structure of control. It will be argued that the many examples of reference frames, in  cognitive psychology, are such structurings of the environment.  Observe that central to all these concepts is a single principle which is, in fact, a particular detailed statement of the  Content Machine Analogy. This statement will be called the Description Postulate. Roughly speaking, the Description Postulate  states that cognition, or the extraction of information, is the attempt to model a phenomenon as the algebraic structure of a  machine, with the powerful condition that the model conform to the Cognitive Stability Principle; that is, the model is  decomposed into a sequence of levels, G = G, - Gz ... Gwith respect to stability. From this, one obtains all the results  concerning the perception of nested control, reference frames, etc.  A Unified Theory of Perceptual Organization  With respect to perception, an investigation into these decomposition sequences reveals that any such sequence is split into  two subsequences, one structuring the way in which the stimulus set can change under external action (e.g., deformation,  rotation), and the other describing the way in which the set is perceived as internally generated from a subset. An  examination of the nested control structure of the latter yields a theory of grouping. The external and internal sequences are  shown to be strongly related to each other in that the symmetry axes of the internal (generating) sequence are lines of  flexibility of the most stable components of the external (e.g., deforming) sequence. It is claimed that cartesian reference  frames are subsequences of the full sequences. Using these principles, a unified theory is offered of several apparently quite  separate perceptual areas, e.g., Marr-Nishihara shape perception, Gestalt grouping, the orientation-and-form problem, and  motion perception.-A technical elaboration of this theory has appeared in Leyton (1984b); and a neuronal model in Leyton  (1985).  112 MICHAEL LEYTON  The Structure of Categories  In this part, the cognitive principles developed in Part I are applied in order to develop a unification of Rosch's prototype  theory with the criterial definition theory of categorization. Rosch's category properties are redescribed in terms of notions  in our cognitive theory, and so too is the criterial theory. Essentialy, with respect to categories, it is proposed that two  descriptions in terms of machines are cognitively formed: (1) an internal reference structure, which yields the prototype  phenomena, and (2) the action of this structure as a cue space to a criterial structure. A 10-part definition of category is  offered.  Grammatical Structure and Function  In this part it is argued that linguistic grammar is an example of an asymmetricsequential structure, G = G, - G2 ... G  Furthermore, it is argued that, as with perceptual organization, the structure G = G, - Gz ... Gis split into two  subsequences, one defining the internal generative structure of a sentence and the other defining its external  transformational structure, i.e., how it can be altered. These proposals will be corroborated independently with respect to a  number of linguistic theories; in particular, with respect to Chomskian theory and the radically different approach of  functional linguistics. The data will include not only English but African Bantu languages and Philippine languages.  Planning  It will be argued that the central criterion which partitions a plan into a hierarchy of levels is stabilty; i.e., the major  steps are more stable than the fine-tuning steps. Second, because each level is essentially a generative structure (i.e., a  space of algorithms to reach a goal), each level corresponds to a computational (algebraic) space. Thus the conclusion will be  that a planning hierarchy has the structure G, - G2. - - Gintroduced above. This claim will be remarkably easy to  corroborate in terms of modern views of trajectory planning (e.g., Paul, 1981; Brooks, 1983).  The general result of this argument will be that, because all the other cognitive levels we have examined also have that  structure, the cognitive system is a planningdefinition system at all levels.  Cognitive Maximization  While the preceding parts tell us how a cognitive representation is structured, the final part examines how the cognitive  system adjudicates between competing representations which all conform to the same structural principles (i.e., which all have  an asymmetric-explicit-sequential machine structure G, - Gz ... G. The Cognitive Maximization Principle tells us that the  cognitive system chooses the representation which maximizes machine structure (i.e., which maximizes the above kind of  structure). We will explore what this means, and offer a theory that  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 113  attempts to explain the evaluation criteria which cognition appears to apply in the four domains we studied in the preceding  parts: perceptual organization, categorization, linguistic grammar, and planning.  PART I: GENERAL THEORY  3. MACHINES: PRELIMINARY COMMENTS  3.1. Basic Structure  Recall that it is an assumption of this series of papers that the concept of a machine, as it emerges in cognitive  representations, embodies two forms of structure: (1) algebraic structure, which describes the computational connectivity of  the machine; and (2) stability, which concerns the hypothesized persistence of the machine. The next few sections examine the  Because this series of papers argues that the cognition of a phenomenon is a description of the latter as a machine, we need  to understand how machines are structured in order to propose here a theory of the cognitive structure of phenomena. The  algebraic structure of a machine is its space of algorithms. It will be argued that this space defines some fundamental  properties of cognitive representations; for example: (1) the internal reference structure of a representation, and (2) what  is cognitively understood to be an object. Thus an understanding of algebraic aspects is crucial to the theory to be  developed. No prior mathematical knowledge is required and we begin at the most basic level.  Every machine has a simple format which is diagrammed in Fig. 2. The box in the center of the figure is an object. Inputs  (i.e., operations) are applied to the object and outputs (i.e., results) are obtained. Two factors are regarded as being  responsible for the outputs: (a) The inputs P, and (b) certain properties, Q, of the object, itself, at the time of input.  These latter properties are called the object's state. When an input is applied, the machine changes its state. Thus, for  example, a computer is a machine with the program as an input, the memory as a state, and the print on the printout paper as  the output.4  input -  state output  FiG. 2. The basic structure of a machine.  Theoretically, a machine is a quintuple M= (Q, P, Y, S, A.), where Q, P, and Y are sets called states, inputs, and outputs,  respectively; and the functions S: Q x P -+ Q and A: Q x P -+ Y are interpreted as determining the next state and output,  respectively.  114 MICHAEL LEYTON  However, a theorem (e.g., Bobrow & Arbib, 1974) states that any machine can be redescribed such that its output is considered  part of the state (e.g., the print produced by a computer can be considered to be part of its memory). The resulting  redescribed machine is called a state-output machine, and it has the convenience of allowing one to describe everything in  terms of inputs and states, ignoring the concept of output.  This means that a machine can be regarded as comprising essentially three components:  (1) an object;  (2) an input space: a set P of inputs, or actions, which can be applied to the object;  (3) a state space: a set Q of states into which the object can be put by applying the inputs.  3.2. Cognition: Two Preliminary Comments  (1) Recall that the Content Machine Analogy asserts that information is extracted from an object exactly when the latter is  viewed as a machine. For example, one can let cups or footballs be viewed as machine objects, i.e., examples of the box in the  center of Fig. 2. Kicking is a usual input operation applied to a football. The states of the ball are its positions. Thus,  kicking the ball causes it to change its state.  Similarly, one can view a cup as a machine. One can apply certain actions to it (e.g., drinking), and it will change its state  (i.e., become emptier). Alternatively, one can apply the same input operations to a cup as one did to a football, i.e.,  kicking, and it will change its state from not broken to broken. Note that, when kicking is applied to a ball, it retains its  non-broken state. Thus even though one can have the same inputs {kicking} and the same space of results {broken, non-broken}  for both a cup and a football, the two objects have a different inter-relationship or correspondence between inputs and  results.  Thus, describing an object as a machine is a means of defining it as a specific inter-relation between inputs and results.  (2) We have just been considering the inter-relation represented by Fig. 2. The Content Machine Analogy claims that the  cognition of an object or phenomenon must be a description of it such that it takes on that form. However, Fig. 2 represents  only one aspect of what a machine is.  How much further we still have to go can be seen if we recall that the computational structure of any machine can be  represented by a computer. The consequence is that the Content Machine Analogy implies that one cognizes an object, such as a  football, only when one views it as a computer.  This assertion seems to be patently ridiculous. And yet this series of papers will attempt to demonstrate that this view is  not only correct, but that it is an important theoretical idea needed for the understanding of cognition.  The essential difference between merely asserting that all objects look like Fig. 2,  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 115  and claiming that they actually look like computers, resides in the concept of algorithm; that is, program or effective  procedure. An algorithm is a string of inputs, i.e., x,, x2,..., x Each input x; can be regarded as an operation or action  on the machine, or as an instruction or rule prescribing how the present state of the computer is to change (i.e., its  state-transition). The structure of algorithms will form much of the concern of this paper, because it will be argued that  there is substantial psychological data to indicate that this structure is the structure of reference in a cognitive  representation. For example, an analysis of the space of algorithms will lead to an understanding of the prototype structure  if a category.  3.3. Clarifying Some Terminology  Before we continue with this concept, some readers might require the following terminological clarification.  An input prescribes a change of state. For example, an instruction in a program is an input. It prescribes a step from one  stage in the computer's calculation to the next. Thus the reader should take note that the following terms will be used  interchangeably:  An input = a transformation of one state to another = an operation on the machine  = an action on the machine. Furthermore, we have  The input-space = the set of all inputs.  Thus the following familiar terms can be described in this way: A program, algorithm or effective procedure  = a selection of members from the input space, applied sequentially to the machine.  Figure 3a diagrams this notion.  a  b  FIG. 3. (a) The input space as a collection of programs. (b) The algebraic connectivity between programs.  116 MICHAEL LEYTON  3.4. What Is a Parameterization?  It will be argued that the cognition of a stimulus set is the modeling of the latter as a machine. Some of the concepts to be  developed in this view can be illustrated by looking at the phenomenon of parameterization. I will offer here a particular  characterization of this phenomenon: In fact, I will claim that parameterization is the modeling of stimulus sets as machines,  i.e., that parameterization conforms to the Content Machine Analogy.  A typical example of a parameterization is the placement of a cartesian coordinate system over a plane. In the general case,  the system can be lain over a curved space (e.g., the surface of a cylinder), and can be many-dimensional. Consider a  two-dimensional parameterization of a set. Select a point, for example (5, 3). The label (5, 3), in fact, contains a  considerable amount of information. It means:  "This point is obtained by moving one unit up from (5, 2)" "This point is obtained by moving one unit right from (4, 3)" "This  point is obtained by moving one unit right and one unit up from (4, 2)" etc.  Thus the label (5, 3) is a name for the collection of all possible algorithms (strings of instructions) for getting from any  other point in the underlying set to (5, 3). The label (5, 3) therefore describes a structure of programs; in fact, a machine.  The other machine constructs are assigned as follows. Because the instructions (i.e., inputs) are rules for changing position  in the underlying set, the positions must be the states of the machine. Finally, the machine object (the box in Fig. 2) must  be what is pushed into the various positions; and this can be regarded as what is invariant, from position to position.  Clearly the common object which can be found at all positions is a point. So the machine is a point.  Thus a parameterization of a set of points appears to be a means of viewing the set as a single point moved into several  states. Furthermore, and crucially, the changes of state in a parameterization are determined by a space of algorithms  (programs). This turns the point into a machine. These concepts will be elaborated and illustrated in what follows.  4. ALGEBRAIC CONCEPTS  The phenomena, introduced briefly in the previous section, in fact arise from the algebraic structure of a machine. As we  shall see, the algebraic structure is the space of algorithms which can be applied to the machine. That structure will be  argued to be central to cognitive representations. Consider, for example, the following phenomenon. Recall, that in the  previous section on parameterization, it was seen that algorithms are an important means by which points can be referred to  each other. Therefore, the space of algorithms can be regarded as a reference frame that is imposed upon a stimulus set. Thus,  this series of papers will claim that, by study-  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 117  ing the algebraic structure of a machine (the space of algorithms), one can explain a number of aspects generally of the  internal reference structure of a cognitive representation.  However, we will find that the algebraic structure can be used to define reference in two entirely different ways,  corresponding to two very different realizations of the Content Machine Analogy. In fact, these two different uses of the  machine's algebraic structure will enable us to obtain a very clear characterization of some important debates in current  cognitive psychology.  One such debate is between whether reference structures are symmetric or asymmetric. The two opposing positions can be  summarized briefly as follows. The view that reference structures are symmetric is often based on the presupposition that  similarity is symmetric, i.e., that the extent-to which stimulus A is similar to stimulus B is the same as the extent to which  stimulus B is similar to stimulus A (e.g., Shepard, 1962a, 1962b). However, in contrast to this, Rosch (1975, 1978) and  Tversky (1977; Tversky & Gati, 1982) have put forward important evidence that similarly is asymmetric. Some of this evidence  was mentioned at the beginning of Section 1.4; for example, category members are judged as similar to their reference point  stimuli (e.g., 99 is similar to 100) but the converse does not usually happen (e.g., 100 is not judged as similar to 99).  One thing that will be argued is that very simple algebraic considerations can characterize, in quite a profound way, the  difference between these positions. Again, we shall find that algebraic considerations can characterize two opposing views  concerning the cognitive nature of an object. One view states that an object is a set of properties common to all its  instances (e.g., Piaget, 1969; Gibson, 1979). The opposing position states that the instances of an object vary in the number  of characterizing properties they posses. For example, prototype instances have more of the characterizing properties than the  non-prototypical instances (e.g., Rosch, 1978).  Another issue which has not concerned cognitive psychology, but will be considered here to be important, is this: As we said  earlier, some of Rosch's results seem to indicate that a stimulus is characterized as a deviation from the prototype. For  example, off-red is characterized as a deviation from red. Therefore, off-red seems to be cognitively represented as its  referential relation to red. I described this phenomenon earlier by saying that reference is explicit in the representation of  the stimulus. However, most theories of representation (e.g., multi-dimensional scaling; constancy theories, multi-resolution  theories, etc.) do not permit the representation of a stimulus to explicitly encode its referential relationships.  A claim to be made later is that algebra clarifies the dichotomy between nonexplicit and explicit reference.  In fact, it will be regarded that algebra clarifies the close inter-dependence between the above three dichotomies: symmetric  vs. non-symmetric reference; objects as invariants vs. objects as prototypes; non-explicit vs. explicit reference.  Let us therefore take a preparatory look at algebra and begin to consider how algebraic criteria could determine the  structures created by cognition.  480/30/2-2  118 MICHAEL LEYTON  4.1. Input Spaces as Algebraic Structures  As pointed out above, the algebraic structure of a machine is the space of its algorithms. Furthermore, as illustrated in the  discussion on parameterization, algorithms can be used to refer points to each other. In particular, it is important to recall  from Section 1.4 that a central feature of the theory to be developed will be the claim that cognitive reference structures  involve not just one reference point but a whole sequence of them. How then will this sequential reference be described?  Recall that the Content Machine Analogy states that the cognition of a phenomenon is the description of the latter as a  machine. The behavior over time of a machine-the sequential change from state to state-is prescribed by a string of inputs, x,  'X2 * X3'* * xn. It is a string of this type that is called a program, or algorithm, or effective procedure. With a number of  structural concepts to be introduced later, a particular class of such sequences will eventually be used to embody sequential  reference. In preparation, it is necessary therefore to consider the sequentiality of algorithms in greater detail.  A somewhat hidden but important aspect defining this sequentiality is the means by which algorithms are built, as sequences,  out of elements or shorter strings of inputs.  Algebra is the study of systems of combination. The means of combining a number of elements to produce another is given by a  combination rule. For example, the rule "multiplication" combines the two numbers, 2 and 3, to produce 6. Figure 3b  illustrates a machine where the input space is a set of numbers. For example, the machine might be the Gross National Product  and the inputs might be numbers applied to it. Suppose now that these numbers are combined using the multiplication rule. This  rule would combine 2 and 3 into a sequence of inputs 2 x 3. This is the program shown in Fig. 3b. However, the program has the  same effect as another input, 6, elsewhere in the space.  Inputs-or more generally, strings of inputs-can be combined as follows: If two strings are represented by the symbols, W 1 =  x, 'X2,, * xand w2 = y 1 * y2 ... Y., then the combined string can be simply the first string followed by the second; i.e.,  W1.W2=x1-.xn'YI-.ym.  Observe now that, using this concatenation process, three successive strings can be bracketed in any way, as can be  illustrated using numbers:  (2 x3) x5=30=2x (3x5).  The brackets indicate which numbers are combined first. Generally, the property just described can be stated as  Al: EW,' W21 - W3= WC CW2- W31 However, one can assume a further property to hold for the input set of a machine: there is a member of that set which does  nothing when applied to the  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 119  machine. That is, an input, called the identity element, which satisfies a property that one can again illustrate using  numbers:  5x1=5=1x5.  The number 1 is an identity element and, in the general case, the symbol e will be used to represent the identity. Thus, the  property we have just defined is  A2: w - e = w = e - w for all w in the input space.  Now assume that, for every sequence w of inputs, there is an inverse sequence 1/w which undoes the action of w. Again, one can  illustrate this property using numbers:  5x1/5=1=1/5x5.  The general statement is  A3: For any input w, there is an input l/w such that  wxl/w=e=l/wx w.  It is clear that properties of this type, i.e., algebraic properties, express the way inputs can combine, and that the  properties therefore express essential aspects of the programs (strings) which can be built out of the inputs.  The set of inputs of any machine satisfies Al. The compliance with A2 can also be assumed s, quite trivially. Many machines  also satisfy A3. To simplify the discussion, this final condition will be assumed to hold for the machines used in cognitive  descriptions. Any set which satisfies A1, A2, and A3 is mathematically called a group. Thus the discussion will refer to the  machine input space as an input group. Recall that the input group is the space of algorithms that are applied to the machine.  The word group refers to the fact that the algorithms will satisfy the simple algebraic properties A1, A2, and A3.  Now recall that algorithms create a referential structure; e.g., in a parameterization they refer points to each other. Thus  later in this paper, the input group (space of algorithms) will become the reference frame that structures a stimulus set.  However, we will find that the group can be used as a reference frame in two very different ways, which will correspond to two  very different realizations of the Content Machine Analogy. One of the alternatives will turn out to have symmetric reference,  and the other alternative will turn out to have asymmetric reference. As a fore-taste of the symmetric case consider the  following.  Symmetric reference in a machine can be actualized by what is called the statetransition diagram of the machine. To illustrate  this, let us look carefully at a simple example. Figure 4 shows the state-transition diagram of a light switch, which can be  s See Bobrow & Arbib, (1974) for an extensive discussion of the algebraic structure of machines.  120 MICHAEL LEYTON  FIG. 4. Thr state-transition diagram of a light switch.  explained as follows. In any state-transition diagram, one simply draws a box for each state, and draws an arrow between each  box to represent the state-transition caused by each input. Thus, an input labels each arrow. A switch is a machine with a  state space consisting of two states {ON, OFF}. Therefore, there are two boxes in the state-transition diagram shown in Fig.  4. Furthermore, at any time, one of two inputs can be applied-DON'T SWITCH and SWITCH-which can be represented by the numbers  0 and 1, respectively. Therefore, for each state, there are two arrows leading from the state, one for each input. Each arrow  describes the effect of one of the inputs.  Let us therefore look closely at Fig. 4. Suppose that the switch were in the state marked ON. If one applied the input 0, the  switch would follow the arrow marked 0, emerging from ON and returning back to ON. That is, the input 0 has no effect on the  state. However, if one applied the input 1, the switch would follow the arrow marked 1 to the state marked OFF. Exactly the  same would happen if one were at OFF. That is, the input (arrow) named 0 would not alter the state, and the input (arrow)  named 1 would send the switch to the only other state.  Thus, the state-transition diagram, described above, is symmetrical, because the actions at one state equal the actions at the  other state. This means that the state OFF is related to the state ON, in exactly the same way as the state ON is related to  the state OFF. Therefore, if cognition imposed, on a pair of stimuli, a reference frame which has the same structure as that  shown in Fig. 4, the stimuli would be symmetrically referred to each other.  Observe that the state space, in this diagram, is { ON, OFF } and the input space is {0, 11. In this case the input space is a  group called ZZ = {0, 11, the cyclic group of size 2. It is called cyclic because the repeated application of the only  non-trivial element 1 causes the system to cycle symmetrically backwards and forwards between ON and OFF. The close relation  between the symmetry of the diagram and the use of a group is no accident. In particular, any symmetric reference frame in  cognition must presuppose a group of transformations, as we shall soon see.  4.2. Conventional Group Concepts  The Content Machine Analogy states that the extraction of information from a stimulus set is the imposition of a machine  structure on that set. This structure is a  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 121  schema which looks like Fig. 2. What we have been dealing with, in the previous section, is the structure of the left hand  side of Fig. 2, the input space. The assumption will be that the input space is structured as a group-i.e., sequences of  inputs (algorithms) obey laws Al-3.  Let us now look more carefully at two particular aspects of the way groups are used in mathematics: (a) They are used to  describe symmetries. [This makes them basic, for example, to quantum physics and general relativity.] (b) They identify an  object as a set of invariant properties through changes of state. These two concepts are discussed, in turn, in the next two  sections. But first we need to understand why they will be discussed.  Recall that the group of a machine will allow us to characterize at least two important aspects of a cognitive representation:  (1) the internal structure of reference, and (2) what is cognitively understood to be an object. When groups are used to  define symmetries and objects as invariants, then they can be used to characterize some important contemporary theories of  representation. For example, one class of such theories are the current transformational theories of perception (e.g., Piaget,  1969; Gibson, 1979; Hoffman, 1966, 1968). These theories either explicitly or implicitly base themselves on the above two  group-theoretic concepts, i.e., symmetry and objects as invariants. I will attempt to show that these two concepts provide a  invalid basis for cognitive theory: For example, transformational grammar seems to structure sentence-spaces asymmetrically  with respect to the kernel (Chomsky, 1957); and, likewise, categories seem to structure stimuli asymmetrically with respect to  the prototype (Rosch, 1975). Again, as we shall see, the objects-areinvariants viewpoint accords with the classical theory of  category-membership, not with Rosch's prototype view. In the subsequent sections, I will develop a very different use of group  theory which strongly prescribes asymmetry and prototype structure; and predicts a number of phenomena which will be  corroborated. However, first let us look closely at a group-theoretic characterization of the cognitive theories based upon  symmetric reference and objects as invariants. In the remainder of Section 4, I shall also describe most of the group theory  that will be required in the subsequent papers.  4.2.1. Groups and Symmetry  We will require a very clear notion of what symmetric reference means. In order to obtain this, we first require a clear view  of how symmetry is characterized in mathematics.  Consider the hexagon shown in Fig. 5a. The symmetry of the figure is, in fact, expressed in the allowable rigid mappings of  the figure to itself; as we shall see: The most obvious such mapping is t, the reflection (flip) of the figure about its  vertical axis; as shown in Fig. 5b. It is the fact that there is a reflection transformation t, sending the figure onto itself  that allows one to say that the figure is reflectionally symmetric.  Another such mapping is the rotation, r6o, of the figure by 60about its center. This transformation gives Fig. 5c, and  expresses what one can call a rotational sym-  122 MICHAEL LEYTON  FIG. 5. (a) A hexagon. (b) One of its reflections. (c) One of its rotations.  metry of the figure. In fact the entire set of rigid mappings, and therefore symmetries, can be elaborated as follows: First,  not only is there rotation by 60 but there is rotation by 120 rotation by 180 rotation by 240 and rotation by 300  that is, in increments of 60from 0up to 300 Second, there is not only reflection t about the vertical axis, but also  reflection about any of the other axes. One can obtain any such reflection by simply regarding it as a reflection about the  rotated vertical axis. This means that such a reflection is the product of t and some rotation; for example, it can be tr12o  The complete list of all these transformations is, in fact, quite simple to understand:  D6 = {e, r60, r120, r180, r240, r300  t, tr6o, tr1201 trlso, tr2ao, tr3oo}.  It consists of 12 transformations: The first six, the upper row, are the six possible rotations; and the second six, the lower  row, are the six possible reflections. In fact, if one compares the upper row carefully with the lower row, one discovers that  the members of the lower row are the members of the upper row, each multiplied by t.  It turns out that this set of 12 elements forms a group. That is, the elements obey the three axioms A1-3. The group is called  D6. A corresponding group, D4, exists for a square. In fact, any regular polygon, of n sides, has an associated group, D  describing its symmetries. The first n members of Dare the n possible rotations and the second n members are the n possible  reflections.  The above illustrates the fact that, if a stimulus set is symmetrically inter-related, then there is an associated group of  transformations. The group is the structure of inter-relations. In fact, it will be argued later that groups are the reference  frames that cognition uses to structure stimulus sets. An important point should now be recalled from Section 1.4: A central  claim to be made is that reference frames are decomposed into levels. The consequence is that the groups used are decomposed.  It will be useful therefore, to conclude this section by illustrating certain aspects of the decomposition of a group.  We return to D6. The first six elements (the upper row of elements shown above) themselves form a group in their own right.  This is a cyclic group Z6. Cyclicity expresses the fact that applying rbo six times not only successively obtains each of the  other rotations in turn-for applying rbo twice gives r12o, and applying r6o three times gives r,so, etc.-but that applying rbo  six times returns one to the starting position.  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 123  The second set of elements (the lower row) in D6 do not together form a group. Nevertheless, as noted above, they are the  members of Z6 multiplied by t. One can write this simply as tZ6. Therefore we see that D6 divides into two halves:  Z6= {e, r6o, r 12o, rI8o, r24o, r3oo1 tZ6= {t, tr6o, tr12o, trlao, tr24o, tr3oo}  Because Z6 is a group, in its own right, one says that it is a subgroup of D6. Furthermore, a set such as tZ6 that is, a  subgroup multiplied by one element-is called a coset. The multiplying element (in this case t) is called a coset leader.  Observe that the subgroup Z6 is also a coset; quite trivially it is eZ6.  For any polygon of n sides, the associated group Dconsists of a cyclic subgroup Zand a coset tZn, in exactly the same way.  The Zsubgroup is the collection of rotations and the tZn coset is the collection of reflections. For example, according to  mathematicians, the symmetry group, D4, of the square is the set  D4= {e, r9o, riso, r27o,  t, tr9o, trlso, tr27o}.  The upper row is the subgroup of rotations which is the cyclic group Z4. The lower set is the coset tZ4. The coset leader is  again t.  Given a group G and a subgroup H there may be several cosets g, H, 92H, g3H,... of H. These would constitute several "rows" of  elements in the same way as D6 above consists of two rows. The rows, or cosets, partition the entire group.  The notion of a coset will be useful to us later. I will argue, for example, that Gestalt groupings, in perception, are  cosets. Furthermore, it can be seen quite easily that morphological classes in linguistics are also cosets.  4.2.2. An Object as Invariant  In the previous section, we saw how groups can be used to characterize symmetry. This will enable us quite soon to use groups  to characterize symmetric reference. However, an associated concept will also be needed.  Recall the Content Machine Analogy which states that the cognition of a phenomenon is a description of the phenomenon as a  machine. We have said that a machine consists of  (1) an object;  (2) an input space: a set P of inputs, or actions, which can be applied to the object;  (3) a state space: a set Q of states into which the object can be put by applying the inputs.  In Section 4, so far, we have been considering the nature of the second item, the input space. This will provide the  referential structure of a representation. Let us now begin to consider what is cognitively understood as an object, the first  item.  124 MICHAEL LEYTON  It is clear that if something can be followed as it undergoes changes of state, then it is recognized as an entity which, in  some sense, remains present during the changes. In fact, there can be two very different answers to the question of what an  entity, or object, is. The modern role of a group provides the first of these, and this answer has been adopted by all  group-theoretic psychologists such as Piaget (1969) and Hoffman (1966, 1968). In this series of papers, I will oppose this  view. However, it is necessary to recapitulate it here.  Consider the properties of the triangle in Fig. 6. For example, the figure is (a) three-sided, (b) closed, (c) equilateral,  (d) pointing up, (e) positioned in the upper right. Note, however, that the first three properties are crucially different  from the last two. They express the figure's identity as a triangle whereas the others appear incidental. For example, one  would say that the figure would be the same if it were pointing to the left or positioned in the lower right area.  The problem then is to establish a means by which, given a property, one can distinguish whether it belongs to the first or  second class. The solution was given by the great mathematician Klein (1893) who thereby laid the foundations of the modern  view of geometry. He claimed that the distinction is made by an assumed group of transformations. Those properties which  change under the transformations are regarded as incidental; those which remain invariant are regarded as essential. For  example, in the above case, an allowable group had been assumed in making the distinction. It was that which consists of all  possible, translations, rotations, and dilations acting on the figure. These operations can be seen as destroying properties  (d) and (e) but leaving (a), (b), and (c) invariant.  An invariant property under a group of transformations is called, in mathematics, a geometric object. It is clear that, in an  important sense, a machine object is that which remains invariant under changes of state, i.e., under the applied inputs. Thus  because the input spaces are assumed here to be groups, the machine object, in this sense, corresponds to Klein's notion of  the geometric object.  This view is useful when one considers processing aspects of cognition. With respect to bottom-up processing criteria,  detecting the invariants across two stimuli is a first step needed before conjecturing some transformational relationship  between the two stimuli. It is this idea that makes the concept of invariant identical to that of object in the  transformational theories of Piaget (1969), Gibson (1966, 1979), and Hoffman (1966, 1968). The invariant is what is tracked;  and the fact that it can be tracked makes it an object.  Fig. 6. A triangle with a number of properties, some of which are essential to its geometry (e.g., three-sideness) and some of  which are not (e.g., being in the upper-right quadrant).  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 125  However, observe that this type of theory leads automatically to the classical view of category membership; i.e., that there  is an invariant set of properties held by each member of a category. (Note that a category such as bird can be regarded as an  object.) Rosch (1978) shows, however, that a category (i.e., object) is cognitively defined not by a set of properties  invariant to all of its exemplars (instances), but by the properties of a prototypical exemplar (instance); i.e., this latter  member has more of the characterizing properties than a non-prototypical member.  Thus although, in processing terms, invariants might be useful in keeping track of an object, in cognitive terms, they do not  correspond to an object. This does not mean the group theory cannot define what is cognitively understood as an object. It  only means that the wrong group-theoretic construct was chosen. Therefore, to account for Rosch's and other data, I will later  give a very different group-theoretic definition of a machine object. Thus the term object will not be used in the sense  defined by Klein, and the term invariant will be used instead for this sense.  DEFINITION 1. A machine invariant is any property which remains unchanged under the total collection of machine inputs.  These issues will be examined a number of times in this paper.  4.2.3. Examples of Groups  Recall that groups will enable us to characterize at least two fundamental aspects of a cognitive representation; the  reference structure, and what is cognitively understood as an object. The present section is the final preparatory one, and  will describe several of the groups to be used throughout the series of papers. In the following section, we can at last  develop a characterization of symmetric reference.  (1) The cyclic groups. We have seen that any symmetry group D of a regular n-sided polygon, contains a cyclic group Z  which rotates the polygon to its n equivalent positions. Cyclic groups need not arise only in such a context. For example, we  met Zz, the cyclic group of size 2, as the group of movements of a light switch.  A central property of any cyclic group Zis that it can always be represented by a clock with n positions around the  circumference. For example, Z,2 can be represented by the usual day clock. After reaching 11, one returns to 12 which is also  the 0 position. Thus any cyclic group Zcan be put in a canonical form:  Z10,1,2,3,...,n-1}  where it is understood that one loops back to 0 after reaching n - 1. The largest cyclic group is  Z= {..., -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3,...}  which is the clock of infinite circumference, or simply the infinite set of whole numbers.  126 MICHAEL LEYTON  (2) Some continuous groups. The groups we have been considering so far are discrete groups; e.g., they can be represented by  separated notches on a clock. Many groups are continuous. That is, their elements form a continuum. Simple examples are as  follows. More complex ones are used later.  (2i) The group R. The group R consists of all the numbers along a continuous infinite line. This contains all the whole  numbers in Z above, and all the decimal numbers in between them. Furthermore, the entire set forms a group under addition. For  7.351 + 1.002 = 8.353.  Note that Z is a subgroup of R.  (2ii) The group R2. Not only can the line be turned into a group but so can the plane, which one can simply denote by R2. Any  point in the plane has coordinates (x,, y,) and can be added to any other point (x2, y2) by simply adding the x-coordinates  together and adding the y coordinates together. Under this rule, the plane forms a group.  Recall that the group Z is a subgroup of R. Similarly, the group Z2 (not the light-switch group Z2) is a subgroup of R2. This  subgroup is the set of points which constitute the grid contained in the continuous plane. It is the set of coordinates which  have only whole numbers as coordinate entries.  (2iii) R and R2 as translation groups. If one understands a number x as an instruction to move a distance x units, then the  groups R and R2 can be understood as translation groups. For example, the element 5 (taken from R) can be understood as move 5  units along a line, and this can be added to the element 6 (meaning: move 6 units along a line) to yield 11 (meaning: move 11  units along a line).  Similarly, the element (x, y) taken from R2, can be understood as move x units horizontally and y units vertically in the  plane. These two-dimensional translations can be added to each other to form a group. What Section 3.4, in fact, tried to show  is that a parameterization can be regarded as a machine, where the inputs form the group R2, and the object (being moved  about) is the single point.  (2iv) The continuous cyclic group SO2. We examined earlier the discrete cyclic group Z that is, where there are n equally  spaced notches around the clock. If one goes to the continuous case, one has a continuous circle where one has all the points  in between the notches. This means that all rotations re are possible, where 0 is any angle. Again, any two members of this  set of rotations can be added as shown in Fig. 7. The set forms a group denoted by S02  r  FIG. 7. Addition of members of the rotation group.  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 127  5. STATE-SPACE DESCRIPTIONS  Let us now return to the Content Machine Analogy, which is going to be the basis of the cognitive theory to be developed. The  analogy is the claim that cognition is the attempt to describe phenomena as machines. Therefore, what is required is a  proposal of the precise form such a description could take.  To obtain an intuitive view of what we are going to do, consider again Fig. lb (which represents the Content Machine Analogy).  In this figure, the head looks at a set of stimuli, S, and sees the stimuli as a machine, M. The way this is going to be  represented is by using the following notation:  M :S  which simply reads, from left to right:  The machine M is "imaged" onto the stimulus set S.  (What is meant by the term "imaged" will be defined soon.) Since the above will be claimed to be general structure of a  cognitive description or representation, the symbol D (description) will be used for the above sequence of symbols. That is,  we have  D: M : S.  This notation simply reads:  The description D takes the machine M and "images" it onto the stimulus set S.  Note that each of the symbols in this map correspond to a crucial component of Fig. 1 b.  We are now going to consider these statements more thoroughly.  Let us begin with an example. Suppose one is presented with a collection of stimuli such as those comprising a hexagon (Fig.  5a). We have seen in Section 4.2.1 how the entire hexagon can be regarded as an object to which a certain group of inputs, D6,  can be applied, i.e., rotations and reflections. This helps us towards understanding how the hexagon, as an object, can be  regarded as a machine. However, there is another way in which the hexagon can be turned into a machine; and it is upon this  latter way that we now concentrate. (In fact, both ways are cognitively relevant, as will be argued in the perceptual  organizational theory). The latter way of describing the hexagon as a machine is a follows: Instead of letting the object of  the machine be the entire hexagon, let the object be only a side. That is, the side is the object to which inputs (actions)  are applied. Thus, rather than regarding the hexagon as comprising six sides, one views it as a single side being pushed into  six states. The hexagon then becomes the set of alternative states, the state space, of the side. Finally, the changes between  the states (i.e., changes between positions) of this object, are prescribed by the inputs. These inputs are in fact the 12  members of D6 listed in Section 4.2.1.  128 MICHAEL LEYTON  Underlying the simple construction just described is, in fact, a viewpoint on objects, reference frames, etc., strongly akin  to cognitive theories which have symmetric reference and the classical notion of a category. Before we can see this, it is  necessary to clarify the above construction in detail.  Recall, from Section 3.1, that a machine consists of  (1) an object;  (2) an input space: a set P of inputs, or actions, which can be applied to the object;  (3) a state space: a set Q of states into which the object can be put by applying the inputs.  Here, for the hexagon, the following three entities have been assigned to the above three constructs:  (1) object = a side;  (2) input space = the 12 transformations in D6; (3) state space = the 6 positions of the sides.  One can visualize more clearly what is happening here if one constructs the statetransition diagram for this machine, as  follows. Recall the state-transition diagram for a light switch illustrated in Fig. 4. One can see from Fig. 4 that if one is  given the state ON, then by applying the entire input group Zz = {0, 11, one obtains the states reachable from ON. The same is  true of the state, OFF. Similarly, if one is given a position for the side in the hexagon, then, by applying all 12 inputs  (the members of D6) to this state, one obtains all the states reachable from that single position. Figure 8 depicts the  state-transition diagram for the hexagon seen as a machine. This diagram can be more clearly understood by comparing it with  the state-transition diagram of a light switch (in Fig. 4). Recall that in Fig. 4 each box represents a different state and  each input is an arrow leading from one state to another (i.e., causing a change of state). Figure 8 expresses the hexagon as  a statetransition diagram in exactly the same way: The sides become the boxes representing states; the arrows between the  sides are the inputs causing transitions between the states. In fact there should be 12 arrows starting at each side, because  there are 12 inputs, i.e., members of D6, that can be applied to any side. For legibility, however, Fig. 8 shows only three  arrows emerging from each side. Thus, as an example, consider the upper right side. Three arrows have their stems originating  at this side; (1) the arrow marked e, which both starts and terminates at that side (signifying no change); (2) the arrow  drawn just below that, marked r60, which starts at the side and terminates at the lower right side, and (3) the arrow marked  r300 (drawn inside the shape and near the top), which again starts at that side but terminates at the top side. Nine more  arrows should be drawn in, starting from this side. The same considerations apply to each of the sides. Thus the hexagon is  represented as the state-transition diagram of a machine.'  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 129 e  e  FIG. 8. A state space description of a hexagon.  From Fig. 8, it is important to understand that a set of stimuli, the sides of a hexagon, are the members of the state space  of a machine. One can represent this by the symbols  D: Q -+S  where Q is the state space of a machine, and S is the stimulus set. The string of symbols just given should be read from left  to right and translated simply as:  The description, D, takes a state space, Q, and images it (via the arrow) onto the stimulus set, S.  It is now obvious that, in using the term image, no reference is meant to the phenomenon of imagery, i.e., internal  visualization. The term will be used in the sense of mapping onto, as takes place, for example, when a set of coordinates are  lain over, or imaged onto, a globe of the earth. (Of course, D is a mapping in the mathematical sense.)  Now note that all of the states of Q might not be instantiated in S. For example, the stimulus set might be perceived as a  hexagon with one of its sides missing. So the symbol {0} representing OFF, or EMPTY, has to be added to the right hand side of  the map, in order to absorb those members of Q (the machine's state space) which are not taken up in S, when Q is imaged onto  S. It is rather like a movie screen which has a hole in it even though the film which is projected onto it is complete. The  symbol {0} will be added to represent any "holes" in the stimulus set. Thus one has  DEFINITION 2. A state-space description of a stimulus set S is a map from the state space Q of a machine onto S. That is, a map  D: Q Sv {0}.  Now let us look at three psychological implications of state-space descriptions.  Symmetric reference. Observe that in the state-space description of the hexagon (Fig. 8), for every set of arrows relating one  side to another, there is an exactly symmetrical set going in the opposite direction. For example, for each arrow r6O which  sends one side to the next, there is an arrow r3oo which sends the latter back to the former. That is, each side is  symmetrically referred to any other side.  130 MICHAEL LEYTON  Non-explicit reference. The referential relations, i.e., the arrows, exist in between the stimuli, i.e., the sides. Thus the  stimuli and the referential relationships are encoded as separate entities. Therefore, the stimuli are not explicitly encoded  as the referential relations.  Objects as invariants. Observe that, in the state space description of the hexagon, every side is descriptively the same as  any other side. There is nothing in the labeling of one side that is different from the labeling of any other. Each has  exactly the same set of arrows. Therefore, the notion of invariant has some very real meaning here. Thus one can consider the  object, which is pushed into the six positions, to be the invariant, that is, the side.  The consequences just discussed, of state-space descriptions, form the basis of several important psychological theories. For  example, multi-dimensional scaling is a much used technique for creating a multi-dimensional space in which a set of  psychological data points can be embedded. This resulting space is often supposed to represent the psychological space in  which the points exist. A central assumption is that the distance between a pair of points A and B, in the space, represents  the psychological similarity of the two data points. Consequently, the similarity of A to B is assumed to be that of B to A;  because the distance and its reverse are the same (Shepard, 1962a, 1962b, 1974, 1980; Coombs, 1964; Kruscal, 1964; Torgerson,  1965; Guttman, 1971; Carrol & Wish, 1974; Carrol & Arabie, 1980).  Observe also that, in the space produced by multi-dimensional scaling, reference a representation is not explicitly (e.g.,  like off-red is defined as its  is non-explicit. That is, any stimulus in such defined as its relationship to another stimulus relation to red.)  In the present series of papers, such theories will be characterized as being based on state-space descriptions. That is, a  multi-dimensional space, of the type described above, will be understood as a machine in which the input group is a group of  transformations (e.g., tranlations) that preserve distance.  However, it will be claimed that state-space descriptions are an invalid basis for cognitive theory. One reason is that in  each of the areas to be examined, we shall see that symmetric reference is violated. For example, in Gestalt perception, an  irregular shape is seen as a deformation of a regular one (e.g., Goldmeier, 1982); but not the reverse. Again, in  categorization, Rosch (1975) has shown that nonprototypical members (e.g., the number 99) are judged as similar to the  prototype (e.g., the number 100), rather than the reverse. Again, one can see that, in linguistics, sentences are considered  to be related to a neutral sentence called a kernel, but not the reverse. Thus the assumption of symmetrical reference seems  to be significantly violated where sufficient psychological investigation has taken place. (See also Tversky (1977) and  Tversky and Gati (1982) for a further discussion and support of asymmetry in similarity judgement.)  Again, there appears to be evidence, from categorization, that a stimulus is cognitively characterized as a deviation from a  prototype. For example, off-red is cognitively defined as a deviation of red (Rosch, 1975); i.e., off-red is understood as  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 131  its referential relationship to red. That is, the referent is explicit in the representation of the stimulus. This violates  the second property, non-explicitness, given above for state-space descriptions.  Concerning objecthood, as was noted earlier, the theories of Piaget (1969), Gibson (1966, 1979), and Hoffman (1966, 1968) have  taken as crucial the notion that an object is an invariant. However, in the detailed discussion to be carried out later, we  shall see that in each of the areas to be examined, invariance is violated. For example, in perception, an object can be  recognized even after deformation which has destroyed invariants. Again, in categorization, membership is not given by the  fulfillment of a set of properties common to all members. Again, in linguistics, there is no invariant sentence common to a  kernel and its transforms.  6. INPUT-SPACE DESCRIPTIONS  We thus require a view of representation that will accord with the condition of asymmetric explicit reference, and will imply  a view of objecthood that strongly predicts constructs such as prototype and kernel.  Recall that it was proposed, in Section 3.4, that the parameterization of a set is a description of the set as a machine. The  argument, which was used to substantiate this claim, is parallel to the argument which led to a state-space description. As  with the view given above of a hexagon, a parameterization causes a set of objects to be reduced to only one object moved into  several states. The space of inputs also forms a group. In the case of a two-dimensional space, the inputs form the group, Rz,  of translations on a plane. At any position, e.g. (5, 3), the entire space of inputs describes the effective procedures which  connect this position to any other. This procedural space is implied by the label (5, 3).  However, what we failed to take into account was that the label (5, 3) implies something more strongly even than the above  considerations. It implies that, given the set of effective procedures, there is one procedure which is particularly  distinguished-namely, that procedure using the numbers 5 and 3; i.e., move right 5 units and up 3 units. The starting point  for this procedure is the position (0, 0). From this concept, the implication is that any other point (x, y) will use the same  position as a starting point for the corresponding procedure "move right x units, and up y units." Thus the implication, in  the labeling provided by a parameterization, is that there is distinguished position at which the machine starts.  The choice of a particular starting state in a machine description has a crucial consequence: All the other states can be  labeled by the inputs which obtained it from the starting state. The label (5, 3) is the input which obtains that position  from the (0, 0) point.  As a second example, consider again the state-space description of the hexagon in Fig. 8. None of the six sides was chosen as  a starting state. However, suppose that the top side were chosen as such. Then every other side could be labeled by the inputs  which produced that side from the top one. Figure 9 shows this labeling. The  132 MICHAEL LEYTON  12 inputs are distributed around the hexagon (2 per side), showing which inputs were used to reach that side from the top  side. For example, one of the labels of the upper right side is r60, because it is obtained from the top side by rotating the  latter 60to the right. The other label of the upper right side is tr3oo, because the side is also obtained from the top side  by a 300rotation together with a reflection about the central axis. Again, the top side itself is the image both of e and of  t, for the following reasons: As was said, it is the image of e because it is the starting side. However, it is the image also  of t because, when one reflects the top side about the vertical axis, one obtains the top side, only with its left and right  halves reflected. Note finally, that the same input cannot be used for two sides, because an input cannot move a state (e.g.,  the top side) into two states; and the hexagon is labeled here only with respect to movements from the starting top side.  (Note that this means there are only 12 labels instead of the 72 in Fig. 8).  What I have done above is to take the input group  D6= {e, r60, r12o, riso, r2ao, r300  t, tr60, tr12o, triso, tr2ao, tr300}  and image it onto a stimulus set. That is, the 12 elements of D6 were imaged onto the six sides of the hexagon.  Thus we obtain here a new view of what is meant by a description of something in terms of a machine. Instead of imaging just  the states onto a set of stimuli, as we did in Definition 2, we image the inputs onto the stimuli:  DEFINITION 3. An input-space description of a stimulus set, S, is a map from the input group G of a machine onto S; in fact,  the map  D: G -+Sv{0}.  To simplify the notation, the set {0} will often not be mentioned. One reads the string of symbols, D: G - S, from left to  right simply as:  The description, D, takes the members of an input group G, and images them (via the arrow) onto the stimulus set S.  In other words, Definition 2, that of state-space description has been replaced  ro tr..  r20 tr2  FIG. 9. An input space description of a hexagon.  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 133  here by Definition 3, that of an input-space description. It will be argued that the latter corresponds more accurately and  usefully to the cognition of a phenomenon. Before we continue, however, note that the map can be many-one. Figure 9 gives a  map from the group D6, of 12 elements, onto a stimulus set containing only 6 elements. This many-one property, and the  direction of the map, seem to be in direct opposition to the contemporary coding-theoretic approaches, for example, that of  Leeuwenberg (1971), which is aimed at converting a figure into a string of letters. I will attempt to show that the theory,  which is to be developed from Definition 3, explains perceptual (and, generally, cognitive) phenomena in a way that does not  seem possible using a coding approach.  Now let us see what an input-space description implies in terms of reference and objecthood.  Asymmetric reference. Consider the input-space description in Fig. 9. In this view, every side is asymmetrically, i.e.,  unidirectionally, related to the top side. For example, the label r60, on the upper right side, means that the side is  regarded as the result of rotation by 60 But this can only mean that the side is understood as starting in the top position.  However, this relationship is asymmetric, because the label, e = non-rotation, given to the top side, does not refer to the  r60 side. Similarly, any other side is unidirectionally referred to the top side. Thus the entire description is an asymmetric  one.  Explicit reference. The lable given to any stimulus (any side) is the referential relationship itself (e.g., r60, for the  upper right side). Thus the referential relation is explicit in the representation of the stimulus.  The object as group identity. Observe that, in the input-space description, no side receives the same labeling as any other  side. For example, there is only one side that is the image of r6o and tr311. Thus, every stimulus is descriptively different.  This means that the notion of invariant becomes unimportant.  We therefore require a viable definition of object, that accords with the notion of input-space description. Recall that I  took the machine object to be that which is acted upon by the inputs. Observe that in the input-space description of the  hexagon (Fig. 9), the sides are defined as transformations of, that is actions on, the top side; the side labeled e. This must  logically be the case for any input-space description: The stimuli are characterized as the result of actions on the stimulus  labeled by the identity element. Therefore, generally, I propose the appropriate construct for object to be the machine in the  non-input or initial state. For example, in the case of the hexagon, the machine object should be regarded as the top side.  This therefore motivates the following:  DEFINITION 4. Given an input-space description D: G - S, the machine object is that member of S which receives the identity  element of G [that is, D(e)].  Another example of a machine object is the point (0, 0) in a parameterization of a plane, because (0, 0) is the identity  element of the two-dimensional group of the  480/30/2-3  134 MICHAEL LEYTON  plane. Again, in Roschian categorization, I will propose that the prototype is the machine object, because, as will be argued  later, this receives the identity element in the input-space description that structures the category. When the notion of  stability is discussed later, the identification of the prototype with the machine object will allow us to understand why the  prototype has such a characterizing role with respect to the category. Again, in transformational grammar, the machine object  will be the kernel sentence; because this receives the identity element in the input-space description that provides the  transformational structure. Again, when stability considerations are brought in later, the characterizing aspects of the  kernel will be explained by understanding the kernel as the machine object.  Much more will be said on this latter. Extensive support will also be offered of this proposal of the cognitive nature of an  object.  Points of clarification. (1) For illustration in this section a very simple shape, a hexagon, was chosen. The second paper  (i.e., on perceptual organization) develops the framework considerably further to handle highly complex shapes, e.g., the  shapes of animals, birds, plants. The only reason these examples have not been examined here is that one requires several  theoretical developments from the second paper to describe the corresponding analysis of such shapes.  (2) Some computational issues: Observe first that input-space descriptions are specified by considerably less bits of  information than state-space descriptions, for this reason: In a state-space description, each stimulus in the representation  must carry with it one copy of the entire input space. In an input-space description, the entire stimulus set shares only one  copy of the input space. Other computational issues are handled in the footnote.'  (3) It should be understood that at no time will the term input refer to the stimuli which enter the organism. To understand  this more clearly, consider what has been done in the previous two sections. We began with Fig. lb which shows a head looking  at a stimulus set and seeing a machine. The machine is in the "cloud" on the left. Now, any machine has two substructures: a  state space and an input space. This means that what is on the left of Fig. lb, "in the cloud," has two substructures:  e Two computational questions suggest themselves: (1) How many groups does the cognitive system need to form the many  descriptions it does? The answer I have proposed in Leyton (1986) is beyond the mathematical level of the present papers, but  concludes that in fact one needs very few. Speaking technically: In the discrete case, the cognitive system only needs free  groups; because any discrete G is the homomorphic image of a free group F. All that is required to obtain any G is to specify  those elements in F which become equated with the identity element. Second, one requires only a small number of free groups,  perhaps only three of four: those that correspond to a generator set of size 1, 2, 3 or 4. This is because, from such a small  set, sufficiently complex groups can be constructed. An equivalent set of considerations exist for the continuous case, by  substituting the notion of Lie Algebra, L, for free group; i.e., any required group G is then specified by factoring a  discrete central normal subgroup from the universal covering group associated with L. (2) Given a set of alternative  descriptions that the cognitive system can apply to a stimulus set, by what criteria does the system make its choice of  description? This is a question of the evaluation of alternative structural descriptions, and is a different issue from the  nature of a structural description-the subject of the present paper. The separate subject of evaluation is to be handled in  the final paper of this series.  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 135  a state space and an input space. What we have asked is how these are sent (imaged) onto the stimulus set on the right of Fig.  lb. Two possibilities were considered: (1) The machine's state space is sent directly onto the stimulus set. (2) The machine's  input space is sent directly onto the stimulus set. It is the latter alternative that will be taken as the basis of the  cognitive theory of these papers.  THE DESCRIPTION POSTULATE: ALGEBRAIC STATEMENT  Recall that the Content Machine Analogy is the claim that cognition is the description of phenomena as machines. Recall also  that I have taken the machine here to embody two types of structure: algebraic structure and stability. Thus the Content  Machine Analogy has essentially two components corresponding to these two forms of structure. I now claim that Definition 3  provides the first component. That is, one is able to state with greater detail:  DESCRIPTION POSTULATE Algebraic component: The cognition of, or extraction of information from, a phenomenon is a map from the  input group of a machine onto the phenomenon; i.e., an input-space description of the phenomenon.'  'The Content Machine Analogy claims that cognition is the description of a phenomenon as a machine; but the Description  Postulate claims that cognition is the description of a phenomenon only in terms of an input group. Thus the latter might seem  to ignore most of what comprises a machine and therefore not seem to be a full realization of the Content Machine Analogy. In  fact, this is not the case. Recall that any machine can be redescribed as a state output machine (i.e., the set of outputs can  be understood as a component of the state space). Thus, in Section 3.1, we defined a machine as comprising three components:  (1) an object, (2) an input space, and (3) a state space. In Sections 5 and 6, we have shown that a state-space description  and an input-space description each define two different ways in which all three components are mapped onto the stimulus set.  In particular, an input-space description maps all three components onto the set as follows. First, the input-space  description explicitly maps the input group to the stimulus set. Second, recall that the machine object was defined a priori  as the entity on which the inputs act. Thus we argued that, due to the inherent asymmetry of an input-space description, this  entity is the stimulus receiving the identity element. Third, because the input-space description is essentially a description  of the stimulus set as an initialized state space, the input-space description implicitly maps the state space onto the  stimulus set. Thus all three components, comprising a machine, are mapped onto the stimulus set via an input-space  description; and the Description Postulate can truly be regarded as a full realization of the Content Machine Analogy.  It might be thought, however, that we could replace machine-theoretic concepts completely with algebraic ones. For example, it  might be thought that the term "algebraic identity element" could be used instead of "machine object." However, such a  replacement would severely hinder one of the main purposes of our discussion. First, recall that we are trying to characterize  what is cognitively understood as an object. Thus we cannot abandon the term object. Second, we are trying to see how  different theoretical viewpoints characterize the cognitive nature of an object. In viewpoints of the type we have understood  as based on state-space descriptions, the object is realized as an invariant whereas in inputspace descriptions, the object is  realized as an algebraic identity. Thus if we spoke not of objects but of algebraic identities, we would not be able to make  the required comparison between theoretical systems.  136 MICHAEL LEYTON  Observe that the postulate states that the cognition of something is a map, D: G - S (recall Definition 3, and its relation to  the postulate). The map consists essentially of three components: a machine group G, a stimulus set S, and a correspondence D  which sends (i.e., images) the members of G onto the members of S. G will turn out to be the reference frame that structures  the stimulus set. Observe that a cognition of S will change if a different G (reference frame) is used. But observe that an  alteration in the cognition of S can occur without altering the G. For, even though G and S might be fixed, the mapping  correspondence D, between G and S, might alter-thus altering the description; and as was said above, it is the description  which defines the cognition of S. Examples where G and S are fixed, and D is altered, will be given throughout this series of  papers. For instance, in the square/diamond effect, one has the same underlying stimulus set S and the same reference frame G;  however, the frame G is sent onto S in one of two different ways, thus creating a square in one case and a diamond in the  other.  8. REFERENCE FRAMES: ALGEBRAIC THEORY  8.1. Introduction  Let us now see how the machine-theoretic view being developed may provide a theory of cognitive reference frames. Assuming  that a reference frame can be regarded at least as a set of objects, the term "reference" is usually used in one of two  senses: (1) as the act of embedding an object into the set, i.e., referencing an object into the frame, or (2) as the act of  judging or defining the objects within the frame with respect to each other, i.e., referencing the objects to each other. In  what follows, the former will be called external reference, and the latter will be called internal reference. It will be a  central purpose of these papers to provide a theory of reference frames such that, using either sense of reference, the term  reference frame denotes the same cognitive structure. That is, one references (embeds) objects into structures where the  objects are referenced (judged with respect to) each other. However, to make the discussion simpler, in what follows, although  I will be speaking about the construct of reference frame in both senses, when the term reference is mentioned separately, it  will be used in the sense of internal reference.  The principal usage of the term reference frame, in psychology, seems to be to explain the different descriptions, given by  subjects, of the same set of stimuli in different circumstances: the researchers argue that the stimuli are described  differently because they are assigned to different "frames." In some sense, therefore, frames are considered, in these  situations, to be crucial in determining the descriptions. Let us review some examples.  (1) Orientation and form. A number of researchers have shown that the perception of the shape of a figure can be different if  the figure is assigned different underlying Cartesian frames [see Rock (1973) for an extensive discussion]. The classic  example, due to Mach (1897), is that of the phenomenological difference  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 137  FIG. 10. (a) A square. (b) A diamond.  between a square in its horizontal orientation Fig. 10a, and in a 45orientation where it ceases to be square-like, and  becomes diamond-like (Fig. 10b); that is, the angles need no longer be 90 The effect of orientation on form was subtly  investigated in a remarkable series of studies by Goldmeier (1937/1972)-where it was demonstrated to be a theoretically  substantial phenomenon. For example, in Fig. 11, Goldmeier showed that the central figure is perceived by subjects to be  dissimilar to the outer two figures (Goldmeier, 1972, p. 88), even though the three are geometrically identical. Rock (1973)  has extensively analyzed the relationship between the various frames which are involved in the perception of shape, i.e., the  Cartesian system defined by the retinal frame, the gravitational or ecological frame, the bodily frame, etc. One should note  that the importance of the orientation and form studies is that they show that perception is a process of describing stimuli,  rather than representing the outside world-that is, there is no sense in which the perceptual structure corresponds to a  structure in the real world; the only structure that occurs is that yielded by the cognitive system-an issue I will attempt to  make rigorous in this series of papers.  (2) Binford and Marr-Nishihara shape description. Marr and Nishihara (1978) have claimed that the perceptual description of  shape (e.g., the shapes of animals) has several levels of detail of a specific sort: Any level is the construction of the  figure as a concatenation of approximately cylindrical modules, in the manner described by Binford (1971), with the specific  relative widths and lengths specified (Fig. 12). Such a description is achieved by assigning a collection of object-centered  local reference frames to regions of the stimulus configuration. One axis of each local frame becomes the rotation axis of the  associated cylinder.  (3) Induced motion. Duncker (1929) has shown that the perceived speed of a moving object depends on the assigned reference  frame. For example, Fig. 13 shows a rectangular frame moved relative to an observer, while a point inside the frame is  O  0  a b c  FIG. 11. An example of the orientation-and-form phenomenon, due to Goldmeier (1937, 1982): The outer two figures are judged as  having greater similarity to each other than to the inner figure.  138 MICHAEL LEPTON  N_  FIG. 12. An example of Binford/Marr-Nishihara shape analysis.  kept still. Duncker nevertheless found that the point is perceived to be moving and the frame is perceived to be at rest. Thus  the rectangle is said to provide a reference frame for the moving point.  (4) Johansson motion perception. Consider Fig. 14a, two stimuli moving perpendicularly and in phase. Johansson (1950) showed  that, if only one is presented, it is seen as a stimulus moving along its path of motion. However, he showed that if both are  presented, they are seen as the ends of a diagonal "invisible rod" being stretched and contracted along its length, while  moving in the opposite diagonal direction (Fig. 14b). This means that the configuration of stimuli form a reference frame  which defines the stimuli in terms of each other.  (5) Musical systems. As has been known for centuries, musical relationships produce a reference structure (e.g., a structure  of resolutions) which, at varying points in the musical work, are assigned by the perceiver, in varying ways, to the same  auditory unit to alter its perceptual effect (e.g., the same diminished 7th chord can imply a number of different resolutions  depending on context).  (6) Pitch structure. In several of the world's musical systems (both melodic and harmonic) a distinguished tone, a "tonic," is  chosen as a reference point which defines the perceptual values to be taken by the other pitches used. The pitch scale thus  becomes a reference frame.  (7) Categorization. Rosch (1975, 1978) has proposed that natural categories have reference point stimuli (prototypes) with  respect to which the other category members are judged. For example, in the category of colors, focal colors act as reference  points (e.g., off-red is referenced to red); in the category of line-orientations, the  FIG. 13. A movement of the outer rectangle induces perceived motion of a stationary point (Duncker, 1929).  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 139  FIG. 14. An example of the Johansson (1950) motion phenomenon: (a) Two points P, and Pz, moving perpendicularly and in phase,  are actually seen as (b) two points moving to and from each other along a diagonal line that is itself seen as moving.  reference points are vertical and horizontal orientations; in the category of numbers, the reference points are multiples of  10 (e.g., 99 is referenced to 100). Rosch further showed that the reverse references do not occur (e.g., 100 is not referred  to 99). Thus there is an asymmetry in the reference process.  From the above examples it appears that the term reference frame possesses a number of quite different specific meanings: In  most shape and orientation studies, it appears to mean a cartesian coordinate system; with respect to the Duncker phenomenon,  it is a rectangular surround; in the Johansson motion studies, it becomes a configuration of stimuli (Fig. 14a); in the  auditory cases considered, it has been used to denote a musical system of development, and a pitch structure. Again because  Rosch claims that members of categories are referenced to prototypes, one can regard categories as reference frames.  However, during the course of this series of papers, I will try to show that all the above phenomena are examples of exactly  the same precise structure: namely, an input-space description. To do this, the argument will require (1) further theoretical  analysis of the structure of input-space descriptions, and (2) a number of theoretical developments in the areas concerned.  Much of the remainder of Part I will be devoted to the first of these topics. This discussion will eventually allow the  development of a more detailed statement of the Content Machine Analogy, which, as we shall see, makes the concepts of  cognition and reference frame strongly interdependent.  8.2. Reference as an Algebraic Phenomenon  8.2.1. Simple Reference  One important advantage of input-space descriptions to our theory is that, unlike state-space descriptions, they have an  asymmetric reference structure. The rest of this paper is a deeper analysis of this asymmetry.  Recall that under an input-space description each stimulus is asymmetrically defined with respect to the stimulus labeled by  the identity element. That is, any stimulus in the set is referred to the element labeled by e. For example, in the inputspace  description of a hexagon (Fig. 9), the r6o-labeled side is defined with respect to the top side, thus complying with the  meaning of internal reference (beginning of Sect. 8.1). Hence, under the input-space description, the hexagon is structured by  a reference frame. In this frame, the top side is the reference point.  140 MICHAEL LEYTON  The content of the next two paragraphs are crucial to our discussion:  Observe that one references the upper right side to the top one by removing or factoring the transformation rbo, which  obtained the upper right side. This removal or factorization returns one to the top side. An alternative way of understanding  this is that one is retracing the generation algorithm that lead from the top side to the upper right side. That is, the side  was generated from the top side by r6O and one is simply retracing that generation path, or algorithm. Thus, under this view:  The structure of reference is the reversal of the structure of generation.  As a second example, recall that, under a parameterization, a point labeled, for example, (5, 3) distinguishes a particular  algorithm, "move across 5 units and up 3 units," with a particular starting point (0, 0) for that algorithm. Furthermore, the  assumption is that any other point (x, y) also refers back to that labeled by (0, 0). Thus, a parameterization is a reference  frame. Observe that once again the reference point (0, 0) is labeled by the identity element-this time, of the two-dimensional  translation group, R2. Furthermore, referencing (5, 3) to (0, 0) is the removal or factorization of the transformation  sequence, "across 5 and up 3 units," from the point (5, 3). Equivalently, it is the reversal or retracing of that generation  algorithm.  Thus,. according to a theory built on input-space descriptions, one would have:  PROPOSAL 5. In human cognition, internal reference, or judgement-with-respect-to, is the factorization of an input group to  the identity, i.e., the retracing of a generation algorithm.  DEFINITION 6. The factorization of a group to the identity is called simple reference.  However, there is a fundamental cognitive phenomenon that I believe exists in the reference structures which have just been  described, and defines what I will propose to be equivalent to the referencing process. In order to see what this phenomenon  is, we will consider a more complicated reference frame than the two which have so far been described.  8.2.2. Proposing the Existence of Successive Reference  In Leyton (1982), I proposed that an input group G is cognitively stratified into levels  G=G,.G2...G(8.2.1)  where each level G; is assumed to be an input group. I argued that reference acts by removing each level G; in turn, from the  last level Gdown to the first G1. Thus, whereas in the previous section, we simply had reference as the removal of a single  group, now we have reference as the removal of a sequence of groups. Observe that because each G; has its own reference point  e;, what one obtains is a sequence of reference points e., e- 1 ,..., e 1, as one goes down levels.  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 141  In order to illustrate these concepts, I will describe here a very simple experiment and analyze the results in terms of the  above concepts. The reader should note that the experiment is used here only to illustrate these concepts. The actual  corroboration of the above proposals can be given only in the subsequent papers where I concentrate in detail on four  cognitive areas in turn.  In Leyton (1984a, Experiment 1), I presented subjects with a parallellogram, as shown in Fig. 15b. They asked which other  abstract geometrical figure came to mind. The usual answer given was a rectangle. They were then presented with a rectangle  and asked which other abstract geometrical figure came to mind. The usual answer was a square. The statistical significance  with which the entire sequence, parallelogram -i rectangle -> square, occurred was considerable. [n = 12; 8 subjects created  this sequence; each remaining subject chose a different sequence. Taking the severely stringent assumption that only the five  chosen sequences are possible, expected mean = 2.4 per sequence. The significance of the score of 8 is thereby t(11) = 3.289,  p <.005, one-tailed. ]  To restate the result, the subjects constructed the sequence of three shapes represented by Figs. 15b, c, and d, where the  next figure in the sequence was the one which was called to mind on the presentation of the previous figure.  The question which concerns us here is what the subjects were actually doing in calling to mind the next shape. My claim is  that they were in fact judging the presented figure with respect to the one which they had reported had come to mind. In fact,  I claim that the reference sequence can be extended further back to an earlier starting point, Fig. 15a, where the  parallelogram has been rotated off the horizontal line. Starting at this earlier stage was not possible in the first  experiment because the calling-to-mind task referred to a different shape, and Figs. 15a and b are not distinguished by shape.  Thus the next experiment tested four successive percepts. My hypothesis was that subjects judge the parallelogram in Fig. 15a  with respect to that in Fig. 15b; and the latter is, in turn, judged with respect to a rectangle; and this latter figure is,  in turn, judged with respect to a square. Thus one obtains the full sequence shown in Fig. 15. Experiment 3 in Leyton (1984a)  was designed to test this. Subjects were presented with the successive pairs along the sequence: i.e., <rotated parallelogram,  parallelogram; <parallelogram, rectangle; <rectangle, square). They were asked which member of each pair was the one which  they judged the other with respect  FIG. 15. A successive reference phenomenon: The rotated parallelogram is referred to a non-rotated one which is referred to a  rectangle which is referred to a square.  142 MICHAEL LEYTON  to. The claim was that they would always choose the second member in each of the pairs (as listed above), thus establishing  the hypothesized sequence. (Order effects were controlled for by appropriate randomization.) This claim was corroborated with  considerable statistical significance [n = 12; there are eight possible pairwise orderings; expected mean = 1.5 per ordering;  hypothesized ordering occurred nine times; t(11) = 4.771, p < .005, one-tailed ].  The reader should note that although we began (in the first experiment) with a sequence of three figures, we have now extended  the sequence to that of four. It is this latter full sequence that will be discussed for the remainder of this section.  In what way can these experiments be used to illustrate the concepts developed in the present paper?  Recall the Description Postulate, which states the cognition, or the extraction of information, is an imaging of an input  group onto a stimulus set (Sect. 7). In the experiment considered, I will argue that the relevant group is the one called SL,  R, which is defined as follows: SLZR is a group of transformations of a particular type: First, the transformations are  linear, which means that straight subspaces (e.g., lines) are sent to straight subspaces. Second, the transformations preserve  area.  What is important now to observe it that it can be mathematically demonstrated that the group can be decomposed into three  subgroups. These three subgroups are illustrated in Figs. 16a, b, and c as  (1) SO2, the group of rotations (Fig. 16a);  (2) N, the group of shears; i.e., where rectangles are mapped to parallelograms (Fig. 16b);  FIG. 16. Three subgroups of SLZR: (a) The rotation group; (b) the shear group; and (c) the pure deformation group.  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 143  FIG. 17. A representation of SLZR (near the identity element).  (3) A, the group of pure deformations-transformations which stretch and contract along perpendicular axes, i.e., map squares  into rectangles' (Fig. 16c).  These three subgroups, into which SLZR factors, are each given by one parameter, respectively, (1) the angle of rotation, (2)  the angle of shear, and (3) the ratio of stretch along the axes.' The three parameters can thus be represented by the three  axes in the three-dimensional space shown in Fig. 17. Therefore, this space will be used to represent SLZR itself. That is,  any point in the space is a transformation that is defined by a shear, stretch, and rotation value.  What I will now try to show is that, given the rotated parallelogram in Fig. 15a, SLZR provides the reference frame for this  stimulus, and that it is this frame which produces the results. Figure 18 shows the group SLZR as previously depicted in Fig.  17, but with some extra letters and lines which will now be explained. We begin by representing the rotated parallelogram  shown in Fig. 15a by the point, x I , in the group shown in Fig. 18. This point represents a quantity of rotation, shear, and  pure deformation, because the point has a value on each of the three dimensions. Now the first reference is that from the  rotated parallelogram to its non-rotated version (Fig. 15b). We can identify the non-rotated version with the point x2 in the  group as depicted in Fig. 18. Thus the reference from the first figure to the second is modeled by the movement in the group  from point x, to x2 along the bold line shown, because the bold line is parallel to the axis representing the subgroup SOZ of  rotations in Fig. 18. Thus we have started at the point x, and moved from it along the rotations dimension, in the direction  of decreasing rotation until we reached the zero point on the rotations dimension, that is x2. At this point all rotation has  been completely removed (factorized) from the percept, and one obtains the non-rotated parallelogram (Fig. 15b).  The same applies to the remaining stages of the referencing process. At x2, one has the parallelogram in its second  orientation, and this is referenced to the straightened version, the rectangle. One can model this reference by a trajectory  in the group in Fig. 18. This second reference stage starts with the figure at point x2. By moving along the bold arrow from  x2 to x3, one is going in the direction of decreasing shear-i.e., parallel to the axis marked N-until one reaches point xs,  'The term pure deformation is used in a standard text such as Guggenheimer's (1977, p.95).  9 In fact, I will use the symbol SLZR to stand for any three-parameter group, where the parameters are those just defined.  Area preservation need not be complied with. Pilot studies of mine have indicated that the intention of some subjects is to  preserve area, whether or not this is actually accomplished.  144 MICHAEL LEPTON  FIG. 18. The successive shape reference of Fig. 15 represented as a trajectory in SLzR.  where shear has a zero value on that dimension. The point x3 is thus the stimulus, the rectangle.  Again, the same applies to the final reference stage where the rectangle is referenced to its nonelongated version, a square.  In this case the relevant group is A, the pure deformation group which is the vertical dimension in SLZR as depicted in Fig.  18. Thus the referential action is that of moving down this subgroup, i.e., along the bold arrow from x3 to x4. The point x3  in Fig. 18 represents the rectangle in Fig. 15c and the point x4 represents the square in Fig. 15d.  Piecing together these stages, one observes that the complete successive reference example in Fig. 15 is given by the entire  bold trajectory in Fig. 18. The next section offers a general reason why the ordering occurs, and the next paper offers a  specific translation of that reason into perceptual organizational terms.  However, here, what we need to observe is that movement along each segment of the trajectory is equivalent to the removal of  one of the dimensions, i.e., one of the groups. Thus, it appears that reference acts by the successive factorization of the  groups, SOz (rotation), N (shear), and A (pure deformation), from the full group SLzR; that is, the input space is decomposed  as  SLZR=A-N-S0z=G,.GZ.G3  which is an example of the general structure defined in Equation (8.2.1). Furthermore, the removal of any of these group  factors is equivalent to referencing back to the point labeled by the identity or zero element in that group; i.e., within any  group factor one has simple reference. Observe now that, because the rotated parallelogram has values in each of the three  dimensions, it has coordinates gt * 92'93. However, as the referencing occurs, each of these elements is replaced successively  by an identity element in one of the subgroups. That is, one has  rotated parallelogram = g, * gz * 93 parallelogram =gt ' gz ' (e3) rectangle = g, (ez - e3) square = (e, eZ - e3 ).  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 145  Therefore, from the above discussion, one appears to have here an illustration of the successive reference points phenomenon,  which was proposed at the beginning of this section. That is, the reference process goes successively to the identity  elements, e3, e2, and e,, of the groups, SO2, A, and N.  9. STABILITY  9.1. The Cognitive Stability Principle  So far in this paper we have done the following: Two alternative realizations of the Content Machine Analogy were proposed:  state-space descriptions and inputspace descriptions. Because input-space descriptions have asymmetric explicit reference, it  was this alternative that was chosen. Next, the notion of successive reference was incorporated into input-space descriptions  by inducing a particular decomposition and a particular ordering on the domain G, of such descriptions. Thus, we obtained a  structure G, - G, Gn which is asymmetric, explicit, and sequential.  An important theoretical problem is evident concerning the structure, G = G, - GZ - - - Gn : What determines the particular  decomposition that is chosen by a cognitive system, and what determines the particular ordering? For example, there is no a  priori reason, in the SL, R example, why the decomposition had to be into the above subgroups, and why these had to have the  ordering that was found. In order to settle this question, let us turn to the other type of structure which has been assumed  here to be embodied in the notion of machine: stability.  In these papers, the stability of a property will be taken to be its observer-defined persistence. Conversely, instability  will be taken to be observer-defined transience. It is a fact, little understood outside mathematics, that the most important  criterion determining all mathematical modeling is stability. The mathematical arguments invoking stability have a particular  form presented in, for example, Hirsch and Smale (1974); Marsden and McCracken (1976); and Thom (1975). As the mathematicians  Marsden and McCracken (1976, p. 3) declare: "It is only stable mathematical models, or features of models that can be relevant  in `describing' nature." Essentially, as Thom (1975, p. 320) argues: nothing can be known unless it is stable. The claim made  here is that this proposal can be regarded as stating that information is extractable only from a stability. That is:  PRINCIPLE 7. Instabilities reduce information.  Since one can assume that the cognitive system attempts always to maximize the extraction of information, then based on  Principle 7, I propose:  PRINCIPLE 8. Given a description, D, of a phenomenon, the cognitive system attempts to remove instabilities from D, leaving  stabilities.  146 MICHAEL LEYTON  Although an extensive attempt will be made to corroborate this principle in each of the cognitive areas to be examined in  these papers, one may observe here that the principle can be regarded as the basis of all constancy phenomena. For example,  the size changes which an object undergoes, due to its different distances from the observer, are unstable whereas the  "actual" size of the object is not. Thus the size changes are removed, leaving the impression of actual size. Again, in the  field of color constancy, an experiment by Hering (1905) may be considered to illustrate the principle particularly clearly.  Hering demonstrated that a fuzzy grey shadowspot cast on a piece of white paper still allows that part of the paper underlying  the spot to be perceived as white. However, if a line is drawn around the spot such that the contour is coincident with the  shadow's penumbra, the underlying section is perceived as grey. Using Principle 8, one can give an interpretation to these  results in the following way: In the former case the shadow is perceived as an instability, due to the supposed incidental  positioning of the paper with respect to the light sources. Therefore it is factored from the color of the paper. (This is the  equivalent argument to the above size constancy argument.) However, in the second case, the boundary is regarded as a stable  cue signifying the partition of the paper into different colors. Thus the grey is not factored as it is in the former case.  Two crucial points are evident from the last example. First, it is the observer that defines the stability values of  properties of the representation. The reader should note that the specific criteria, used by an observer in making this  decision, will be examined in the subsequent papers under the specific area of cognition where each criterion is cognitively  used. However, as far as we are concerned in the present paper, the criterion can be completely arbitrary; what will be  important for us first to recognize is that the cognitive system has a choice with respect to the value to be assigned. Thus,  as we saw in the case of the grey shadow-spot, the observer chooses either one of, at least, two different stability values  for the stimulus.  The second point to be made is so important that it occupies us for the remainder of this paper: The claim to be put forward  here is that the choice of stability value has structural consequences upon the cognitive representation. That is, while, as  far as this first paper is concerned, the criteria for deciding upon a stability value can be arbitrary, what concerns us is  that, once a set of stability (persistence) values have been decided upon, there are resulting structural effects upon the  representation.  An illustration of this was given in the shadow-spot experiment. The sheet is structured differently depending on the  stability value assigned to the shadow spot. That is, the structural consequence of regarding the shadow-spot as unstable is  that it is not seen as part of the paper's surface; i.e., it is removed or partitioned from the paper's surface. The  organizational consequence of regarding the shadow-spot as stable is that it is seen as being a part of the paper's surface.  Before the structuring effect is illustrated further, let us gain a better understanding of the nature of the structurations.  What is now taken into account is that one property of a phenomenon can have relatively greater or lesser stability in  comparison with another property of the  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 147  phenomenon. Putting the concept of relative stability together with Principle 8, 1 propose that properties with greater  instability are removed by the cognitive system before properties with lesser instability. This conclusion will be important  to the theory being developed and is stated as follows:  COGNITIVE STABILITY PRINCIPLE: Given any phenomenon, S, the cognitive system attempts to remove its properties in order of  decreasing instability.  The ordering provided in this principle will be called the stability ordering.  Recall now that this section began by asking what determines the particular decomposition G, - GZ ... Gn of the input group,  G, used in an input-space description; and the particular ordering of the levels, G;. The claim to be made now is that the  principle just given determines these structural aspects. That is, the decomposition G, - GZ ... Gis a decomposition into  stability levels. Furthermore, the group Gis cognized as the least stable and so is removed first; level G,,-, is cognized  as the next most unstable and therefore is removed next; and so forth down to G,, which is removed last because it is  recognized as the most stable.  The shadow-spot example is too simple to illustrate this. However, as an immediate illustration let us return to the  succession of four figures found in the experiments in Section 8 (Fig. 15). The reader will recall that when a subject is  presented with a parallelogram, he or she calls to mind a rectangle, and when presented with a rectangle, he or she calls to  mind a square. As a subsequent experiment [Experiment 4 in Leyton (1984a)] a separate group of subjects were asked a different  type of question concerning these shapes. They were presented with the parallelogram and asked to state which property of the  figure's shape was "most unstable, transient, or likely to change." With statistical significance, the chosen reply for this  figure was its slant [n = 12, p <.003 '. A further group of subjects were asked the same question concerning the rectangle.  With statistical significance, the chosen reply for this figure was its height [n = 12, p <.019]. The next paper will develop  a specific perceptual-organizational reason why this ordering occurred. However, here it is sufficient to observe that the  "persistence" judgement task had a significant effect.  Two points of comparison, between the first experiment and the one just described, are worth noting. ,  (1) Observer that the two experiments asked fundamentally different questions. In the former case the subjects were asked a  question concerning a figure other than the one presented, i.e., which other figure was called to mind. In the second case, no  second or hypothetical figure was alluded to. The subject was ased a question concerning properties of the presented figure;  i.e., which was the most unstable property. Note furthermore that the issue of a property of the presented figure did not  arise in the first experiment.  (2) Comparing the two sets of results, one observes the following interesting  'A binomial table was used because subjects gave only two categories of replies.  148 MICHAEL LEYTON  phenomenon: In the first experiment, when presented with a figure, the subjects called to mind another figure which was the  same as the presented figure except for one property (e.g., when presented with a parallelogram, they called to mind a  rectangle, which is the same as the parallelogram except for the slant). It was just this property that the second group of  subjects had independently chosen as the most unstable of the presented figure. Thus, in calling to mind a hypothetical  figure, the subjects in the first experiment had removed the instability identified in the second experiment.  A crucial point to observe now is that there was a successive removal of the instabilities. In the first experiment, the  initial figure in the series was a parallelogram. A parallelogram has both slant and height. However, the subjects factorized  these in succession rather than together. Furthermore, the same order of factorization was consistently chosen.  One therefore sees here what appears to be an example of the Cognitive Stability Principle: that cognition attempts to remove  properties in order of decreasing instability. In fact, because of the transformational relatedness of the figures, one can  consider the subjects as moving progressively to models of greater and greater stability; that is, describing the percept as  something else with an instability (e.g., a parallelogram is a rectangle with slant).  This type of phenomenon will appear repeatedly throughout this series of papers. For example, in the second paper, we shall  see several more such examples in shape perception. Again in transformational grammar, it will be claimed that the  transformational system is partitioned with respect to stability and the components are factored in order of decreasing  instability. Again it will be claimed that the levels of a planning hierarchy are induced by a stability ordering and one  obtains the levels of ever more major ground work by successively factorizing the levels in order of decreasing instability  (recall the overviews given in Sect. 1.4 and Sect. 2). It is the general nature of the occurrence of this factorization  phenomenon that encourages us to give it central importance in the remainder of this paper.  Although the SL, R example will be discussed in much greater detail in the perceptual-organizational paper, one further test  should, however, be mentioned here. Even though, it was concluded above that the subjects were successively factorizing  instabilities, i.e., that the results corroborate the Cognitive Stability Principle, we still have to check that subjects were  going to what they regarded as progressively more stable constructs. For example, there is still the possibility that although  the subject factorizes one instability, its actual removal might result in a construct which appears more unstable.  In the Experiment 5 of Leyton (1984a), I extended the sequence, once again, back to an earlier starting point, the rotated  parallelogram. Subjects were presented with the successive pairs of figures in Fig. 15-that is, <rotated parallelogram,  parallelogram, <parallelogram, rectangle, < rectangle, square >-and asked which member of each pair seemed to be "more  unstable, transient, or likely to change." The conjecture was that the subjects would always choose the second member in each  pair. This was corroborated with considerable statistical  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 149  significance [n = 12; all 12 gave the hypothesized order; therefore, significance was greater than the pairwise ordering on  reference judgements; i.e., greater than t(l l) = 4.771, p<.0005, one-tailed; order effects were controlled for]. Thus the  hypothesis that the subjects tried to create successively more stable constructs, in this shape case, was supported.  9.2. The Nature of Internal Reference  The experiment, just described, also allows one to return to the concept of reference or judgement-with-respect-to. Recall  that the Cognitive Stability Principle was used to solve the problem of the order with which input groups are factorized in a  reference frame. I claimed that the order is that of decreasing instability.  Let us once again turn to the SL2R illustration, because the other examples of successive factorization, put forward in these  papers, can be described only with the theoretical structure developed later for their respective cognitive domains. In  Section 8.2.2, it was argued that  SL2R=A-N-S02  constitutes a reference frame into which a parallelogram is placed. The reference ordering is given by factorization of the  rotation group, S02, the shear group, N, and pure deformation group, A, in succession, each factorization being a movement of  the figure to the identity of the corresponding group. One question which then had to be settled was why this particular  factorization sequence was chosen and not another. This question can now be answered. In Experiment 3 (Sect. 8.2.2) and the  experiment just described, the same pairs of figures were shown to the subjects (the successive pairs in Fig. 15). In the  former experiment the subject were asked which member of each pair was the referent; in the latter experiment the subjects  were asked which member was more stable. The answers were found to be the same. Thus the particular route which a subject  takes through SL2R, when referencing, is also the route determined by the Cognitive Stability Principle, i.e., the stability  order.  It seems therefore that, in these experiments, judgement-with-respect-to and factorization-of-instability correspond. In fact,  we will find, throughout this series of papers, that this correspondence exists quite extensively. For example, again in shape  perception, we will find that the points on a side are both judged with respect to, and considered less stable than, the  central point. Again, we shall find that the sides of a polygon are judged with respect to, and considered to be less stable  than, a horizontal side; etc. Again in linguistics we shall find that the transformational system is decomposed with respect  to stability, and movement to succesively more stable levels corresponds to the direction of reference. Again, in a planning  hierarchy, we shall see that the hierarchy is induced by stability, and the factorization of instability corresponds to the  reference ordering between levels. In anticipation of these results, I therefore propose:  480/30/2-4  150 MICHAEL LEYTON  PROPOSAL 9. The phenomenon of judgement-with-respect-to and factorization-ofinstability are equivalent.  Note that Proposal 9 is an assertion which concerns not only the ordering of the subgroups G,, G2,..., G but also concerns  the ordering within any one factor Gi. For example, in the SLZ R illustration, recall that within a group factor, one has  simple reference (Definition 6); i.e., movement to the group identity (for example, along.any one of the three segments in  Fig. 18). Proposal 9 asserts that the withingroup transformational reversal, which constitutes simple reference, is also the  result of the removal of instability.  The type of structure, G = G, - GZ ... G that I have been defining will be called an algebraic stability ordering:  DEFINITION 10. A stability ordering on an input group G (in fact, a dynamical system" on G) is called an algebraic stability  ordering if it decomposes G into a  " An algebraic stability ordering is a dynamical system in the strict sense of the term: Let us consider the continuous case  only. Let G be a Lie group, and TG its tangent bundle with associated bundle projection ir: TG -. G. Then a: G TG is a vector  field if it is a section of the bundle; that is, a is a continuous, function such that 7z * a = I,, at each point g E G. Thus  we can define an algebraic stability ordering rigorously as a dynamical system as follows:  DEFINITION 10. Let G be a Lie group, TG its tangent bundle and I - I a norm on G induced by a Riemannian metric on G. Then an  algebraic stability ordering on G is a section a: G -. TG of the tangent bundle such that G can be written as a product G = GI  - G2 ... G and a can be written as a sum, Y.; Jai: G-. TG}, of n vector fields, where, given any left coset 91 *g2-9iI-Gi  (g; eG;), the following conditions hold: (i) in all but a small neighborhood of the coset leader 9 1 * 92 ... gi_ 1, one has l  ai(g)I > IQi-, (g)I, for all g in the coset; (ii)91 -g2 ... 9i -I is a sink for ai, within the coset; and the coset  is the basin of attraction for gl 'g2 ... gi 1; and (iii) Jai( - )I decreases on any trajectory defined on 81'82-gi-I . Gi.  Observe that if we let /' be the Lie algebra of G, then, using the natural F-valued 1-form, we can consider a to map into the  Lie algebra.  Thus the vector field a models the reference structure we have been developing above. In particular, it is important to  observe that each vector a(g) E TG, models the strength and direction of cognitive reference at g. The reader should note that  time, in a real sense, is not necessarily involved: The field a defines the reference structure and indeed there is a  parameter that defines the induced flow structure. But this parameter simply shows how the points interconnect referentially  in the reference structure; something that the field does not directly show.  It is now possible to give a rigorous definition of the instability of a transformation g. It seems reasonable to call the  norm la(g)l of the reference vector at g, the instability of g, because in the present case, the norm can be regarded as a  Liapunov function of the vector field, and a Liapunov function can be regarded as a measure of distance from stabilization. In  particular, each coset leader 91 .92 ... gi _ I is an asymptotically stable equilibrium with respect to the dynamical system  ai restricted to the coset; and the Liapunov function is minimized at 9,'92 " * gi _ I.  The reader should note that, due to the low mathematical level assumed in these papers, and the fact that still more  mathematical material should not be explained in the paper, the above more rigorous definitions will not be incorporated into  the main body of the paper. The reader should also note that by an abuse of notation GI - G2 ... Gwill usually be called the  algebraic stability ordering. [The above is presented in greater detail in Leyton (1986)].  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 151  sequence G = G, - G2 ... G of group factors, G;; and there is increasing stability in the following two directions:  (1) componentwise, Gto G, , and  (2) within each component, G;, elementwise to the identity, e;, of that component.  Thus, for example, to go back to our illustrating experiment, SL2 R = A - N - SO2 is an algebraic stability ordering because  stability increases in the direction from SO2 to N to A; and also within each group as the shapes move to the identity  elements of each respective group. For example, in the shear group, N as the parallelogram straightens to a rectangle, it is  cognized as becoming more stable.  Definition 10 therefore embodies one of the central constructs of our theory: a reference structure that is  asymmetric-sequential.  10. THE PRINCIPLE OF NESTED CONTROL  In this section, I will argue that the imposition of an algebraic stability ordering, on a stimulus set, results in the  cognition of that set as a nested structure of control. This proposal will be called the Principle of Nested Control. Since  this principle will be crucially important to our cognitive theory, it is worth spending some time clarifying it.  Suppose that a man is at some point, A, on the surface of the earth. He holds out his arm, and lets an object drop to the  ground. The object undergoes a group of downward movements G2 as it falls.  Then supposing that the man moves to another point, B, and does the same thing. The object falls to the ground at this new  point. So the object undergoes the action of the same group, G2, at point B: as shown in Fig. 19.  Observe now that in moving from point A to point B, another group G, has been introduced-that of movements across the earth.  In fact, G, (the movement of the man) moves the group of object movements, G2 (the gravitational trajectory), from the first  point A, to another point B (see Fig. 19). The group G, will be said to be a control variable with respect to G2, because it  controls the position of the G2 machine. In control theory, one way of understanding a control variable is that it sets a  value (e.g., position) of the action of a system (i.e., it is a boundary value). One resulting effect is illustrated in the  present example: the control variable G, sends a machine of the form G2 at A, onto a machine of the form G2 at B.  Equivalently, it sends gravitational trajectories onto each other. That is, because the control variable, here, sets the  position of machine G2, it can also be regarded as moving it about. '2  There is, in fact, an important way of representing each of the downward trajec  u Of course, in control theory, the general case has a control parameter continuously changing so that the above effect is  hidden.  152 MICHAEL LEYTON  G2  FIG. 19. An example of nested control: The group G, moves trajectories of the group Gz around.  tories in this system. Let us denote the translation across the earth, that moved the man to the first point A, by tA; and the  translation across the earth, which moved the man to point B, by tB. Then, one can simply label the gravitational trajectory  at A by  to ' G2,  that is, G2 translated, or acted on, by tA. And one can represent the translation of G2 to B by  tB. G2,  that is, G2 translated, or acted on, by tB. This means that the two trajectories, to - G2 and tB , G2, are cosets of G2.  Recall, from Section 4.2.1, that a coset, of some H is a set of the form gH.  Now observe that the two values to and tB come from the group G,, the movements across the earth. So one can represent the  fact that G, moves the gravitational G2 around, simply by the product G = G, - G2 as long as we understand that G, acts to the  right of it in the product, that is, on G2, moving the latter around. If the reader has any problems with the product, G, -  G2, he or she simply has to remember that it means exactly what Fig. 19 means. The diagram simply represents the product.  The whole process can, in fact, be built up further. For example, the earth is slowly moving through space. So it is carrying  the above entire system G, - G2 from one part of the solar system to another. Now, because the earth is moving under a group  Go, one can say that the latter acts on the G, - G2 system. Again, as before, one can represent this simply by adding Go to  the left of the sequence, thus;  Go-G,-G2.  Again, one must remember that Go acts on the sequence to the right of it; that is, it acts on G, - G2, the terrestrial system  shown in Fig. 19, and moves it around the solar system. Again, because Go moves the terrestrial system about, I will say that  it acts as a control variable, with respect to that system. Each occurrence of the terrestrial system (i.e., at different  places in the earth's orbit) will again be a coset of G, - G2. Furthermore, a coset will be represented by to - G, - G2, where  to is the translation through space which brought G, - G2 to that part of the solar system.  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 153  Now for the next concept. An important thing to observe is that we have here a nested system of control. G,, the man, controls  the position of the gravitational trajectory, Gz, moving it about on the surface of the earth; and Go controls the combined  terrestrial system G, - G2, moving it about in the solar system. This nested effect is represented by the fact that every  group in the sequence, Go - G, - G2, acts on the sequence to the right of it. Such a right hand sequence will be called an  i-subsequence. (The letter i, will stand for "initial" in the reference ordering, or "internal" in the nested structure.)  Now let us involve the notion of stability.  First, note that each position in the solar system orbit Go is cognized as changing more slowly, i.e., is more stable, than  each position of the walking man, the system G, to the right of Go in the sequence. Again, each position in the man's path, G,  , changes more slowly, and is thus more stable, than each position in the gravitational trajectory, G2, the system to the  right of G, in the sequence. Thus, any group in the sequence is slower to change than the system to the right of it, i.e., the  system which it controls.  I will now simply reverse the above argument, in the case of algebraic stability orderings. That is, I will argue that an  algebraic stability ordering creates the impression of nested control. The next paragraph attempts to derive this proposal,  and then it will be stated properly.  Suppose that a machine input-group decomposition were G = G, - G2, where this product is an algebraic stability ordering. Then  the machine would always travel towards the identity of G2 before any significant movement in G, occurs. For instance, if the  above terrestrial system were an algebraic stability ordering, the object would complete its gravitational trajectory to the  earth, before any significant movement of the man, across the earth, takes place. This would mean that while movement in G2  takes place, the value in G, would remain fixed; e.g., the position on the surface of the earth would be the same while the  object descends. Phenomenologically, one has a machine of the form G2 with a fixed value in G, (e.g., a trajectory with a  fixed position). Essentially, then, the algebraic stability ordering on G, - G2 causes the product to be viewed as shown in  Fig. 19; that is, as a set of distinct machines, all of the form G2, but each with a different value in G,; e.g., the set of  gravitational trajectories, each with a different position on the earth's surface. The group G, can then be viewed as  controlling these G2-machines; that is, moving them about. Thus I claim that an algebraic stability ordering on the  decomposition G = G, - G2 has the phenomenological result of causing G, to be viewed as a control parameter with respect to G2.  To generalize this conclusion, one requires the definition mentioned earlier in passing:  DEFINITION 11. Given a group decomposition G = G, - G2 ... G with an algebraic stability ordering, the subsequence G;+, -  Gj+2 ... Gis called the i-subsequence of the factor G;.  154 MICHAEL LEYTON  That is, given any factor G;, the subsequence to the right of it, in the decomposition, is called the i-subsequence of G;.  Thus, as a general statement of the conclusion given above I propose:  PRINCIPLE OF NESTED CONTROL: Given an input group decomposition G = G, - G2 - - - Gn, with an algebraic stability ordering,  any factor Gj is cognized as a control group of its i-subsequence Gj +, - G;+2 ... Gn.  That is, any factor Gj is cognized as a control group of the subsequence G;+, - G;+2 ... Gn, to the right of it in the overall  sequence. In other words, G; is cognized as moving machines of the form G;+, - G;+2 ... Gn, onto other machines of that form.  As an example, consider again Fig. 18 which represents the SL2R sequence. In particular, consider the SO2 axis in that  diagram. Parallel to and above that axis, there is a dotted line emerging from x3. That is, one has two parallel lines, one  starting from x4 and the other starting from x3, and both in the SO2 direction. Observe now that the point x4 is a square, and  the point x3 is a rectangle. Thus the two lines are, respectively, the square with its rotation space and the rectangle with  its rotation space. Therefore, the A axis sets the stretch value of any figure that is to have the dynamical space of the  rotation group. (Recall that the term control will be used in these papers in the sense of setting a value of a dynamic; i.e.,  a sense used in control theory). Note further that the A axis sends the SO2 lines onto each other; e.g., it sends the square  with its rotation space onto the rectangle with its rotation space. In the next paper, the perceptual consequences of the  control phenomenon will be shown to be very significant. Indeed, it will become the entire backbone of the theory of Gestalt  grouping.  11. THE DESCRIPTION POSTULATE  It is now possible to state the Description Postulate, which will be the basis of the cognitive theory of these papers. It is  a more detailed statement of the Content Machine Analogy, which states that cognition is the description of phenomena as  machines. Recall that the structure defined by a machine is understood here as having two forms, algebraic structure and  stability. In Section 7, the algebraic component of the Description Postulate claimed that the cognition of a stimulus set is  the structuring of the set as the input group of a machine. It is now possible to add the stability component of the  Description Postulate. This addition is the statement that the input group has an ordering of the type given in Definition 10.  DESCRIPTION POSTULATE: The cognition of, or extraction of information from, a phenomenon, S, is a map D: G --. S u {0 } from  the input group G of a machine onto S, such that G is given a decomposition,  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 155  G = G, - Gz - - - G defined by an algebraic stability ordering on the machine". (Such a map will be called a machine  description.)  It is now possible to offer a definition of reference frame based upon the theory being developed here. In the present series  of papers, I will try to show that this definition is behind all the disparate examples of reference frames given in Section  8.1.  DEFINITION 12. A reference frame is an input group, G, with an algebraic stability ordering, G = G, - Gz ... G  The basic concept to be gained from the above definition is stated in the following proposal:  PROPOSAL 13. Cognition (or the extraction of information) is a map from a reference frame, G = G, - Gz ... G onto a stimulus  set.  Thus, in this view, one must conclude that the concept of cognition, or information, cannot be separated from the concept of  reference frame.  12. THE PRINCIPLE OF STIMULUS IDENTITY  The notion of stability is central to the dynamical structure of a machine. Dynamical systems concepts enter crucially in the  theory which I have been developing in this paper. According to the mathemathical theory of dynamical systems (e.g., Hirsch &  Smale, 1974, p. 190), any such system has a particular property which I take as fundamental to the theory being elaborated  here:  The entire state space of a dynamical system can essentially be identified with just a few states within that space: the  stable states of the system.  The reason is that the system will typically be at only those states.  In fact, the identification of a system with its stable states can be viewed as one of  `3 It is now possible to see a relationship between Shannon information theory and the construct stability in the present  paper. Following the generalizations developed by Resnikoff (1985) of the Shannon measure and the Boltzman equation, we can  define the change in Shannon information in going from g to h along an algebraic stability ordering to be log(Ja(h)J1Ja(g)I;  i.e., the ratio of the norms of the associated vectors in the tangent bundle. Thus, because we earlier equated stability with  information, our measure of information is the negative of the Shannon measure. That is, to obtain the Shannon information  function, one simply inverts the graph of the Liapunov function we defined on the algebraic stability ordering (Footnote 11).  Thus, structurally, the functions are the same.  What are our main reasons for considering the information function as the inversion of the Shannon measure? As stated earlier,  a primary reason follows from Thom's thesis that nothing can be known or recognized unless it is stable. However, a second  reason is actually related to this: We shall find that the more cognitively stable an object is, the greater is the number of  trajectories that are associated with it. (For example, a kernel sentence allows more transformations than a derived  sentence.) Thus upon the presentation of a more stable object, there is a greater reduction in uncertainty concerning the  behaviors of the object under a set of actions prior to the object's presentation.  156 MICHAEL LEYTON  the implications of the Cognitive Stability Principle, which proposes that cognition attempts to remove instabilities leaving  stabilities; for this removal means that what is being represented becomes identified with those states that are defined as  stable.  Seeing the above dynamical systems principle as an application of the Cognitive Stability Principle allows one to understand  why I did not define a machine object as an invariant under the input group. The invariants are part of the presented  stimulus; whereas, according to the Cognitive Stability Principle, the machine object is actually a different stimulus. Let us  consider this in more detail.  The SLZR example, examined in Section 8 and 9, illustrates this well; for recall the conclusion that, in the factorization  process, the subject was "describing" the percept as something else with an instability (e.g., "a parallelogram is a rectangle  with slant") (Sect. 9). Thus consider the transformation of a rectangle into a parallelogram. Suppose that one assumed that  the cognized object which has undergone the transformation is the set of properties which are invariant in the transformation  from the rectangle to the parallelogram. Since both figures have four straight sides, one such invariant is the property: four  straight sides. Another invariant is: opposite sides are equal and parallel. However, observe that the sizes of the angles are  not invariant in going from the rectangle to the parallelogram; i.e., the angles change. Thus, from the invariance viewpoint  of an object, what one has here is a four-sided object with opposite sides equal and parallel-but no specification being made  with respect to angle size. However, suppose instead that one adopted the above dynamical systems' principle, which states  that a system is identified with just its stable states. Then one would conclude that the cognized object is the set of  properties of the more stable stimulus, the rectangle. This includes "having right angles"-a property not possessed by the  parallelogram. Thus, if one adopted the above dynamical systems' principle, one would have to conclude that when looking at  the parallelogram, one cognizes it as an object with right angles, which has undergone an unstable change: even though there  are no right angles evident in the presented stimulus!  As was pointed out earlier, contemporary psychologists such as Gibson (1966, 1979), Piaget (1969), and Hoffman (1966, 1968)  have proposed that a stimulus is identified as an invariant under a set of transformations. This is the Klein view of geometry  which has dominated all branches of mathematics in this century. However, the theory presented in this series of papers  develops an opposing position. Fundamentally, this latter position is based on the Cognitive Stability Principle, one  implication of which is that a stimulus is identified not with its invariants, but with its stable states. This identification  is embodied in the concept of an algebraic stability ordering (Definition 10). One property of such an ordering is that a  stable state has to be a group identity element. The reader can now see a still more important reason why I define the machine  object (Sect. 6) as being that stimulus labeled by the identity element. It is because the algebraic stability ordering  ensures that this stimulus is the stable point in the system, and the Cognitive Stability Principle implies that the system is  identified with the stable point. To summarize:  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 157  PRINCIPLE OF STIMULUS IDENTITY: A stimulus is identified as that (other) stimulus which receives the algebraic identity  element under a common inputspace description, i.e., as the machine object.  This principle will be corroborated several times during the course of the series of papers. For example, it will be claimed  that the principle explains why categories are identified with their prototypes and why, in Transformational Grammar, kernel  sentences are understood as capturing the essence of a derived sentence-i.e., the latter's propositional content.  13. SUMMARY  This paper began by proposing the Content Machine Analogy, which states that cognition is the description of phenomena as  machines. Two alternative realizations of this analogy were proposed and explored: state-space descriptions, which have  symmetric non-explicit reference and define objects as group invariants; and input space descriptions, which have asymmetric  explicit reference and define objects as group identity elements. The latter was chosen as the basis for the cognitive theory  because these papers attempt to account for asymmetric explict reference and phenomena such as prototypes and kernel. Thus the  Content Machine Analogy received a particular form in the algebraic component of the Description Postulate. This part of the  postulate states that the cognition of a stimulus set S is a map from a machine's input group onto S. Because the input group  manifests asymmetric explicit internal reference, we began our exploration of it as the reference frame of a representation.  It was then proposed that the input group decomposes cognitively into subgroups which are successively factorized from the  total input group. The successive factorization is in fact the successive initialization of machine components. The theory  predicts that the sequence of initializations results in stimuli having successive reference points in the total frame. The  important question remained, however, of the nature of the criterion which determined both the frame decomposition and the  ordering of the factorization sequence. An answer was provided by investigating stability issues as follows.  It was argued that instabilities reduce information. This proposal lead to the Cognitive Stability Principle which is of  considerable importance to the theory developed in these papers. The principle states that, given a description (i.e.,  "representation"), the cognitive system attempts to remove instabilities from it, in order of decreasing instability. This was  claimed to have a powerful structuring effect on the machine groups used in cognizing a phenomenon. The effect is the group  decomposition introduced earlier, and the factorization ordering is that of decreasing instability. This stability ordering  together with a within-subgroup stability ordering towards each subgroup identity, was called an algebraic stability ordering.  This type of structure embodies one of the central constructs of the proposed cognitive theory; a reference structure that is  asymmetric-sequential.  158 MICHAEL LEYTON  I then derived and proposed a Principle of Nested Control which claimed that an algebraic stability ordering on an input group  is cognized as a nested structure of control. The principle will be crucially useful in these papers.  At this point it was possible to give a particular detailed statement of the Content Machine Analogy, called the Description  Postulate: The cognition of a stimulus set is a map from the input group of a machine onto the set such that the machine  structure has a decomposition determined by an algebraic stability ordering. Because it was claimed that a stimulus is  described as a machine, moving under an algebraic stability ordering, the cognitive effect of the description is that of  embedding the stimulus in a reference frame. Thus a reference frame was defined as the domain of the description map. Observe  that the Principle of Nested Control specifies a powerful relationship between the cognition of control and the phenomenon of  reference frame.  Finally, the Cognitive Stability Principle was seen as implying the dynamical systems principle that a system can be  identified with its stable state. This lead to the Principle of Stimulus Identity, which proposes that a stimulus is  identified as that (other) stimulus which receives the identity element in a common input-space description.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  I am immeasurably grateful to Julie Gee who read several drafts of this paper and gave me valuable detailed feedback on each  draft. Also, I wish to thank Jochen Braun, David Buss, Joe Lappin, Duncan Luce, William Meredith, Eleanor Rosch, and Iskender  Savasir, who each read at least one of the drafts and also gave me valuable feedback. Revisions of the paper were supported by  NSF grant IST-8418164.  REFERENCES  AKMAJIAN, A. & HENY, F. W. (1975). An introduction to the principles of transformational syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  BINFORD, O. B. (1971). Visual perception by computer. Presented at IEEE Systems, Science, and Cybernetics Conf.  BORROW, L. S. & ARBIB, M. A. (1974). Discrete mathematics: Applied algebra for computer and information science. Washington,  DC: Hemisphere.  BROOKS, R. A. (1983). Solving the find-path problem by good representation of free space. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man,  and Cybernetics, SMC-13, No. 3.  CARROLL, J. D. & ARABIE, P. (1980). Multidimensional scaling. Annual Review of Psychology 31, 607-649.  CARROLL, J. D. & WISH, M. (1974). Multidimensional perceptual models and measurement methods. In E. C. Carterette & M. P.  Freidman (Eds.), Handbook of perception. New York: Academic Press. CHAITIN, G. (1966). On the length of programs for computing  finite binary sequences. Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery 13, 547-569.  CHOMSKY, N. (1957). Syntactic structures. The Hague: Mouton. COOMBS, C. H. (1964). A theory of data. New York: Wiley. DUNCKER,  K. (1929). Uber induzierte Bewegung. Psychologishe Forschung. 12, 180-259. Translated and condensed in W. D. Ellis (Ed.), A  source book of Gestalt psychology. New York: Harcourt Brace. FINE, T. L. (1973). Theories of probability. New York: Academic  Press.  GENERAL INFORMATIONAL PRINCIPLES 159  GIBSON, J. J. (1966). The senses considered as perceptual systems. Boston, MA: Houghton-Mifflin. GIBSON, J. J. (1979). The  ecological approach to visual perception. Boston, MA: Houghton-Mifflin. GOLDMEIER, E. (1937). Uber Anlichkeit bei gehenen  Figuren. Psychologische Forschung. 21, 146-209. English translation by E. Goldmeier: Similarity in visually perceived forms.  Psychological Issues, 1972, 8, No. 1, Monograph 29. New York: International Universities.  GOLDMEIER, E. (1982). The memory trace: Its formation and its fate. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. GUGGENHEIMER, H. W. (1977).  Differential geometry. New York: Dover.  GUTTMAN, L. (1971). Measurement as structural theory. Psychometrika, 36, 465-506.  HERING, E. (1905). Grundzuge der Lehre vom Lichtsinn. English translation by L. Hurvich and D. Jameson (1964), Outlines of a  theory of the light sense. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press. HIRSCH, M. & SMALE, S. (1974). Differential equations,  dvnamical systems, and linear algebra. New York: Academic Press.  HOFFMAN, W. C. (1966). The Lie algebra of visual perception. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 3, 65-98.  HOFFMAN, W. C. (1968). The neuron as a lie group germ and a lie product. Quarterly of Applied Mathematics, 25, 423-440.  JOHANSSON, G. (1950). Configurations in event perception. Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell.  KLEIN, F. (1893). Vergleichende Betrachtungen uber neuere geometrische Forschungen, Mathematische Annalen, 4333, 63. English  translation, Bulletin of the New York Mathematical Society, 1892, 2, 215. KOLMOGOROV, A. (1968). Logical basis for information  theory and probability. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, IT-14, pp. 662-664.  KRUSCAL, J. B. (1964). Multidimensional scaling by optimizing goodness of fit to a nonmetric hypothesis. Psychometrika, 29,  1-27.  LACHMAN, R., LACHMAN, J. L. & BUTTERFIELD, E. C. (1979). Cognitive psychology and information processing. Hillsdale, NJ:  Erlbaum.  LEEWENBERG, E. L. J. (1971). A perceptual coding language for visual and auditory patterns. American Journal of Psychology,  84, 307-349.  LEPTON, M. (1974). Principles of artistic method: Algebraico-logical postulates in the foundations of the science of  perception. Research report, Mathematics Institute, Warwick University, England. LEPTON, M. (1982). A unified theory of  cognitive reference frames. Proceedings of the Fourth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, University of  Michigan, Ann Arbor, M, pp. 204-209. LEPTON, M. (I 984a). A theory of information .structure. PhD. thesis, University of  California, Berkeley. LEPTON, M. (1984b). Perceptual organization as nested control. Biological Cybernetics, 51, 141-154.  LEPTON, M. (1985). Generative systems of analyzers. Computer Vision, Graphics, and Image Processing, 31, 201-241.  LEPTON, M. (1986). Principles of information structure common to six levels of the human cognitive system. Information  Sciences, 38, No. 1, entire journal issue.  MACH, E. (1897). The analysis of sensations. English translation (1959). New York: Dover.  MARK, D., & NISHIHARA, H. K. (1978). Representation and recognition of the spatial organization of three-dimensional shapes.  Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 200, 169-294.  MARSDEN, J. E., & MCCRACKEN, M. (1976). The Hopf bifurcation and its applications. New York: Springer-Verlag.  NEWELL, A., & SIMON, H. A. (1972). Human problem solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. PAUL, R. P. (1981). Robot  manipulators. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  PERLMUTTER, D. M. & POSTAL, P. M. (1983). Towards a universal characterization of passivization. In D. M. Perlmutter (Ed.),  Studies in relational grammar (Vol. 1). Chicago: University of Chicago. PIAGET, J. (1969). The mechanisms of perception.  Translated by G. N. Seagrim. New York: Basic Books. RESNIKOFF, H. (1985). The illusion of reality: Topics in information  science. New York: Springer-Verlag. ROCK, I. (1973). Orientation and form. New York: Academic Press.  ROscH, E. (1975). Cognitive reference points. Cognitive Psychology, 7, 532-547.  ROSCH, E. (1978). Principles of categorization. In E. Rosch & B. B. Lloyd (Eds), Cognition and categorization. Hillsdale, NJ:  Erlbaum.  160  MICHAEL LEYTON  SHEPARD, R. N. (1962a). The analysis of proximities: Multidimensional scaling with an unknown distance function. 1.  Psychometrika, 27, 125-140.  SHEPARD, R. N. (1962b). The analysis of proximities: Multidimensional scaling with an unknown distance function. II.  Psychometrika, 27, 219-246.  SHEPARD, R. N. (1974). Representation of structure in similarity data: Problems and prospects. Psychometrika, 39, 373-421.  SHEPARD, R. N. (1980). Multidimensional scaling, tree-fitting, and clustering, Science, 210, 390-398. SOLOMONOFF, R. (1964). A  formal theory of inductive inference, Information and Control, 7, 1-22 & 224-254.  THom, R. (1975). Structural stability and Morphogenesis. English Translation by D. H. Fowler. Reading, MA: Benjamin.  TORGERSON, W. S. (1965). Multidimensional scaling of similarity. Psychometrika, 30, 379-393. TVERSKY, A. (1977). Features of  similarity. Psychological Review, 84, 327-352.  TVERSKY, A. & GATT, 1. (1982). Similarity, Separability, and the Triangle Inequality. Pychological Review, 89, 123-154.  RECEIVED: February 12, 1985