10.1016/0022-2496(87)90024-1
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 31, 429-438 (1987)  Book Reviews  Perspectives Yet Unseen  JAMES E. CUTTING. Perception with an Eye for Motion. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1986. Pp. xiii + 321. $29.95.  Reviewed by KEITH NIALL  James Cutting is a Professor of Psychology at Cornell University. He obtained his Ph.D. in Experimental Psychology at Yale  University in 1973. His main research interests concern mathematical models in the study of perception, and ecological optics.  The reviewer, Keith Niall, is a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Department of Psychology, Queen's University. His research  interests include geometric models of shape constancy and the measurement of primary spatial abilities.  Several decades have passed since J. J. Gibson published The Perception of the Visual World, thus launching an important  approach to research in visual perception. Cutting's (1986) Perception with an Eye for Motion ranks among the best in this  tradition of "ecological optics"; few researchers combine such flair for experimentation with such breadth of historical  knowledge. Cutting has done innovative work in the perception of complex motions (e.g., Cutting, 1978) and in the categorical  perception of sounds. Cutting seeks to vindicate ecological optics and to establish what has been called "naive realism" in  epistemology. An objective of ecological optics is to solve an epistemological problem: how the shapes of things are known  through vision. Ecological optics is not meant to supplant modern physical optics; the connection with physical optics is that  ecological optics supposes shapes are known by what would once have been called "natural geometry" (e.g., Descartes,  1637/1965, p. 106; Cutting, Chapter 2). An explanation by natural geometry declares that we perceive the distance and shape of  objects by geometric principles which are embodied in the perceptual system. Some psychologists and philosophers, however,  have not been convinced by the arguments that physical and ecological optics are linked in the intimate way such an  explanation supposes. For example, laws of optics proper would not change, even if the principles of ecological optics turned  out to be false; and the principles of visual perception may have only a remote connection with the laws of optics.  Requests for reprints should be sent to Dr. Keith Niall, Department of Psychology, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario,  Canada K7L 3N6.  429  0022-2496/87 $3.00  Copyright cij 1987 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  430 BOOK REVIEWS  ECOLOGICAL OPTICS AND THE CROSS RATIO  Ecological optics supposes that a description of the geometrical conditions of vision is sufficient basis for a theory of  visual shape constancy. Its strategy is to suggest that things cannot appear to be otherwise than they are, when viewing  conditions are taken into account. This is in fact a distinctive epistemological premise, though sometimes it is presented as  if it were a universally accepted truth (Warnock, 1982, p. 148). Where shapes are concerned, the claim amounts to this: there  are geometric properties of objects that are apparent as they are seen from various positions or angles, and these geometric  properties provide a basis for shape constancy. This claim is the familiar invariance hypothesis (e.g., Boring, 1952). These  basic properties turn out to be projective properties; the invariance hypothesis stipulates a place for projective geometry in  the theory of shape constancy. Projective equivalences-quantified as projective invariants-are the elements of this geometry.  There is a projective equivalence between flat objects and the candle shadows they project onto a planar surface. Projective  equivalences are equivalences preserved by projective operations; ideally, projective operations can be effected with an  unmarked straight edge alone (unlike Euclidean operations, which require both straight edge and compass).  Cutting's Chapter 5 tells how the notion of invariance is applied to problems of shape constancy. This chapter is the best  recent account of the invariance hypothesis (it is a revision of Cutting, 1983). One important projective invariant is the  cross ratio, concerning which Cutting states: "I do not suggest that the use of the cross ratio in perception solves  fundamental and sweeping epistemological problems. It is merely one example, perhaps not even a prototypical one, that can be  used to promote realism as a perspective in perception and epistemology" (p. 79). To define the cross ratio, let i, j, k, and  1 be four points ordered in one direction along a line. Let x,; stand for the directed distance between points i and j, so  that x;; is of opposite sign to xi;. Then one cross ratio is expressed by  xrtxik  For points on a line, the cross ratio is the simplest projective invariant (see Fig. 1). (Many "simple" geometric properties  of shape and size, such as length and angle, are not projective invariants.) Since it is both simple and basic, the cross  ratio is central to the geometric description of the way light is propagated from objects to the retina. The cross ratio is  just the sort of robust quantity that might explain perceived constancy of shape and size. Gibson (1950) thought as much, as  have others (e.g., Johansson, 1977; Michaels & Carello, 1981). Yet no one has demonstrated that the cross ratio actually  performs the psychological work that ecological optics assigns to it. Indeed, Neisser (1977, p. 24, cited in Cutting, p. 71)  says that such claims are ecological optics' "largest outstanding promissory note," and Cutting (1982, p. 214) has called  Gibson's (1950) identification of the cross ratio with the  BOOK REVIEWS 431  Light source  FIG. 1. Cross ratio values: (1) (xil'xjk)l(xik'xlj), -0.75; (2) (xik'xlj)1(xll'xjk), -1.33; (3) (xi,-xjk)l (xij'xkl), +3.00;  (4) (xiy'xkl)Axi!'Xjk), +0.33; (5) (xik'xlj)AXii'xkl), -4.00; (6) (xij'xkl)Axik'xlj), -0.25. The values of the six cross  ratios on points i', j', k', and 1' are identical to those that can be calculated on points i, j, k, and t.  relevant perceptual invariant "a landmark in the study of perception." Cutting aims to perform the wanted demonstration.  Nonetheless, Cutting's own judgment in later chapters of the book is that the cross ratio is sometimes effective in specifying  form, and sometimes not (pp. 131, 142).  Perception with an Eye for Motion has a natural division into four sections. Section 1 (Chapters 1 through 5) provides a  general and historical background on optics, invariance, and projective relations. Section 2 (Chapters 6 through 9) describes  the application of the cross ratio to the study of vision, and describes some experiments. Section 3 (Chapters 10 through 13)  presents a theoretical review and empirical study of direction-finding by means of "optical flow." The last section (Chapters  14 and 15) rounds out the book with a theoretical discussion of "direct" and "directed" perception.  THE CROSS RATIO IN EIGHT EXPERIMENTS  Twelve of Cutting's own experiments are described in his book. In the first eight experiments, presented in Section 2, he  seeks to establish the cross ratio as an effective invariant for the visual perception of form. There are positive things to  say about these experiments. Psychophysical method and experimental design are used admirably (the Weber fraction condition of  the second experiment is a noteworthy example). Yet there are errors in these experiments that arise from confusion, and which  make the interpretation of the evidence problematic. The nature of these confusions makes this a difficult book to review,  because they represent major flaws in an otherwise impressive attempt to establish ecological optics on a firm experimental  basis. Some of these pervasive confusions are broadly theoretical, with implications for general arguments, while others are  practical or arithmetical.  A confusion of the first kind occurs when Cutting wrongly identifies claims about projective invariance with claims about  rigidity and coplanarity. Some authors (e.g., Simpson, 1983) mistakenly hold that a constant cross ratio among points is a  sufficient condition for the collinearity of points. Cutting makes the same mistake, and he also makes the mistake of taking a  constant cross ratio (as applied in a slightly  432 BOOK REVIEWS  different way, see p. 105) as a sufficient condition for the coplanarity of parallel lines. Yet, for one example, a cross  ratio can be defined among points that fall on a full circle (cf. Schwerdtfeger, 1979). There do exist projective criteria for  collinearity (see Coxeter, 1961, p. 220, and for coplanarity see Veblen and Young, 1910, p. 329). The confusion of  collinearity and projective invariance motivates Cutting to produce a "projected-angles" formula for the computation of the  cross ratio, so that "the shape of the projection surface becomes irrelevant. Thus the projection surface can be a plane, as  in a movie theatre, or a curved surface, such as the retina or cornea of the eye" (p. 81 ). But this implies that the shape of  the projecting surface need not be planar, either, contrary to Cutting's intent. Further, Cutting considers preservation of  the cross ratio to be criterial for an object's rigidity (for example, pp. 97, 105, 115). Yet the constant cross ratio of a  moving object is no guarantee that the rigid shape of the object will be maintained as it is moved (that is, under its  displacement).  Some authors (e.g., von Helmholtz, 1878; and Ullman, 1979, p.146) have claimed that rigid bodies must be postulated prior to  any discussion of geometry. If this is true, and the rigidity of objects that undergo displacement is ensured only by a  postulate on which geometric matters themselves depend, then geometric quantities are not sure criteria for the rigidity of  objects. Some have thought that the bare possibility that geometry can be applied to physical objects at all depends on this  postulate (Torretti, 1978, pp. 157, 158). Of course, if one assumes that a body is rigid under displacement, its projections  onto a planar surface can be predicted. In the absence of a competing hypothesis, ecological optics might safely have assumed  the rigidity of objects in a theory of shape constancy. Yet there exists a strong alternative psychological claim about shape  constancy and rigidity under displacement. Von Helmholtz (1876, 1878) makes a plausible claim that the phenomena of shape  constancy would not even if objects were not rigid under displacement (that is, as they are, when they are). Moreover,  projective invariance could obtain under the conditions Helmholtz specified. The rigidity postulate is a working part of  Helmholtz's theory. Helmholtz evaluates what Cutting has only assumed. In short, Cutting has not established the role of  coplanarity or rigidity in shape constancy. Let us see if he provides evidence for the role of projective invariance in shape  constancy.  Some errors in arithmetic are apparent in Cutting's presentation of the cross ratio. These undermine the value of the first  eight experiments. The errors are brought to light by a general equation that obtains among the various cross ratios that can  be computed on the same points. That equation is called "the fundamental syzygy." With the notation introduced earlier, the  fundamental syzygy can be expressed as  xr;xkl+ xrkxq+ x;,x k =0  (Klein, 1925/1967, Vol. 2, pp. 155-158). (If, instead, i, j, k, and 1 are four vertices of a plane quadrilateral, none of  which coincide with the origin, then a planar projective invariant, the two-dimensional analog of the cross ratio, can be  computed. This  BOOK REVIEWS  433  analog of the cross ratio can be obtained by substituting for x;; the areas of triangles formed by the origin and ordered  pairs of points.)  Six cross ratio formulas can be obtained by rearranging the terms of the syzygy. If A stands for  x ij xk!  the cross ratio given earlier, then the other cross ratios can be expressed as  A,1-A,11A,AA1,andAA1  (see Schreier and Sperner, 1961, p. 55). Cutting seems not to realize that these formulas are determined in this way, for he  says: "It is something of an embarassment to discover that the six classes of cross ratios have different numerical  properties" (p. 123). In one table, he lists the amount of change in the cross ratio concomitant with differences in the  position of points on a line (Table 6.1, p. 89).  TABLE 6.1 Six Classes of Cross Ratios   Value for Change with Change with   Cross ratio Range even interior exterior    distribution shift' shift"    < From Cutting, p. 89    1. (AD BC)/(AC BD) 0.0-1.0 0.75 0.13 0.04   2 (AC BD)/(AD BC) 1.0-00 1.33 0.25 0.07 Pairs  3. (AD BC)/(AB CD) 0.0-00 3.00 2.24 0.49 of equal  4. (AB CD)/(AD BC) 0.0-00 0.33 0.25 0.07 values  5. (AC-BD)1(AB-CD) 0.0-00 4.00 0.68 0.68   6. (AB - CD)/(AC - BD) 0.0-00 0.25 0.04 0.04   < Revised   Value Change with Change with  Cross ratio Range for leftward leftward   even movement' movement'   distribution of point A of point B  1. (AD BC)/(AC DB) 00 -0.75 0.05 -0.05  2. (AC DB)/(AD BC) 00 -1.33 -0.10 0.09  3. (AD BC)/(AB CD) 00 +3.00 -0.72 1.14  4. (AB CD)I(AD-BC) 00 +0.33 0.10 -0.09  5. (AC. DB)/(AB . CD) 00 -4.00 0.72 -1.14  6. (AB - CD)/(AC - DB) 00 -0.25 -0.05 0.05  Note. A reconstruction of Cutting's Table 6.1 (p. 89) can be used to illustrate some misuses of the cross ratio and a failure  to produce a projective mapping.  The movements of points A and B are as illustrated in Cutting's Fig. 6.4 (p. 88), and the values of the displacements are  given in that figure. I assume for the revised table that points A and B are spaced 7 units apart.  434 BOOK REVIEWS  The values he does list violate the relations implicit in the syzygy; thus, there should be six pairs of equal values along  the last two columns of Table 6.1, yet just three are equal. This discrepancy is due to arithmetical error. Other errors occur  because Cutting puts arbitrary bounds on the value of the cross ratio. He restricts his principle measure of the cross ratio,  so that it varies between one and zero, when in fact it can take any real value. He also disregards the sign of the cross  ratio, deeming a difference in cross ratios of -0.69 equal to a difference of +0.69 (see also Fig. 6.4, p. 88). Hence, Cutting  has an invalid measure of the cross ratio. (Granted, he only wishes to measure relative change in the cross ratio for an  independent variable.)  Another serious criticism is that the stimuli of the first eight experiments do not preserve projective properties when the  locations of individual lines in the stimuli are changed. Cutting uses four parallel bars as his basic stimulus, like four  parallel fingers of a hand. One of these may have a motion independent of the rest, like a finger that waggles while the hand  is moving. Cutting measures the cross ratio on a line that intersects these parallel bars at right angles. He computes the  cross ratio for those collinear points of intersection. He varies the position of one of the four parallel bars, that is, the  position of one of four points on the line, in an effort to produce constant values of the cross ratio (e.g., Fig. 6.4, p.  88). There is an artifact in his procedure; when one cross ratio is constant, other cross ratios on the same points vary (see  Table 6.1 ). One assumes that all eight experiments employ similar materials. That is to say, all eight experiments fail to  control projective properties. Cutting makes the claim that observers can be sensitive to changes of 0.05 in any cross ratio  of such stimuli, though he uses only one measure of the cross ratio. This he calls the "canonical cross ratio" (pp. 80, 81).  Yet the value of other cross ratios on the same points is not constant; those cross ratios can vary more than 1.50 (note rows  3 and 5 of the revised table). This is no relation of projectivity, even though one measure of the cross ratio remains  constant. Cutting is not free to choose one cross ratio measure and ignore the rest; in any projective mapping, all the cross  ratio measures are preserved. When some cross ratios are not preserved, no projective mapping has been established. All cross  ratios can be controlled at once; any projective mapping from line to line will achieve that end. The point is that the method  by which Cutting attempts to change the distances among points or bars, while preserving a single cross ratio, is not a  projective mapping. The variation in values seen among these cross ratio measures indicates that, for his purposes, his  stimuli are disordered. His experimental conditions do not manipulate projective properties, as he intended. (I conjecture  that a distance ratio, not the cross ratio, is the quantity that Cutting has manipulated in these experiments. A distance  ratio is a simple ratio of two distances.)  OTHER EVIDENCE  Chapters 8 and 9 seem to exaggerate the importance of the cross ratio as an index of projective invariance. Klein (1925/1967,  Vol. 2, p. 158) cautions against  BOOK REVIEWS 435  treating the quantities of projective geometry as if they were constructions on the cross ratio. He remarks that such an  emphasis makes insight into projective geometry difficult. Perhaps it also makes insight into the applications of projective  properties to perception difficult. Cutting measures the cross ratios of points on a line, and complains that "the cross ratio  is confined to collinear points or coplanar parallel lines" (p. 115). Yet he continues to use the cross ratio, and fails to  explore other invariant measures of planar projections. Instead he proposes to assess planar projective properties by  measuring many cross ratios on skew lines, which he models in turn by an index of the proximity of points, that is, by a  "distance-density function." His motivation is tenuous. He says "the general pattern... is that cross ratio change is a  function of proximity of a displaced element with others.... Thus changes in cross ratio may have a systematic relation to  various measures of density. The pursuit of this idea is the crux of this chapter" (p. 116). Cutting may have lost sight of  his goal at this point, since he recognizes that the measure he chooses is not a projective invariant (note 1, p.273). Why  choose thus when there are measures of planar projective invariance? One example is the two-dimensional analog of the cross  ratio, which I mentioned in connection with the fundamental syzygy. Is there any greater motivation to use a distance-density  model to approximate cross ratios than there is to approximate visual angle by the same method? The appropriate measures  should be applied in the first place. Chapter 8 explores and tests the hypothesis that "if a rigidity-violating element always  appears in a region of the same density, it ought to be equally easy to detect" (p. 124). This is a fair hypothesis about  constraints on the information that is used in making perceptual judgments, but it is not an hypothesis about projective  invariance or the cross ratio.  Cutting's general conclusion about the cross ratio is that it is sometimes effective in form perception, and sometimes not. He  concludes that cross ratios are useful to observers as they judge the rigidity of planes in rotation, but not when they judge  the rigidity of moving planes that remain parallel to the picture plane. The latter case is often considered to be simpler.  The parallel movement of planar figures cannot be distinguished by a projective property from the rotation of planar figures,  and Cutting wisely attempts no such distinction. As it is, perhaps the cross ratio is never a psychologically effective  invariant. A strong case for its effectiveness has not yet been made.  OPTICAL FLOW  Chapters 10 to 13 are devoted to problems of optical flow; they are excellent. The focus of expansion in an optical flow field  has been cited as a visual cue by which an observer senses the direction of his own motion. Chapter 10 contains summaries of a  good sample of relevant research and criticism. Cutting provides practical evidence about direction finding based on another  cue: motion parallax. He makes this topic easy to understand. In these chapters, Cutting defends the hypothesis that  436 BOOK REVIEWS  an observer can use changes in the optic array to tell the direction of his movement. Koenderink and van Doorn (1981) have  provided an analysis which suggests that the focus of expansion does not indicate the direction of an observer's own movement,  independent of eye movements. Cutting suggests that changes based on differential motion parallax do indicate the direction in  which an observer is moving. He provides two experiments to document the point. He specifies the asymmetries of optical flow  that occur as an observer moves in a straight line, or along a circular track. He shows that these asymmetries of optical flow  are effective indicators of direction. Here at least, there seems to be evidence for an explanation based on ecological optics.  DIRECTED PERCEPTION  Cutting's book neither extends ecological optics, nor does it lend support to naive realism. Yet it does seek to offer a new  approach to the theory of perception, which he calls "directed perception." Cutting draws conclusions about directed  perception from his results. He stresses the variety of stimulus information that is relevant to judgments of the shapes of  objects. He contrasts directed perception with both direct perception and perception mediated by inference. He distinguishes  directed perception from other theories in the way that this information is "mapped" between environment and observer. Direct  perception implies that things cannot appear to be otherwise than they are, that is, the physical descriptions of objects are  assumed to be univocal: they map in a one-to-one manner onto the kinds of information available to the observer. Theories that  suppose perception to be mediated by inference assume information to be equivocal; many kinds of physical description are  specified by many kinds of information. Directed perception is different: many kinds of information are assumed to specify  each property visible to an observer. There is a many-to-one mapping of physical descriptions onto information. Cutting's  claim is that while information about shape is not univocal, neither is it wholly equivocal.  His theme is the immediacy of perception, that is, how things may be said to be "present to the mind." Cutting mentions the  history of the notion of immediacy in his "Nine Issues Concerning Direct Perception" (p. 224). He would have done well to  refer to a more comprehensive history of the relevant ideas, such as Yolton (1984). Perhaps he mistrusts such philosophic  reviews, since he says of Austin's (1962) discussion of direct perception that it "was more about words than about perception"  (p. 234). Cutting's own historical discussions occur in the first four and the last two chapters of the book. These are broad  and insightful, though misleading in a few points. Here is one: he suggests that the abstraction of primary from secondary  qualities was acceptable doctrine for Berkeley (p.227, but see Grayling, 1986, p.74). At another point, he attributes to  Poincar6 the view that projective notions are central to the understanding of visual perception (p. 143, but see Poincar6,  1913). 1 have not been convinced by Cutting's arguments for the  BOOK REVIEWS 437  directedness of perception. When Cutting discusses the theory of depth cues, for instance, he says that the number of cues  seems to increase without end, that "it seems difficult not to let everything flood in" (p. 245). Here the theory of depth  cues may be defended by a paraphrase of Austin's (1961, p. 221) statement on the many uses of language: "I think we should not  despair too easily and talk, as people are apt to do, about the infinite [number of depth cues. Psychologists] will do this  when they have listed as many, let us say, as seventeen; but even if there were something like ten thousand [depth cues],  surely we could list them all in time. This, after all, is no larger than the number of beetles that entomologists have taken  the pains to specify." The point is that the number of depth cues or the complexity of the "mapping" between environment and  observer is no bar to a theory of form perception that is based on depth cues. There is nothing inherently wrong with theory  that is replete with Baconian detail. Cutting does construct an effective argument to the effect that "directed perception" is  a better theory of form perception than is "direct perception." But in my view he has not shown that "directed perception" is  a satisfactory theory. There are perspectives on this subject that are yet unseen.  Perception with an Eye for Motion has many positive qualities, and it has serious flaws. The format of the book makes it easy  to read, and the footnotes are apt and informative. Although I would not recommend this book to an unsophisticated reader, any  serious student of perception should have a copy.  REFERENCES  AUSTIN, J. L. (1961). Philosophical papers. London/New York: Oxford Univ. Press (Clarendon ). AUSTIN, J. L. (1962). Sense and  sensibilia. London/New York: Oxford Univ. Press (Clarendon). BORING, E. G. (1952). Visual perception as invariance.  Psychological Review, 59, 141-148. COXETER, H. S. M. (1969). Introduction to geometry. New York: Wiley.  CUTTING, J. E. (1978). Generation of synthetic male and female walkers through manipulation of a biomechanical invariant.  Perception, 7, 393-405.  CUTTING, J. E. (1982). Two ecological perspectives: Gibson vs. Shaw and Turvey. American Journal of Psychology, 95, 199-222.  CUTTING, J. E. (1983). Four assumptions about invariance in perception. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception  and Performance, 9, 310-317.  DESCARTES, R. (1965). Discourse on method, optics, geometry, and meteorology (P. J. Olscamp, Trans.). New York: Bobbs-Merrill.  (Original work published 1637).  GIBSON, J. J. (1950). The perception of the visual world. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. GRAYLING, A. C. (1986). Berkeley: The  central arguments. London: Duckworth.  VON HELMHOLTZ, H. L. F. (1876). The origin and meaning of geometric axioms, I. Mind, 1(3), 301-321. VON HELMHOLTZ, H. L. F.  (1878). The origin and meaning of geometric axioms, II. Mind, 3(10), 212-225.  JOHANSSON, G. (1977). Spatial constancy and motion in visual perception. In W. Epstein (Ed.), Stability and constancy in  visual perception (pp. 375-419). New York: Wiley.  KLEIN, F. (1967). Elementarmathematik vom hoheren Standpunkte aus. II. Geometric [Elementary mathematics from an advanced  standpoint. II. Geometry]. Berlin: Springer. (Original work published 1925).  438  BOOK REVIEWS  KOENDERINK, J. J., & VAN DOORN, A. J. (1981). Exterospecific component of the motion parallax field. Journal of the Optical  Society of America, 71, 953-957.  MICHAELS, C. F., & CARELLO, C. (1981). Direct perception. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. NEISSER, U. (1977). Gibson's  ecological optics: Consequences of a different stimulus description. Journal for the Theory of Social Behavior, 7, 17-28.  POINCARE, H. (1913). Dernieres pensies. [Last thoughts]. Paris: Flammarion.  SCHREIER, O., & SPERNER, E. (1961). Projective geometry of n dimensions. New York: Chelsea. SCHWERDTFEGER, H. (1979). Geometry  of complex numbers. New York: Dover.  SIMPSON, W. A. (1983). The cross-ratio and the perception of motion and structure. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGGRAPH/SIGART  Workshop on Motion (pp. 125-129). New York: Association for Computing Machinery.  TORRETTI, R. (1978). Philosophy of geometry from Riemann to Poincare. Boston: Reidel. ULLMAN, S. (1979). The interpretation of  visual motion. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. VERLEN, O., & Young, J. W. (1910). Projective geometry, Vol l. New York: Ginn.  WARNOCK, G. J. (1982). Berkeley. Oxford: Blackwell.  YOLTON, J. W. (1984). Perceptual acquaintance from Descartes to Reid. Minneapolis: Univ. of Minnesota Press.