10.1016/0022-2496(87)90018-6
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 31, 307-320 (1987)  A Limitation Theorem for the Differentiable Prototypification of Shape  MICHAEL LEYTON  Psychology Dept., Busch Campus, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ 08903  In previous papers it was shown that subjects decompose the global linear prototypification of shape into separate stretch,  shear, and rotation components, i.e., the Iwasawa decomposition of the full transformation. The purpose of the present paper  is to extend these decompositional results to prototypification that varies differentiably across a region-a process that  occurs in complex shape. As a first step we require that local symmetry axes become local eigenspaces in any assigned local  transformations. This condition, called the Interaction Law, is substantially validated by previous experimental work.  Clearly, the use of the Interaction Law requires, as input to the prototypification process, a local symmetry analysis. The  analysis chosen is the Smoothed Local Symmetry (SLS) of Brady. Four alternative local frames are considered in order to  characterize the SLS by a moving frame, but we find that only one of the alternatives satisfies the Interaction Law; i.e., the  frame is a basis of eigenvectors that are local symmetry vectors. With this basis, the SLS is characterized as a trajectory  through the General Linear Group. Prototypification can then take place by applying the Iwasawa decomposition at each point of  the group trajectory, and factorizing the Iwasawa subgroups. The culmination of this analysis is the proof of a limitation  theorem, which states that the factorization of one subgroup necessarily involves the factorization of one of the other  subgroups. Thus one level of prototypification is impossible. Furthermore we find that two levels of prototypification can  lead only to a global or flexed symmetry. Thus the theorem shows that the shapes that can result from the local use of the  Iwasawa decomposition are much more restricted than the shapes that can result from the global use of the decomposition.  Nevertheless, in the local case the resulting shapes are highly salient as prototypes, which strongly validates our method.  The method is further validated by showing that if a moving frame were chosen in which the Interaction Law did not hold, the  resulting shapes would not be psychological prototypes. U 1987 Academic Press, Inc.  1. INTRODUCTION  One of the central problems in our understanding of shape perception is that of the elaboration of perceptual prototypes. The  importance generally of prototypes has been reinforced by Rosch (1978) in that she has shown that a prototype psychologically  characterizes the category of which it is an exemplar. Schemes for deriving shape from prototypes include that by Marr and  Nishihara (1978), who use a multiresolution hierarchy; Pentland (1986) who uses Boolean operations; and  Address reprint requests to Michael Leyton, Department of Psychology, Busch Campus, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ  08903.  307  0022-2496/87 $3.00  Copyright Qc 1987 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  308 MICHAEL LEYTON  Leyton (1984, 1985, 1986a, 1986b, 1986c, 1987a, 1987c) who uses the successive action of Lie groups. It is upon the latter  approach that we will concentrate in the present paper.  In Leyton (1984, 1985) it was argued that certain decompositions of globally acting linear transformations (i.e.,  decompositions of linear transformations acting over an entire shape) characterize important aspects of the psychological  prototypification of shape. The purpose of the present paper is to extend these decompositional results to prototypification  that is locally dependent. While global prototypification, using linear transformations, is psychologically important to both  simple and complex shape, it is clear that local prototypification also becomes important for complex shape. For example, to  prototypify the shape of a man who is bent over, one might wish to straighten his back. This will probably involve (1) a  completely different transformation from that required for the head of the man, and (2) a different linear transformation for  each infinitesimal region within the back itself. Thus, local prototypification is required in two senses:  LOCAL, SENSE 1. Properties are confined to particular regions.  LOCAL, SENSE 2. Properties change smoothly over a region.  In the present paper, we shall examine local prototypification in the second sense, and prove a crucial Limitation Theorem on  such prototypification. This theorem strongly restricts the shapes that can emerge from differential prototypification to a  few that are psychologically highly salient.  Before examining differentiable prototypification, let us first consider an example of global linear prototypification. In  Leyton (1984), I found that when subjects are presented with a parallelogram which is rotated off the horizontal (Fig. la),  they refer it to a parallelogram which sits on the horizontal (Fig. lb), and they refer this parallelogram to a rectangle  (Fig. lc), which they then refer to a square (Fig. ld). I argued that, if one regards the final percept (the square) as the  ultimate prototype of the initial percept (the rotated parallelogram), then the initial percept is understood as a deviation  of the square under some linear transformation, T. However, the experiments show that, psychologically, the removal of T is  not performed in a single step. The process involves successive stages of prototypification,  REMOVE T  REMOVE REMOVE ROTATION SHEAR  REMOVE STRETCH f  a b c d FIG. 1. Global linear prototypification using the Iwasawa decomposition.  LIMITATION THEOREM 309  and one obtains them by successively removing from T three transformations in the following order: (1) rotation, (2) shear,  and (3) stretch, as shown in Fig. l. Observe now that the above linear transformations are used globally; that is, they act on  the entire shape. This means that they cannot handle, for example, the straightening of the arched back of a human being. As  noted above, to handle the latter situation, we need to look at the local actions of Lie groups.  2. THE IWASAWA DECOMPOSITION  Let GLz R be the group of linear transformations not involving reflection and acting on the plane; i.e., the positive general  linear group. Since any linear transformation can be represented by a matrix, one can consider GLz R to be a group of  matrices. It can be shown that any matrix in GL z R can be written as a product of three matrices of the form shown thus:  a 0 1 c cos 0 -sin 0 ~0 b)(0 1 )(sin 0 cos 0 ).  The first matrix, having only diagonal entries, must have two linearly independent eigenvectors and thus have the effect of  stretching the plane along the directions of those vectors. For example, a square, centered at the origin and aligned with the  usual basis vectors, is stretched into a rectangle. The second matrix has only one eigenvector and must tilt all lines  parallel to the other axis by an equal amount, thus causing a shear of the plane; e.g., a rectangle tilts, becoming a  parallelogram. Finally, the third matrix is a rotation by angle 0. Thus the group GLzR admits a decomposition  GL z R = Stretch - Shear - Rotation,  where Stretch is the group of orthogonal stretches, Shear is the group of shears, and Rotation is the group of rotations. This  decomposition is known as the Iwasawa decomposition.  Now let us return to the example of global linear prototypification shown in Fig. 1. If we say that the initial percept Fig.  la is related to the ultimate prototype, a square, by a linear transformation T of the plane, then it seems that the  successive prototypification results show that the Iwasawa decomposition has strong psychological salience. That is, T is  factorized in accord with this decomposition, and the successive reference is the removal of the subgroup factors of the  decomposition.  The purpose of the present paper is to extend the use of the Iwasawa decomposition to the local prototypification of complex  shape, and to show that, in its local use, the Iwasawa decomposition conforms to a limitation theorem that strongly restricts  the types of shapes that can emerge from the prototypification process. Nevertheless, we shall see again that the Iwasawa  decomposition is, psychologically, highly salient.  310 MICHAEL LEYTON  3. PSYCHOLOGICALLY NATURAL BASIS VECTORS  In order to provide an analysis using Lie groups, we need to decide how the action of any transformation is to be tied to the  space upon which it acts. According to Leyton (1984), there is a natural way in which this is psychologically done:  INTERACTION LAW. Symmetry axes become eigenspaces.  For example, let us return to the transition between the square (Fig. ld) and the rectangle (Fig. lc). Psychologically, the  salient axes of a square are the axes that bisect opposite sides (Leyton, 1984, 1986c, 1986d). However, these lines remain  over themselves in the transformation from a square to a rectangle: i.e., the lines become eigenspaces.  Leyton (1985, 1986c, 1987a) presents strong evidence to show that the Interaction Law also applies locally. That is, subjects  convert local symmetry axes into local eigenspaces (i.e., principle directions of transformations). Thus a primary conjecture  of this paper will be that the local prototypification of a shape rests on the shape's local symmetry structure. Therefore, in  order to develop a theory of local prototypification, we need to adopt a view as to what a local symmetry analysis looks like.  4. LOCAL SYMMETRY ANALYSIS  There are currently three local symmetry analyses in use at present: the Symmetric Axis Transform (SAT) of Blum (1973) the  Smoothed Local Symmetry (SLS ) of Brady (1983); and the Process-Inferring Symmetry Analysis (PISA) of Leyton (1987b, 1987c).  These can be regarded as natural local symmetry analyses, because they each are based on the set of reflectional symmetries  yielded by the curve's tangent vectors. In order to understand them, consider Fig. 2. It shows two points, A and B, on a curve  parameterized by arc length. Let n,, and nB be the unit normal vectors at A and B, respectively; and let to and tB be the unit  tangent vectors at A and B, respectively. Then, A and B are paired if their tangent vectors are symmetric about some vector t  (see Fig. 2). That is, t is a local mirror that reflects tR into tB. The three analyses-SAT, SLS, and PISA-are distinguished  by the particular point on the mirror that they choose as the reflection point. In the present paper, we shall adopt the  choice made by the SLS. This reflection point is the midpoint along AB, that is, the point shown as P in Fig. 2. The locus of  such points P forms an axis that can be curved (indicated by the dotted line in Fig. 2a). This locus is regarded as the  symmetry axis in the SLS.  Now consider the vector tp that is tangent to the SLS-axis (i.e., tangent to the locus of points P). The vector tp is not  necessarily coincident with t. As Brady and Asada (1984) put it, the angle 0 between t and tp is a local measure of the lack of  LIMITATION THEOREM 311  a  b  c  Fic. 2. (a) The Brady SLS. (b) A flexed symmetry. (c) A global symmetry.  symmetry of the shape. Thus when 0 = 0, the shape is either a flexed symmetry (Fig. 2b) or a global symmetry (Fig. 2c).  Now let us list here the equations, from Brady and Asada (1984), which we will find useful in our analysis later. Let a be the  angle between nA and AB, which is the same as the angle between nB and AB, as shown in Fig. 2a. Let a step of length ds along  the SLS-axis induce a step of length dsA along the contour at A, and a step -dSB along the contour at B. Let &A Ids and ds,lds  be denoted by sA and sB. Then Brady and Asada have  and  tP = (1 )  2 (tASA -tBSB)   tan =tan asA-sB. (2)  sA+sB   Furthermore, Brady and Asada give the following differential equation for the length h(s) of the cross section AB,  h'(s)=2It,I tan acos0, (3)  and the following equation relating the curvatures KP, KA, and KB, of, respectively, the SLS-axis, the contour at A, and the  contour at B:  KP = 0'+ 2 (KASB + KBSB). (4)  S. A LIE GROUP DESCRIPTION OF BRADY'S SLS  Recall the reason why we invoked a symmetry analysis such as Brady's: Given that we are interested in prototypification via  Lie groups, we must decide how a  312 MICHAEL LEYTON  group is to act on the underlying space which we wish to prototypify. The Interaction Law above proposes that a group is tied  to the underlying space by ensuring that the eigenspaces of the transformations are the symmetry axes of the space. It is for  this reason that the symmetry analysis becomes essential.  Let us begin by observing that there are four obvious coordinate systems yielded by the SLS. In all cases, the coordinate  origin is a point P on the SLS axis:  Type 1 coordinate system: Here the basis vectors are (1) the unit vector t and (2) its perpendicular unit vector u that has  its tail at P and points along the cross section towards B.  Type 2 coordinate system: Here the basis vectors describe the local structure of the SLS-axis. They are (1) the vector tp,  which is tangent to the SLS axis at P, and (2) the vector n, which is normal to the SLS-axis at P.  Type 3 coordinate system: A particular conflation of the above two systems: basis vectors tp and u.  Type 4 coordinate system: The other possible conflation of the above two systems: basis vectors t and np.  The four systems are defined by basis vectors taken from a pool of four vectors: t, u, tp, and np. Let us therefore go through  the four vectors in turn and see which ones are appropriate, via the Interaction Law, for defining the action of GLzR.  Recall first from Fig. 2a that the vector t defines the reflection axis between vectors to and tB. Therefore, by the  Interaction Law, t must be an eigenvector of the Lie group. More precisely, in keeping with our discussion of Fig. 1, we see  that t can be regarded as an eigenvector of the group Stretch in the Iwasawa decomposition GL z R = Stretch - Shear - Rotation.  Now let us consider the vector u. In Leyton (1984), I argue that the cross section of a two-dimensional figure tends to be  understood as a symmetry axis of the full cross section slice of the three-dimensional version of the figure. That is, the  cross section slice is understood as having a symmetry axis in the manner shown in Fig. 3a, and, by the Interaction Law, this  becomes an eigenspace of the deformation action D (Fig. 3b) which widens and contracts the slice, as it moves through space.  Now let us consider the two vectors that arise directly from the SLS-axis. The first is the vector t,. Because this vector is  tangent to the SLS-axis, and thus locally  FIG. 3. (a) A cross section assumed to be symmetrical. (b) A cross section, being deformed and moved through space.  LIMITATION THEOREM 313  describes the SLS-axis, one might at first conclude that it embodies symmetry and that it should thus be considered to be an  eigenspace. However, one should understand the extent to which the SLS-axis embodies symmetry. Any point P, on the SLS-axis,  is the midpoint of a cross section. That is, P embodies symmetry only in the sense of being a bisector of a line. In fact,  while the SLS-axis gives these midpoints, it does not give the actual axes of symmetry. These latter axes lie along the  vectors t, and their orientation is independent of the local orientation of the SLSaxis. Thus the SLS-axis should not be  understood as a symmetry axis, qua axis. It is in fact a curve on which one can define a continuous field of symmetry axes,  but these are not necessarily tangential to the curve. Corresponding considerations invalidate the SLS-normals, np, for such a  role.  The above discussion, therefore, implies that only two of the four vectors used in the four coordinate systems can become a  basis of eigenvectors for the action of subgroup Stretch in the Iwasawa decomposition GL Z R = Stretch - Shear - Rotation. The  vectors are t and u, and the valid coordinate system therefore seems to be that listed above as Type 1.  Now let us move on to the shear transformation. Observe that, in the transition from Fig. lc to lb, shear preserves one of the  eigenvectors of the stretch transformation; i.e., the horizontal axis is an eigenspace of both the stretch and the shear.  Therefore, either t or u must be an eigenvector of the shear. Now if we assume that shear is responsible for the local  asymmetry, then adding the shear transformation will map either (1) t to tp, or (2) u to np.  A number of reasons seem to argue against alternative (2). First, np is a vector that is differential-geometrically derived  from the tangent tp of the SLS-axis. Therefore, it would seem unnatural to choose np as a basis vector, because, from a  vector-space point of view, the derivation would have to be in the reverse; that is, tp would have to be derived from np  (after shear). Second, a little consideration will reveal to the reader that if np were chosen as the new basis vector (after  shear), then, if stretch were zero, the cross section could be arbitrarily large because shear could be arbitrarily large (the  cross section would project onto the constant np). However, psychologically, it seems that an arbitrarily large change in  cross section is explained as a stretch, not as a shear. Thus, due to these considerations, we will assume that the cross  section vector u is an eigenvector of shear, and that the combined map of stretch followed by shear sends t to tp. In short,  the combined map is the matrix of column vectors [t, (h/2) u)], where h is the width of the cross section. Finally, we can  regard the rotation matrix as rotating the basis, relative to some fixed basis in the ambient space.  In consequence, therefore, the SLS is given by a trajectory of transformations in GL Z R, and, under the Iwasawa decomposition  GL Z R = Stretch - Shear - Rotation, each such transformation is represented as an ordered multiple of matrices thus:  It, I cos 0 0 1 0 cos 0 -sin 0  ( 0 h/2)((2 1t,I sin 0)/h 1 )(sin 0 cos 0 )  Observe that these matrices allow us to assign a measurement of local increase in  314 MICHAEL LEYTON  regional area: The second and third matrices have determinant 1 and thus involve no area increase. Thus, the increase in area  of the entire transformation is given by the determinant of the first matrix and this is (h/2) It, I cos   Finally, by multiplying out the three above matrices, one finds that the full local linear transformation is represented by  I t' l cos cos B - It, I cos 0 sin B  t p sin 0 cos 9 + Z sin B - It, I sin O 'sin B + Z cos B  f). LOCAL PROTOTYPIFICATION  We have now defined the action of GL Z R upon a region of shape. We did this by using the SLS scheme in conjuction with the  psychological claim embodied in the Interaction Law.  It is now possible to investigate the local prototypification of shape by investigating the result of removing factors from  the Iwasawa decomposition. Figure 4 shows all possible factorizations (i.e., subproducts) of the decomposition. Each node in  the tree is a particular product or subproduct. The idea is that by starting with a general shape, i.e., given by the top-most  product, a successive prototypification is represented by a downward route in Fig. 4. Since, including the top node, there are  seven distinct products or subproducts in Fig. 4, there are a total of seven possible shapes distributed over three levels of  prototypihcation. It should be understood that the factors listed at each node correspond to non-trivial transformations;  e.g., if the subgroup Stretch is mentioned at a node, then the node represents non-trivial stretch. Results from the following  analysis will be used to state the Limitation Theorem to be presented later.  Eliminate Local Stretch  We begin by factorizing from the top node to the left-most subproduct in the  Stretch x Shear x Rotation  Shear X Rotation Stretch X Rotation Stretch X Shear  Shear Rotation Stretch  FIG. 4. All possible factorizations of the Iwasawa decomposition.  LIMITATION THEOREM 315  second level; that is, we begin by finding out what a shape region looks like if it has no stretch but has non-trivial shear  and rotation.  If there is no stretch, the stretch matrix equals the identity matrix, and, in particular, the top diagonal entry of that  matrix, It, I cos 0, is unity. This implies that  ItpI zA0 and cos000. (5) No stretch also implies that  h'(s)=0.  Combining this last equation with Eq. (3) in Section 4, we obtain 0=2 Itp l tan a cos o  which implies that  tan g = 0 or cos 0 = 0 or tp i =0.  However, the second and third alternatives were ruled out by (5) above. Therefore, we have tan a = 0, which implies that a =  0, which implies that t,, is parallel to tB.  However, this means that vectors (t, sA - t,sB) and (t, - tB) are parallel. But the former vector is t, and the latter vector  is t. This means that 0 = 0. Therefore, there is no shear. Thus we conclude that it is impossible to have local shear without  local stretch. In consequence, the non-trivial product, Shear - Rotation, cannot exist.  Finally, descending from the Shear - Rotation node in the tree, we have the separate nodes Shear and Rotation. The former case  (shear-only) cannot exist, because, as we have just seen, one requires non-trivial stretch for non-trivial shear. However, the  latter case of rotation-only can exist and is the flexed symmetry (Fig. 2b).  Eliminate Local Shear  We next factorize from the top node to the middle subproduct in the second level; that is, we find out what a shape region  looks like if it has no shear but has non-trivial stretch and rotation.  First observe that if we have no shear, then  Therefore, by Eq. (2), in Section 4,  0=tan a SA +SB. (6) A B  This leads to two cases:  316 MICHAEL LEYTON  Case 1. a = 0. Under this case, Eq. (3) implies that  h'(s)=0  which implies that stretch has been eliminated. Thus we have shown that the elimination of shear requires the elimination of  stretch. Therefore, under this case, the product Stretch - Rotation cannot exist. Note that the Rotation node, below it, is  possible, and is a flexed symmetry.  Case 2. a 0 0. By Eq. (6), we therefore have  SA =SB.  Now let P be at some point s along the SLS-axis. The cross section at s + as (along that axis) has endpoints ds,, to and  dSBtl. But since s', = sB, we have I dsl tA I = I dSBtB 1. Therefore, the cross section at s + as is parallel to that at s,  which means that the cross section vector u does not rotate. But this means that there is no rotation in the local frame.  Thus, under this case, we have proved that the elimination of shear requires the elimination of rotation. Therefore under this  case one cannot have the product Stretch - Rotation, and the only condition left is the condition Stretch.  But observe that since there is no shear, tp lies along t, and since there is no rotation, t does not rotate, which means that  tp does not rotate, which means that the SLS-axis has no curvature. However, substituting the conditions xP = 0, 0, and sA =ss  into Eq. (4), we obtain  hA = _KB  which is a global symmetry.  Summarizing the no-shear condition, we have the following: There is no Stretch - Rotation condition, and the two separate  conditions Rotation and Stretch are the flexed and global symmetries, respectively.  Eliminate Local Rotation  We come now to the right-most node of the middle level of prototypification. The absence of local rotation means that the  cross sections must be parallel. Impose now a Cartesian (x, y)-plane such that the cross sections are parallel to the y-axis.  Then each cross section is coincident with some line of the form x = c, for some c. Now let the two sides of the SLS be curves  C, and Cz in the plane. The tangents to the curve C, must make the same angle to each cross section x = c, as the tangents to  the curve CZ (by the SLS condition). This means that the curves C, and CZ must be reflectionally symmetric about the x-axis.  Therefore, the curves are globally symmetric. This proves the impossibility of the Stretch - Shear condition, and the  possibility of only the stretch condition.  LIMITATION THEOREM 317  RESTRICTION AND PSYCHOLOGICAL SALIENCE  Figure 5 tabulates the results of the previous section. The first important point to observe is that, mathematically, the  results of this analysis are highly restrictive: only two prototypes exist out of a set of possible six. This gives a major  difference between the results of local prototypification and the results of global prototypification. In the global case,  there is an allowable shape at each node of the hierarchy. For example, given a rotated parallelogram at the top node, the  middle level of nodes yields, from left to right, a rotated rhombus, a rotated rectangle, and a non-rotated parallelogram, and  the bottom level of nodes yields, from left to right, a rhombus, a rotated square, and a rectangle. Thus, although,  psychologically, the global prototypification path is downwards through only the right-most nodes (Stretch - Shear - Rotation  --+ Stretch - Shear -> Stretch), all other nodes are mathematically possible. In the local case, most nodes are not  mathematically possible.  A particular aspect of these conclusions should be emphasized: A major difference between the results for local  prototypification and global prototypification is that in the local case there are no shapes on the middle level. That is,  local prototypification with respect to a single member of the Iwasawa decomposition is impossible. This gives us the  Limitation Theorem to which our argument has been directed:  Stretch x Shear x Rotation  Shear x Rotation Stretch x Rotation Stretch x Shear  >>-<Z:~_  Shear Rotation Stretch  4  FIG. 5. The only possible shapes resulting from the factorizations of the Iwasawa decomposition used locally to characterize  the SLS.  318 MICHAEL LEYTON  LIMITATION THEOREM. Let a shape be locally characterized by the Iwasawa decomposition, GL z R = Stretch - Shear - Rotation,  defined by the eigenvector basis yielded by the SLS symmetry vectors under the Interaction Law. Then the factorization of one  of the Iwasawa subgroups necessarily involves the factorization of one of the other Iwasawa subgroups.  Despite the restrictiveness of this result, it is important to observe that the prototypification process, shown in Fig. 5,  leads to two shapes that have considerable psychological salience: the flexed symmetry and the global symmetry. This gives  psychological support for the validity of the method we have chosen. For it could have been the case that, having decided upon  the Iwasawa decomposition, applied it to the SLS, and used the Type 1 coordinate system rather than the others, we could have  ended up with shapes that were psychologically obscure. That is, there are a number of crucial stages at which our analysis  could have gone wrong. This is strongly illustrated, as follows.  In Leyton (1985, final section) the coordinate system that was chosen was not (t, u), but that which we have given here as  Type 2 (t,, n,), i.e., that deriving entirely from the SLS-axis (i.e., having the SLS tangent and normal as basis vectors).  Pro to typification with respect to this coordinate system, in fact, yields a shape at the middle-level node Stretch - Shear.  The shape is shown in Fig. 6. Because there is no local rotation in this shape, the axis is straight. However, as shown in the  figure, there is changing shear (where shear is defined as mapping the normal line to the cross section line), and there is  changing stretch.  Nevertheless, observe that although the axis is straight, the shape itself does not appear to be particularly distinguishable  from a general wave-like shape with a curved axis. According to our discussion in Section 5, this lack of psychological  salience of the straight-axis example would be due to the fact that the axis is not an axis of symmetry. The actual local  symmetry axes lie at arbitrary orientations along the straight SLS-axis. Thus, a straight SLS-axis does not represent any  greater degree of actual symmetrization. That is, no local prototypification has actually occurred in the straigthening.  This shows that the stages in our argument were crucial. In particular, if we had not chosen the Type 1 coordinate system, and  therefore adhered to the Interaction Law, the results would have been psychologically meaningless.  FIG. 6. A demonstration that the use of a frame that does not accord with the Interaction Law does not lead to a significantly  more prototypical shape, upon factorization. Here the factorized subgroup is Rotation.  LIMITATION THEOREM 319  8. SUMMARY  It was shown, in previous work, that subjects decompose the global linear prototypification of shape into separate stretch,  shear, and rotation components, i.e., that they use the Iwasawa decomposition. The present paper extended these  decompositional results to prototypification that varies differentiably across a region-a requirement for complex shape.  Our argument began with the local version of the Interaction Law. This states that local symmetry axes become local  eigenspaces under locally assigned transformations. The law is substantially validated by previous experimental work. The  local use of the Interaction Law requires, as input to the prototypification process, a local symmetry analysis, and the  analysis we chose was the Smoothed Local Symmetry of Brady. Furthermore, four alternative local frames were considered in  order to characterize the SLS by a moving frame. However, we found that only one of the alternatives satisfies the Interaction  Law. That is, only in this alternative, is the frame a basis of eigenvectors which are, simultaneously, local symmetry  vectors. Thus, using this basis, the SLS was characterized as a trajectory through the general linear group.  With this machinery, prototypifcation became possible (1) by applying the Iwasawa decomposition at each point of the group  trajectory, and (2) by factorizing the Iwasawa subgroups. The crucial limitation theorem which states that the factorization  of one subgroup necessarily involves the factorization of one of the other subgroups was then proved. Thus we found that one  level of prototypification is impossible. In addition, it was shown that two levels of prototypification can lead to only a  global or a flexed symmetry. Therefore, these results determine that the shapes that can result from the local use of the  Iwasawa decomposition are much more restricted than the shapes that can result from the global use of the decomposition.  However, the results also show that, in the local case, the shapes yielded by the group-factorization process are highly  salient as prototypes. This strongly validates our method. Further validation was obtained by showing that if a moving frame  were chosen in which the Interaction Law did not hold, the resulting shapes would, psychologically, not be significantly  prototypical.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  I thank Whitman Richards for useful suggestions on the presentation of this material. This research was supported by NSF Grant  IST-8418164 and was carried out while the author was at Harvard University.  REFERENCES  BLUM, H. (1973). Biological shape and visual science (part 1). Journal of Theoretical Biology, 38, 205-287.  320 MICHAEL LEPTON  BRADY, M. (1983). Criteria for Representations of Shape. In A. Rosenfield & J. Beck (Eds.), Human and Machine Vision.  Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  BRADY, M., & ASADA, H. (1984). Smoothed local symmetries and their implementation. The International Journal of Robotics  Research, 3, 36-61.  LEPTON, M. (1984). Perceptual organization as nested control. Biological Cybernetics, 51, 141-153. LEPTON, M. (1985).  Generative systems of analyzers. Computer Vision, Graphics, and Image Processing, 32, 201-241.  LEPTON, M. (1986a). Principles of information structure common to six levels of the human cognitive system. Information  Sciences, 38, 1-120.  LEPTON, M. (1986b). A theory of information structure. I. General principles. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 30, 103-160.  LEPTON, M. (1986c). A theory of information structure. II. A theory of perceptual organization. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 30, 257-305.  LEPTON, M. (1987a). Nested structures of control: An intuitive view. Computer Vision, Graphics, and Image Processing, 37,  20-53.  LEPTON, M. (1987b). Symmetry curvature duality. Computer Vision, Graphics, and Image Processing, 38, 327-341.  LEPTON, M. (1987c). A process-grammar for shape. Artificial Intelligence, in press.  MARK, D., & NISHIHARA, H. K. (1978). Representation and recognition of the spatial organization of three-dimensional shapes.  Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Ser. B, 200, 169-294. PENTLAND, A. P. (1986). Perceptual organization and the  representation of natural form. Artificial Intelligence, in press.  ROSCH, E. (1978). Principles of categorization. In E. Rosch & B. B. Lloyd (Eds.), Cognition and Categorization. Hillsdale, NJ:  Erlbaum.  RECEIVED: June 22, 1986