10.1016/0022-2496(87)90017-4
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 31, 211-218 (1987)  Book Review  Learning Syntax with Stacks and Buffers  ROBERT C. BERWICK. The Acquisition of Syntactic Knowledge. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1985. Pp. ix + 368. $27.50.  Reviewed by EDWIN WILLIAMS  The author is Associate Professor of Computer Science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he also obtained his  Ph.D. He has recently received a Presidential Young Investigator Award. His primary research include formal learning theory,  computational complexity and natural language, and parsing and linguistic theory. His recent books include The grammatical  basis of linguistic performance (with A. Weinberg, MIT Press, 1984) and Computational complexity and natural language (MIT  Press, in press).  The reviewer is Professor of Linguistics at the University of Massachusetts. His primary research interest is syntax, and his  recent work includes Introduction to the theory of grammar (with H. van Riemstdijk, MIT Press, 1986).  Robert Berwick's book The Acquisition of Syntactic Knowledge is most remarkable for having found a learning problem whose  detailed algorithmization is neither trivial nor impossible, and he has consequently opened up a vein of research that will  not be exhausted for some time. The system he reports on is a full-scale working program that learns to parse sentences of  natural languages. The system is very clean and highly rationalized on linguistic, psychological, and computational grounds.  It demonstrates in a very concrete way the consequences of some general ideas about language learning. In this review I will  outline Berwick's accomplishment and give some general critiques of the ideas that lie behind it.  The learning program learns the rules by which the Marcus parser parses sentences. The Marcus parser (Marcus, 1980) is a  "bottom-up" limited look-ahead syntactic parser for English, written by M. Marcus as his Ph.D. dissertation at MIT. The parser  is not simply a recognizer for English; it also builds a phrase marker, or tree, for the surface structure of each sentence  that it parses.  Marcus supplied his parser with a full knowledge of English. Berwick's task to build a learning program that would learn, from  exposure to examples, the rules that constitute the Marcus parser's knowledge of language.  The first step was to clean up the Marcus parser in various ways. Berwick supplies a much simplified version of the parser,  while retaining the essential characteristics. In particular, he posits a far more restricted rule format. The reason is  clear: the more restricted the rule format, the easier it will be to learn the rules. 211  0022-2496/87 $3.00  Copyright (0 1987 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  212 BOOK REVIEWS  Berwick's system gives a very concrete lesson in this linguistic truism. The rules that Marcus used were so varied in  character that it is hard to imagine in fact what kind of system could have learned them.  The parser has a push-down stack, on which it stores parsed pieces of the sentence under consideration, and an input buffer,  of which the first three cells are available for inspection and manipulation by the parser. A "parsing action" consists of  inspecting the top of the stack and the three cells of the input buffer, and then performing some action, such as attaching  the first element of the input buffer to the phrase in the top of the stack. For example, if a NP is on the top of the stack,  and the input buffer contains an adjective, then this adjective would be removed from the input buffer and attached to the NP.  There are only three basic operations that can be performed (attach, switch first two buffer cells, and insert an item) so the  space of possible rules is quite small. This restriction in the space of rules is the single most important thing that makes  the learning possible.  Although the actual lisp code is not given, the workings of the parser and of the learning mechanisms are given in explicit  enough detail that the algorithm can be fully understood, and no doubt it could be coded up with little further insight  required. In this I think the exposition hits just the right balance of detail and generality. On one point thought I think  the text is unnecessarily obscure. A format for parsing rules is given in terms of X-bar theory, the theory of phrase types  that "decomposes" the names of the phrases into more primitive "features"; so, the category Noun, for example, rather than  being understood as a primitive category, is "+Noun, -Verb" and so on for the rest of the categories. Berwick gives all of his  rules in this notation, instead of the more familiar N, V, A, P notation, and because this notation is difficult to read, his  rules cannot be apprehended at a glance, but must be puzzled out individually. Of course, the notation serves a theoretical  purpose: the feature decomposition permits generalization that the more familiar notation does not. But it would have been  better to have used the notation only in those few places where it was crucial and use the more familiar elsewhere; this is  the practice of the majority of linguists. I copied the chart on p. 65 of all these X-bar notations onto the back cover of the  book, and then rewrote the rules in the simpler notation as I encountered them.  The learning procedure, as I have indicated above, is a very simple, orderly business. If the parser reaches a point in a  parse in which there is no applicable rule. and it has not completed the parse of the sentence, it enters its learning mode.  It takes the current state of the parser at the point of failure as the "structural description" of a new parse rule and tries  in turn each of the few parsing actions (attach, etc.) as the "structural change" of the rule. Since there are only three  actions to try, and they are always tried in the same order, this rule formulation is completely deterministic. If the rule so  derived permits completion of the parse, then the new rule is added to the list of the parser's rules.  Before it is added to the list, though, it is generalized with other rules that are sufficiently similar to it. The  generalization is done by "intersecting" the contexts of the rules in a very simple way, reminiscent of the notion of "version  spaces."  BOOK REVIEWS 213  The learning procedure is clearly "error driven" and "data driven" in the sense that it is not "looking" for any particular  rules to learn, but is simply solving problems that arise in the parse. The generalizing rules themselves are hardly specific  to language learning; any learning that consisted of associating actions with triggering environment might use the same simple  procedures. Berwick's program provides an experimental ground in the domain of language for such procedures, but at the same  time this approach to language learning is now somewhat out of step with the current parametric approaches, but more on this  A feature of the system to which Berwick gives only passing attention is that there is no learning of rules except for the  parsing rules. Berwick intends these rules to fully characterize the language that is being learned; in other words, there are  no grammar rules except for these parsing rules. There are are several potential problems with this conception. The parsing  rules in general have nogrammatical analog. For example, the attach rules have as their closest analog the grammar rules of  phrase structure. However, there is nothing to prevent the attach operation from having a structural description that could  not be matched in a phase structure rule. For example, suppose that a complementizer (that in that 'John was here) could be  prefixed to a clause only if the subject of that clause contained a definite article. This is a restriction that Berwick's  parser would be able to enforce, but it could have no analog in a system of phrase structure rules. The role of phrase  structure rules in the grammar is very much up in the air at the moment, but Berwick presents his alternative with no evidence  favoring it over the standard view.  A second question has to do with the role of the parser. Will the optimal treebuilder for sentences of a language also be an  acceptor for the language, that is, a device that will build trees for all and only all of the sentences of the language? It  may well be that these two tasks are best separated. Suppose, for example, that the parser could assign a grammatical  representation to all English auxiliary strings, including the ungrammatical ones such as "John have could leave," etc. Would  it suit its central purpose (i.e., assigning correct trees to correct strings) less well for that? In fact, the parser itself  could no doubt be made more efficient as a tree assigner if its role as an acceptor were eliminated. Of course, there must be  some account of ungrammaticality, but this may reside in the language production device, or in a speaker-hearer neutral  specification of the rules of the language, that is, the grammar. There is no question that Berwick's rules are not this  grammar (they could not directly be used by a production system, for example), and it remains unclear what relation they might  have to grammar rules.  The relation of parsing rules to grammar rules is especially unclear in the case of Wh constructions: relatives, questions,  etc. Here, the parsing rule deposits a "trace" in the missing object position of such sentences as "Who did John see-", but no  rule is responsible for linking this trace to the Wh word to which it is bound. Thus, the parser is somewhat short of deriving  what a grammarian would call surface structure. There are some speculative remarks on how this might be accomplished (p. 204)  but the mechanisms clearly would take the parser to a new level of complication.  214 BOOK REVIEWS  Another problem with the Wh rule is that it can never recognize Wh movement from any position other than an obligatory  argument position. This is because the "insert trace" operation is ordered last (in both parsing and in acquisition) after the  other operations, so a trace is posited only as a last resort. This can arise only when some particular phrase is expected in  the string and not found. The ordering has its own virtues, which we will take up shortly, but besides making impossible the  identification of non-argument traces, it also would seem to make impossible the identification of distantly bound argument  traces, since these bindings are to be mediated by traces in COMP (p.205), and these are themselves not argument traces, and  so will not be posited, by the parser or by the learner. In sum, we must conclude that the story on Wh movement is only half  worked out there.  Despite the descriptive shortcomings (Wh movement constructions, principally) and the confusion of grammar rule and parser  rule (perhaps deliberate), the system that Berwick details gives a unique test to certain ideas about language learning.  The first of these ideas is called the "subset principle."Languages, at least in some of their structure, do not differ from  one another randomly, but rather the differences occur on specific dimensions. So, for example, consider the questions of  whether a language has a particular optional movement rule. Having the rule or not is a dimension along which languages can  vary (the dimension has only two values). All else held equal, the language that does not have the rule (call it L- ) will be  a subset of the language that does have the rule (L+ ); this is because all of the structures in L - are also in L +, but L +  has as well all of the structures transformed by the movement rule. So these two languages stand in the subset relation.  It is relatively simple to see how the subset relation would cause a special problem for learning from "positive data" only,  that is, from exposure to sentences of the language alone, unenriched by information about what is NOT grammatical. Suppose  that the language to be learned were the smaller of two languages in the subset relation-the learner could never with  certainty know this, as no single sentence would ever prove that the language was not the large one. If the subset relation  holds then the language first; as he encounters data inconsistent with that language, he posits the smallest language  consistent with what he has heard so far. This procedure, dictated by the subset principle, guarantees an inevitable march  towards the correct grammar, with no errors, and no need for "negative" evidence. So, for example, in the case of the two  languages just mentioned, L- will be the learner's first guess; if he is exposed to L-, then he will know it from the start;  if, on the other hand, he is exposed to L+, then some sentence from L+-L- will prompt him to revise his guess. On the other  hand, if the learner's first guess were L+, no single example would ever disconfirm this.  Berwick does a thorough job of exploring the consequences of this idea in various domains of acquisition. This idea is  presently perhaps the main guiding idea in the juncture of grammatical studies and acquisition studies, because of the wide  range of rather precise predictions it is capable of in heterogeneous domains. Previous to Berwick it has been applied to the  parametric analysis of X-bar theory (Williams, 1978, 1981; where it is called the "Principle of Minimum Falsifiability"  BOOK REVIEWS 215  (PMF)) and to the theory of filters (Chomsky and Lasnik, 1977, where it is called "the logic of markedness"). Subsequently, it  has been applied to a wide range of linguistic constructions, including binding theory (Wexler and Manzini, in press),  "subject pro drop" (Hyams, 1983, 1986), and elsewhere. In each case, where some range of variability exists, the subset  principle predicts that the child's first guess will be the smaller language, and he will advance to the larger language only  under prodding of data from the complement of the two languages.  In a "parameterized" model of Universal Grammar (UG) the subset principle has a simple application. A parameterized model of  UG is a model in which the substantive principles of grammar are universal, but with certain features of the principles left  open, to be fixed by experience. For example, all languages have phrases, and the phrases have heads; the position of the head  in its phrase is left open, to be fixed by the child on the basis of the language he is exposed to. Often, the options  permitted in the fixing of a parameter are ordered in the subset relation, in that fixing the parameter one way will give a  subset of the language obtained by fixing it another way. The role of the subset principle in such cases is straightforward:  let the option giving the smallest language be the initial hypothesis about the fixing of a parameter.  It is important to realize though that it is not necessary for the languages described by a range of parameter settings to be  in the subset relation in order for learning to procede without evidence. For example, consider the infinite class of  languages formed from some language L:  {L;} = {Ai, L+ {i} }.  No two L; are in the subset relation, yet the class is identifiable in the limit, as exposure to the single positive instance  of i serves to identify the language as L;. This class satisfies Angluin's (1978) theorem (cited by Berwick, p. 236), which  simply means that the subset principle itself is not necessary.  In fact, the subset relation is the cause of learning problems, and the ordering of the guessed languages from smallest to  largest is the solution to that problem. Some, for example, Wexler and Manzini (in press), have suggested that all parameters  describe sets of languages in the subset relation, but this is motivated neither linguistically nor by considerations of  learning from positive evidence only.  The subset principle is of great interest principally because it is a precise formalization of the PMF, or the logic of  markedness, or the general idea that language learning should proceed without "negative evidence." It may, however, not be the  empirically correct means of achieving this end. Consider, for example, the "pro drop" phenomenon: in some languages  understood subjects of clauses can be dropped (yes in Italian, no in English). Since pro drop languages can retain their  subjects as well, clearly the subset principle will tell us that the child's initial guess should be that the language he is  exposed to is not pro drop (pd-), and only exposure to sentences with their subjects missing should prompt revision of the  grammar to pd+. However, Hyams, in an extensive empirical investigation of the acquisition of pro drop and non pro drop  languages, has suggested that the initial  216 BOOK REVIEWS  guess is rather that the language is pro drop, counter to the prediction of the subset principle. Her hypothesis raises the  question: How then does the child learn that his language is not pro drop, if in fact it is not? Her answer is that there will  be other clues; for example, only non pro drop languages will have expletive, or referentially empty, subjects, like "it" and  "there" in English. These simple data will trigger the advance to pd-.  But if this is correct, then this means that the two languages, pd + and pd-, will not be in the subset relation: pd + will  have pro dropped sentences that pd- lacks, and pd - will have expletive subsets that pd - lacks. The reason that acquisition  can proceed in such a situation is that there is smple triggering data for both language types, and in fact the triggering  mechanism is strictly positive data. The subset principle cannot strictly speaking be true then; then PMF, on the other hand,  which says that alternative hypotheses must be ordered so as to maximize falsifiability, is a full degree of magnitude less  formal than the subset principle.  Berwick conceives of the subset principle as operating at the level of design of the learner. In other words, the learner does  not compute what is a subset of what in order to know what the initial hypothesis is, rather, the learner is built so as to  always guarantee that the first guess will be the smallest language, but without computing which it is. Others, notably Wexler  and Manzini (in press), have taken the opposite view, that the learner actively computes the subset relations, though no one  has succeeded in turning this into an empirical question. It is difficult to see what the empirical difference would be unless  the computation interacted with learning in some way.  We have spoken so far of dimensions of variation as though they were specified in advance, and the points on the dimensions  specified as well. In the most current "parametric" models of Universal Grammar (UG), this is typical; learning reduces to  answering a number of prespecified questions each of whose answers is drawn from a small set of possibilities, and these  possibilities are furthermore ordered by the subset principle, the PMF, or some such principle. Berwick's model is not exactly  this, and in fact most resembles a slightly earlier stage of the development of ideas about grammar and UG. His system is  capable of learning rules, in the sense of the term embodied in earlier work in generative grammar, codified in Chomsky  (1965): operations with a "structural description" and an action; the structural descriptions are quite limited, consisting of  a description of the machine at a given state of parsing, and the actions are quite limited as well, there being only three,  but the system nevertheless resembles much more a general rule learning model of grammatical acquisition rather than a  "parametric" model. In fact, though, the current fashion for parametric models is perhaps an overreaction to the deep failure  of the generalized transformational rule writing system, and in fact Berwick has found a modest system in between the two in  descriptive power and has shown in the most concrete way that the learning of the rules in this system is a feasible thing. In  any case, the learning of language is surely not all reducible to the setting of parameters; it is very likely that some  aspects of structure are learned by the kind of system that Berwick outlines, though perhaps not the aspects of structure that  he  BOOK REVIEWS 217  treats, for if anything is learned by mere parameter setting, it will be the "core" rules of phrase structure, Wh movement,  and NP movement. A test of the pure parameter setting model on the scale of Berwick's project has yet to be done.  A further principle or set of principles that is tested in Berwick's model of language learning is a kind of conservatism.  First, there is a conservatism built into the order of grammar changes that are entertained when a parse fails. The "attach"  rules are tried first, these corresponding most closely to the linguist's phrase structure rules, and only if they fail are  the more transformational operations considered-the switch buffer cell operation and the insert trace operation. One probably  unintended consequence of this is that the position of Wh trace in nonobligatory positions will never occur, and this is  surely wrong (Where did John think that Bill saw Mary?).  A further conservative aspect of the learner is its refusal to recursively enter the learning mode. In other words, it is  conceivable that in the course of making one grammar change, the learner could encounter the need to make another grammar  change; one could easily imagine this exploding wildly, entirely restructuring the grammar in one fell swoop. The claim that  the learning mechanism cannot call itself makes a very strong claim about the nature of the learning problem-everything that  needs to be learned lies near the surface of the language and can be learned on its own, apart from other things that must be  learned. This would seem to keep the problem tame in a way that need not be and forces the learning to be interestingly  incremental. I wish that Berwick has supplied more commentary on the empirical nature of the claim embodied by this  prohibition of recursion. I wonder if the classes of languages that can be learned by a non-recursive learning procedure form  a mathematically interesting subclass.  The question of the mutual independence of the various episodes of learning that make up the total act of learning a language  arises most naturally in the context of parameterized models of language. One can insist, as Wexler and Manzini (in press)  recently have, that the parameters be independent of one another, in the sense that the ordering of hypotheses connected with  one parameter is independent of conclusions about the setting of other parameters.  Independence guarantees incremental learning; if the parameters were so mutually interdependent that it were necessary to set  every parameter at the same time, and the evidence for the setting was the sum total of the evidence relevant to each of the  parameters individually, then it is not clear that the parametric model has any advantage over the general "evaluation" metric  model of grammar acquisition, as laid out in Chomsky (1965), for example.  A substitute for independence would be a fixed ordering of the setting of parameters. T. Roeper has mentionted to me the  following example. Languages generally have anaphoric elements that require antecedents, and there is generally some  restriction on how far away the antecedent can be (for example, can the antecedent be in a previous clause or not; witness the  ungrammaticality of "*John thinks that Mary likes himself'). This domain of antecedency must be learned by the child on the  basis of relevant examples from the language. Languages also have  218 BOOK REVIEWS  pronouns, which do not need antecendents, but when they have antecendents they can have them arbitrarily far away. Now a child  who observes an element with an antecedent at some distance from it can decide one of two things: first, that the element is a  pronoun; or second, that the element is an anaphor, and the domain of antecedency is at least big enough to include the  antecedent in that sentence. But this requires the learning of two things simultaneously: the identity of an element as  pronoun or anaphor and the fixing of the domain of antecedency. Often, as in this example, there will be multiple ways to set  pairs, or triples, etc., of parameters compatible with a given piece of data. But if the parameters are ordered, then at most  one will be eligible to be set at a given time, whether or not the parameters are dependent on one another, and the learning  can proceed incrementally.  REFERENCES  ANCLUIN, D. (1978). Inference of reversible languages. Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery, 29, 741-765.  CHOMSKY, N. (1965). Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. CHOMSKY, N., & LASNIK, H. (1977). Filters  and control. Linguistic Inquiry, 8, 425-504. HYAMS, N. (1983). The acquisition of parameterized grammars. Ph.D. dissertation,  CUNY, New York. HYAMs, N. (1986). Language acquisition and the theory of parameters. Dordrecht: Reidel.  MARCUS, M. (1980). A theory of syntactic recognition for natural language. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.  WEXLER, K. & R. MANZINI (in press). Parameters, and learnability in binding theory. In T. Roeper and E. Williams (Eds.),  Parameters and Linguistic Theory. Dordrecht: Reidel.  WILLIAMs, E. (1978). The natural philosophy of language acquisition, manuscript (1976), and presentation, Language Acquisition  Workshop, Five Colleges Inc.  WILLIAMs, E. (1981). Language acquisition, markedness, and phrase structure. In Tavakolian (Ed.), Language acquisition and  linguistic theory. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.  Printed in Belgium