10.1016/0022-2496(87)90026-5
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 31, 441-448 (1987  Book Reviews  From a Line Drawing to a Polyhedron  KOKICHI SUGIHARA. The Machine Interpretation of Line Drawings. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press Series on Artificial Intelligence, MIT  Press, 1986. Pp. x + 233. $30.00.  Reviewed by WALTER WHITELEY  The author obtained his advanced training in the Engineering Division of the University of Tokyo and is currently an Associate  Professor in the Department of Mathematical Engineering and Instrumentation Physics at that university. His primary research  interests involve the topics of the book under review and related matroid theory and combinatorial algorithms.  The reviewer is a Professor at Champlain Regional College, Montreal, and Chercheur Invite and Co-Director of the Structural  Topology Research Group at the Universite de Montreal. He has contributed chapters to various books in his primary research  area, which is theory and application of the combinatorics and geometry of rigid structures.  How can a computer recover a spatial polyhedron (a plane faced solid object in space) from a single view? That is the basic  problem addressed by Sugihara's book. Summing up a decade of contributions to the field, Sugihara presents his computer  algorithm for converting an appropriately general line drawing of the visible edges, or all the edges, into a set of possible  spatial objects, with some correction of the picture if necessary.  The algorithm is presented in four modules for the hidden-part-eliminated pictures (standard camera pictures), with variants  for hidden-part-drawn pictures (designer's line drawings).  Module I (Chap. 2): This labels the edges in the line drawing by boundary orientation (arrows), and convexity (+, - signs),  using the Huffman-Clowes labelling system to produce candidates for spatial reconstruction.  Module II (Chaps. 3, 4, and 5): From a labelled picture, this extracts a "spatial structure" of layered polygonal faces and  applies a strict linear algebra criterion to find the convex cone of possible spatial objects which project to the labelled  line drawing.  Requests for reprints should be sent to Walter J. Whiteley, Mathematics Department, Champlain Regional College, 900 Riverside  Drive, St. Lambert, Quebec, Canada J4P 3P2.  441  0022-2496/87 $3.00  Copyright (P^) 1987 by Academic Press, Inc.  480/31/4-10 All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  442  BOOK REVIEWS  Module III (Chaps. 6, 7, and 8): An innovative correction procedure constructs good spatial objects in the face of small  errors in the diagram, selecting a correct subset of the picture by a combinatorial algorithm and correcting the position of  the remaining vertices.  Module IV (Chaps. 9 and 10): This incorporates additional data, such as a few heights, or surface shading, to give a unique  spatial polyhedron. The methods include a combinatorial criterion for selecting independent heights in the object and  optimization techniques for incorporating surface cues.  The steps are presented clearly and effectively with examples, mathematical sophistication, and, with one exception which is  discussed below, convincing arguments that the modules are correct and efficient for the selected inputs. The book shows  occasional traces of unidiomatic English (polyhedrons, rather than polyhedra, as the plural of polyhedron) but it is, on the  whole, very readable and free of misprints.  For a reader who has examined such problems, at least briefly, Sugihara's book is a pleasant, coherent survey of one complete  approach to the problem of machine reconstruction of polyhedra from line drawings. The book neither gives, nor claims to give,  a complete survey of the field, although Sugihara includes a brief historical survey in the Introduction and some connections  to alternate, more geometric approaches in the final chapter.  HIDDEN-PART-ELIMINATED PICTURES  As an algorithm for pure machine perception, the methods described are impressive but incomplete. The class of objects and the  corresponding line drawings are, of necessity, restricted by a number of assumptions. Let me trace two simple examples (Figs.  IA and 113) through the first three modules, with comments along the way.  For drawings drawn from machine vision, which are hidden-part-eliminated, the first module labels the lines, assuming that no  edge belongs to more than two faces and the observer (or the camera) is not coplanar with any two non-collinear edges in the  object (Assumptions 2.2 and 2.5). The labelling identifies boundary edges (arrows with the visible face on the right side,  from tail to head) and convex (+ ) and concave (-) edges between two visible faces. The labelling may not be unique, since we  do not know the structure of any hidden edges or faces. Figures 2C-2H show some, but not all, of the "consistent" labellings  for our examples. Certain vertex conditions apply to the labelling, which say that the convexity and boundary arrangements are  possible in 3-space at this one vertex. The picture is rejected if no consistent labelling exists.  The second module takes any labelled picture and identifies a corresponding incidence structure of vertices V, faces F  (polygonal regions in the diagram), and incidences R c V x F when a vertex lies on a face. This is extended to a spatial  BOOK REVIEWS 443  A  4  FIGURE 1  structure with a set T of statements about the layering of faces ("behind," "properly behind," "in front of," and "properly in  front of" applied to selected vertex face pairs). Figure 2 shows two selected labellings and the corresponding set of vertices  v; and faces f for this labelling. The incidences (v;, f) in R are evident in this diagram. Sample layering information would  be "v2 is properly behind fl" in Figure 2C, since the edge f f2 is convex ( + ).  The incidence structure is converted into a system of homogeneous linear equations: (v;, f) in R becomes a;x; + b; yi + z; +  c; = 0, where a., b.., c, are unknown parameters for a non-vertical plane, x;, y; are the known coordinates of the vertex in  the picture, and z; is the unknown height of the vertex. The layering information produces homogeneous linear inequalities:  "v, is properly behind f2" becomes a2 x1 + b2 YI + z, + c2 < 0, since the viewer is assumed to be "above" the picture. Modulo  round-off errors in a digital computer, this system of JR1 equations, and (TI inequalities in I VI + 31FI variables are solved  for a cone of possible spatial objects. If there is no solution, the picture is incorrect in a strict sense. The picture in  Fig. 2A is correct, with a solution cone of dimension 5-showing that the heights of the five vertices can be chosen  independently. The picture in Fig. 2B is incorrect- it is not the projection (either orthogonal or central) of a spatial  polyhedron, with this labelling. Simple linear algebra shows that the solution cone for a correct picture has dimension at  least 4-reflecting 3 free choices  444 BOOK REVIEWS  A  IV1=5 IF1=4 IRI=12 IR1 =12, 13 =1V1+31F1-4  C  D  IVI=6 IF1=4 IRI=15 IR1 =15 > 14 =M +31P-4 I+31F1-4  FIGURE 2  for the position of a first plane and one more choice of a vertical scale. We note that Sugihara's analysis, implicit in the  proof of Theorem 3.2, shows that the hidden-part might connect the visible portions like caps on mushrooms to a single back  face. The restricted information available in a single hidden-part-eliminated drawing cannot distinguish a torus (a donut  shaped object) or other complex shape from a sculpted spherical polyhedron (a topological ball).  Sugihara's two stage picture correction module is original, but contains a gap. Sugihara argues, convincingly, that all  pictures use generic positions for the vertices, up to digitalization errors and other noise. There are no meaningful  algebraic connections among the coordinates of the vertices in the picture. (Of course this argument also implies that no  "digitalized picture" could violate any of the labelling assumptions, since no three points could be collinear but ... !) A  combinatorial theorem shows that the system of linear equations for R (ignoring the inequalities in T) has a correct solution  for generic positions of the vertices, with distinct planes for each face, if and only if for each subset R' of incidences on  at least 2 faces IR'J  I V(R')l + IF(R')l -4. (This count comes from a comparison of the variables, solutions, and equations in the linear system.)  This characterizes "generically reconstructible pictures" such as Fig. 2C. For such pictures Sugihara completes the linear  algebra and checks the inequalities from T for the cone of spatial objects.  For other pictures, such as Fig. 2D, with some IR'J > I V(R') I + IF(R')I -4, the linear system is "superstrict." Any spatial  polyhedron will require special dependencies of the coefficients in the linear equations and these are easily lost in the  numerical calculation. For these superscript pictures, Sugihara uses the counts and a nice graph-flow algorithm to extract a  maximal subset R* of R which is generically reconstructible. Figure 3B shows such a subset R*, obtained by removing one  vertex. The solution for R* is computed, the inequalities are checked, and this solution is used to "correct" the position of  the remaining vertices in R, but not  BOOK REVIEWS 445  IV1=6 IF1=4 IR1=15 IN =15, t4 =M.310-4  B  IV"1=5 IF-1=4 IR-1=12 IR-1=12 513=IV<31F'1-4  FIGURE 3  R*. As Sugihara notes, this reconstruction is possible provided that these vertices lie on at most 3 non-triangular faces.  Unfortunately, for some pictures there is a contradiction between choosing maximal reconstructable subsets R* and removing  only vertices incident with at most 3 non-triangular faces. Figure 4A shows a hidden-part-eliminated picture which is  superstrict (I R' I > I V' I + I F I - 4 for the subset in Fig. 413). Any subset R* with vertex a, b, or c removed is  generically reconstructable, but these are incident with 4 non-triangular faces. The "correct picture" has a, b, and c  collinear (Fig. 4C). Figure 4D shows a second bad example: the "corrected picture" must make the lines ad, be, cf concurrent,  but all six vertices are incident with at least 4 nontriangular faces.  FIGURE 4  446  BOOK REVIEWS  Although Sugihara admits this may happen, he gives no examples and offers no analysis of this limitation. We have evidence  that a more subtle variant of Sugihara's correction procedure should work for all spherical polyhedra, including all  hidden-part-eliminated pictures. All faces and vertices of any spherical polyhedron can be listed so that each face is  incident with at most 3 previous vertices in the list and each vertex is incident with at most 3 previous faces in the list  (Barnette & Grunbaum, 1969). Such a list provides a "correction sequence": given an initial segment of the list which fits the  picture, the remaining sequence gives explicit choices to complete the spatial polyhedron, with corresponding corrections for  the picture. Algorithms to construct a "good correction sequence" for a "minimal correction" of the picture need to be  analyzed.  HIDDEN-PART-DRAWN PICTURES  For hidden-part-drawn pictures, which a designer might use during computer aided design, Sugihara's algorithm feels more  awkward. To detect crossing edges, the labelling procedure becomes more restrictive. On the other hand, hidden-partdrawn  pictures come from a human designer with extra information. Specifically, Sugihara requests that the designer input a  "face-layer structure"-layering of these faces when they overlap. This face-layer structure gives all of the information  Sugihara normally extracted from a "labelling" of the edges. The entire process of prior machine labelling of the drawing is  now unnecessary. The restrictions on the drawing imposed by his labelling algorithm are unnecessary, since the other modules  work well from this face-layer structure and the simple assumption that the observer is not coplanar with any face!  For these hidden-part-drawn pictures, Sugihara's picture correction module faces another, insurmountable obstacle. The  toroidal polyhedron in Fig. 5, with no trivalent vertices and no triangular faces, is "superstrict" and not correctable by  Sugihara's methods. A very different "correction" procedure is needed here. For example, drawing additional edges to split  some non-triangular faces will always produce a generically reconstructible picture. My experience indicates that the designer  might not know that there is a small bend in a large "face" and this error is at least as likely as a misplaced vertex.  In summary, the modules provide some techniques for computer manipulation of  FIaup,E 5  BOOK REVIEWS 447  hidden-part-drawn pictures, but impose too many restrictions to be a general tool for the designers.  OTHER CONNECTIONS  In his last chapter, Sugihara summarizes some connections between the study of polyhedral pictures and the study of rigid  frameworks. For example, a single geometric technique originated as the "reciprocal diagram" in James Clerk Maxwell's work on  graphical statics (Maxwell, 1864) was revived independently as the "gradient space" in work on polyhedral pictures (Huffman,  1971; Mackworth, 1973) and has matured into a general tool of computational geometry (Ash, Bolker, Crapo, & Whiteley, 1987).  The proof of Sugihara's characterization of generically reconstructable pictures was also adapted from a rigidity theorem for  plane frameworks, and the picture reconstruction theorem extends the rigidity theorem (Whiteley, 1986a).  Sugihara makes brief forays into the larger study of which data sets could fix the design of a spatial polyhedron-such as  lengths for edges, dihedral angles between faces, parallel sets of lines or faces, etc. Given the combinatorial structure of  vertices and faces of the polyhedron, Sugihara's modules analyze the information in a single projection of the vertices, as  well as the independence of heights for selected subsets of vertices. Recent studies show that the algebraic methods of his  second module, the underlying combinatorial counts of this third module, and the reciprocal diagrams mentioned in the rigidity  chapter can yield important insights into these more general problems (e.g., Whiteley, 1986b; 1987).  What relations (if any) does this machine analysis have with human analysis of a line drawing? Few humans use either the  algebraic-combinatorial methods of Sugihara or the geometric constructions of the classical reciprocal diagram. Having  observed geometers and designers over the past decade, I offer an alternate hands-on test of reconstructability based on lines  of intersection for various pairs of faces, drawn in the picture. Consider a cross-section reciprocal-showing the lines of  intersection of all other faces with a single "general" face of the polyhedron (a face which is not collinear with any other  pair of distinct faces), which is compatibleany edge between a pair of faces contains the point of intersection of the  cross-section lines of these faces. Figure 6A shows a picture with a compatible cross-section reciprocal, while Fig. 613 shows  a picture with no compatible reciprocal. I conjecture that a compatable cross-section is necessary and sufficient for the  picture to lift as a set of incident, possibly self-intersecting planes in space over the picture. (The line drawing and the  cross-section reciprocal are reciprocal in the sense that any plane polarity will take a picture and its cross-section into a  cross-section and the picture of the spatial polar of the original structure.) Moreover, I predict that the usual details of  convexity and concavity of edges, and the layering of faces and vertices can be checked with simple geometric tests on this  reciprocal pair.  Unfortunately, inspite of the long history of "graphical statics," including numerous engineering textbooks, no classical or  modern theory of reciprocals has  448 BOOK REVIEWS  A  B  Intersections with face F  E  FIGURE 6  solved the fundamental problem of algorithms to generate a reciprocal or to show that no reciprocal exists. The absence of  general algorithms is a fundamental difficulty in using such geometric methods on computers (Aurehammer, 1987). The presence  of good algorithms is the strength of Sugihara's book.  REFERENCES  ASH, P., BOLKER, E., CRAPo, H., & WHITELEY, W. (1987). Convex polyhedra, spider wabs and Dirichlet tessellations. In G. Fleck  and M. Senechal (Eds.), Shaping space: A polyhedral approach. Boston: Birkhauser, in press.  AURENHAMMER, F. (1987). Recognizing polytopical cell complexes and constructing projection polyhedra. Journal of Symbolic  Computation, 3.  BARNETTE, D., & GRUNBAum, B. (1969). On Steinitz's theorem concerning convex 3-polytopes and some properties of graphs. In The  many facets of graph theory (pp. 27-40), Lecture Notes on Mathematics 110. Berlin: Springer.  HUFFMAN, D. (1971). Impossible objects as non-sense sentences. In B. Meltzer and D. Mitchie (Eds.) Machine intelligence 6 (pp.  295-323). Edinburgh: Edinburgh Univ. Press.  MACKWORTH, A. K. (1973). Interpreting pictures of polyhedral scenes. Artificial Intelligence, 4, 121-137. MAXWELL, J. C.  (1984). On reciprocal figures and diagrams of forces. Philisophical Magazine Series 4, 27, 250-261.  WHITELEY, W. (1986a). A matroid on hypergraphs with applications in scene analysis and geometry. Journal of Discrete and  Computational Geometry, in press.  WHITELEY, W. (19866). Parallel redrawing of configurations in 3-space. Preprint, Champlain Regional College, St. Lambert,  Quebec J3P 4P2.  WHITELEY, W. (1987). Problems on the realizability and rigidity of polyhedra. In G. Fleck and M. Senechal (Eds.), Shaping  space: A polyhedral approach. Boston: Birkhauser, in press.