10.1016/0022-2496(87)90014-9
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 31, 179-191 (1987)  Multidimensional Scaling and Threshold Graphs  MARGARET B. COZZENS  Department of Mathematics, Northeastern University, and Department of Psychology, Harvard University  AND  ROCHELLE LEIBOWITZ  Department of Mathematics, Wheaton College  A set of data has a Guttman scale if and only if a corresponding graph is a threshold graph. In this paper we relate the  concepts of disjunctive and conjuctive Guttman scales, and biorder dimension to the threshold dimension of a graph. For those  graphical properties that can be tested in polynomial time, the comparable Guttman scaling techniques can be performed in  polynomial time. Fast algorithms are provided for computing a Guttman scale, and the conjunctive and disjunctive dimension of  data with no 3-crowns. We define an extended Guttman scale to indicate strength of agreement, dominance, etc., and show that  this, too, exists if and only if a particular graph is a threshold graph. () 1987 Academic Press, Inc.  INTRODUCTION  Interlocking techniques of attitude measurement seek to represent subjects and items jointly in a way that the order  representation reflects domination. For example, a set of colleges and a set of prospective students may be linearly ordered  so that each student is accepted by every college that follows it in the order, equivalently that each student satisfies the  requirements for admission of each college that follows it in the order. This idea, which is due to Bogardus (1925) and  Guttman (1944) and has been used extensively in opinion scaling, individual prejudices, educational testing, etc. (Coombs,  1964; Dawes, 1972), can be formalized as follows. Let S be a set of subjects and I be a set of items. Then aRb denotes that  subject a dominates item b (student a is accepted by college b). A Guttman scale for the data (S, I, R) is a linear ordering  of S u I such that subject a precedes item b in the ordering if and only if aRb. In other words, the existence of a Guttman  scale amounts to the existence of two scales f : S -* R and g: I -> IR, such that  aRb if and only if f(a) > g(b).  Requests for reprints should be sent to Prof. Margaret Cozzens, Department of Mathematics, Northeastern University, 360  Huntington Ave., Boston, MA 02115.  179  0022-2496/87 $3.00  Copyright , '. 1987 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  180 COZZENS AND LEIBOWITZ  F~  FIGURE 1.  Ducamp and Falmagne (1969) have shown that, when the sets S and I are finite and disjoint, the two scales f and g exist  satisfying (1) if and only if the following condition holds for the relation R:  aRb and cRd if and only if aRd or cRb. (2)  Cogis (1980) describes relations satisfying (2) as Ferrer's relations and Doignon, Ducamp, and Falmagne (1984) introduce the  term biorder.  Leibowitz (1978), Cogis (1980), and Cozzens and Leibowitz (1984) drew a parallel between the existence of a Guttman scale, the  existence of a biorder, and a class of graphs called threshold graphs. Threshold graphs were initially introdued by Chvatal  and Hammer in 1973 as a class of graphs for which there is a particularly simple method of distinguishing independent sets  (sets of vertices with no edges) from nonindependent sets. Since that time threshold graphs have been studied extensively and  applied to such areas as parallel processing. (See Golumbic (1980) for a summary of the properties and characterizations of  threshold graphs.)  The most useable and testable characterizations of threshold graphs are given in the following two theorems:  THEOREM 1 (Chvatal & Hammer). A graph is a threshold graph if and only if it does not contains a generated subgraph isomorphic  to 2Kz, P4, or C,. These graphs are pictured in Fig. 1.  THEOREM 2 (Chvatal & Hammer). A graph is a threshold graph if and only if for each subset S of G there exists a vertex u E S  such that a is adjacent to all vertices in S - { u } or to none of them.  We relate biorders to threshold graphs as evidenced in the next theorem. A split graph is a graph G = (V, E) such that V can  be partitioned into two sets S and I such that S induces a complete subgraph and I is an independent set.  THEOREM 3. A graph is a threshold graph if and only if G is a split graph, G = S v I, S complete and I independent, and the  orientation R of edges from S to I is a biorder.  The hypothesis of a split graph is necessary in the "if' part of Theorem 3. For example, the graph shown in Fig. 2 shows that  merely the existence of an orientation of the edges of G that is a biorder is not sufficient for G to be a threshold  SCALING AND THRESHOLD GRAPHS 181  G R. a biordei  FIG. 2. G and a biorder R on G.  graph. (We would need both side edges oriented downward from S to I, but then R is not a biorder. )  We now have the theorem relating the existence of Guttman scales to threshold graphs (Cozzens and Leibowitz, 1984).  THEOREM 4. A Guttman scale for data (S, I, R) exists if and only if the split graph formed with S as a complete graph, I an  independent set, and an edge between a E S and b E I when aRb, is a threshold graph.  Appendix A gives a 0 (n log n) algorithm for determining a Guttman scale for a set of data, using the properties of threshold  graphs.  Real data may fail to satisfy (2) for a variety of reasons. For example, there may not be a single criterion for admission to  colleges. A student may have to have a minimum SAT score, and a minimum high school average to qualify for admission. On the  other hand, for some colleges a student may have to satisfy only one minimum, either SAT score, or high school average. In  these cases the relation is not a biorder, but the intersection of two biorders, or the union of two biorders, respectively,  and there are two pairs of scales, (f, , g,) and (f2, gz), each of which captures one of the criteria for admission. Equation  (1) generalizes to:  or  aRb if and only if f, (a) < g, (b) and f=(a) < g,(b) (3)  aRb if and only if, f,(a) < g, (b) or f2(a) < g2(b). (4)  In the remainder of this paper we will use the relationship of threshold graphs to biorders and Guttman scales to consider  intersections and unions of Guttman scales and biorders as intersections and unions of Guttman scales and biorders as  intersections and unions of threshold graphs. We will also show how it is possible to introduce levels of domination and  produce extended Guttman scales for this data.  2. THRESHOLD DIMENSION, BIORDER DIMENSION,  AND MULTIDIMENSIONAL SCALES  For a graph G = ( V, E), a set of threshold graphs G; = ( V E,) i = 1, 2,..., k, with E= E, u E2 u E3 v ... u Ek is called a  threshold cover of graph G. The threshold  182 COZZENS AND LEIBOWITZ  dimension of a graph, denoted t(G), is the least number k such that G has a threshold cover of size k. Other types of  dimension of a graph are defined in terms of intersections of supergraphs. Since the complement of a threshold graph is a  threshold graph, and De Morgan's Laws apply, we have a relationship between the threshold dimension of a graph G and the  intersections of threshold supergraphs of the complement of G, denoted G.  LEMMA 1. t(G) is the least integer k such that G is the intersection of k threshold graphs.  The difficulties one encounters when trying to compute the threshold dimension of general graphs is not surprising since  Chvatal and Hammer (1973) pointed out that the problem of computing the threshold dimension is NP-complete. Yannakakis (1982)  showed the stronger result that determining if t(G) < k is NP-complete for all fixed k >, 3.  We will now relate the threshold dimension of a graph to biorder dimensions, and multidimensional Guttmans scales. We define  the disjunctive Guttman dimension of a set of data (S, I, R), denoted go(S, I, R), to be the least number of Guttman scales  whose union represents the data (S, I, R). If (S, I, R) has a Guttman scale, then the disjunctive dimension is 1. Similarly,  the v-biorder dimension of a relation R, denoted v-bid(R), is the least number of biorders R,, R,, R3,..., Rk, whose union is  R. Thus for a given set of data (S, I, R), gp(S, I, R) = v-bid(R).  To find the disjunctive Guttman dimension of a set of data, we can construct the graph G for the data set (S, I, R) as defined  in Section 1. It is now easy to generalize Theorem 4 to higher dimensions.  THEOREM 5. gp(S, I, R) = t(G) = v-bid(R).  We can also define the conjunctive Guttman dimension of data (S, 1, R), denoted gc(S, I, R), to be the least number of Guttman  scales whose intersection represents the data (as in the SAT score and high school average combined implying admission to  college in the example of Section 1). Lemma 1 implies that the least number of threshold graphs whose intersection is G is  just the threshold dimension of the complement of G. Similarly, the n-biorder dimension of a relation R, denoted n-bid(R), is  the least number of biorders whose intersection is R. We therefore have the following theorem:  THEOREM 6. gc(S, I, R) = t(G) = n-bid(R).  3. DETERMINING THE THRESHOLD DIMENSION OF SPLIT GRAPHS  The graphs constructed so far have been split graphs with complete set the set of subjects S, and independent set the set of  items L Since a polynomial time algorithm exists for determining if the threshold dimension of a split graph is less  SCALING AND THRESHOLD GRAPHS 183  FIG. 3. K3+p.  than or equal to 2 (Kelleher, 1985), determining if gp(S, I, R) < 2 can be done in polynomial time. (See Doignon et al. (1984)  for the biorder equivalent.) Similarly, determining if gc(S, I, R) < 2 is possible in polynomial time since this is equivalent  to determining if t(G) < 2. In this section we show that a polynomial algorithm exists for determining the threshold dimension  of certain classes of split graphs.  A set D ~ V is a dominating set for a graph G = (V, E) if for every v ~ D, there exists a u E D such that (u, v) E E. Kelleher  (1985) defines a clique dominated graph to be a graph that contains a dominating set that is a clique. Clearly, every  connected split graph is a clique dominated graph. We use the notation K,,+p to be the complete graph on k vertices with a  pendant edge attached to each vertex of the complete graph. K3+o is shown in Fig. 3.  THEOREM 7 (Kelleher, 1985). A finite connected graph with no induced PS (the path on S vertices), CS (the cycle on S  vertices), or Kk+P, k >, 3, contains a clique dominating set of size < k - 1.  We have the even stronger result stated in the following corollary:  COROLLARY 7.1. If G is a finite connected split graph and G does not contain Kk+v, k >, 2, as a generated subgraph then G  contains a dominating clique of size <k-1.  We can use Corollary 7.1 with k = 3 to produce a polynomial time algorithm to determine the threshold dimension of a split  graph with no K3+p, as shown in Appendix B. This algorithm does not require a precheck to determine the absence of forbidden  subgraphs. Appendix B gives an example of an application of the algorithm.  In terms of the biorder dimensions these results show that determining the u-biorder dimension of a relation is polynomially  decidable for all relations R such that R does not contain a 3-crown. A 3-crown is a relation Q such that Q is a one to one  mapping from a set of 3 elements to a set of 3 elements. Similarly, these results show that determining the n-biorder  dimension of a relation R such that R contains no 3-crowns is polynomially decidable. The u-biorder dimension) can be higher  than 3 for these relations as evidenced by the graph corresponding to one such relation shown in Fig. 4.  184 COZZENS AND LEIBOWITZ  FIG. 4. Example of a graph G with no K3 +P and t(G)=4.  4. EXTENDED GUTTMAN SCALES  We may want to distinguish two types of agreement, dominance, replies, instead of just one. For example, an individual may  answer a question correctly easily or with difficulty, or a student may exceed the requirements of a college by a wide margin  or by only a little. If the set of "subjects" and "items" are not disjoint then the concept of a double semiorder as developed  by Cozzens and Roberts (1982) applies and is interesting. However, in this case the sets of subjects and items are disjoint  and the notion of double semiorder becomes uninteresting.  Let S be the set of subjects and I be the set of items. Duplicate the set I as I'. Let R be the relation defined by: for a E  S, b E I, aRb if and only if a agrees with b, and T be the relation defined by: for a E S and b E I', aTb if and only if a  agrees strongly with b. Each of R and T are subsets of S x (I u T).  An extended Guttman scale, denoted (S, I, I', R, T), is a linear ordering of S u I u I' such that subject a agrees with all  items in I following it in the order and subject a agrees strongly with all items in I' following it in the order, and  disagrees with all items in I preceding it in the order.  It is clear that an extended Guttman scale contains a Guttman scale for (S, I, R) and a Guttman Scale for (S, I', T). We  define a graph G similar to the one in Section 1, where V = S u I u I', S generates a complete graph, I u I' generates an  independent set, and there is an edge between a E S and b E I if and only if aRb, and there is an edge between a E S and b E  I' if and only if aTb.  THEOREM 8. An extended Guttman scale exists for (S, I, I', R, T) if and only if G is a threshold graph.  Proof. G is not a threshold graph if and only if there exists a P4 with center vertices subjects and end vertices items if and  only if one of the following three cases exist, where the center vertices are s, and sZ and the end vertices are a and b:  SCALING AND THRESHOLD GRAPHS 185  Case 1: a, b E I. Then subject s, agrees with item a and not b and subject s2 agrees with item b and not a. Therefore no  Guttman scale exists for (S, I, R), so no Guttman scale exists for (S, I, I', R, T).  Case 2. a, b E I'. No Guttman scale exists for (S, I', T).  Case 3: a E I and b E I' (or vice versa). Then subject s, agrees with item a and does not strongly agree with item b, and  subject s2 agrees strongly with item b and does not agree with item a. In a linear ordering, b precedes s, and a must follow  s, . Since s2 does not agree with item a, s2 must follow a to give b - s, - a - s2. But now s2 agrees strongly with item b,  yet b precedes s2, a contradiction. Q.E.D.  EXAMPLE. Let S = { Peter, John, Mary, Nancy }, and I be the questions {radicals, exponents, logarithms, factoring}. a agrees  strongly with b iff a answers question b correctly with ease; a agrees with b iff a answers b correctly; and a disagrees with  b iff a answers question b incorrectly. Mary answered all 4 questions correctly, and answered the ones about exponents and  factoring with ease. Nancy answered only the questions about factoring and exponents correctly and only the one about  factoring with ease. John answered all of the questions correctly with ease, and Peter answered only the question about  factoring correctly and not with ease. Figure 5 shows the corresponding graph.  Using the algorithm in Appendix A the corresponding extended Guttman scale is J-1'-r'-M-e'-r-1-N-f'-e-P-f.  The extended Guttman scale can also be translated into relational terms. Both R and T are subsets of SXI, and since strong  agreement means agreement, T ~ R. An extended Guttman scale exists if and only if we can find real valued functions, f defined  on S, g, and g, defined on I, such that  aRb iff f(a) < g, (b) iff {a, b} E E(G), (5)  aTb iff f(a) < g2(b) iff {a, b'J E E(G). (6)  The requirement that G be a threshold graph translates into 3 of the relational axioms given by Ducamp and Falmagne (1969) for  the relational system (S, I, R, T)  r  FIG. 5. Example for an extended Guttman scale.  186 COZZENS AND LEIBOWITZ  to be a bisemiorder. Ts~ R is a fourth axiom. Therefore, we have the following theorem:  THEOREM 9. If S and I are finite disjoint sets, R, T s~ SXI, and (S, I, R, T) is a bisemiorder, then an extended Guttman scale  exists for (S, I, I', R, T), and the associated graph is a threshold graph.  Even though Ducamp and Falmagne were not able to extend their bisemiorder results to more than two relations on SXI, the  extended Guttman scale can be extended to arbitrarily many (k) strengths of agreement, k relations R,, R2,..., Rk, by simply  duplicating the set I for items k times and requiring that the graph G with vertices V = S U JUT U I(2) U ... U III), such  that subject a agrees with all items following it in the order, agrees with strength 2, all items in I(2) following it in the  order,..., agrees with strength k, all items in Irk) following it in the order, and disagrees with all items in I preceding it  in the order is a threshold graph.  THEOREM 10. A general extended Guttman scale exists for (S, I, I', I(21,..., III), R,, R2,..., Rk) if and only if the  corresponding graph is a threshold graph.  APPENDIX A  ALGORITHM -GUTTMAN SCALE:  input: vertices in S and I, degree of v for each v e V, and degree sequence 0 < d(1) < d(2) < d(3) < ... < d(m)  begin  for i= 1 to m, D(i) <- {vertices of degree d(i)}, T(i) --> ~D(i) I begin  l+- I  while i 0 m do  if d(i+I)=d(i)+T(m-i) then iii+1 else stop, print "no threshold graph" end  begin  Ds(m/2) E- S n D(m/2) D,(m/2) E-- I n D(m/2 ) D(0) <- {vertices of degree 0}  procedure-order D(i) for vertices in S in descending order, S(1), S(2)....S(rm/21)  procedure-order D(i) for vertices in I in ascending order, I(1), I(2),..., I(rm/2l )  Q+-O i+- I  If d(m)=n-I then while i m/2  SCALING AND THRESHOLD GRAPHS 187  begin  add S(i) to Q add I(i) to Q i<--i+l  end else while i $ m/2 begin  add I(i) to Q add S(i) to Q iii+i  end Print Q end  end  APPENDIX B  Algorithm to find the threshold dimension of a split graph with no K3+,,.  To construct a tree where each node is an edge set of the graph. The edges in each node that is a star will receive labels.  Once the tree is completed, a backtracking merge is done based on the labels. The threshold dimension is the number of leaves  at the end. The following procedures are used:  1. dominating edge (parent)-produces 2 vertices a, b;  2. partition (parent)-constructs the tree with labels;  3. merge (children)-merges leaves with previous leaves at a higher level.  star(v) = set of edges incident to v input: Graph G = (V, E), and V = S v I output: k = threshold dimension of G begin  begin root+-G=(SVI, E) parent- root partition (parent) end  return partition tree merge (children)  return k +- number of leaves of merged tree end  Any number of procedures can be used to find a dominating edge, including the Kelleher algorithm.  188 COZZENS AND LEIBOWITZ  PROCEDURE: partition (parent) begin  P parent while P 54 QS begin  if vE V such that A(v)= V- {v} then add star(v) as child of parent label (star(v)) +- io  if P 0 QS add P - star(v) as child of parent P +- P - star(v)  else dominating edge (parent) to get a and b add star(a) as child of parent label(star(a)) +- i,  add star(b) as child of parent label(star(b)) E- i2  if P :A 0 add P - (star(a) u star(b)) as child of parent  P <--- P - (star(a) u star(b))  if x = v, a, or b, and e = {x, y } E E(star(x)) and { y, z } e star(x) and label(star(z)) = kj for 1 <k,< i- 1, j=0, 1, or 2,  label(e) +- (j,, j2,---,ii- I )  if ji = 1 and 2 write ji *-- 1 - 2 I-I-{-1  end  return partition tree end  PROCEDURE: merge (children) input: partition tree, highest level 1 begin  I ~- 1 begin for i =1, 1- 1,..., 2 do  if for P=0, 1, 2, label(star(a))=ip  and if label(e) = (j,, j2,..., 1 or 1 - 2... )  i - 1 place  for all e E star(a) and label(star(x)) = (i - 2), then star(x)  star(x) u star(a)  and if label(e) = (ill j2,..., 2 or 1 - 2,...)  for all e E star(a) and i- 1 place label (star(x)) = (i - 2) 2  SCALING AND THRESHOLD GRAPHS  189  FIG. 6. Example of a graph that the algorithm will be applied to.  then star(x) +- star(x) u star(a) and if label(e) =(jl,j2,...10,...I...)  i- l place  for all e E star(a) and label(star(x)) = (i-2)o  then star(x) <- star(x) u star(a) else for star(a) with label(star(a)) = it and for t = min } p } such that label(star(a)) =  ip at level i, and eestar(a) and label(star(x))=(i-2), star (x) star(x) u {e: label(e) = (it, j2, ..., q,... ) }  i - 1 place  it-i-1  end  delete any parent who has no children that are stars return merged tree  end  For a formal proof that the algorithm works see Cozzens (1986). Here we will give an indication of why it works relative to  the example in Fig. 6. G has no K, ,,,  e  star (a) 11 P- (star (a)ustar (c)) star (c) 12  h  star (b) 21 star (d) 22  FIG. 7. Decomposition of the graph of Fig. 6.  190 COZZENS AND LEIBOWITZ  FIG. 8. Three threshold subgraphs of G.  hence has a dominating edge. Kelleher (1985) provides a polynomial algorithm to find a dominating edge in a graph with 2 or  more vertices and no C5, 5, or K3 ,, as generated subgraphs. This algorithm does not require a precheck to determine the  absence of these graphs and will find a dominating vertex first if one exists. This algorithm works even when any of these  subgraphs exist as long as one can always find a dominating edge at each stage.  In the graph in Fig. 6, {a, c} is a dominating edge. There is no dominating vertex. The stars i, and iz are shown in Fig. 7,  as well as P- (star(a) U star(c)).  All edges in 2, can be included in 1 I and 12. Therefore the threshold dimension is 3 = 1111, 12, 2211. The three threshold  subgraphs are given in Fig. 8.  REFERENCES  BENZAKEN, C., & HAMMER, P. L. (1978). Separation of dominating sets in a graph. Annals of Discrete Mathematics, 3, 1-10.  BOGARDUS, E. (1925). Measuring social distances. Journal of Applied Sociology, 9, 299-308.  CHVnTAL, V., & HAMMER, P. L. (1973). Set packing and threshold graphs. University of Waterloo Research Report, Corr. 73-21.  COGIs, O. (1980). On a digraph dimension. Annals of Discrete Mathematics 8, 279-281. COGIS, O. (1982). Ferrers digraphs and  threshold graphs. Discrete Mathematics, 38, 47-52. COOMBS, C. H. (1964). A theory of data. New York: Wiley.  COZZENS, M. (1986). Algorithms to compute threshold dimension of clique dominated graphs, submitted.  COZZENS, M., & LEIBOWITZ, R. (1984). Threshold dimension of graphs. SIAM Journal of Algebraic and Discrete Methods, 5, 4,  579-595.  COZZENS, M., & ROBERTS, F. S. (1982). Double semiorders and double indifference graphs. SIAM Journal of Algebraic and Discrete  Methods, 3, 4, 566-583.  DAWES, R. M. (1972). Fundamentals of attitude measurement. New York: Wiley.  DOIGNON, J. P., DUCAMP, A., & FALMAGNE, J. C. (1984). On realizable biorders and the biorder dimension of a relation. Journal  of Mathematical Psychology, 28, 73-109.  DUCAMP, A., & FALMAGNE, J. C. (1969). Composite measurement. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 6, 359-390.  FOLDES, S., & HAMMER, P. L. (1968). On a class of matroid producing graphs. Colloquia Mathematica Societatis Jknos Bolyai  (Combinatorica), 18, 331-352.  CAREY, M., & JOHNSON, D. (1979). Computers and intractability-a guide to NP-completeness. San Francisco: Freeman.  GOLUMBIC, M. C. (1980). Algorithmic graph theory and perfect graphs. New York: Academic Press. GUTTMAN, L. A. (1944). A basis  for scaling qualitative data. American Sociological Review, 139-150. GUTTMAN, L. A. (1950). Measurement and prediction.  Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press.  HAMMER, P. L., IBARAKi, T., & PELED, U. N. Annals of Discrete Mathematics, 1985.  SCALING AND THRESHOLD GRAPHS 191  HAMMER, P. L., IBARAKI, I., & SIMONE, B. (1981). Threshold sequences. SIAM Journal of Algebraic and Discrete Methods, 2, 39-49.  KELLEHER, L. (1985). Domination in graphs and applications to social network theory. Ph.D. thesis, Northeastern University  Mathematics Department.  LEIBOWITZ, R. (1978). Interval counts and threshold numbers of graphs. Ph.D. thesis, Rutgers University Mathematics Department.  WOLK, E. W. (1965). A note on the comparability graph of a tree Proceedings of the American Mathematics Society, 16, 17-20.  YANNAKAKIS, M. (1982). The complexity of the partial order dimension problem SIAM Journal of Algebraic and Discrete Methods,  3, 3, 351-358.  RECEIVED JUNE 7, 1985  480/31/2-6