10.1016/0022-2496(87)90029-0
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 31, 248-269 (1987)  Mathematical Modeling of Fatigue in Physically Demanding Jobs  STEPHEN .T. GUASTELLO  Marquette University  AND  DAVID W. MCGEE  Illinois Institute of Technology  This paper applies catastrophe modeling to fatigue resulting from physically demanding work. It is shown that the cusp model  is essentially the same as a mathematical model for behavioral fatigue originally proposed by Ioteyko (1920, La fatigue  [Fatigue] (2nd ed.), Paris: Flammarion). The test of the model was nested in a standard personnel selection problem involving  129 employees of a Midwest manufacturer. Dynamometer measurements of arm, back, and leg strength were collected before and  after a simulated task sequence, along with measurements of height, weight, body fat, and exercise habits. The cusp model for  arm strength was substantially more accurate than linear modeling alternatives. Several variables were implicated in the  process. The results argue in favor of the proposed paradigm for studying fatigue. CC) 1987 Academic Press, Inc.  This paper explores some nonlinear dynamic processes underlying physical fatigue in humans, a problem that has both practical  and theoretical importance. The reliability and validity of dynamometer measurements of physical strength for predicting  performance in physically demanding jobs is now well established (Arnold, Rauchenberger, Soubel & Guion, 1982; Braithewaite &  Markos, 1980; Campion, 1983; Chaffin, Herrin, Keyserling & Foulke, 1977; Hogan, Ogden, Gebhart & Fleishman, 1980; Myers,  Gebhart, Crump & Fleishman, 1983; Pytel & Kamon, 1981; Reilly, Zedeck & Tenopyr, 1979) for both industrial and military  personnel. A note of caution for their use is introduced, however, when one observes that persons high in body fat tend to be  stronger than leaner subjects, but experience muscular fatigue to a greater degree (Petrofsky & Phillips, 1981). Selection on  the basis of physical strength alone could possibly produce dysfunctional side effects due to a higher propensity for those  selected to experience fatigue. Side effects would include increased turnover, a reduction in performance in the latter  Send correspondence and requests for reprints to Stephen J. Guastello, Department of Psychology, Marquette University,  Milwaukee, WI 53233.  248  0022-2496/87 $3.00  Copyright G 1987 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  FATIGUE 249  half of a work shift, or increased accidents or injuries (Bogardus, 1912; Chaffin et al., 1977; Ryan, 1947).  Personnel decisions, therefore, must take both strength and fatigability into account. Catastrophe theory is introduced as  both an analytic technique for determining critical (cut-off) values of independent variables and as a descriptive qualitative  model of fatigue.  Catastrophe theory is interesting for five reasons. First, it is an under-explored method for testing theoretical propositions  involving equilibria, critical values, and sudden change. Second, the class of mathematical models it involves denotes  specific dynamic processes and relationships among variables, which are often theoretically interesting. Third, one of the  simpler catastrophe theory models, called the cusp, is remarkably similar to a theoretical mathematical model for the fatigue  process proposed over 60 years ago (loteyko, 1920). Verification of catastrophe theory hypotheses would in turn corroborate  earlier theory. Fourth, the early theory suggested that physical and mental fatigue processes are similar (Starch & Ash,  1917); the study of one becomes a contribution to the understanding of the other. And fifth, catastrophe theory is a general  systems theory which describes discontinuous change processes in many disciplines. Many additional interesting relations may  be uncovered by establishing the connection between fatigue dynamics and other phenomena.  The purposes of this research are (1) to study fatigue through application of catastrophe theory and demonstrate that the  properties of the latter are consistent with known mathematical models for the fatigue process, (2) to determine the degree to  which body fat plays a role in the fatigue process, (3) to determine other variables that are causally influencing the fatigue  process, and (4) to introduce a method for establishing cut-off scores on predictor variables in a selection situation.  Theoretical fatigue models are presented next, followed by the central concepts of catastrophe theory.  Fatigue  Historically, many perspectives on fatigue have been investigated, ranging from the biochemical to the socio-economic. The  present discussion is limited to fatigue in large muscle groups and personnel decisions within the context of physically  demanding work. Therefore, branches of investigation pertaining to the metabolic effects of fatigue, reading and visual  fatigue, the ever-enigmatic Hawthorne Studies, rest and recovery, drugs and diseases, children and special populations,  training approaches, and strength of the nervous system, need not be discussed further. A commentary on the history of fatigue  research is found in Kroll (1981).  Definition. Fatigue is operationally defined as a decrement in work capacity over time; it is often inferred by decrements in  performance on physical tasks (Ash, 1914; Ioteyko, 1903; Mosso, 1894, 1915; Starch & Ash, 1917; Weinland, 1927). The work  curve is a graphic plot of performance over time. It can be decomposed into  480/31/3-3  250 GUASTELLO AND MC GEE  two parts: the curve itself and deviations from the curve. The curve denotes a loss of work capacity and decrement of  performance caused by fatigue. The variability from the curve increases dramatically toward the end of the cycle and denotes  loss of control over one's neuromuscular system (Ash, 1914; Starch & Ash, 1917; Weinland, 1927).  The loss of work capacity and control are results of underlying biochemical activities which serve to protect the muscle from  damage. This study requires no assumptions as to what biomechanical or biochemical processes are specifically operating. For  reference see Simonson and Weiser (1976) and Porter and Whelan (1981).  Mathematical analysis of work curves. Differences among work curves for individual subjects were noted early (Mosso, 1894,  1915). Seven classes of curves were identified: those that (1) dropped gradually, (2) dropped suddenly, (3) maintained stable  but high performance, (4) maintained stable but low levels, (5) maintained stable levels of performance prior to and sometimes  after the output drop, (6) were highly unstable, or (7) increased suddenly (Crawley, 1926; Ioteyko, 1920; Marks, 1935).  Some subjects show an increase in strength or work capacity after having been exposed to a physical work set that fatigues  must other subjects. Two explanations emerge from the literature: exercise and scalloping. Crawley (1926) found that subjects  increased work output in a subsequent test session if the same muscle groups were utilized in a previous session. More  generally, exercise is known to increase work capacity by an additional 50 o compared to pre-existing levels (McCormick,  1976). Crawley (1926) also found that individuals who knew their work period would end expended their greatest effort just  before the close of the session. Subjects who were not so informed exhibited a more typical work curve.  loteyko (1920) determined a general formula for the work curve which satisfied all known varieties,  H2=a+bt+ct2+dt3 (1)  where the height to which a weight is pulled, H2, is equal to the initial height of the weight (constant a) and a polynomial  function of some variable that changes over time. According to Niefeld and Poffenberger (1928), variables b, c, and d are  empirically determinable values only since their values differed from those obtained previously. In a later investigation,  Marks (1935) also observed cubic structure, and interpreted b as meaningful, and c and d as empirical in nature. Subjects in  that study were classified as pykniks (high weight-height ratios) or leptosomes (low weight-height ratios). A comparison of  extreme groups determined significant differences in the change in work rates (p < .01), whereby pykniks fatigued faster than  leptosomes.  Modeling research conducted in the 1950's, and later, adopted an exponential modeling format rather than the cubic polynomial  variety. The estimated parameters were interpreted as simply empirical in nature (Caldwell & Grossman,  1973; Clarke, 1962; Clarke & Stelmach, 1966; Grose, 1958; Kroll, 1981). For fatigue on a hand grip ergograph test,  Y,=a,e-kit+ate-k-`-a3e-k3`+a4(1 -e-k,t), (2)  where Y is strength at any point after the start of exercise, a, , ..., a4 represent fatigable strength with empirical weights  absorbed, k, , ..., k4 are empirical weights, and t is time. For recovery from fatigue,  Y,=c- (a,e-k'`+ate-kz` ), (3)  where c is the asymptote (Clarke, 1962; Clarke & Stelmach, 1966).  Qualitative variables. The pykniks and leptosomes varied by height and weight, and perhaps body fat. Body fat, age, and  initial strength were subsequently studied to determine their relationship to fatigue. Strength generally decreases with age  (Kantowitz & Sorkin, 1983), and the largest decrements occur on tasks requiring greater stamina (Salthouse, 1976). High fat  persons tend to fatigue to a greater extent than others (Brady, Knight & Berhage, 1977; Petrofsky & Phillips, 1981), except in  the case of swimming (Morehouse & Miller, 1971).  Catastrophe Theory  Catastrophe theory is a general systems theory for qualitatively describing and predicting discontinuous changes in events. At  its core is the principle that discontinuous changes in events can be modeled by one of seven elementary topological forms  (Thom, 1975). The forms are hierarchical, varying in the number of control parameters and behavior outputs involved.  The cusp (Fig. 1) is the second simplest of the series and is the most frequently applied model. It is also the simplest model  that describes the fatigue phenomenon. The response surface is three-dimensional and describes two stable states of behavior.  Oscillation between the two states is governed by values of two control parameters, asymmetry (a) and bifurcation (b). At low  values of b, change is smooth, and at high values of b, it is discontinuous. Change is denoted by the path of the control  point in Fig. 1. At low values of a, changes occur around the lower stable state. Changes occur between states at middle  values of a and around the upper stable state at high values. Taken together, the surface is the set of points which satisfy  the equation  y3-by-a=0. (4)  The shaded area of the surface is the region of inaccessibility in which very few points fall.  The bifurcation set is the set of critical points along the manifold at which behavior will change suddenly from one modality  to the other. If the bifurcation set were drawn on the surface itself (instead of a two-dimensional plane) one would  252 GUASTELLO AND MC GEE  Asvmmetrv  N SET  FIG. 1. General cusp model.  observe two diverging surface gradients, one connecting the cusp point to the upper mode. The cusp point is the point of  greatest instability. The behavior modalities, which would correspond to statistical modes, exert two attractor forces on the  system. Let a point on the surface denote a behavior that is about to change. As the behavior changes, it makes a path that  usually runs between the cusp point and one of the modes. The actual path the point takes depends on values of a and b. An  extended treatment of the general properties of catastrophe theory may be found in Poston and Stewart (1978).  A comparative research design. It has been shown that a cusp hypothesis may be evaluated through use of the polynomial  regression equation  Z2-ZI=#0+#I Z1+/3221+ #3bz,+#4a,  where a and b are control parameters, and z, and z2 are standardizations of the criterion (y),  (Y- 4s,  and A and s are the lower limit (estimate of location) and sample standard deviation (estimate of scale) of y. The criterion,  which is physical strength in this case, is measured at two points in time, before and after some event of interest has taken  place. Control variables are similarly normalized. Values of ~2 may be arbitrarily set equal to 0.00, or the sample values may  be used. The R2 coefficient for Eq. (5) indicates the degree to which the data fit the topological model. In practice, the  variables hypothesized to correspond to a and b can be singular or plural. It should be added, however, that the emphasis in  applying catastrophe theory is on modeling, not curvefitting.  FATIGUE  253  The purpose of the location parameter, A, is to fix a zero point on the criterion measurement. One may choose the lowest  possible value of y, or one may choose the lowest observed value of y for the sample under study. Separate values of A (and s)  are used for transformations of y and Y2. In the event the chosen values of A are imperfect measures of the zero point, the  inaccuracy will produce a significant f 2Z2 term; this is the Tschirnhaus transformation (Poston & Stewart, 1978).  The scale parameter represents dispersion around a mode rather than dispersion around a mean. The sample standard deviation is  a good estimate of dispersion around the mode of bifurcation and asymmetry variables, since these would be normally  distributed. In the case of the criterion (y, physical strength), the standard deviation becomes a less perfect measure of  scale. The discrepancy is dependent upon the amount of unfolding in the surface that underlies the observed data distribution.  As a result, the difference between the standard deviation and scale is reflected in /l, , which is associated with the cubic  potential.  The terms of Eq. (5) are entered in the order in which they are written from left to right. If the cubic term is significant,  the model is in fact classified as a cusp. If the quadratic term is also significant, one threshold of the cusp is better  represented than the other, and/or the distances from the cusp point to the modes are unequal. The significance of bz and a  terms indicate that those variables contribute to the latent bifurcation and asymmetry parameters, respectively. In this  application, the quadratic term is more important than in other cusp applications, on account of its presence in the Ioteyko  function. Relative to catastrophe modeling, it is important to test the quadratic term, but its nonsignificance does not  invalidate the cusp hypothesis.  In the sign of the regression of weight fl, is negative, the tail of the b lies on the bifurcation manifold of the response  surface. If the sign of /33 is positive, the positive tail of b lies on the manifold. Values of z are bimodally distributed on  the manifold of the surface. Where there are a number of significant b terms, some positively weighted and some negatively, it  is convenient to infer that b variables contribute to the positive and negative divergence gradients of the surface  respectively.  A significant R2 coefficient for Eq. (5) is not sufficient to accept the model. It is necessary to determine R2 coefficient  for a next-of-kin model which states that change in the dependent measure in a linear function of the experimental variables a  and b:  Ay =flo+/3,b+a2a. (7)  Note that no pre-estimations of location or scale are used. The surface of the cusp has a smooth (low b) and an unfolded (high  b) region. It can now be asked if the empirical cusp is more smooth than not smooth by testing a variant of Eq. (7):  Y2=#o+ #IYI+#2b+#3a. (8)  Equation (8) is the same as Eq. (7), except that y, has been moved from the left to right side of the equal sign. It states  that the value of the criterion at the later point  254 GUASTELLO AND MC GEE  in time is a linear function of the value of the criterion at some earlier point in time plus the experimental variables a and  b. Y, also has an empirical weight in Eq. (8), rather than a weight of 1.00. When change in criterion scores drops to zero or  a constant, RZ for Eq. (5) approaches 0.00 and RZ for Eq. (8) approaches 1.00.  Only an inspection of the coefficients is necessary, since previous applications of catastrophe theory have demonstrated that  such differences are dramatic (Cobb, 1981; Cobb & Zacks, 1985; Guastello, 1982a, 1982b, 1982c, 1984a, 1985a, 1985b, 1986,  1987; Stewart & Peregoy, 1983). The following heuristics are used: (1) If R for the cusp model is greater than or equal to R  for linear change, change is better explained by the cusp than the linear model (i.e., theory is better than no theory). The  Rz coefficient for Eq. (5) represents the degree to which the data fit the cusp shape. (2) If R for the cusp is greater than R  for the pre-post model, the change that took place is more catastrophic than smooth. (3) If the first rule holds but the  second rule does not hold, the pre-post model may be adopted as the best predictive model, but the cusp is still accepted as a  better explanation of change than the linear model. The present research problem required that both rules (1) and (2) hold in  order for the cusp model to be accepted at this time.  Critical Points  The implicit discriminant functions (IDFs) and bimmodal transformation are optional parts of a catastrophe investigation for  use when critical points are of interest and the catastrophic activity is taking place in one region of dependent measure  scores rather than throughout its distribution. Imagine that the data points are suspended in three-dimensional space. It is  possible that the cusp point and unfolding may not be located in the center of the data distribution, but perhaps located in  the upper or lower tail of the criterion distribution (Guastello, 1982b). The problem is managed by data recoding rules: they  are actually utility transformations of the criterion (Guastello, 1982b; Novick, 1980) and are called implicit discriminant  functions (IDFs).  A cusp surface may be restricted in range at the top or bottom of the scale or in unfolding. Restriction in unfolding would  occur if subjects were not worked hard enough to promote a discernible discontinuous change in behavior. In essence, there  would be no "treatment effect" since no treatment would be given. This restriction may be corrected by using the bimodal  transformation. The bimodal transformation and IDFs are data recoding rules which effectively rotate the surface around the  data to see if a catastrophic shift is more likely at the top end of the lower end of the scale. If the data transformations  are successful in capturing a discontinuity in the data distribution, the Rz coefficient for Eq. (5) will increase.  For the bimodal transformation, criterion scores less than - is are recoded to 0.00. For the upper IDF, criterion scores less  than + is are recoded to 0.00. For the lower IDF, cases above - is are recoded to 0.00. The lower IDF employs a retrograde  transformation, such that resulting positive differences scores reflect positive change. The absolute value of the differences  score increaes as it  FATIGUE 255  approaches the - is point. Renormalization after recoding is an option for the user. (This is one of several possible methods  for determining critical points.)  The values of - is and + is are suggested by the particular problem under study. In personnel selection situations - is is a  popular cut-off point on selection tests. Preliminary and analyses of physical abilities data indicated that a - is cut-off  would select 20 % women, which would fulfill Equal Employment Opportunity goals. Other problems might require specific  numerical values of y as cut-off points (e.g., Guastello, 1987).  The bimodal transformation and IDFs represent a utility-valued criterion. While the distribution of z may not be obviously  discontinuous, the utilities associated with particular values may be clearly discontinuous. Each data treatment represents a  different perspective on the statistical modeling task. The bimodal transformation addresses the question, what if the  exposure that produced the change in behavior were stronger than the one tested. In that case it is likely that the scores  below the cut-off would be attracted more strongly to the lower mode while the higher scores would remain the same or would be  pulled further to the upper mode. The upper IDF is useful in situations where, first, the exposure produces a relatively rare  but desirable group of scores that one wants to select into the system, and second, scores below a certain cut-off point are  of no utility to the system. The lower IDF is useful in situations where the exposure produces a relatively rare but  undesirable score that one wants to select out of the system.  The use of the regression technique for catastrophe theory hypotheses, with or without the data transformations, is consistent  with the assumption of homoscedastic errors. If the homoscedasticity assumption is violated in the context of a regular linear  hypothesis, the Rz coefficient would be impaired. The cusp hypothesis, on the other hand, addresses a particular anomolous  variance pattern; deviations from homoscedasticity are accounted for by the bifurcation parameter and cubic power terms.  Homoscedaticity is then preserved around the contour of the surface, rather than around a straight line. The bimodal and IDF  transformations enhance homoscedasticity around the contour of the surface by reducing variance in one of the tails.  Relatively larger amounts of variance appear in the manifold region. Situations do exist where the real data are better  represented by the cusp equation than the bimodal transformation of IDF data, and where transforming the data would make it  useless to the problem under scrutiny (e.g., Guastello, 1982a).  Difference scores. Difference scores are historically unreliable in psychology, and researchers have been advised not to use  them. Psychometric proofs based on the assumption that errors are uncorrelated support this position (Lord & Novick, 1968).  There is other evidence, however, that errors in intraindividual measurement are in fact correlated from one time frame to the  next and represent a form of structured change (Labouvie, 1980; Rambo, Chomiak & Price, 1983). Woodward (1914) made the same  observation specifically in reference to performance changes under conditions of fatigue. It was also asserted that what had  been labeled "dependent  256 GUASTELLO AND MC GEE  error" is variance accounted for by the power potentials which are part of the catastrophe models (Guastello, 1982b, 1982c).  Modeling Fatigue  In order to establish that changes in work capacity over time (i.e., fatigue) is a cusp catastrophe, we need to establish the  following points of relationship: (1) Identify two stable states of behavior. (2) Identify a point of instability. (3)  Illustrate that sudden change occurs between the two modalities. (4) Identify a mathematical link between the cusp and Ioteyko  (1920) function. (5) Identify bifurcation and asymmetry variables. The first three points may be satisfied by showing the  similarity of the seven work curves to trajectories on the cusp surface.  First, let the following entities be equivalent (all other influences being equal):  d performance ^Z' d capacity '~" d strength  Second, let strength be partitioned into strength of a primary muscle group (arm strength for general labor tasks) and  strength of a secondary muscle group (e.g., back and leg strength, and/or aerobic capacity which will not be mentioned  further). The seven work curves can be shown as trajectories or orbits on the cusp surface. Curves 1 and 2 are trajectories in  low versus high b sides of the surface, respectively (Fig. 2). Curves 3 and 4, which reflect global stability, are high and  low performance states, respectively. Curve 5 reflects local stability in which performance orbits around the upper mode,  escapes, then drops suddenly to the lower one where it remains. Curve 6 is an orbit around the cusp point, which is the region  of greatest instability on the surface (b-.0.). Finally, curve 7 is the exercise or scalloping effect by which output  increases over time.  Equation comparison. Equation (1) can be converted to a syntax parallel to that for Eq. (4),  H=i'o+#1t3+ /22 t2+N3bit, (10)  where H = HZ because H, = a = A. Since there is a known linear relationship between work done and isometric strength, a  normalized measure of strength, z2,  FIG. 2. Cusp catastrophe surfaces illustrating the seven work curves identified by Crawley (1926), Ioteyko (1920), and Marks  (1935).  FATIGUE 257  may be substituted for H. Since performance capacity decreases over time, z, may be substituted for t as well. Finally, let b,  be a set of variables where each is independently weighted in its interaction with z. The resulting cusp defines two stable  modes of behavior: fatigue and antifatigue (z2 = AZ, with z, = A). Having made the logical substitutions of z2 for H, and z  for t, the cubic, quadratic, and interaction terms in Eq. (10) are equivalent to the cubic, quadratic, and bifurcation terms  in the cusp equation, respectively. The regression weights al, and F'2 assume the positions of empirical weights c and d in  the original original fatigue Eq. (1).  Asymptotic stability. Two studies employing exponential modeling are pertinent to the catastrophe model (Clarke, 1962; Clarke  & Stelmach, 1966). The fatigue and recovery curves resembled curves 5 and 7, respectively. In both cases asymptotic stability  was achieved at the end of the time series. These zones of stability are specific attributes of the cusp catastrophe (Fararo,  1978). While a direct conversion cannot be made between the Clarke functions and the cusp, it is mathematically true that any  curve can be represented by some combination of polynomial elements.  Bifurcation. Variables contributing to the bifurcation parameter are those known to affect rates of ascent or descent:  exercise history, height, weight, and body fat. The amount of work done is additionally hypothesized as a b; term: those  persons who did the most work would be expected to show the most change compared to those who did none at all.  Asymmetry. While arm strength serves as the z axis, the secondary strength variables compensate for inadequate arm strength  when performing labor tasks. Thus, the two strength measures which are not the criterion strength measure are hypothesized as  asymmetry terms. Similar models were also tested where change in back or leg strength was the criterion, and remaining  strength variables were a terms.  METHOD  Subjects  A total of 129 subjects, who were subcategorized as males, females, laborers, nonlaborers, whites, blacks, and Hispanics,  participated in the study. All were employees of a large integrated steel manufacturer located in the Midwest. The  incorporation of non-laborers was necessary to increase the range of performance on both predictors and criteria, and the  number of female subjects. All subjects participated in the study as a part of their normal day's work. Laborers were  scheduled to participate at the beginning of their work shift to minimize any fatiguing effects from their normal duties.  258 GUASTELLO AND MC GEE  Measures  The study was conducted within one operating department of the company. The subject department is responsible for rolling raw  steel shapes (blooms) into variously shaped finished products such as bars and coils. Tasks that were chosen for simulation  presented no safety hazards to the inexperienced subjects nor required any complex work practices that prior experience could  affect significantly. No task required more than one worker to perform. The simulations were easy to construct, and the  measures of performance they allowed were representative of performance on the job itself. Table 1 describes the task  simulations and performance scales.  Predictors consisted of measures of arm, leg, and back strength plus body fat, sex, height, and weight along with self-reports  of age and exercise habits (average hours per week spent in heavy exercise away from work). The device used to measure  strength consisted of an adjustable chain and two hand grips. The chain was attached to a 1000-lb (453.59-kg) capacity  standard industrial load cell which measured the force imposed by the subject pulling on the handle/chain by means of a  Wheatstone bridge circuit. The load cell was attached by electrical cable to an electronic digital counter that displayed in  pounds of force the peak load the subject imparted on the load cell. Body fat was measured by the "short form" caliper  technique (Kirkendall, 1980).  Procedure  The testing facility was located in a large room on the plant property. Temperature and humidity were maintained within  comfortable limits which, based on anecdotal comments from several subjects, detracted from the fidelity of the simulations  since the majority of work performed by laborers at this plant is done under a variety of climatic conditions. Each subject,  upon entering the testing facility, was informed of the goals of the study, that they would experience a taxing 2-hr workout  and that participation was voluntary. No subjects declined participation. The subject's height, weight, and percentage of body  fat were then measured. Arm, leg, and back strength were measured sequentially. The measure of strength in each mode (arm,  leg, back) was the average of three trials in each mode. Subjects were allowed a practice trial in each mode. Experimenters  made sure that each subject was properly positioned for each trial. Subjects were given visual feedback of their performance  since they were able to see the data readout screen on the electronic counter. Experimenters systematically gave positive  feedback to all subjects even if the scores they obtained were relatively low.  Following collection of the predictor data, subjects performed each simulation in the sequence shown in Table 3. The sequence  was chosen for its conduciveness to the physical layout of the testing facility. Explanations of how to perform each  simulation were standardized, and subjects were allowed to practice (e.g., shovel a few shovel fulls of slag, lift the bags  once, take 3-4 swings with the sledgehammer, etc.) prior to a data collection trial. Subjects were told prior to the beginning  of  FATIGUE  259  TABLE 1 Simulations and Performance Measures  Simulation  Performance measure  Shoveling and dumping-Shovel slag into wheelbarrow to a specific height and dump load  Time to complete in seconds  2.  3.  Wheelbarrow obstacle course-Maneuver wheelbarrow over "railroad tracks" loaded with sandbags:  (a) 100 lb (45.36 kg)  (b) 200lb (90.72 kg)  (c) 300lb (136.01 kg)  Sledgehammering with 8-lb (3.43-kg) hammer in three positions:  (a) overhand  (b) less dominant side  (c) dominant side  Time to complete in seconds  Number of hits on target in 2 min for each mode  4.  Balance-traverse 2 in. x 4 in. x 8 ft (5.08 cm x 20.16 cm x 2.44 cm) beam:  (a) forward (b) sideways (c) backward  Three trials in each mode. Score was total number of times, beam was traversed without touching floor (maximum score = 9).  5.  6.  Carrying-Carry 108-lb (48.79-kg) bucket of furnace refractory material. (Material was used as packaged by manufacturer.)  Bar Pull/Push-Pull and push 800-lb (432.87-kg) bar across greased feed table'  Distance moved in 1 min  Total distance traversed back and forth in 2 min  7.  8.  9.  Sandbag carry-Carry 25-lb (10.24-kg) sandbags 25 ft (7.62 m)  Sandbag carry-Carry 50-16 (20.48-kg) sandbags 25 ft (7.62 m)  Bucket carry and dump-Carry 40-16 (19.14-kg) buckets of gravel 25 ft (7.62) and dump into chute 4.5 ft (1.372 m) high  Total number of sandbags transported in 15 min  Total number of sandbags transported in 15 min  Total number of buckets dumped in 15 min  No index of friction was used. Table was greased for each user to visual similarity with actual task.  each simulation to work at a comfortable pace and that they could rest ad lib. Oneminute scheduled rest periods were taken  between simulations 5, 6, and 7. Fiveminute rest periods were scheduled between simulations 7, 8, and 9. The simulations took  approximately 2 hr to administer for each subject.  The researchers felt that the motivation with which subjects approached the tasks could have a significant impact on  performance. Thus, a five point scale ranging from 1 = "very lackadaisical, does not appear to be trying at all" to 5 =  "appears to  260 GUASTELLO AND MC GEE  be giving maximum possible effort" was developed. The test administrators, who were graduate students in Industrial and  Organizational Psychology, rated each subject, approximately 90 % of whom were rated as 4 or higher.  After each simulation, the subjects (laborers only) were asked if the simulation was very much like, somewhat like, or not at  all like their normal work duties. Data for the fatigue analyses were collected by measuring arm, leg, and back strength  immediately after performing the last simulation. The data collection procedure was the same as that for collecting initial  strength data, except there were no practice trials.  RESULTS  A composite criterion was composed of the sum of simulation scores, each divided by its respective standard deviation; means  or lower limits not subtracted here (Wainer, 1978). Using the stepwise procedure, the best set of predictors for the amount of  work accomplished criterion was found: arm strength, leg strength, height, prior experience as a laborer, balance, and age.  All variables were positively weighted. The results for both /3-weighted and unit weighted equations appear in Table 2.  Fatigue  Three sets of six regression models were tested, four of which pertained to the cusp catastrophe: Eq. (4) with data  standarization only, bimodal transformation, upper and lower IDFs. The other two models were Eqs. (7) and (8) which used no  standardizing. The bimodal transformation and IDF data were renormalized after  TABLE 2  Summary of Stepwise Regression and Unit Weighted Predictors for Unitized Criteria  R F  Multiple model .87 60.99 Arm strength  14.75b  Leg strength  21.40 Height  13.22b  Physical labor now  5.59`  Balance  9.95 Age  7.65 Unitized predictors .85 339.96 P <.0001. b P <.001. P <.05. p<.01.  FATIGUE  261  recoding. One set of regression models was calculated for each of the three strength measures. For bimodal and IDF data  preparations, strength measures that were used as asymmetry variables were similarly recoded to simplify the interpretation of  results.  The variables height, weight, prior labor experience, body fat, motivation, amount of work done (composite), and exercise were  tested in the equations as both bifurcation and asymmetry terms. The noncriterion strength measures were entered as asymmetry  terms also, as previously described. To establish the most descriptive theoretical models, a step-forward regression procedure  was used with a .05 significance criterion to remain in the equation.  Having established the best theoretical models, the regression models were recalculated with procedure alterations to ensure  practicable results. First, actual values of the work composite were replaced by predicted values of work using the unitized  model developed earlier. Second, the motivation variable was dropped since it cannot be ascertained at the time of personnel  selection. Third, a stepwise variable entry procedure was used with a .05 significance criterion to remain in the equation.  The stability of the resulting fatigue models was ascertained again by unitweighting the predictors. Models were additionally  tested for stability of empirical weights using a random sample split of 90 and 39 cases. Previously known examples of  empirical catastrophes show widely disparate empirical weights, where the power-potentials are given the largest weights  (Guastello, 1982b, 1987).  A summary of multiple regression coefficients for the 18 fatigue regression models appears in Table 3. For back and leg  strength, a catastrophe explanation was superior to the linear change models of the Eq. (7) type. Coefficients for linear and  nonlinear models were equivalent for arm strength. Catastrophe coefficients were dwarfed by coefficients for the pre-post (or  constant change) models of the Eq. (8) type.  The bimodal transformations and IDFs resulted in marked increases in multiple correlation coefficients. The best catastrophe  model was the lower IDF for arm strength, which was superior to both control equation types (R =.95; Table 3). Coefficients  for back and leg strength catastrophes did not exceed those for pre-post constant change models. The lower IDF for arm  strength and the three pre-post models were selected for interpretation and additional analysis.  TABLE 3  Summary of Fatigue Models with Multiple Regression Coefficients  Linear Pre- Cusp Cusp bimodal Cusp upper Cusp lower Strength  change post basic transform IDF IDF measure  .51 .85 .52 .62 .77 .95 Arm  .32 .82 .62 .49 .54 .71 Back  .22 .90 .39 .52 .54 .80 Leg  262 GUASTELLO AND MC GEE  Fatigue Model Interpretation  For the arm strength catastrophe, the largest predictor for strength difference was pre-test arm strength cubed. The quadratic  term was also significant. There were four bifurcation or dynamic factors predicting strength decrease: the total amount of  work done, exercise, status as a laborer, and body fat. Weight (as opposed to fat) was a bifurcation factor along with  motivation that predicted strength increase. Pre-test leg strength was an asymmetry factor (Fig. 3).  It should be remembered when diagramming the model that negative change scores in lower IDF mean a positive change in  strength, and positive change indicates strength decrease. Thus, the fatigue group appears on the upper mode and the  antifatigue group appears on the lower. Antifatiguers showed a strength increase and were characterized by showing  comparatively weak-pre-test strength, tended to weigh more (but not necessarily in fat), and were identified as the more  motivated workers. They also tended not to be laborers. Persons showing critical fatigue also showed low initial strength,  tended to do comparably more work, exercised more frequently, were likely to be laborers, and were higher in fat.  Significant predictors of post-test arm strength were pre-test arm and leg strength and exercise (R =.85). Significant  predictors of post-test back strength were pre-test arm and back strength (R =.82). Significant predictors of post-test leg  strength were pre-test back and leg strength (R =.90).  Fatigue Model Stability  When the arm strength catastrophe was recalculated with the changes mentioned, all variables were significant, and R for the  model dropped from .95 to .93 (Table 4). When predictors were unit-weighted, r dropped to .36. This drop in r could easily  occur if the empirical weights were truly unequal; limited past experience shows that there is no reason to believe that the  weights should be equal (e.g., Guastello, 1982a).  SUBJECT STATIC EFFECTS  Work done Gy'1'y Weight Exercise '~,C  Motivation/ aborer at  Body fat ,,,en  leg strength  FIG. 3. Empirically determined fatigue model for the - is selection threshold for arm strength.  FATIGUE 263  TABLE 4  Summary of Regression for Cusp Lower IDF, Change in Arm Strength  Model R F  Multiple .93 101.39 Z,-Cubic  10.06b  Z,-Quadratic  29.16 Z,-Work  4.45`  ZI-Exercise  8.97"  Z,-Weight  16.84 Z,-Physical labor now  9.06b  Z,-Body fat  37.18 Leg strength  8.65 Unitized .36 19.51  Cross-validation (Z,-cubic) .72 102.70 `1 P =.0001. b p=.01. p=.05.  When the sample was divided into 90 subjects and 39 subjects, however, and the variables entered stepwise, only the cubic term  entered the equation. A one-variable model resulted with r = .72. The cross-validity study indicated that the cusp structure  was true, but the empirical weights for control variables were too unstable or too small for direct use. The value of .72 was  calculated using lower IDF coded scores and thus represents the stability of decisions made with the fatigue model and the  cut-off for arm strength given by the coding scheme (see below). The theoretical model, which is based on the full sample, is  not compromised. The subject-variables ratio for arm fatigue was 14.33:1, 11.25:1 for cross-validation main sample.  TABLE 5  Summary of Practical Fatigue Models for Selection  Model Arm strength Back strength Leg strength  R F R F R F  Multiple .85 95.62.82 134.67.89 259.83 Pre-test back    78.82 9.38b  Pre-test arm  78.44 21.98   Pre-test leg  9.50b    202.41 Exercise  8.42b      Unitized .79 212.43.82 251.29.87 390.08 p = 0.0001. '' p=.01.  264 GUASTELLO AND MC GEE  The pre-post models were recalculated using a stepwise procedure also; the same R coefficients were obtained within rounding  error. Unitized predictor sets for posttest arm, back, and leg strength were .79, .82, and .87, respectively (Table 5).  Critical Points  The lower IDF imposes a cusp point at -Is (102.41 lbs, 46.45 kg for arm strength) with an equilibrium to each side. The shift  threshold also occurs at -ls on the leg strength axis (250.12lb, 113.45 kg).  DISCUSSION  Fatigue and Catastrophe Theory  Arm fatigue. The Physical Abilities Simulation produced some fatigue as evidenced by decreased means of strength scores for  the arm muscle group and by virtue of the fact that additional predictors were needed in concert with pre-test strength scores  to predict post-test strength. Critical fatigue was produced for persons of low arm strength, as determined by the catastrophe  analysis. Compensation effects were noted among the arm, leg, and back muscle groups, e.g., very high leg strength compensated  for relatively weak arm strength. In the strength-performance model both arm and leg strength were positive predictors of  performance. Similar effects were found in the pre-post models for fatigue. The cusp model offered a more mechanical  interpretation: for the lower values of leg strength, score changes of the fatigue type occurred; for the higher ranges,  changes were across the threshold(s); and for still higher values they were of the antifatigue type.  Utility and stability. The full sample analyses represented an 11.8 % increase in utility by using the cusp model for  predicting fatigue. The utilized cusp was unstable, but only because empirical weights were truly unequal. The unitized  prepost model for arm fatigue was somewhat better than the cross-validated cusp, but only because the small but detail-rich  effects did not take on their full character until the full sample was used. While the sampling strategy was adequate for most  purposes, it is suggested that future fatigue investigators use a subjects-variables ratio in excess of 14:1, after separating  a holdout sample.  Back and leg fatigue. The superiority of the pre-post models indicated that strength in the back and leg muscle groups  remained stable (as opposed to catastrophically depressed) as a result of the 2-hr workout, although some fatigue was noted in  leg strength.  Critical points. The critical value of 102.41 lb (46.45 kg) for arm strength is quite stable, although the critical value for  leg strength is not. Since the two strength measures are highly correlated, disparate strength-moment scores are not generally  expected.  FATIGUE 265  The utility of the cut-off point is asymmetric. If selection ratios are large, thus requiring the selection of applicants in  the middle to lower strength ranges, use of the cut score (or the pre-post arm fatigue model in Table 5) is warranted. If  selection ratios are small, allowing the selection of applicants from the upper score ranges, then the performance prediction  model alone (Table 2) is sufficient. Note that selecting above the mean for total applicants would result in the selection of  only 2 % of the female applicant pool. Each user is therefore cautioned to use his or her own judgment in adopting a specific  selection scheme based on social, legal, and economic priorities, as well as the true difficulty level of the jobs in question.  Theory  Mathematical model. The system of work curves which Ioteyko (1920) identified as a cubic polynomial function of time have now  been established as a cusp catastrophe. This conversion allows for new inferences concerning points of stability and  instability and points of critical change. Fatigue is defined in the model as a change in arm strength. Body fat was a  significant bifurcation variable in the fatigue process. Other significant bifurcation variables in the process are prior  labor experience, height, weight (not fat), exercise habits, and motivation to perform in the situation, which was  subjectively determined here. Leg strength was a significant asymmetry variable.  Dynamics. The discovery of bifurcation and asymmetry functions within the fatigue process enhances the original theory by  giving it a causation mechanism for the system of work curves that are traditionally observed. Change in strength upward or  downward is limited, first of all, by the amount of work done. Individual differences in exercise and work history, body fat,  weight, and motivation direct the changes in either a positive or negative direction. The asymmetry parameter governs how  close the individual is to a threshold where a sudden change in strength takes place. Proximity to the thresholds is  proportional to the strength in a related compensatory muscle group. Finally, the exercise set results in two qualitatively  different outcomes: a net increase in work capacity, and a net loss of work capacity.  Theory building. One might ask why mathematical modeling should be used at all. Historically the approach has made many  contributions in the physical and biological sciences. Although we may not know what a particular variable may be, we may  still determine how it should function in the process once it is identified. By establishing a new application of catastrophe  theory, one can establish links between fatigue and other phenomena that utilize similar dynamics. Of perhaps most direct  interest are other work performance models.  The work performance models appear to fall into four categories: opponent process, diathesis-stress, buckling, and fatigue.  The opponent process model  480/31/3-4  266 GUASTELLO AND MC GEE  addresses fluctuations in work performance over a relatively long time (months as opposed to hours). Changes in performance  absenteeism and turnover are a butterfly catastrophe (five-dimensional) function of ability, extrinsic motivation, intrinsic  motivation, and organizational climate (Guastello, 1981, 1984b, 1986, 1987). Concepts such as equity, commitment, tension, and  dissatisfaction act as opposing forces and are part of the bifurcation set. Specific applications may involve only a cusp  subset of behaviors (Guastello, 1982b, 1984a; Sheridan, 1985; Sheridan & Abelson, 1983).  The diathesis-stress models examine deviancies in work efficiency under conditions of stress such as shift work. Task  difficulty exaggerates the fluctuations (bifurcation), while favorable or unfavorable social conditions influence the positive  or negative direction of change (asymmetry; Guastello, 1982a, 1985b).  The buckling model for human performance is based on the cusp model for Euler buckling of an elastic beam. Change in  performace (time to complete a labor task) is a function of the work load (asymmetry), the person's height, and other  variables related to elasticity under varying work loads. Height and elasticity concepts are comparable to definitions for an  application to a steel beam (Guastello, 1985a). The fatigue model, finally, describes the change in performance capacity as  function of work done (bifurcation), individual differences related to fatigability (bifurcation), and compensatory work  capacities (asymmetry).  New mathematical modeling research could proceed in any of several directions. One line of pursuit would investigate recovery  from fatigue and the impact of rest periods; the reverse of common work curves would be expected. A second approach would  explore the variability of work curve (cusp) parameters and qualitative variables as work sets and working conditions are  varied. The latter suggestion could be applied equally well to the study of opponent process, diathesis-stress, and buckling  performance functions. Response surfaces of greater dimensionality than the cusp would be observed when elements of the four  types of work models are varied simultaneously. The high degree of fit one typically obtains from a good application of a  catastrophe model indicates that a large portion of work performance phenomena is attributable to its inherent nonlinearity.  While biochemical aspects of fatigue were not studied here, future research might be expected to find (1) that aerobic  capacity is also an asymmetry variable, (2) that biochemical processes underlying the work curve follow similar cusp  functions, and (3) that similar models can be established for back, leg, and other muscle groups. Some of the catastrophe  models advanced in the past for other situations were found to be of equivalent accuracy to pre-existing theory, which led  some writers to question whether the models were trivial after all (Sussmann & Zahler, 1978). The answer turned out to be  "No," since these seemingly redundant models offered properties which allowed for the solutions to problems left unanswered by  preexisting theory (Gilmore, 1981).  FATIGUE  267  REFERENCES  ARNOLD, J. D., RAUCHENBERGER, J. M., SOUBEL, W. G., & GUION, R. M. (1982). The validation and utility of a strength test for  selecting steelworkers. Journal of Applied Psychology, 67, 588-604. ASH, I. E. (1914). Fatigue and its effects upon control.  Archives of Psychology, 31.  BOGARDUS, E. S. (1912). The relation of fatigue to industrial accidents. American Journal of Sociology, 17, 512-539.  BRADY, J. I., KNIGHT, D. R., & BERHAGE, T. E. (1977). Relationship between measures of body fat and gross motor proficiency.  Journal of Applied Psychology, 62, 224-229.  BRAITHWAITE, D. W., & MARKOS, V. H. (1981). Preemployment physical ability tests for production and maintenance positions.  Pittsburgh, PA: United States Steel Corporation.  CALDWELL, L. S., & GROSSMAN, E. E. (1973). Effort scaling of isometric muscle contractions. Journal of Motor Behavior, 5, 9-16.  CAMPION, M. A. (1983). Personnel selection for physically demanding jobs: Review and recommendations. Personnel Psychology,  36, 527-550.  CHAFFIN, D. B., HERRIN, G. D., KEYSERLING, W. M., & FOULKE, J. A. (1977). Preemployment strength testing in selecting workers  for materials handling jobs (Report No. CDC-99-74-62). Cincinnati, OH: National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health,  Physiology & Ergonomics Branch.  CLARKE, D. H. (1962). Strength recovery from static and dynamic muscular fatigue. Research Quarterly, 33, 349-355.  CLARKE, D. H., & STELMACH, G. E. (1966). Muscular fatigue and recovery curve parameters at various temperatures. Research  Quarterly, 37, 468-479.  COBB, L. (1981). Parameter estimation for the cusp catastrophe model. Behavioral Science, 26, 74-77. COBB, L., & ZACKS, S.  (1985). Applications of catastrophe theory for statistical modeling in the biosciences. Journal of the American Statistical  Association, 80, 793-802.  CRAWLEY, S. L. (1926). An experimental investigation of recovery from work. Archives of Psychology, 85. DOWNIE, N. M. & HEATH,  R. W. (1965). Basic statistical methods (2nd ed.). New York: Harper & Row. FARARo, T. J. (1978). An introduction to  catastrophes. Behavioral Science, 23, 291-317.  FLEISHMAN, E. A. (1964). The structure and measurement of physical fitness. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.  GILMORE, R. (1981). Catastrophe theory for scientists and engineers. New York, Wiley.  GROSE, J. E. (1958). Depression of muscle fatigue curves by heat and cold. Research Quarterly, 29, 19-31.  GUASTELLO, S. J. (1981). Catastrophe modeling of equity in organizations. Behavioral Science, 26, 63-74. GUASTELLO, S. J.  (1982a). Color matching and shift work: An industrial application of the cuspdifference equation. Behavioral Science, 27,  131-139.  GUASTELLO, S. J. (1982b). Moderator regression and the cusp catastrophe: Application of two-stage personnel selection,  training, therapy, and policy evaluation. Behavioral Science, 27, 259-272. GUASTELLO, S. J. (1982c, November). Prison riots:  An empirical application of catastrophe theory. Paper presented at the meeting of the Illinois Psychological Association,  Chicago.  GUASTELLO, S. J. (1984a). A catastrophe theory evaluation of a policy to control job absence. Behavioral Science, 29, 263-269.  GUASTELLO, S. J. (1984b). Catastrophe modeling of two opponent process models: Drug addiction and work performance. Behavioral  Science, 29, 258-262.  GUASTELLO, S. J. (1985a). Euler buckling in a wheelbarrow obstacle course: A catastrophe with complex lag. Behavioral Science,  30, 204-212.  GUASTELLO, S. J. (1985b). Color matching throughout the work week: An industrial application of the swallowtail-difference  equation. Behavioral Science, 30, 213-218.  GUASTELLO, S. J. (1986). Butterfly catastrophe model of motivation in organizations: Evaluation of an introductory psychology  course. ERIC Resources in Education, April, No. ED263846.  GUASTELLO, S. J. (1987). A butterfly catastrophe model of motivation in organizations: Academic performance. Journal of  Applied Psychology, 72, 165-182.  268 GUASTELLO AND MC GEE  HOGAN, J. C., OGDEN, G. D., GEBHARDT, D. L., & FLEISHMAN, E. A. (1980). Reliability and validity of methods for evaluating  perceived physical effort. Journal of Applied Psychology, 65, 672-679. IOTEYKO, J. (1903). La fatigue [Fatigue]. In M. Richet  (Ed.), Dictionnaire de physiologie (Vol. 6). Paris: Flammarion.  IOTEYKO, J. (1920). La fatigue [Fatigue] (2nd ed.). Paris: Flammarion.  KANTOWITZ, B. H., & SORKIN, D. (1983). Human factors: Understanding people-system relationships. New York: Wiley.  KIRKENDALL, D. (1980). How to use your fat-o-meter body fat calipers. LaCrosse, WI: University of Wisconsin- LaCrosse Research  Unit.  KROLL, W. (1981). The C. H. McCloy research lecture: Analysis of local muscular fatigue patterns. Research Quarterly for  Exercise and Sport, 52, 523-539.  LABOUVIE, E. (1980). Measurement of individual differences in intraindividual changes. Psychological Bulletin, 88, 54-59.  LORD, F. M., & NovICK, M. R. (1968). Statistical theories of mental test scores. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.  MARKS, E. S. (1935). Individual differences in work curves. Archives of Psychology, 186.  MCCORMICK, E. J. (1976). Human factors in engineering and design. (4th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. MOREHOUSE, L. E., &  MILLER, A. T. (1971). Physiology of exercise (6th ed.). St. Louis: Mosby. Mosso, A. (1894). La fatigue intellectuele et  physique (Intellectual and physical fatigue). Paris: Alcon. Mosso, A. (1915). Fatigue. New York: Putnam.  MYERS, D. C., GEBHARDT, D. L., CRUMP, C. E., & FLEISHMAN, E. A. (1983). Validation of the military enlistment physical  strength capability test. Bethesda, MD: Advanced Research Resources Organization.  NIEFELD, M. R., & POFFENBERGER, A. T. (1928). A mathematical analysis of work curves. Journal of General Psychology, 1,  448-458.  NovICK, M. (1980). Statistics as psychometrics. Psychometrika, 45, 411-424.  PETROFSKY, J. S., & PHILLIPS, C. A. (1981). The influence of body fat on isometric exercise performance. Ergonomics, 24,  215-222.  PORTER, R. & WHELAN, J. (Eds.) (1981). Human muscle fatigue: Physiological mechanisms. London: Pitman.  POSTON, T., & STEWART, I. N. (1978). Catastrophe theory and its applications. London: Pitman.  PYTEL, J. L., & KAMON, E. (1981). Dynamic strength test as a predictor for maximal and acceptable lifting. Ergonomics, 24,  663-672.  RAMBO, W. W., CHOMAK, A. M., & PRICE, J. M. (1983). Consistency of performance under stable conditions of work. Journal of  Applied Psychology, 68, 78-87.  REILLY, R. R., ZEDECK, S., & TENOPYR, M. L. (1979). Validity and fairness of physical ability tests for predicting  performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 64, 262-275.  RYAN, T. A. (1947). Work and effort: The psychology of production. New York: Ronald Press. SALTHOUSE, T. A. (1976). Speed and  age: Multiple rates of age decline. Experimental Aging Research, 2, 349-359.  SCHMIDT, F. L., HUNTER, J. E., & PEARLMAN, K. (1981). Task differences and validity of aptitude tests in selection: A red  herring. Journal of Applied Psychology, 66, 166-185.  SHERIDAN, J. E. (1985). Catastrophe model of employee withdrawal leading to low job performance, high absenteeism and turnover  during the first year of employment in an organization. Academy of Management Journal, 28, 88-109.  SHERIDAN, J. E., & ABELSON, M. A. (1983). Cusp catastrophe model of employee turnover. Academy of Management Journal, 26,  418-436.  SIMONSON, E., & WEISER, P. C. (Eds.) (1976). Psychological aspects and physiological correlates of work and fatigue.  Springfield, IL: Thomas.  STARCH, D., & ASH, I. E. (1917). The mental curve of work. Psychological Review, 24, 391-402. STEWART, I., & PEREGOY, R. L.  (1983). Catastrophe theory modeling in psychology. Psychological Bulletin, 94, 336-362.  FATIGUE 269  SUSSMANN, H. J., BL ZAHLER, R. S. (1978). A critique of applied catastrophe theory in the behavioral sciences. Behavioral  Science, 23, 383-389.  THom, R. (1975). Structural stability and morphegenesis. New York: Benjamin-Addison-Wesley. WAINER, H. (1978). On the  sensitivity of regression and regressors. Psychological Bulletin, 85, 267-273. WEINLAND, J. P. (1927). Variability of  performance in the curve of work. Archives of Psychology, 87. WOODWORTH, R. S. (1914). Professor Cattell's psycho-physical  contribution. Archives of Psychology, 30.  RECEIVED: March 23, 1987