10.1016/0022-2496(87)90031-9
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 31, 299-305 (1987)  Book Review  R. S. MICHALSKI, J. G. CARBONELL, AND T. M. MITCHELL (Eds.). Machine Learning: An Artificial Intelligence Approach (Vol. 2).  Los Alton, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1986. Pp. x + 738. $39.95,  Reviewed by EARL HUNT  Michalski is a Professor of Computer Science and Medical Information Science at the University of Illinois at  Urbana-Champaign. He received his Ph. D. from the University of Silesia, and prior to moving to the U.S.A. in 1970, he was a  Research Scientist at the Polish Academy of Sciences in Warsaw. His research interests include inductive inference, modeling  of human plausible reasoning, and automated pattern discovery. Carbonell is an Associate Professor in Computer Science at  Carnegie-Mellon University, where he has taught since obtaining his Ph.D. in Computer Science at Yale in 1979. His research  interests span several areas of artificial intelligence, and in 1981 he published the book Subjective understanding: Computer  models of belief systems (U.M.I. Research Press). Mitchell is Professor of Computer Science at Carnegie-Mellon University. He  obtained his Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering from Stanford University in 1978. His current research on learning focuses on  machine learning of heuristics and problem solving strategies.  The reviewer is Professor of Psychology at the University of Washington. He was Editor of the Journal of Cognitive Psychology  from 1975-1986. His primary research interests are Cognition and Mathematical Psychology, and he is the author of Artificial  intelligence (New York, NY: Academic Press, 1975).  Machine learning His based on the second Machine Learning Conference, held at the University of Illinois in 1983, with  Additions. The conference papers represented a fair sample of topics in the field. The only notable exception is the virtual  absence of a discussion of connectionism, which is represented only by a single paper by J. Holland on a fairly specific issue  concerning the design of parallel machines. The book is almost a prototypical example of the benefits and perils of edited  volumes. It contains good papers... and others. As a whole, the papers were published about a year later than they would have  been had they been submitted to and accepted by a refereed journal. Some of the papers are undoubtedly better because they  have the sort of free wheeling creativity that might not survive the reviewing process. There are also papers for which the  benefit of an absence of reviewing is not so clear.  Given such a mixed bag of topics and quality, a reviewer can either list briefly what each paper says or can choose to discuss  the general topics raised and try to give some idea of how those topics relate to the study of human learning.  I shall attempt the latter course. I shall review, quite selectively, some of the papers 299  0022-2496/87 $3.00  Copyright i 1987 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  300 BOOK REVIEW  presented in this volume. My discussion will be centered on the relevance of the papers to the study of psychology. Issues  that are strictly related to computer program use and design will be ignored. This still gives me quite a bit to say, because  many of these papers do indeed deal with psychology... if only as a source of ideas for psychological theory.  Machine learning II is organized into an introduction, four substantive sections, and a section of miscellaneous papers. The  first section contains an innocuous introduction to the volume and an only slightly edited transcription of a reasonable but  unmemorable (and not to be discussed) conversation between some of the conference participants. The more interesting papers in  the miscellaneous section can be discussed as the topical sections are considered. I shall not attempt to discuss each paper  within a section, altho I shall draw on specific papers to make what seem to me to be important points.  The first section deals with algorithms that attack two classic problems in induction. In the "concept identificaton" problem  a learner is shown N objects, each of which is describable by stating the values of k attributes. In some cases any  combination of values is possible, in others the combination of attribute value assignments may be restricted. (For instance,  in biology winged vertebrates tend to be light boned.) Two problems can be posed to the learner. In a concept identification  problem the learner must discover the rule a teacher is using to classify objects. In a concept formation problem the learner  must develop a classification scheme in the absence of a trainer.  Both the identification and formation problems are indeterminate. Unless the learner can observe the universe of objects  before proposing a solution to the concept identification problem there is no guarantee that the solution chosen will predict  all the trainer's actions. Concept formation is similarly indeterminate. Unless the universe of objects is observed there is  no way that the learner can be certain that a proposed classification scheme is the best possible one, in the sense that it  maximizes some utility function based on treating objects equivalently within a class. In both cases the only way that a  learner can proceed is to assume that there is an implied order of utility for "right answers," such as the rule "Minimize the  number of attributes tested before making a class" ition." To illustrate, suppose you, as an observer, were to notice that all  kna Chevrolet owners were blond and under 50 years of age, while all BMW owners were bald and over 50. Should you conclude  that the distinction is based on hair, age, or a combination of the two? This depends upon whether you favor simple hypotheses  or restrictive hypotheses.  The study of algorithms for solving concept identification and concept formation problems is of interest, simply because such  problems do exist. For example, the development of a diagnostic rule for identifying poisoning victims can be looked upon as a  concept identification problem. As every mystery writer knows, but as some unknown toxicologist had to discover, there are  distinct sti, to associated with cyanide and arsenic poisoning. The history of the discovery U. ..Ie AIDS  drome is an example of concpet formation; physicians had to realize that a number  BOOK REVIEW 301  of nonidentical cases were examples of the same underlying disease. In the past such discoveries have been made by humans. It  is quite possible that in the future these and many other practical problems will be attacked by machines executing algorithms  similar to the ones described in Machine learning II.  But what about psychology? Here the relevance of the algorithms is less clear. Psychologists used to think that the concept  identification problem, in particular, was a pure case of general human learning. There is a tradition of studying such  problems that dates back at least to Hull's 1920 doctoral thesis. This tradition culminated in the 1950s and 1960s (cf.  Bourne, 1965; Bruner, Goodnow, and Austin, 1956; Hunt, 1962). Of late, though, the study of concept identification has fallen  on hard times. Most harshly, it is seen as an artificial situation. Several modern writers have dismissed the work from 1920  to 1970 as paradigm bound. To the extent that they are correct, the papers recorded by Michalski et al. are valueless for  psychology.  Let us grant that the experimental situation lacks "ecological validity," whatever that is. The artificial situation is still  capable of eliciting psychologically interesting behavior. Both concept identification and concept formation paradigms can be  used as behavioral indices of brain damage. For instance, the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test, a close clinical relative of the  classic concept identification paradigm, can be used as an indicator of excess alcohol consumption. Such observations suggest  that, for whatever reason, the algorithms required for concept identification and formation are rather closely connected to  the classifying algorithms implicit in our brain structures. It seems doubtful, though, that these "brain algorithms," which  certainly should be studied, are likely to be as computationally complex as the algorithms considered in Machine learning II.  (Connectionist algorithms for solving concept identification and formation problems would be quite another matter!) So I  respectfully suggest that the algorithms in Section II of this particular volume have little to do with psychology, even  though the problems they address may be relevant to the understanding of human behavior.  Section III of Machine learning II is quite a different kettle of fish. It contains two articles, one by P. Rosenbloom and A.  Newell and one by John Anderson, that are openly intended as contributions to psychology, and one unusually wideranging  discussion, by K. Forbus and D. Gentner, about how one might learn about the physical world. The two learning articles can be  discussed together because they are concerned with the same issue. How does learning enable us to reorganize our responses to  the world? Why, for instance, does the inexperienced skier inch his or her way down the slopes, while the experienced one  soars?  Rosenbloom and Newell begin with the observation that the time taken to execute an action is approximately a (negative) power  function of the number of times that the action has been practiced. They derive the power function by assuming that action  learning is hierarchial. Learners break up actions into chunks, learn to execute the chunks as a unit, and then form chunks of  chunks. Think of how you dial a completely unfamiliar phone number, a somewhat unfamiliar one, and your own. An approximation  of the power law is said to be implied by hierarchial chunk  302 BOOK REVIEW  formation. Unfortunately, in spite of the fact that the paper goes into great detail about theory in some places, there are no  precise presentations of data. The reader has to take the authors' assertions about fits between theory and data on faith.  This is puzzling, since the paper appears to be a revision of the first author's Ph.D. thesis, so presumably a good deal of  comparisons to data were made.  Anderson's paper accepts the fact of hierarchial chunking and attempts to explain it. Most of the paper is devoted to a  complicated example of how knowledge about LISP programming might be chunked. Stretching an analogy to computer program  execution, knowledge is said to be "compiled" if a procedure can be executed without some sort of supervisory control.  Returning to the skiing example, the experienced skier appears to readjust his or her weight to disturbances in balance  without any conscious thought. The novice does not. Anderson argues that the move from controlled to "compiled" processing  requires the repetition of stimulus-response-stimulus-response sequences, until the latter parts of a sequence are executed as  a unit when the first item is observed. Anderson claims to be able to derive response generalization and discrimination from  proceduralization, but just how this is done was not apparent to me. The key words that should have appeared on page 296 did  not!  Lack of explanation is a problem for both of these papers. The articles contain good ideas, but the authors have not made them  clear. Rosenbloom and Newell are making a classical mathematical psychology argument, but their claims and evidence for them  is lost in a great deal of not clearly relevant discussions of the sort of learning system that might produce a hierarchial  chunking procedure. Anderson's paper could also have benefited from drastic editing. The idea that knowledge becomes  "proceduralized" sounds appealing, but just what is the difference between proceduralized and nonproceduralized knowledge, and  how does one move from one state to the other? Anderson touches on these issues, and then moves away from them at the crucial  point. Another plea for the refereed journals! Or at least for an editor who forces a bit more discipline on the authors.  The next paper, by Forbus and Gentner, overflows with ideas relevant to the psychologist. Forbus and Gentner are concerned  with how people learn to deal with the physical world. (A paper in the next section, by Burstein, extends many of the ideas of  Forbus and Gentner to the problem of learning how to program simple algorithms.) Forbus and Gentner argue that our  understanding progresses from the collection of prototype "good examples" of certain physical situations ... such as the  memorial image of an ideal toss of a basketball ... to qualitative, perhaps inconsistent, laws of physical causation. For  example, children appear to develop an understanding of a balance beam by first grasping the idea that balance is determined  by weight, and then by realizing that the location of the weights on the beam is important. Only after some experience do  children realize that the interaction of weight and placement is important. In more complex situations, only a very few of us  progress to the point at which our mental models really do consider, correctly, all the factors relevant in a physical  situation. (How many readers of this article really understand why a yo-yo top works?)  BOOK REVIEW 303  How are these progressively greater levels of understanding achieved? Forbus and Gentner argue that a great deal of learning  depends upon drawing analogies between the situation to be understood and other situations that are already understood. For  example, electricity may be understood by analogy to hydraulics ... if the learner understands hydraulics. Previous work by  Gentner on analogy learning is drawn upon to fortify Forbus and Gentner's argument that learning by analogy is basic to the  development of understanding of the physical world. No data is offered for the argument. Indeed, I have trouble imagining how  a crucial test of these ideas could be constructed. Nevertheless, I really liked the paper. It helped my own thinking about  how to teach; even how to teach about thinking. The paper is a broad brush treatment of complex notions. The broad brushes  build an exciting painting.  Section IV deals with learning by analogy; the extent to which a new idea can be developed by using an old concept as guide.  Given the discussion in the preceding section, I expected the section on analogy to have a great deal of content for  psychology. Surprisingly, it did not. Burstein's paper extending Gentner's ideas to computer program writing has already been  mentioned. (A related paper, by Dershowitz, appears later in the book.) One of the editors, Carbonell, presents a wide ranging  but (at least to me) not very focused discussion of how analogies might be used to acquire "expert knowledge." The book then  moves to Section V, on "Learning by observation and discovery."  The papers in this section are concerned with the detection of regularities when only "positive examples" are seen. In a  sense, this is what happens when we observe the physical world. We induce its laws by observing what does happen. By  definition, we do not observe something that cannot happen. How is learning possible when observation is restricted in this  way? An extremely interesting paper by Langley, Zitkow, Simon, and Bradshaw addresses the question of learning about the  physical world head on. They describe a series of programs that induce scientific laws from experimental observations. Each  program deals with some aspect of 18th and 19th century chemistry. The first program, BACON 6, summarizes numerical relations.  Further on in the series, the STAHL program deduces substance components from data on reactions between substances. (The  program derived a version of the phlogiston theory which, though known to be wrong today, was a useful model in its time.)  Other programs are described that deal with qualitative structures, such as the acid-base distinction, and that infer  structural models of molecules from chemical reactions between them. The basic principle behind all of these programs is the  concept of searching an (implied) space of possible models and stopping when a model is found that can derive the  relationships in the data.  With the Langley et al paper in mind, let me jump to a paper by Berwick in the General section at the end of the book. Berwick  describes the "subset principle," which has been proposed as a general principle for human learning. The idea behind the  subset principle is that a learner begins with a mechanism for generating hypotheses in some implied order. During learning  hypotheses are generated, in order, until one is found that explains the known data. This hypothesis is  304 BOOK REVIEW  maintained until an infirming instance is discovered. The learner then generates hypotheses anew, following the prescribed  order, until the first hypothesis is found that covers both old and new data. If we consider the order of generating  hypotheses as an ordering of naturalness, as perceived by the learner, then the learner will always maintain the most natural  hypothesis permitted by the data.  The Langley et al, work can be seen as an example of the subset principle. To illustrate, in inferring quantitive relations  between two variables a model generating program might first start with linear relations, then try quadratic relations, then  cubic, etc. This is an ordering of naturalness as perceived by people.  Using the Langley et al. paper to illustrate the subset principle is my idea. Berwick's argument is based on observations  about how children uncover the phonology of their language and on how they develop concepts about the real world. Langley et  al. are interested in developing artificial intelligence techniques for problems that engaged some of the most sophisticated  thinkers of the Scientific Revolution. That is why I find the connection between the two papers interesting. To what extent is  the Langley et al. paper an example of the subset principle? To what extent are other machine learning and learning simulation  programs based on the principle? Do these similarities tell us something about human thinking? Including the thinking of  people who write simulation and AI programs? After all, psychology should apply to the artificial intelligensia as much as it  applies to the college sophomore.  This section contains several other articles, but they are of doubtful relevance for psychologists. A paper by Stepp and  Michalski describes learning algorithms for the "positive examples only" case. These were interesting alternatives to  statistical clustering. The most complex algorithm described required that the learner have some idea of causation in the area  being studied, but the description of the algorithm was so brief that I could not evaluate it. S. Amarel offers a very long  discussion of an algebraic approach to program synthesis using an algebraic approach to input-output specification. The author  asserts that this can be looked upon as a model of theory formation but, frankly, this reader did not see the connection.  Finally, G. DeJong presents a brief description of a program that is said to infer explanatory schema from a single example of  a story. For instance, one gets the idea that this program could infer a "hostage" schema from a single account of a  kidnapping. Unfortunately the article presents such a brief description of how the program operates that the reader has little  idea of the program's theoretical basis or its potential as either a psychological theory or as an Al device. Another example  of why a refereed journal is a better investment than a book of collected papers!  What is the overall value of this book? The value of a collection is exactly equal to the sum of the values of the individual  papers. The better papers here do not present facts, they provoke thoughts. There is nothing wrong with that! But it does  raise a puzzling point. Perhaps this is more of a comment on Al than on Machine learning, but let me raise it anyway. What a  psychologist gets out of these papers is a set of very broad concepts. Consider Anderson's paper on the progression from  declarative to procedural knowledge or the Langley et al. stress on searching a  BOOK REVIEW 305  space of possible models. These papers help me order my thinking about a wide range of phenomena in cognition. But I do not  see how the ideas in the papers could ever be falsified by data. From a strict logic of science view statements that cannot be  falisified are vacuous. So, if I accept the hypothesis that the cognitive sciences should proceed using the same logic of  science that has been so useful to the natural sciences, then I should reject virtually every paper in Machine learning 11 as  being vacuous. I am not going to do that, and I hope other readers will not. By an even greater logic, then, I must believe  that the logic of science that has guided the physicists need not guide the cognitive scientists. I suppose I do, but I do not  have a replacement for it.  Now I feel that I am in trouble. How do we decide what a good cognitive science model is? The field has not answered this  question. Until it does, I doubt that a book like Machine learning 11 can have an adequate review.  REFERENCES  BOURNE, L. E., JR. (1966) Human conceptual behavior. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.  BRUNER, J. S., GOODNOW, J. J., AND AUSTIN, G. (1956) A studv of thinking. New York: Wiley. HUNT, E. (1962) Concept formation:  An information processing problem. New York: Wiley.  Requests for reprints should be sent to Earl Hunt, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195.  Printed in Belgium