10.1016/0022-2496(87)90016-2
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 31, 203-2tO (1987)  Book Review  Computing with Connections  W. DANIEL HILLIS. The Connection Machine. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1985. Pp. xi + 190. $22.50.  Reviewed by TERRENCE J. SEJNOWSKI  W. Daniel Hillis is President of Thinking Machines Corporation, a company that he co-founded. He obtained his Ph. D. in  Computer Science at MIT in 1985.  The reviewer, Terrence J. Sejnoski, received a Ph. D. in physics from Princeton University in 1978. He is currently an  Associate Professor of Biophysics, Biology, and Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at the Johns Hopkins University.  His primary research interest is how information is represented, transformed, and learned, by parallel networks of neurons.  In 1981 the VLSI revolution was already in full swing when graduate student W. Daniel Hillis wrote MIT AI Memo No. 646 on the  "Connection Machine (Computer Architecture for the New Wave)." The memo outlined a new type of parallel computer with millions  of processing units that was "designed for symbol manipulation, not number crunching." Other computer architects were linking  together tens to hundreds of off-the-shelf microprocessors; Hillis suggested instead building a much finer-grain architecture  based on many more custom-built processors, each with only a few thousand bits of memory and capable of performing only simple  logical operations. This design was inspired by parallel architectures for artificial intelligence, particularly Scott  Fahlman's NETL (1979), that could implement fast set intersection in semantic networks.  The book under review is Hillis' doctoral dissertation, published just four years after the AI Memo. It describes both the  design and implementation of a 65,536 processor Connection Machine"', a computer that is now manufactured by Thinking Machines  Corporation, a company Hillis co-founded. Curiously, the original motivation for the Connection Machine-semantic networks in  artificial intelligence-remains unimplemented. The Connection Machine has found other uses as a general-purpose parallel  processor suitable for a wide variety of problems, many unanticipated when the Connection Machine was conceived. In  particular, the recent work on connectionist models in artificial intelligence (Feldman & Ballard,  Please address all communications and requests for reprints to Dr. Terrence J. Sejnowski, Department of Biophysics, Johns  Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218.  203  0022-2496/87 $3.00  Copyright (() 1987 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  204 BOOK REVIEWS  1982) and the parallel distributed processing models in cognitive science (Rumelhart & McClelland, 1986) could greatly benefit  from the enormous potential for computation provided by the extensible hardware design of the Connection Machine.  In this review I will focus on the parts of the book that are most relevant to the goal expressed by Hillis in the  introduction: "1.1 We Would Like to Make a Thinking Machine." Even the technical parts of the book, however, are highly  accessible to a general scientific audience and many of the general design features are explained in a clear, informal style,  perhaps influenced by Disney World where the first draft of the book was written. In addition to hardware considerations, the  book also has chapters on data structures and algorithms, such as sorting, that are appropriate for the architecture.  PARALLEL COMPUTING  Computation requires getting the right piece of information to the right place at the right time, and doing the right thing to  it once it gets there. The key to the Connection Machine is how the information gets there. In a conventional digital  computer, both the program and the data are stored in the memory and single items are sent to the central processing unit  sequentially. This feature characterizes the von Neumann architecture and was fixed in the early days of digital computers  when memory was slow and expensive. The rate of processing is now sufficiently high in the fastest computers that the speed of  light limits the amount of information that can be transmitted sequentially through the connection between the memory and the  central processing unit: this is the so-called von Neumann bottleneck.  Numerous designs have been proposed to open up the bottleneck. For example, the Bolt, Beranek, and Neumnn Butterfly" and the  Intel Cosmic Cube"' have multiple computers that communicate with each other through a switching network. The Connection  Machine is more similar in its basic architecture to the Massively Parallel Processor (MPP) built by Goodyear for NASA in  1983, intended primarily for processing satellite images (Potter, 1985), and the Distributed Array Processor (DAP), built even  earlier in England, about one-fourth the size of the MPP. The MPP has 16,000 paired memories and processors which communicate  with their nearest neighbors on a two-dimensional grid. It executes single instructions on multiple data (SIMD).  The Connection Machine is also a SIMD architecture but differs from the MPP in two respects: First, the processors in the  Connection Machine are at the corners of an n-dimensional hypercube (so that each has a direct connection to n neighbors).  Only three pages are devoted to a "Tour of the Topology Zoo," an important topic that deserved more discussion. Second, the  processors can send packets of information to any other processor by paths that are automatically routed through other  processors. Routing is much slower than a direct connection, but allows more flexibility for some applications. The design of  the router, based on  BOOK REVIEWS 205  probabilistic algorithms (Valiant, 1982), is probably the most impressive technical achievement in the Connection Machine and  the details remain a trade secret of the Thinking Machines Corporation.  In principle, a conventional digital computer could simulate any parallel design, given world enough and time. In practice,  the motivation for research into algorithms is highly architecture dependent, because the only way to fully test an algorithm  is to implement it and measure its performance. Applications that have been successfully implemented on the Connection Machine  include stereo and motion algorithms in computer vision, VLSI circuit design using simulated annealing, hydrodynamic  simulations using cellular automata, and document retrieval based on key words. New parallel algorithms are being discovered  for problems, such as the inversion of sparse matrices, that were previously overlooked, in part because they are inefficient  on the von Neumann architecture. Even rulebased expert systems can be implemented in parallel (Blelloch, 1986).  Debugging programs on a parallel machine can be a nightmare unless good programming tools are available. Fortunately, the  Connection Machine can be programmed in *Lisp, a version of Common Lisp to which parallel instructions have been added. It is  possible in this environment for a moderately skilled programmer to bring up new applications in a few days. CmLisp, a more  powerful version that "defines the Connection Machine" (p. 47) is not yet released.  Many of the knowledge representations and search algorithms that are commonly used in artificial intelligence have been  optimized for the von Neumann architecture. Similarly, the model of computation based on logic that led to the von Neumann  architecture has served as a model for human reasoning in cognitive science (Pylyshyn, 1984). The recent availability of  parallel hardware makes apparent the extent to which cognitive science and artificial intelligence have been shaped by  hardware that is based on sequential symbol processing. If it is no longer necessary to make a virtue of the von Neumann  bottleneck, how should symbols be distributed over a million processors to take best advantage of the increased processing  power of a parallel architecture? Tinkering with fundamental assumptions like this one may lead to new computational models  for artificial intelligence, cognitive science, and neuroscience (Churchland, 1986).  BRAINS  Parallel machines may also have significance for the exploration of the human brain, by far the most sophisticated parallel  computer in existence. In the brain there are over 100 billion neurons and 100 trillion synaptic connections between neurons,  but more than 90% of the brain's volume is composed of axons and dendrites; that is, the brain is mostly connections. These  biological wires are poor conductors compared with copper wire. Axons transmit information at a maximum rate of a few hundred  bits per second and at speeds of at most a few hundred meters per second. Moreover, neurons are relatively simple processing  units compared with digital computers, capable only of adding and multiplying analog  206 BOOK REVIEWS  signals with low precision. How is the brain, using processors with a cycle time measured in milliseconds, able to retrieve  information in less than a second? Even more impressive is our ability in an equally short time to recognize objects in images  and plan limb movements. The brain can perform in a few hundred cycles what digital machines cannot now perform in many  millions of cycles.  Hillis compares digital computers with brains on p. 3. It is difficult to compare their processing powers because we do not  yet understand the principles of computation in the brain. Hillis compares the maximum switching rate of gates in a computer  (a billion transistors switching a billion times per second) and the maximum rate of firing of all the neurons in the brain  (100 billion neurons firing at a thousand times a second). However, this is not the right measure since switching events by  themselves are only one part of performing a computation, and both the brain and the digital computer would burn out if all  their components were to start switching at their maximum rates for even a short time. Two more realistic measures of  performance are the average processing power, measured in operations per second, and useful communications bandwidth, measured  in bits per second.  The processing units in the current generation Connection Machine are bit-sliced processors with a one microsecond cycle time  and 4,000 bits of memory each. A processor can add two numbers with 8 bits of accuracy in 8 cycles, and can multiply two  numbers with the same accuracy in 64 cycles. Thus, the 65,536 processor Connection Machine can perform a maximum of about one  billion 8-bit multiplications per second. The total communications bandwidth between processing units in a Connection Machine  is about 10 billion bits per second, but the I/O bandwidth for communicating between the Connection Machine and its host  computer is only 500 million bits per second. Only a fraction of the maximum processing power of the Connection Machine may be  achieved on a particular problem unless a highly efficient algorithm is found that maps well onto the architecture of the  Connection Machine and all of the information needed to solve the problem is resident. Thus, if the data exceeds 32 MB (the  total memory capacity of a 65,536 Connection Machine) then the I/O bandwidth may be rate-limiting.  Firing at a maximum rate of a few hundred spikes per second, a neuron can convey only a few bits per second via its average  rate of firing, but it can communicate by direct connections with thousands of other neurons. Hence, the average  communications bandwidth used by the brain in moment to moment computation is about  (10" neurons)(5 x 103 connections/neuron)(2 bits/connection/sec) ,z~ 10'5 bits/sec.  This is about a 105 times greater bandwidth than the current generation Connection Machine. It is significant that the brain  can make effective use of this bandwidth; each synapse between neurons can perform a low-precision addition or multiplication  (depending on the type of synapse). Hence, the average processing rate in the brain is at least 10'5 operations per second.  This estimate represents the minimal amount of digital computation that must be done to simulate neural operations in real  time. It is a lower bound since we have not taken fully into  BOOK REVIEWS 207  1s 1a 13  y 12 c  0  y II N  n 10 c 9 0  8  n O P O  6  5 4 3  FIG. 1. Graph of computing power, measured in operations per second, for the largest general pupose digital computers as a  function of time. Operations vary from simple boolean evaluations to 64 bit floating point arithmetic and vary in their  execution times. Different problems require different mixtures of operations, so the error bars indicate the approximate range  of the effective computing power. The Connection Machine (CM) is described in the review. The GF-11 is an experimental machine  under development at IBM. A lower bound for the equivalent computational power needed to simulate the synaptic activity in the  human brain is given in the text and drawn as a horizontal dashed region at the top of the graph. In primates, the visual  system uses about 20-40% of the total processing power.  account the analog operations that occur in dendritic trees. Many of the operations in the brain are analog and could be  simulated much more efficiently with analog technology (Mead, 1987).  The cost of computing has decreased by a factor of about 10 every 5 years over the last 35 years (Fig. 1). If this continues,  then it will only take about 25 more years (2015) before processing power comparable to that in the brain can be purchased for  $3 Million, approximately the current cost of the Connection Machine. David Waltz (personal communication) independently  arrived at a similar conclusion taking into account the cost of memory, communications, and processing. It is very unlikely,  however, that this goal can be achieved with the current technology: new technologies, perhaps based on optical computing, are  needed.  CONNECTIONEST MODELS  At about the same time that Hillis was designing massively parallel hardware, massively parallel algorithms were being  explored by others who were inspired by the massively parallel architecture of the brain. At a meeting held in 1979 at San  Diego, researchers from artificial intelligence, electrical engineering, cognitive  480/31/2-7  208 BOOK REVIEWS  psychology, and neuroscience met to explore parallel models of associative memory (Hinton and Anderson, 1981). The common  assumption was that many relatively simple processing units, similar to neurons, could be connected together to solve complex  computational problems. This approach could be called computing with connections, or connectionist computing (Feldman &  Ballard, 1982), and it shows promise as a link between cognitive science (Rumelhart & McClelland, 1986) and neuroscience  (Hopfield & Tank, 1986; Sejnowski & Churchland, 1987).  Connectionist models are highly nonlinear and highly difficult to analyze, except in special cases (Ackley, Hinton, &  Sejnowski, 1985; Cohen & Grossberg, 1983; Hopfield, 1982). As a consequence, much of the recent research has been empirical.  Conventional computers can be used to simulate a connectionist network model with a time penalty that scales with the number  of connections in the network. A parallel implementation of a network model would greatly speed up the design and exploration  of these models. However, the increase in speed is generally accompanied by a decrease in the flexibility of the hardware. In  the extreme case, a VLSI device can be designed with a fixed set of weights that can run a particular network, but no other  network, a million times a second. A special purpose network simulator that could handle a wider range of network  architectures would be preferred (Bailey & Hammerstrom, 1986; Hecht-Nielsen & Smith, 1986).  All of the currently available general-purpose parallel machines, including the Connection Machine, can be adapted to run  connectionist network models even though they were not designed with network models in mind. For coarse-grain architectures,  such as the BBN Butterfly and the Intel Cosmic Cube, the processing units can handle many units in the network. The fine-grain  architecture of the Connection Machine maps better onto connectionist networks if the processing units are used to represent  the connections themselves (Blelloch & Rosenberg, 1987). Which of these parallel machines is the most useful for developing  connectionist models will depend as much on the ease with which they can be programmed as on the details of the hardware  designs.  PHYSICS OF COMPUTATION  The last chapter of the book is entitled "New Computer Architectures and Their Relationship of Physics, or Why Computer  Science is No Good." Theory in computer science tends to be based on existing hardware, and most existing computers use the  von Neumann architecture. The chapter begins appropriately with a quote from von Neumann, who was well aware of the need for a  broader science of computation. Von Neumann himself contributed not just to the development of the sequential architecture  named after him, but as well to the foundations of cellular automata (von Neumann, 1963), an early parallel architecture that  has only recently been exploited (Wolfram, 1983).  Hillis turns to physics in search of models on which to base a new science of parallel computation: "If the universe is a  computing machine, then we know of at least some computing machines that have elegant laws." Are there other models of  BOOK REVIEWS 209  computation that are closer to physics than current theory in computer science? As Hillis points out, the physics of  macroscopic systems depends on the law of large numbers, and he speculates that a similar "law of large systems" may someday  be found for computing systems based on many simple processing units. The brain is another obvious model of computation in  nature, one whose principles we do not yet understand, but whose existence makes it more plausible that Hillis is thinking in  the right direction.  CONCLUSION  The Connection Machine is available today for use by scientists who want to study problems that are amenable to a massively  parallel fine-grain computer architecture. New fields of computational science may grow out of the early explorations that the  Connection Machine and other parallel computers are making possible. There are already computational branches of physics that  depend on supercomputers as much as high-energy experimentalists depend on particle accelerators. Someday there may be  branches of psychology and neuroscience that depend on massively parallel computers.  Hillis has produced a lively book as well as a lively machine (with a little help from his friends). It is hoped that the  entrepreneurial spirit that built the Connection Machine does not interfere with the scientific spirit that guided its design.  The fate of the Connection Machine depends as much on the vagaries of the marketplace, where it now must complete with many  other parallel designs, as on the virtues of the architecture itself. The next generation Connection Machine, already in  production, will have more memory and more processing power. Parallel computing has an exciting future.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  I am grateful to Guy Blelloch, Geoffrey Hinton, Charles Rosenberg, David Touretzky, and David Waltz for helpful discussions on  parallel architectures.  REFERENCES  ACKLEY, D. H., HINTON, G. E., & SEJNOWSKI, T. J. (1983). A learning algorithm for Boltzmann machines. Cognitive Science, 9,  147-169.  BAILEY, J. & HAMMERSTROM, D. (1986). How to make a billion connections. Technical Report of the Oregon Graduate Center,  CSIE-86-007.  BLELLOCH, G. E. (1986). CIS: A massively concurrent rule-based system. Proceedings of Fifth National Conference of the  American Association for Artificial Intelligence, August 11-15, 1986, 2, 735-741. BLELLOCH, G. E., & ROSENBERG, C. R. (1987).  Network learning on the connection machine. Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.  CHURCHLAND, P. S. (1986). Neurophilosophy: Toward a unified science of the mind/brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  210  BOOK REVIEWS  COHEN, M. A., & GROSSBERG, S. (1983). Absolute stability of global pattern formation and parallel memory storage by  competitive neural network. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 13, 815-826.  FAHLMAN, S. E. (1979). NETL: A system for representing and using real-world knowledge. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  FELDMAN, J. A., & BALLARD, D. H. (1982). Connectionest models and their properties. Cognitive Science, 6, 205-254.  HECHT-NIELSEN, R., & SMITH, C. A. (1985). DARPA ADAPT Program Mark IV ADAPT Processor. TRW Technical Report.  HINTON, G. E., & ANDERSON, J. A. (1981). Parallel models of associative memory. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  HOPFIELD, J. J. (1982). Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective computational abilities. Proceedings of  the National Academy of Sciences USA, 79, 2554-2558.  HOPFIELD, J. J., AND TANK, D. W. (1986). Computing with neural circuits: A model. Science, 233, 625-633.  MEAD, C. (1987). Analog VLSI and Neural Systems. Reading: Addison-Wesley. POTTER, J. L. (1985). The massively-parallel  processor. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. PYLYSHYN, Z. W. (1984). Computation and cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. RUMELHART,  D. E., & MCCLELLAND, J. L. (1986). Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition.  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  SEJNOWSKI, T. J., & Churchland, P. S. (1987). Computational Neuroscience (in preparation). VALIANT, L. G. (1982). A scheme for  fast parallel communication. SIAM Journal of Computing, 11, 350-361.  VON NEUMANN, J. (1963). The general and logical theory of automata. In A. H. Taub (Ed.), J. von Neumann, collected works (Vol.  pp. 5, 288).  WOLFRAM, S. (1983). Statistical mechanics of cellular automata. Reviews of Modern Physics, 55, 601--644.