10.1016/0022-2496(88)90017-x
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 32, 350-354 (1988)  Book Review  HANS COLONIUS. Stochastische Theorien individuellen Wahlverhaltens (Stochastic Theories about Individual Choice Behavior).  Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1984. Lehr- and Forschungstexte Psychologie 9. Pp. xiv + 162. $30.00.  Reviewed by ULF BOCKENHOLT  The author is Associate Professor of Psychology at Oldenburg University. He received his Doctoral degree in Psychology from  Braunschweig University in 1976. His major research interests, in addition to choice and preference, are visual and auditory  psychophysics and tutoring systems.  The reviewer is Assistant Professor of Psychology at the University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign. His primary research  interests concern mathematical models of judgment and decision-making.  Stochastic choice models originated from work in econometrics, biometrics, sociometrics, and psychometrics. Common assumptions  of these four research areas are that choices are intrinsically probabilistic and that choice probability in some sense  reflects the preference strength for an alternative. For some time now, econometrics has represented the most active research  area. As a result, numerous textbooks and research monographs have been published on stochastic choice models during the last  decade. These books focus in one way or another on three classes of models: multinomial logit response models, multinomial  probit response models, and elimination models. These models are fairly complicated, and so it is not surprising that large  sections of these books address statistical issues such as parameter estimation and model tests. Reported applications, of  course, are of an economic nature and mostly concern predictions of aggregated choices such as forecasts of travel demands.  In contrast, Colonius provides us with a book about stochastic choice models that does not even mention parameter estimation  or statistical tests. Instead, Colonius has selected the unifying framework of measurement theory to guide his overview of  stochastic choice theories. His goal is the development of axiomatic for  Requests for reprints should be sent to Ulf Bockenholt, Department of Psychology, University of Illinois, 603 E. Daniel  Street, Champaign, IL 61820.  350  0022-2496/88 $3.00  Copyright J 1988 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  BOOK REVIEW 351  mulations of probabilistic measurement structures for a selected set of stochastic theories about human choice behavior. For  this purpose, he reviews the still incomplete list of directly testable conditions necessary and/or sufficient for a set of  choice probabilities to be representable by a stochastic choice model. In addition, he presents some new conditions that  characterize the testability of certain stochastic choice models and their uniqueness properties. Empirical results are  mentioned only in passing, and only insofar as they contribute directly to new model developments or revisions. Consequently,  this carefully written book fills a critical niche in the domain of preferential choice research because it focuses on  important aspects of stochastic choice theories that so far have not received the attention they deserve. Thus, Colonius' book  is both a timely and a complementary contribution to the multi-disciplinary research area of stochastic choice models.  In his first of ten chapters, Colonius introduces the reader to choice models by presenting four important experimental  paradigms and their formal structures for obtaining choice data. In particular, he defines procedures for picking one out of n  alternatives, ranking n alternatives, eliminating successively unacceptable alternatives from n alternatives until only one  remains, and comparing pairs of alternatives. Following the econometric tradition the author then classifies choice models  into three categories by distinguishing among fixed utility models, random utility models, and elimination models. Of course,  these classes are not mutually exclusive; a few models even belong to all three classes.  The next chapters are devoted to an impressively extensive discussion of the fundamental properties of these families of  models. In particular, the remaining book chapters consider binary fixed utility models, simple scalability, the general  random utility model, comparisons of in and dependent utility models, binary random utility models, Thurstonian models, models  for rank order probabilities, and choice models for similar alternatives. A brief discussion of each chapter is given below.  The coverage of binary fixed utility models in the third and fourth chapters follows standard lines. Weak utility models,  simple scalability, strong utility models, and the Bradley-Terry-Luce model (as an example of a strict utility model) are  defined. The problem of nontransitivity of indifference is used to motivate the concept of a semiorder. This presentation is  close in spirit to Roberts' discussion (1979, Chap. 6).  The final section of Chapter three is dedicated to the definition of probabilistic biorders and bisemiorders. Some well-known  examples of "composite measurement" such as the Guttman scale, the Mokken model, and the Rasch model are also described. This  discussion is complemented by a careful presentation in Chapter four of models of simple scalability and their relations to  order independence. Simple scalability requires that there be real valued functions Fand u, with Fstrictly increasing in  its first argument and strictly decreasing in the remaining n - 1 arguments, such that for all {x, y, ..., z} E B,  P(x, B) = Fn Eu(x), u(y), ..., u(z) ],  352 BOOK REVIEW  where P(a, B) denotes the probability of choosing alternative a from set B. In the notation of Tversky (1972), order  independence holds whenever for all B, C ~-: A, a, b E B-C, and c E C  P(a, B) >, P(b, B)pP(c, Cu {a1)<P(c, Cu {b}),  provided the choice probabilities on the two sides of either inequality are not both 0 or 1. Tversky (1972, Theorem 1) claims  that simple scalability and order independence (each as defined above) are equivalent. However, using the following example  originally suggested by Mark Perkins, Colonius demonstrates that this is not the case and that additional monotonicity  conditions are required for such equivalence.  Let A = { a, b, c } be a set of alternatives and (A, P) be a choice system with P(x, {x, x})=0.5 for xc-A, P(a, {a, b})=0.4,  P(a, {a, c})=0.3, and P(b, {b, c})= 0.4, P(a, A) = 0.7, p(b, A) = 0.2, and P(c, A) = 0.1. Then, (A, P) satisfies simple  scalability as we can define the functions u, F2, and F3 as u(a) = 1, u(b) = 2, u(c) = 3, FZ[u(x), u(y)] = P(x, {x, y}) for x,  y E A, and F3[u(x), u(y), u(z)] = p(x, {x, y, z}) for pairwise distinct x, y, z E A. Clearly, Fz and F3 are well-defined,  strictly increasing in the first argument, and strictly decreasing in the second argument for FZ and in the second and third  argument for F3. However, if we let C= {c}, then  P(c, Cu {a})=0.7 > P(c, Cu {b})=0.6,  but  P(a,B)=0.7>P(b,B)=0.2,  violating order independence. Colonius employs this example for motivating the definition of n-monotone functions by Smith  (1976). Useful numerical examples such as this one are often found in the text as a straightforward means of introducing new  concepts or definitions.  The fifth chapter discusses the representation and uniqueness problem of random utility models in a general form; i.e., no  particular distributional assumptions are being made. Falmagne (1978) presented necessary and sufficient conditions on choice  probabilities for the existence of a random utility representation in the case of a finite choice set. Using the Moebus  function, Colonius simplifies the proof of Falmagne's representation theorem and discusses the corresponding uniqueness  theorem, The sixth chapter is the most original of this monograph. The author briefly reviews properties of independent random  utility models. In particular, he provides a simple proof, in a more general setting, of the Sattath-Tversky inequality which  is one important characteristic of independent random utility models. Arguing that utility values of similar alternatives are  positively related, Colonius next considers models with positive dependence between alternatives and introduces a class of  "associated" random utility models which includes independent random utility models as a special case. Parts of this chapter  can be found in Colonius (1983).  BOOK REVIEW 353  Currently, results for binary random utility models are less complete than those for general random utility models. For  example, the general representation problem for the binary model is still unsolved. In his seventh chapter, Colonius  summarizes the most important results that have been obtained so far regarding this issue. In particular, he reviews the  triangle condition and unpublished results of Cohen and Falmagne (1978) which show that the triangle condition is not  sufficient for guaranteeing the existence of a random scales representation. Colonius points out some well-known relationships  between the representation problem of independent binary random utility models and probability paradoxes such as the  nontransitivity, or voting, paradox. The survey of Thurstonian models in Chapter eight is similar to that of Luce (1977).  Relevant research by Yellott and Strauss regarding the uniqueness and representation problem of Thurstonian models is  summarized.  In his penultimate chapter, Colonius investigates relationships between random utility models for choice and rank order  probabilities. Using the powerful concept of exchangeability, the author presents a new characterization of the strict utility  model and introduces a class of random utility models with stochastically ordered permutations. An important feature of this  class of models is that the probability of a certain rank order is a function of both the "win" probabilities of each  alternative and the number of alternatives in the set. Yellot's results regarding generalized Thurstonian models for ranking  are also discussed.  The last chapter of this book is the most interesting from a psychological viewpoint. Colonius discusses the influence of  similarity of alternatives on choice behavior. The elimination-by-aspects (EBA), elimination-by-tree (EBT), choice-byfeatures  (CBF), and additive random aspects (ARA) models (Edgell & Geisler, 1980) are introduced and compared to each other.  Unfortunately, the recent results of Marley (1981) regarding the asymptotic equivalence of the EBA model and the ARA model of  Edgell and Geisler are not presented. However, using his previously introduced association concept Colonius suggests a  generalization of the choice-byfeatures models and demonstrates that this class of models is identical to the class of  associated random scales models.  The book is technically excellent, and I found few typographical errors, none of which were misleading. Clearly, the main  strength of the book is Colonius' concise and tight development and review of theoretical results. The study of the book will  be rewarding because it makes many mathematically sophisticated papers in this field more accessible not only by providing a  coherent framework for presenting old and new results but also by considerably unifying and simplifying proofs. In style, the  book is similar to those by Roberts (1979) and Falmagne (1985). In contrast to these two books, however, the book of Colonius  does not include empirical results and exercises. The rigorous exposition of theoretical results is, however, supplemented by  plenty of numerical examples.  When I finished reading the book I was somewhat reminded of a quote in the preface to Contemporary Developments in  Mathematical Psychology (Krantz, Luce, Atkinson & Suppes, 1974). The editors justified their decision not to include a survey  chapter about preferential choice by writing  354 BOOK REVIEW  Perhaps the most striking exclusion is the entire area of preferential choice. There is no lack whatever of technically  excellent papers in this area, but they give no sense of any real cumulation of knowledge. What, are the established laws of  preferential choice behavior? (Since three of the editors have worked in this area, our attitude may reflect some measure of  our own frustration.) (p. xii)  Has this situation changed fourteen years later? Unfortunately, there is still a tendency for research on stochastic choice  theories to diverge from the growing field of behavioral decision studies which focuses on process models. While economists  have successfully applied and further developed models for the purpose of aggregated choice prediction, it is clear from a  psychological viewpoint that only modeling final choices is severely limited. For enhancing the predictive and explanatory  power of choice theories, it seems more promising to develop process models of choice behavior which will ideally take into  account variables that characterize the information processing of the decision maker such as reaction times. As an important  side result, a better understanding of the range of applicability of stochastic choice models would be obtained.  However, this outlook for future research should not distract from the fact that Colonius has provided us with an excellent  reference and survey book that should be useful for anyone interested in the area of random utility models.  REFERENCES  COHEN, M., & FALMAGNE, J. C. (1978). Random scales representation of binary choice probabilities: A counter example to a  conjecture of Marschak. Mathematical studies in perception and cognition (No. 5). New York: Department of Psychology, New York  University.  COLONIUS, H. (1983). A characterization of stochastic independence by association with an application to random utility.  Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 27, 103-106.  EDGELL, S. E., & GEISLER, W. S. (1980). A set-theoretic random utility model of choice behavior. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 21, 265-278.  FALMAGNE, J. C. (1978). A representation theorem for finite random scale systems. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 18,  52-72.  FALMAGNE, J. C. (1985). Elements of psychophysical theory. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.  KRANTZ, D. H., LUCE, R. D., ATKINSON, R. C., & Suppes, P. (Eds.) (1974). Contemporary developments in mathematical psychology  (Vol. 1). San Francisco: Freeman.  LUCE, R. D. (1977). Thurstone's discriminal processes fifty years later. Psychometrika, 42, 461-489. MARLEY, A. A. J. (1981).  Multivariate stochastic processes compatible with "aspect" models of similarity and choice. Psychometrika, 46, 421-428.  ROBERTS, F. S. (1979). Measurement theory. New York: Wiley.  SMITH, T. E. (1976). Scalable choice models. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 14, 239-243. TVERSKY, A. (1972). Choice by  elimination. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 9, 341-367.