10.1016/0022-2496(88)90010-7
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 32, 213-231 (1988)  Plural Psychological Developmental Models: An Ordinal Generalization of the Guttman Scale  B. MONJARDET* AND G. NETCHINE-GRYNBERGt  * Universal Paris V et Centre d'Analyse et de Mathematique Sociale, and tLaboratoire de Psychologie du Developpement et de  !'Education de l'Enfant, Universal de Paris V, CNRS  We present the main features of an attempt to formalize models of "plural" psychological development by means of the theory of  ordered sets. Such an attempt aims to express the coordination among several dimensions of development. The resulting model is  an ordinal multidimensional generalization of the Guttman scale, which allows an appropriate mathematical translation for the  theoretical hypothesis already formulated in the development field. We begin with an introduction describing precisely the  aims and method of our work. Then we discuss this model with regard to other generalizations of the Guttman scale and proceed  to describe its construction. Finally we conclude by contrasting properties and implications of Guttman-like and plural models  and pointing out further directions for research. 'K~, 1988 Academic Press, Inc.  1. INTRODUCTION  This paper presents an ordinal generalization of the Guttman scale, motivated by a mathematical formalization of a class of  psychological developmental models, called plural models. In comparison with other ordinal multidimensional generalizations of  the Guttman scale, its main feature is that it allows an appropriate mathematical expression for theoretical hypothesis  already formulated in the psychological field.  The approach is therefore one of validating hypothetical models rather than data analysis, and as according to Guttman's  original view, the dimensionality must receive an explicit theoretical definition, prior to any data collection. This point  with a few comments on the Guttman model, some of its multidimensional generalizations, and their various functions in  psychological measurement and data analysis will be considered in Section 2. In this introduction we will briefly describe  plural psychological development models, explain why they must be mapped into logical models using the mathematical theory of  ordered sets, and indicate the main  Reprints requests should be addressed to B. Monjardet, CAMS, 54 bd Raspail, 75270 Paris Cedex 06, France. We thank C. Chubb,  J. C. Falmagne, J. T. Townsend, and an anonymous reviewer for helpful comments on the first draft of this paper. Special  thanks are due to C. Chubb for editorial assistance which has led to a significant improvement in style.  213  0022-2496/88 $3.00  Copyright c, 1988 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  214 MONJARDET AND NETCHINE-GRYNBERG  stages of this formalization. We remark that this paper will consider only construction and properties of the mathematical  formalization of the theoretical models and not the linkage of empirical observations with theory.  Our interest in the construction of plural theoretical developmental models arises from the need to understand the  coordination among several developmental sequences or dimensions in a specific instance. In an experiment on visual perception  of form in young children, a series of embedded figure problems was generated and employed as stimuli (Netchine-Grynberg,  1976, 1981). They differed systematically on two perceptual dimensions: (i) the geometrical relations between the embedded  figures in each problem, and (ii) the complexity of their figural components, i.e., the number of points, lines and surfaces  (with six and three levels of difficulty on each dimension, respectively). It was assumed that each perceptual dimension  involves distinct modes of extracting and processing visual information, which can be regarded in the framework of the  Piagetian theory respectively as vertical and horizontal "decalage." In order to make testable the corresponding hypotheses,  it was necessary to construct a mathematical representation of the relationship between these two perceptual dimensions.  This case, termed the referential case, which will be used systematically throughout the paper as a concrete example  illustrating the major steps of the model construction, leads us to consider the general paradigm implied in the study of the  coordination between several developmental dimensions. Such a plural design can be encountered over a large range of  psychological situations. It is the underlying structure present for instance every time a psychological activity involves  several areas of behavior, or a task requires different skills or depends upon knowledge from more than one field. However, we  can point out that these classes of activities are not taken into account in the classical child psychological literature, in  which development is mainly considered as following a single path, whose postulated structure is a simple order hierarchy. In  order to be closer to the psychological reality of the development of such plural activities, it is necessary to be able to  analyse the various components which constitute them and to describe their relationships during the course of their changes  (Netchine-Grynberg, 1984).  Thus, we emphasize the value of local composite models, accounting for the coordination between several developmental  dimensions, as alternatives to those classical models of psychological development which can be expressed in terms of a  Guttman-like linear order model. Such composite models are termed plural models and require a multidimensional generalization  of ordinal linear scales.  The theory of ordered sets is quite suitable for depicting the corresponding hypothetical plural developmental orders  conceived in the psychological field. Each of the single units defined in experimental observations-for instance each of the  answers of a child population to a series of cognitive problems-can be identified with an element of a set, whose structure  expresses the relation involved by the psychological assumptions on development changes.  Moreover, ordered set theory should be considered an essential instrument when one adds that the developmental plural orders  in which we are interested must be  PLURAL PSYCHOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENTAL MODELS 215  represented as partial orders, structures much more difficult to manage than linearly ordered scales. In recent years, partial  order theory developed in the general framework of discrete mathematics has had significant advances (see for instance Ordered  Sets, 1982; Orders: Descriptions and Roles, 1984), relevant to the formalization process of plural models.  In terms of ordered set theory, every developmental dimension may be represented by a linear order-a scale-and their  composition is expressed by the ordinal product of these linear orders. This product order, named "basic order" in the model,  is obviously a partial order. However, such partial orders have strong mathematical properties depending on parameters that  allow variations in accordance with the number of these initial scales. In our reference case, there are two dimensions, one  with three and the second with six steps and 18 resulting classes of tasks, termed classes of observation, or items. With two  dimensions the procedures of model construction are identical for any number of steps on these two dimensions. This is not  completely true if the number of dimensions is more important. But in any case a product of linear orders emerges as the  structure common to all such local plural models.  Three main stages must be distinguished in the construction of a formal model expressing the interconnections between the two  dimensions underlying the plural development assumptions of our reference case.  The first stage is the generation of the theoretical set of single observations, or items, implied by the basic order (Section  3).  From this item set can be derived theoretical individual patterns of response, termed "consistent patterns." Generating these  consistent patterns, assessing their structure, and looking for their various kinds and properties are the main operations  carried out in the second stage (Section 4).  A set of patterns can be considered a population. The third stage addresses the problem of defining a referential a priori  population of patterns, appropriate for the validation of a given set of developmental assumptions. (Section 5).  In fact, it is possible to derive from an item set a large number of patterns sets, labelled here "pattern families." A  taxonomy of all possible pattern families is given, using the basic order as a classification criterion and allowing algebraic  comparison between pattern families; it is in the framework of such a taxonomy that theoretical populations could be defined.  Another primary interest in models formalizing psychological concepts and hypotheses is the construction of an abstract  representation, a kind of prototype or mould, whose study lends insight into the general properties of the depicted object. In  the field of developmental models, we take into account the characteristics of individual developmental pathways, associated  with plural development. The last section (Section 6) is devoted to the definition of some varieties of especially interesting  "consistent developmental paths."  Finally, we end this introduction with a remark. As stated above, the mathematical tools utilized in our formal model belong  to the theory of ordered sets. Among the concepts and results that we use, several are classical and very well  216 MONJARDET AND NETCHINE-GRYNBERG  known, others are not new but are much less known, and at least one result is (apparently) new. In all cases, at the end of  each section, a remark gives mathematical references where one can find more details and the proofs of the referenced results.  Moreover, these remarks aim to distinguish the notions or results valid only for the particular type of poset relevant to our  needs (a product of two linearly ordered sets) from those valid for a more general plural model (a product of several linearly  ordered sets) and from those valid for arbitrary partially ordered sets.  2. THE FUNCTIONS OF SCALOGRAM ANALYSIS  Scalogram analysis goes back to the forties where it was initially conceived in a precise theoretical framework: it aimed to  ascertain if a theoretically defined psychological variable could be considered "unidimensional" (Guttman, 1950, Chap. 2, pp.  46-59). The answer was given by comparing the empirical structure of observations with a theoretical structure: the perfect  Guttman scale. The mathematical content of this Guttman model was later explicitated by Ducamp and Famagne (1969) from the  point of view of measurement theory; the corresponding mathematical object is now called a biorder (and is equivalent to the  older notion of Ferrer's relation).  Meanwhile scalogram analysis had been used as an exploratory technique in data analysis, for instance to select items having a  scalable structure or to obtain a unidimensional reduction of observations. In these last cases, the dimension obtained is not  derived from a theoretically postulated order and must be considered an instrument in a data analysis process. In the meantime  in practical research, unidimensional structures appear quite often to be too restrictive a tool to be suitable for describing  empirical observations. In order to obtain more general data models for the reduction of observations, Coombs and Kao (1955;  see also Coombs, 1964) propounded a multidimensional generalization of the Guttman scale, now called the  conjunctive-disjunctive Coombs-Kao model. Here also it is only recently that the mathematical structure and properties of this  model were systematically investigated by Doignon, Ducamp, and Falmagne (1984).  They used the notion of biorder (or Ferrer's) dimension, a dimension based on the fact that a 0-1 array (representing the  answers of subjects to dichotomous items) can always be obtained as the intersection of biorders (i.e., Guttman scales).  Previously interesting variations of the Coombs-Kao model had been suggested by Matalon (1962, 1965), while more or less  plausible models had been suggested (see, for instance, Shye, 1978). On the other hand, in the seventies Flament developed  another way to generalize scalogram analysis based on the use of boolean techniques, "1'analyse booleenne des questionnaires,"  and he analyzed its relations with the Coombs-Kao model. Comprehensive surveys on other kinds of generalizations can be found  in Bender (1980) and Henning and Rudinger (1985).  Looking only at the best known generalization, i.e., the Coombs-Kao model and  PLURAL PSYCHOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENTAL MODELS 217  its developments by Doignon, Ducamp, and Falmagne, we may stress the consequence of the shift in the measurement process  between hypothetical models and data reduction models, especially that affecting the dimension of the data table. For the  Coombs-Kao model, the interesting parameter is the minimum number of Guttman scales required to obtain the 0-1 array  representing the data. This number, not necessarily easy to compute (see especially Koppen, 1987), is called the biorder (or  Ferrer's) dimension of the array. There exist generally several "optimal" systems of Guttman scales representing the same  array (a system is said to be optimal if the number of scales used is exactly the dimension). This may be seen as an asset if  one wants various representations of the array. However, in data analysis processes, the fact that there may be more than one  optimal system of Guttman scales, whose intersection represents the data, seldom yields substantive theoretical meaning (see,  for instance, Matalon, 1965; Shye, 1978).  The use of the concept of dimension is quite different in the model-validation case. There, the number of scales is, on the  contrary, theoretically fixed and the empirical data simply confirm, or not, the hypothetical dimensions. Originally,  according to Guttman's view, "unidimensionality" had to receive an explicit theoretical definition, prior to any observation  being made and data collected. In our ordinal multidimensional generalization of Guttman scales, dimensions are again  considered the mathematical translation of theoretically postulated linear orders. In the field of developmental psychology,  actually most theoretical assumptions can be regarded as expressing "naturally" an order which can be made explicit by logical  models prior to data collection.  3. THE ITEMS AND THE BASIC ORDINAL STRUCTURE OF THE SET OF ALL ITEMS  An item (task, problem, etc.) is denoted by e; it is defined as an ordered pair e = (i, j) where i and j represent levels on  two linearly ordered scales. These scales correspond to developmental dimensions and can be considered dimensions of  difficulty. In our central example, one of these scales has three levels and the other six. We denote the two scales by  El = { 1 < 2 < 3 } (three levels)  Ez={1<2<3<4<5<61 (six levels).  Since we want to consider all possible combinations of levels, we define the set E of items as the ordinal product of the two  scales E, and Ez. So, first,  E=E, xE2={(i,j): 1<i,<3, 1<,j<,6},  and second, E is endowed with the partial order (i,j)<(i',f)-i<P and j<j'.  218 MONJARDET AND NETCHINE-GRYNBERG  E, and EZ being linearly ordered sets, it is well known (see, for instance, Birkhoff, 1967; Barbut & Monjardet, 1970) that (E,  ~) is a distributive lattice where the join and meet operations are given by  (i, j) v (i', j')=(max(i, (), max(j, j'))  (i, j) n (i', j') = (min(i, i'), min(j, j')).  Henceforth we shall simply denote by E this partially ordered set; the partial order < will be called the basic order between  the items and will be sometimes denoted by < E. If e and e' are in E, and e < e' we shall say that e is equal to or less than  e' in difficulty (or that e' is equal to or greater than e in difficulty). Obviously this special interpretation of the basic  order does not prevent a different interpretation, more suitable in another context.  4. CONSISTENT PATTERNS  4.1. The Consistent Patterns and the Latticial Structure of the Set of All Consistent Patterns  As already stated, it is assumed that a subject has only two possible "answers" called, for example, "success" and "failure,"  and also that a subject must complete all the items. So the response of a subject is perfectly known, if one knows the set of  items that he passes. Thus, we define a response pattern as a subset of the set E of items and we denote it by P; so 0 E-~ P s  E (P is always interpreted as the set of passed items for a subject, E -P being the set of wrong items). Since there are 18  items, there are 2'8 different response patterns. Here we are interested in some special response patterns that we call  "consistent" (with the basic order).  A pattern is called consistent if it satisfies the following property:  for every e E P and for every e' E E, e',< e => e' e P.  Figure 1 A shows an example of a consistent pattern: P = { (1, 1), (1, 2), (1, 3), (1, 4), (1, 5), (2, 1), (2, 2), (2, 3), (2,  4), (3, 1), (3, 2), (3, 3)} (an item belonging to P is represented by a cross on this figure).  There is a useful coding of consistent patterns by a triple n,n,n3 of integers. If P is an arbitrary pattern, we set up  a(P)=nln2n3  with, for i = 1, 2, 3,  n;=Max[ jE [.1, 6] such that (i, j)EP].  So, n; is the highest level on the scale E2, for all the items in P with level i on the scale E,.  PLURAL PSYCHOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENTAL MODELS 219  A  6  5 4 3 2 1  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  +543  B F------I C  5  X 'X  X X X X X X X X  5  L  x X X X X X X X X X X X X x  1 2 3 2 2  The consistent pattern 543 P(2,5)=550 P(2,5)=644  FIGURE I  If (and only if) P is a consistent pattern, we can find all (and only) the items belonging to P by knowing only 6(P); indeed,  in this case, (i, j) E P if and only if j < n;. Moreover, we have 6 > n, >, n, >, n3 >1 0. It is easy to see that there is a  bijection between the set of all triples of integers satisfying these conditions and the set of all consistent patterns. So  each consistent pattern can be coded by such a triple. For instance, the consistent pattern in Fig. 1 A is coded 543.  Henceforth we shall use this coding and we shall write, for example, P = 543.  One can also associate with each consistent pattern a line formed by six vertical and three horizontal segments and going from  the lower right corner to the opposite higher left corner of Fig. 1. Then the number of consistent patterns is precisely the  number of ways in which we can choose the occurrences of vertical (or horizontal) segments among the nine possibilities. This  number is given by  (6+3)!=g4. 6!3!  We denote by ~0 the set of these 84 consistent patterns. This set is partially ordered by the inclusion order between patterns:  PgP'pfor every eeE [eeP=> eeP').  Moreover, it is clear that if P and P' are consistent patterns, the intersection P n P and union P u P are consistent  patterns. So, (9, s~ ) is a distributive lattice. Figure 2 represents this lattice; in this figure the consistent patterns are  given by their codings. Note that if P=n,n2n3 and P'=nin'n3 are (the codings of) two consistent patterns, we obtain (the  codings of) P n P and P u P by  P n P'= (Min(n, , n, ), Min(n2, nz ), Min(n3n3 ))  Pu P'= (Max(n,, n,), Max(n2, n'), Max(n3, n3)).  Let us define the score s(P) of a pattern P as the number of items belonging to P. Then, if P is consistent, we have  s(P)=n, +n2+n3.  220 MONJARDET AND NETCHINE-GRYNBERG  SCORE -18  -17 -16 -15 -14 -13 -12 -11 -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 -0  THE DISTRIBUTIVE LATTICE of the 84 CONSISTENT PATTERNS  FIGURE 2  In Fig. 2, the consistent patterns are ranked according to their score, from 0 (obtained with P=000) up to 18 (obtained with  P=666).  Remark. The notion of consistent pattern could be defined if the basic order were an arbitrary partial order. In the theory of  ordered sets, this notion is called an (order) ideal or a down subset (various other words are also used). The set of all  order ideals is always a distributive lattice (see, for instance, Birkhoff, 1967; Barbut & Monjardet, 1970; Aigner, 1979), but  it can be very difficult to compute its cardinality.  In our case the basic order is a product of two linear orders with three and six elements. More generally if the basic order  is a product of two linear orders with m and n elements, the order ideals have a special structure called "step-type" or  "Ferrer's board" and their number is (m + n )!/m! n!.  PLURAL PSYCHOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENTAL MODELS 221  Denote by L,the lattice of these ideals; L., is isomorphic to the free modular (or distributive) lattice generated by two  chains of m - 1 and n - 1 elements, with a least and a greatest element adjoined (see Birkhoff, 1967, pp. 65-66). Special  properties of L,have been recently investigated (see Griggs, 1984, pp. 399-400). Note that it is much more difficult to  compute the number of order ideals for a product of more than two linear orders.  4.2. Simple, Cosimple, and Doubly Simple Consistent Patterns  We begin by defining the notion of simple pattern. Let e be an item; we denote by P(e) the pattern formed by all the items  less than or equal to e in difficulty:  P(e) = ie' E E: e',< e}.  It is clear that P(e) is a consistent pattern and we call it a simple pattern. For instance, if e = (2, 5), one can easily  check that the associated simple pattern is 550; this consistent pattern is represented in Fig. 113. Note that a subject  characterized by this pattern passes just the items (i, j) with i < 2 and j < 5.  Since there is a simple pattern associated with every item, there are 18 simple patterns. We denote by ,' the set of these  patterns: Y is partially ordered by the order inclusion between patterns and it is clear that this order "reproduces" the  basic order between the 18 items: more precisely, (Y, g ) is isomorphic with (E, < ).  Now, we define the cosimple patterns. Let e be an item; we set up  Pie) = {e' E E: e :!t e' }.  It is easy to see that ple) is consistent, and we call it a cosimple pattern. For example, with e = (2, 5), we obtain the  pattern P(e I = 644, represented in Fig. 1 C; note that a subject characterized by this pattern passes just the items (i, j),  with i,<1 or j,<4.  We denote by Y* the set of 18 cosimple patterns. This set ordered by inclusion is isomorphic with the basic order (and with  (Y, ~ )).  Finally, we say that a (consistent) pattern is doubly simple if and only if P is simple and cosimple. There are seven doubly  simple patterns: 111, 222, 333, 444, 555, 600, 660, and we denote this set by 9; so 9 = Y n Y *.  Simple and cosimple patterns lend themselves to psychological interpretation. We now show that they have a significant  "structural" role.  We said that a pattern is generated by other patterns if it can be obtained as a union of intersections of these patterns. For  instance, P is generated by PI, Pz, P3, Pa if  P= (PI nP3)U(PInP2nPI)U(PInP4).  Note that a pattern P is generated by itself (P = P U P, or P = P n P).  Now, we can state the following results: Every consistent pattern, different from  222 MONJARDET AND NETCHINE-GRYNBERG  000, is a union of simple patterns. Every consistent pattern, different from 666, is an intersection of cosimple patterns.  Every consistent pattern, different from 000 or 666, is generated by the doubly simple patterns.  Remark. The first two results are a special case of the characterization of the sets of join-irreducible and meet-irreducible  elements in the distributive lattice of the order ideals of a poset (see, for example, Barbut & Monjardet, 1970, Chap. 6). For  the third, see Remark in Section 5.1.  5. FAMILIES OF PATTERNS  5.1. Definitions and Taxonomy  Suppose each of a group of subjects completes all the items. We shall call the set of response patterns given (at least once)  a family of patterns (or simply a family) and we denote it by ~F.  In order to classify all possible families, we introduce some definitions:  - A family .F of patterns is closed if and only if P, P e ~F imply P n P and PVPE~F.  - A closed family is associated with every family F ; it is called the closure of and denoted by 9. It has two classically  equivalent definitions:  9 is the smallest closed family containing ~F,  9 is the set of patterns generated by the patterns of ~F.  Now, we classify the families of patterns with reference to the two following properties:  171: Every consistent pattern is generated by patterns of F.  112: Every pattern generated by patterns of ~F is a consistent pattern.  We can also express these properties by means of the closure 9 of ~F. Indeed, 171 holds if and only if 9 2 9, and 172 holds if  and only if 9 g30 (or equivalently ).  Combining these two properties, one obtains four classes of families.  I. Families ~F satisfying 171 and 172, i.e., such that _ 30; we call such a family a complete consistent family.  11. Families J~' satisfying 172 but not 171, i.e., such that 9 c 9; we call such a family an incomplete consistent family.  111. Families J satisfying 171 and not 172, i.e., such that 9 Z:) 9; we call such a family a compatible non-consistent family  (N.B.: the use of the term "compatible" will be explained in Section 5.2).  IV. Families J~' satisfying neither 171 nor 172, i.e., such that 9 9=' _,V and  . ;t 9; we call such a family an incompatible non-consistent family.  PLURAL PSYCHOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENTAL MODELS 223  A significant result is the following characterization of the complete consistent families; F is a complete consistent family  of patterns if and only if it satisfies the following two conditions:  (i) All patterns of y are consistent.  (ii) F contains 000, 666, and the seven doubly simple patterns.  In other words, if we set up -9 + _ 9 u {00, 666 }, F is a complete consistent family if and only if  This result also allows one to characterize the other families: J~" is an incomplete consistent family if and only if all  patterns of F are consistent and F does not contain (at least) a pattern of -9+. 3 is a compatible non-consistent family if  and only if F contains -9+ and (at least) one non-consistent pattern. F is an incompatible non-consistent family if and only  if ~F does not contain -9+ and contains (at least) a non-consistent pattern.  So, given a family of patterns, it is easy to find the class to which it belongs.  Remark. The same taxonomy of families of response patterns could be obtained with any basic partial order defined on a set of  items. But the above characterizations of the four classes are true only for the partial orders in which the set of "doubly  irreducible" order ideals generates all the order ideals (or equivalently, in which the distributive lattice of order ideals  has a unique minimal generating subset). One can show that this is always the case if the partial order is a distributive  lattice, and, especially, if it is a product of linear orders (see Monjardet & Wille, 1988).  5.2. The Taxonomy Revisited with Respect to the Basic Order  In this section we intend to show that the above taxonomy of all the families of patterns has another interpretation related  to the order between the items. We must first recall a fundamental mathematical duality, called the Galois connection between  families and binary relations (see, for instance, Monjardet, 1970; Doignon and Falmagne, 1985).  We express this duality by means of the three following "facts" (theorems in the mathematical theory).  FACT 1. To every family y of patterns is associated a preorder R, (i.e., a transitive and reflexive relation) on the set of  items:  eR1.e'<> for every PE~F [e'eP=> eEP].  Intuitively R., can be seen as the "difficulty order" between the items that is manifested whenever a set of subjects gives F  as its family of response patterns: if P is a pattern of _F containing e', it contains also all the items less than or equal  to e' in difficulty (according to R,,).  224 MONJARDET AND NETCHINE-GRYNBERG  FACT 2. To every binary relation R on the set of items is associated a closed family ~FR.  More precisely, ~FR is the set of "R-consistent" subsets of E, with P E- E being R-consistent if and only if e E P and e'Re  imply e' E P.  FACT 3. The set of all closed families of patterns corresponds bijectively with the set of all preorders on E.  Using the above duality and recalling that the basic order between the items is denoted by < E, we can give the following  ordinal characterizations of the four classes of our taxonomy of families of patterns.  1. F is a complete consistent family of and only if  R,= <E  (i.e., eR,, e'.--> e < E e').  In other words, F is complete consistent if the difficulty order associated with F is exactly the basic order.  II. F is an incomplete consistent family of patterns if and only if  <EcR~F .  This means if e is less difficult than e' in the basic order, it is less or equally difficult in R,, and we have at least two  items e and e' such that either (i) e is less difficult than e' in the basic order, yet equal in difficulty to e' in R,,, or  (ii) e and e' are incomparable in the basic difficulty order, yet e is less than or equal to e' in difficulty in R,.  In Section 5, we shall study the special case of incomplete consistent families -F for which RI. is complete preorder (Fig. 4  gives an example of such families).  111. J~' is a compatible non-consistent family if and only if  In this case R~ is a partial order strictly included in the basic order: there exist at least two items e and e', with e less  than or equal to e' in difficulty in the basic order, yet with e and e' incomparable in R,. This property of inclusion between  R IF and < E explains the term "compatible" given to the corresponding families.  IV. ~F is an incompatible non-consistent family if and only if  R, !t= < G and < E !t= Rte.  PLURAL PSYCHOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENTAL MODELS 225  6. CHAINS OF PATTERNS AND DEVELOPMENTAL PATHS  6.1. Chains and Consistent Chains  We say that a family W of patterns is a chain if and only if for all P, P' c- 16, either PAP' or P'cP.  Using the duality of Section 5.2, one can also say that W is a chain if and only if the associated preorder R, is complete.  There are two extreme cases of chains. First is the chain with a unique pattern P; the associated complete preorder, denoted  by RP, has only two equivalence classes, P and E-P, and every item in P is less difficult (according to Rp) than every item in  P. Secondly the maximal chains, i.e., the chains containing 19 patterns from 000 up to 666. Then the associated complete  preorder is a linear order.  EXAMPLE. Let 16 be the maximal chain (of consistent patterns) {000, 100, 200, 210, 220, 221, 321, 421, 521, 531, 532, 533,  543, 544, 644, 654, 664, 665, 6661.  We denote by < (instead of R,) the corresponding linear order on the items. It  is(1,1)<(1,2)<(2,1)<(2,2)<(3,1)<(1,3)<(1,4)<(1,5)<(2,3)<(3,2)< (3,3)<(2,4)<(3,4)<(1,6)<(2,5)<(2,6)<(3,5)<(3,6).  The chains can be classified according to the taxonomy of Section 4. Note that a chain can never be a complete consistent  family since its associated preorder is always complete (and thus different from the basic order). We consider only the chains  that are also incomplete consistent families, and we call them consistent chains. Using previous results, we see that a  consistent chain 16 can be characterized by the following two equivalent properties:  IV is a chain containing only consistent patterns: 16 (-- Y.  W is a complete preorder such that for all e, e' in E, e < E e' implies eR, e'.  The above example is a consistent maximal chain.  How many consistent chains are there? We do not know the answer (this is an example of a simple question with an answer that  is not simple at all). On the other hand we know the number of maximal consistent chains: 87, 516.  If we cannot count consistent chains, we can nevertheless structure the set of all consistent chains. It is partially ordered  by the inclusion order W ~-: 16'. Since, as is clear, if W and V are consistent chains, the meet W n 16' is a consistent chain  we obtain a meet-semilattice. Moreover, this semilattice satisfies other properties that one summarizes by saying that it is a  "median semilattice," i.e., a semilattice "near" to a distributive lattice (for more information see Bandelt & Barthelemy,  1984, and references therein).  Remark. According to the duality between families and binary relations, the number of maximal consistent chains is the number  of linear orders containing the basic order, here the product order of two linear orders. This number is also equal  226 MONJARDET AND NETCHINE-GRYNBERG  to the cardinality of a certain set of "standard Young tableaux" and is given by the Frame-Thrall-Robinson formula:  18!  (1 ...6)(2...7)(3...8) (=87, 516).  See for example, Aigner (1979, Chap. 3.4). Note that the number of linear orders contaning a product of more than two linear  orders is not generally known.  6.2. Some Types of Consistent Developmental Paths  In the case of a cumulative development we can interpret a chain of patterns as the developmental pathway of a particular  subject: then, each pattern represents a state of development of this subject. We consider below three types of consistent  developmental pathways (defined as consistent chains of patterns).  6.2.1. The "horizontal" developmental paths. We say that a pattern P is a horizontal pattern if and only if it satisfies the  condition  [(i, j) E P] implies [for k = 1, 2, 3 and 1<j, (k, 1) e P, and for k < i, (k, j) e P].  Note that this definition implies that such a pattern is consistent.  In words a horizontal pattern is characterized by the fact that a subject (giving this response) can pass an item at level j  on the scale Ez only if he passes all the items at a lower level on E2 and at an arbitrary level on E, , and all the items at  the same level on E2 and at a lower level on E, .  Obviously, the term "horizontal" is arbitrary and is only used here because we chose to place horizontally the scale E, on the  graphical representations of E, x Ez. Figures 3A and 3B give two examples of horizontal patterns.  It is easy to see that there are 19 (including 000) horizontal patterns and that they form a maximal consistent chain.  Denoting it by A", we have  .*' = 1000, 100, 110, 111, 211,..., 655, 665, 666 1.  This chain appears "on the right" in Fig. 2. The corresponding linear order between the items is represented in Fig. 3C.  c  X X  X X X 'horizontal"  Patterns  X X X X X X  e  X X X x X X X X X  D  The 'horizontal" 443 333 F=1111,222,333,444,5551 linear order  FIGURE 3  PLURAL PSYCHOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENTAL MODELS 227  We say that a consistent chain of patterns W defines a horizontal developmental pathway if every pattern in W is a horizontal  pattern, or equivalently if W 9 ~*'. So there are as many horizontal developmental paths of subchains of *', or as complete  preorders containing the linear order represented in Fig. 3C (i.e., 2`9). Figure 3D represents the complete preorder  associated with the horizontal developmental pathway  = {l11,222,333,444,555}.  Note that in this case only scale E2 is relevant.  6.2.2. The "vertical" developmental pathways. Similarly, one defines vertical (consistent) patterns by the following: P is a  vertical pattern if and only if it satisfies the condition  [(i, j) E P] implies [for l =1, 2,..., 6 and k < i, (k, l) E P,  and for 1 < j, (i, 1) E P].  Figures 4A and 4B represent two examples of such patterns.  There are 19 vertical patterns forming a maximal consistent chain denoted by Y/' (on the left in Fig. 2), and the associated  linear order is represented in Fig. 4C. We say that every subchain of Y," defines a vertical developmental path. So there are  2'9 such paths. Figure 4D represents the complete preorder associated with the path {600, 660}; here, only the scale E, is  relevant.  6.2.3. The "central" developmental paths. We say that a pattern P is central if and only if it satisfies the condition  [(i, j) E P] implies [for (k, 1) with k + l < i + j, (k, lc- P].  In words, when a subject characterized by such a pattern passes items (i, j), he passes all the items with a sum of levels  lower that i + j.  One can see that there are 37 central patterns (an example is given in Fig. 5A). So contrary to the horizontal and vertical  cases, there are several maximal chains of central patterns.  c  e   X X D  x X   X X X X 0  x x X X   X x 'vertical" X X   X X patterns X X 0  The 'vertical' 640 660 F=1600,6601 linear order  FIGURE  480/32/3-2  228 MONJARDET AND NETCHINE-GRYNBERG  s  c  x  x x x x x x x x x x x  543 F=1100,210,321,432,543,654,665+  FIGURE 5  We say that a consistent chain of patterns W defines a central developmental pathway if every pattern in W is a central  pattern.  A central path is maximal if the corresponding chain is maximal and one can prove that there are 5184 ( = 2' .6') such maximal  central paths.  Figures 5B and 5C show two examples of linear orders associated with two maximal central developmental paths. Figure 5D shows  the complete preorder associated with the central path defined by 1100, 210, 321, 432, 543, 654, 6651.  CONCLUSION  We have already explained in the Introduction in what sense the ordinal plural model may be considered a generalization of the  Guttman scale. Now we will comment first on some of its characteristics and properties and contrast them with the Guttman  model implications. Then we will indicate some future directions for research in the study of the properties of the plural  model and in its use in the field of developmental psychology.  Our generalization may seem fairly simple: in the example taken, we merely consider the product of two linear orders, instead  of one such order. But even in this apparently easy case, the effective construction of the "theoretical" objects associated  with the plural model can be quite complicated. It can raise non-trivialand even unsolved-mathematical problems. But in spite  of these difficulties, whenever a plural model is suggested by theoretical considerations, it makes possible a distinctive  description of response patterns, of populations, and of developmental sequences, which may be indistinguishable in the linear  order case.  The first step in making explicit the mathematical consequences of any ordinal structure on the items is to construct the  associated "theoretical" patterns, the socalled consistent patterns in our model. If the theoretically postulated order on the  18 items of the example had been a linear order, then we would have obtained exactly 19 consistent patterns: 18 associated  with each item e and consisting of all the items less than or equal to e, and the trivial pattern with no item. Moreover, the  set of 18 non-trivial consistent patterns would have been linearly ordered an isomorphic to the set of items. Now in the case  of our direct product structure, first  PLURAL PSYCHOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENTAL MODELS 229  we get a number of consistent patterns (84) much more important than the number of items. Second, the ordered set of these  patterns has a distributive latticial structure like the ordered set of items, but it is no more a direct product. Third, one  reobtains the item structure within the consistent patterns, but by two different ways: with the set of 18 simple patterns on  one hand, and with the set of 18 cosimple patterns on the other. Note in the Guttman case that these simple and cosimple  patterns coincide because an item is less than or equal to another in difficulty if and only if it is no more difficult than  this other item.  Let us emphasize that although the operations of enumerating and structuring the consistent patterns are not too difficult in  our case (direct product of two chains), neither are they trivial.  As to the determination of families of consistent patterns associated with the basic order, the taxonomy of all possible  families is the same in its principle under both the Guttman-like linear order model and the plural model. However, under the  plural model the referential class of complete consistent families admits many such populations, while in the linear order  model, only one family-the set of 19 consistent patterns-can be said to be complete consistent. In consequence, the  determination of the three other classes is also much easier in linear than in plural models. Actually, in our plural model  the working out of the taxonomy of populations has raised non-trivial problems which have required a new mathematical result  (on the boolean codings of distributive lattices).  With regard to developmental pathways, while the Guttman model posits essentially just one way coinciding with the 19  consistent patterns (any other path being a subset of this one), the number and variety of pathways become very important  under the plural model. The enumeration of all maximal paths uses a deep combinatorial result (the Frame-Thrall-Robinson  formula) and the number of all developmental pathways remains unknown. However, specific paths and types of paths can be  described according to their psychological significance.  In order to obtain new advances in using the model, future research directions concern the formalization of some important  characteristics of the plural paradigm in the developmental model framework. How can we precisely define a developmental  dimension (for a given population)? For example, how can we express "unidimensional" developments as contrasted with  "multidimensional developments"? Note that the instance of the central patterns in Section 6.2.3 shows a notion of central  development that cannot be formalized by a single complete preorder on the items or on the subject, i.e., by a Guttman scale.  Another related problem is to formalize a notion of "independence" (or of dependence) between the two initial scales, for a  population, within this ordinal model. In addition, ad hoc methods will have to be devised in order to analyse the  correspondance between observed data and psychological hypotheses expressed in terms of plural models. It is clear that such  methods should have to encompass statistical aspects of the data, especially frequency counts of the observed patterns. It may  also be worthwhile introducing probabilistic assumptions in the model.  Another problem encountered in extending the use of the model is its  230 MONJARDET AND NETCHINE-GRYNBERG  generalization to more than two dimensions. Here we must distinguish between the methodological choice implied by the  definition of a model expressing theoretical hypotheses already formulated in the psychological field, prior to any data  collection, and the mathematical construction of this model. Although the methodological strategy remains invariant in all  cases, the mathematical construction can nonetheless raise ever more difficult questions as the number of dimensions  increases. At present, the mathematical elaboration of the properties of the model provides a general basis for the study of  plural developements. It helps to clarify the various structural aspects of the "reality" implied in a plural experimental  paradigm. It provides a rich language for characterizing types of populations as well as developmental pathways.  REFERENCES  AIGNER, M. (1979). Combinatorial theory. New York: Springer-Verlag.  BANDELT, H. J., & BARTHELEMY, J. P. (1984). Medians in median graphs. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 8, 131-142.  BARBUT, M., & MONJARDET, B. (1970). Ordre et Classification, Algebre et Combinatoire (2 tomes). Paris: Hachette.  BARTHELEMY, J. P., FLAMENT, CL., & MONJARDET, B. (1982). Ordered sets and social sciences. In 1. Rival (Ed.), Ordered sets.  (pp. 721-758). Dordrecht: Reidel.  BENTLER, P. M. (1980). The study of cognitive development through modeling within qualitative data. In R. H. Khave & H. Spada  (Eds.), Developmental models of thinking. New York: Academic Press. BIRKHOFF, G. (1967). Lattice theory. Colloquium  Publications, Vol. 25, Providence: Amer. Math. Society.  COGIS, O. (1980). La dimension Ferrers des graphs orientes. These, University Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris.  CoGts, O. (1982). On the Ferrers dimension of a digraph. Discrete Mathematics, 38, 47-52. COOMBS, C. H. (1964). A theory of  data. New York: Wiley.  COOMBS, C. H., & KAo, R. C. (1955). Nonmetric factor analysis. Engineering Research Bulletin, No. 38. University of Michigan,  Ann Arbor: Michigan Press.  DoIGNON, J. P., & FALMAGNE J. C. (1985). Spaces for the assessment of knowledge. International Journal Man-Machine Studies,  23, 175-196.  DoIGNON, J. P., DUCAMP, A., & FALMAGNE, J. C. (1984). On realizable biorders and the biorder dimension of a relation. Journal  of Mathematical Psychology, 28, 73-109.  DUCAMP, A., & FALMAGNE, J. C. (1969). Composite measurement. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 6, 359-390.  FLAMENT, Cl. (1964). Analyse d'un questionnaire bidimensionnel. Bulletin du C.E.R.P., 13, 4, 245-257. FLAMENT, Cl. (1976).  L'analyse booleenne de questionnaire. Paris: Mouton.  GREEN, D., FORD, M. P., & FLAMER, G. B. (1971) (Eds). Measurement and Piaget. New York: McGrawHill.  GRIGGS, J. R. (1984). The Sperner property. Annals of Discrete Mathematics, 23, 397-407.  GUTTMAN, L. (1950). The basis for scalogram analysis. In S. A. Stouffer, et al. (Eds.), Measurement and prediction. Princeton,  NJ: Princeton Univ. Press.  GUTTMAN, L. (1950). The principal components of scale analysis. In S. A. Stouffer, et al. (Eds.), Measurement and prediction.  Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press.  HENNING, H. J., & RUDINGER, G. (1985). Analysis of qualitative data in developmental psychology. In J. R. Nesselroade & A. Von  Eye (Eds.), Individual development and social change. New York: Academic Press.  PLURAL PSYCHOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENTAL MODELS 231  KOPPEN, M. G. M (1987). On finding the bidimension of a relation. Journal of Mathematical PSvchology, 31, 155-178.  MATALON, B. (1962). Une generalisation multidimensionnelle de 1'analyse hierarchique. Bulletin du CE.R.P., 11, 1, 45-57.  MATALON, B. (1965). L'analyse hierarchique. Paris: Mouton.  MONJARDET, B. (1970). Tresses, fuseaux, preordres et topologies. Mathematiques et Sciences humaines, 30, 11-22.  MONJARDET, B., & WILLS, R. (1988). On finite lattices generated~by their doubly irreducible elements. Annals of Discrete  Mathematics, in press.  NESSELROADE, J. R., & VON EYE, A. (Eds.) (1985). Individual development and social change. New York: Academic Press.  NETCHINE-GRYNBERG, G. (1976). Verification experimentale de relations d'ordre et analyse factorielle. Rapport au 21 eme  Congres International de Psychologie, Paris.  NETCHINE-GRYNBERG, G. (1981). Reference experimentale complexe et faits de developpement. Discussion paper, E.P.H.E., 3rd  section.  NETCHINE-GRYNBERG, G. (1984). Developpement modele et modeles de developpement. Psvchologie franfaise, 29 (1), 22-28.  NETCHINE-GRYBERG, G., & NETCHINE, S. (1981). Le developpement mental et les temporalites de 1'enfance. In M. Hurtig & P.  Rondal (Eds.), Introduction a la psychologie de l'enfam. Liege: Mardaga. RIVAL, 1. (ED.) (1982). Ordered sets. Dordrecht:  Reidel.  POUZET, M. & RICHARD, D. (Eds.), (1984). Orders: Descriptions and roles. Annals of Discrete Mathematics, 23.  SHYE, S. (1978). Partial order scalogram analysis. In J. C. Lingoes, E. E. Roskam, & I. Borg (Eds. ), Theory construction and  data analysis in the behavioral sciences (pp. 265-278). Jossey-Bass. STOUFFER, S. A., et al. (1950). Measurement and  prediction. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press. WOHLWILL, J. F. (1973). The studv of behavioral development. New York: Academic  Press.  RECEIVED: September 9, 1986