10.1016/0022-2496(88)90013-2
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 32, 285-297 (1988)  The Psychophysical Function of Binocular Space Perception  JAN DROSLER  Universit6t Regensburg  A psychophysical study of binocular space perception is conducted because our understanding about this psychological  phenomenon is inadequate for several reasons. The traditional psychophysical function induces a dependency of apparent  distance on apparent direction. However, it fails to capture the uniqueness of the visual origin, as opposed to the location  of two eyes in physical space, and is highly irregular at the boundaries of visual space. All of these deficiencies may be  attributed to the fact that the traditional psychophysical function was developed with the sole objective of fitting the data.  A general postulate concerning the generic psychophysical function is presented first in order to introduce a psychologically  meaningful invariance property. Invariance is defined as perceptability of rigid motion. The postulate amounts to the  application of R. D. Luce's ((1959). On the possible psychophysical laws. Psychological Review, 66, 81-95) principle for  "possible psychophysical laws," weakened for non-Euclidean perceptual spaces. Second, the paper presents different possible  psychophysical laws for binocular space perception. This presentation leads to  C= /z'+cz, with z as the (complex-valued) stimulus localization, c as the (real-valued) interpupillary distance of the  subject, and C as the (complex-valued) localization in the visual plane. This function captures most of the empirical  horopters in a qualitatively valid manner. Moreover, the function is shown to be a conformal map and thus satisfies the  general principle of independence of apparent distance and apparent direction. Finally, the relationship among the laboratory  plane, the visual plane, and Euclidean maps of the visual plane is discussed. ` 1988 Academic Press, Inc.  PSYCHOPHYSICS VERSUS PSYCHOLOGICAL SCALING  In binocular perception, visual space has several characteristics that clearly distinguish it from other linear spaces  occurring in psychology. Empirical results caused Luneburg (1947, 1950) to contend that binocular perception generates a  nonlinear visual space.  Occasionally, the question whether the psychophysical function is at least partially determined by the geometry of visual  space has been raised. In that case, postulates about the geometry should be stated before those concerning the psy  Requests for reprints should be sent to Jan Drosler, Institut fur Psychologie, Universitat Regensburg, Postfach 3 97, 84  Regensburg, FRG. This is a revision of a paper read at the Fechner Memorial Conference, Universitat Bonn, June 25, 1987.  285  0022-2496/88 83.00  Copyright t() 1988 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  286 JAN DROSLER  chophysical function. Because, e.g., any hyperbolic plane is bounded by a so-called fundamental curve, investigators might  expect a specific psychophysical function which maps the unbounded Euclidean laboratory plane into a bounded visual plane.  However, the boundary actually is an empirical aspect of the visual plane. Should the difference of binocular parallax  ("lateral disparity") elicit the proximal stimulus for binocular distance perception, then all stimuli producing a subliminal  disparity will be mapped onto the boundary. Even if this holds true for pin-point lights at about a 20-m distance from the  subject as well as for the stars in the night sky, light years away, these facts by themselves do not determine the  psychophysical function.  Gauss' theorema egregium states that the structure of a plane is solely a function of its intrinsic properties. Thus, it is  expedient to investigate the structure of visual space, including its metric, separately from any psychophysical dependency.  As far as geometry is concerned, this structure is ascertainable from observations within the plane. Therefore, experimental  investigations of perceptual spaces can be based on perceptual judgment alone without any regard for psychophysical  dependencies.  A program of research in the psychophysics of visual space requires a stepwise procedure. The first stage concerns finding the  psychophysical law, which transforms physical horopters into visual configurations, i.e., mathematical formulations of the  horopter's attributes. The function in question would transform directional horopters into radial straight lines and distance  horopters into concentric circles around the subject. The second stage deals with analysis of the geometry of visual space.  The two steps are independent of one another. Hence, the ensuing discussion may refer to the first one alone.  Multidimensional Psychophysics  Psychophysics, as a subdiscipline of experimental perceptual psychology, is usually practiced in one dimension. In fact,  measurement-related theoretical investigation of the varying perceptual intensities may be regarded as the basis for any  psychophysical study of perception. A perceptual intensity is measurable only if a homomorphism into the real numbers exists.  This intensity must be measurable in order to study any functional relationship with physical intensities. This is because the  term "function" signifies a numerical mapping. Correspondingly, multidimensional psychophysics requires measurement  theoretical investigations in each of the perceptual dimensions concerned.  For the purposes of the present study, the problem of coordinatization of the visual plane will be regarded as settled. The  foundational problems have been studied by Beals, Krantz, and Tversky (1968) and Drosler (1979) and therefore will not be  discussed further in this paper.  This paper is of broader scope than only binocular perception. The research attempts to answer questions about psychophysical  dependencies of perceptual spaces by utilizing a general approach. Results will be derived from assumptions about the generic  psychophysical function.  PSYCHOPHYSICAL FUNCTION OF BINOCULAR SPACE PERCEPTION 287  PREVIOUS WORK  Experimental data provide the empirical basis for investigating the psychophysics of perceptual space. In the study of  binocular visual space, data usually are presented in the form of horopters. A horopter is a stimulus configuration which is  judged constant with regard to a definite, perceptual attribute such as "straightness" or "direction."  For the purpose of simplicity, the present investigation explicitly concerns only two-dimensional stimulus configurations and  the corresponding visual plane. This approach introduces no undue restrictions into the discussion. Only if the family of  stimulus planes containing the centers of rotation of both eyes, as well as the corresponding visual planes, is parametrized  by an angle of elevation /3 will both three-dimensional spaces be represented. According to empirical reports found in the  related literature, elevation appears to be mapped by a psychophysical identity transformation. The angle /3 may be identical  for both spaces.  Horopters  Distance horopters are those stimulus configurations that are perceived as lying on a constant (semi-)circle about the  subject. Directional horopters are the stimulus configurations that are perceived by the experimental subject as radially  extending straight lines in the horizontal plane. It is understood, of course, that the physical stimulus arrangements usually  do not possess the characteristics of straightness or circularity. These attributes are based solely on the subject's judgment.  A stimulus configuration of  x2+y2-2cxcoty-c2=0  has been traditionally accepted as a distance horopter. In the formuia, 2c is the interpupillary distance. The angle of  parallax of the stimulus is designated by y. These "Vieth-Miiller circles" are named after G. U. A. Vieth and Johannes Muller,  who recorded Vieth's ideas concerning distance horopters in his classical textbook of physiology (1838).  In the binocular laboratory a stimulus configuration of  -x2+ y2+2xycot 2cp-c2=0 (2)  is traditionally accepted as an empirical directional horopter. The value 2c is the subject's interpupillary distance and cp  is the angle of slope of the hyperbola's asymptotes. The formula was suggested by Hillebrand (1902) in order to capture his  experimental data. It is now known as "Hillebrand's Hyperbola." See Fig. 1.  Luneburg's Psychophysical Function  Modern experimental research was carried out mainly by Indow, Inoue, and Matsushima (1962, 1963), Zajaczkowska (1956), as well  as Foley (1966). Their  2$$ JAN DROSLER  Ftc. 1. Top view of the stimulus plane, containing a sample of Vieth-Muller circles and Hillebrand's hyperbolas. The subject's  eyes are located at L = is and R = -ic.  research findings contributed to the study of horopters and the geometry of visual space. Apparently no novel psychophysical  functions were proposed beyond the one given by Luneburg (1947, 1950), in which he used a Fechnerian type of argument.  In order to simplify some of the algebra involved, the following complex-valued notation will be used: z = x + iy, i = _1/ 7 .  Luneburg's psychophysical function is  zr42exp(-Qy+i(p)  =2expI-Qtan-1G2 +22 2/+i2tan-t( x2 2x2 2)].  y -y +c  Here cp denotes the parameter of Hillebrand's hyperbolas and y designates that of the Vieth-Muller circles. Parameter c stands  for the interpupillary distance of the subject and a is a personal constant for the subject, representing sensitivity in  binocular depth perception. This psychophysical function transforms Vieth-Muller circles into loci of equal apparent distance  and Hillebrand hyperbolas into apparent straight radial lines. Hence, it captures the information contained in the empirical  distance horopters, as well as in the directional horopters.  An interesting feature of the function A is that its absolute value JAI can operate as a predictor for apparent distance. This  was contended by Luneburg (1947, 1950) and experimentally demonstrated by Indow et al. (1962, 1963). In this manner,  application of A to a stimulus configuration performs more than one would expect of a psychophysical function in a  non-Euclidean context. With respect to radial extensions, JAI can be interpreted metrically. This is true because integrating  along geodesics amounts to determining the length of straight lines.  PSYCHOPHYSICAL FUNCTION OF BINOCULAR SPACE PERCEPTION 289  The function .i, however, is not a conformal mapping. Moreover, it does not capture the uniqueness of the visual origin as  opposed to the physical prevalence of two eyes. The physical locus of the subject's eyes is smeared over the entire rear  boundary of the visual plane by this map. Therefore, it represents neither the single binocular visual "ego-center" nor the  perception of rigid displacement of stimulus configurations.  POSSIBLE PSYCHOPHYSICAL FUNCTIONS  Luce's Principle  Luce (1959) proposed a principle, which now bears his name, for formulating possible psychophysical laws. He postulated that  admissible transformations must be taken into account in the physical, as well as in the psychological, scales, if they are to  be connected by any law of nature. Stated more precisely, an admissible numerical transformation of the stimulus variables  should result in an admissible numerical transformation of the perceptual magnitudes. This criterion was introduced as  "dimensional invariance" by Buckingham (1914).  At first sight, Luce's principle appears to be open for multidimensional generalization. Admissible transformations, in the  sense of measurement theory, can be regarded as motion on the real line. In a corresponding multidimensional generalization,  e.g., in the two dimensions of a plane, one could interpret admissible transformations as movement in the ordinary sense. In  this manner, one could properly represent motion as an automorphism.  More thorough reasoning shows, however, that this type of generalization is only possible in very special cases. Luce's  principle requires more of the psychophysical function than merely mapping the set of stimuli. It also requires the mapping of  the set of admissible stimulus transformations onto the set of admissible perceptual transformations for each pair of planes.  Such a close connection between stimulus and perception is unusual. The mapping of one linear vector space onto another serves  as an illustration. This case, however, rarely occurs in the psychological laboratory because usually only the stimuli are  elements of a linear vector space, not the corresponding perceptual events.  A mere multidimensional generalization of Luce's principle cannot be applied to binocular visual space, because the set of the  Euclidean automorphisms cannot be mapped onto the set of non-Euclidean automorphisms. Thus, a weakening of Luce's principle is  proposed here. It consists of the postulate that the respective transformations are mapped onto each other only in the small,  i.e., locally. This leads to a psychophysical law invariant with regard to the Riemannian metric. Formally, this requires that  the line element of visual space is proportional to that of the physical stimulus space due to a location-dependent factor of  proportionality. In differential geometry, maps with this property are said to be conformal.  290 JAN DROSLER  DEFINITION 1. Let f be a function which maps a region G of the (x, y)-plane onto a region G' of the (u, v)-plane. Let f have a  nonvanishing derivative in G and let all partial derivatives of f exist in G. The map f is conformal iff the CauchyRiemann  partial differential equations  au ev au av  ax ay, ey ax  are satisfied.  A conformal map of the stimulus into the perceptual space would transform the distance and directional horopters into ordinary  polar coordinates. It would render the distance horopters as (semi-)circles about the visual origin and the directional  horopter as a straight line through the same origin.  Only if a psychophysical function is a conformal map may a small rigid displacement of several stimulus points be perceived as  a small rigid displacement without distortion. It is postulated here that perception of small rigid displacement is a  characteristic of binocular visual space. Thus, one cannot dispense with the requirement of conformal mapping. Subsequently,  only conformal maps, which transform at least one family of physical horopters into polar visual coordinate lines, will be  considered.  A Psychophysical Function Based upon the Vieth-Miiller Circles  The conditions imposed by accepting any one of the horopters as well as the author's generalization of Luce's principle are  strict enough to formulate the result in terms of the following theorems.  THEOREM 1. A function q which maps Vieth-Muller circles into concentric circles conformally is given iff  Z + ic ` ZH (Z -Icl  The line of proof for choosing a psychophysical function which is a conformal mapping is simple: the directional and the  distance horopters are to be mapped into polar coordinates. For this mapping, introduction of complex notation will  substantially simplify notation. The argument and the absolute value of a complex variable written in polar form are  orthogonal to each other. Hence, the problem of finding a suitable psychophysical function is solved as soon as the families  of orthogonal trajectories to the empirical horopters have been found. Standard methods are available for this purpose.  PSYCHOPHYSICAL FUNCTION OF BINOCULAR SPACE PERCEPTION 291  Proof. By setting the scale factor in (1) as c = 1 temporarily the orthogonal trajectories can be found from the Vieth-Muller  circles' differential equation  dy y2-x2-1  dx 2xy  Solving this differential equation for its reciprocal negative right-hand side gives the orthogonal trajectories to the  Vieth-Muller circles as  x2+(y+1)2  x 2+ (y- 1)2 = const.  After reintroducing the scale factor c this is  x2 + (Y+ c)2 const. (5 ) x2+(y- C)2 -_  The curves constitute two families of circles, one around each of the subject's eyes (Fig. 2). For all stimuli on one of these  curves, the ratio of the distances to both eyes located at i is constant. The function q maps stimuli situated on any of  these circles onto a particular radial line.  FIG. 2. A sample of Vieth-Muller circles together with some of their orthogonal trajectories of Eq. (5).  480/32/3-6  292 JAN DROSLER  Introducing the Vieth-Muller circles (1), as well as their orthogonal trajectories (5), into a function as absolute value and  argument, respectively, results in  _xz+(y+C)z 1 2cx x z+ C zexpCitan- G z+yz-Cz)]  Writing the function as a dependence of visual localization q on stimulus location z results in (4).  For a reversal of the inference, the conformality of the map is proven. Let n = u + iv, and  ~1(Z)=n(x+iY)= x + i(y + C) (X +i(y-C))'  Let  W= 1 x2+(y+C)z  -log 2 z.  2 x +(y-C)  Then, the first Cauchy-Riemann differential equation gives  au _ av_ _ _ 1 ( 2cx )~ 4cxy sin W + 2c(xz - yz + Cz) COS W  ax ay -exp -tan- yz+xz_CZ (Yz+xz)z+2cz(xz-Y2)+C The second Cauchy-Riemann differential equation in the present case results in  au_ av 1 ( 2cx )~ 2c(yz-xz-CZ) sin W+4cxycos W  ay ax = exp -tan- yz + xz - Cz (Yz + xz)z + 2CZ(xz - yz) + c Thus, the function r1(z) fulfills the Cauchy-Riemann conditions.  Properties of the Map  As a psychophysical function, (4) transforms the Vieth-Muller circles into concentric circles around the subject.  Separating the stimulus coordinate z = x + iy results in  Zz-Zz  ~~1~ =exp(-Y)=exp Ctanh-1 (ZZ+Z2+CZ)]  arg q = log z + is  ( I )~ . Z-ZC  The angle y represents binocular parallax, the parameter of the Vieth-Muller circles. Its argument is the logarithm of the  ratio of the stimulus' distances to both eyes at ic. The function q maps Vieth-Muller circles onto concentric circles. The  function rl also maps the circles that are orthogonal to the Vieth-Muller circles (5) onto radial lines.  PSYCHOPHYSICAL FUNCTION OF BINOCULAR SPACE PERCEPTION 293  A Psychophysical Function Based on Hillebrand's Hyperbolas  THEOREM 2. A function C which maps Hillebrand's hyperbolas into radial straight lines conformally exists iff  Proof. Let the scale factor c= 1 for the purpose of finding the orthogonal trajectories of Hillebrand's hyperbolas by means of  their differential equation:  dy Y(y-+x2-1)  dx x(y-+x'-+1)'  The differential equation of the orthogonal trajectories results from substituting dy/dx with -dx/dy in (7),  dy_ x(x2+y2_ +l)  dx y (x2 + y-- 1)  It has the solution  (x.2+Y2)2-2( y2-x2)+1-a4=0.  After reinstating the scale factor c, its solution is  ((x2+Y2)2-2C2(Y2-x2)+C4)114-a=0.  Again, constructing complex-valued functions in polar form using both families of orthogonal trajectories gives  ICI eiar,I=((x2+Y2)2-2C2(Y2-x2)+c4)1/4expCi I tan-' Cx2 2x2 2/J. -y +c  Expressing the formula as the dependency of visual localization q on stimulus localization z leads to (6), a considerable  simplification.  Reversing the inference again demonstrates the conformality of the map. Calculating the Cauchy-Riemann differential equations  for polar coordinates results in  ~(z) = ~(re'B) = Re'&,  R = (r4 + 2c2 cos (20) r-' + C4)114,  and  1 1 sin(20)r2 0=-tan  2 cos(20)r2 + c2  294 JAN DROSLER  Partial differentiation yields for the first equation  OR R a0 r3 + cz cos(2B) r  ar - r ad - (ra + 2cz cos(20)rz + c4)T4.  The second equation applied to the psychophysical function results in  1 OR _ 00 _ cz sin(20) r  r TO _ -R Or (r4 + 2cz cos(2B)r2 + c4)3/4.  Thus, for C the Cauchy-Riemann conditions are fulfilled.  Properties of the Map  The orthogonal trajectories to Hillebrand's hyperbolas (8) constitute a family of lemniscates with parameter a. Its square,  az, denotes the product of the distances of the stimulus from the two eyes, located at ci (Fig. 3).  An analysis of the complex coordinate of the stimulus as z = x + iy results in  R = 1~1 = ((xz + yz)z - 2cz(yz -xz) + c4)l14  Cx 2xy  0=arg cp  ~==-tan- z-yz+cz .  The argument of C is identical to the parameter ~p of Hillebrand's hyperbola, which represents the angle of slope of its  tangent lines. This map, as a psychophysical function, would represent points on a common Hillebrand hyperbola as having equal  apparent direction from the observer. It correctly maps the directional horopters (2) (Fig. 3).  R  FIG. 3. Some hyperbolas of Hillebrand as directional horopters in the stimulus plane together with the distance horopters of  Eq. (8) introduced here.  PSYCHOPHYSICAL FUNCTION OF BINOCULAR SPACE PERCEPTION 295  Their curvatures, in general, are somewhat less than that of the Vieth-Muller circles. With specific parametrization, the  curves may have an indentation that is straight ahead with respect to the subject.  THE APPROPRIATE PSYCHOPHYSICAL FUNCTION  Both psychophysical functions considered in the preceding paragraphs are conformal maps and each captures one set of stimulus  horopters. The function ?I transforms Vieth-Muller circles into concentric visual circles around the subject. The function C  transforms Hillebrand's hyperbolas into visual radial lines. In order to denote which function is more appropriate, further  empirical consequences must be explored. Relevant evidence is available in terms of experimental data concerning the  directional alleys of Blumenfeld (1913), which have been replicated by Indow et al. (1962, 1963) and Indow (1979).  The subject is asked to arrange stimuli into an apparent straight line. The line originates from a given point in the  horizontal plane and proceeds perpendicularly to the frontal line (which passes through the centers of rotation of both eyes).  The resulting stimulus horopter is a line curved slightly convex toward the sagittal line. The experiment usually is carried  out for two such configurations, symmetrical with respect to the sagittal line. This in turn produces the "alley" stimulus  configuration. Given an invertible psychophysical function, these alleys can be predicted by calculating the stimulus  arrangements in z from a given visual configuration in 11 or respectively.  One finds that the predicted alleys from rl are circular arcs. They possess a curvature which deviates markedly from the  empirical data. The function ~, however, predicts alleys which correspond closely to the data. They are curved only slightly  and exhibit the general tendency of the corresponding empirical horopters. Compared to their empirical counterparts, they do  not converge as strongly with the sagittal line. This discrepancy could be canceled by introducing anisotropy to the visual  plane by means of different scale factors for both dimensions. The author refrains from doing so, because discussions in the  literature indicate that researchers have experienced difficulties in conducting alley experiments (cf. Indow et al., 1962;  Indow, 1979). This is because subjects exhibit a tendency of producing physical alley configurations contrary to experimental  instruction.  The function C does not predict Vieth-Muller circles as distance horopters, although the lemniscates which are introduced in  their place agree better with the empirical data (Foley, 1966) than do the Vieth-Muller circles. This is the case because the  binocular field of vision is limited to a sector of about 45on each side of the sagittal line. Hence, the peripheral sectors  of the Vieth-Muller circles may be disregarded.  296 JAN DR6SLER  CONCLUSION  The result of the present study is that Luce's (1959) principle, after suitable weakening, may be generalized to nonlinear  manifolds in more than one dimension, in order to find possible psychophysical laws. In the present case, the invariance  principle of the subject's capacity to distinguish distances from directions binocularly leads to two possibilities for the  psychophysical function. The function ~: C -> C, z v--. `2 + c2 is chosen because it fulfills the postulated principle of  invariance, has very simple algebraic structure, and captures most of the empirical data. The present approach advocates  strict segregation of the studies of psychophysical dependency from that of the internal structure of the visual plane.  Therefore, this approach lacks the information concerning the metric of the visual plane.  The psychophysical function for binocular vision maps the physical stimuli into a second structure, which is visual space.  Sometimes a third structure, the Euclidean map of visual space (cf. Luneburg, 1947; Indow, 1979), is mentioned in the  discussion.  However, it is of interest only after the intrinsic geometric structure of visual space has been determined.  The derivation of the function, which maps hyperbolic visual space into a Euclidean map, is known as the "Poincare model" (cf.  Klein, 1928); it is discussed in depth by Indow (1979). The bounded visual plane is mapped onto the lower half of a sphere by  means of parallel projection. Then the hemisphere is mapped on the Euclidean plane by means of stereographic projection. A  graphical illustration of the projections is contained in Indow's (1979) paper.  By means of elementary stereometric considerations, the Euclidean map turns out as  0:C-+C ~H4k~(2k- 4k2  I~12  If it is concatenated with the psychophysical function (6), then the Euclidean map of hyperbolic visual localization for any  plane stimulus configuration can be calculated. Visual distances however can be predicted only by integrating along the path  of geodesics, which are the circles intersecting the fundamental circle perpendicularly.  A consideration of these relationships, together with the proposition presented in this paper, leads to a hypothesis about the  cause for the non-Euclidean structure of binocular visual space. Conformal maps preserve the Riemannian property. A conformal  psychophysical function will provide visual space with a Riemannian metric. Among other things this restricts the set of  possible automorphisms. Existence of an absolute threshold for binocular disparity narrows the set to one particular  automorphism, the hyperbolic one.  PSYCHOPHYSICAL FUNCTION OF BINOCULAR SPACE PERCEPTION 297  This is the case because a threshold partitions the set of stimuli in a way that combines all subliminal stimuli into one  class. The stimulus coordinates for all members of this equivalence class of objects are defined by the boundary of the  supraliminal region. This is peculiar to binocular vision, because subliminal disparity does not render the objects invisible,  as, e.g., subliminal brightness would. In the present approach this boundary is given by a lemniscate. In the limit the  sequence of lemniscates approaches a circular form, which is a quadric. Any visually meaningful automorphism of the  supraliminal region must leave this quadric invariant. It is well-known that the only Riemannian automorphism with this  property is the hyperbolic one. The foregoing argument can be extended to three-space and its automorphisms immediately. There  the fundamental (generalized) quadric is the limiting sphere of minimal disparity.  REFERENCES  BEALS, R., KRANTZ, D. H., & TVERSKY, A. (1968). Foundations of multidimensional scaling. Psychological Review, 75(2), 127-142.  BLUMENFELD, W. (1913). Untersuchungen uber die scheinbare Gr6sse im Sehraume. Zeitschrift Psychol. Physiol. Sinnesorg., 65,  241-404.  BUCKINGHAM, E. (1914). On physically similar systems: Illustrations of the use of dimensional equations. Physical Review, 4,  345-376.  DROSLER, J. (1979). Foundations of multi-dimensional metric scaling in Cayley-Klein geometries. British Journal of  Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 32, 185-211.  FOLEY, J. M. (1966). Locus of perceived equidistance as a function of viewing distance. Journal of the Optical Society of  America, 56, 822-827.  HILLEBRAND, F. (1902). Theorie der scheinbaren Grosse bei binokularem Sehen. Denkschriften Akad. Wiss., Math. Naturw. Masse,  72, 255-307.  INDOW, T. (1979). Alleys in visual space. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 19, 221-258.  INDOW, T., INOUE, E., & MATSUSHIMA, K. (1962). An experimental study of the Luneburg theory of binocular space perception. 2.  The alley experiments. Japanese Psychological Research, 4, 17-24. INDOW, T., INOUE, E., & MATSUSHIMA, K. (1963). An  experimental study of the Luneburg theory of binocular space perception. 3. The experiments in a spacious field. Japanese  Psychological Research, 5, 1-27.  KLEIN, F. (1928). Vorlesungen fiber nicht-euklidische Geometrie. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. LUCE, R. D. (1959). On the possible  psychophysical laws. Psychological Review, 66, 81-95. LUNEBURG, R. K. (1947). Mathematical analysis of binocular vision.  Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press.  LUNEBURG, R. K. (1950). The metric of binocular visual space. Journal of the Optical Society of America, 40, 62742.  MLILLER, J. (1838). Handbuch der Physiologic des Menschen. Braunschweig: Vieweg.  ZAJACZKOWSKA, A. (1956). Experimental determination of Luneburg's constants U and K. Quaterly Journal of Experimental  Psychology, 8, 66-78.  RECEIVED: November 25, 1987