10.1016/0022-2496(88)90046-6
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 32, 205-207 (1988)  Book Review  Statistics: Art or Craft?  WILLIAM A. GALE (Ed.). Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1986. pp. xiv + 418. $39.95.  Reviewed by YOSHIo TAKANE  The author, William A. Gale, is a member of the Technical Staff at AT & T Bell Laboratories. He obtained his Ph.D. in Physics  at Rice University in 1969, and his current primary research interest is the application of artificial intelligence in  statistics. He has published Life in the Universe, Westview Press, Boulder, 1979, and Inflation, Oelgeschlager Gunnhaim,  Cambridge, 1981.  The reviewer, Y. Takane, is a Professor of Psychology at McGill University. He was President of the Psychometric Society in  1986-87, and some of his research interests concern stimulus recognition models, multidimensional scaling, and statistical  expert systems.  By 1995 or so, the largest single driving force in guiding general work on data analysis and statistics is going to be the  needs that have to be met to understand and improve data-analytic expert systems, ... .  The above statement was excerpted from the last chapter (Chapter 18) of Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. It is rather  compelling, because it was made by John Tukey, a modern day "prophet" in statistics, to whom we owe much of the current  proliferation of research in robust techniques, exploratory data analysis, and interactive computer graphics for statistical  data analysis (SDA). I like the statement. It is a bit exaggerated, but I interpret it as his usual first-rate rhetoric to  emphasize the importance of nonmathematical aspects of SDA. I like it, because I share his strong conviction that more work  needs to be done on strategic aspects of SDA and their implementation in the form of statistical expert systems (Takane, 1986).  A statistical expert system is a computer implementation of statistical expertise in such a form that "it can provide  intelligent statistical advice, make intelligent decisions, and explain its lines of reasoning for such decisions." Gale and  Pregibon (1984; Pregibon & Gale, 1984) have already taken a big step toward this goal. They have developed a computer program  for simple regression analysis, called REX (regression expert), which checks assumptions underlying regression analysis,  suggests possible corrective actions, carries out necessary computations, and writes  Requests for reprints should be sent to Dr. Yoshio Takane, Department of Psychology, McGill University, 1205 Dr. Penfield  Avenue, Montreal, PQ, H3A 1B1, Canada.  205  0022-2496/88 $3.00  Copyright u.~ 1988 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  206 BOOK REVIEW  a summary report on major results of the analysis. Gale (Chapter 10 of Artificial Intelligence and Statistics) is now working  on a meta expert system, called STUDENT, which learns strategies for SDA through examples worked out by human expert  statisticians, and builds an expert system (like REX for regression analysis) in other analysis domains. This latter attempt  is, of course, much more challenging than merely developing domain specific statistical expert systems.  Both REX and STUDENT extensively use artificial intelligence (AI) techniques. One active area of AT research concerns  acquisition and representation of knowledge in a computer in such a way that it can be efficiently retrieved, modified, and  manipulated to arrive at some form of conclusion. New concepts and programming styles have been invented to suit this purpose.  It was quite natural then that Gale chose to utilize the AT methodology in representing and manipulating strategic knowledge  in statistics. This was the point of initial contact between AT and statistics, which later culminated in the workshop on AT  and statistics at AT & T Bell Labs and the book entitled Artificial Intelligence and Statistics based on the workshop.  For those who, like myself, missed the workshop, while having been interested in the topic, Artificial Intelligence and  Statistics is indeed a welcome volume. In this volume Gale reviews what has been done, what is being done, and what is going  to be done in the future in the development of statistical expert systems, and demonstrates how AT concepts are useful  (Chapters 8 and 10). Pregibon presents a concise, yet vivid, guide to statistical strategy in the light of his experience in  building REX (Chapter 17). The book also contains chapters presenting other people's views and approaches to statistical  strategy and statistical expert systems. Among them I found Chapter 9 by Ellman, Chapter 15 by Oldford and Peters, and Chapter  16 by Hand particularly insightful. Ellman discusses a way of representing computational knowledge particularly suitable for  explanation. Oldford and Peters present an "operational level" view of data analysis, using the collinearity detection problem  as an example. Hand, on the other hand, views data analysis as consisting of several stages (1. formulation of aims, 2.  translation into formal terms, 3. numerical processing, and 4. interpretation). Actual data analysis takes place by cycling  through these stages several times to reach a final conclusion.  As indicated in Chapter 1 of the book, Gale has considerably widened his initial contact between AT and statistics. He also  includes aspects of interaction between these two areas other than the statistical expert systems. Again I found three  chapters of this nature particularly entertaining. Chapter 2 by Spiegelhalter addresses the problem of uncertainty propagation  in expert systems. He argues quite convincingly that nothing other than probability (e.g., belief function, fuzzy set) is  really necessary, and advocates the subjective Bayesian approach to deal with the problem. (There is some follow-up of this in  DeGroot, 1987.) In Chapter 4 Fisher and Langley present a survey of AT approaches to cluster analysis, called conceptual  clustering, which is radically distinct from the numerical taxonomy that we are so accustomed to. In Chapter 13 Butler and  Corter discuss possible applications of psychometric methods to knowledge acquisition. As a psychometrician I was par-  BOOK REVIEW 207  ticularly intrigued by the novel use that they are proposing of the methods with which I am already familiar.  As is usual with a collection of chapters written by different authors, some portions of the book are extremely readable,  while others are not. In general I found it more difficult to understand the chapters written by AT people (with the exception  of Chapters 2, 4, and 13). This, however, may merely reflect my state of knowledge in Al. On the other hand, it may be more  deeply rooted to a general difficulty in communicating AT products. The non-algorithmic nature of the AT programs makes it  difficult to understand what they really do. It also makes evaluation of the programs extremely difficult.  The book is the first of its kind. (See also Haux, 1986, which is, as far as I know, the second of its kind.) The book  demonstrates that although the useful interplay between AT and statistics has just begun, it is already producing interesting  results. However, many challenging tasks (e.g., standardization of statistical knowledge, standardization of statistical  consulting processes) remain to be done in order to go beyond REX and STUDENT, i.e., to build more sophisticated statistical  expert systems fully equipped with the sort of capabilities described by Hand (1984, 1985). A contributor to the book (Huber  in Chapter 12) thinks that the task is formidable if not impossible. I remain curious, not as a bystander, but as a committed  researcher in this area, as to what follow the lead of Artificial Intelligence and Statistics in the next ten years. The only  way to prove that statistics is not an art but a craft is to demonstrate the feasibility of the statistical expert systems.  REFERENCES  DE GROOT, M. H. (Ed.). (1987). Statistical Science, 2 (1), 3--44.  GALE, W. A. & PREGIBON, D. (1984). Constructing an expert system for data analysis by working examples. Compstat 1984  (Proceedings in computational statistics) (pp. 227-236). Wien: Physica-Verlag. HAND, D. J. (1984). Statistical expert systems:  Design. The Statistician, 33, 351-369.  HAND, D. J. (1985), Statistical expert systems: Necessary attributes. Journal of Applied Statistics, 12, 19-27.  HAux, R. (Ed.). (1986). Expert systems in statistics. Stuttgart: Gustav Fischer Verlag.  PREGIBON, D., & GALE, W. A. (1984). REX: An expert system for regression analysis. Compstat 1984 (Proceedings in computational  statistics) (pp. 242-248). Wien: Physica-Verlag.  TAKANE, (1986). Development of cognitive statistics and statistical expert systems. Invited Address. In Proceedings of the  14th annual meeting of the Behauiormeiric Society (pp. 47-48); Japanese Journal of Behariormetrics, 14, 38-40.