10.1016/0022-2496(89)90015-1
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 33, 358-365 (1989)  Book Review  No Harm Intended  MARVIN L. MINSKY AND SEYMOUR A. PAPERT. Perceptrons: An Introduction to Computational Geometry, Expanded Edition. Cambridge,  MA: MIT Press, 1988. Pp. 292. $12.50 (paper).  Reviewed by JORDAN B. POLLACK  The Authors are professors at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Minsky in Electrical Engineering and Papert in  Applied Mathematics. Minsky's major research interests are artificial intelligence (AI) and theories of computation, and  Papert's are cybernetics and child development.  The reviewer received his Ph.D. in Computer Science from the University of Illinois in 1987, and is currently an Assistant  Professor of Computer and Information Science at the Ohio State University. His research currently involves the use of  connectionist models in traditional AI tasks.  INTRODUCTION  By 1969, the date of the publication of Perceptrons, AI was not operating in an ivory-tower vacuum. Money was at stake. And  while this pressured the field into a preference for shortterm achievement, it also put a premium on claims that the sponsor's  investment would bear fruits beyond the immediate product. It [was] almost inevitable for AI to appropriate our work as proof  that neural networks were universally bad. We did not think of our work as killing Snow White... (Papert, 1988, p. 7)  Research on Connectionist and Neural Networks has recently awakened, and is now expecting a valuable kiss from Prince DARPA.'  In fact, 1988 may be the year of connectionism's loss of innocence. Not only has 1988 seen the publication of articles,  including Papert's, about the symbolic/connectionist debate in Daedelus, but also the publication of a provocative special  anti-connectionist issue of Cognition. Finally, to top it off, MIT Press has re-issued Perceptrons, with an new prologue and  epilogue, titled, respectively, "The View from 1988," and "The New Connectionism."  Because this is the third edition of the book, I will focus attention on the new  ' The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency has recently announced a major funding initiative in neural networks.  0022-2496/89 $3.00  Copyright C(:, 1989 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  358  BOOK REVIEW 359  material,' which is more political than scientific. First, however, for those who have not read Perceptrons, I will summarize  its scientific contents. This work, in retrospect, will most likely be viewed as the greatest contribution to the cognitive  sciences made by Minsky or Papert, so it is still important to understand their findings. The book is indeed valuable to those  who intend to work on neural networks from the viewpoint of theoretical computer science, although the field of computational  complexity of parallel algorithms has evolved quite rapidly, and independently, of Minsky and Papert's work.  The book uses some modern mathematics, such as topology and group theory, to explain the computational and adaptive capacities  and limitations of simple networks of threshold logic units, which perform pattern-recognition tests by thresholding linear  combinations of binary input vectors with numerical weights.  First, Minsky and Papert defined the order of a predicate as the size of the largest conjunction in the minimal  sum-of-products logical form for that predicate. Thus while both conjunction and alternation are predicates of order 1,  exclusive-or is a predicate of order 2. The generalization of exclusive-or to more than 2 inputs is parity, which is not of  finite order: a sum of products to represent parity of n inputs has at least one term of size n. As a predicate of non-finite  order is scaled, then, there is no limit to the fan-in of linear threshold units.  Using arguments of symmetry, Minsky and Papert then showed, with their Group Invariance Theorem, that linear threshold  functions which are invariant under a permutation group can be transformed into a function whose coefficients depend only on  the group; a major result is that the only linear (i.e., order 1) functions invariant under such transitive groups as scaling,  translation, and rotation are simple size or area measures. Attempts to use linear threshold functions for, say, optical  character recognition under these transitive conditions are thus doomed to failure.  After a cataloguing of the orders of various geometric functions, Minsky and Papert focused on the problems of learning. They  showed that as various predicates scale, the sizes of coefficients can grow exponentially, thus leading to systems of  impractical memory requirements needing unbounded cycles of a convergence procedure.  No one, in fact, disputes the contribution made by Perceptrons to the study of networks of neuron-like units, or disputes the  authors' results on how such networks scale. The reviewer considers, as deep truth, their lesson that successful learning is  more dependent on what is to be learned than on details of the learning mechanism. It is therefore unsurprising that very hard  cases can be devised for supposedly general purpose learning mechanisms (Blum & Rivest, 1988; Judd, 1987; Kolen, 1988), up to  the problem of categorizing whether or not inputs are "halting tapes for Turing Machines." (p. 226.)  The two major issues in dispute, between Minsky and Papert and the modern  'The new edition refers to reviews of first edition by Newell (1969) and Block (1970).  360 BOOK REVIEW  PDP movement, are first, a matter of responsibility, and second, the interpretation of recent results in the field.  MALICE AFORETHOUGHT  Minsky and Papert surrounded their 1969 mathematical tract with fairly negative judgements and loaded terms, such as the  following quotes, which have been used as evidence (Dreyfus & Dreyfus, 1988; Rumelhart & Zipser, 1986) that they actually  intended to stifle research on perceptron-like models.  Perceptrons have been widely publicized as "pattern recognition" or "learning" machines and as such have been discussed in a  large number of books, journal articles, and voluminous "reports." Most of this writing ... is without scientific value. (p. 4)  We do not see that any good can come of experiments which pay no attention to limiting factors that will assert themselves as  soon as the small model is scaled up to a usable size. (p. 18)  [We] became involved with a somewhat therapeutic compulsion: to dispel what we feared to be the first shadows of a "holistic"  or "Gestalt" misconception that would threaten to haunt the fields of engineering and artificial intelligence... (p. 20)  There is no reason to suppose that any of these virtues carry over to the many layered version. Nevertheless, we consider it  to be an important research problem to elucidate (or reject) our intuitive judgement that the extension is sterile. (p.231)  Despite these pronouncements, in 1988, Minsky and Papert wish to deny their responsibility, or, at least, their  intentionality, in bringing about the decade-long connectionist winter:  One popular version is that the publication of our book so discouraged research on learning in network machines that a  promising line of research was interrupted. Our version is that progress had allready come to a virtual halt because of the  lack of adequate basic theories. (P. xii)  Their explanation is that two problems, recognized by Samuel (1967), and a fundamental principle, stopped all research on  machine learning, perceptrons included. The first problem is the apportionment of credit (or blame) for incorrect global  behavior of a system to specific elements in an interdependent system of such elements. The second problem is the creation of  novel and useful higher-order abstractions. The basic law is that a system must be able to potentially represent what it wants  to learn, and Minsky and Papert assert that perceptrons "had no way to represent the knowledge required for solving certain  problems." (p. xiii)  The credit assignment and novel feature problems are, indeed, central to the "new connectionism." For example, by relaxing the  activation function from a threshold to a sigmoidal, Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams (1986b) were able to demonstrate credit  assignment in multiple layered networks, and Hinton (1986) showed how such networks, when appropriately constrained, could  develop semantically interpretable higher-order elements.  BOOK REVIEW 361  And, although the old new connectionism, circa 1980-1985 (cf. Waltz & Pollack, 1985), was fairly weak on representational  issues, there is currently quite a focus on representation in the new new connectionism (Pollack, 1988; Touretzky, 1986;  Touretzky & Geva, 1987) One reason that is has taken connectionism several years to rediscover the law of representational  adequacy is that there was no body of work in AI involving issues of knowledge representation in neural models.  But the real problem which terminated the research viability of perception-like models was the problem of scaling. Minsky and  Papert asserted that as such learning models based on gradient descent in weight space were scaled up, they would be  impractical due to local minima, extremely large weights and a concurrent growth in convergence time.  So, were they responsible for killing Snow White? No, since intention and action are separable, they were no more responsible  than Bill, who, intending to kill his uncle, is "so nervous and excited [when driving] that he accidentally runs over and  kills a pedestrian, who happens to be his uncle" (Searle, 1980, p. 51). If Minsky and Papert did not intend to stifle the  field of neural networks, then, perhaps, they would act in accordance with their new motto: "We see no reason to choose  sides." (p. xiv)  MALICE AFTERTHOUGHT  Unfortunately, the new epilogue is not in accordance with this relaxed position. Instead, it is an attempt to make good their  assertion, in the prologue, that "little of significance [has] changed since 1969." They take on the new connectionism, as  embodied in the Parallel Distributed Processing (PDP) volumes (McClelland et al., 1986; Rumelhart et al., 1986a), although  they focus mainly on Chapter 8 (Rumelhart et al., 1986b).  Some of the new writing echoes their earlier battle rhetoric. In a long paragraph, for example, they discuss the new  connectionism as a "new and heated.. intellectually aggressive movement to establish a paradigm." It is not just a movement,  it is a "connectionist revolution," fomented by the professional agitators Rumelhart, McClelland, and their "14  collaborators," who published a "manifesto." Even though they only criticize Chapter 8, they hope that the reader will "seize  the general" point. Finally, the authors wrap themselves in the "flag" of unsolvable problems (pp. 247-248).  Minsky and Papert point out, rightly, that Rumelhart et al. have no result, like the Perceptron Convergence Theorem  (Rosenblatt, 1962), that the generalized delta rule is guaranteed to find solutions when they exist, and that "little has been  proved about the range of problems upon which [the generalized delta rule] works both efficiently and dependably." (p. 260)  Since, despite the fact that they "consider [ed ] it an important research problem," they have no new results about  multi-layered perceptrons in the 19 years since the book's first publication, they, in fact, know just how hard it is to  answer questions  362 BOOK REVIEW  like this. But they also miss the fact that such questions are not of central concern to psychologists, such as Rumelhart and  McClelland, who might even use firstorder systems in pursuit of a cognitive model (Rumelhart & McClelland, 1986) which is  empirically testable and deniable (Pinker & Prince, 1988).  Minsky and Papert go on to give a cursory reexamination of scaling issues for the generalized delta rule, and, in fine form,  conclude that:  We do not know if this fact is significant, but many of the small examples described in PDP could have been solved as quickly  by means of exhaustive search-that is by systematically assigning and testing all combinations of small integer weights. (p.  262)  We do know, however, that generalizations from single pieces of evidence (i.e., PDP Chapter 8), are usually poor. While one  could indeed solve the credit assignment problem for the seven weights of the exclusive-or network using exhaustive search,  one could not do it for a text-to-phoneme network (Sejnowski & Rosenberg, 1986) with its 105 weights or an autonomous vehicle  controller with 106 (Pomerleau, 1988).  On the other hand, we also know that for certain classes of very hard problems, there are no algorithms which scale  significantly better than exhaustive search, unless they are approximations. But there are many such impractical and  approximate methods which are in practical use worldwide. Despite the fact that the Travelling Salesman Problem is  NP-complete, salespersons do travel, and often optimally. Many problems which come up in operations research and automated  manufacturing, such as integer programming, are similarly combinatorial in nature, but this is not used as evidence to stop  work on these problems.  Large numbers and long convergence times may be the cost of doing business in machine learning, until, and this is really  doubtful, somebody discovers the secret of alchemical intelligence, turning the lead of NP into the gold of P.  FAIRY TALES AND DOUBLE STANDARDS  But AI has not discovered the secret P = NP key. And it has remained free to work on toy problems, in the United States at  least, without ever being held hostage to the double standard of scaling up.  For example, work continues on Al systems which rely on schema-based memory, ignoring the combinatorics of the schema  selection problem. The notion of a theorem prover carrying logical inference on thousands of axioms and millions of  propositions is hardly viable as a cognitive architecture. No rule-based system has survived more than a few thousand rules,  and the problems of maintaining such large rule-bases are unsolved. And qualitative reasoning in the domain of naive physics,  which seems to have dominated much of the mainstream publication of AI for the past few years, ignores the isse of  computational tractability altogether.  3 However, there are responsible practioners who do care about tractability (Chandrasekaran, 1987).  BOOK REVIEW 363  Thus, scaling is a disease which affects all kinds of Al, including the symbolic kind that Minsky and Papert were trying to  protect from the holistic or gestalt misconception.  Scaling is, in fact, a very important aspect of current research in connectionism. For example, Rosenfeld and Touretzky (1987)  analyzed the scaling behavior of coarse coded distributed representations, Mjolsness, Sharp, and Alpert (1987) described  beautiful experiments with a recursive description of networks which can be trained in the small and grown, and Waibel (1988)  describes work in the modular combination of trained networks.  Connectionists are finally meeting a scientific goal for cognitive modeling which traditional AI itself has always lacked,  namely, the construction of theories embodied as computer programs which are both testable and repeatable. Meanwhile, the  symbolic processing side of AI has wandered off into building systems of Brobdingnagian proportions (Lenat, Prakash &  Shephard, 1986). Whether or not such large-scale software-engineering project are even doable (Brooks, 1975; Cherniak, 1988;  Parnas, 1985), AI's most "successful" programs, such as SHRDLU (Winograd, 1972) or BORIS (Dyer, 1983), are so complex that  nobody can repeat these experiments to confirm or deny their findings or to build on previous results.  One of the hallmarks of real work in artificial intelligence is that theory-making must be backed up by program building.  Evidence of a working program is what distinguishes real AI from mere creative psychology. In one of the most brilliant  turnabouts in scientific history, Minsky and Papert admit that the neural networks are workable for toy problems, and  therefore fit nicely into Minsky's grand unified theory of a Society of Mind (Minsky, 1986), a theory which purports that  "mind is made up of a large number of components or `agents,' each of which would operate on the scale of... a toy problem"  (p. 266). Unfortunately, while small and medium-sized neural networks are fully operational, nobody has ever seen a working  Society of Mind program.  This is quite a humorous turn of events. The psychologists offer an implemented information-processing model, which the  computer scientists reject in favor of a creative psychological theory!  The remainder of the epilogue is, essentially, a criticism of certain aspects of modern connectionism, such as distributed  representations (Hinton, 1984), from the perspective, and in the diffuse style, of Minsky's vast theory.  CONCLUSION  Perceptrons, and its authors, certainly have their places assured in history. The book absolutely needed to be reissued, as  many copies were crusty tomes buried in the cybernetics sections of university libraries. And money definitely was at stake,  in the high rolling game of academic publishing.  But this reviewer sees no scientific point to the new prologue and epilogue. They  364 BOOK REVIEW  seem to be more of the same sort of stuff as the original introduction and conclusion-harmful innuendo (i.e., "no better than  exhaustive search") juxtaposed to, but not quite balanced by, whimsical praise:  On the positive side, we applaud those who bravely and romantically are empirically applying hill-climbing methods to many new  domains for the first time. (p. 261)  And nobody, not even the senior researchers of artificial intelligence, has a clue as to how the mind is constructed out of  pieces, or how to software engineer, evolve, or back-propagate such a complex piece of machinery. All that we can hope for,  today, is to build, from the middle out, a scientifically sound body of work on the mind. Minsky and Papert have created a  lasting document with the mathematical core of Perceptrons. Whatever the authors' intention, the new prologue and epilog are  not incontestable codicils.  REFERENCES  BLOCK, H. D. (1970). A review of Perceptrons. Information and Control, 17, 501-522.  BLUM, A., & RIVEST, R. L. (1988). Training a 3-node neural network is NP-complete. In Proceedings of Institute of Electrical  and Electronics Engineers Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, Denver.  BROOKS, F. P. (1975). The Mythical Man-Month. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.  CHANDRASEKARAN, B. (1987). Towards a functional architecture for intelligence based on generic information processing tasks.  In Proceedings of the Tenth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Milan, 1183-1192.  CHERNIAK, C. (1988). Undebuggability and cognitive science. Communications of the Association for Computing Machinery, 31,  402-412.  DREYFUS, H. L. & DREYFUS, S. E. (1988). Making a mind versus modeling the brain: Artificial intelligence again at the  crossroads. Daedalus, 117.  DYER, M. G. (1983). In Depth Understanding. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  HINTON, G. E. (1984). Distributed representations. CMU-CS-84-157, Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie-Mellon University, Computer Science  Department.  HINTON, G. E. (1986). Learning distributed representations of concepts. In Proceedings of the Eighth Annual Conference of the  Cognitive Science Society, Amherst, MA, 1-12.  JUDD, S. (1987). Learning in networks is hard. In Proceedings of the First Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers  Neural Network Conference, San Diego, II-686-692.  KOLEN, J. F. (1988). Faster learning through a probabilistic approximation algorithm. In Proceedings of the Second Institute  of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Conference on Neural Networks, San Diego, I-449-454.  LENAT, D., PRAKASH, M. & SHEPARD, M. (1986). CYC: Using common sense knowledge to overcome brittleness and knowledge  engineering bottlenecs. Artificial Intelligence Magazine, 6, 65-85. MCCLELLAND, J. L., RUMELHART, D. E., & THE PDP RESEARCH  GROUP (1986). Parallel distributed processing: Experiments in the microstructure of cognition (Vol. 2). Cambridge, MA: MIT  Press. MINSKY, M. (1986). The Society of Mind. New York: Simon and Schuster.  MJOLSNESS, E., SHARP, D. H., & ALPERT, B. K. (1987). Recursively generated neural networks. In Institute of Electrical and  Electronics Engineers First International Conference on Neural Networks, San Diego, III-165-171.  NEWELL, A. (1969). A step toward the understanding of information processes. Science, 165, 780-782. PAPERT, S. (1988). One  artificial intelligence or many? Daedalus, 117, 1-14.  130QK REVIEW  365  PARNAs, D. (1985). Software aspects of strategic defense systems. American Scientist, 73, 432-440. PINKER, S., & PRINCE, A.  (1988). On language and connectionism: Analysis of a parallel distributed processing model of language inquisition. Cognition,  28, 73-193.  POLLACK, J. B. (1988). Recursive auto-associative memory: Devising compositional distributed representations. In Proceedings  of the Tenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Montreal. POMERLAU, D. A. (1988). ALVINN: An autonomous land  vehicle in a neural network. In Proceedings of Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Conference on Neural  Information Processing Systems, Denver.  ROSENBLATT, F. (1962). Principles of neurodynamics. New York: Spartan.  ROSENFELD, R. & TouKETZKY, D. (1987). Four capacity models for coarse-coded symbol memonesCMU-CS-87-i82, Pittsburgh: Computer  Science Department, Carnegie-Mellon University. RUMELHART, D. E., & MCCLfLLAND, J. L. (1986). On learning the past tenses of  English verbs. In J. L. McClelland, D. E. Rumelhart & the PDP Research Group, (Eds.), Parallel distributed processing:  Experiments in the microstructure of cognition (Vol. 2). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  RUMELHART, D. E., MCCLELLAND, J. L., & THE PDP RESEARCH GROUP (1986a). Parallel distributed processing: Experiments in the  microstructure of cognition (Vol. 1), Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. RUMELHART, D. E., HINTON, G., & WILLIAMS, R. (1986b). Learning  internal representations through error propagation. In D. E. Rumelhart, J. L. McClelland, & the PDP Research Group (Eds.),  Parallel distributed processing: Experiments in the microstructure of cognition (Vol. 1). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  RUMELHART, D. E., & ZtPSER, D. (1986). Feature discovery by competitive learning. In D. E. Rumelhart, J. L. McClelland, & the  PDP Research Group, (Eds.), Parallel distributed processing: Experiments in the microstructure of cognition (Vol. I ).  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  SAMUEL, A. L. (1967). Some studies in machine learning using the game of checkers. 11. Recent progress. IBM Journal of  Research and Development, 11, 610-618.  SEARLE, J. R. (1980). The inientionality of intention and action. Cognitive Science, 4, 47-70. SEJNOWSKI, T. J., & ROSENBERG,  C. R. (1986). NETtalk: A parallel network that learns to read aloud. JHU/EELS-86/01: The Johns Hopkins University, Electrical  Engineering and Computer Science Department.  TOURETZKY, D. S. (1986). BoltzCONS: Reconciling connectionism with the recursive nature of stacks and trees. In Proceedings of  the 8th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Amherst, MA, 522-530.  ToURETZKY, D. S., & GEVA, S- (1987). A distributed connectionist representation for concept structures. In Proceedings of the  Ninth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Seattle, 155-164. WAIBEL, A. (1988). Modularity in neural networks  for speech recognition. In Proceedings of Institute of Elertriccrl and Electronics Engineers Conference au Neural Information  Processing Systems, DenverWALTZ, D. L. & POLLACK, J- B. (1985). Massively parallel parsing: A strongly interactive model of  natural language interpretation. Cognitive Science, 9, 51-74.  WINOGRAD, T. (1972). Understanding natural language. New York: Academic Press.