10.1016/0022-2496(89)90011-4
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 33, 298-308 (1989)  Subjective Probability Calibration: A Mathematical Model  JEFFREY M. ALBERT  Western State University  AND  GEORGE C. SPONSLER  Law Mathematics and Technology, Inc., Bethesda, Maryland  A mathematical model is offered representing phenomenologically how the brain may subconsciously make subjective probability  estimates based upon memories of prior experiences it deems similar, and how those estimates should be calibrated or  corrected. The model differs from former theories in that it proposes a new approach based upon a new concept of estimator  accuracy or expertise reflecting a subconsious partitioning of the estimator's memory trace of his prior similar experiences,  and upon identification of an actual subjective probability of which a particular judgment is an estimate. It is hypothesized  that the brain on the average estimates a particular subjective probability to be the midpoint of the range of values  permitted such estimates. Various related statistical distributions are derived, and formulae are presented relating the  accuracy, the estimated and actual subjective probabilities, and the expected actual subjective probability to be associated  with a particular judgment. 1989 Academic Press, Inc.  This paper offers a mathematical model of how the human brain may make subjective probability estimates derived from its own  subconscious memory traces of prior experiences it deems similar. When presented with a new fact pattern, it is assumed the  brain abstracts unidentified cues by an unknown mechanism, which is not modeled, which permit it to associate a set of prior  experiences presumably selected for and characterized by a similar set of cues. The total possible memory trace is assumed to  be composed of the results of predictions of binary events which either did or did not occur. Successful predictions are  imagined to be encoded in the memory traces as 1's and failures as 0's. It is further assumed there have been a total number,  n, of such prior events of which a fraction, b, were successfully predicted. However, the brain may not be able subconsciously  to identify the entire set but rather may only select a subset or partition, an, of the full set, where a is  Reprint requests should be addressed to G. C. Sponsler, Law Mathematics and Technology, Inc. 7804 Old Chester Rd., Bethesda,  Maryland 20817.  0022-2496/89 $3.00  Copyright L 1989 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  298  SUBJECTIVE PROBABILITY CALIBRATION 299  a fraction bounded (as also is b) on the closed unit interval from 0 to 1. The particular subjective probability estimate is  then taken to be the fractional number of successful predictions of the particular partition subconsciously selected by the  brain.  We define a subjective probability to be the estimate (again a fraction between 0 and 1) of the certainty which its estimator  ascribes to the outcome he predicts for the associated binary event. The particular certainty or subjective probability  estimate, x, the estimator assigns is thus taken to be the fractional number of successful past predictions included in his  subconscious partition.  We further identify a as the estimator's expertise in making his subjective probability estimate: a true expert will correctly  identify the full set of prior prediction results, that is, a = 1, and his estimate, x, will equal the actual frequency of  past successful predictions, b. A less expert estimator will identify or remember only a subset or partition representing a  fraction, a, of the full set of prior predictions. The fractional number of successful predictions of that subset-which may be  greater or less than b-is the corresponding subjective probability estimate, x, representing the certainty the estimator  ascribes to his prediction, since he was correct in the corresponding fraction of the past events he has identified. The  objective of our model is to calibrate the estimate, x, by replacing it with the true frequency, b, of past successful  predictions of all events, including those which the estimator did not identify. Hence we call b the actual subjective  probability.  Although much has been written on the philoshophy and application of subjective probabilities (e.g., de Finetti, 1972;  Jeffrey, 1984; Lindley, Tversky, and Brown, 1979; and Savage, 1954), to the present authors' knowledge no one has heretofore  offered a mathematical model of the phenomenological mechanism by which the brain may arrive subconsciously and almost  instantaneously at its estimate of the subjective probability it associates with the predicted likelihood of the occurrence of  an uncertain binary event.  To illustrate our concept of subjective probability, consider a weatherman required to forecast tomorrow's weather given  today's weather pattern. Subconsciously the weatherman abstracts cues from today's weather pattern which he compares, again  subconsciously, with those corresponding to sets of his memories, selecting that set which he deems subconsciously to be most  similar to today's pattern. He then forecasts a 60% chance of rain tomorrow. What he means is that he is 60% certain it will  rain tomorrow, or correspondingly that his subconscious' estimate is that it rained in 60 % of the events of the memory trace  he deems similar. Were the forecaster truly expert (and if he could locate records) he would find that it did in fact rain in  60 % of the cases he identified. Were he less expert, he would discover it rained in some other fraction of the cases, greater  or less than 60 %.  Our mathematical model, derived hereafter, predicts the range permitted the possible actual subjective probability, b, given  the estimate, x, for a given accuracy, a, of estimation. The model also permits determination of the range of estimates, x,  permitted for a given actual subjective probability, b.  300 ALBERT AND SPONSLER  To derive our model, we partition the appropriate memory trace into two parts: the part identified subconsciously by the  estimator with success frequency x, his estimate; and the unidentified remainder of the full trace, the remnant success  frequency of which is x+. The total number of binary events in the identified part is an, and the number of events in the  unidentified part of the memory trace is, of course, (1 -a)n, where n is the total number of binary event prediction results  constituting the full memory trace. Since the frequency of successful predictions of the full memory trace is given by bn, it  follows that  b=ax+(1 -a) x'. (1)  This is our basic equation. Since the individual elements constituting the memory trace are binary results of prior events, we  would normally expect a, b, x, and x+ all to be rational fractions bounded on the closed unit interval. However, the memory  trace itself, physiologically, might be continuous and so mathematically we permit Eq. (1) to represent either continuous or  discreet quantities, which in turn may thus also be continuous and irrational. We ask, then, what range of values the  estimate, x, is permitted in a memory trace of actual subjective probability, b? To answer that question we first solve Eq.  (1) for x:  x=(1/a)[b-(1-a)x+]. (2)  All the variables and parameters of Eq. (2) lie on the closed interval from 0 to 1. From that equation we therefore see that  the minimum value, xmin, and the maximum value, xmax, of the estimate are bounded as follows:  and  xmin= (1/a)(b-I+a), a>, (I-b) (3)  xmax=bla, aJb   xmin a,< (I -b) (5)  xmax - 1, a<b (6)  These relationships are summarized in Table 1.  The ranges permitted the subjective probability estimate, x, are plotted in Fig. 1 for various values of accuracy, a, with the  actual subjective probability, b, as parameter. We observe the bilateral symmetry of these so-called "cusp" charts about the  mid, or b = z, point; hereafter, for convenience, we shall restrict ourselves to the closed interval b = z to b = 1,  recognizing the symmetrical nature of our results in the interval b = 0 to b = z.  It is common knowledge, reported by many investigators (e.g. Kahneman and Tversky, 1972, 1973, and 1979, and Slovic, Fishoff  and Lichtenstein, 1977), that estimators of subjective probabilities tend to be overly optimistic; that is, for subjec-  SUBJECTIVE PROBABILITY CALIBRATION 301  TABLE I Ranges permitted x for various a and b  a-<b  a>-b  a-< 1-b) a->(1-b) max x  min x max x min x   0 1 1 1   -(b-1+a)    a   0 b 1 (b-I+a) b  a a a  X 1.0 0.8 - 0.6 - 0.4 - a2 -  a  0 11.2 0.4 0.6 a8 I.0  b=o  b = 0.1  X  LO --i  0.s 0.6 OA a2  0 . 1 1 1 a 0 Q2 0.4 Q6 QS 1.0  b=0.z b=0.3  X  1.0 0.6  0.4 I 0.2  0 a  I  0 0.2 0,4 0.610.8 I.0  b=0.4  X  1.0 -,  QS - Q6  OA I I a2  o a I  0 0.2 0.4 0.6 a8 1.0  b=o.s  X X  1.0 LO  0.8 - I 0.s I .  0.6 - 0.6 -  0.4 - OA -  Q2 0.2 -  0-1 I I a 0-I , I I I  0 0.2 0.4 0.6 Q8 I.0 0 Q2 0.4 0.6 0.8 I.0  b=o.6 b=o.7  X X X  1.0 - LO ~ , I ' I I I I . L0 _ . . . .. . . .. 0.8 -  0.6- 0.6- 0.6  0.4 - O - 0.4 -  a2 nz - n2 -~  04,1115- a 0 a 0-I I I I I a  0 0.20.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 QS LO 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.B 1.0  b=0.8 b=o.9 b=1.o  Fla. 1. Range of subjective probability estimates (x) vs. accuracy (a) with (b) as parameter.  302  ALBERT AND SPONSLER  tive probabilities greater than z, the average estimate tends to be greater than the actual experimental frequency of  successful predictions. If we assume for each accuracy, a, the estimates are uniformly distributed in the various permitted  ranges, we observe that this optimistic prediction tendency is confirmed in that, for a greater than z, the line segments of  the ranges permitted the estimates have their greater portion above the particular actual subjective probability, b. Indeed,  in such circumstances, the average estimate, z, occurs at the midpoint of each permitted range which, for b > z, is given by  a< (1-b)  =i[(2a+b-1)/a], (I-b)5a,<b (7) =z[(a+2b-1)/a], b<a<1.  Corresponding formulae for b < 1 are obvious by inspection of Fig. 1.  These average estimates, z, are graphed in Fig. 2 for several selected values of accuracy, a. The curves of Fig. 2 demonstrate  the anticipated optimistic nature of the average estimate in that the expected value exceeds the corresponding actual  subjective probability, b.  But are the estimates uniformly distributed? We can calculate the distribution if we assume the subconscious choice of any  partition of an bits is equally likely. The probability of choosing anx successes (1's) in such a partition, given that the  full memory trace of n bits contains bn 1's, is uniquely determined by choosing anx 1's  a T V O  Q C d l7 O IX W O E  w d Or  D a  O N Q  Actual Subjective Probability  FIG. 2. Average vs. actual subjective probabilities with accuracy as parameter.  SUBJECTIVE PROBABILITY CALIBRATION 303  from the total bn and an - anx 0's (failures) from the total n - bn. The resulting formula is  nb'anx (n-bn)' (an -anx)  n Can  The expected value of the estimates, z, given the actual subjective probability, b, is given by  u  z = Y (anx/an) P(anx/b, n), anx = t  where the summation is over those necessarily integer values permitted between the upper and lower bounds given by  an, b >, a  u=  {bn, b < a  1- 0, (a+ b)<,1  {(a+b-1)n, (a+ b)>1  and where P(anx/b, n) is given by Eq. (8).  As might be expected, computation demonstrates that z = b for all a; that is to say, the average estimate of all partitions  determined by a given accuracy equals the actual subjective probability. We conclude the brain must not make its estimate  based on the subconscious selection of equally likely partitions.  We hypothesize that on the average, the brain makes its subjective probability estimate by choosing the midpoint of the range  of estimates permitted by the estimator's particular expertise or accuracy.  This hypothesis is satisfied if the distribution of estimates is uniform, but uniformity is not required. Indeed, it is not  even required to derive Eqs. (7) which only require, in accord with the hypothesis, that the average estimate occur at the  midpoint of each permitted range.  An alternative, and particularly promising, density function is a transformation of the Beta distribution (Mood, 1950; Cramer,  1961):  B(u)=(a+#+1)!ua(1-u)", 0<u<1 a! fl!  = 0, elsewhere.  The parameters a and /3 must both be greater than minus one, and the density becomes the uniform distribution over the unit  interval when a = fl = 0. The average and the mode of the distribution both occur at u =1 when /3 = a, and by symmetry also  the median. The factorial sign, !, indicates the factorial function with argument  304  ALBERT AND SPONSLER  given by the symbol it follows. The factorial function is equal to the gamma function of the same argument plus one.  To determine the density distribution for the estimate, x, we introduce a change of variable, as follows:  Let u = (x - x,)/(x, - x,), where x, and xare the lower and upper bounds of each range, x(a), as presented by Eqs. (3)  through (6), and summarized in Table 1 with x, = x,and x= Xmaz. Since B(x) dx=B(u) du we obtain  B(x)=(a+/3+1)! (x-x,)" (XU-x)" 1  a! l! (xu-xl)" (XU-X1)1 (xu-xt)  In addition to grouping terms, this equation can be further simplified by setting a = /3, in order that z may be at the  midpoint of each range of x corresponding to u = 2. In addition we require that when a = 0, a = /~ = 0, in order that the  distribution be uniform, as it must be when the accuracy is zero. If we assume a and # are both functions of the accuracy, a,  and if we assume they are also linear, it follows that a = /l = ka, where k is an arbitrary constant, greater than -1, which  may be used to fit the distribution to an actual experimental frequency function for some a =A 0. We thus arrive at the  desired distribution, given by  _ [2ka+1]! [(x-x,)(xu-x)]ka  B(x) [(ka)!]2 [Xu-XI]zku+' , 0,X,<x<xu'l,  where  ( b/a, a b xu- -11, a~b,  0<a,b<I  _ 0, a<(1-b)  -1(b -l+a)/a, a>(1-b)  k = const. > -1.  This distribution displays the behavior we would expect of such a density function, namely: it is uniform at a = 0; its mean  is at the midpoint of each x(a) range or interval; and the distribution of estimates tends to concentrate or cluster about a  point predicted to be the midpoint of each range x(a). That clustering also is predicted to be symmetrical about the midpoint.  All of these predictions are amenable to experimental verification.  Mathematically, the distribution (9) behaves, as it should on reflection, as a Dirac delta function under three limiting  conditions: as b approaches 0 or 1, and as a approaches 1. As the interval xu - x, approaches zero as a approaches 1, as it  must, the integral of (9) over that interval remains unity, as it must being a density function, while the function itself  approaches infinity. This is the behavior  SUBJECTIVE PROBABILITY CALIBRATION 305  demanded of a delta function. Similarly, as b approaches 0 or 1, the interval x- x1 again approaches zero while again the  function itself approaches infinity, but its integral again must necessarily remain unity.  Our basic hypothesis that the brain estimates subjective probabilities by choosing the midpoint of the permitted range of  estimates leads to several interesting results in accord with information theory. The area of each cusp chart of Fig. 1 for a  given actual subjective probability, b, and its complement, 1 - b, represents the total corresponding uncertainty associated  with all possible accuracies, a, of estimation. In information theory terms the same area is recognized to be the entropy, S,  associated with a binary experiment of probability b. As the cusp charts of Fig. 1 are symmetric and of equal area for b and I  - b, the total uncertainty, that is the entropy, is given by  b (1-b) 1  S = f0 da + fb (b/a) da + f( 1 - b) [(I - a)/a] da  =-[(1-b)ln(1-b)+bInb], (10)  in which we have employed the integration limits appropriate for b < '-2. The total information associated with an actual  subjective probability, b, is given by subtracting (10) from unity. After normalizing, by requiring that I = 0 for b = z, we  obtain  I= 1 +b 1092 b+(1 -b)1092 (1 -b). (11)  According to information theory, (11) represents the informational content of a binary signal subjected to noise and  associated with probability b of receiving the signal sent.  The problem in either verifying or employing all the foregoing formulae is that both the accuracy, a, and the actual  subjective probability, b, can only be approximated. Indeed, b, by its very nature is unknowable without total recall. But  both a and b can be estimated by experiment (cf. Cambridge & Shreckengost, 1978) in which, by repeated controlled tests,  estimates are related empirically to actual subjective probabilities. In these so-called SPAT (Subjective Probability  Assessment Test) tests the subject is given, say, 100 true/false questions, taken from an encyclopedia, which he is asked to  answer and to associate his certainty with each answer. His certainty is identified as his subjective probability estimate, x,  and the actual fractional number of correct answers associated with a particular estimate is taken to be an estimate, b, of  the actual subjective probability, b. For example, the subject might associate a certainty, x, of 0.8 with, say, 10 of the 100  questions, but experimentally have been correct in his true/false answers in only 7 of those 10 questions, corresponding to an  estimated actual subjective probability, b, of 0.7. To calibrate a different, new estimate by the same subject empirically,  one assumes his accuracy is the same and then merely by inspection determines what b corresponds to the given x using the  experimental SPAT curves, as they are called.  480;171;3-b  306  ALBERT AND SPONSLER  In the absence of a SPAT curve, we can still theoretically determine the estimated actual subjective probability, $, given a  particular subjective probability estimate, x, and the associated accuracy, a. To do so, we return to our basic Eq. (1) and  ask what are the theoretical maximum and minimum values permitted b for a given a and x. As all quantities are bounded on the  unit interval, we obtain  "max=1-a(I-x) (12)  bmin - ax. (13)  If we assume the estimated actual subjective probabilities are uniformly distributed over the range permitted by (12) and  (13), the average or expected value is then given by  Exp b=' -z+ 2a(2x- 1) (14)  Selected values of (14) are depicted in Fig. 3, in which the dependent values, Exp b, are plotted as abscissas to conform with  the preceding figures. We see a linear relation is predicted, from which it would be possible to determine a particular  subject's accuracy, a, simply by measuring the slope of his particular experimental curve corresponding to Fig. 3.  Empirically, the subject would be given a series of SPAT tests and the average estimated actual subjective probabilities  determined for each x resulting.  Figure 3 predicts another interesting effect: an estimator of low accuracy can be absolutely certain that a particular binary  event will occur, but the underlying  0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 Average Subjective Probability  Average C-- 6  FIG. 3. Estimated vs. average subjective probabilities with accuracy as parameter.  SUBJECTIVE PROBABILITY CALIBRATION 307  actual subjective probability may be substantially less than unity. For example, if a = 0.6 and x =1, we see Exp b = 0.8. A  possible explanation of this apparently contradictory phenomenon is that of the n total similar prior binary events, the  particular estimator could only recall 0.6n, all of which had resulted in successes. The actual subjective probability, in  accord with (12) and (13), might actually lie anywhere in the range 0.6 to 1, depending upon how many of the 0.4n prior  similar events, which had been forgotten, had resulted in success.  But are the estimated actual subjective probabilities uniformly distributed? If the empirical curves corresponding to Fig. 3  are linear, the assumption is valid; or at least, as before, the expected value lies at the midpoint of the permitted range.  If not, not. Theoretically, we can derive the anticipated distribution, which is not uniform, as follows.  Under the assumption that any number, nb, of successes is equally likely in the permitted range, anx < nb <, n - an(1 - x),  given that anx successes are selected from a subset of size an from the full set of n binary-event results of the total  possible memory trace, then the probability that the unknown number of successes is nb is given by'  nb) - nVanx n(1-b)'an(1-x)  P( ~n=an( anx t-.")sC  anx (n- s) c an(1-x)  L. s -  _nbcanx n(1-b)c an(1-x)  (n+ 1)c n(1 -a) (15)  Calculation of (15) will demonstrate that for a = 1, P(b = b) = 1, as it should (the total number of successes in the chain of  n binary events being nb); whereas, if a = 0, P(nb = 0, 1, 2,..., nb) = 1/(n + 1), as it should, corresponding to the uniform  distribution where all possibilities are equally likely.  The expected or mean actual subjective probability estimate is given by multiplying (15) by b and then summing over the  permitted values:  ft-a(t-x)]n  Exp b = Y, T P(nb). an_.  (16)  Equation (16) may be used in two ways: if we assume a particular value, or set of values, for n (the total, actual, number of  binary events constituting the memory trace) we can compute Exp b which in turn we would use to calibrate (that is, replace or  substitute for) x; or, if we have determined Exp b experimentally, we can invert (16) and solve it for n by iteration.  By way of numerical illustration, if n = 5, a = 0.6, and x = 0.66, calculation shows that Exp b = 0.64, demonstrating some, if  small, optimism in the estimated subjective probability, x.  ' Our thanks to the JMP reviewer for this derivation.  308 ALBERT AND SPONSLER  As b is a positive fraction less than one, it follows that when we multiply the numerator of (15) by b and then sum over the  permitted values, the same summation formula applies as was employed in simplifying (15), and the summed numerator must  necessarily be less than or equal to the common denominator. Hence, Exp b 5 1. But it might be greater than x; if so, then  (15) and (16) cannot apply as they would contradict the experimentally observed optimism. Experiment is demanded.  Only experiment will also determine whether (16) is a better representation than (14) for Exp b. Indeed the entire theory  demands, and it is hoped will receive, experimental verification.  REFERENCES  CAMBRIDGE, R. M., AND SHRECKENGOST, R. C. (1978). Are you sure - The subjective probability assessment test. Washington, DC:  Central Intelligence Agency, Information Science Center.  CRAMER, H. (1961). Mathematical methods of statistics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton, Univ. Press. DE FINETTI, B. (1972).  Probability, induction and statistics. New York: Wiley.  JEFFREY, R. (1984). De Finetti's probabilism, Synthese.  KAHNEMAN, D., AND TVERSKY, A. (1972). Subjective probability: A judgment of representativeness. Cognitive Psychology, 3, 430.  KAHNEMAN, D., AND TVERSKY, A. (1973). "On the psychology of prediction." Psychological Review, 80, 237.  KAHNEMAN, D., AND TVERSKY, A. (1979). "Intuitive prediction: Biases and corrective procedures," Studies in Management Science,  12, 313.  LINDLEY, D. V., TVERSKY, A, AND BROWN, R. (1979). On the reconciliation of probability assessments. Journal of the Royal  Statistical Society, Series A, 142.  MOOD, A. F. (1950). Introduction to the theory of statistics. New York: McGraw-Hill. SAVAGE, L. (1954). The foundations of  statistics. New York: Wiley.  SLOVIC, P., FISCHOFF, B., AND LICHTENSTEIN, S. (1977). Behavioral decision theory. Annual Review of Psychology, 28, 1.  RECEIVED: October 8, 1987