10.1016/0022-2496(89)90028-x
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 33, 163-171 (1989)  Groups of Order-Automorphisms of the Rationals with Prescribed Scale Type  PETER J. CAMERON  School of Mathematical Sciences, Queen Marv College  It is shown that, for any given m and n with m < n (where n = oo is allowed), there is a group of order-preserving  permutations of the rational numbers whose degrees of homogeneity and uniqueness are m and n, respectively. This is in  contrast with the situation for the real numbers. The result is deduced from a more general theorem applying to a wide class  of relational structures. The tools used are FraTsse's theorem on homogeneous structures and a lemma of Tits. All the groups  constructed are isomorphic to the free group of countable rank. '' 1989 Academic Press, Inc.  INTRODUCTION  The theory of measurement, initiated by the Greek geometers, has received a great deal of attention this century from  philosophers and psychologists. The view propounded by Stevens (1946) is that a measurement "scale" is a family of  representations of the things measured into a number system (usually the real numbers), the key feature being not the  individual representations but the group of order-preserving permutations of the range taking one representation into another.  Two important parameters of this group are its degree of homogeneity (the greatest m for which it is transitive on the set of  increasing m-tuples) and its degree of uniqueness (the least n for which two automorphisms which agree on n points coincide).  Of course, the value recorded by a measuring instrument is a rational number (and one of a very restricted class of  rationals). Nevertheless, the argument which forced the Pythagoreans to admit irrationals as measures of length is well-known.  It is not my purpose to enter here into a priori philosophical discussion of this point (see the remarks in Narens (1981, p.  253)); I simply illustrate one major difference between the real and the rational numbers: the possible scale types they can  support.  The "scale type" of a group G of order-preserving permutations of an ordered set  Reprint requests should be sent to Peter J. Cameron, School of Mathematical Sciences, Queen Mary College, Mile End Road,  London El 4NS, UK.  163  0022-2496/89 $3.00  Copyright v 1989 by Academic Press, Inc.  480/33/2-4 All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  164 PETER J. CAMERON  X is the pair (m, n), where m and n are the degrees of homogeneity and uniqueness of G. In the case where X= IR (the set of  real numbers), the possible scale types are very restricted. Following Narens (1981) and Alper (1985), Alper (1987) showed  that if 1 < m < n < oo, then necessarily n < 2; and the groups which can occur can be described (up to conjugacy). By  contrast, if X= 0 (the set of rational numbers), there is a group of any possible scale type (m, n) with m < n, abstractly  isomorphic to a free froup of countable rank (see Theorem 1).  There is a further reason for examining the possible scale types for rational numbers. By the Lowenheim-Skolem theorem of  model theory (see Mendelson (1964, Corollary 2.16)), if any infinite ordered set admits a group of automorphisms of scale type  (m, n) (with m and n finite), then there is a countable ordered set admitting such a group. Moreover, the only countable  ordered set satisfying 2-point homogeneity is Q. Thus, any nonexistence results for 0 would immediately give general  nonexistence for all infinite sets. In view of our main theorem, we can only hope for such a result in the case m = n > 2.  I am grateful to Manfred Droste, who introduced me to this subject, and to Professor R. D. Luce who provided me with  information about it.  1. PRELIMINARIES AND STATEMENT OF THE RESULT  We say that a group G of order-preserving permutations satisfies n-point homogeneity (resp. n-point uniqueness) if, given any  two n-tuples (x,, ..., x and (Y1, -,Yn) in ascending order (i.e., x, < ... <x, and Y, < ... < y, there is at least one  (resp. at most one) element g e G which carries x; to yi for i = 1, ..., n. Noting that n-point homogeneity implies (n -  1)-point homogeneity, there is a largest value of n for which n-point homogeneity holds; this value is the degree of  homogeneity of G.  The n-point uniqueness condition is equivalent to the requirement that the stabiliser of any n points is the identity. If this  holds for any n, then there is a smallest value for which it holds, called the degree of uniqueness of G. Also, we say that  the degree of uniqueness is oo if any nonidentity permutation in G fixes only finitely many points, but there is no upper  bound for the numbers of fixed points.  The scale type of G is the pair (m, n), where m and n are the degrees of homogeneity and uniqueness (assuming that they  exist). Note that, necessarily, m ,< n. With this notation, our result can be stated as follows:  THEOREM 1. Given m and n, with m < n (possibly n = oo ), there is a group G of order-preserving permutations of 0 (the set of  rational numbers) with scale type (m, n).  The theorem is proved in Section 4; the intermediate sections contain some necessary background.  Thus the only cases left open are those when these degrees are equal. Examples  GROUPS OF ORDER-AUTOMORPHISMS 165  are known for the cases (in, n) = (0, 0) (the trivial group), (1, 1) (the group of additive translations), and (2, 2) (the  group of permutations of the form  x: i--* ax + b,  where a > 0). I would guess that there are no such groups with m = n > 2, but cannot prove it. The arguments of Narens for the  real numbers, relying on their completeness via the intermediate value theorem, do not apply in this case. Note that, as  remarked in the Introduction, nonexistence of such groups acting on any ordered set would follow from their nonexistence on Q.  The tools in the proof of Theorem 1 are Fraisse's theorem about homogeneous relational structures and a lemma of Tits giving  actions of the free group. I now proceed to discuss these.  2. AMALGAMATION AND HOMOGENEITY  We deal with structures consisting of a set of points carrying a number of relations of various arities (in logical terms,  structures over a first-order relational language). For finite degrees of uniqueness, we lose no generality in doing so:  LEMMA 2.1. Let G be a permutation group on a countably infinite set X, satisfying n-point uniqueness for some finite n. Then  there is a relation R on X such that G is the automorphism group of (X, R).  Proof. R is a 2(n + 1)-ary relation defined as follows. Let 0, 02,..., be the orbits of G on (n + 1)-tuples of  distinct points. Then a 2(n + 1)-tuple (xo, ..., Xn, yo, ..., y satisfies R if and only if there exists i such that (xo,  ..., xn) E O; and (yo, ..., y E 0;+,. Clearly R is G-invariant, so G < Aut(R). We can recognise the tuples in O, as those  which occupy the first n + 1 places in tuples satisfying R but never occupy the last n + 1 places. Then tuples in OZ are those  which follow tuples in O,, and so on. So Aut(R) has the same orbits on (n+ 1)-tuples of distinct elements as G. Finally, given  any n-tuple (xo, ..., x_ I), the (n + 1)-tuples obtained by adding one further point all lie in different G-orbits, and so  an automorphism of R fixing xo, ..., xn _ I must fix all points. Thus, G = Aut(R).  A relational structure M is called homogeneous if any isomorphism between finite substructures of M can be extended to an  automorphism of M. The following theorem due to Frafsse gives a necessary and sufficient condition for the existence of a  homogeneous structure, in terms of its finite substructures. First, we need some definitions. A class W of structures has the  amalgamation property if, whenever A, B, , BZ E W and f : A F B; are embeddings (i = 1, 2), there is a structure C E 1W and  embeddings g; : B; -. C such that  glfl=g2f2'  166 PETER J. CAMERON  In other words, given two structures with a common substructure, there is a larger structure containing both, such that their  intersection is at least the common substructure. We say that the strong amalgamation property holds if the amalgam can always  be chosen so that the intersection is no larger than the common substructure; formally, if C, g, , and g2 can be chosen so  that if b; e B; with g, (b,) = 92(b2), then there exists a E A with b; =f,(a), i = 1, 2.  The age of a structure M is the class of all structures isomorphic to finite substructures of M.  THEOREM 2.2 (Fraisse (1954)). (i) Let 16 be the age of the countable homogeneous structure M. Then W is closed under  isomorphism and, taking substructures, has only countably many, members (up to isomorphism) and has the amalgamation property.  (i) Conversely, if the class W of finite structures has the properties of the preceding sentence, then there is a countable  homogeneous structure M, unique up to isomorphism, such that 16 is the age of M.  It is customary for logicians to include the joint embedding property in the list of conditions; this is because of their  convention that the empty set does not carry a structure (which is not adopted here).  Note that, given any permutation group G on a countable set X, there is always a homogeneous relational structure M on X such  that G S Aut(M) and G has the same orbits on n-tuples as Aut(M), for all n. (Simply take one relation for each orbit of G on  tuples, and let a tuple satisfy a relation if and only if it lies in the corresponding orbit.) We cannot in general, however,  either get by with a finite number of relations or assume that G = Aut(M). However, in the next result, the assertions about  Aut(M) are inherited by any subgroup having the same orbits on tuples.  PROPOSITION 2.3. Let M be a countable homogeneous relational structure, G its automorphism group, and W its age. Then the  following are equivalent:  (i) 16 has the strong amalgamation property;  (ii) the stabiliser (in G) of a finite tuple has no additional fixed points;  (iii) the stabiliser (in G) of a finite tuple has no additional finite orbits.  Proof. (i) implies (ii): suppose that (i) holds; let A be a finite subset of M, H its pointwise stabiliser. Let B consist of A  and one additional point y, and let C be a strong amalgam of two copies of B over A. Since C is in the age of M, we can find  an isomorphic copy in M; by homogeneity, we can assume that the same set B is used. Thus there is a point z :Ay such that the  map fixing A pointwise and carrying y to z is an isomorphism. Again by homogeneity, it extends to an automorphism of M, that  is, an element of H not fixing y.  (ii) implies (iii): If the pointwise stabiliser of A had an additional finite orbit B, with b c- B, then the pointwise  stabiliser of A u B\ {b } would fix b.  GROUPS OF ORDER-AUTOMORPHISMS 167  (iii) implies (i): Let B, and B2 be substructures of M having a common substructure A, and let H be the pointwise stabiliser  of A. Assuming (iii), all orbits of H outside A are infinite; so, by Lemma 2.3 of Neumann (1976), there exists h E H such that  h(B,\A) and BZ\A are disjoint. Then h(B,)uBZ is the required strong amalgam.  We will use the strong amalgamation property as follows. Let M1, M2 be homogeneous structures whose ages W,, W2 have the  strong amalgamation property. Let W be the class of finite sets carrying a structure from W, and a structure from f2  (independently). Then W also has the strong amalgamation property, and so is the age of a unique countable homogeneous  structure M. Now M has the property that if we consider only the M, relations on M, it is isomorphic to M, , and similarly for  M,. (This follows from homogeneity, using the uniqueness statement in Fraisse's theorem.) This construction would not work if  we had only the amalgamation property, since different amalgams might require different identifications.  3. A CONSTRUCTION OF TITS  The essence of Tits' construction is contained in the following result, abstracted from Tits (1974, p. 230).  PROPOSITION 3.1. Let G be a permutation group on a countable set X, N a normal subgroup of G having the same orbits on X as G.  Suppose that there is a subgroup K containing N such that KIN is a free group of countable rank. Then there is a subgroup H of  G such that  (i) HN=K HnN={1};  (ii) H is a free group of countable rank;  (iii) H has the same orbits on X as does G.  Proof. I give the simple argument, because I require a slight modification. Let the cosets Nf,, Nf2, ..., be free generators  for KIN. Enumerate the pairs (xi, yi) of elements of X lying in the same orbit of G (or N), and for each i choose h; e N such  that hi(fj(xi)) = yi. Let H be the group generated by h, f,, h2 f2, ... . Clearly H satisfies (iii). If h = w(h, f, , ...,) e  N, where w is a reduced word, then w(Nf, ...) = N; since KIN is free, w is trivial, and h= l. Thus (i) holds, and (ii) follows  from (i) by the third isomorphism theorem for groups.  Note that the argument shows that, for any choice whatsoever of h,, h2, ..., the group H satisfies (i) and (ii); so we can use  some of the generators to achieve the required transitivity, and others for a different purpose, as we shall do later. First,  though, an important example:  168 PETER J. CAMERON  PROPOSITION 3.2. The free group of countable rank acts on a countable set in such a way that  (i) it is highly transitive, i.e., given any two tuples of distinct points of the same length, some permutation carries the  first to the second,  (ii) its degree of uniqueness is oo; that is, any nonidentity element fixes finitely many points, but the numbers of fixed  points are unbounded.  Proof. Let Y be an infinite set, X the set of all finite tuples from Y, G the full symmetric group on Y, and N the group of  finitary permutations (those fixing all but finitely many points). Let L be the free group of countable rank, embedded into G  by its regular representation-that is, identify Y with L, and let L act by right multiplication-and let K= LN. Then L n N= {  11, so KIN ; L. Let H be the group guaranteed by Proposition 3.1. The high transitivity of H follows from (iii). Also, every  nonidentity element of H is the product of an element of N (fixing all but finitely many points) and a nonidentity element of  L (fixing no points), and so fixes only finitely many points; and, by high transitivity, the numbers of fixed points are  unbounded. Note that, in fact, for any n there is a free generator of H fixing at least n points; this will be needed later.  4. THE MAIN THEOREMS  Results analogous to those stated for the ordered set of rational numbers follow for homogeneous structures whose ages have  the strong amalgamation property. These results are proved in two parts; I deal with finite uniqueness first. The term "degree  of uniqueness" is extended in the obvious way, to mean the least n such that the stabiliser of any n points is trivial. The  "degree of homogeneity" of a subgroup G of Aut(M) is the greatest n for which G has the same orbits on n-tuples as does Aut(M).  THEOREM 4.1. Let M be a countable homogeneous relational structure whose age has the strong amalgamation property. Then, for  any positive integer n, there is a subgroup H of Aut(M) having the properties  (i) H is a free group of countable rank;  (ii) the degree of uniqueness of H is n;  (iii) the degree of homogeneity of H is n - 1.  Proof. Let L be the language of M, and L + be obtained by adding one 2n-ary relation symbol to L. In all our L+-structures,  the interpretation of this symbol will be an equivalence relation on the n-element subsets of the domain; we assume this  without further comment.  Let W be the age of M, and W+ the class of expansions to L+ of the specified kind of structures in W. Then W'+ has the strong  amalgamation property, by the  GROUPS OF ORDER-AUTOMORP14ISMS 169  remark at the end of Section 2. So, by FraIsse's theorem, there is a unique countable homogeneous L+-structure M+ whose age is  W+. We require two properties of M+:  (a) M+ is an expansion of M, so that Aut(M+) 5 Aut(M). This is because M+, as an L-structure, is isomorphic to M, as remarked.  (Note that Aut(M+) has the same orbits on M"- ` as Aut(M), since the added relation is trivial on (n - 1)sets.)  (b) Aut(M+) induces the full symmetric group on the set of (countably many) equivalence classes of n-sets in M+.  Let C,, cz, ..., be any enumeration of the equivalence classes. Let L* be obtained from L by adding n-ary relation symbols R,,  R2,..., and (6* the class of expansions of W-structures to L* in which the interpretations of R,, Rz, ..., partition the  n-sets. Clearly the expansion M* of M in which R; is interpreted as c; is a homogeneous L*-structure with age W*. By  uniqueness again, if c,, cz, ..., is any other enumeration of the classes, there is a permutation of M which preserves the  L-structure and maps c; to c;, i = 1, 2, ...; this is an automorphism of M+ inducing a prescribed permutation on the set of  equivalence classes.  Now let N be the kernel of the action of G = Aut(M+ ) on the set of equivalence classes. Thus N=Aut(M*); by homogeneity, N has  the same orbits on M"-` as does Aut(M+). Let K be the subgroup of Aut(M+) inducing the regular representation of Fw on the set  of equivalence classes.  Now Tits' lemma guarantees the existence of a complement H for N in K (necessarily isomorphic to F), having the same orbits on  M"-` as do N and G and acting regularly on the set of equivalence classes. Now the stabiliser of an n-tuple fixes the  equivalence class of the corresponding n-set, and so is trivial. Thus (i)-(iii) hold, except for the fact that some  nonidentity element fixes n - 1 points. This requires a slight modification. Use the generators fz, f, ... to achieve the  transitivity, but treat f differently. Suppose that f, maps the equivalence class c, to the class c2. Choose points x, , ...,  x,-,, y, z such that  (i) {x,, ..., xn ,, y} E c, and {x,, ..., xn_,, z} E Cz;  (ii) the map fixing x,, ..., xn , and carrying y to z is an isomorphism of L-structures.  By homogeneity of M*, there exists h, E N such that h,(f (xr)) = x; for i = 1, ..., n - 1, and h, (f (y)) = z. Then choose h,  f as the first generator of H; it fixes x, , ..., xn _ , but not y.  Note that it follows easily from (ii) that the stabiliser of any n - 2 points is nontrivial. For, given an (n - 2)-set A,  choose an (n - 1)-element structure B in W containing A and use strong amalgamation to find an n-element amalgam C of two  copies of B over A. We may assume that C s M; that is, there are points y, z E M such that the map fixing A pointwise and  carrying y to z is an isomorphism of induced substructures. By homogeneity, this map is induced by an automorphism of M+; by  (ii), it is induced by a (nontrivial) element of G.  170 PETER J. CAMERON  COROLLARY 4.2. Let M be a countable homogeneous structure whose age has the strong amalgamation property, and m and n natural  numbers with m < n. Then there exists a subgroup H of Aut(M), which is a free group of countable rank and has degree of  homogeneity m and degree of uniqueness n.  Proof. A k-uniform hypergraph on a set X is a set of k-element subsets ("hyperedges") of X. The class of k-uniform hypergraphs  has the strong amalgamation property. By the remark at the end of Section 2, if M is as in the corollary, there is a k-uniform  hypergraph on the underlying set of M such that the compound structure M' is still homogeneous (and its age has the strong  amalgamation property). Then Aut(M') is a subgroup of Aut(M) whose degree of homogeneity is k - 1. Now replace M by M' in the  proof of Theorem 4.1, with k=m+ 1.  We turn now to the case where the degree of uniqueness is infinite.  THEOREM 4.3. Let M be a structure whose age has the strong amalgamation property, and let m be a positive integer. Then there  is a subgroup H of Aut(M) with the properties  (i) H is a free group of countable rank;  (ii) the degree of homogeneity of H is m;  (iii) the degree of uniqueness of H is ao.  Proof. Let n = m + 1. We modify the previous construction in three ways:  (a) We tighten up the interpretation of the equivalence relation on n-sets, so that no (n + 1)-set has all its n-subsets  equivalent. (This class still has the strong amalgamation property: to form a strong amalgam of sets B, and Bz, specify that  n-sets not contained in B, or BZ belong to "new" equivalence classes.)  (b) Use a different embedding of F. in Sym(X): instead of the regular representation, use the representation as a highly  transitive group with infinite degree of uniqueness given in Proposition 3.2. Note that, for any two tuples of the same size,  there is a free generator taking the first to the second. In particular, there is a subsequence of N with infinite complement,  say k,, kz, ..., such that the generator fk; fixes at least i points.  (c) Modify the construction of H as follows. Use the generators of L/N not in the subsequence (f,) to ensure that G has the  same orbits on M"-' as Aut(M), where 1; = k;, j = (;; ), i > n. For each i > n, choose an i-set I whose n-subsets belong to  equivalence classes fixed by f,;. Then there exists h; e N acting on I in the same way as f,;; replace the generator f,, by h;  If,,, which fixes I pointwise.  As before, the resulting group H satisfies (i) and (ii). By (c), it contains elements with arbitrarily many fixed points. It  remains to show that no nonidentity element fixes infinitely many points. So let g E G, g 0 1. Then g fixes only finitely many  equivalence classes, by (b). By Ramsey's theorem, if g fixed infinitely many points, there would be an (n + 1)-set all of  whose n-sets are equivalent, contrary to (a).  GROUPS OF ORDER-AUTOMORPHISMS 171  5. ORDER -AUTOMORPHISMS OF THE RATIONALS  Cantor (1895) characterised the ordered set 0 of rational numbers as the unique countable dense ordered set without  end-points. It is straightforward to show that Q is homogeneous. Since the age of any infinite ordered set is the class of all  finite ordered sets, it follows from Frdisse's theorem that 0 is the unique countable homogeneous ordered set. (This was the  example which motivated Frafsse's work.)  Furthermore, the age of 0 satisfies the strong amalgamation property. This is easily seen directly; alternatively, it follows  from Proposition 2.3, since the orbits of the stabiliser of a tuple are the open intervals into which 0 is divided by the  points of the tuple, and all are infinite. Theorem 1 follows, therefore, from Corollary 4.2 and Theorem 4.3.  To conclude, I remark that the group of order-automorphisms of 0 is very rich in interesting subgroups; the possibilities are  by no means exhausted by our theorem. Imposing an order on a finite set of n elements is equivalent to labelling its members  with the numbers 1, ..., n. By the remark at the end of Section 2, the following holds. Let M be any homogeneous countable  structure whose age W has the strong amalgamation property. Then there is a homogeneous structure M' whose age V consists of  labelled members of W, and Aut(M') is a subgroup of Aut(o).  REFERENCES  ALPER, T. M. (1985). A note on real measurement structures of scale type (m, m+l). Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 29,  73-81.  ALPER, T. M. (1987). A classification of all order-preserving homeomorphism groups of the reals that satisfy finite  uniqueness. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 31, 135-154.  CANTOR, G. (1895). Beitrage zur Begrundung der transfiniten Mengenlehre. Mathematische Annalen, 26, 481-512.  FRAISSt, R.(1954). Sur 1'extension aux relations de quelques proprietes d'ordres, Annales Scientifiques de rtcole Normale  Superieure, 71, 361-388.  LUCE, R. D. (1986). Uniqueness and homogeneity of ordered relational structures. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 30,  391-415.  MENDELSON, E. (1964). Introduction to mathematical logic. New York: Van Nostrand-Reinhold. NARENS, L. (1981). On the scales of  measurement. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 24, 249-275. NEUMANN, P. M. (1976). The structure of finitary permutation  groups. Archiv fir Mathematik (Basel), 27, 3-17.  STEVENS, S. S. (1946). On the theory of scales of measurement. Science, 103, 677-680. TITS, J. (1974). Buildings of spherical  type and finite BN-pairs. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.  RECEIVED: September 15, 1987