10.1016/0022-2496(89)90022-9
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 33, 473-495 (1989)  A General Counter Model for Refractory Phenomena  WOLFGANG SCHWARZ  Philipps Unioersitkt  A renewal counting model is formulated which explains the limits of the processing rate as a refractory phenomenon. The model  assumes that stimulus elements are delivered to a central counter according to a renewal process and that the registration of  a stimulus element blocks the counter for a random duration during which newly arriving stimulus elements cannot be  registered. The main properties of the model are derived for arbitrary interarrival and blockade distributions, and the  application of these general results to specific models is illustrated in detail. It is shown that the assumption of a random  duration of the blocking intervals leads to a qualitatively different behaviour of the model as compared to the case of fixed  deadtimes. On the basis of these qualitative differences, versions of the general model become empirically distuingishable.  Finally, alternative models such as cascades of counters are discussed and applications to experimental paradigms for flicker  fusion and tachistoscopic recognition are outlined in some detail. 1989 Academic Press, Inc.  1. INTRODUCTION  Why is the capacity for the perception and integration of stimuli limited with respect to time? Well-known examples for this  phenomenon are the upper limits of the discharge of nerve cells, the limited capacity for temporal resolution of the various  senses, or the numerous findings concerning the "psychological refractory period."  A general answer to this question is attempted by counter models which assume that the registration of discrete primary events  leads to a temporary inability of the receiving system to register further events. For the example of the neural refractory  period this mechanism has been modelled in great detail (e.g. Sampath & Srinivasan, 1977). With respect to the examples on a  more behavioural level there has not as yet been great agreement concerning the underlying mechanisms and the way they  cooperate (Luce, 1986, p. 185 ff.). Given this state of affairs, it seems appropriate to use a strategy based on a coherent,  theoretically founded description of the known empirical facts. In a second step one should try to relate these precisely  fixed observations to the hypothesized mechanisms. A prime example of such a strategy is the final reduction of the upper  limits of the nerve cells' frequency of discharge to the dynamics of the ionic currents through the  I thank Dirk Vorberg for helpful comments on an earlier draft, and Kathrin Biegger for improving my English.  473  0022-2496/89 $3.00  Copyright 2_) 1989 by Academic Press, Inc.  480/33/4-7 All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  474 WOLFGANG SCHWARZ  cellular membrane in the well-known works of Baylor, Fuortes, Hodgkin, and Huxley (for a summary, see Fuortes, 1971).  The aim of this article is more modest, namely, to introduce a general stochastic counter model as a basis for an exact  description of refractory systems. The conceptual frame of this model was originally derived from the study of radioactive  emissions and aimed at a description of the renewal counting processes of devices designed to register the emitted particles.  Counter models are well established mainly in perception and information processing. Some examples are the classical models of  Hecht, Shlaer, and Pirenne (1942), Brindley (1954), and van der Velden (1944) for the dependency of elementary visual  processes on the quantal structure of light. Later elaborations and developments including McGill (1962, 1963, 1967, 1971),  Luce and Green (1972), and Wandell (1977) have enlarged the scope of application of these models, which were originally  severely limited. While the classical models have been interpreted and controlled in a strictly physical way, the more current  developments sometimes employ analogies or metaphors to describe the flow of information through a processing system. Within  the frame of a stochastic process formulation, one usually assumes a more or less specified discrete accumulation of  information over time (for an overview, see Luce, 1986, Chapter 9; Townsend & Ashby, 1983, Chapter 9; or Ratclifl; 1988).  However, strictly psychophysically oriented developments in the original tradition are also notable, especially the work of  Teich and his collaborators, e.g. Teich, Prucnal, Vanucci, Breton, and McGill (1982) or Teich and Lachs (1979).  In the following we will consider a counter model to explain refractory phenomena only. The experimental arrangement  originally postulated by these models can be described as follows: a counter is placed within range of a radiating substance.  It registers the emitted particles which contact the receiving device. However, due to the inertia of the counter, the  mechanism is blocked after each contact for a resolving time or "deadtime." The general problem a counter model should solve  is to specify the relation between (a) the temporal sequence of the emitted impulses, (b) the deadtimes (i.e., the durations  of the blockades), and (c) the properties of the temporal sequence of registrations at the counter.  This formulation is deliberately vague because the directions of inference are different for differing applications.  In the original applications of counter models in particle physics, the experimenter observed the sequence of time points of  registrations, and assumed the deadtime to be constant. The aim then was to infer properties of the primary radiation process  from the observations as read from the counter.  Historically, this example also demonstrated very clearly the necessity of precise quantitative modelling. After Rutherford  and others had described the emission of a-particles as a Poisson process, a number of investigators (e.g., Levert & Scheen,  1943) using Geiger-Muller counters found a mean-to-variance ratio significantly below one, contrary to expectation. It was  concluded that the original theory was inadequate. Actually, only the consequences of the inertia of the counter-the  GENERAL COUNTER MODEL 475  deadtime-had not been taken into account. If one corrected for losses due to deadtimes, the original assumption of a Poisson  process turned out to be an excellent approximation. In this way, counter models were often used as an error-theory of the  Geiger-Muller counters (e.g., Kurbatov & Mann, 1945; MaierLeibnitz, 1942).  On the other hand, for the example of an on-center retinal ganglion cell, it is already known (e.g., Lennie, 1981) that the  sequence of depolarizations which are to be counted can well be approximated as a Poisson process. Here, the sequence of the  time points of depolarization constitutes the observed material as obtained from nerve recordings, and the aim is to infer  properties of the deadtime, i.e., the neural refractory period.  Possible applications in psychology include experiments on the perception of flicker (e.g., Boynton, 1972, Section C) and on  tachistoscopic recognition performance under a high presentation rate (e.g., Sperling, Budiansky, Spivak, & Johnson, 1971).  Both experiments have in common that they point to a minimum resolving or minimum processing time which effectively limits the  observed performance. For the case of flicker fusion, we may assume that if the onset of a new cycle or pulse occurs during a  refractory period caused by previous cycles, it will not be perceived and thus no flicker will be reported. In tachistoscopic  recognition the ability to register the presented stimulus elements could be limited by the decoding process if both  operations draw on a shared limited capacity. The precise assumptions for both applications in terms of the counter model  analyzed in this paper will be described in some detail in Section 6.  The plan of this article is as follows.  In Section 2 we will describe in detail the assumed experimental situation and the structure of the model we consider. The  model itself will be defined by five short assumptions. Also, we give a short review of special cases and of some related  models already treated in the literature, as well as a summary of our notation.  Section 3 presents the most general results we derive. Two proofs are given for these results: one is compact, but abstract,  while the other one rests on an elementary representation that helps in understanding the formal structure of the problem.  In Section 4 we will use the results obtained in Section 3 to derive the main properties of the model which are necessary for  applications.  In Section 5 we present some special cases of the general model and illustrate how to apply the previously derived results.  Specifically, we will show that the usual assumption of constant deadtimes leads to a behaviour of the model which is  qualitatively different from models which allow for some variability of the deadtimes. Necessary and sufficient conditions for  either behaviour are presented. Also, alternative classes of counter models are considered that can be analyzed by techniques  very similar to the ones used in this paper.  Finally, Section 6 outlines some applications of the model to flicker fusion and tachistoscopic recognition experiments.  476 WOLFGANG SCHWARZ  2. ASSUMPTIONS OF THE MODEL AND NOTATION  The starting point of the following considerations is a sequence of time points of events { T;, i > 11, which in the sequel  will be denoted as the primary process. The events themselves will be denoted as contacts (of the counter). The time intervals  between any two subsequent contacts are assumed to follow a common distribution and to be independent of each other.  For most applications in psychology, the primary process will be a time series of experimentally induced stimuli. An example  is provided by the quantal theories of vision already mentioned in the Introduction. Here, the primary process consists of the  instants at which quantal absorptions ( =contacts) in the retina occur. A second example with an experimenter-controlled  primary process is provided by the experimental arrangement used by Green and Luce (1971; for a summary see Luce, 1986, p. 105  ff.) for the detection of stimuli presented according to a Poisson timeschedule. Due to the fairly general conditions of their  occurrence, Poisson processes generally serve as a plausible initial assumption for the primary process (see Cox & Smith,  1953, 1954).  In the following, the random point of time at which the i th event from the primary process contacts the counter is denoted as  T;, i>, 1. At each instant of the process, the counter is in one of two states: either free or blocked. Initially, it is  assumed to be free.  If the counter is free when a contact occurs, then a registration of the event of the primary process takes place. The  temporal sequence of the instants of registration, { S;, j > 11, constitutes the secondary process. Roughly speaking, the  secondary process is the process as seen from the output of the counter. To model the refractory behaviour, we assume that  each registration blocks the counter for a random duration D, also denoted as the deadtime of the counter.  If the counter is blocked when a new contact occurs, then no new registration can take place. In this case, it is assumed that  such a new contact annuls the blockade due to its predecessor and a new blockade begins, which prolongs the deadtime for a  further random duration D, measured from the instant of the new contact.  The assumptions made so far may now be summarized as follows:  (A1) The instants { T;, i >, 1 } constitute a stochastic renewal process.  (A2) At each instant the counter is either free or blocked. Initially, it is free.  (A3) If the counter is contacted from an event of the primary sequence in its free state, then the event is registered and the  counter is blocked for a random duration D.  (A4) If the counter is contacted from an event of the primary sequence in its blocked state, then the event is not registered,  the after-effects of previous contacts are annulled, and the counter is blocked anew for a random duration D.  (A5) The durations of the deadtimes form a sequence {D, m >, 1 } of  GENERAL COUNTER MODEL  477  identically and independently distributed random variables which are independent of the variables T;.  The assumptions given above are summarized in Fig. 1. It shows a renewal counting process starting at T = 0. From (A2) and  (A3), the waiting time W, to the first registration is always identical to the time Z, of the first event in the primary  process. The events in the primary process are represented in the lower portion of the figure. The upper portion shows the  durations D of the deadtimes, during which no registrations can occur. Also shown in the figure is the sequence of the  instants S; (marked with a cross) at which the registrations occur.  For the primary process, it was postulated [(A1)] that it constitutes a renewal process. From the assumption (A2) concerning  the starting state of the process it follows then that the time to the first registration is simply the time of the first  contact. From (A3) it follows that the state of the counter after any registration is the same as the state after the first  registration. This implies that the secondary process constitutes a delayed renewal process, with independent renewal epochs  of which only the first is distributed differently from the following ones.  To summarize, the sequence generated by the primary process is mapped by the selection rule of the counter onto the sequence  which is formed by the events of the secondary process, the registrations. Given the sequence of the blockade durations { D.J,  the sequence {T;{ and {S;} are related by a one-to-one correspondence and may be reconstructed from each other. In this  general sense, a counter is simply a specific transformation of a given (primary) renewal process.  The main aim of the analysis of the model is to find the distribution of the interregistration times of the secondary process,  i.e., the distribution of the time intervals between any two subsequent registrations. As will be shown in detail, all other  quantities of interest may then be found in a standard manner not specific to counter models.  In the derivations given below, the distributions governing the primary process and the deadtimes are considered as given,  either by theory or by data. The aim then is to describe the secondary process as observable from the output of the counter in  terms of these given quantities. This does not mean that specific assumptions will be made concerning the distributions, which  are considered as given; it only indicated which information is supposed to be available. Of course, knowledge of the  secondary process's functional dependence on the assumed  `- W1 ~~ W2 --W3  `D1->`DZ-~ FD3`FD4--3St S2 S3  x x x  T=O r, rZ r3 r4 TS  FIG. 1. A renewal counting process according to Assumptions (A1)-(A5). See text for detailed explanation.  478 WOLFGANG SCHWARZ  distributions governing the primary process and the deadtimes enables one to judge the adequacy of these assumptions.  Counter models were originally formulated only for the case of constant deadtimes. These models are generally classified into  Type I and Type II counters. In Type I counters, it is assumed that new contacts during a blockade of the counter have no  effect whatsoever: they are not registered and they do not influence the current deadtime. Hence a contact that hits upon the  counter in its free state blocks it for a fixed duration. The counter must be free again after the cessation of the deadtime,  because it is impossible to prolong the blockade while the counter is blocked.  In Type II counters, new contacts during a blockade of the counter are also not registered; however, they are assumed to  prolong the blockade for a new blockade duration measured from the instant of the new contact. Thus, a Type II counter can  remain blocked indefinitely.  Both types of counters can be generalized to random deadtimes.  For the Type I counter, the generalization to random deadtimes is straightforward. We will discuss the structure of the Type I  counter for arbitrary deadtimes briefly in Section 5. However, for the Type II counter at least two generalizations to random  deadtimes are possible, which have been described by Feller (1966, 1968) and by Takacs (1960).  Feller's generalization conforms to the one outlined in (A1)-(AS). In contrast, Takacs does not assume the blockades due to  previous contacts to be annulled by new contacts; i.e., he assumes that upon a new contact a new registration can occur if and  only if all previous blockades are over. Note that this conceptual difference is crucial only for random deadtimes.  The Takacs generalization, though of obvious importance, will not be considered in this paper in order to limit its length.  For future work it would be important to study systematically the differences implied by the Feller and the Takacs  generalizations of the Type II counter to random deadtimes. Obviously, for any given path of the primary process, a Feller  Type II counter registers at least as many contacts as does a Takacs Type II counter. Apart from comparisons with the  predictions of the two models, the question whether for a specific psychological application the Feller or the Takacs  generalization (if any) is adequate must of course be decided from substantive considerations.  Concerning known results on Type II counters, approximate formulae for the correction of counting losses in Type II counters  under the most simple assumptions have been in use since the early 1940s.  Feller (1948) was the first to reduce counter problems to the summation of random variables and hence to renewal theory. He  assumed the primary process to be Poisson and the deadtime to be constant and derived expressions for the expectation and  variance of the number of registrations in a given interval. The same case-Poisson input and constant deadtime-has since then  been investigated in a great many aspects; e.g., the distribution of inter-registration times or the distribution of the  blocked time in a given interval (e.g., Parzen, 1962; Miiller, 1973, 1974).  GENERAL COUNTER MODEL 479  In contrast, generalized Type II counters with random deadtimes have been considered less frequently. Takacs (summarized in  Takacs, 1960) investigated his generalization (as described above) for a Poisson primary process and an arbitrary distribution  of deadtimes. He obtained his main results in the form of integral equations. Partial results under the same assumptions have  also been derived by Smith (1957).  Feller (1966, p. 371), considering the generalization of Type II counters described in (Al)-(A5), also assumed a Poisson  primary process and derived an integral equation (marred by printing errors) for the distribution function of the duration of  the blockades. Special cases of this general model (Poisson primary process, exponential deadtimes) are also treated in other  areas of application, e.g., in weather forecasting (Cox & Miller, 1965, Section 3), in reliability theory, or in queueing  theory (Kleinrock, 1975). To the best of my knowledge, the main equations for this model, (3) and (15), are more general  (though rather obvious) than previously published results. Also, the nonparametric property of Eq. (9) derived in Section 4  seems to be new. A major argument to consider not only a Poisson input, but a general renewal input to the counter stems from  current notions in human information processing and is presented at the end of Section 5.c.  Let us now develop some notation necessary to analyze the model as outlined above (see also Fig. 1). The reader is advised to  review the notation only in a cursory fashion at first, and to return later to this compilation whenever necessary.  In general, densities associated with distribution functions such as F, G, K, are assumed to exist and are denoted with the  same lower case letter (f, g, k). If random variables (r.v.'s) of a given sequence are identically and independently  distributed (i.i.d.), we drop their index when referring to their common distribution.  The r.v.'s T;, i > l, denote the renewal epochs of the primary process. From (AI ) we have that the r.v.'s Z; defined by Z, -  T, , Z; = T; - T; , , i > 2, are i.i.d., with a common distribution function denoted as F(t) - P(Z < t).  Similarly, define the inter-event times W of the secondary process in terms of the registration times S as W, - S1, Wj = Sj -  Sj _ , , j > 2. From (A2) and (A3), the r.v. S, and hence W, are distributed as in Z,. From (A3), the variables Wj, j>2, are  also i.i.d., and their common distribution function is K(t) - P(W < t).  It will prove useful to introduce a separate notation for the distributions of the registration times S;. Hence, we let Qi(t)  - P(S; < t). The precise relation between the Qi and F will be given in Section 4.  By (A5), the durations of the deadtimes D are i.i.d., with a common distribution denoted as G(t) =_ P(D < t).  Convolutions will be considered frequently; they are denoted as a * b(t). The n-fold convolution of a function a(t) with  itself is denoted as al")(t).  Laplace transforms are generally indexed with the symbol of the transformed function; e.g., Lf.(,_G)(s) is the transform of  the function f(t) -[1-G(t)]. For the basic properties of Laplace transforms as applied to densities and distribution  functions, we refer to Feller (1966, Chap. 13).  480 WOLFGANG SCHWARZ  To describe the properties of the secondary process, we introduce the following random functions, expectations, and generating  functions:  N(t) - number of registrations in the interval [0, t] M(t) - E[N(t)], the expectation of N(t)  R(t) = E[NZ(t)], the expectation of NZ(t)  V(t) - Var[N(t)]=R(t)-MZ(t), the variance of N(t)  U(z, t) - E[z^'(`)] _ ~o z" - P[N(t) = n], the generating function of N(t) V(z, s) - Lu(s) =fo e -S` U(z, t) dt, the Laplace  transform of U with respect  to t.  3. BASIC EQUATIONS OF THE MODEL  In this section we derive the basic equations governing the counter model as defined above. Let us first derive a  representation of the distribution of the waiting time W from one registration to the next.  Given the assumptions and notation stated in Section 2, the distribution function K(t) of the inter-event times W of the  secondary process obeys the integral equation  1 -K(t)= [1 -F(t)]+  f(x) - [1 -G(x)] - [1 -K(t-x)] dx.  Equation (1) may be derived as follows.  The event { W > t }, i.e., that there is no further registration in the interval (0, t] given that there has been a  registration at T= 0, has by definition a probability equal to 1 -K(t). It is composed of two mutually exclusive events, which  exhaust the event { W > t }.  One is that the first event of the primary renewal process occurs only after t; in this case it is clear that no registration  can occur before t. The probability of this event is simply 1 - F(t). This explains the first summand of Eq. (1).  The other is that we have a conjunction of the following three events:  (a) the first event after T=0 of the primary process occurs at some instant x e (0, t], the corresponding density being f(x);  and  (b) the blockade initiated from the registration at T=O still lasts at T = x, the probability of this event being 1 - G(x); and  (c) in the remaining interval (x, t] of length (t-x) there is no further registration; from (A4), the probability of this  event equals 1 - K(t - x).  Integrating over the possible region of the instants xe (0, t], we obtain the second summand of Eq. (1).  GENERAL COUNTER MODEL 481  Differentiating (1) produces the density k(t) of the r.v.'s Wj, j >, 2, the inter-event  times of the secondary process:  k(t)=f(t)-G(t)+J f(x).[1-G(x)]-k(t-x)dx. (2) 0  Finally, application of the Laplace transform on both sides of Eq. (2) and simple  algebraic rearrangement yield  Lk(S) = Lf.G(SV [ 1 - L j. (1 -G)(S)]I  where, e.g., Lf.G(S) denotes the Laplace transform of the function f(t) - [1 -G(t)] (see end of Section 2).  We will now give an alternative derivation of this basic result. The derivation rests on a generalization of a representation  of the inter-event time W in the secondary process which is due to Feller (1948). The basic idea is that W can be represented  as the sum of a random number N of r.v.'s as  if N=0  Y_ Xj+Y if N>, 1. j=1  Here, the r.v.'s Xj are i.i.d. as the r.v. Z, given Z <, D. Y is independent of the Xj and distributed as Z, given Z > D.  Representation (4) expresses the simple fact that W is made up of a (random) number N of inter-contact times, all of which  except the last are smaller than the deadtime initiated by their predecessor-and hence hit upon the counter in its locked  state. The r.v. N = 0, 1, ... denotes the number of contacts which hit upon the counter in the blocked state. From assumption  (A4), N has a displaced geometric distribution according to  P(N=n)=P(Z>D)-[P(Z<Df" n=0, 1,....  Define two distributions A (x) - P(Z < x I Z < D) and B(x) - P(Z < x I Z > D). Their densities are  a(x) = f(x) - [1 - G(x) ]/P(Z < D) b(x) = f(x) - G(x)/P(Z > D). From the theorem on compound probabilities, we have  K(t)=P(W<t)= Y P(W<tjN=n)-P(N=n). n=0  Inserting the distributions corresponding to N=n and differentiating yields  00  k(t)= Y [a(")*b(t)]-P(Z>D)-[P(Z,<D)]n. n=0  482 WOLFGANG SCHWARZ  Equation (5) is the analogue to the representation (4) in terms of the densities involved. Taking the Laplace transform on  both sides of Eq. (5), we again obtain  Lk(s) = Lb(s) - P(Z > D) - [L.(s) - P(Z < D )]n n=o  = Lb(s) - P(Z > D)/[ I - Qs) - P(Z < D)]  =Lf G(S)l[1-Lf.0-G)(s)I- (3)  Equation (3) is a key result of our treatment in that it specifies the fundamental density k(t) of the secondary process in  terms of the given quantities F and G. Hence, Eq. (3) allows us to calculate the density of the inter-registration times for  arbitrary distributions of the primary renewal epochs and the deadtimes. In Section 4, we will demonstrate in detail how to  derive further interesting properties characterizing the secondary process from the knowledge of k(t), i.e., from Eq. (3).  The representation of W in Eq. (4) is similar, but not identical to the representation of W as a stopping time (e.g., Ross,  1983),  N  W = Zn, (6) n=l  where N-min. ,,{n: Z> D}, i.e., W is a sum of inter-contact times up to the first of these, ZN, which is larger than the  duration of the deadtime initiated by its predecessor.  From Wald's identity (e.g., Ross, 1983) it follows directly that  E[ W] = E[Z] - E[N] = E[Z]IP(Z > D). (7)  However, in Section 4 we will present a more systematic and more general derivation of several characteristics of the  secondary process from which-besides Eq. (7)-further useful results follow that are not so easy to obtain from Representation  (6).  4. DERIVATIONS FROM THE BASIC EQUATIONS  This section presents the derivation of results for the secondary process, which are important for the application of the  model. The main emphasis is on results which describe the functional dependence of the secondary on the primary process and on  the distribution of the deadtimes. We start with a derivation of the mean and variance of W the waiting time between any two  registrations of the counter.  To find the moments of W we need only to differentiate Eq. (3) with respect to s, and to evaluate at s = 0. Observing the  relations  P(Z=tIZ,<D) P(Z,<D)dt f(t)J1-G(t)]  GENERAL COUNTER MODEL  483  and  P(Z=tI Z>D)-P(Z>D) dt~ f(t)-G(t)  the resulting expressions can be formulated completely in probabilities and expectations associated with the variables Z and D:  EE W1 =E[Z]/P(Z> D) (7)  E[Z2]-2-E[Z]-E[ZjZ>D] _p2[Z] (8)  Var( W) = P(Z > D) + Pz(Z > D)  These results may be used to obtain a nonparametric property of the general model as follows. For this derivation, we must in  addition assume the first two raw moments of W (and hence of Z) to be finite.  Under these conditions, the following relation generally holds:  E[ZIZ>D]-P(Z>D)= f, t-f(t)-G(t)dt5E[Z]. 0  Inserting the result P(Z>D)=E[Z]/E[W] from Eq. (7) into Eq. (8), we obtain after simple rearrangements  E[ W2] E[Z2] E[ W] __ E[Z]  This property of the model holds generally, independent of the distributions F and G. Specifically, it does not follow from  the sole fact that P(Z <, t) 3 P( W < t), i.e., that registrations cannot follow each other more, rapidly than contacts do.  The latter property only implies an ordering of all existing moments of W and Z, but this is neither sufficient nor necessary  for the inequality given above.  Apart from the analysis of the inter-registration times W in most applications the main focus will be on the process-character  of the model. Here, one may either consider the distributions Q.(t) for an arbitrary, but fixed number n (i.e., the instants  Sof the nth registration at the counter), or fix the time t and consider the number of registrations in [0, t] (i.e. N(t)).  Of course, these quantities are related in a characteristic fashion which is given below. To generate the relevant model  predictions, we start with a simple consideration concerning the distribution functions Qn(t).  The variables Sconsist of n independent summands, the first of which is-from (A2y-distributed as in Z, while the following  ones are distributed as is the r.v. W. Hence, we have that  Q, (t)=F(t) and Qt)=F*k('')(t) for n>, 2 (10)  484 WOLFGANG SCHWARZ  or, in operational notation,  LQ,(s) = (1/S) - Lf(s) - [Lk(S)]"-', (10')  where Lk(S) was derived in Section 3 from the basic quantities F and G.  To obtain the relationship between the distributions of Sn and of N(t), note that the events ISn < t} and {N(t) > n} are  equivalent. For the number of registrations in [0, t] is n or greater iff the nth registration occurs before or at t.  Consequently,  P[N(t) > n] = P(Sn 1< t) = Qn(t)  P[N(t) > n + 1 ] = P(Sn+ 1 1< t) = Qn+ 1(t)  The distribution of N(t) follows by simple subtraction:  P[N(t)=n]=Qn(t)-Qn+1(t), nil  P[N(t)=0]=1-Q1(t)=P(W1>t)=1-F(t).  From Eq. (11), the expected value of the number N(t) of registrations in [0, t], E[N(t)]=M(t), follows immediately as  M(t)= Y n-P[N(t)=n]= Y, Qn(t), (12)  n=0 n=1  where Eq. (11) indicates that the last summation is telescoping.  Using a similar summation, we can find the second raw moment E[N'(t)],  R(t) = Y n2-P[N(t)=n]=2. Y n'Qn(t)-M(t), (13)  so that finally the variance of N(t) is obtained from Eqs. (12) and (13) as Var[N(t)] = V(t) =R(t)-M2(t).  The disadvantage of the results just given is that they require the sequence of functions {Q.(t)}. Now, the calculation of the  Qn(t) requires to convolute k(t) n - 1 times with itself, while our result (3) gave only a representation of the Laplace  transform of k(t). Even with the most simple distributional assumptions, the (n - 1)-fold convolution k(n-1_)(t) and hence the  calculation of Q"(t) turns out to be more intricate than appears tolerable for ordinary applications of the model. For that  reason, we give an alternative representation of the quantities determined in Eqs. (12) and (13) which does not require an  explicit knowledge of the Q.(t) itself, but uses Eq. (3) as its starting point.  Let us first introduce the generating function U(z, t) of the counting variable N(t),  U(z, t)-E[z'v1`1]= Y z"-P[N(t)=n]. n=0  GENERAL COUNTER MODEL 485  Using telescoping summation, we have from Eq. (11)  U(z,t)=I+(I-1/z) z"-Qn(t). (14) n-~  Differentiating with respect to z and evaluating for z = 1 would equally yield the moments derived in Eqs. (12) and (13). As  these quantities are also functions of the time t, we obtain more compact results if we first take the Laplace transform of U  with respect to t and differentiate with respect to z afterwards:  V(z, s)-LU(s)e-s'. U(z, t) dt. 0  The main advantage of this representation is that we can now apply the convolution theorem of the Laplace transform in Eq.  (10') to convert the infinite series from Eqs. (12) and (13) into simple geometric series, which are easily summed. Performing  these operations yields  (z-1)-Lf(S)  V(z'S)-(1/S)+s-[I-z-Lk(S)]. (15)  Differentiating with respect to z and setting z equal to 1 yields the operational image L(s) of the mean-value function M(t),  LM(S) = (1/s) -Lf(S)l [l -Lk(S)], (12')  which, with regard to Eq. (10), is easily recognized to be equivalent to Eq. (12). Nevertheless, the inversion of Eq. (12')  will in all cases lead much more simply to an explicit representation for M(t) than the direct use of Eq. (12).  Differentiating once more and evaluating at z = 1 gives us the Laplace transform of the function E[N2(t)-N(t)]. Using the  result Eq. (12') for M(t), we can convert this into an equation for LR(s), the Laplace transform of E[N2 (t) ]:  LR(s) = (1 IS) ' Lf(s) ' [1 + Lk(s)]/[1 - Lk(S)]2. (13')  To summarize, we have obtained (the Laplace transform of) the density k of the inter-registration times W in terms of (the  Laplace transforms of) the distribution functions F and G, which govern the inter-contact times Z of the primary process and  the deadtime D (Eq. (3)). Also, we derived the expectation and variance of W completely in terms of probabilities and  expectations associated with the basic variables Z and D (Eqs. (7), (8)). This enabled us to obtain a nonparametric property,  Eq. (9), of the general model that holds for arbitrary F and G. Finally (Eqs. (12'), (13') ), we found the operational  representations for the expectation and the variance of the counting variable N(t), the number of registrations in the  interval [0, t]. In the next section, we will discuss the application of the general results obtained so far to some specific  models.  486 WOLFGANG SCHWARZ  5. APPLICATIONS TO THE ANALYSIS OF SOME SPECIFIC MODELS AND DISCUSSION OF ALTERNATIVE ASSUMPTIONS  In this section we will apply the general results obtained in Sections 3 and 4 to some models which result from specific  assumptions concerning properties of the primary process and the duration of the blockade of the counter.  a. Model C: Constant Duration of the Blockades  The single special case of the general model which has by far attracted the most attention in the literature (see Section 2)  assumes the primary process to be Poisson (with a rate i) and the deadtime to be a constant (r). First, we want to demonstrate  how to analyze this model using the general equations derived in Sections 3 and 4. Subsequently, we will discuss some  qualitative properties of the model, which will be compared with an alternative model in Section 5.b.  The assumptions in Model C are  F(t)=1-e-'", t>0  and  0<t<T t >r.  The simplifications which result from these assumptions are considerable. For the inter-event times W of the secondary  process, we obtain results without effort if we substitute the simple facts P(Z > D) = 1 - F(r) = e-"" and E[Z I Z > D] ='r +  1/h into Eqs. (7), (8), to obtain  E[W]=e"rly and Var(W)=[e2"r/,U2].[1-2juT-e-"T]  in agreement with Takacs (1960) and with Parzen (1962). Furthermore, our Eq. (3) reduces to  Lk(S)= 1/[1 + (SIP) -e(s+")r].  Inserting this into Eq. (12'), we find  LM(s) = [s + lt -e- (s+")r] _ ul [s2 _ (s + P)]  in agreement with Feller (1948). Inversion of Lm(s) yields the expected number M(t) of registrations in [0, t],  M(t)= (I-e--"` for 0<t<T  11-e-"r+(t-T) Et e -"r for t>T,  which is not in agreement with Feller (1948) because of an obvious (e.g., for T = 0)  GENERAL COUNTER MODEL 487  printing error (which nevertheless has penetrated the literature since then; see, e.g., Bharucha-Reid, 1960, p. 306).  Similarly, E[NZ(t)] may be determined via insertion into Eq. (13'). Using the relation V(t) = R(t) - M2(t), for t > 2 -T the  variance of N(t) is found to be  Var[N(t)]=e-2,q(1+pT)'-2it2T-(t-r)]+e`T[y-(t-T)-I].  Concerning the agreement with Feller (1948), similar remarks apply as above. Let us now discuss some qualitative aspects of  the behaviour of Model C. Consider first the mean inter-registration time, E[W], as a function of the intensity p of the  primary Poisson process. The characteristic feature of Model C is that E[W] assumes a single minimum at y = 1/T; in this case,  E[ W] equals r - e. Hence, under Model C, the mean of the time between two subsequent registrations is always equal to or  larger than 2.718 times the (constant) duration T of the blockade. The "optimal" intensity to attain this minimum is so  constituted that E[Z] ='t, i.e., the mean temporal distance between two contacts is just equal to resolving time of the  counter.  These findings may be understood as follows. For very intensive primary processes there are many contacts, but for the same  reason the counter is nearly always blocked. For very small intensities the counter is nearly always free, but evidently there  are only very few contacts-which are in this case registered with high probability. From these two extreme cases and the  continuity of E[ W] in !t it follows that there must be at least one intermediate optimal intensity.  Consider now the limiting process as ,u --+ oo. In this case, a degenerated process is obtained, which, as a consequence of  Assumption (A2) concerning the starting state of the counter, registers a contact instantaneously at T= 0, followed by a  permanent blockade of the counter.  Finally, we remark that for the limiting case T = 0 a homogenous Poisson process with mean value function MT-o(t)=,ut is  obtained, as was to be expected from substantive considerations. All these facts may also be found analytically from the  corresponding limits in the expressions given above.  b. Model V: Variable Duration of the Blockade  For many applications in psychology the assumption of fixed blockade durations T will be unrealistic. Consequently, we  investigate the process analyzed in Section 5.a under the alternative assumption that the duration of the blockade is an  exponentially distributed r.v. (with rate a):  G(t)=1-e- for t>0.  This alternative assumption will also illustrate the influence that variability of the deadtimes exerts on the secondary  process as seen from the output of the counter. As in Section 5.a, we will at first derive all necessary results for this  process and then discuss its asymptotic and qualitative behaviour to compare it with Model C.  488 WOLFGANG SCHWARZ  Inserting the assumption concerning G(t) into Eq. (3) yields  a  Lk(s) =  s+a s+,U'  a result which in this special case can be confirmed (perhaps more easily) from the theory of discrete Markov processes in  continuous time.  The structure of Lk(s) indicates that k(t) is the convolution of two exponential densities, namely,  k(t) = [a .p/(N- o0]. [eat-e-"`].  As k is the density of the sum of two independent exponential r.v.'s, it follows immediately from well-known linearity  properties that  E[ W] = 1/y + l/a Var(W) = 1/y2 + 1/a2.  This may be formally confirmed by Eqs. (7), (8).  The Laplace transform LM(s) of the mean-value function M(t) is obtained by inserting Lf(s) and Lk(s) into Eq. (12'),  Lm(s) = y - (a + s)/[s2 - (s + a + y)].  When we invert this, M(t) turns out to be  M(t) = [y/(a+u)]2. [1-e-(a+"'']+ [a-Pl(a+0] -t.  An analogous substitution into Eq. (13') yields  _ 2a,u2-(s+a) LR(s) s3 . (s + a +,U)2  The inversion gives us  z 3a2_2ay+,u2)  ap - (a2 + 3P2) (06,U)2 2 + (a+u)3 .t+(a+u)Z.t  Finally, the variance of N(t) is obtained as V(t) = R(t) - M2(t).  Let us now consider again the asymptotic and qualitative behaviour of Model V and compare it with Model C.  a is the rate of the exponentially distributed duration of the deadtime after a registration has occurred. As a -. oo the  counter is immediately free again following  GENERAL COUNTER MODEL 489  any contact; consequently, we obtain in the limiting case a homogenous Poisson process with mean-value function M,,. jt)=pt.  This behaviour corresponds to Model C, which also yields a Poisson process with mean-value function equal to pt as i--+ 0.  As a --a 0, the duration of the blockade approaches infinity and the counter is permanently blocked after the first  registration. From assumption (A2) concerning the starting state of the counter, M(t) and R(t) reduce to P( W, < t)=F(t) = 1  -e -"", the distribution function of the waiting time to the first registration. Hence, the models are indistinguishable with  respect to this limiting process also.  By far more interesting is the comparison of the models for large intensities P of the primary Poisson process.  As it approaches infinity, the result for Model V is a displaced Poisson process: the first event occurs instantaneously at  T=0 and the following registrations are separated by temporal distances which are exponentially distributed with rate a. This  limit can be understood as follows: as p --> oo there will be new contacts nearly always and the sequence of registrations  will depend on the behaviour of the blockade durations only. Given a contact occurs, it follows from well-known minimum  properties of the exponential distribution that the probability p, that the next event will not be a contact but the cessation  of the induced deadtime, equals p = a/(a + p). Also, the expected time up to the next event is the same whether this event is  a new contact or the cessation of the blockade, and it equals 1/(oc + p). Consequently, at each instant when the counter is  blocked, the expected waiting time till the counter is free again equals (1/p) - [1/(a+ p)] = 1/a, independent of p. Now, as  p-> cc, the counter is in fact nearly always blocked, hence the inter-registration times are asymptotically exponentially  distributed. This may also be seen very clearly from the density k(t) of the r.v. W the time between two registrations under  Model V.  Taking the initial instantaneous registration into account, the asymptotic expectation of the number of registrations in [0,  t] equals M,,- x (t) = 1 + at, while from similar considerations the asymptotic variance Vu =  (t) equals at; both results  conform to a displaced Poisson process.  Thus, the asymptotic behaviour of Model V for large primary intensities contrasts to the corresponding behaviour of Model C,  for which an increase of the primary intensity beyond an optimal value leads to a decrease in its output and finally to a  permanent blockade of the counter. This difference concerning the saturation behaviour of the two counters provides an  opportunity for an empirical differentiation of the alternative models. From a model-theoretic point of view, we obtain a  further instructive example of how the randomization of a single aspect or quantity of a model may change the models behaviour  in an unpredictable and qualitative fashion (see also Vorberg, 1986).  Letting p --> 0 under Model V, we also obtain a Poisson process trivially, with expectation pt. This simply reflects that for  very weak primary pocesses the deadtimes of the counter become unimportant.  To summarize our findings, let us, first for Model V, consider for an arbitrary but fixed point t in time the expected number  M(t) of registrations at the counter  480,/33/4-8  490 WOLFGANG SCHWARZ  as a function of the intensity y of the primary Poisson process. We then obtain a function that departs linearly from the  origin with a slope of t as U is near the origin, passes a nonlinear but monotone transition zone, and finally reaches a  horizontal asymptote equal to 1 + at as tc tends to infinity.  For Model C the initial portion of this function locks similar, but then it reaches a maximum and attains asymptotically a  value of one as p -,, oo. For this model, then, it is literally true that "less is more," in the sense that beyond an optimal  intensity the output of the counter decreases as the primary intensity increases.  From these considerations, an obvious question is under which general conditions on the deadtime density g an optimal  intensity p of the primary Poisson process exists beyond which the expected inter-registration time, E[W], increases again,  i.e., the counter becomes "saturated". From our basic Eq. (3) it is not difficult to answer this question; we need only to  insert the Poisson assumption L f (s) = p/(s + p). Differentiating with respect to s and setting s equal to zero yields E[ W1  = 1/[,u-L,(h)], in general. Differentiating once more with respect to P shows that a necessary condition for the occurrence of  saturation behaviour is that the equation  [Lg(h)ILg(h)]= -N,  has at least one positive root. If in addition that root passes the second derivative test, it gives the optimal intensity.  From our discussion of Models C and V, it is also not difficult to construct a more general model that incorporates both  asymptotic behaviours as described above. To this end, it suffices to assume a deadtime distribution of the form  G(t) _ 0  ~ 1 - e a(t r)  t<T t>, T.  As a -+ oo, we obtain Model C in the limiting case, while for T = 0 we have Model V. For example, the mean inter-registration  time E[W] for the general model and the mean number M(t) of registrations in [0, t] are found to be  E[W] =eut - [1/a+ 1/,u]  and  M(t) - 1 _ e-ut  1[p/(a +h)]2. [I -e-(a+")`] + [ate/(a+ p)] - t  t<T t>T.  These expressions reduce to the corresponding results found previously for Models C and V if the limits are taken as indicated  above.  c. Alternative Models  In spite of the fairly general analysis of the model given in Sections 3 and 4, the question remains whether the assumptions  made at the outset are adequate. For  GENERAL COUNTER MODEL 491  example, an assumption which may appear questionable is the selection rule of the counter as expressed in (A4). According to  this rule the deadtimes of the counter are assumed to be prolonged when new contacts hit upon the counter in its blocked  state. It is well known (e.g., Dudel, 1980) from the physiology of the nerve cells that immediately following the  depolarization of a cell there is an absolute refractory period during which no stimulus events whatsoever influence the  behaviour of the cell-in particular, the deadtime cannot be prolonged during that phase. Hence, we may consider an alternative  to our assumption (A4):  (A4') If the counter is contacted in its blocked state, then no registration occurs, and no influence is excerted on the time  course of the current blockade.  It is immediate that under this alternative model, even for constant deadtimes, very intense primary processes cannot block  the counter permanently-in contrast to Model C in Section 5.a. In the limiting case as p --+ oc, the expected number of  registrations up to t is simply M(t) = 1 + [t/i]-this will occur if there is an immediate further registration whenever a  deadtime ceases. This modified model corresponds to the "Type I" counter described in Section 2. It can be analyzed by  techniques very similar to these used above, though its formal structure is rather more simple. More specifically, the  following basic representation of the r.v. W, corresponding to Eq. (6), holds:  Here W and Z have the same meaning as before and  N=min~n: Y_ Zi~D}. n_>l i"i  We do not enter into the analysis of this model here, but refer to the investigation of its special cases (with assumptions  analogous to these of Model C above) given by Feller (1948) or Miiller (1973, 1974). However, in concluding we remark that the  common preference for the Type I counter (e.g., Teich & Lachs, 1979) is insufficiently justified by reference to the supposed  "saturation effect" of the Type II counter. As our analysis in Section 5.b clearly demonstrates this behaviour is not  essential to the Type 11 counter in general.  Finally, one might wish to consider a generalization of the model that accounts for the notion of stage-wise processing  systems such as are typical for the information processing approach in cognitive psychology (see Townsend & Ashby, 1983).  A relatively simple way to construct a serial, deadtime distorted counter mechanism is to conceive of a cascade of counters  (exhibiting a partial temporal overlap of the stages), where the output of the first one is fed into the second one, and so  on. In the terms used throughout this paper we would say that the secondary process of the first counter is assumed to  constitute the primary process of a second counter, and so on. General results on cascades of, say, n counters can  492 WOLFGANG SCHWARZ  easily be obtained from Eq. (3), if one nests the output density, say, k,, of the first counter as f2, the input density of  the second counter, into the expression corresponding to Eq. (3) for the second counter.  We will not pursue the formal theory of cascades of counters at that time but merely note that models of a similar type have  been shown to account for some general features of the speed-accuracy trade-off by McClelland (1979, see also Luce, 1986, pp.  152, 244). However, in our view, the main point to be learned from this consideration is the usefulness of a general renewal  model which does not presuppose a Poisson primary input. The results of Sections 5.a and 5.b suggest that a deadtime distorted  primary Poisson process will generally produce a secondary process which is no longer Poisson. This conjecture may indeed be  proved rigorously. Hence, in conceiving cascades of counters, results for general primary renewal processes such as our Eq.  (3) are called for.  6. OUTLINE OF SOME APPLICATIONS TO PSYCHOLOGY  The aim of this final Section is twofold: first, to provide some alternative views to thoroughly investigated experimental  issues which derive from the model presented in Section 2; second, to illustrate that the potential scope of the counter  models is larger than their somewhat narrow standard terminology might at first suggest.  Consider first an experiment on the visual critical fusion frequency employing homogenous rectangular pulses of a given  intensity, onset asynchrony, and duration, designed to determine the probability of flicker perception as a function of the  total duration of the flicker train (see Boynton, 1972, Section C, for a review of experiments of this type). The typical view  (e.g., Boynton, 1972; Breitmeyer, 1984) holds that fusion will be reported if the neural or visual persistence of the  preceding pulses smears together with the neural activity due to their successors, thereby bridging the temporal gap between  two subsequent pulses.  An alternative view in the spirit of the counter model discussed above would have to assume that (a) the perception of flicker  (i.e., of an interruption of the pulse train) is contingent on the perception of the onsets of the single pulses (following  the first one), and (b) the delivery of each pulse temporary inhibits the system to register such onsets. The inhibitions  correspond to the deadtimes D of our model.  It seems reasonable to assume that the transduction of each pulse exhibits some temporal variability that effectively converts  the deterministic presentation schedule into a primary renewal process. Assuming that the observer reports flicker as soon as  a given number of onsets has been registered, all relevant predictions for this situation are given by the results derived  above. Within such an interpretation fusion frequency and temporal resolution data would have to be interpreted as an estimate  of the refractoriness of the contributing channels rather than an estimate of the time course of the persisting neural  activity. As both factors, refractoriness as well as persistence, are known to be present in the visual system, either  explanation is likely to be insufficient in itself.  GENERAL COUNTER MODEL 493  As a second application, consider a tachistoscopic recognition experiment using a high-frequency stimulus presentation such as  the one by Sperling et al. (1971), where the subjects are required to report the presence and/or location or identity of a  target item.  Within the framework of the model discussed above, we may assume an essentially serial structure within which the total  processing capacities are to be shared by a transferring system and a decoding system. Thus, the decoding process causes  blockades of varying durations during which no new sensory input can be received.  More specifically, we assume that items are initially represented in some peripheral storage and are transferred from there  one by one to a central decoding device (see, e.g., Rumelhart, 1970). As these transmission times are likely to be variable,  we can approximate the delivery of items to the decoder as a (primary) renewal process. During the decoding phase, items  cannot be received and are permanently lost from the system. Thus, the decoding phases correspond to the deadtimes D of our  model. Recognition of the target can occur only upon previous decoding; hence, at least for a perfect decoder, the probability  of recognition is equal to the probability that a randomly selected item hits upon the central decoder in its free state.  A complete account of the process would in addition require two assumptions concerning (a) the influence of the presentation  rate on the primary renewal process (delivery of items to the central decoder) and (b) the guessing behaviour of the subject.  In this application, one might question assumption (A4), which effectively states that the decoding phase can be prolonged  even by items which actually are not decoded. However, results on disinhibition phenomena from sequential blanking procedures  (e.g., Breitmeyer, 1984, p. 126 ff.) indicate that such counterintuitive modes of processing cannot be ruled out on purely a  priori grounds.  Under a somewhat more general perspective, the counter model may be considered as an alternative to the "signal-queueing"  hypothesis described by Luce (1986, p. 188) in cases where it must be assumed that signals which hit upon some stage in its  blocked state (due to previous signals) are permanently lost from the system. This will not usually be the case in the double  stimulation paradigms discussed by Luce, but it is generally a reasonable assumption under situations of prolonged  high-frequency stimulation. Here, the presentation rate may well be assumed to exceed some internal processing rate and  information loss becotpes a significant, if not the dominant factor determining the observable performance.  REFERENCES  BHARUCHA-REID, A. T. (1960). Elements of the theory of Markov processes and their applications. New York: Wiley.  BOYNTON, R. M. (1972). Discrimination of homogenous double pulses of light. In D. Jameson & L. M. Hurvich (Eds), Handbook of  sensory physiology, Vol. VII, 4: Visual psychophysics (pp. 202-232). BerlinfNew York: Springer-Verlag.  494  WOLFGANG SCHWARZ  BREITMEYER, B. (1984). Visual masking. Oxford: Clarendon Press.  BRINDLEY, G. S. (1954). The order of coincidence required for visual threshold. Proceedings of the Physical Society B, 67,  673-676.  Cox, D. R., & MILLER, H. D. (1965). The theory of stochastic processes. London: Chapman & Hall. Cox, D. R. & SMITH, W. L.  (1953). The superposition of several strictly periodic sequences of events. Biometrika, 40, 1-11.  Cox, D. R. & SMITH, W. L. (1954). On the superposition of renewal processes. Biometrika, 41, 91-99. DUDEL, J. (1980). Funktion  der Nervenzellen. In R. F. Schmidt & G. Thews (Eds.), Physiologie des Menschen (20th Ed., pp. 1-33). Berlin/New York:  Springer-Verlag.  FELLER, W. (1948). On probability problems in the theory of counters. In Studies and essays: A volume for the anniversary of  Courant (pp. 105-115). New York: Wiley.  FELLER, W. (1966). An introduction to probability theory and its applications, Vol. II. New York: Wiley. FELLER, W. (1968). An  introduction to probability theory and its applications, Vol. I. (3rd ed.). New York: Wiley.  FUORTES, M. G. F. (1971). Generation of responses in receptor. In W. R. Loewenstein (Ed.), Handbook of sensory physiology,  Vol. 1: Principles of receptor physiology (pp. 243-268). Berlin/New York: Springer-Verlag.  GREEN, D. M., & LUCE, R. D. (1971). Detection of auditory signals presented at random times, III. Perception and  Psychophysics, 9, 257-268.  HECHT, S., SHLAER, S., & PIRENNE, M. H. (1942). Energy, quanta, and vision. Journal of General Physiology, 25, 819-840.  KLEINROCK, L. (1975). Queueing systems, Vol. 1. New York: Wiley.  KURBATOV, J. D., & MANN, B. H. (1945). Correction of G-M counter data. Physical Review, 68, 40-43. LENNIE, P. (1981). The  physiological basis of variations in visual latency. Vision Research, 21, 815-824. LEVERT. C., & SCHEEN, W. L. (1943).  Probability fluctuations of discharges in a Geiger-Miiller counter produced by cosmic radiation. Physica, 10, 225-238.  LUCE, R. D. (1986). Response times. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.  LUCE, R. D., & GREEN, D. M. (1972). A neural timing theory for response times and the psychophysics of intensity.  Psychological Review, 79, 14-57.  MAIER-LEIBNITZ, H. (1942). Die Koinzidenzmethode and ihre Anwendung auf kernphysikalische Probleme. Physikalische Zeitschrift,  43, 333-362.  MCCLELLAND, J. L. (1979). On the time relations of mental processes: An examination of systems of processes in cascade.  Psychological Review, 86, 287-330.  McGILL, W. J. (1962). Random fluctuations of response rate. Psychometrika, 27, 3-17.  McGILL, W. J. (1963). Stochastic latency mechanisms. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, & E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical  Psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 309-360). New York: Wiley.  McGILL, W. J. (1967). Neural counting mechanisms and energy detection in audition. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 4,  351-376.  McGILL, W. J. (1971). Poisson counting and detection in sensory systems. In E. F. Beckenbach & C. B. Tompkins (Eds.), Concepts  of communication: Interpersonal, Inteapersonal and mathematical (pp. 257-281). New York: Wiley.  MULLER, J. W. (1973). Dead-time problems. Nuclear Instrumentation and Methods, 112, 47-57. MULLER, J. W. (1974). Some formulae  for a dead-time distorted Poisson process. Nuclear Instrumentation and Methods, 117, 401-404.  PARZEN, E. (1962). Stochastic processes. San Francisco: Holden-Day.  RATCLIFF, R. (1988). Continuous versus discrete information processing: Modeling accumulation of partial information.  Psychological Review, 95, 238-255.  Ross, S. M. (1983). Stochastic processes. New York: Wiley.  RUMELHART, D. E. (1970). A multicomponent theory of the perception of briefly exposed visual displays. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 7, 191-208.  SAMPATH, G. & SRINIVASAN, S. K. (1977). Stochastic models for spike trains of single neurons. New York: Springer.  GENERAL COUNTER MODEL 495  SMITH, W. L. (1957). On renewal theory, counter problems, and quasi-Poisson processes. Proceedings of the Cambridge  Philosophical Society, 53, 175-193.  SPERLING, G., BUDIANSKY, J., SPIVAK, J. G., AND JOHNSON, M. C. (1971). Extremely rapid visual search: The maximum rate of  scanning letters for the presence of a numeral. Science, 174, 307-311. TAK.ACs, L. (1960). Stochastic processes. London:  Methuen.  TEICH, M. C., & LAcHs, G. (1979). A neural counting model incorporating refractoriness and spread of excitation. 1.  Application to intensity discrimination. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 66, 1738-1749.  TEICH, M. C., PRUCNAL, P. R., VANucci, G., BRETON, M. E., & McGILL, W. J. (1982). Multiplication noise in the human visual  system at threshold. 1. Quantum fluctuations and minimum detectable energy. Journal of the Optical Society of America, 72,  TOWNSEND, J. T., & ASHBY, F. G. (1983). Stochastic Modeling of Elementary Psychological Processes. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ.  Press.  VAN DER VELDEN, H. A. (1944). Over het aantal lichtquanta dat nodig is voor een lichtprikkel bij het menselijk oog. Physica,  11, 179-189.  VORBERG, D. (1986). Unerwartete Folgen von zufalliger Variabilitdt: Wettlauf-Modelle fiir den StroopVersuch. Zeitschrift fur  experimentelle and angewandte Psychologie, 32, 494-521.  WANDELL, B. (1977). Speed-accuracy trade-off in visual detection: Applications of neural counting and timing. Vision Research,  17, 217-225.  RECEIVED: March 4, 1988