10.1016/0022-2496(89)90016-3
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 33,366-374 (1989)  Book Review  The European Mathematical Psychologists and Their Paperfest  EDWARD E. ROSKAM 8C. REINHARD SUCK (Eds.) Progress in Mathematical Psychology-1. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1987. Pp. ix + 538.  Dfl 225.00.  Reviewed by J.-CL. FALMAGNE  Roskam obtained his Ph.D. in Psychology at the University of Leiden in 1968, and he spent some time during the years 1968-1970  with Clyde Coombs at the University of Michigan. Since 1966 he has been associated with the University of Nijmegen, where he  is currently Professor of Mathematical Psychology in the Psychological Laboratory. He has been visiting professor at the  Universities of Bonn and Aachen. He has published extensively in his areas of interest, which include multidimensional  scaling, methodology, and psychometric theory. Suck obtained his Ph.D. in mathematics at Ulm University in 1975, and since  then he has been a Lecturer at the University of Osnabriick. His major research interests involve measurement theory,  probability theory, and the philosophy of science.  The reviewer is Professor of Psychology at New York University. He obtained his Ph.D. at the University of Brussels, and has  been a Visiting Lecturer at the Universities of Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, and Michigan. He is currently Acting Professor at the  University of California, Irvine. His research interests include measurement and psychophysical theory (Elements of  Psychophysical Theory. Oxford Univ. Press, 1985), with his more recent work being concerned with knowledge structures.  Every summer, just before or after the vacation, the European community of mathematical psychologists convene in some place or  other for its annual paperfest. The first encounter was in Paris, in 1971. Nowadays, the meeting often takes place in Germany  or Holland, a choice which reflects the composition of the group, a mixed breed of mathematical psychologists and  mathematicians with a large concentration in these two countries. The official language of the meetings is English, even  though only a small proportion of the participants have English as their native tongue. A few years ago, the decision was  taken to publish most of the papers presented at one such meeting in a volume entitled Trends in Mathematical Psychology  (Degreef and van Buggenhaut, 1984). This started a tradition. The present volume is the latest addition to the series.  As far as I know, only a minimal amount of editing of the papers takes place, which is consistent with the goals of the  operation: a fast publication of work still in progress. In other words, appearance of a paper in one of these volumes does  not preclude a later publication of an extended of modified version of the same paper 366  0022-2496/89 $3.00  Copyright ;c 1989 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  BOOK REVIEW 367  in a standard journal. Some object to what they call "cheap" papers. However, to this reviewer, the unspeakable delay often  involved in getting results into print largely justifies the enterprise, provided that the editing standards of such volumes  are clearly stated. Actually, the quality of the contributions tend to be quite high.  Roskam is a mathematical psychologist from the University of Nijmegen, and Suck is a mathematician holding a position in the  psychology department of the University of Osnabriick. This is a fitting choice for the editors of this volume since, of the  41 authors, 32 come from either Germany or Holland (16 from each). Belgium (2), France (2), Spain (2), England (1), Sweden (1)  and the United States (1) are also represented. As far as I can tell, about 30% of the contributors are less than 40 years  old, and of those, 50% had a formal mathematical education. For someone concerned with the future of the field, these are  comforting statistics.  But let us turn to the content of the book. It contains 30 papers, organized into six areas: measurement theory (6), cognitive  processes (4), performance and timing (4), perception and psychophysics (7), psychometrics and scaling (6), and social choice  and conflict (3). In view of the large number of papers, I could not give a faithful account of all of them. Actually, I will  spend considerably more time on some papers than others, not necesarily because they are more interesting, but because they  seem to illustrate significant points of view or directions of research. To convey the remarkable diversity of research topics  covered, each of the papers will be at least briefly outlined.  In Part I (Measurement Theory), Niederee's paper follows the current trend, also exemplified by Luce's and Narens's recent  work, of analyzing in depth the most fundamental aspects of measurement theory-as opposed to ever axiomatizing new situations.  In the Scott/Suppes paradigm, at the core of a measurement theory is an isomorphic embedding of some empirical structure onto  a particular numerical structure. For philosophical and practical reasons, the fact that the representing numerical structure  is considered as given a priori is judged unsatisfactory by the author, who asks two questions:  (1) What precise meaning could be given to the term "numerical structure"?  (2) How can some notion of "measurement procedure" explicitly be incorporated into measurement theory?  His idea is to "start out with presupposing some (`empirical') structure a just as the Scott/Suppes approach does. Contrasting  with the Scott/Suppes paradigm, a ,numerical structure' will not be pregiven; instead, it will be, roughly speaking,  `constructed from oc....." To this end, he considers some "`standard measurement procedure' solely based on the relations and  functions in a." Applying this procedure results in sets of informations which can be regarded as "numbers." This may perhaps  seem both arbitrary and abstract. However, Niederee spends much time motivating his approach, which he regards as a  "model-theoretic reconstruction and generalization of the Greek theory of proportions." Whether or not one is willing to  accept Niederee's constructions, there are profound reasons to reconsider the role of the real numbers in the notation of  scientific theories.  368 BOOK REVIEW  The next paper, by Orth, is a welcome use of meaningfulness concepts to the analysis of attitude models. If the theory of  meaningfulness is generally regarded among the important contributions of measurement theory, there certainly is no plethora  of significant applications, and this one is certainly of interest.  Irtel considers a functional equation  u[r(a, x), r(b, x)] = u[r(a, y), r(b, y)]  formalizing the concept of specific objectivity in psychometric theory (Rasch, 1960, 1977). From the standpoint of measurement  theory, this functional equation can be regarded as a "representation condition." An example is given of an (ordinal) model  different from Rasch's but satisfying this condition. Moreover, standard functional equation techniques apply, and lead to  interpretable solutions of that equation, and of one of its variants.  This part also contains a note on ordinal scales, by Droste, a paper presenting some approximation theorems for conjoint  measurement, by Suck, and finally, an attempt by Smolenaars to introduce likelihood techniques in the deterministic setting of  fundamental measurement theory.  The first paper of Part II (Cognitive Processes), by Raaimakers, reviews a number of applications of the SAM theory for  long-term memory (Raaimakers and Shiffrin, 1980, 1981). SAM stands for Search for Associative Memory. The core of the theory  is a retrieval structure formalized by a matrix [S(Q;, I;)], where Q; denotes a retrieval cue, I; denotes an "image" (a  complex information structure stored in long term memory), and S(Q;, I;) represents the strength of the association between  the image I; and the retrieval cue Q;. The cues are in principle observable (their presentation to the subject may be  controlled by the experimenter), while the images are presumably hypothetical constructs. To apply SAM in a particular  situation, important features of the theory have to be specified, concerning, in particular, the storage characteristics, the  retrieval strategy, and, especially, certain critical equations linking the strengths S(Q;, I;) to observable quantities.  Several examples of application are discussed in the paper, which will not be reviewed here. The opening paragraph of the  paper prompts a reaction, though. The author writes:  There has been a long tradition of mathematical modeling of learning and memory processes. In recent years, however there has  been a marked change in the scope of mathematical models for human memory. In the sixties, the field was dominated by  Markovian models. These models had a rather limited range of applications, most of them being specifically designed for one  particular experimental task. There were models for paired-associate memorizing, quite different models for recognition  memory, and yet other models for free recall performance and short term memory tasks, but none of these was applicable beyond  those self-imposed boundaries. Although such models are still proposed from time to time, and do serve important functions, a  more recent trend is the development  BOOK REVIEW 369  of what might be called "general theories," instead of models developed for one specific experimental task. We now have what  might properly be called "models of memory" instead of, say, a model for forced choice recognition tasks.  This long citation illustrates a fairly common point of view in contemporary experimental psychology. The quoted passage  strongly suggests that the present generation of researchers has suddenly become more ambitious than their predecessors. This  is an oversimplification. We should remember that the Markovian models "specifically designed for one particular task" were in  fact introduced as a reaction against the very general, very ambitious learning theories of the thirties and forties. These  theories led to much experimentation, and endless (and mostly fruitless) controversies. The sad fact is that those competing  general theories could not be very well separated on the basis of the data. The Markov models were an attempt to be more  rigorous in the specification of the assumptions. The story of these models deserves to be told, but is too long to be  contained here. In any event, have we gone the full circle? Are the contemporary cognitive theories essentially different in  character from the classical learning theories? To some extent, they seem to be. They tend to be formulated in a more precise  language (either mathematical or computer-like), and there is a better articulation between the general features of the  theory, and the specific models used in particular situations. Nevertheless, as far as I can see, a failure in one, or even a  few particular applications does not hurt the general theory very much. Since the local assumptions drive most of the  predictions, such theories remain as impervious to experimental verification as were the classical learning theories of our  elders. These remarks are not meant to critize contemporary theoretical constructions such as SAM. (I certainly have nothing  better to offer for the same purpose.) But if progress is to be made, it is important to keep such efforts in a proper  perspective.  In the next paper, Buffart discusses a network model with hierarchical constraints, for the representation of serial patterns  of the type "aabab" or "ghghghrstrst." In discussing the model, much use is made of the group of permutations transforming a  pattern into another (for a fixed alphabet). Then Roskam, the senior editor, outlines a "a psychometric theory of  intelligence." Despite the provocative title, faithfully summarizing an outline is somewhat of a challenge, and I will resist  the temptation. I will only say that this theory has emerged from research on speed and precision in time limit tests, by Van  der Ven, Van den Wollenberg, Pieters, Van Breukelen, and Jansen. The last paper of this section, by Van Breukelen, Jansen,  Roskam, Van der Ven, and Smit (all from the University of Nijmegen) discusses three models for response times in simple  overlearned tasks, in which speed is an essential factor. The mechanics of these models is based on the gamma and  Poisson-Erlang distributions.  Part III (Performance and Timing) begins with a paper by Colonius on a reaction time model, in the context of parallel,  self-terminating processes. The focus of the paper is the assumption of stochastic independence of channels processing  480/33,!3-10  370 BOOK REVIEW  times. Ways of measuring the degree of dependence are proposed. Next, comes a note by Diederich, who analyzes facilitation  effects in a bimodal detection task. Her results support her claim that analyzing the distributions of the reaction time  differences between left- and right-hand responses are indicative of the presence of facilitation effects in the motor  component. In the following paper, Eisler analyzes partial results of an experiment aimed at scaling subjective duration in  rats. Eight rats' lever presses were reinforced after an interruption of a tone of varying duration provided that the lever  had not been pressed before the tone. The latencies of the first lever presses, before the interruption, are analyzed from the  view point of an exponential distribution. This assumption is soundly rejected. This part ends with a discussion, by Holling  and Gediga, of the importance of stress in a waiting situation. The framework of the research is human-computer interaction.  In Part IV (Perception and Psychophysics), a long paper by Treisman examines some possible mechanisms for the setting of the  decision criterion in signal detection. The author argues that, even if the assumption of an optimal setting is accepted, it  does not automatically follow that the setting is constant. Relevant data are the sequential dependencies frequently  encountered in signal detection tasks, which are often assumed to have a sensory origin. The author considers a different  explanation. For instance, such effects could be due to momentary changes in the subjective probabilities of the stimuli. A  criterion setting theory is proposed,  based on three control processes: a long-term process which determines criterion reference values; a short-term process which  adjusts the criterion to adapt it to momentary changes in the estimated probabilities of the stimuli; and a second short-term  process, stabilization, which attempts to maintain the position of the criterion in a suitable relation to the flux of  relevant sensory inputs. The effects of feedback on the criterion are also considered.  A number of applications of this theory to data sets are described. However, the results are difficult to evaluate, since  important aspects of the theory are not discussed in the paper.  Then comes a note by Nelson proposing the Goodman-Kruskal gamma coefficient as an alternative to conventional signal detection  measures such as d', the slope of the ROC curve (in normal/normal coordinates), or the area under that curve, all of which he  found flawed. I must say that I had some difficulty following the author's arguments. Let us write US and Ufor the two  random variables, and let hs, QS and u,, 6n be their means and variances, respectively. Within the Gaussian theory, the ratio  va, of the standard deviations can be estimated from the slope of the ROC curve. However, objects the author, this index  relies on the assumption that the discrimination accuracy does not covary with the false alarm rate. This is indeed a critical  assumption of the model. However, this model is at least testable: the linearity of the ROC curve in normal/normal coordinates  can be assessed empirically. The author seems to be saying that this linearity does not guarantee the constancy of the  discrimination accuracy, across variations of the  BOOK REVIEW 371  false alarm rate. This is true enough: obtaining a good fit never guarantees that a model is correct. I find this objection  peculiar. Regarding the area under the ROC curve, Nelson conveys the impression that this index is distribution-bound. But the  area under the ROC curve is theoreticaly equal to P { U, > U} Thus, if g is any strictly increasing, continuous function, we  have  P{U,> U=P{g(U,)>, g(Un)1.  The area under the ROC curve is thus invariant under strictly increasing, continuous transformation of the random variables.  The specific assumptions on the distributions are much less critical than one might think (cf. Falmagne, 1985, Remark  10.4(1)). The Goodman-Kruskal coefficient may be a good index to use in some situations, but it is just as theoretically  engaged as the indices that the author complains about. This index, which we denote by y, is computed from the formula  _ h -f  y h +f- 2hf'  where h and f denote the hit and false alarm rate, respectively. (Thus, 0 < y < 1 if  0 < f < h < 1.) Accordingly,  h= f(l +y) 1+2fy-y'  If we assume that y is constant across conditions, this equation predicts the form of the ROC curve. It is the equation of a  hyperbola passing through the origin and the point (l, 1). The argument used by Nelson against the Gaussian model can be  returned against the model associated with the y coefficient. If the data points fall approximately on one such hyperbola, one  might conclude that the discrimination accuracy remains constant. However, if one has reasons to believe that the subject is  actually governed by another model (say, Luce's (1963) threshold model, which predicts that the data points should all fall on  one of two segments of straight lines) then the constancy of the discrimination accuracy should be rejected.  The next paper, by Mortensen, considers the question of whether visual detection arises from the activation of a single  channel, or results from probability summation among several channels. The point of this paper is to establish that, under  certain conditions, the threshold curves resulting from superposition lead to reject the assumption of probability summation.  In his second paper in this volume, Irtel considers some possible constraints for binocular brightness processing. In the  context of the models of Schroedinger and de Weert and Levelt, the author formulates an "invariance principle," which is  formalized by the equivalence  B(a, x) < B(b, y) <-> B(ta, tx) < B(tb, ty) dt > 0,  where B is the binocular brightness function. (This equivalence can be summarized  372 BOOK REVIEW  by the functional equation B(ta, tx)=F;[B(a, x) ], with F a strictly increasing function.) The consequences of this principle  are explored mathematically. Experimental results are reported and analyzed.  A note by Lukas considers the size-distance invariance hypothesis (SDIH) in visual perception from the viewpoint of  measurement theory. He argues that "unlike its physical counterpart, SDIH is far from being a well founded law on the  numerical relationship between perceived distance, perceived size, and visual angle." He proposes an alternative model based  on additive conjoint measurement. An informative note by Garriga Trillo describes the serious problems potentially associated  with small disorders. The author argues that the absolute threshold sensitivity tests used in chemosensory clinics are  difficult to apply, and the evaluation of the result is a complicated task. After studying six measures of olfactory  sensitivity, it is found that one particular ordinal measure is to be preferred, from the standpoint of practicality and  validity.  Part IV ends with a very useful paper by Zaus, in which he reviews and evaluates a number of hybrid "adaptive methods," that  is, "sequential designs for estimating parameters in sensitivity experiments." The term hybrid covers those cases in which the  target value is first bracketed in an effective way, using one procedure, then a refinement of the location of this value is  obtained by some other procedure.  In Part V (Psychometric and Scaling Theory), Jansen discusses a model proposed by Rasch, in which the test scores are regarded  as realizations of a Poisson process with intensity p;ij = Q;/B; where i denotes the subject, and j denotes the test. The  contribution of the paper consists in an improvement of current methods for parameter estimation, based on considering prior  information. A paper by van Blockland-Vogelsang, Verbeek, and Eilers develops a probabilistic version of the unfolding model  (Coombs, 1964), based on the error model of Feigin and Cohen (1978), which is itself a special case of the nonparametric  family of distributions for ranking data derived by Mallows (1957). The authors investigate an iterative estimation of pattern  and error parameters.  Barthelemy and Mullet propose an algebraic model describing the rules underlying expert categorical judgments. Each of 13  experts had to assign each of the students in a sample to a category representing the best choice of curriculum for that  particular student (e.g., long classical scientific studies, short industrial studies). The student were characterized by  their grades, test scores, their own choice of future studies, etc. The aim of the analysis is to represent the categorical  assignments by the experts by polynomial classes. For instance, one particular expert assigned five students to category 5:  "long scientific studies." The expert rule for this assignment was described by the polynomial  S2 [L2+ VI],  formalizing the rule: "each time a pupil is good in science (Sz) and is either good in literature (L Z) or has a good score on  a verbal test, then he/she is assigned to category 5 (long scientific studies)."  BOOK REVIEW 373  Beckert and Billhardt analyze the configural effects in similarity judgements in term of a "contrast model," assuming that the  stimuli are represented by sets of features and features combinations. A note by Buggenhaut and Degreef starts from the  observation that, in the Boolean analysis of questionnaires, it is often advisable to neglect some responses, since the full  implication graphs are too complex, and too difficult to use. On the basis of an example, a comparison is made of two  dichotomization methods and the associated implication graphs.  The final paper of Part V is by Garcia-Perez, who proposes a finite state theory of performance in multiple choice tests. This  theory is presented as an alternative to conventional scoring schemes, such as the number of correct responses, with or  without a correction-for-guessing. The basic idea of the theory is that a subject's response to an item results from a  preliminary classification of each of the possible alternatives as either true or false. For example, "if the subject only  classifies k false alternatives (0 < k < N- 1) then the probability of being correct will be 1/(N-k) if the subject decides to  guess at random among the remaining (unclassified) alternatives." Some simplifying assumptions are made, and the resulting  model is applied to some preliminary data.  Part VI (Social Choice and Conflict) contains three papers. Bezembinder considers the problems of content and structures in  utilities for social choices from the viewpoint of psychometric theory and measurement theory. He discusses, in particular,  the issue of the amalgamation of individual utilities into a social utility. In their paper, Schulz and May discuss a random  utility model for ranking data. It is assumed that the utilities are a shift family (Ui),,;,of independent random variables,  with an extreme value distribution. Moreover, the location parameter m; of U, is linearly dependent on the attributes of  simuli i. Parameter estimation procedures are developed, which have good uniqueness and existence properties. An application  to experimental data is described. In the last paper, van den Wittenboer, de Bruyn and Catau examine a simple case of those  situations in which two decisions makers with conflicting goals control the same dynamic system. Various possible strategies  are discussed, which are confronted with the data of an experiment involving a game simulating a market with two competitive  firms.  Having reached the end of this long series of papers, the reader is left with a mixture of favorable impressions. To begin  with, there is the remarkable variety of themes, models and techniques encountered, which we mentioned at the beginning of  this review, and the generally high level of competence of the contributors, relative to the going standards in the field. A  closer look, however, reveals a more sharply defined image. For instance, the impact to measurement theory is quite  noticeable: the current "bible" (Krantz et al., 1971) is cited in no less than eight papers distributed in four sections of  the book. One might be puzzled by this observation. For many, measurement theory is still an excursion in Esoterica. There is  no need to dispute such a view here. (I am resisting a strong impulse.) Actually, I suspect that this prominence of  measurement theory is only an aspect of the growing importance of algebra, and more specifically, combinatorial techniques, in  the formulation of models for behavioral data. The field appears to be moving away  374 BOOK REVIEW  (quite appropriately, in my view, at least for some areas) from the types of models encountered in the natural sciences.  In any event, this book offered a good occasion to take stock of mathematical psychology. From the vantage point of the  European contingent, it is obviously very healthy and vigourous.  REFERENCES  CoomBs, C. H. (1964). A theory of data. New York: Wiley.  DEGREEF, E., & VAN BUGGENHAUT, J. (1984). Trends in Mathematical Psychology (Advances in Psychology, 20). Amsterdam:  North-Holland.  FALMAGNE, J.-CL. (1985). Elements of psychophysical theory. New York Oxford Univ. Press.  FEIGIN, P. D., & COHEN, A. (1978). On a model for concordance between judges. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, B, 40,  No. 2, 203-213.  KRANTZ, D. H. K., LUCE, R. D., SUFFEs, P., & TVERSKY, A. (1971). Foundations of measurement. Volume 1. Additive and polynomial  representations. New York: Academic Press.  MALLOWS, C. L. (1957). Non-null ranking models I. Biometrika, 44, 114-130.  RAAIMAKERS, J. G. W., & SHIFFRIN, R. M. (1980). SAM: A theory of probabilistic search of associative memory. In G. H. Bower  (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation: Advances in Research and theory (Vol. 14). New York: Academic Press.  RAAIMAKERS, J. G. W., & SHIFFRIN, R. M. (1981). Search of associative memory. Psychological Review, 88,93-134.  RASCH, G. (1960). Probabilistic models for some intelligence attainment tests. Copenhagen: Danish Institute for Educational  Research.  RASCH, G. (1977). On specific objectivity: An attempt at formalizing the request for generality and validity of scientific  statements. Danish Yearbook of Philosophy, 14, 58-94.