10.1016/0022-2496(89)90029-1
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 33, 172-186 (1989)  A Model for Contextual Fluctuation  GER-JAN M. MENSINK University of Nijmegen  AND  JEROEN G. W. RAAIJMAKERS  TNO Institute for Perception  Current theories of human memory frequently assume that the probability of recall depends on the similarity of the test  context to the study context. A model for contextual fluctuation is developed that is based on Stimulus Sampling Theory. The  model assumes that "context" can be represented by a set of so called contextual elements. Part of this set represents the  current context. There is a continuous fluctuation between the active contextual elements (the current context) and the  inactive contextual elements. During study, part of the current context is conditioned to (stored in) the memory trace. The  model may be used to derive predictions for the overlap between the study and test contexts. The model is developed in the  context of interference paradigms. It is shown that the model leads to a number of interesting predictions. The incorporation  of this model in the SAM theory (Raaijmakers & Shiffrin (1981). Psychological Review 88, 93-134) enables that theory to  predict such phenomena as spontaneous recovery and proactive inhibition. Cc' 1989 Academic Press, Inc.  Recent theories of memory have placed considerable emphasis on the role of contextual factors in retrieval from long-term  memory (e.g., Anderson, 1983; Glenberg, 1979; Raaijmakers & Shiffrin, 1981). In particular, it has been assumed that the  probability of recall depends on the similarity of the context at the time of retrieval to the context at the time of  encoding. This factor is often assumed to be (at least partly) responsible for the gradual decrease in the probability of  recall as a function of the retention interval. That is, it is assumed that the similarity of two contexts is determined by  the distance in time: the context at time t(i) will be more similar to the context at time t(i +j) than to the one at time t(i  + k) where k >j. However, with the exception of Estes (1955) and Bower (1972), no attempts have been made to formally  incorporate this notion in current mathematical models for learning and memory.  This work was supported by a grant from the Netherlands Psychonomics Foundation which is subsidized by the Netherlands  Organization for the Advancement of Pure Research (ZWO). Requests for reprints should be sent to Jeroen G. W. Raaijmakers, TNO  Institute for Perception, P.O. Box 23, 3769 ZG Soesterberg, The Netherlands.  0022-2496/89 $3.00  Copyright u', 1989 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  172  A MODEL FOR CONTEXTUAL FLUCTUATION 173  In this article, we will develop a model for contextual fluctuation that will be incorporated in the SAM theory (Raaijmaker &  Shiffrin, 1981). However, although our presentation will be in the context of that theory, we believe that our results have a  wider applicability and might be incorporated in other models of memory. Special attention will be given to interference  phenomena. A full account of this particular application is given in Mensink and Raaijmakers (1988). In the present paper we  will focus mainly on the quantitative aspects of contextual fluctuation model.  The SAM theory is a cue-dependent probabilistic search theory that has been shown to be able to account for a large range of  phenomena in the memory literature (see Raaijmakers & Shiffrin, 1980, 1981; Gillund & Shiffrin, 1984). The SAM theory assumes  that context acts as a search cue similar to other cues such as item cues or category cues. In this theory, context has been  used as the factor that allows the memory search to be focused on the target list of items. Moreover, Raaijmakers and Shiffrin  (1981, p. 129-130) assume that contextual change is one of the major factors determining forgetting. For example, it can be  easily shown that a decrease in the contextual retrieval strengths (as defined in this theory) leads to a decrease in the  probability of recall. However, in order to be able to extend the SAM model to the explanation of time-dependent aspects of  memory (e.g., simple forgetting), it is necessary to make at least one variable in the model timedependent. In accordance with  Raaijmakers and Shiffrin (1981) a likely candidate is the associative strength of the context cue to the stored memory images  (or traces). In the next section we will develop a context fluctuation model. This model will then be incorporated in the SAM  model and will be shown to be responsible for the prediction of a number of interference phenomena.  DESCRIPTION OF THE MODEL  The model that we will discuss is an element-based context model in the tradition of Stimulus Sampling Theory. We will present  the model as it applies to the pairedassociate learning paradigm although it could undoubtedly be generalized to other  paradigms such as free recall.  Let us start with a verbal description of the model. Following Estes (1955) and Bower (1972), context (internal as well as  external) will be represented as a set of contextual elements. At any given time only a part of this context is perceived by  the subject and this subset is denoted as the current context. Elements that are part of the current context are said to be in  the active state. All other elements are inactive. We assume that at any moment only a fixed number n of the elements are in  the active state. The total number of elements is equal to N + n. Hence, the number of inactive elements equals N. With the  passage of time, the current context changes due to a fluctuation process: inactive elements may become active and some active  elements will become inactive.  Before applying these ideas to the paired-associate paradigm, we will first discuss  174 MENSINK AND RAAIJMAKERS  how they are related to the concept of contextual information as used in the SAM theory. According to SAM, at the time of  study both item and context information is stored in long-term memory. It is assumed that both the S-R pair and the contextual  elements are encoded in the same image or episode (Mensink & Raaijmakers, 1988). Both the associative strength between the two  members of a pair and the contextual associative strength are a function of the presentation time. In order to relate this to  the present context model, it seems natural to assume that the number of active elements that will be encoded in the image, is  a function of presentation time.  We will now apply these ideas to a paired-associate interference design (A-B, A-C). Imagine that a subject is given one study  trial on a List-1 stimulus-response pair (a-b) and the one study trial on the corresponding a-c pair, followed by a retention  test (A-B denotes a list of paired associates, whereas a-b symbolizes an individual pair). Thus, both "lists" contain only a  single pair. This particular situation is illustrated in the following scheme:  a-b `' a-c `z test  where t, and t2 represent the interlist interval and the retention interval, respectively.  Consider what happens when the a-b pair is presented for study. Any active contextual element may be encoded in the item's  image. Such an element is denoted by x,. Elements that are not encoded, are denoted as y-elements. During the interlist  interval t, the fluctuation process causes a new sample of context elements to be active when the a-c pair is presented. This  active set will contain x, and y elements. Some of the active y elements will be stored in the a-c image. These elements are  called x2 elements. An x, element that is stored in the corresponding List-2 a-c image now refers to two traces that belong to  different lists and that involve the same stimulus terms. Such an element is denoted by xo (overlap element). At the end of  the retention interval (t,) the active set will contain x,, x2, xo, and y elements. These elements constitute the context cue  that is used to retrieve images from memory. Its associative strength to an image from List-i is assumed to be proportional to  the sum of active x; and xo elements, i.e., to the overlap of the set of elements stored in the image and the set of elements  active at the time of testing.  In summary, there are always two sets of contextual elements, the active elements and the inactive elements. Active elements  may be encoded during a study trial. The probability of recall on a test trial is a function of the overlap between the  context elements active at test and the elements encoded in an image.  At this point we have to make some simplifying assumptions in order to keep the model mathematically tractable. It will be  assumed that during a learning trial the contextual state remains fixed, i.e., active elements remain active and similarly for  inactive elements. If one would assume that the context fluctuates within as well as between trials one would have to treat  all items individually, which would make computation of model predictions quite complicated and practically unfeasible. The  above assumption implies that we disregard an item's position in the list.  A MODEL FOR CONTEXTUAL FLUCTUATION 175  In addition, we will have to make some decisions concerning the relationship between the elements encoded on a given trial in  the images corresponding to different items. It seems unlikely that the same subset of active elements is encoded in all  images, especially since it is also assumed that the number of elements encoded depends on the presentation time. It will  therefore be assumed that the encoding of active elements in a memory image is governed by a stochastic process and that the  subsets of active elements that are encoded in the images of different items are independent samples from the set of elements  that constitutes the current active context.  THE MATHEMATICAL MODEL  The heart of our model is the equation that gives the number of elements of a given type v (v=x1, x2, xo, or y) that are  active following t seconds of fluctuation, given that the state at t = 0 is known. This equation is given by the solution of  the differential equation  d t) dt=yA'(t)-#A(t)  A'(t)=K-A(t),  where A(t) denotes the number of elements that are conditioned (i.e., encoded in the memory image) and active. A'(t) gives the  number of elements that are conditioned but inactive and K equals their sum: A(t)+A'(t), i.e., the total number of conditioned  elements. y is the rate at which an inactive element becomes active and Q gives the rate at which an active element becomes  inactive. Note that during a fluctuation period, K is constant but A(t) and A'(t) are changing. Thus,  dA(t)-yK-(f+y)A(t). dt  The solution of this differential equation is  A(t)=A(0) exp{-(/3+y)t) +K#+y [1-exp{-(l+y)t}].  Thus, A(t) gives the number of elements from class v that are active following t seconds of fluctuation. In this derivation we  have implicitly assumed that the total number of contextual elements is reasonably large (otherwise the use of the  differential equation technique would not have been appropriate). Hence, A(t) might be considered as the expected number of  active elements.  Next, we need a learning equation, i.e., a formula that gives the number of active elements that are stored in an image during  a study trial as a function of the study  176 MENSINK AND RAAIJMAKERS  time. We will assume that the increase in the number of stored elements is proportional to the number of active elements that  are as yet not conditioned (not stored in the image under consideration). This leads to the differential equation  dA(T)-n-A(T)] dT  where T gives the presentation time in seconds. The solution is  A(T)=A(O) exp(-aT) + n[1-exp(-aT)].  Hence the probability that an active element that has not already been encoded in the image, is stored during a study trial of  T seconds is equal to  w=A(T)-A(0)= 1 -exp(-aT). n-A(0)  Equations (1) and (2) will be used to derive formulae for the number of elements from class v that are active at the time of  testing. Let us assume a multitrial list learning situation of the following kind where t, denotes the intertrial interval, t2  the interlist interval and t3 the retention interval:  A -B `` A-B `A-B `z A-C `` A-C `3 TEST  In this analysis we will use the following notation:  Aji, j, t)  K(i, j)  the number of contextual elements of type v that are active t seconds after the jth trial on List-2 and following i trials on  List-1;  the total number of elements of type v (active plus inactive) after i trials on List-1 and j trials on List-2.  Let us start with List-1 trials (i = 1, j = 0). At the start of the first study trial, n y elements will be active.  Immediately after the first trial, nw of these elements are conditioned and have become x, elements. During the intertrial  interval fluctuation occurs and on the second trial another subset of the remaining y elements is transformed into x,  elements. In general, we have the following difference equation for the number of x, elements:  K,(i, 0) = K,(i -1, 0) + w[n - A,(i -1, 0, t,)].  In words: the total number of x, elements on trial i is equal to the number on trial i -1 plus a proportion w of the  unconditioned elements that are active at the end of the intertrial interval between trial i and trial i -1 (i.e., at the  start of trial i). For the number of active x, elements we have  A,(i, ,(i,0,0)=A,(i- 1, 0, t,)+ w[n- A,(i- 1, 0, t,)],  A,(i, 0, t,)=A,(i, 0, 0) exp{ -(P+y)t, } +K,(i, 0)h(t,),  A MODEL FOR CONTEXTUAL FLUCTUATION 177  where h(t) is defined as  h(t) =fl+y [1-exp{-(#+y)t}]  Due to the conditioning process the number of y elements decreases. This leads to  A ji, 0, 0)=n-A,(i, 0, 0)  =A,,(i- l, 0, ti) -w[AY(i- 1, 0, t  K,,(i, 0) = KY(i - 1, 0) - w[AY(i -1, 0, t,)]  =Kv(i-1,0)[1-wh(t,)]-Ay(i-1,0,0)wexp{-(fl+y) t,}.  With these equations and the initial conditions A,(0, 0, 0)=K,(0, 0)=0, A ,(0, 0, 0) = n, and K,,(0, 0) = N+ n, these  quantities can be calculated for all times during List-1 learning.  Suppose now that a second (interfering) list is presented t2 seconds after the Ith trial on List-1. At the end of the  interlist interval the number of elements of each type is given by  A,(I, 0, t2)=A,(I, 0, 0) exp{ -(fl+y)t2} +K,(I, 0)h(t2),  A2(I, 0, t2)=AO(I, 0, t2)=0,  AJI, 0, t2)=n-AI(I, 0, t2),  K2 V, 0) = KO(I, 0) = 0.  During List-2 learning some of the y elements will become x2 elements and some of the x, elements will become xo elements. The  following set of difference equations describes the changes in the number of elements of each type:  A ,(I, j,0)=(1-w)AI(I j-1, tj),  KI(I,j)=K,(I, j-1)-wA,(I, j-1, tj), A2(I, j, 0) = A2(I, j - 1, ti) + wAY(I, j - 1, ti),  K2(I, j) = K2(I, j - 1) + wAY(I, j - 1, ti), AO(I, j, 0)=AO(I, j- 1, t,)+wA,(I, j- 1, t,)  KO(I, j) = KO(I, j-1) + wA,(I, j- 1, ti), A,,(I, j,0)=(1-w)AY(I, j-1, t,),  KY(I, j) = KY(I, j- 1) - wA,(I, j - 1, ti).  178 MENSINK AND RAAIJMAKERS  As in the case of List-1 learning, the composition of the active set of contextual elements changes during the intertrial  interval (of length t, seconds):  AJI, J, t,)=AJI, J, fl)exp{-(fl+Y)tij +KjI J)h(tj  A similar equation describes the state of affairs at the end of the retention interval (t3 seconds), i.e., the interval  between the last List-2 trial and the final testing:  AJI, J, t3)=AJI, J, 0)exp{-(#+Y)t3l+Kv(I, J)h(t3).  We have not been able to derive a (closed) analytical solution for these difference equations. However, after insertion of the  appropriate values for t,, 12, and 6, these equations can be easily used to compute the state of activation at the end of the  last List-2 trial. These results may then be used to calculate the number of active elements of each type at the time of test.  IMPLEMENTATION IN SAM  In the original SAM model, the probability of recalling an item was a function of, among other things, the "contextual  retrieval strength," the strength between the context cue and the memory image (or memory trace) corresponding to that item.  The present notion of a fluctuating context may be incorporated in a natural way in the SAM model. We assume that the  contextual retrieval strength is proportional to the overlap in the contextual elements that are active at the time of testing  and the contextual elements stored in the memory image.  For any List-i image, the overlap is equal to the sum of the number of active x; and xo elements. Hence, the contextual  retrieval strength (s;) between the context cue at test and a particular List-i image is equal to  [AJI, J, t3)+A0(I, J, t3)]  Si = a.  n  In this formula we divide by n in order to eliminate a non-identifiable parameter: since all Av are proportional to n, we  cannot estimate n and a separately. Put in another way, the contextual retrieval strength is proportional to the proportion of  the elements active at the time of testing that are encoded in the memory image. Since the value of n is arbitrary, we have  scaled the A, and K, in units of n. That is, we have set n equal to 1 in all calculations.  The implementation of this contextual fluctuation model in SAM poses a number of other problems that we will briefly discuss.  In SAM, associative strengths are incremented (increased) after a successful recall (a learning-during-retrieval assumption).  For paired associates this means that the interitem strength (the strength of the stimulus item to the memory image) and the  contextual strength will be incremented after recall of the response. Within the fluctuation model, the  A MODEL FOR CONTEXTUAL FLUCTUATION 179  increment for the contextual strength should be proportional to the number of active elements that are not encoded in the  image. This process can be understood as follows. The fact that the subject was able to recall a response means that the  subject was able to recover the image (the representation of this pair in memory). This means that the content of such an  image was activated at that moment. We assume that during this period the active contextual elements that were not already  stored in this image, may now become associated to this memory image. That is, they are stored together with the other  elements from the recovered image. When the subject is tested a second time on this item, the expected overlap between context  cue and image will be larger than before which leads to a higher probability of recall. However, if one wants to work with  this incrementing assumption, one will have to resort to complicated Monte Carlo simulation methods, treating all items  individually. Since the data that we will consider do not seem to depend on such an incrementing assumption, we will work with  the simplified model without the learning-during-retrieval assumption.  Finally, the present model assumes that when an item is presented on several trials, new contextual elements are always added  to the same (single) memory image. This implies that an item is always "recognized," i.e., the image that was stored on the  first presentation is always successfully recovered as it is presented on later study trials. The present model could be  generalized by assuming that on a repeated presentation context elements are added to the memory image of a previous  presentation, if that image is retrieved on the second presentation. If it is not recognized (i.e., not retrieved), then a new  image would be formed. Such a more complicated study-phase retrieval model might be useful for the explanation of spacing  effects, but does not seem to be necessary for the modeling of list learning paradigms.  APPLICATIONS OF THE MODEL  In this section we will consider a number of predictions of the present contextual fluctuation model. We will focus on the  effects of varous experimental variables on the contextual strengths. All calculations will be based on the following set of  parameter values: y = 0.01, /3 = 0.035, a = 0.2, T = 4.0, a = 0.62, t, = 10, and t2 = 10. In addition, we will show how this  fluctuation model enables the SAM theory to account for a number of interference and forgetting phenomena. A full account of  the application of SAM to interference and forgetting is presented elsewhere (Mensink & Raaijmakers, 1988). In this paper, we  limit the presentation to those predictions of the new SAM model that are a more or less direct consequence of the  incorporation of the contextual fluctuation model.  We will first examine the effects of the number of List-I and List-2 trials. Figure 1 shows the total number of contextual  elements of each type (K,,) immediately after each of five List-1 trials and three List-2 trials. Obviously, during List-1  study trials the number of x, elements increases steadily. Furthermore, during List-2 trials, a  480/33/2-5  180 MENSINK AND RAAIJMAKERS  a  1.4  c  0 v  1.2  c  1.0  0 0.8  0.6  E  0.4  0  0 0.2  0.0  1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 List-1 list-2 trial number  FIG. 1. Total number of class v (v=x,, x2, or xo) elements immediately after each of five List-1 trials and three List-2  trials.  number of these x, elements transform into xo elements. At the same time the number of xZ elements starts to increase.  Figure 2 gives the total number of elements of each type as a function of the length of the intertrial interval (t,). These  results show that the total number of stored elements (of whatever kind) increases with larger intertrial intervals. This can  be easily understood: as the intertrial interval increases, the overlap between  _N C G1 E d w v a c 0 II  c 0 U  a D E c 0 0  2.0  0.8  0.4  0.0  0 10 50 100 intertrial interval  FIG. 2. Total number of class v elements as a function of intertrial interval lengths at the end of five List-1 trials and  three List-2 trials.  A MODEL FOR CONTEXTUAL FLUCTUATION 181  the elements present on successive trials decreases and, hence, the number of elements that are already stored. In other  words, there are more elements that can be stored and each element has a fixed probability of being stored on any given trial.  This result implies that the model predicts that distributed learning should be better than massed learning. This so-called  distributed learning effect is of course a well-known phenomenon (e.g., Robinson, 1921; Hovland, 1938).  The finding that the curves for K, and Ko show a cross over is accidental and depends on the parameter values that are used.  The number of overlap elements (KO) depends both on the number of x, elements that remain in the active set during the  intertrial interval and on the number of x, elements that fluctuate during that interval from the inactive to the active set.  For small values of t,, a relatively large number of elements remain in the active set, whereas for large values of t, , a  large number of the elements migrate to the active set.  In Fig. 3 it is shown that the distribution of the total numbers of elements over the various types of elements is strongly  influenced by the interlist interval (t,): an increase in the interlist interval leads to less overlap elements. This might  explain why it is easier with larger interlist intervals to discriminate between items from the two lists. That is, most  models for list discrimination or list membership decisions will assume that such decisions become easier when there is less  overlap between the list contexts.  Figure 4 presents the changes in the set of active elements as a function of the retention interval. This figure shows a  continuous growth in the number of active y elements as the retention interval increases. With this property of the model  simple forgetting is easily explained since y elements are not connected to any of the to be recalled items. Another  interesting result concerns the increase in the number  2.0   c * K1  w o K2  w   1.6 * K0  a   v   w   c   z 1.2   v   c   0   u   0 0.8   w   E   c 0.4  d 0  0.0 0  10 50 100 interlist interval  Fig. 3. The total number of overlap elements as a function of the interlist interval. Unique elements are also depicted.  182  MENSINK AND RAAIJMAKERS  1.0   a Al  o A2  '^ 0.8 AO  c   a Ay  E   a,   0.6   J   O   FIG. 4. The number of active class v elements as a function of the retention interval.  of active x, elements, especially when contrasted with the decrease in the number of active x2 elements. This can be explained  as follows: At the start of the retention interval, most active x, elements have been transformed into overlap elements. As  the retention interval increases, more and more of the x, elements in the inactive set migrate into the active set.  This result has some very interesting consequences for the dependence of retroactive and proactive interference on the length  of the retention interval. Let s, and s2 be the contextual strengths for a List-1 and a List-2 item, respectively. Then,  according to SAM, the probability of sampling a particular List-1 image is a function of the relative strength of the List-1  image. Thus, the probability of recalling response R, relative to R2 depends on the ratio s2/SI. The behavior of this ratio as  a function of the retention interval is shown in Fig. 5. The ratio s21SI decreases as the retention interval increases. This  implies a relative and possibly an absolute increase in the probability of recalling List-1 responses, a phenomenon known as  spontaneous recovery. Whether or not an absolute increase is observed depends in the SAM model not only on the relative value  of s,, but also on its absolute value. The latter is always a decreasing function of the retention interval. Hence, there are  two opposing processes in the model that determine the probability of recall: the probability of sampling the List-1 image (a  function of the relative strength) and the probability of recovering the item given that the image has been sampled (a  function of the absolute strength). By the same mechanism, the probability of recalling a List-2 response decreases relative  to a control condition (proactive interference) because this probability is also a function of s2/sI.  Thus far, we have examined the effects of some experimental variables on the predicted number of contextual elements of the  different types. Although this is important, it does not follow that such predictions can be translated directly into  N N L CC N O X C O U O O O  A MODEL FOR CONTEXTUAL FLUCTUATION 183 1.7  FIG. 5. Ratio of List-2 and List-1 context strength (s2/s,) as a function of the retention interval.  predictions for recall. The latter also depend on other characteristics of the larger model for recall of which the context  fluctuation model is only a part. As we have already mentioned, we have developed a model based on the SAM theory that  incorporates the present contextual fluctuation model.  Mensink and Raaijmakers (1988) present a full description of this new model and its application to a large number of  interference and forgetting phenomena. In this paper, we present only a few examples in order to illustrate the increase in  explanatory power obtained by the incorporation of the contextual fluctuation model.  The first phenomenon that we will discuss is proactive interference (PI). It has been shown in many experiments that the  amount of PI depends on the length of the retention interval. As described above, this result follows quite naturally from the  contextual fluctuation model. As the retention interval increases, the contextual strength for List-1 items increases relative  to the contextual strength for List-2 items.  In order to investigate this further we simulated an experiment of Koppenaal (1963). In this simulation the two lists (AB-AC  paradigm) consisted of 10 pairs each. List 1 was given 10 study trials and List 2 five study trials (of 2 seconds each). For  the final recall test the MMFR method was used, that is the subject was asked to give both responses. The predicted results  are shown in Fig. 6 for various retention interval lengths (arbitrary time units). Mensink and Raaijmakers (1988) present the  equations that were used to generate these predictions.  The model predicts that recall decreases in both the control condition (C) and the PI condition (L2). However, recall  decreases faster in the PI condition as shown by the standard difference measure for PI (C-L2). Hence, the model predicts an  increase in PI as a function of the retention interval. This is due to the decrease in the ratio S2/S,,  184 MENSINK AND RAAIJMAKERS  a 0  u a c 0 a E  4  2  x-x- , 1~ 1  5 50 100 300 1000 retention interval  FIG. 6. Predicted patterns of recall for Koppenaal's (1963) study. Control group recall as well as MMFR List 2 recall are  depicted . The difference is given by the PI curve.  Our second demonstration concerns spontaneous recovery. There has been much controversy concerning this phenomenon and its  occurrence seems to depend on many procedural details of the experiment (see Brown, 1976). For example, with MMFR testing  absolute spontaneous recovery is seldom observed. Briggs (1954) demonstrated spontaneous recovery using the MFR recall method.  In such a test, subjects are asked to produce the first response that comes to mind. Briggs' subjects were interrupted at  certain recall levels during learning. Immediately after such an interruption they were given a MFR recall test. Figure 7  shows the results predicted by our model. In this analysis, a MFR test was simulated whenever the "subject"  1.00  0.80  vl c 0.60  u a  0.40  n  0 0.20  1 2 3 4 11 1 2 3 4 5 50 100 300 1000 List 1 list 2  criterion levels retention interval  FIG. 7. Recall predictions for the Briggs' (1954) study. R, gives the List-1 MFR response curves. Rz gives the second list MFR  response curves. Criterion level i corresponds to the MFR test given during list learning when the 24 * ia correct criterion  was reached.  A MODEL FOR CONTEXTUAL FLUCTUATION 185  reached a score of at least 24, 48, 72, or 96% correct. In addition, MFR tests were given after various retention intervals.  MFR testing was simulated by calculating the probability that a particular response is recalled before the competing response  is produced. For present purposes the most interesting aspect of the predictions is the increase in the List-1 responses  produced as a function of the length of the retention interval. Again, this is due to the ratio sz/sl.  From these results it is evident that the present contextual fluctuation model greatly increases the scope of the SAM theory.  We believe, however, that its relevance is not limited to the SAM theory. Many other models for recall incorporate the notion  that the overlap between study and test contexts affects the probability of recall. Any such model might profit from the  present contextual fluctuation model.  CONCLUSION  We have presented a model for contextual fluctuation and its implications for two-list or interference designs. We have shown  that the combination of such a model with a more general memory theory (i.e., the SAM theory) leads to a powerful model that  is able to predict a large number of well known phenomena. For a more complete account of this latter model we refer to  Mensink and Raaijmakers (1988).  Although we have emphasized the relation to SAM, this does not mean that this is the only theory that might profit from the  incorporation of such a fluctuation model. The idea that the probability of recall is a function of the overlap between test  and encoding conditions (or retrieval and trace information, see Tulving (1983)) is much more general. The present contextual  fluctuation model might be incorporated in any such model. For example, distributed memory models assume a vector  representation for stimulus events. Part of these vectors might correspond to contextual information. The relation of the  stimulus vectors at storage and test might be described by the present fluctuation model.  The notion of contextual fluctuation has obviously implications that go beyond the phenomena of interference and forgetting.  For example, one of us (J.R.) is currently involved in a project on the application of SAM to spacing and repetition  phenomena. In that project, the present contextual fluctuation model plays a prominent part.  REFERENCES  ANDERSON, J. R. (1983). A spreading activation theory of memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 22, 261-295.  BOWER, G. H. (1972). Stimulus-sampling theory of encoding variability. In A. W. Melton & E. Martin (Eds.), Coding processes in  human memory (pp. 85-123). Washington, D.C.: Winston.  186  MENSINK AND RAAIJMAKERS  BRIGGS, G. E. (1954). Acquisition, extinction and recovery functions in retroactive inhibition. Journal of Experimental  Psychology, 47, 285-293.  BROWN, A. S. (1976). Spontaneous recovery in human learning. Psychological Bulletin, 83, 321-338. ESTES, W. K. (1955).  Statistical theory of spontaneous recovery and regression. Psychological Review, 62, 145-154.  GILLUND, G., & SHIFFRIN, R. M. (1984). A retrieval model for both recognition and recall. Psychological Review, 91, 1-67.  GLENBERG, A. M. (1979). Component-levels theory of the effects of spacing of repetitions on recall and recognition. Memory and  Cognition, 7, 95-112.  HOVLAND, C. I. (1938). Experimental studies in rote-learning theory. I. Reminiscence following learning by massed and by  distributed practice. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 22, 201-224. KOPPENAAL, R. J. (1963). Time changes in strength of  A-B, A-C lists: Spontaneous recovery? Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 2, 310-319.  MENSINK, G. J., & RAAIJMAKERS, J. G. W. (1988). A model for interference and forgetting. Psychological Review, 95, 434-455.  RAAIJMAKERS, J. G. W., & SHIFFRIN, R. M. (1980). SAM: A theory of probabilistic search of associative memory. In G. H. Bower  (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation: Advances in research and theory (Vol. 14). New York: Academic Press.  RAAIJMAKERS, J. G. W., & SHIFFRIN, R. M. (1981). Search of associative memory. Psychological Review, 88, 93-134.  ROBINSON, E. S. (1921). The relative efficiencies of distributed and concentrated study in memorizing. Journal of Experimental  Psychology, 4, 327-343.  TULVING, E. (1983) Elements of episodic memory. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.  RECEIVED: April 24, 1985