10.1016/0022-2496(89)90010-2
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 33, 288-297 (1989)  Combination of Prejudiced Subjective Probabilities  GEORGE C.SPONSLER Law Mathematics Technology, Inc., Bethesda, Maryland  AND  JEFFREY M. ALBERT  Western State University  A new mathematical model is offered to explain how the human brain, acting under the influence of pre-existing prejudice, may  combine independent subjective probability estimates. It is hypothesized that the effect of such prejudice is to divide the  full probability space, subconsciously considered by the brain, into two disjunct sample spaces: on which is negative to, or  contradicts, the prejudice; and the other which is positive or supports the prejudice. Corresponding formulae are derived.  Comparisons are developed with the two primary alternative methods of combination-Bayesian and Dempster/Shafer-and  experimental verification discussed and proposed. CI 1989 Academic Press, Inc.  The interpretation and use of subjective probabilities has often involved controversy, as seen in the writings of Cohen  (1977), de Finetti (1972), Hogarth (1975), Kahnemann and Tversky (1972), Keynes (1921), Kyburg and Smokler (1964), Lindley,  Tversky, and Brown (1979), Slovic, Fischoff, and Lichtenstein (1971), Spetzler and von Holstein (1975), Tversky (1975),  Tversky and Kahnemann (1973, 1974, 1979), and Winkler (1968). There is even dispute over the proper definition for subjective  probability. Albert and Sponsler, the present authors, employ the term in this paper to mean the certainty that an estimator  ascribes to the outcome he predicts for a binary event (one possessing only two possible outcomes: true or false, yes or no,  etc). Other definitions have been employed by other investigators. For example, Savage (1954) and de Finetti (1974) regard  subjective probabilities as given by a set of bets about an event that an estimator is willing to accept. But Tversky and  Kahneman point out that in reality subjective probabilities determine preferences among bets and are not derived from them, as  in the axiomatic theory of rational decision (e.g., Savage).  De Finetti says: "Any assertion concerning probabilities of events is merely the expression of someone's opinion and is not  itself an event. There is no meaning in  Reprint requests should be addressed to Dr. George C. Sponsler, President, Law Mathematics & Technology, Inc., 7804 Old  Chester Road, Bethesda, Maryland 20817.  0022-2496/89 $3.00  Copyright 1989 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  288  PREJUDICED SUBJECTIVE PROBABILITIES 289  asking whether such an assertion is true or false or more or less probable." But we side with Jeffrey (1984), who contends  that de Finetti would have to admit that (1) uncertainty about the exact numerical value of a subjective probability estimate  is real and even quantifiable, in principle, but that (2) effort would be better expended in closer examination of the first  order probability rather than the second. Jeffrey quotes Hume (Part IV, Book I of Treatise of Human Nature): "... all  knowledge resolves itself into probability... [and] all belief is more an act of sensitive, rather than cognitive, parts of  our natures." Jeffrey concludes that "the subjectivist concept of probability is all we need for ... decision making under  uncertainty."  Lindley, Tversky, and Brown (1979) have identified three methods for applying standard criteria of reliability and validity to  the measurement of belief in evaluating and improving subjective probability assessments: they are termed pragmatic, semantic,  and syntactic. We employ all three methods in this paper. We propose pragmatic tests in comparing expert subjective  probability estimates with "reality," that is with experiment. Certain tests we propose of subjective probability estimates  implicitly employ a semantic meaning of probability scale in that a fraction of a total number of independent estimates of  binary events, each possessing the same subjective probability, should be found to have been correctly predicted to occur. And  in accord with the syntactic criterion, we assume our subjective probabilities obey objective probabilistic laws.  In the practical application of subjective probabilities the fundamental, basic, and common problem is how to combine  different estimates of the same probability into an overall composite estimate. Such combination has been accomplished both  empirically, if arbitrarily, and in accord with objective probabilistic laws. Morris (1977) has written that there are three  ways to combine expert judgments: weighting, which is ad hoc in nature, requiring arbitrary generalities; consensus, for which  there is no rule if there is no consensus, indeed no rationale why consensus should be right at all (c.f. Winkler, 1968, and  Dalkey, 1967); and the commonly employed Bayesian method, joining a priori with a posteriori probabilities in accord with the  classic formula first proposed by Rev. Thomas Bayes (1763), and more recently applied to the combination of legal evidence by  Finkelstein and Fairley (1970).  Indeed, considerable use of combined subjective probabilities has been employed in the combination of legal evidence by a  number of authors, including Bar-Hillel (1973), Cullison (1969), Eggleston (1978), Eils, Seaver, and Edwards (1977), Hans and  Vidmar (1986), Kalven and Zeisel (1966), Kaplan (1968), Saks and Kidd (1980), and Schum and Martin (1982), among others. For  the most part, these investigators have assumed the various estimates were statistically independent, but Geisser (1965) has  even included correlated estimates. Standing out in a class by itself is the work of Shafer (1976), whose Mathematical Theory  of Evidence is at heart Dempster's rule of combination.  Broadly, then, there are two schools for combining subjective probabilities: the Bayesians, and Shafer/Dempster. Neither makes  particular provision for the role of prejudice in either reaching or combining individual subjective probability  480333-5  290 SPONSLER AND ALBERT  estimates. Both the Bayesians and Shafer/Dempster would simply take any a priori probability, identified as prejudice, and  combine it with succeeding estimates, taking two at a time in their respective fashions, thereby extinguishing the role of  prejudice once it has been combined with another, succeeding subjective probability estimate. But Sponsler, with Clement et  al. (1972), has devised a new set of formlae for combining subjective estimates which explictely incorporates and preserves  the role of pre-existing base, that is a priori, probabilities representing prejudice, the effect of which is to introduce a  reduced sample space within which the various subjective probability estimates are combined. (See Feller, 1950, re such sample  spaces.) Subsequently Albert and Sponsler (1987) have also developed a new theory of calibration which introduces a  subconscious subjective probability, called the "actual" subjective probability, which is hypothesized to underlie and be  reflected by the various individual subjective probability estimates.  The opportunity thus presents itself to compare empirically the predictions made by these three theories to determine which  best represents the combination of subjective probabilities made, subconsciously, by a group of estimator subjects. The  resulting selection could then be incorporated into computer programs to be employed in conjunction with existing programs to  permit and facilitate the use of combined subjective probabilities in larger management systems applications for decision  analysis and other purposes, explicitly incorporating the role of individual estimator prejudice.  We turn now to the derivation of the proposed combination formulae. The full probability space is the closed unit interval. We  hypothesize that the effect of prejudice is to introduce an a priori subjective probability, bo, which devides the full space  into two sample spaces: the contradictory or "negative" interval from 0 to bo, and the supportive or "positive" interval from  bo to 1. This situation is depicted by Fig. 1, where for illustration we have arbitrarily selected bo to be 1/2, corresponding  to no prejudice. Figure la portrays the positive sample space where the introduction of new evidence with associated  subjective probabilities b, and b2 tends to support the existing prejudice, bo, whereas lb represents the negative sample  space where new evidence with associated subjective probabilities, also denoted as b, and b2 (but of different, lower values),  tends to negate or contradict the existing prejudice. The effect of the reduced sample space is to introduce a need for  conditional  (b, - bo) / (i _ bo)  bo b, a. Positive I  (b2_ bo) /(i - bo)  (bo b,) /bo  o b, b2 bo i b. Negative I----,I  (bo- b2) / / bo  FIG. 1. Sample spaces.  PREJUDICED SUBJECTIVE PROBABILITIES 291  probabilities; that is, probabilities conditioned upon the existence of the prejudice, bo, which must be normalized to the  reduced spaces defined on the intervals 0 to bo and bo to 1, respectively. These conditional probabilities are indicated on  the figure as (b, - bo)/(l - bo), (bo - b 1)/bo, etc., as shown. It is well known (e.g., Feller, 1950) that the usual formulae  for combining probabilities apply equally well to conditional probabilities within their appropriate sample spaces. But as the  positive and negative sets are disjoint, the two cases must be combined separately (i.e., individual positive and negative  probabilities cannot be combined immediately, but must first be treated separately).  Applying the conventional formulae for addition of probabilities in the two reduced sample space results in  b+=bo+(1-bo) (b,-bo)+ (b;-bo)-(b;-bo)(bi-bo)  C(1 - bo) (1 - bo) (1 - bo)z I  (b;-bo)(b;-bo) b;>b >bo (1)  =b;+b;-bo  (1 -bo)  and similarly  b_=bi+b;-bo+(bo-b`b(bo-b'), b;, b;,bo, (2 .) 0  where we have assumed 0 < bo < 1. -  If more than two subjective probabilities, b; and b;, are to be combined, formulae (1) and (2) can be used iteratively using  any two of the multiple subjective probabilities at a time, and then using the result as a single probability to which is to  be added another of the remaining probabilities, and so on until the entire set to be combined has been exhausted. But note,  bo continues to be employed, via formulae (1) and (2), in each successive iteration, and "positive" and "negative"  probabilities may not be mixed.  Equations (1) and (2) display several interesting properties which, upon reflection, will be recognized to be required of  formulae for combining independent subjective probabilities associated with different evidence, namely: if b; or b; = 1, b+=1;  if b;=6;=60, b+=bo; if bi=b,, b+=6;; if b;=bo, b +=b;; if b;>, b;,, b+ >, b;; if b; 3 b;, b+ >, b;; and, of course, bo 5 b+ <  1.  Formulae (1) and (2) were employed empirically to determine the probable response of a set of Army Reserve volunteers to a  group of alternative incentives for enlistment or reenlistment. The predicted results were found to be within a few percent of  the results obtained when the recommended incentives were actually offered. (See Olson & Sponsler, 1973.)  If we wish to combine both "positive" and "negative" evidence, we must first combine both types separately before adding the  overall result, since the two reduced sample spaces are disjoint, as follows:  292 SPONSLER AND ALBERT  (b+-bo) (bo-b_)  b,=bo+ (1-b) (1-bo)- b bo =b++b_-bo, 0<b <bo<b+<1  =0, b_ =0, b+ :A 1  =1, b+=1, b :A 0. (3) Equations (1), (2), and (3) can be combined into a single formula for the  combination of subjective probabilities by using the theorem of James Bernoulli:  P'.=1_H(1_Pi).  When this repeated product theorem is introduced into Eq. (1) and (2), and those results in turn are introduced into eq. (3),  we obtain the desired inclusive combination formula:  b.=bo+(1-bo)~1-~~1-(bi-bo)II -bo 1-HI 1-(bo-bk)11 (1 -bo) k bo  l  =bo+(1-bo)C1-H ((11 -b b;o) )J-boC1-11bbk ]' 0<bk<bo<b;<1 k  = 0, if b; 0 1 and one or more bk = 0  = 1, if bk :~4-0 and one more b; = 1 (4)  Having thus derived the Sponsler combination formulae, the question to be answered is whether the new formulae are better than  either the Bayesian or Shafer/ Dempster models for combining subjective probabilities under the influence of prejudice. The  Sponsler model was most successful in predicting the reactions of Army enlistees and reenlistees when, as noted before, it was  tested empirically in 1972-1973 in the Army's volunteer reserve enlistment incentives program, Olson and Sponsler (1973). The  present authors now suggest the three models be tested and compared as to their ability to predict combined subjective  probabilities estimates by a group of volunteer subjects presented with variations of a basic problem to which they would be  asked to assign two independent and one combined subjective probability estimates, as follows.  The basic problem, one amenable to exact probability calculation, is taken from Tversky and Kahneman (1980). The same problem  has been employed by Saks and Kidd (1980) to illustrate the gap between the judgments people make intuitively and objective  probabilities yielded by explicit calculation. The basic problem is stated as follows:  A taxicab was involved in a hit-and-run accident at night. Two cab companies, the green and the blue, operate in the city. A  witness reports that  PREJUDICED SUBJECTIVE PROBABILITIES 293  the offending cab was blue, and legal action is brought against the blue cab company. The court learns that 85% of the city's  cabs are green and 15% are blue. Further, the court learns that on a test of ability to identify cabs under appropriate  visibility conditions, the witness is correct on 80% of the identifications and incorrect on 20%. What is the proability that  the responsible cab was blue?  The typical subjective probability estimate is 0.80; but application of Bayes' Theorem results in the actual, objective  probability of 41 %.  This problem is easily modified for application to the experiment proposed here by replacing the exact data by information  bearing on the credibility of two hypothetical witnesses, after first providing background information designed to produce  strong prejudice against a third-party accused. Thus the cohort of volunteers might first be advised that the accused was,  say, charged with rape and murder and had been so charged in the past. After hearing testimony of a city official that 85% of  all the cabs in town are green, that 15% are blue, and that the accused is a cab driver, the volunteers are then presented  with testimony by an alcoholic drifter that he saw the crime and that the cab involved was blue. The experiment volunteers  would then be asked to estimate the (subjective) probability that the cab involved was green, based on the testimony of the  first witness considered by itself, that the cab was blue, based solely and independently on the testimony of the second  witness; and finally that the cab was green or blue, based on the combined evidence of the two witnesses together.  The foregoing scenario is easily modified to produce other situations in which the volunteers would tend to discredit one or  another of the two witnesses whose testimony might be either supportive or contradictory of each other. The purpose of the  proposed experiment would be to determine which of the three mathematical models or theories best predicts or represents the  combined or cumulative subjective probability, given the independent subjective probability estimates corresponding to the two  witnesses' testimony for various parametric credibility situations.  To illustrate numerically the different combined probabilities which may result from the three mathematical models, let us  consider the situation wherein a particular volunteer estimates an 85% (subjective) probability that the car is green, as a  result of the testimony of a first witness, and 80% that the car is blue as a result of the testimony of the second witness.  Mathematically, employing Bayes' Rule, this is the same situation as pertained with the original problem as posed by Tversky  and Kahneman. The combined probability employing the Bayesian method is again 41% that the car is blue, or 59% that it is  green. These figures result by application of Bayes' formula,  P(w/b)P(b)  P(blw)-E P(w1b) ] _ P(w/b)P(b)+P(Ivlg)P(g)  P(w, b)  P(w, b) + P(w, g)'  294 SPONSLER AND ALBERT  where P(i/j) is the conditional probability of i given j, P(ilk) is the conditional probability of "not i" given k, and P(m,  n) is the joint probability of m and n. The application to the problem is most easily visualized in terms of the following  matrix, wherein the matrix elements are the probabilities of the joint events:  .68 .12 .80  .17 .03 .20  .85 .15   The marginal entries are the independent subjective probabilities estimated in response to the testimony of the two witnesses.  Here the a priori values are at the bottom, but as indicated by formula (5) the roles of the witnesses may be reversed with  the same combined result.  Application of Dempster's method, a la Shafer, is somewhat more complicated in that different formulae must be used with  conflicting evidence (as here with the sample problem) than in supportive (or "homogeneous", Shafer's term) situations. If  P(g) is the subjective probability estimate favoring a green car, in response to witness one, and P(b) is the probability of a  blue car, estimated for witness two, then the combined probability of a green car, P _ (g), resulting from the conflicting  evidence is given by  P -(g)= - P(b)~ _(g)= 1 -P(g)P(b) '  while the combined probability of blue, P_(b), is given by:  P- P(b) [1 - P(g)~ (b)= 1_P(g)P(b)  Understanding of these formulae is facilitated by consideration of a diagram depicting what Shafer terms "probability masses".  Such a diagram is shown below, with the probability numbers entered from our same example as before:  .85  BLUE  neither  EMPTY, (Q1)  GREEN  To apply Dempster's rule in a conflicting evidence situation, such as is this example, it is necessary to eliminate the large  rectangle labeled EMPTY and to  PREJUDICED SUBJECTIVE PROBABILITIES 295  inflate the measures of the remaining rectangles by the factor 1/[1-P(g)P(b)], thus obtaining formulae (6) and (7).  Using those formulae, the results of our example using the Dempster method are P(b)=0.38 and P(g)=0.53. It is interesting to  note that with the Dempster method the two probabilities no longer sum to one. The difference is the probability mass assigned  to the upper right rectangle labeled "neither" which corresponds to an estimator's inability to make any estimate.  Incidentally, had the evidence been supportive, or "homogeneous" in Shafer's terminology, the corresponding formula for  combined evidence would be  P+(b or g) = 1 - C[ I -P(b)][I -P(g)]], (8)  which will be recognized to be the probability combination rule originally proposed by James Bernoulli in Chapter IV of Part  IV of his famous Ars Cojectandi (1713). As with Dempster's method, Sponsler's combination formulae also distinguish between  supportive and contradictory evidence. But unlike Dempster, Sponsler's formulae result in unit sums for P(b) +P(g). Indeed,  Sponsler's formula for conflicting evidence is quite simple in appearance,  P,.=P+ +P_ -Po, (9)  where P, is the overall combined probability resulting from a set of supportive witnesses, of combined probability P+, and  another set of contradicting witnesses, of combined conflicting probability P _ , where the estimator's a priori prejudice is  PO.  In our present example of two conflicting witnesses, one supporting a blue identification with a corresponding subjective  probability 80% and the other supporting green with 85% (or, correspondingly, favoring blue by 15%) subjective probability,  assuming no prejudice (or Po = 50%), we obtain the combined subjective probability for the blue car of 0.8 + 0.15 - 0.5 or  0.45, with the corresponding combined subjective probability favoring a green car of 0.55 or 55%.  Thus with no prejudice we obtain three different solutions for the three mathematical models:  P(b) = 41 %, Bayesian method and P(g) = 59%  P(b) = 38%, Dempster method and P(g) = 53%  P(b) = 45%, Sponsler method and P(g) = 55% with no prejudice.  But if we introduce a permanent or quasi-permanent prejudice, the Sponsler method produes drastically different results, while  both the Bayesian and Dempster methods remain unchanged (unless we first introduce the prejudice as a separate subjective  probability and combine it with the witness probabilities, after which it is extinguished).  If there were a pro-blue prejudice a priori, the Sponsler formula would yield a  296 SPONSLER AND ALBERT  combined green subjective probability of 65%, if P,=60%. Or if there were a pro-green prejudice with Po = 40% then the  combined green subjective probability would be only 45%, reversing the no prejudice results!  The foregoing results may at first glimpse appear contradictory, with a pro-blue prejudice resulting in a higher green  combined subjective probability than resulted in the case of no prejudice, and vice versa. But on reflection they are seen to  be consistent: a high individual green subjective probability estimate "weighs" more in a situation in which the same  estimator is prejudiced in favor of blue, and vice versa.  From this relatively simple example we have seen there may indeed be significant differences between the three models, and we  also have seen that prejudice can introduce extraordinary differences. The authors propose a statistically designed and  controlled experiment, employing volunteer subjects as outlined previously, to test and, hopefully, demonstrate the  superiority of their combination formula over the other two models.  REFERENCES  ALBERT, J. M., & SPONSLER, G. C. (1989). Subjective probability calibration: A mathematical model. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 33, 298-308.  BAR-HILLEL, M. (1973). On the subjective probability of compound events. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 9, 396.  BAYES, T. (1763). An essay towards solving a problem in the doctrine of changes. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal  Society of London, 53, 370; reprinted (1970) in E. S. Pearson and M. G. Kendal (Eds.), Studies in the History of Statistics  and Probability. New York: Hafner.  CLEMENT, W., SPONSLER, G. C., et al. (1972). Maintenance of reserve components in a volunteer environment (Vol. IV, App. Cl).  Research Analysis Corp. R-148.  COHEN, L. J. (1977). Th probable and the provable. Oxford: Clarendon Press.  CULLISON, A. (1969). Probability analysis of judicial fact-finding. Toledo Law Review, 1, 538. DALKEY, N. C. (1967). Delphi.  RAND Corp., P-3704.  DEFINETTi, B. (1972). Probability, induction and statistics. New York: Wiley. DEFINETTI, B. (1974). Theory of probability. New  York: Wiley.  EGGLESTON, R. (1978). Evidence, proof and probability. London: Weidenfeld & Nicholson.  EILS, L., SEAVER, D., & EDWARDS, W. (1977). "Developing a technology of probabilistic inference: Aggregating by averaging  redujces conservation. Los Angeles: University of Southern California, Social Science Research Institute.  FELLER, W. (1950). An introduction of probability and its applications. New York: Wiley.  FINKELSTEIN AND FAIRLEY (1970. A Bayesian approach to identification evidence. Harvard Law Review, 83,489.  GEISSER, S. (1965). A Bayes approach for combining correlated estimates. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 60.  HANS, V. P., & VIDMAR, N. (1986). Judging the jury. New York: Plenum.  HOGARTH, R. M. (1975). Cognitive processes and the assessment of subjective probability distributions. Journal of the American  Statistical Association, 70.  JEFFREY, R. (1984). De Finettis probabilism. Synthese.  KAHNEMANN, D., & TVERSKY, A. (1972). Subjective probability: A judgment of representativeness. Cognitive Psychology, 3, 430.  KAHNEMANN, D. & TVERSKY, A. (1973). On the Psychology of Prediction. Psychological Review, 80, 237.  PREJUDICED SUBJECTIVE PROBABILITIES 297  KAHNEMANN, D. & TVERSKY, A. (1979). Intuitive prediction: Biases and Corrective procedures. 12 Studies in Management Science,  12, 313.  KALVEN, H., & ZEISEL, H. (1966). The American jury. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press. KAPLAN, J. (1968). Decision theory and  the fact finding process. Stanford Law Review, 20, 1065. KEYNES, J. M. (1921). A treatise on probability. London: MacMillan &  Co.  KYBURG, H. E. & SMOKLER, H. E. (Eds.) (1964). Studies in subjective probability. New York: Wiley. LINDLEY, D. V., TVERSKY, A.,  & BROWN, R. (1979). On the reconciliation of probability assessments. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A, 142.  MORRIS, P. A. (1974). Decision analysis expert use. Management Science, 20.  MORIS, P. A. (1977). Combining expert judgments: A Bayesian approach. Management Science, 23. OLSON, H& SPONSLER, G. C.  (1973). Maintenance of reserve components in a volunteer environment. Durham, NC: Proceedings Army Operations Res. Sym.  SAKS, M. & KIDD, R. (1980). Human information processing and adjudication: Trial by heuristics. Law and Society, 15, 121.  SAVAGE, L. (1954). The foundation of statistics. New York: Wiley.  SCHUM, D. A., & MARTIN, A. W. (1982). "Formal and empirical research on cascaded inference in jurisprudence. Law and Society,  17, 105, and others dated 1971-1983.  SHAFER, G. (1976). A mathematical theory of evidence. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press.  SLOVIC, P., FISCHOFF, B., & LICHTENSTEIN, S. (1977). Behavioral decision theory. Annual Review of Psychology, 28, 1.  SMITH, R. J. (1984). Crisis Management Under Strain. Science, 225, 907.  SPETZLER, C. S., & STAEL VON HOLSTEIN, C. A. S. (1975). Probability encoding in decision analysis. Management Science, 22, 340.  TVERSKY, A. (1975). Assessing Uncertainty. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 36, 148. TVERSKY, A., &  KAHNEMAN, D. (1973). "Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency and proabiility. Cognitive Psychology, 5, 207.  TVERSKY, A., & KAHNEMAN, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 1124.  TVERSKY, A., & KAHNEMAN, D. (1980). Causal schematas in judgments and uncertainty. In M. Fishbein (Ed.), Progress in social  psychology, Hillsdale.  WINKLER, R. L. (1968). The consensus of subjective probability distributions. Management Science, 15.  RECEIVED: October 8, 1987