10.1016/0022-2496(89)90004-7
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 33, 68-90 (1989)  On the Possible and Stable Psychophysical Laws  RYOZO YOSHINO  Cognitive Sciences, University of California, Irvine  Axiomatic measurement theory in psychology has been developed to clarify the characteristics of possible forms of  psychophysical laws. Concurrently structural stability theory in mathematics has been established to elucidate the stability  of a map describing a certain phenomenon under unknown small perturbations accompanying every observation. Until now, these  two theories have been developed independently. The main objective of this paper is to introduce structural stability theory  into axiomatic measuement theory in order to clarify the characteristics of "possible and stable" laws in psychophysics. In  particular, the theory mathematically explains the experimental data that the exponents in Stevens' power laws are restricted  to a certain set of numerical values. The theory may be applied with special care to other fields in science also. 1989  Academic Press, Inc.  Discovery of a scientific law is a landmark of development of a science. Therefore there is no question about the significance  of the study of the general nature of scientific laws. On one hand, psychologists have developed axiomatic (or abstract)  measurement theory to characterize the nature of psychophysical laws. (See Luce, Bush, & Galanter, 1963; Pfanzagl, Bauman, &  Huber, 1971; Krantz, Luce, Suppes, & Tversky, 1971; Roberts, 1979; Falmagne, 1985; Narens, 1985; and their references.)  Responsible for one of the most significant achievements in the theory, Luce (1959) identified the "possible" forms of  psychophysical laws under certain conditions. His work is mainly based on the study of admissible transformations on scales of  independent and dependent variables in psychophysical laws. This theory mathematically justified a well-known psychophysical  law obtained by Stevens (1957): Stevens' power law. On the other hand, mathematicians have developed structural stability  theory to analyze the "stability" of an observation system in measurement of a scientific law. Here, stability means some  invariance under unknown small perturbations of the sort involved in any observation. (See Arnold, Guisein-Zada, & Varchenko,  1985, for an elementary explanation of structural stability theory.) This theory utilizes many branches of advanced  mathematics such as functional analysis, differential topology, and abstract algebra. Morse theory  The author acknowledges many valuable comments by William H. Batchelder, Louis Narens, Duncan Luce, Michael Cohen, Fred S.  Roberts, action editor, Zangwill Rosenbaum, Barry Tesman, and James T. Townsend, editor, on an early draft of this paper. The  author is, however, fully responsible for the particular approach taken here in this paper and for any errors contained  therein. Requests for reprints should be sent to Ryozo Yoshino, Cognitive Sciences, University of California, Irvine,  California 92717.  68  0022-2496/89 $3.00  Copyright Q 1989 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  ON THE POSSIBLE AND STABLE LAWS 69  (e.g., Milnor, 1963) is one of the early achievements in structural stability theory. Until now, these two theories, axiomatic  measurement theory and structural stability theory, have been developed independently. The main objective of this paper is to  introduce structural stability theory into axiomatic measurement theory in order to characterize the nature of "possible and  stable" laws in psychophysics, or more generally, in science. In the subsequent sections, I will briefly explain (i) a history  of axiomatic measurement theory and a history of structural stability theory, (ii) Stevens' power laws and Luce's theorem in  axiomatic measurement theory, (iii) Morse theory in structural stability theory, (iv) the possible and stable laws in the  univariate case, and (v) the possible and stable laws in the multivariate case. Two main results will be presented as  Corollaries 1 and 2. These will be obtained by a combination of axiomatic measurement theory and structural stability theory.  Theorem 4 will mathematically explain a certain substantive aspect of Stevens' power laws.  SOME HISTORY  Sciences like physics, chemistry, and modern biology have enjoyed many successful examples of discoveries of natural laws such  as Newton's gravitational law, Maxwell's electromagnetic laws, the constant ratio law in chemical reactions, and Mendel's  genetic law.  Human sciences like psychology, especially the field of sensation, however, have had difficulty clarifying even the existence  of laws until recently, mainly because the meaning of laws or measurements was not necessarily clear. Stevens (1946) reported  the work of the special committee of the British Association for the Advancement of Science instructed to consider-and report  upon the possibility of quantitative estimates of sensory events; that is, the question being addressed was Is is possible to  measure human sensation? After much debate, the committee was directed towards a concrete example of a sensory scale, the sone  scale of loudness, rather than the original epistemological question. Since then, many researchers have started efforts to  clarify the nature of psychophysical laws, sometimes in a specific modality of sensation and sometimes in an axiomatic  approach to cover many modalities in general.  Stevens (1957), among others, reported one of the most influential papers in psychophysics under the title "On the  Psychophysical Law." In that paper he theoretically obtained what is now referred to as the "power laws," which cover many  modalities of sensation and perception. The laws claim that equal stimulus ratios produce equal subjective ratios and are  represented by power functions whose exponents are determined by corresponding modalities. And successively, under the title  "On the Possible Psychophysical Laws," Luce (1959) presented an intensive study to clarify the general nature of  psychophysical laws. The core of the study was solving certain functional equations which should be satisfied if inde-  70 RYOZO YOSHINO  pendent variables and dependent variables in psychophysical laws take certain scale types such as interval, ratio, or log  interval scales. This work clarified the possible forms of psychophysical laws under certain conditions and mathematically  justified the derivation of Stevens' power laws. Luce (1959) was just the start of a now active prgram to bring dimensional  analysis into axiomatic measurement theory (e.g., Krantz et al., 1971). More recently, efforts to study the general nature of  scientific laws, especially psychophysical laws, have crystalized as part of a new research field called axiomatic (or  abstract) measurement theory. The development is covered by Luce et al. (1963), Pfanzagl et al. (1971), Krantz et al. (1971),  Roberts (1979), Falmagne (1985), Narens (1985), and their references.  Concurrently, mathematicians have been interested in the study of dynamic systems in order to identify the nature of stably  observable phenomena since Poincare (1881, 1882, 1885, 1886, 1895) presented a series of celebrated geometrical studies of  differential equations. His idea is briefly summarized as follows. The theory of differential equations is very useful for the  study of pure mathematics or mechanics. Unfortunately it is well-known that, in almost all cases, a differential equation  cannot be solved by a method of integration. Therefore, if we restrict the study of differential equations to the cases where  we can apply a method of definite or indefinite integration, then the study is restricted to a small range and we will never  be able to solve numerous important problems in science. Therefore, it is necessary to study the general nature of a function  defined by a differential equation without reducing the function to a simpler form. A complete study of a function consists of  two parts. These are (i) a qualitative part, or geometry of curves defined by a function, and (ii) a quantitative part, or  calculation of numerical values of a function. For example, consider a case where we study an algebraic equation. First, we  identify the number of real solutions of an algebraic equation by, for example, Sturm's theorem. This is the qualitative part  of the study. Then we calculate numerical values of the solutions. This is the quantitative part. If we study an algebraic  surface, then we analyze the shape defined by the algebraic equation before we calculate coordinates of points on the surface.  Similarly we should start every theory of functions, first, by a qualitative study. The qualitative study itself is very  significant. In effect, a variety of important problems in analysis and mechanics is reduced to it. Take an example of the  three-body problem in celestial mechanics. It is well-known that we cannot solve the problem by a method of integration.  However, by qualitative study we can know the orbits of three planets, e.g., whether a planet stays within a certain region or  whether the distance between two planets is decreasing or increasing. Thus there must be problems which we can completely  solve only by this sort of qualitative study.  From the viewpoint of modern mathematics, the qualitative approach proposed by Poincare (1881) means a topological study of a  differential equation, in which we study the trace of a curve defined as a solution of the equation in order to know the  stability of the solution. The concept of stability is very important. We cannot avoid unknown small errors accompanying any  observation, because we cannot construct a completely closed system which excludes any unexpected small pertur-  ON THE POSSIBLE AND STABLE LAWS 71  bations of the system, and our observation behavior itself more or less perturbs the system. (Recall the basic problem of  observation in quantum mechanics.) Therefore, we can stably observe only phenomena which correspond to stable solutions under  small perturbations, i.e., solutions whose topological properties are invariant under small shifts to neighboring solutions.  We can discard solutions that are unstable under unknown small perturbations of the sort involved in any observation  procedure, unless we are interested in a statistical law which cancels instability of observations of each element's movement  in a certain massive group. (The formal definition of a stable map will be given later in Definition 5.)  Poincare's idea is still rapidly being developed as the theory of dynamical systems or, more specifically, structural  stability theory. The pure mathematical component of this theory has been intensively developed by Mather, Arnold, and many  other mathematicians (Mather, 1969; Golubitsky & Guillemin, 1973; Arnold et al., 1985). See Arnold et al. (1985) for some  history and the theory. Smale and Hirsch (1974) wrote an introductory book of the applications of the theory of dynamical  systems to a variety of fields including engineering, physics, and biology. Among others, Thom's catastrophe theory (1975) has  been well-known and applied to many fields in both natural and social sciences.  SOME REVIEWS  In this section I will review papers by Stevens (1957) and Luce (1959) for an explanation of a main result shown later. I keep  these reviews at a minimum and leave the detailed explanations to the original papers and many other references.  (i) Stevens' Power Law  Stevens (1957) argued that there is a general psychophysical law relating subjective magnitudes. This law simply states that  equal stimulus ratios produce equal subjective ratios, at least as a first-order approximation. The law is represented by a  power function y = kxb, where x is an independent variable of a certain physical stimulus, y is a dependent variable of the  corresponding subjective reaction, and b and k are constants. For example, an independent variable may be intensity of  illumination and a dependent variable may be subjective brightness. In practice, Stevens utilized this law in what is called  magnitude matching or magnitude estimation. In magnitude matching, subjects are asked to match two subjective magnitudes  corresponding to two distinct modalities such as loudness and heaviness. (Note that "subjective magnitude of numbers" is used  in magnitude estimation. For simplicity, I refer to both magnitude estimation and matching as "magnitude estimation" in this  paper.) Therefore, we have two power functions, e.g., f, (s) = k, s" for brightness and f2(t) = k2 t12 for loudness, where k,  and k2 are some arbitrary non-zero constants for the units and b, and b2 are some positive  72 RYOZO YOSHINO  constants. By the matching procedure, we can equate these two equations as f(s)=f2(t). Thus we obtain  ki - s b' _k2 tbz,  or  s = (k2lk1 ) llb, tb2lb, = ktbzlbi  for some constant k. Usually this form of equation is referred to as the "power law" and experimental data are used to  estimate the exponent b2/b, in the power law. Stevens (1957, 1961) collected experimental data on a dozen perceptual  modalities to estimate the exponents in power laws which correspond to those modalities. Interestingly, it turns out that the  exponents in those power laws roughly fall between 0 and 2 (Stevens, 1957) or 0 and 3.5 (Stevens, 1961). He did not attempt  any theoretical explanation of this range, and perhaps he thought that the determination of the exponent was totally dependent  on each empirical case. I will, however, later show that this is not necessarily the case and that there is a rationale that  the exponents in Stevens' power law should be restricted to a certain range.  (ii) Functional Equations under Two Principles by Luce  Luce (1959) clarified the characteristics of possible psychophysical laws in several cases where independent and dependent  variables take several types of scales such as interval scales, ratio scales, or log interval scales. In his study, he solved  functional equations which should be satisfied in each case under two principles concerning theory construction.  Those two principles are:  1. Consistency of substantive and measurement theories. Admissible transformations of one or more of the independent variables  shall lead, via the substantive theory, only to admissible transformations of the dependent variables.  2. Invariance of the substantive theory. Except for the numerical values of parameters that reflect the effect on the  dependent variables of admissible transformations of independent variables, the mathematical structure of the substantive  theory shall be independent of admissible transformations of the independent variables. (See Luce, 1959, p. 85.)  The above two principles were the basis of Luce's analysis, although now he no longer refers to them as primary principles but  he thinks that they can be derivable from deeper principles of theory construction. (See Rozeboom, 1962a, 1962b; Luce, 1962;  Acz61, Roberts & Rosenbaum, 1986.) Among others, he deduced a theorem of interest under these principles by solving the  following functional equation closely related to dimensional invariance in dimensional analysis,  U(kx)=K(k) U(x),  where U(x) is continuous, k > 0, K(k) > 0, U(x) > 0, and x >, 0.  ON THE POSSIBLE AND STABLE LAWS 73  The theorem states:  THEOREM 1 (Power Laws as the Possible Laws for Ratio Scales). If the independent and dependent variables are both ratio  scales, then possible laws must be represented as U(x) = kxb, where b is independent of the units of both variables. (See  Luce, 1959, p. 87 for the theorem and a proof.)  This theorem provided a theoretical justification of Stevens' power laws. The theorem was a surprise to many researchers  because it claims that the possible forms of scientific laws may be restricted even without commitment of substantial data  relating to laws. Several reserachers (Rozeboom, 1962a, 1962b; Luce, 1962; Luce et al., 1963; Roberts & Rosenbaum, 1986) have  re-analyzed the derivation of the above theorem, by checking the justification of the assumptions such as dimensional  invariance represented by the above functional equation or continuity of the function U(x). For example, Luce and Galanter  (Luce et al., 1963, p. 292) state that the derivation of Theorem 1 by Luce (1959) seems unsatisfactory in two respects: (i)  "it prejudges the question whether sensations form a ratio scale" and (ii) "it assumes that the psychophysical function can be  stated without bringing in dimensional constants that cancel out the physical unit."  There may be many ways to evaluate the achievement of Luce (1959). My point of view on his work is as follows. Although every  scientist has an individual intuitive notion of "law," there is no completely established definition of law. This is not an  obstacle to science; rather, it may be a source of scientific development because a scientist can maintain a degree of freedom  in scientific thinking, which admits a variety of approaches towards each problem. To this intuitive notion of law, we may be  able to introduce a notion such as "degree of lawfulness": As more strict conditions are imposed on a law or on the admissible  transformations of scales in a law, the law becomes more lawful. In fact, Narens (in preparation) is realizing this idea as a  part of a theory of "meaningfulness" by applying Galois theory (e.g., Edwards, 1984). From this point of view, I may state  that Luce (1959) restricted his analysis to, so to speak, "strongly lawful" laws, which cover a small range of laws but still  cover numerous important physical or psychophysical laws. I will utilize the above theorem and, therefore, my theory in this  paper will inherit the commitment that Luce (1959) took in his analysis.  For a later theoretical development, I need to comment on the range of the exponents in the power function of Theorem 1. The  above theorem does not mention any restriction on the exponent b, i.e., - oo < b < oo. Therefore, this theorem does not  explain why the exponents in the power laws are observed to fall in a certain interval, more precisely, in between 0 and 2  (Stevens, 1957) or 0 and 3.5 (Stevens, 1961).  I will, however, attempt to mathematically explain this fact using structural stability theory. For this purpose, I will  introduce the main part of Morse theory in the next section.  74 RYOZO YOSHINO  MORSE THEORY IN STRUCTURAL STABILITY  In this section I will summarize some theory of structural stability. Later this will be combined with Luce's theorem to  produce new theory on the possible and stable laws. The main theory in this section is from Morse Theory (Theorem 2), and some  preparatory definitions will be presented to state it. For the sake of simplicity, I will sacrifice generality: I will deal  with Euclidean spaces although results below can be generalized for manifolds (e.g., Pollack, 1974) . (In this short paper, it  is impossible to explain the advanced mathematical theory in detail. See Arnold et al., 1985, for an elementary exlanation of  structural stability, or Milnor, 1963, for a celebrated introduction to Morse theory.)  I will analyze a set of maps from R" to R', where R' is an i-dimensional Euclidean space:  f R"~R'  x = (XI, X2,..., x") H y =Px ).  DEFINITION 1. In a Euclidean space R', a subset S of R' is said to be compact iff S is bounded and closed. In particular, a  subset S of R' is compact if it is a bounded and closed interval.  DEFINITION 2. A map f is said to be a C map iff f is k-times continuously differentiable on independent variables x,, x2,  ..., x" for all positive integers k.  DEFINITION 3. A non-constant map f is said to be critical at x iff df(dx = (df(x)/dx,,..., df(x)/dx=0. Then x and f(x) are  said to be, respectively, a critical point of f and a critical value. Furthermore, a critical point x is said to be  nondegenerate iff the Hessian is non-zero, i.e., det(82f(x)/8x; 8x;) is not zero. By definition, a constant map does not have  any critical point.  DEFINITION 4. Let h be a C' map from Rs to R5, h: RS -+ Rs, for a positive integers. The map h is said to be a diffeomorphism  iff h is 1-1 onto and its inverse map h-': RS -+ RS is also a C' map.  DEFINITION 5. A C' map f is said to be stable iff for any C' map g from R" to R' which is sufficiently close to f (considering  sufficiently higher terms of Taylor expansions), there exist diffeomorphisms h, and h2 such that the diagram in Fig. 1 is  commutative.  Usually a stable map f is regarded as a "representative" of all maps that are diffeomorphic to f. (Although we need to  introduce Whitney topology in order to completely define "stability," it is omitted here to avoid much complication. For  complete understanding, see Golubitsky & Guillemin, Chaps. 11 and 111.) See Appendix A for an intuitive explanation of a  stable function.  ON THE POSSIBLE AND STABLE LAWS 75  i  h2  f =h2ogohi  FIG. 1. A stable map f any map g sufficiently close to f is diffeomorphic tof.  Definition 5 plays the central role in the theory of structural stability and many other equivalent statements of the  definition are known. (See Golubitsky & Guillemin, 1973.) The main objective of the theory is to classify C maps by  equivalence relations of diffeomorphisms, for only properties of natural phenomena which are stable under unknown small  perturbations can be stably observable in measurement. Or, more generally, only invariant properties under admissible  transformations of diffeomorphisms are considered to be observationally meaningul. This claim mathematically will be justified  by the fact stated in Theorem 2 (1) below.  Some comments below may be helpful for the understanding of the definition of a stable map. One may ask questions such as (i)  Why do we have to deal with C~ maps instead of continuous maps? (ii) Why do we classify maps by diffeomorphism rather than,  for example, by homeomorphism (to be defined by replacing C`with Cin Definition 4)?, or (iii) Should all laws be stable?  My answer to the first question concerning differentiability is the following: There may be a law represented by a continuous  but non-differentiable map. Strictly speaking, therefore, I am analyzing a particular class of "laws" under the assumption of  differentiability which still may cover numerous important laws. Some people consider this a strong assumption. On the other  hand, often the weaker assumptions, such as continuity and monotonicity, lead to differentiability (see Aczel et al., 1986, p.  391). It may be important to study what conditions can be replaced with the assumption of differentiability in this case.  My answer to the second question concerning diffeomorphic classification is the following: There are many alternative ways to  classify maps. We may be able to introduce a notion such as "degree of stability" just as I mentioned "degree of lawfulness"  for Luce's approach. The above definition of a stable map is based on classification of maps by diffeomorphism. Therefore it  defines, so to speak, "strong stability" of maps, which allows us to obtain a fruitful result. If we consider a classification  of maps by homeomorphism, then it defines a much weaker stability of maps and it cannot differentiate even, e.g., y = xz from  y = x4. (See Arnold et al., 1985, p. 8.) Such an insensitive classification may not be very interesting. This point should be  clarified in the future development of a rigorous theory of degree of stability.  480;33/1-6  76 RYOZO YOSHINO  Finally, my answer to the third question concerning the existence of non-stable laws is the following: There are some unstable  scientific laws such as Reynolds law of similarity in hydrodynamics (e.g., Milne-Thomson, 1968). The hydrodynamics law  describes the dynamic similarity of an object in a certain fluid. The similarity is characterized by Reynolds number  represented by R = p VL/p, where R is Reynolds number, p is density, V is velocity, L is length, and p is coefficient of  viscocity. That is, if two systems have the same Reynolds number, then they are considered the same system of hydrodynamics.  This hydrodynamic law is a typical example of an approximate law. The quantitative validity is restricted only to certain  ranges of the variables and the hydrodynamics shows a wild instability outside of the valid ranges. Therefore, in such a wild  instability, one cannot obtain a consistent quantitative law, except perhaps a law obtained by a statistical technique of data  reduction which cancels instability of observation. Such a law may not have a stable form in the sense of Definition 5 and the  quantitative significance is not very high, although it may still be useful for a certain practical purpose. Here again, I  emphasize that I am analyzing laws obtained by a certain quantitative observation of a relationship between independent  variables and dependent variables. Because every observation accompanies unknown small perturbations in an observation system,  one needs to consider something like "stability" of a law, although one may be able to introduce a concept different than  Definition 5.  In this paper, I adopt the approach based on the above definition of a stable map because it is generally accepted and  extensively utilized in mathematics. The establishment of a theory based on this approach will facilitate, if necessary, a  construction of a similar theory based on a weaker assumption.  The study of maps from R" to the line R1 (Morse theory) provides a special case for which the goals of structural stability  theory can be attained. The results of Morse theory of interest to us can be stated as follows.  THEOREM 2 (Morse theory). Let D" be a compact subset in R". More specifically, let D" be  f xl , ..., x") 10,< x; ,< c; for some constant c; (i =1, ..., n) }.  (1) The stable maps f'. D" -+ R1 form an everywhere dense and open set in the space of C maps from D" to R'. (Note that  Whitney topology is assumed.)  (2) A map f is stable iff the following conditions C1 and C2 are satisfied: C1: All critical points of the map f are  non-degenerate.  C2: All the critical values of the map are distinct.  (3) A map f D" -+ R' is stable at a point xo iff there exist neighborhoods of x, in D" and yo = f (xo) in R' in which  coordinates x 1, ..., x" and y can be chosen so tha the map can be represented in one of the following n + 2 forms:  C1: y=x1.  C2: y = x; + _ _ _ + xk - xk + , - - xfor some k = 0, 1, 2, ..., n.  ON THE POSSIBLE AND STABLE LAWS 77  For a proof and more detailed explanation, see (Arnold et al., 1985, p. 5; Milnor, 1963). Note that Theorem 2 can be  generalized to a compact manifold rather than only a bounded and closed subset of R". For example, D" may be taken as  D" = { (x1_., x") 1 0 < x; < oo for i= 1, 2,..., nil  where oc is a point of infinity for the one-point compactification or Alexandroffs compactification of the interval (e.g.,  Kelley, 1955). Also note that a constant map is stable by Theorem 2 (2) because a constant map has no critical point.  Theorem 2 (1) mathematically justifies the definition of "stability": Every c map is surrounded by stable C maps in the  set of C' maps. On one hand, a property of a stable map is invariant in its diffeomorphism class. That is, a stable map is  stably observable even if it is perturbed by unknown small perturbations accompanying an observation. On the other hand, by  small perturbations an unstable map shifts to a stable map in the neighborhood. Therefore, as long as we are interested in  stably observable laws, we have only to consider stable maps. (See Appendix A.) Note that, as mentioned before, I am not  dealing with "measurement error" in a data reduction technique, but a substantive invariance in an observational system, which  is robust to unknown small perturbations.  Theorem 2 (2) will be applied later to prove that the exponent in Stevens' power law must be restricted to a certain set of  numerical values if the law is "possible and stable."  A NEW RESULT: THE POWER LAWS WITH RESTRICTED EXPONENTS  As already explained, Stevens (1957) theoretically rationalized the power laws for magnitude estimation and estimated the  exponents in the power laws by experimental data in many modalities such as loudness, brightness, heaviness, and taste. One of  the most interesting findings-in his data is that the estimated exponents in those substantive examples fall in an interval  between 0 and 2. (The interval is between 0 and 3.5 in Stevens, 1961.) In this section the goal is to argue that this  substantive discovery is not accidental but can mathematically be deduced from a combination of Luce's theorem (Theorem 1) and  a theorem of structural stability (Theorem 2). First, I will prove the following key theorem.  THEOREM 3. A power function y = kxb, where k is a non-zero constant, is stable on the interval 0 <, x 5 c for some positive  constant c iff b is 0, 1, or 2. (The constant c can be taken to be arbitrarily large or a point of infinity for the one-point  compactifcation. )  Proof. Use Theorem 2 (2). That is, identify a condition on b that y = kxb on the interval 0 < x < c is a C map and that (i)  it has no critical point, or (ii) all critical points are non-degenerate and all critical values are distinct. This condition  means that for all positive integers j the j th derivative of y = kxb exists and is continuous  78 RYOZO YOSHINO  on 0 5 x < c, and that (i) the first derivative is always non-zero, or (ii) the second derivative is always non-zero at all  points where the first derivative is zero, and all critical values are distinct.  First, suppose that b is a negative real. Then, the power function is not continuous at the origin x = 0. This implies that  the function is not a C function. Therefore we can disregard the case where b is negative.  Next, I will show that y = kxb is a C map only if b is a non-negative integer. Let b be a positive real, but not be an  integer. Then for a sufficiently large integer j, the j th derivative of y = kxb is d'y/dx' = s/x` for a non-zero constant s  and a positive constant t = j - b > 0. This is discontinuous at x=0. Therefore y =kxb is not a C map. Thus we have only to  pay attention to a non-negative integer b.  I will divide the proof into two cases.  (1) I show that y = kxb is stable for b = 0, 1, or 2.  (i) Let b = 0. Then y = k. By Definition 3, a constant map has no critical  point.  (ii) Let b = 1. Then y = kx and dy/dx = k 0 0. Therefore, there is no critical point in this case.  (iii) Let b = 2. Then y = kx2 and dy/dx = 2 - kx. There is only one critical point at x = 0. And d 2y/dx2 = 2 - k :;6  0. Therefore, the critical point is nondegenerate.  (11) I show that y = kxb cannot be stable if b is not 0, 1, or 2. Let b be a positive integer greater than or equal to 3. Then  dy/dx = kbxb -' and d 2y/dx2 = kb(b -1) xb-2. Therefore, there is a degenerate critical point at x = 0. Q.E.D.  By Theorem 3 and Luce's theorem (Theorem 1), the following corollary is immediately obtained:  COROLLARY 1 (The Possible and Stable Laws for Ratio Scales). Under the principles of consistency and invariance, if the  independent and dependent variables are both ratio scales, then the only possible and stable functions on the interval 0 ` x  <, c for some arbitrary positive constant c are in a form of y = kxb, where b is 0, 1, or 2. (The constant c can be taken to  be a point of infinity.)  Note that if we consider the interval e < x < c for some positive constants e and c, excluding the origin x = 0, then y = kxb  for any non-zero real b is stable because there is no critical point of the function. This means that there may be a law  represented by a power function y = kxb on the interval, where b is not 0, 1, or 2. Such a function, if defined near the  origin also, shows instability as the independent variable approaches the origin.  However, the origin plays a significant role in ratio scales because the origin differentiates ratio scales from interval  scales. And the property of a psychophysical law near thresholds of variables is one of our major concerns. Therefore, the  above corollary should play an important role in analysis of psychophysical laws. Note  ON THE POSSIBLE AND STABLE LAWS 79  also that we cannot directly apply Morse theory to the open interval, 0 < x < c, although non-standard analysis (e.g.,  Robinson, 1966) may be helpful to generalize the theory to cover this case.  In Corollary 1 the word "laws" is meant to be, so to speak, "primary laws" that are obtained by direct observation of  independent and dependent variables. Therefore, other forms of laws may be obtained as a combination of several stable laws  under certain conditions, just as will be exemplified below by magnitude estimation. (See also a note following Corollary 2.)  Now I will consider Stevens' power laws of magnitude estimation, especially the possible range of the exponents in the power  functions. In the procedures of magnitude estimation or matching, subjects are asked to match two subjective magnitudes in two  modalities. A power law, s = kt1211' for some constant k is obtained by a combination of two "primary power laws," e.g., f (s)  = k, sb' and f2(t) = k2 thz. In order to avoid trivial cases, we can assume that b, and 62 are nonzero. On one hand, the  process to obtain two power laws should be considered with their stability because it is based on subject's direct  observations. On the other hand, the process to equate two power laws is assumed to be free from instability by the definition  of magnitude estimation or matching. (The experimenter does not directly observe the law, but simply records subject's  responses. The process of recording is free from instability of an observation.) In magnitude estimation the estimated  exponent by an experimenter is b2/b,, rather than b, and b2 separately. By Corollary 1, the values of b, and b2 can be 1 or 2.  This immediately implies that the values of b,/b, can be 1/2, 1, or 2. Thus we obtain  THEOREM 4 (Power Laws in Magnitude Estimation). In magnitude estimation, the exponent in the power laws obtained by a  combination of two stable power functions on [0, c], where c is a positive constant or a point of infinity, is 1/2, 1, or 2.  In practice those exponents in (Stevens, 1957, 1961) have some variations around these theoretical values, 1/2, 1, or 2.  Although there are several possible explanations for this discrepancy, I will briefly summarize Stevens' comments on the  consideration of the exponents. Stevens (1961) noted that we should not take those exponents obtained in the magnitude  estimation as the completely determined values because those values may be variable by several factors such as (i) variability  due to the observer's modulus (i.e., his conception of the "standard"), (ii) variability due to the observer's conception of a  subjective ratio, and (iii) variability due to differing sense-organ operating characteristics. (See Stevens, 1961, for a  detailed discussion.) Appendix B gives a statistical explanation about the discrepancy between the theoretical values and the  data of the exponents in the power laws. Another possibility is that the exponents in some of those power laws may not be 1/2,  1, or 2. Therefore, some power laws may show instability near their thresholds. This point may be related to an observation on  data of magnitude estimation near threshold: There may be some departure of data near a threshold from an estimated power  function (see Luce et al., 1963, pp. 273-283).  80 RYOZO YOSHINO  POSSIBLE AND STABLE LAWS OF CONTINUOUS, MULTIVARIATE POWER LAWS  In this section I will attempt to characterize the forms of possible and stable laws in multivariate cases as a generalization  of Corollary 1.  Because I am not ready to cover all possible cases, I restrict my attention to the following functional equation which is  analogous to that in the univariate case,  U(k,x,, k2x2, ..., kn)=K(ki, k2, ..., kn) U(x,, x2, ..., xn),  where U(x) is continuous, k; > 0, U(x) > 0, and x; >, 0 for i (i = 1, 2, ..., n). The folowing theorem is from Luce (1964).  THEOREM 5 (Luce, 1964). If both the independent and the dependent variables are  ratio scales, then there exist a positive k and non-zero bi such that  n  U(xi, x2, ..., xn)=k H xi i=i  Now the possible forms of laws under the principles of consistency and invariance have been identified in the case where  independent variables and a dependent variable are ratio scales. Next I will apply Morse theory to these multivariate power  laws in order to identify the forms of possible and stable laws in the multivariate cases.  For the sake of simplicity, I introduce the following definition.  DEFINITION 6. For a positive integer k, define a non-negative k-domain excluding the origin to be {(X1, ..., xk) I e; ~ xt 5  c;}, where e; is a positive constant and c, is a positive constant or a point of infinity for i = 1, 2, ..., k. And define a  non-negative k-domain including the origin be the same as above except all ei's are 0.  The next proposition is immediately obtained. (Calculate the first derivative to see that there is no critical point.)  PROPOSITION 1. The power function of Theorem 5 is stable on the non-negative ndomain excluding the origin if all the b;'s are  non-zero reals. If at least one of the b;'s is non-zero, the power function is stable on a non-negative s-domain excluding the  origin, where s is the cardinality of the b;'s that are non-zero. If all of the b,'s are zero, then the power function is a  constant function and is therefore stable.  The following is a key theorem.  THEOREM 6. A power function, k H"=, xbi is stable on a non-negative s-domain including the origin for an integer s iff it is  in one of the following three forms:  (i) y = k,  (ii) y = kxb1  for b; = 1 or 2 for some i (i = 1, 2, ..., n), on { (x;): 0 S x; <, c; }, or  ON THE POSSIBLE AND STABLE LAWS 81  (iii) y = kx,xj for some i and j (i, j = 1, 2, ..., n), on { (x;, xj): 0 S x; 5 c;, 0 5 xj < ej}, where c; and ej are positive  constants or points of infinity.  Proof. If the power function is stable near the origin, then all b;'s are nonnegative integers: Otherwise, the power function  is not differentiable at the origin by an argument similar to the proof of Theorem 3. Therefore, we can assume that all b;'s  are non-negative integers.  A constant map (i) y = k is stable because it has no critical point by Definition 3. The case of a univariate power function  is reduced to Theorem 3: the function is stable iff it is in the form of (ii). (Note that the function is unstable on a  nonnegative s-domain including the origin for an integer s greater than 1. On the domain, the rank of the Hessian cannot be  more than 1 at the origin; therefore, the origin is a degenerate critical point.)  Next, consider a bivariate power function (iii): y=kxbix;j for nonzero constant k, b;, and b;. The first partial derivatives  are  ay/ax; = kb ;xb,-'x j  and  ay/ax; = kb;xb'xb~-'.  Therefore, there is 'a critical point at (x;, x;) = (0, 0) . The second derivatives are a'ylaxr ax;=kb;b;xb,-'xbj -',  a2y/ax; =kb;(b;- 1) xbj-2xb;, xbj -' xbj -'. 02y/ax; ax; = kb; b;  Therefore, the Hessian at (x;, xj) is  k2[bi(bi- 1)(b;- 1) bjx?b,-2x2b,-2- b2b2x26,-2x~bl-2] =k2bibj[(bi- 1)(bi- 1)-bib;7 x2(6'-l)x;(b'-') =kzbib;(1 -bi-bj) x?(b,  -1)x~(b;-1).  This is non-zero at (x;, xj) = (0, 0) iff b; = b; = 1. This means that the critical point is non-degenerate iff b; = bj = 1.  Thus a bivariate power function is stable on the non-negative 2-domain iff it is in the form of (ii). (Note that the function  is unstable on a non-negative s-domain including the origin for an integer s greater than 2. On the domain, the rank of the  Hessian cannot be more than 2 at the origin; therefore, the origin is a degenerate critical point.)  Now consider a power function with more than two independent variables. For simplicity, I use a trivariate power function:  y=kx;'xz2x3' for nonzero constants k, b,, b2, and b3. This case will be sufficient to clarify a general case.  82 RYOZO YOSHINO  The first derivatives are  aylax, = kb, xb, lx2zx33, aylax2=kb2x1'x2 x3', aylax3 = kb, x" xiz x33 _ 1. Therefore, this function has a critical point at  (x,, x2, x3)= (0, 0, 0). The second  derivatives are  a2ylax; axe= kb; bjxbi- l xj,- lxmm a2ylax? =kb,(br- I) xbl-2xb]xmm~ where i, j, and m are distinctively 1, 2, or 3.  Therefore, the Hessian is  ex 3b'-2xibz-2363-2, where c is a constant.  This is 0 at (x,, x2, x3) = (0, 0, 0).  This means that the critical point is degenerate. Therefore, the function is not stable. Q.E.D.  By Theorems 5 and 6, the following corollary immediately is obtained.  COROLLARY 2. Under the principles of consistency and invariance, if the independent variables and the dependent variable are  all ratio scales, then the only possible and stable laws on a non-negative s-domain including the origin for an integer s are  in the form of (i), (ii), and (iii) in Theorem 6.  The above corollary gives us the forms of possible and stable laws on a nonnegative domain including the origin. Of course, by  Proposition 1, there may be a law represented on a domain excluding the origin in a different form from those of (i), (ii),  and (iii) in Theorem 6. And also, there may be variations as a combination of these, so to speak, "primary laws," as seen in  Stevens' power law of magnitude estimation.  It is instructive to consider, as an example, Newton's gravitation law for two objects whose masses are m, and mz and their  mutual distance is r: F= Gm, m,lr2 for a gratitational constant G. Note that solid angle (11r )2 is a substantive variable  rather than r itself because of the propagation mechanism of gravitation. Therefore, F is a function of three variables m,,  m2, and (llr)2. By Proposition 1 and Corollary 2, the function F is stable on the non-negative 3-domain excluding the origin,  but not stable on the non-negative 3-domain including the origin. F, as the function of two variables m, and m2, has a stable  form on a non-negative 2-domain including the origin: (1) F= k, m, m, for a constant k, when masses of the two objects are  independent variables and the distance between the two objects is fixed. Similarly, F, as the function of a variable (1lr)2,  has a stable form on a nonnegative 1-domain including the origin: (2)F=k2(llr)2 for a constant k2 when  ON THE POSSIBLE AND STABLE LAWS 83  (1/r)2 is an independent variable and the masses are fixed. However, if three independent variables m,, m2, and (1/r )2  simultaneously approach zero, then F=Gm,m2/r2 is not stable. This provides us with a reasonable observation and can easily be  validated. This situation occurs when one measures by a highly sensitive apparatus two very light particles losing their  weights and going far away from each other. Therefore, such a measurement must be perturbed by unknown small perturbations, as  may be seen in quantum mechanics.  The theorems in this section have been obtained under a certain condition. In order to cover more variety of laws, we need to  develop more complete theory of multivariate laws in the future. See, for example, Luce (1964), Osborne (1970), Falmagne  (1985), and Aczel et al. (1986), for the meaningful multivariate laws.  CONCLUDING REMARKS  The present theory, as a combination of axiomatic measurement theory and structural stability theory, has identified the forms  of possible and stable functions under certain conditions. There are three main notes about the theory or the approach taken  here: (i) the range of the laws covered in this paper, (ii) the study of admissible transformations of scales in differential  equations, and (iii) structural stability theory and dimensional analysis.  First, the theory presented in this paper does not cover all the laws but a certain range of laws because the approach taken  here relies on particular assumptions on the admissible transformations of scales and on the definition of stability.  Reviewing the argument to obtain the key results of Corollaries 1 and 2, we must recall that the power functions are obtained  as "possible" laws from (i) the assumption of scale types on independent and dependent variables (we restricted the scale type  to ratio scales) and the exponents in the power functions are restricted by applying (ii) Morse theory to obtain "stable"  laws. These laws may be considered as, so to speak, "strongly lawful" and "strongly stable" laws. This point was suggested by  the ideas of degree of lawfulness and degree of stability and should further be developed to complete the theory.  In science, there are some laws which may be represented in a different form from those in Corollary 1 or 2. For example, if  the scale types of variables are not ratio scales, then the law may not be in a form of a power function. Luce (1959)  identified the forms of possible laws for all combinations of scale types including ratio, interval, and log interval in the  case of one independent and one dependent variable. Those possible laws may have stable forms without a special restriction.  However, other restrictions may be required, in addition to the restriction that the exponent of the power function is 0, 1,  or 2 as shown in Corollary 1. Therefore, there may be a natural law which has a different form from those in Corollaries 1 and  2 if the independent and the dependent variables in the law are, e.g., interval scales. In many important cases, however, the  independent and the dependent variables of laws in natural science are ratio scales.  84 RYOZO YOSHINO  For another example, as Luce (1959, 1964) and Aczel et al. (1986) emphasized, if we use dimensionless variables or introduce a  constant to adjust dimensional invariance, laws may take any form because the principles of consistency and invariance do not  restrict their possible forms.  Second, Luce (1959) obtained power functions by solving the functional equation U(kx) = K(k) U(x) which is closely related to  dimensional invariance of dimensional analysis in a case where both the independent and the dependent variables are ratio  scales. Although this seems a natural condition, the equation may be missing some special cases. For example, the differential  forms U, (x) = x + dx, U2(X) = dx, and U3(x) = x - dx satisfy a functional equation such as Luce's: U, (kx) = kx + d(kx) = k(x  + dx) = k U, (x), etc. Nevertheless, these functions are not included in the set of solutions in Luce (1959). The derivation  of Luce is correct. (Recall that he assumes only U(x) to be continuous, although the solution can be differentiable on a  certain domain.) Then what is wrong? The problem is due to the singular nature of differentials: The differential dx always  has the same "unit" and "dimension" as those of the variable x itself. Therefore x and dx are considered "distinct" variables  but with a strict and direct relationship: x = f dx. This particular characteristic was not covered by the derivation in Luce  (1959) and is therefore not covered by the theory in the present paper. In natural science, scientists extensively utilize  differential equations in their analysis. Therefore, we need to develop a theory of the possible and stable forms of  differential equations in order to cover a wider range of scientific laws. Such a theory will also be useful in developing a  dynamic modeling in phychophysics. (See Smale & Hirsch, 1974, for dynamical systems in a variety of scientific fields.)  For an instructive purpose, I will analyze the Stefan-Boltzmann law of blackbody radiation, u = bT', where u is the energy  density, b is a constant, and T is the temperature (e.g., Zemansky, 1957). This law has an apparently unstable form near the  origin, T= 0, because the exponent in the power function is not 0, 1, or 2. This is one of the most fundamental laws in  thermodynamics. However, this law is a mathematically derived law from a law deduced from the electromagnetic theory and the  energy equation in thermodynamics. The law and the equation are, respectively,  P = u/3 (1)  and   (aU/a V)T= T(aP/a T),,- P, (2)  where U is the energy, V is the volume, P is the pressure, and   u= U/V (3)  By Eqs. (1) and (3), we obtain  (aU/aV)T= (a(u - V)/aV)T= u  ON THE POSSIBLE AND STABLE LAWS 85  and  (8P/a T),,= (8(u/3)/a T),= 1/3 -du/dT. Therefore, Eq. (2) is successively transformed as  u = (T/3)(du/dT) - u/3  du/u = 4 - dT/T (4)  In(u) = 4 - In(T) -+- In(b), where b is a constant.  Therefore,  u=bT  Thus the derivation of the Stefan-Boltzmann law involves several points mentioned before. In particular, the differential  equation of Eq. (2) is crucial to produce the exponent, which gives the law an apparently unstable form. Also note that (i)  the deduction of Eq. (2) in thermodynamics needs the introduction of entropy S, which is measured by an interval scale and  (ii) both sides of Eq. (4) are dimensionless because dimensions are canceled by the variables and their differentials. Thus, a  fundamental law in science may be a mathematically derived law from more primary laws; sometimes including a differential  equation. Such a law may have a different form from those in Corollaries 1 and 2.  Finally, I will comment on a possible application of structural stability theory to dimensional analysis. On one hand, some  measurement theorists claim that M (mass), L (length), T (time), etc., are fundamental dimensions because all other quantities  such as V (velocity) and Mm (momentum) can be defined by certain combinations of the fundamental dimensions. On the other  hand, others claim that there is no absolution distinction between the fundamental dimensions and the derived dimensions  because the fundamental dimensions can also be defined by a certain combination of the derived dimensions such as M=Mm/V. (See  Kratz et al., 1971, p. 502 for a related argument.)  From the point of view of structural stability, however, I suggest that for each practical measurement one may be able to  distinguish the fundamental dimensions from the derived dimensions. For example, consider dimensional analysis of sound  intensity I = kM/T 3, where k is a constant, M is mass, and T is time. This can be represented in many mathematically  equivalent forms such as 1=k(MIL3)(L3IT3), I = kD V 3, or I = kr1A, where D is density, ri is viscocity, and A is  acceleration. By Corollary 2, the representation I = krIA has the stable form while the others do not, although the latter are  mathematically equivalent to the former. This suggests an interpretation that even if one controls L, M, and T in a  measurement of I, in reality one controls n and A through q = MILT and A = LIT'. In this sense the equation I = ki7A and the  quantities n and A may be considered, respectively, a fundamental law and the fundamental dimensions of the law, while the  other equations may be considered the derived ones from the fundamental law. We may some-  HE) RYOZO YOSHINO  times be able to represent a certain law in several stable forms. Then one cannot identify the best representation among them  without knowing an additional criterion. We can, however, distinguish a set of representations of stable forms from a set of  representations of unstable forms. This type of study may be developed in the future.  I hope that the theory of the possible and stable psychophysical laws will be further developed and applied to other  scientific fields where measurements play a significant role.  APPENDIX A: AN INTUITIVE EXPLANATION OF "STABILITY"  Intuitively, if a map is stable, the shape of the graph is invariant under (unknown) small perturbations (in Whitney  topology). For example, consider maps f (x) = x, f2(x) = x2, f 3(x) = x3, and f4(x) = x Maps f2, f,, and f4 have a critical  point at the origin while f does not have a critical point at all. Furthermore, the Hessian of f2 is non-degenerate while  those of f and f4 are degenerate. Therefore maps ft and f2 are stable, but f and f4 are not, although the graphs of f2 and f4  are very similar in a neighbouhood at the origin. (In fact the graphs of these four maps are very similar at the positive side  of a neighborhood of the origin.) (See Fig. 2).  Note that "stability" plays a significant role in the invariance of "shapes" near critical points. Consider some functions to  represent small perturbations on the domain of x (or on the graphs). (We similarly can consider perturbations on the range,  but we omit it here for the sake of simplicity.) Technically we have only to  FIG. 2. Examples of stable and unstable maps: f and f2 are stable while f and f4 are unstable.  ON THE POSSIBLE AND STABLE LAWS 87  consider polynomial functions whose degrees are less than those of the original functions. For example, let g, (x) = e, ,  g2(x)=e,x+e2, g3(x)=e,x2+e2x+e3,  g4(x) = e, x3 + e2 x2 + e3x + e4 for some small reals e;  (i = 1, 2, 3, or 4 and 0 < le;l 4 1). (These e;'s may be considered kinds of random variables.) Then, by these small  perturbations the graphs of map f change to those of h; = f + gi for i = 1, 2, 3, and 4. (See Fig. 3.)  On the one hand, there is no essential change in the shapes of the graphs of f, and f2. That is, under small perturbations the  shapes of these stable maps remain as they are, On the other hand, there are drastic changes in the shapes of the graphs of  the unstable functions f, andf4: however small the perturbations (or e;'s) may be, there appear more critical points near the  origin x=0. Note that h 3 and h4 themselves have stable forms. In other words, small perturbations make unstable functions f  and f4 shift to stable functions h3 and h4 which are near the original unstable functions.  I will conclude this appendix with a comment on information reduction of statistical data. We sometimes cannot distinguish  some functions only by statistical criteria such as A.I.C. (See Akaike, 1977, for Akaike information criterion on the  trade-off between the number of parameters and goodness of curve-fitting.) For example, y = x2 and y = x4 may equally well  describe a given set of data. Even in such a case, however, we may be able to distinguish those functions from a point of view  of structural stability. That is, because y = x2 is in a stable form while y = x4 is not, the former is preferable.  hi =f, + g,  h2=f2+ g2  h3=f3+ g3 h4=fa+ g4  FIG. 3. Changes of maps under small perturbations: f and f4 show drastic changes while f and f2 are almost the same as before  perturbations.  HH RYOZO YOSHINO  APPENDIX B: AN EXPLANATION OF THE VARIATION OF  THE EXPONENTS IN THE POWER LAWS  There may be many ways to consider measurement errors involved in the exponents b2/b, in magnitude estimation. The following  explanation is based on the idea of considering b, and b2 random variables.  Note that the data in Stevens (1957, 1961) were obtained by averaging data from more than 10 subjects. Therefore b, and b2 may  involve statistical errors. Let  b, = b; + r,  and  b2=b2 +r2l  where b; and b2 are the theoretical values (1 or 2), and r, and r2 are variables of errors such as  E(r1)=E(r2)=0,  2  V(r,) = v,,  and  V(r2) = vZ  for some positive constants v, and V. Here, E( ) and V( ) stand for, respectively, expectation and variance.  E(b2/b,) = E[(b2 + r2)/(b; + r,)] is calculated as follows. Suppose r, < b; and r2 < b2 . Recall an approximation 1/(1 + x) =  1 - x for x < 1. Then, approximately,  (b2 +r2)/(bi +rl)  -. [b2 (1 + r2/bz)(1 - rllb, )]lbi  = C(1 - r1/b1 +r2/b2 - r1 r2/bi b2 )] b2 lbi  Therefore,  E(62lb1)=[E(1)-E(r1)lbi  +E(r2)lb2 -E(r,r2)/b, b2 ] b2/b; =b2lbi -E(r1r2)lbi 2.  In general we know the following form of Schwartz's inequality:  -V1 V2.< E(r1 r2).< v1 v2 .  ON THE POSSIBLE AND STABLE LAWS 89  By Eqs. (5) and (6), we obtain  JE(b2/b1)-b2 lbi 1 <v1V2/biz.  There are four cases to classify.  For (bi , b2 )_ (1, 2),  2 - VIV2 < E(b2/bI) < 2 + vlv2.  (2) For (bi ,b2)=(1, 1),  1 - VIV2 < E(b2/bI) <_ 1 + vlv2.  For (bi , bZ) _ (2, 2),  1 - VIV2/4 < E(b2lbI) < 1 + VIV2/4.  (4) For (bi , b2)=(2, 1),  1/2 - V1 V2/4 < E(b2/b1) < 1/2 + V1 V214.  For example, if ulv2= 1, then [min(E(b2/bl), max(E(b2/b,)] = [0, 3]. This interval roughly covers the range of exponents in  Stevens (1957, 1961).  The above derivation suggests a possible explanation of the variation of the exponents in the power laws. However, in order to  completely justify the explanation, we need more substantive data concerning the variation of the exponents in the power laws.  REFERENCES  ACZEL, J. ROBERTS, F. S., & ROSENBAUM, Z. (1986). On scientific laws without dimensional constants. Journal of Mathematical  Analysis and Application, 119, 389-416.  AKAIKE, H. (1977). On entropy maximization principle. In P. R. Krishnaiah (Ed.), Applications of statistics. Amsterdam:  North-Holland.  ARNOLD, V. I., GUISEIN-ZADA, S. M., & VARCHENKO, A. N. (1985). Singularities of differential maps (Vol. 1). Boston: Birkhauser.  EDWARDS, H. M. (1984) Galois theory. New York: Springer-Verlag. Graduate texts in mathematics, 101. FALMAGNE, J. C. (1985).  Elements of psychophysical theory. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. GOLUBITSKY, M., & GUILLEMIN, W. (1973). Stable mapping and  their singularities. New York: SpringerVerlag.  KELLEY, J. L. (1955). General topology. New York: Van Nostrand.  KRANTZ, D. H., LUCE, R. D., SUPPES, P., & TVERSKY, A. (1971). Foundations of measurement (Vol. 1). New York: Academic Press.  LUCE, R. D. (1959). On the possible psychophysical laws. The Psychological Review, 66, 3, 81-95. LUCE, R. D. (1962) Comments  on Rozeboom's criticisms of "On the possible psychophysical laws." Psychological Review, 69, 548-551.  LUCE, R. D., BUSH, R. R., & GALANTER, E. (1963). Handbook of mathematical psychology (Vol. 1). New York/London: Wiley.  90 RYOZO YOSHINO  LUCE, R. D. (1964). A generalization of a theorem of dimensional analysis. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1, 278-284.  MATHER, J. (1969). Stability of C"' mappings. IV. Classification of stable germs by R-algebra. Publ. Math. LH.E.S., 37,  223-248.  MILNE-THOMPSON, L. M. (1968). Theoretical hydrodynamics (5th ed.). New York: Macmillan Co. MILNOR, J. (1963). Morse theory.  Annals of mathematics studies. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press. NARENS, L. (1985). Abstract measurement theory.  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  NARENS, L. (in press). Meaningfulness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  OSBORNE, D. K. (1970). Further extensions of a theorem of dimensional analysis. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 7, 236-242.  PFANZAGL, J., BAUMAN, V., & HUBER, H. (1971). Theory of measurement (2nd rev. ed.). Wurzburg, Wien, Physica-Verl.  POINCARE, E. (1881). M6moire sur les courbes defines par et appl., 3e serie, 7, 375-424.  POINCARE, E. (1882). M6moire sur les courbes d6fin6s par et appl., 3e serie, 8, 251-296.  POINCARE, E. (1885). M6moire sur les courbes defines par et appl., 4` serie, 1, 167-244.  POINCARE, E. (1886). M6moire sur les courbes d6fin6s par et appl., 4e serie, 2, 151-217.  POINCARI, E. (1895). Analysis situs. Journal Ecole Polytechnique, 2e serie, 1, 1-121. POLLACK, A. (1974). Differential  topology. Englewood Clifs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. ROBERTS, F. S. (1979). Measurement theory with applications to decisionmaking,  utility, and the social sciences. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.  ROBERTS, F. S., & ROSENBAUM, Z. (1986). Scale type, meaningfulness and the possible psychophysical laws. Mathematical Social  Sciences, 12, 77-95.  ROBINSON, A. (1966). Non-standard analysis. Amsterdam: North-Holland.  ROZEBOOM, W.W. (1962a). The untenability of Luce's principle. Psychological Review, 69, 542-547. ROZEBOOM, W. W. (1962b).  Comment. Psychological Review, 69, 552.  SMALE, S., & HIRSCH, W. (1974). Differential equations, dynamical systems, and linear algebra. New York: American Press.  STEVENS, S. S. (1946). On the theory of scales of measurement. Science, 103, 2684, 677-680. STEVENS, S. S. (1957). On the  psychophysical law. The Psychological Review, 66, 2, 153-181. STEVENS, S. S. (1961). The psychophysics of sensory function. In  W. A. Rosenglith (Ed.), Sensory communication. Cambridge, MIT Press.  THOM, R. (1975). Structural stability and morphogeneses. New York: Benjamin/Addison-Wesley. ZEMANSKY, M. W. (1957), Heat and  thermodynamics. New York: McGraw-Hill.  une Equation diMrentielle. Jour. Math. pures une Equation diff6rentielle. Jour. Math. pares une Equation diMrentielle. Jour.  Math. pures une Equation diff6rentielle. Jour. Math. pures  RECEIVED: November 6, 1987