10.1016/0022-2496(89)90006-0
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 33, 99-108 (1989)  Book Review  A Unique Approach to Stimulus Detection Theory in Psychophysics Based upon the Properties of Zero-Mean Gaussian Noise  DONALD LAMING. Sensory Analysis. London/San Diego: Academic Press, 1986. Pp. xiv + 306. $72.00.  Reviewed by W. J. MCGILL AND M. C. TEICH  Donald Laming is Lecturer in the Department of Experimental Psychology at the University of Cambridge in Great Britain. He has  been associated with that department since obtaining his Ph. D. there in 1964. His major research interests are sensory  discrimination and judgment, and memory. He has published Information Theory of Choice-Reaction Time (Academic Press, 1968)  and Mathematical Psychology (Academic Press, 1973). A discussion of Sensory Analysis under the titles "Precis of Sensory  Analysis (23 Open Peer Commentaries," and "A Reexamination of Sensory Analysis" appears in Behavioral and Brain Sciences  (1988). 11.  W. J. McGill is Adjunct Professor of Psychology, University of California, San Diego, and President-Emeritus of Columbia  University; and M. C. Teich is Professor of Engineering Science, Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University,  and a member of the Fowler Memorial Laboratory, Department of Otolaryngology, Columbia College of Physicians & Surgeons. The  reviewers have collaborated on papers in visual and auditory detection and on several studies of stochastic counting processes.  1. INTRODUCTION  This is a very important book, perhaps the most significant advance in psychophysical detection theory since the now-classical  collection of papers, Signal Detection and Recognition by Human Observers, published under the editorial direction of John A.  Swets in 1964.  The importance of Laming's work derives from a multiplicity of virtues. Foremost is the quality of his analysis, combining  technical skill, breadth of scholarship, and a tough advocative stance on key mechanisms of sensory detection. Laming's  unblushing advocacy brings fresh vitality to a theoretical area grown moribund in recent years.  The principal virtue here is the prospect of reviving an immensely important part of sensory psychology. The original work  pioneered by W. P. Tanner, J. A. Swets,  Requests for reprints should be sent to Dr. W. J. McGill, Department of Psychology, University of California at San Diego, La  Jolla, CA 92093.  99  0022-2496/89 83.00  Copyright cQ. 1989 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  too MC GILL AND TEICH  and D. M. Green had this bold quality. It challenged the very idea of a threshold, pointed to the critical importance of  outcomes or payoffs, and gave us a vision of sensory processes as approximations to a mathematically defined "ideal observer."  To be frank, the ideal observer idea did not fly. It failed to suggest easily identifiable mechanisms by which its properties  might be realized or approximated. Thus, depicting the auditory nervous system as a cross-correlator did not suggest much that  is practical in the interpretation of neurophysiological data.  Moreover, few serious attempts were made beyond the research of Barlow (1957) and Nachmias and Steinman (1963) to bridge the  gap between detection theories that had grown up independently in vision and audition. Many believed (and still believe) that  the phenomena of the two major senses are so dominated by mechanisms in the receptors themselves as to be unamenable to a  single detection theory.  And so the early vitality of signal detection theory, a powerful driving force in auditory research of the 1960s, dissipated  slowly into a methodological literature not unlike Thurstone scaling-an important tool but essentially a curiosity. The task  of describing how information passes from sense organ to sensorium edged subtly back to a concentration on sense organs, at  least among sensory psychologists. Studies of information flow drifted over into the so-called cognitive areas where the  utterly complex adaptive mechanisms of perception, language, and memory had begun to challenge the best mathematical minds.  Incremental detectability in the eye, the ear, and the skin senses was, of course, not abandoned; nothing of the sort. But it  came to be seen as less interesting than the more complex forms of cognition. Intensity discrimination couched in the  framework of a single broad detection theory simply lost its fastball and was relegated to footnotes in papers on parallel  processing midway through the 1980s.  Then along came Laming in 1986 with his breath of fresh air regenerating the excitement of the search for missing pieces of  the puzzle surrounding sensory communication.  The idea is wide spread that the sensations we experience correspond nicely in magnitude to the level of neural activity at  some ... part of the sensory apparatus. I happen not to share that belief ...  The neural quantum theory ... (Stevens, Morgan, and Volkmann (1941)) ... is a patent redherring ....  Another belief is ... (that) ... the sensory response to small perturbations about an equilibrium point is linear. That idea  also has to go.  My objective is not to achieve a balanced appraisal of ... opinions which may reasonably be held in the light of present  experimental findings but to present my own conception of how sensory analysis works.  Isn't it refreshing? You need not agree with Laming's conception of sensory analysis at every disputed point, and believe us  we do not, in order to appreciate the force of his arguments or the thrust of this criticisms. The point is that you finish  the book with furious marginalia on virtually every page, and yet you know that detection theory is alive again.  A REVIEW OF SENSORYANALYSIS BY DONALD LAMING 101  2. LAMING'S SENSORY ANALYSIS  The sophisticated reader will benefit by turning at once to Chapter 13, Some Principles of Sensory Analysis, before beginning  at the beginning with Laming's summary of the psychophysical foundations of Weber's Law.  His principles set forth the key points of his position. There are, he argues, basic functional differences in data on  difference discrimination (two distinct stimuli separated by a silent interval or gap) and increment detection (continuous  background with stimulus briefly superimposed).  In difference discrimination:  (a) Weber's Law holds down nearly to absolute threshold.  (b) The psychometric function is a normal integral linear with stimulus magnitude (amplitude).  (c) The ROC curve derives from the Gaussian and is symmetric.  In increment detection:  (a) Weber's Law at high magnitudes gives way to a square-root law for lowintensity stimuli.  (b) The psychometric function is a normal integral with the square of the increment in stimulus amplitude (i.e., low-increment  suppression).  (c) The ROC curve is asymmetric and biased toward detection of an increment when it is present.  The discovery of these regularities is not without potential for dispute about the reality or importance of some of the claims  made, but taken together such regularities offer a striking tribute to Laming's observational acumen. It is perfectly evident  that something is going on in such data and Laming has seized upon it.  Laming lays out his basic arguments oil visual and auditory detection in Chapter 4. He reviews the classical psychometric  functions for pure noise (vision, audition), pure tones in noise (audition), pedestals in noise (audition), and modulation of  visual itensity via sinusoidal gratings. The linchpin of Laming's analysis is the finding, well-documented but thus far  unexplained, that the slope of the psychometric function changes sharply from condition to condition. Why should the slope of  the psychometric function undergo a marked steepening as we move from difference discrimination to increment detection in  studies of luminance? More important, why should the detectability of a sinusoid in wideband noise accord well with energy  detection, while the same function for increments in pure noise does not? The slope of the psychometric function in the latter  case is roughly double that of an energy detector.  Laming relies heavily on a remarkable paper by Green (1960; reprinted in Swets (Ed.), 1964) in which virtually every property  of incremental detection with bandlimited noise checks out nicely against energy detection, but, unaccountably, the  psychometric functions are much too steep. Laming shows that a normal integral  102 MC GILL AND TEICH  against the square of the signal-to-noise ratio fits Green's data well, and then Laming offers his own explanation of why this  must be so.  It is at this point that Laming decides to jettison energy detection and sets forth his position that the "proper  psychological measure of auditory intensity is amplitude." It is an important decision fraught with danger for the unwary.  Auditory amplitude and auditory power or energy are related by a square law, but moving from one unit system to the other can  produce a quagmire in which the inexperienced reader can sink into total confusion. Laming shows himself never to be confused  but he moves abruptly without warning, and it is often difficult to track him.  The next chapters (5 and 6) are devoted to the heart of Laming's analysis. He postulates that in steady state the level of  incoming stimulation feeds into a mechanism that divides a stimulus into positive and negative inputs each perturbed  independently by Gaussian noise. The so-called "negative" input inhibits its counterpart, producing a result resembling  algebraic addition when the inputs are combined. Hence the combined input generates a new Gaussian noise with zero mean, and  variance proportional to the level of the input. The magnitude of the combined input fades to zero in steady state  stimulation, but magnitudes are implicitly reflected in variances. This is a well-known property of linearly filtered Poisson  events, so-called "shot-noise"; i.e., the mean and variance are proportional. Moreover, such mixtures of excitatory and  inhibitory inputs reflect a familiar principle of sensory physiology (Kuffler, Nicholls, and Martin, 1984).  It follows that Laming's mechanism, coupled with the idea that detectability is fixed when the ratio of variances is fixed,  will produce Weber's Law in any sense modality for stimuli at any intensity level. Weber's Law is a property of such zeromean  Gaussian noise. Laming then argues that a brief rectangular change in level (i.e., a "boxcar") will be differentiated by the  mechanism if the latencies of response to the positive and negative inputs are slightly different. The noisy derivative is fed  via half-wave rectification and integration to a fixed observation window, generating the data on which detection decisions  are based.  Evidently with only Gaussian internal noise and the derivative of the signal in increment detection, a careful study of the  properties of Gaussian noise enables Laming to compute the behavior of the mechanism under various forms of visual, auditory,  and other sensory stimulation. He shows (Chapter 6) that a square-law transform must occur with brief incremental inputs. The  latter should then be governed by the properties of non-central Xz (non-central because of the brief positive jump as the  stimulus increment is differentiated). Laming proceeds to calculate the behavior of the mechanism in threshold experiments on  spatial and temporal summation (Chapter 7), as well as in studies of negative masking (Chapter 8).  Negative masking is one of the puzzling ambiguities of auditory research. Partial suppression of internal noise by stimuli at  or just above threshold is known to occur in sensory neurophysiology. One example is the reduction of firing rate during the  "clipped" portion of the cycle in primary auditory nerve fibers. Does it  A REVIEW OF SENSORY ANALYSIS BY DONALD LAMING 103  also occur in psychophysical data? Laming reviews auditory data on pure-tone and noise detection as well as visual contrast  observed with sinusoidal gratings, aiming to show the effect. He then deduces the shapes of the masking curves from the  properties of his "differential coupling" mechanism.  In both these areas, summation and negative masking, Laming's systematic derivations of I x T laws, square-root law summation  in vision and audition, as well as negative masking curves and even 4th power laws for sinusoidal gratings, constitute a  dazzling tour-de-force on the power of zero-mean Gaussian noise as a tool of detection theory.  Chapter 9 outlines data in which a square-root law is found to characterize increment detection over the first 2-4 log units  of intensity. The result is a classical one in luminance discrimination where it has become known as the deVries-Rose Law  (operating over some 5-6 log units of intensity above threshold.) But Laming manages also to extract a square-root law at low  intensities from pure tones and incremental noise detection. He does this by reworking data of Harris (1950, 1963) into  amplitude units.  The deVries-Rose Law is ordinarily viewed as a bulwark of the argument that at low levels the eye is, in effect, an energy  detector. This is because light energy flows essentially as a Poisson process where square-root law detectability results from  changes in level. (Equation (5.5) is missing a square-root sign on the right-hand side.)  Laming rejects such ideas. His differential coupling mechanism should follow Weber's Law all the way down to threshold. Hence  square-root law detectability poses a problem. Laming solves it by devising a second mechanism which introduces no latency  difference in positive and negative inputs. There is perfect symmetry. This second mechanism sits in front of the differential  coupler. At low intensities where shot noise breaks down into its discrete Poisson counts, half-wave rectification simply  wipes out the negative input. Hence a Poisson process at halfrate forms the input to the differential coupler which is in  effect transparent to it since there is nothing to differentiate. To take care of other difficulties, Laming views the  mechanism as having three distinct stages: a pair of "exact" (i.e., symmetrical) analyzers surrounding the "differential"  (asymmetrical) analyzer. Incremental changes at low intensity levels are detected primarily by the first stage; at medium and  high levels by the second stage. A third "exact" stage is required to produce Weber's Law all the way down to absolute  threshold in difference discrimination (non-contiguous stimuli).  3. THE UNITS PROBLEM IN AUDITION  The foregoing non-quantitative summary of Laming's position is intended to convey both the flavor of his argument and the  sophisticated character of his handling of zero-mean Gaussian noise as a detection device. It is, to say the least, a vast  improvement over the ideal-detection schemes that Laming wants to put behind us.  104 MCGILL AND TEICH  But advocative force, however necessary and attractive, sometimes causes him to soft pedal arguments on which other workers  experience difficulty. What follows is the reviewers' effort to illuminate some of those difficulties in greater detail.  Laming's commitment to amplitude as the proper measure of the stimulus in any sense modality, but particularly in audition,  has profound consequences that are not fully acknowledged. At first blush one is inclined to react with indifference. Who  cares? Power and amplitude determine each other. Laws stated in terms of one variable also determine their opposite numbers  completely. One of the reviewers (W.J.M.) recalls long arguments with L. Jeffress on this topic. Jeffress (1968) devised an  electronic model, not cited by Laming, resembling Laming's differential coupler closely although lacking the latter's  zero-mean characteristic. Jeffress, too, believed that sensation is an amplitude-like event. He took his commitment to the  extreme of rederiving the statistics of his device via the distribution of X (rather than Xz). The argument centered on  whether or not such precautions made any difference since each probability distribution determined the other completely.  It does make a difference. Consider the relation between peak amplitude and power in a sinusoid,  I = Az12,  where I is intensity or power and A is peak amplitude. Now differentiate and divide  both sides by A' +u = (21))' +a)/z:  dl dA 2i,+p)n  TO +p)/z- TV .  So, to a good approximation, if a small increment AI is negligible in relation to I,  AI AA  I(I+a)/z- Aa1  where the relation is one of proportionality.  Laws stated in terms of amplitude are not identical to laws stated in power units. The quantity /3 is a dummy variable  intended to reveal such differences. For example, suppose that over a range of amplitudes AA remains constant (see Laming's  Fig. 1.10). Set =0 and we see that A1 will follow a square-root law over the same range.  Similarly, if AI is nearly constant, as it is near absolute threshold, set Q = -1 and note that AA - A is constant over the  same region. As amplitude increases, AA decreases, and we see that negative masking may arise in part from the choice of  amplitude units.  Laming is fully aware of these problems. He chooses simply not to draw attention to them, leaving them to a footnote on p. 14.  A more interesting issue is why auditory research persists in reporting results in terms such as "AA in dB." The decibel scale  was devised so as to convert measurements to power units precisely to  A REVIEW OF SENSOR YANALYSIS BY DONALD LAMING 105  avoid such confusions, but 20 log AA is not a quantity expressing the spirit of the decibel scale. The answer, of course, is  that researchers generally measure voltages into earphones and then use the earphone calibration to convert to sound pressure  levels. Effects that seem linked to changing voltage may be severely attenuated or even wiped out by conversion to power units  (cf. negative masking). The creation of bastardized decibel measures is understandable and perfectly acceptable except when  one unit system is looked upon as right and the other wrong. In fact, they are transforms of each other.  The potential for confusion posed by the choice of a unit system is nowhere clearer than in noise intensity discrimination.  Miller's (1947) classical study (ignored by Laming) was reported in power units (AI in dB vs I in dB). It displays unit slope  (i.e., Weber's Law) over a range of 70-80 dB and then coasts smoothly toward zero (AI constant) below about + 10 dB re  absolute threshold. Subsequently Raab, Osman, and Rich (1963), extensively reported by Laming, reran Miller's experiment with  a cute gimmick. They produced noise increments in two ways: via changes in gain and via the addition of an independent noise  generator. Raab et al. (1963) argued that a gain change would produce correlated noise and should be reported in pressure  units whereas an independent noise should be plotted as additive power units. The so-called correlated noise showed the  negative masking effect. Independent noise did not.  The difficulty here is that the two methods must produce nearly the same noise and we appear to be looking at a units problem.  This was pointed out by Green (1966) and eventually straightened out. But in the meantime Miller's original article was  reprinted in the Luce, Bush, and Galanter (1963) handbook, and Miller (p. 134) attached a footnote acknowledging an error  that, in the opinion of these reviewers, he had not committed. To demonstrate the point consider the moment generating  function FY(O) of a narrowband Rayleigh noise  Fx(O) ==; I  1 - No O  where x is measured in power or energy units, No is the noise power per unit bandwith, and O is the variable in the moment  generating function domain. Changing the gain takes us to  FY(O)=1-(S,+ No) O,  and So is taken to be the increment in power in the so-called correlated case. Now suppose an independent noise generator adds  an energy increment x to the baseband noise. Hence  exp(xO/1- No O) G.<(O) = 1 - NOO  106 MC GILL AND TEICH  The result is clearly different, but x is a random variable. We proceed to integrate it out,  GC(B) - 1_ f e-xlsCexp(x9ll -N)1 dx  -JO So 1-No9  The two noise processes (gain change and independent generator) are identical in energy content. If detectable differences are  to be found, they will come via changes in the autocorrelation function, not in the way noise increments are formed.  Now of course this does not suggest that negative masking is wholly an artifact of the unit system. Repeated encounters with  such masking in the psychoacoustic literature and its plausible basis in auditory electrophysiology suggest that the  phenomenon is real. But the effects are small and, for practical purposes, dependent on the choice of amplitude units. If a  function exists mapping stimulus energy into impulse counts in the auditory nervous system, then we (the reviewers) prefer to  work in power units because they are additive. Laming is entitled to argue for a different view, but we think his book would  have benefited from a chapter devoted to the units problem in audition, and perhaps also in those areas of vision research  where light undergoes sinusoidal modulation.  4. SQUARE-LAW TRANSFORM  Perhaps Laming's most remarkable achievement in the book is his derivation of the square-law transform property of the  differential coupler. It enables Laming to predict the steep slopes of Green's (1960) psychometric functions in  noise-increment detection and to explain related phenomena in receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) plots. Moreover, the  square-law transform provides the principal basis for Laming's rejection of energy detection.  It is not altogether graceful for the reviewers to react to these unquestioned advances by saying that, of course, no one ever  took the energy-detection hypothesis literally in any case. Vision and audition span some 12-13 log units of intensity  sensitivity whereas the nervous system is hardput to range over as much as 3 log units. Even allowing for volume measurements  of activity rather than single fibers, there is just no way to avoid some compression when stimulus energy is mapped into  neural counting. So linear energy mapping was never supposed, even over the relatively short ranges spanned by the  psychometric function.  Moreover, Green's (1960) data depart from the ideal energy detector in two respects. They are shifted toward fewer degrees of  freedom (i.e., narrow bandwidths), and the psychometric functions are steeper. The big difficulty for the theorist is to  explain both of these effects simultaneously. The shift toward fewer degrees of freedom is easily handled by supposing the  listener's bandwidth to be less  A REVIEW OF SENSORY ANALYSIS BY DONALD LAMING 107  than ideal, but in that event the psychometric function will be flatter not steeper. Laming's differential coupler deals with  the steepened psychometric function but not with the degrees-of-freedom problem.  We have computed psychometric functions supposing that stimulus energy sets off a birth-death process in the auditory tract.  Even with this additional flexibility the steepness of the pure-noise psychometric function is unchanged from that found in  simple energy detection. But we also observed that any fractional power of the signal-to-noise ratios calculated from the  birth-death process shifts the psychometric function toward fewer degrees of freedom and makes it steeper. In other words both  requirements can be met by a mapping restriction on stimulus energy.  We hold no brief at this point for the birth-death process over the differential coupler. The intent of the remark is that  there may well be other ways of mapping energy into neural counting that will generate suitably steep psychometric functions  located in the place at which Green (1960) found them. It is a bit too early to declare the battle ended and to cast all forms  of energy detection into exterior darkness. But we agree with Laming that simple energy detection will not do the trick.  Finally, we remark that, precise as psychophysical data tend to be, they are insufficiently precise to meet the demands that  Laming's generalizations place upon them. We have already discussed the problem posed by negative masking in audition. To  these we would add that 2 or 3 log units are generally not enough to establish a square-root law trend. If you study the data  Laming produces to support his contention that a square-root law is a characteristic feature of low levels of incremental  detectability and if you bring to the task a suitably jaundiced eye, you find the argument a little fuzzy. Laming argues,  almost passionately, for more precise data in order to test his theoretical views. We certainly agree, but it may be that some  of these theoretical points turn on questions of such subtlety we may have to wait a long time before the data to settle them  become available. Scientific disputes, sad to say, are rarely settled by data.  We cannot close this review on a note in which we appear to cavil. Laming has written a very important book. He has breathed  fresh life into detection theory. Every serious experimental psychologist, every mathematical psychologist, will want to own  it not only for the pleasure of reading (and quarreling with) Laming's theoretical arguments but also for the treasure of  functional data he provides over the whole range of modern psychophysics. It is hard to imagine anyone else so competent to  handle so much so well. It is, when all else is said and done, a very remarkable achievement.  REFERENCES  BARLOW, H. (1957). Increment thresholds at low intensities considered as signal/noise disciminations. Journal of General  Physiology, 136, 469-488.  GREEN, D. M. (1960). Auditory detection of a noise signal. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 32, 121-131.  (Reprinted in $WETS (Ed.) op. cit. Chap. 27, pp. 523-547)  480/33/1-8  108 MCGILL AND TEICH  GREEN, D. M. (1966). Comments on an article by Raab, Osman, and Rich. Journal of the Acoustical Society o/ America, 39,  748-749.  HARRIS, J. D. (1950). The effect of sensation levels on intensive discrimination of noise. American Journal of Psychology, 63,  409-421.  HARRIS, J. D. (1963). Loudness discrimination. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, Monograph Suppl. 11.  JEFFRESS, L. (1968). Mathematical and electrical models of auditory detection. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,  44, 187-203.  KUFFLER, S. W., NICHOLLS, J. G.. AND MARTIN, A. R. (1984). From neuron to brain, 2nd ed. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Pub.  LUCE, R. D., BUSH, R., AND GALANTER, E. (Eds.) (1963). Readings in mathematical psychology, Vol. l. New York: Wiley.  MILLER, G. A. (1947). Sensitivity to changes in the intensity of white noise and its relation to masking and loudness. Journal  of the Acoustical Society of America, 19, 609-619. (Reprinted in LUCE, BUSH, & GALANTER Op. cit. pp. 119-134)  NACHMIAS, J., AND STEINMAN, R. M. (1963). Study of absolute visual detection by the rating-scale method. Journal of the  Optical Society of America, 53, 1206-1213.  RAAB, D., OSMAN, E., AND RICH, E. (1963). Effects of waveform correlation and signal duration on detection of noise bursts in  continuous noise. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 35, 1942-1946.  STEVENS, S. S., MORGAN, C. T., AND VOLKMANN, J. (1941). Theory of the neural quantum in the discrimination of loudness and  pitch. American Journal of Psychology, 54, 315-335.  SWETS, J. A. (Ed.) (1964). Signal Detection and Recognition by Human Observers. New York: Wiley.