10.1016/0022-2496(89)90003-5
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 33, 36-67 (1989)  Global Matching: A Comparison of the SAM, Minerva II, Matrix, and TODAM Models  MICHAEL S. HUMPHREYS, RAY PIKE, JOHN D. BAIN, AND GERALD TEHAN  University of Queensland  The pair recognition paradigm was chosen as a means to evaluate and compare different ways to implement a global matching  process in which the matches with all list items are combined into a single value. Simplified versions of the SAM, Minerva II,  Matrix, and TODAM models are shown to be specific instances of a more general model and are shown to share a parameter-free  prediction. This prediction is then shown to be unaffected by the inclusion of additional processes into the models such as  variable encoding, cue weights, forgetting, single item matches, context, and background memories. Furthermore, it is only  slightly affected by the formation of interpair associations. A test of the prediction using word pairs was inconclusive due  either to the use of a recall strategy or to a low level of interitem similarity. Ways to differentiate between the different  models and to test the global matching assumption rigorously are discussed. 1989 Academic Press, Inc.  As Roediger (1980) has pointed out the language we use to describe memory processes and our theories concerning them typically  embody assumptions about spatial storage and serial search. Thus, information is said to be stored in distinct memory stores,  at different locations within a store, as nodes in a network, etc., and at the time of test these stores or locations are  examined, the paths of the network are followed so that the information stored at each node may be examined, etc. There are  now, however, several psychological models that use a parallel global metaphor instead of a sequential, spatially distinct  metaphor (Anderson, Silverstein, Ritz, & Jones, 1977; Eich, 1982, 1985; Gillund & Shiffrin, 1984; Hintzman, 1984, 1986;  Humphreys, Bain, & Pike, in press; McClelland & Rumelhart, 1985; Murdock, 1982, 1985; Pike, 1984). In this paper we start the  process of comparing the different ways of implementing the parallel global metaphor. Our point of departure in this  enterprise is the pair recognition paradigm. This paradigm, with its two explicitly provided cues, clearly illustrates the  associative nature of these models in a way that single item recognition, even with an implicit second cue (context), does  not. In addition, pair recognition does not involve the response recovery or identification stage that greatly complicates the  modelling of recall.  The common ground for the models that we discuss can be characterized, for pair  This research was supported by a grant from the Australian Research Grants Scheme to the first three authors. Reprint requests  should be sent to M. Humphreys, Department of Psychology, University of Queensland, St. Lucia, Qld. 4067, Australia.  36  0022-2496/89 $3.00  Copyright (c) 1989 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  GLOBAL MATCHING 37  recognition at least, by what may be termed global matching. Suppose a subject has learned a list of pairs and a probe pair is  presented for recognition. The more conventional matching model (e.g., Flexser & Tulving, 1978) sees the ensuing process as  one of serial or parallel matching of the representation of the probe pair with each pair in memory. Each decision is based  upon the strength of a particular match. If no match exceeds threshold then a negative response ensues. In the global matching  process however the strengths of all matches are combined into a single value and the decision is based upon this composite  value. Thus for a positive probe the presence of the pair in memory will ensure that a relatively strong composite match  occurs, greater than would generally be the case for a negative probe. In the two forms of this basic model to be discussed,  the main structural difference lies in whether the associations or items in memory are considered separated from each other,  so that a multi-match process must occur, or whether all associations are summed together so that the match is made with a  composite association.  The two examples of a global matching model in which the items or associations are stored separately are Gillund and  Shiffrin's (1984) modification of the SAM model (Raaijmakers & Shiffrin, 1981) and Hintzman's (1984, 1986) Minerva II model.  The other class of global models, the distributed storage models, contains many specific examples (Anderson et al., 1977;  Eich, 1982, 1985; Humphreys, Bain, & Pike, in press; Knapp & Anderson, 1984; Murdock, 1982; Pike, 1984). Although differing in  psychological content, the distributed storage models can be divided into two classes on the basis of the mathematics  employed. Eich (1982, 1985) and Murdock (1982) represent an association as the convolution of two vectors, whereas Anderson et  al. (1977), Humphreys et al. (in press), Knapp and Anderson (1984), and Pike (1984) represent an association as the matrix  product of two vectors. We chose to compare a model based on convolutions (essentially Murdock's, 1982, TODAM model) with a  comparable model based on matrix products. Both of these models were in turn compared with the SAM and Minerva II models.  In the pair recognition paradigm subjects study pairs of words (A, B,, A2BZ, ..., AkBk) and are then asked to discriminate  between intact study pairs (A;B;) and other pairs. These other pairs consist of rearranged (AiB;), mixed (A;D or CB; where C  and D are new words), and new (CD) pairs. The subject's task is to decide for each test pair whether or not it is intact. To  facilitate comparison of the global models we begin with a simplified set of psychological ideas and procedures (a subset of  those presented by Gillund and Shiffrin, 1984; Hintzman, 1986; and Murdock, 1982). These ideas are then expressed in the  different mathematical forms specified by the models. The advantage of proceeding this way is that it unconfounds the  mathematical models from their psychological content. The disadvantage is that it does not embrace all the psychological  concepts used in conjunction with each model.  With all four models, predictions for the pair recognition paradigm depend on the expected matching strengths and the  variances for each of the four kinds of test pairs (intact, rearranged, mixed, and new). Murdock (1984) has published closed  form expressions for the TODAM model, and we provide these expressions for the  38 HUMPHREYS ET AL.  Matrix model in this paper. Closed form expressions for variances have not yet been published for the SAM and the Minerva II  models. Mathematical developments alone, however, will not be sufficient to permit easy comparisons between the models because  the psychological theory underlying the variance predictions also needs development in all four models. In the Minerva II,  TODAM, and Matrix models matching strength variances depend on a variety of assumptions about the memory vectors. In the  existing versions of these models these assumptions appear to have been made for mathematical convenience, not for their  psychological merit. Gillund and Shiffrin's (1984) introduction of variance into the SAM model seems equally arbitrary. In  addition any adequate theory must include background memories as it is clearly inappropriate to assume that the relevant list  is somehow totally isolated from all other memories (see Bain, Humphreys, Tehan, & Pike, 1988; Humphreys, Bain, & Pike, in  press). However, their inclusion would alter variance predictions and signal to noise ratios.  In order to avoid a situation in which between model comparisons would critically depend on what we believe to be the weakest  aspect of these models (namely the variance predictions), we decided to confine our comparisons to what we refer to as signal  strengths. The intact, rearranged, and mixed signal strengths are defined as the expected matching strengths for the  corresponding test pairs minus the expected matching strength for the new test pairs. Signal strengths can be scaled in terms  of new pair standard deviation units and we can, without loss of generality, set this standard deviation equal to one.' The  procedure for estimating signal strengths is a variation of the standard signal detection procedure and is discussed later.  When study and test pairs are randomly formed from a common pool of items the use of signal strength is particularly  appropriate for a global matching model. By subtracting the new pair matching strength from the intact, rearranged, and mixed  matching strengths most of the noise due to irrelevant list pairs is removed. Even more importantly background noise (prior  memories in and out of the experimental setting) is removed because the match with the preexisting memories is the same for  all test pairs. Thus when we restrict our analysis to signal strengths we are not forced to assume that list memories are  somehow isolated from all preexisting memories.  With our simplified psychological model it becomes obvious that all four mathematical approaches produce similar results. This  is demonstrated by rewriting the models as functions that relate study events to memories and cues to memories. We then can  solve the functions relating cues to study events and find that these functions are basically the same in all four models.  Although this structural similarity means that by using pair recognition data alone it will be almost  ` We are not assuming that the variances of the intact, rearranged, and mixed matching strengths are equal. When we scale in  terms of the standard deviation of the new pair matching strength we use the difference in matching strengths divided by the  standard deviation of the new pair matching strength. This quantity is estimated from the receiver operating characteristic  curve and the procedure is described under Results.  GLOBAL MATCHING 39  impossible to distinguish between comparable versions of these four models, it also leads to a model-free test of the global  matching assumption. That is, we are able to show that all four models predict that the signal strengths for rearranged and  mixed test pairs will be in a ratio of 2:1.  We then incorporate additional psychological processes into these models to see whether the structural similarity or the 2:1  ratio is altered. We are able to show that these relationships are not affected by (a) variable encoding, (b) differential  weights on cues, (c) faillures to learn and/or forgetting, (d) contextual associations, (e) background noise, (f) a relaxation  of the assumption that only intrapair associations are formed, and (g) a relaxation of the assumption that single item matches  do not contribute to the overall matching strength. The 2:1 ratio is, however, affected by the use of a recall strategy in  recognition (cf. Bain, 1979; Bain & Humphreys, 1988; Humphreys, 1978; Humphreys & Bain, 1983; Mandler, 1980). We review the  evidence for the use of such a strategy and present an experiment which shows that either subjects are recalling or there is  no difference in mean matching strengths among new, mixed, and rearranged pairs, only a difference in variances. Since both of  these alternatives prevent us from testing the 2:1 ratio, we discuss how this ratio might be tested in future research.  SAM  In the SAM model, when a subject studies a list of pairs AI BI, A2BZ, ..., AkB,, it is assumed that 2k separate entities  called images are stored, one for each item in the list. It is the strength of the association between cues and images which  contributes to the global matching strength, and in our simplified version of this model two associations are strengthened by  a study trial. One association is between an item and its image and we represent the strength of this association as S(A;, A;)  or S(B;, B;). The other association is the intrapair association and its strength is represented as S(A;, B;) or S(B;, A;)  where the first term within the parentheses refers to the cue and the second to the image. In addition to the associations  which are strengthened on the study trial (the full model contains context-to-item associations which are discussed later) it  is assumed that preexperimental associations exist between all the cues and list items. The strengths of these preexperimental  associations are represented as S(A;, A;), S(B;, Bj), S(A;, Bj), S(B;, Aj), S(C, Aj), and S(C Bj). Associations between cues  and preexperimental images are not included in the calculations. That is, it is assumed that preexisting images are excluded  without excluding preexisting associations.  To .recognize a single item in this model we would sum over all the associations between the test item and the 2k images in  memory. We will refer to this as a "single match." The possibility that the single match is involved in pair recognition will  be ignored until later. Instead, we assume that pair recognition depends only on what we refer to as the "joint match." The  joint match is based on the product of the associative strengths between the cues in the test pair and the images in  40 HUMPHREYS ET AL.  memory. Thus, if the test pair is (C, D) and A; was one of the items in the study list. the matching strength for that pair of  cues and that image is  match between cues and an image = S(C, At) S(D, A;). (1)  The global matching strength is the sum over all 2k of these "matches." In order to make the relationship between the SAM  model and the other models more transparent, we treat the pair of images which result from the presentation of a particular  study pair as the unit of summation rather than the individual images. The expression for the global match between an intact  test pair (Ai, Bj) and memory is shown in  k  intact matching strength= y [S(Aj, Aj) S(Bi, Aj) + S(Aj, Bj) S(Bi, Bj)]  = [S(A;, Ai) S(Bi, Ai)+S(Aj, Bj) S(Bi, Bi)]  k  + y [S(Aj, Aj) S(Bi, A;)+S(Aj, Bj) S(Bi, Bj) ]. (2) J#i  Note that in Eq. (2), [S(Ai, A;) S(Bi, A;)+S(A;, Bj) S(Bi, B,)] represents the match between the test pair and the two images  which resulted from studying that pair. We refer to this as a match between a test pair and the images from a study pair where  there are two items in common. There are also k - 1 matches of the form [S(Ai, Aj) S(Bi, Aj)+S(Ai, Bj) S(Bi, Bj)] where i 0j.  These matches are between the test pair and the two images which resulted from studying an unrelated pair.  test  When a rearranged pair (A,Bj) is matched against memory there are two matches with a pair of images which come from study  pairs with one word in common with the probe pair and k - 2 matches with a pair of images which come from study pairs with no  words in common with the probe pair,  rearranged matching strength = [S(Ai, Ai) S(Bj, A,) + S(Ai, Bj) S(Bj, B;)]  + [S(Aj, Aj) S(Bj, Aj)+S(Aj, Bj) S(Bj, Bj)]  k  + Y [S(Ai, A,) S(Bj, A,) + S(Ai, B,) S(Bj, B,)].  /0 ij (3)  When an old-new pair (AjC) is matched against memory there is one match with the pair of images from a study pair which has  one word in common with the probe pair and k - 1 matches with the images from study pairs which have no words in common,  GLOBAL MATCHING 41  old-new matching strength = [S(Ai, Ai) S(C, Ai) + S(Ai, B,) S(C, Bi) ]  k  + Y [S(Ai, A) S(C, A;)+S(Ai, B;) S(C, B;)] (4) J#i  The expression for the new-old matching strength is readily generalizable from the expression just given for old-new matching  strength.  When a new pair (CD) is matched against memory there are k matches between the probe cues and pairs of images from study pairs  where there are no words in common,  k  new matching strength = [S(C, Ai) S(D, Ai)+ S(C, Bi) S(D, Bi)]. (5)  A useful but somewhat imprecise parameterization for this model is shown in Table 1. In this table the expected values for  self strength (a), intrapair strength (b), and preexperimental strength (d) are substituted for the expressions used in Eqs.  (1)-(5). Then the mean matching strength for a new pair is subtracted from the mean matching strengths for intact, rearranged,  and mixed pairs. In order to justify this parameterization we need to assume (a) that all study and test pairs have been  randomly formed from the same pool of items, (b) that on average the strengths of the forward and backward associations are  equal, (c) that self strength is not dependent on the position within the pair, and (d) that within a pair self strength is  independent of intrapair strength. In presenting this parameterization of the SAM model we have enclosed specific expressions  in brackets. These bracketed expressions are the mappings produced by the SAM model between test and study  TABLE 1  Signal Strengths for the SAM, Minerva II, Matrix, and TODAM Models  Model  Test item SAM Minerva Matrix and TODAM  A; B; [2ab] - [2d2] [(2a)'] - [(2#)'] [a2] - [#Z]  AA 2[ad+bd]-2[2dz] 2[(a+#)']-2[(2p)'] 2[afi]-2[#']  A;D [ad+bd]-[2d2] [(a+P)']-[(2p)'] [a#]-[fl2]  Note. The expected matching strength for a pair of new words has been subtracted from the expected matching strenth for each  pair depicted. A and B represent old items, C and D new items. A;Bi is an intact test pair, A;B; is rearranged, and A;D is  mixed. For the SAM model, b equals the mean intrapair associative strength, d the mean preexisting associative strength, and a  the mean self strength. For the other models a equals the mean similarity of the vectors representing the same item on the  study and test occasions and P represents the mean similarity between a random pair of items. In general, b > d, a > d, and a  > ft. For each model the expressions which correspond to the parameters of the General Global Matching Model are enclosed in  brackets.  42 HUMPHREYS ET AL.  pairs and we refer to them as the parameters of the General Global Matching Model (GGMM). A discussion of this mapping is  deferred until after we have presented the details of the other models.  MINERVA II  In our simplified version of the Minerva 11 model for pair recognition, items are represented as n-element vectors. Hintzman  (1984, 1986) speculates about what the elements might represent (sensory features, abstract features, etc.). Although such  speculations may be important in adding psychological content to the mathematical structure we can ignore them for the purpose  of comparing the different ways of implementing the global matching metaphor. As with the SAM model we will represent list  items and distractors as upper case letters (e.g., A;, B;, C). The corresponding vectors will be represented by the  corresponding lower case letters (e.g., a;, b;, c). In this model subjects store associations not items or images  corresponding to items. Hintzman (1984, 1986) represents an association as a 2nelement vector in which the first n elements  represent the cue vector and the last n elements the target vector. The partitioned vector representing this association (a;:  b;) will be referred to as an associative vector and a separate associative vector is stored for every pair in the study list.'  In pair recognition, the two items in the test pair are combined into an associative vector and this associative vector is  matched against each associative vector in memory. The matching process can be represented as the dot product between the  probe vector and the associative vector in memory. In the Minerva II model, the dot product is then raised to the third power.  Thus, if the test pair is CD and the memory pair is AB, the matching strength would be [(c:d) - (a:b)]3. The  z Hintzman has indicated that the use of the vector (a,: b;) to represent the association occurred because he was modelling a  situation in which associations were being stored between two very different entities (e.g., face-name pairs) so that there  would be no overlap in features. In general he would prefer to represent the association as the sum of the two vectors  (Hintzman, personal communication). This makes virtually no difference to the mathematics, except that associations are  unidirectional in the former model and bidirectional in the latter model. That is, if the associative vector representing the  test pair is (b;: a,) and the associative vector that was stored is (a,: b,), the match is no greater than that between  randomly formed pairs. Although unidirectional associations may be useful in modelling serial learning, and some  paired-associate paradigms (e.g., Wollen, Fox, & Lowry, 1976), there are clearly many times when bidirectional associations  are required. In the Minerva 11 model and in the other unidirectional model which we consider, the Matrix model, this problem  can be overcome by storing both the forward and the backward associations or by matching the cues in the forward and backward  directions. We do not think that these solutions to the need for bidirectional associations necessarily contain any  psychological content. Thus in order to avoid the double notation needed to represent the two matches or the two associations  we will represent only the forward association in memory and we will assume that the ordering of the vectors in a test pair  will always match the ordering of the vectors in a memory pair.  GLOBAL MATCHING 43  global matching strength is the sum over all the study pairs of the individual matching strengths,  k  global matching strength = Y [(ai: bi). (aj: bj)]3. (6) j=1  The purpose of the exponent in this equation is to introduce nonlinearity into the model (Hintzman, personal communication)  and this feature plays a crucial role in the model. Hintzman (1984) shows, for example, how the use of an exponent can improve  recall. For pair recognition some form of nonlinearity, such as an exponent greater than one, is also required if the global  matching strength for an intact pair is to exceed the global matching strength for a rearranged pair.  In the Minerva 11 model, just as in the SAM model, the global matching strengths for intact, rearranged, mixed, and new pairs  are the sums of component matches where the test and memory pairs have two words in common, one word in common, or no words in  common,  k  intact matching strength = [(ai: bi) - (ai: bi)]3 + Y [(ai: bi) - (aj: bj)]3 (7)  rearranged matching strength = [(ai: bj) - (ai: bi)]3 + [(ai: bj) - (aj: bj)]3  k  + Y [(ai: bj) - (a,: br)]3 (8) 156 i. j  k  old-new matching strength= [(ai: c) - (ai: bi)]3+ I [(ai: c) - (aj: bj)]3 j#i  k  new matching strength= Y [(c: d) - (ai: bi)]3. (10) i=1  Note that the dot product between two associative vectors (e.g., (ai: bi) - (aj: bj)) can be rewritten as the dot product of  the cue vectors (ai - aj) plus the dot product of the target vectors (bi - bj). When we use vectors to represent items the dot  product between two vectors represents the similarity between the two items. The dot product of an item with itself represents  the similarity of an item with itself or more generally the similarity between how that item was encoded on the study and test  occasions. Thus all the expressions which represent a match where there are two words in common are the cubed sum of two self  similarities. Matches where there is one word in common are the cubed sum of a self similarity and an interitem similarity.  Matches where there are no words in common are the cubed sum of two interitem similarities. If we assume that (a) self and  interitem similarities do not depend on whether the item in question was presented as the first or second member of a study  pair and (b) for a given test pair (AiBi) and study pair (AjBj) the matches (ai - aj and bi - bj) are independent, then we can  write the expected values of the signal strength as a function of the expected values of the self matches (0c) and the  interitem matches (P). The resulting expressions are shown in Table 1 with the  44 HUMPHREYS ET AL.  expressions corresponding to the parameters of the GGMM (the mapping between test and study pairs) enclosed in brackets.'  THE MATRIX MODEL  As in the Minerva II model items are represented as vectors, and associations, not items, are stored. The association is  represented by the matrix product of a column vector with a row vector, the so-called "Hebbian" rule for association (e.g.,  Anderson et al., 1977; McClelland & Rumelhart, 1985). Thus, if the study pair is A,B;, the column vector ai and row vector b;  would produce a matrix (aib;) where row r is the vector b; multiplied by the value of the rth element in ai and where the  column c is the vector ai times the cth element in bi. An associative matrix is formed for each pair in the list and all of  these associative matrices are added together to form the memory., #. To recognize the pair A,B, the matrix which represents  the cue to target association (aib;) is matched against the memory #. This match is represented as the dot product of the two  matrices (aib',) --W. This dot product is the sum of the corresponding element-by-element products of the two matrices which  are of the same order.  Although a match with a composite memory appears very different from the separate matches envisioned in the SAM and Minerva II  models, the results are surprisingly similar. This arises because in the Matrix model the matching process proposed is  distributive over matrix addition. Thus the match with a composite memory can also be written as the sum over component  matches where there are two cues in common, one cue in common, and no cues in common,  k  intact matching strength = (aib',) (a;b;) + y i  (aib') - (a;b;) (11)  i#i  rearranged matching strength = (a;b,) - (aib;) + (aibj) - (a;b;)  k  + Y (aib;)-(arbi) (12) i#l,i  k  old-new matching strength = (aic') - (aib') + (ai c') (a;b;) (13) J#i  k  new matching strength = (cd) (a;b;). (14) ;=  ' Hintzman (1986) also divides the dot product between the cue vector and the memory vector by Nr (the number of corresponding  elements in which both are not zero). Since the vector elements in Minerva IT only take on values of -1, 0, and + l, this  correction can make a significant difference to the parameters in Table 1. We have omitted this aspect of Minerva II in order  to better illustrate the similarity between Minerva IT and the other models and because it only makes a difference when a  substantial number of vector elements are 0, which the other models do not assume. In addition, we use the parameterization of  the GGMM, not the parameterization depicted in Table 1 in deriving the predictions in this paper. The parameterization of the  GGMM corresponds to the expressions enclosed within brackets in Table 1 and is unaffected by the division of the component  matches by Nr.  GLOBAL MATCHING 45  The assumptions that are needed in order to write the expected value of the matching strengths in terms of the expected values  of the match of a vector with itself (a) and of a vector with another vector (fl) are (a) self and interitem similarities do  not depend on whether the item in question was presented as the first or second member of a study pair and (b) for a given  test and study pair the match of the first member is independent of the match of the second member. To see how this is done,  note that every term in Eqs. (11) through (14) has the form (a;b;) - (a;b;), where a;b; and a;b; are matrices and the dot  product between the two matrices is a scalar. These terms can be rewritten as (a; - aj)(b; - b;) where the results of the dot  products a; - a; and b; - b; are scalars whose product is also a scalar (see Pike, 1984). All of the component matches thus  have terms which represent the similarity of the same item on the study and test occasions and/or the similarity between two  different items. The expected signal strengths are shown in Table 1 with the parameters of the GGMM enclosed in brackets.  TODAM  The TODAM model like the Minerva 11 and Matrix models stores associations. These are represented as the convolution between  two item vectors. For two vectors a and b each with elements ap and bg (p, g = 1, ..., n), the convolution of a with b (a*b)  may be written as a vector in which the jth element consists of the sums of all combinations ap bg such that p + g = j + 1.  Thus the jth element is a, b; + a2 b; _ , + - - - + aj b, so that j will range from 1 to 2n - 1. TODAM then conceives of the k  convoluted vectors for pairwise association as being superimposed so that the total memory is  k  Il= Y a; * b;. (15) i=1  Note that in the complete TODAM model single unit vectors and a forgetting parameter (which decreases strength in an  exponential fashion) may also be present. Pair recognition is accomplished by matching the convolution of the vectors  representing the cue pair against memory. This is described as the vector dot product  (a,*b;)-V=(a;*b;)-(a,*b,)+(a;*bi)-(a2*b2)+...+(a,*bi).(ak*bk). (16)  The fact that the matching operation is distributive over vector addition, the symmetry of the convolution operation (i.e.,  a;*b; = b;*a,), and the random formation of study and test pairs jointly ensure that matching strengths in the TODAM model can  also be written as a function of component matching strengths (the match of a convolution of two cues with the convolution of  a study pair).  Thus, just as in the other three models, matching strengths are sums of com-  46 HUMPHREYS ET AL.  ponent matches where there are two words in common, one word in common, and no words in common,  k  intact matching strength = (ai * bi) - (ai * bi) + Y (ai * bi) - (a; * b;) (17) ioi  rearranged matching strength = [(ai * b;) - (ai * bi) + (ai * b;) - (a; * b;)]  k  + Y (ai * bi) - (ar * br) (18) 1 i. i  k  old-new matching strength = (ai * c) . (ai * bi) + Y (ai * c) - (aj * b;) (19) J#i  k  new matching strength = Y (c * d)(ai * bi). (20) i=i  To produce a parameterization of the TODAM model similar to those for the other models is relatively simple, when we are  concerned with signal strengths. This is because it is the case where (a * b) - (c * d) = (a - c)(b - d) + residual (see Pike,  1984) where the residual matching strength consists of sums of products of vector elements of the form a,cgb9dh where r :Ag  and q :Ah. Assuming independence of vector elements these terms can, therefore, produce only "noise" strengths. The expected  value of the residual is the same regardless of whether or not c = a or b = d or both are the case. Thus these residual terms  will drop out in a calculation of signal strengths, giving results identical to those of the Matrix model. Differences in the  residual component will occur only if we consider convolutions of vectors with themselves which we are not doing (but see  Eich, 1985). Also, although the signal strengths are identical in the two models, estimates of standard signal detection  parameters such as d or du would not be identical due to variance differences (see note in Appendix).  STRUCTURAL SIMILARITY  Signal Strengths  These four models differ in their assumptions about the nature of the memory trace. The SAM model stores images of individual  items whereas the other three store associations between items. The Minerva 11 model stores these associations separately  whereas the TODAM and Matrix models store them as part of a composite memory. The TODAM model represents an association as a  convolution of two vectors and the Matrix model represents an association as the matrix product of two vectors. These models  also differ in their descriptions of how cues and memory interact to determine matching strengths. The SAM model uses the  products of associative strengths, the Minerva 11 model matches individual memories, and the TODAM and Matrix models match a  composite memory. Nevertheless, matching strengths for all four models can be written in terms of a  GLOBAL MATCHING 47  function relating test pairs to study pairs. This function takes on one value (T2) if a test pair and a study pair have two  items in common, a second value (T,) if they have one item in common, and a third value (TO) if they have no items in common.  In all four models this parameterization requires less restrictive assumptions than does the parameterization used in Table 1.  That is, a single value for all study and test pairs which have no words in common follows directly from the assumption that  all pairs are randomly formed from a common pool of items. In the SAM model a single value for all study and test pairs with  one word in common follows from the randomization assumption plus the assumptions that self strength is he same for the two  positions within a pair and that forward and backward associations are, on average, equal. In the Minerva 11 and Matrix models  we must assume that forward and backward associations are, on average, equal and that the match of an item with itself does  not depend on whether the item occurred in the first or second position of the study pair. Only the latter assumption is  required for the TODAM model because it assumes that associations are bidirectional. These assumptions may not generally hold,  although they are clearly closely approximated in some data sets. For example, Bain and Humphreys (1988) reported finding at  best small differences between the recognition of the first and second member of study pairs, between the recognition of  old-new and new-old pairs, and between forward and backward recall. Such findings, in any data set, would justify this  parameterization for all four models. Such findings are also necessary to justify the parameterizations used in Table 1 but  they are not sufficient. Assumptions about the independence of the within-pair parameters are also required, but it is easy to  imagine situations (e.g., item characteristics of one pair member affecting the learning of the other) where the independence  assumptions would not hold.  However, given the assumptions listed above, we can thus write the expected matching strengths for intact, rearranged, mixed,  and new pairs as linear combinations of T2, T,, and TO,  intact matching strength = T2 + (k - 1) TO (21)  rearranged matching strength = 2T, + (k - 2) TO (22)  mixed matching strenth = T, + (k - 1) TO (23)  new matching strength = kTO. (24)  As we did in Table 1, it is generally more useful to set the standard deviation of the new matching strength equal to 1 and  express the differences between the mean matching strengths in terms of new matching strength standard deviation units,  intact signal strength = T2 - TO (25)  rearranged signal strength = 2(T, - TO) (26)  mixed signal strenth = T, - TO. (27)  480/33/1-4  48 HUMPHREYS ET AL.  We refer to the model outlined in Eqs. (1)-(7) as the General Global Matching Model although it should be emphasized that it  is merely a summary of the functional relationships between test pairs and study pairs that is implied by our simplified  versions of the SAM, Minerva II, Matrix, and TODAM models. Under reasonable restrictions on their parameters (a, b > d and TZ  > Tt > To, T2 - To > 2(Tt - To)) the SAM and GGMM models are isomorphic with respect to signal strengths. That is for all  permissible values for the SAM model there exists a permissible set of GGMM parameters that produces the same signal strengths  and vice versa. The other models, however, represent specific restrictions on the parameter space of the GGMM. That is, for  all a, P (a > # > 0) there exist GGMM parameters which produce the same signal strengths as those produced by a and Q but  there exist permissible sets of GGMM parameters which produce signal strengths that cannot be duplicated by permissible values  of a and l. With the restriction that a = b, the SAM model is isomorphic, with respect to signal strengths, to the Matrix and  TODAM models. Furthermore, Minerva 11 is very similar to these other models for reasonable signal strengths. For example, the  ratio of intact and old-new signal strengths ranges from 8 to 2 in the Minerva model and from infinity to 2 in the other  models.'  Variances  In all four models the variances of the matching strengths can also be conceptualized as arising from variances and  covariances of individual matches. In the SAM model the individual matches are with the pair of images arising from a  particular study pair and in the other three models it is with the association (an associative vector, the convolution, or  matrix product of two vectors). However, we can ignore the specifics of the proposed memorial representation and write  variances and covariances as functions of specific combinations of test and study pairs. To illustrate this, we change our  notation since here it is convenient to vary the study pairs leaving the test pair constant. Thus the test pair will be  represented as AB and the study pairs as AB, AD, CB, and CD. The subscripts s, t refer to different study pairs. We represent  the match between a test and study pair as (AB) m(CB) and we define the following variances and covariances,  vo = Var[AB) m(CD)] vt =Var[(AB) m(AD)] Var[(AB) m(CB)] vZ = Var[(AB) m(AB)] co=Cov[(AB) m(C,D,), (AB) m(CLD,)]  More generally the upper bound on signal strengths for the Minerva 11 model is 2' where A is the exponent to which the  component matches are raised.  GLOBAL MATCHING 49  c, =Cov[(AB) m(ADS), (AB) m(C,Dt)] Cov[(AB) m(C,B), (AB) m(CtDt)] c2 = Cov[(AB) m(AB), (AB) m(CD)] Cov[(AB) m(AD), (AB) m(CB)].  The variances for intact, rearranged, mixed, and new matching strengths in terms Of vo, v,, v2, co, c,, and c2 are given in  Var(intact)=v2+(k-1) v2(k-1) c2+(k-1)(k-2)co (28)  Var(rearranged)=2v,+(k-2)vo+2c2+4(k-2) c,+(k-2)(k-3)co (29)  Var(mixed)=v,+(k-1)vo+2(k-1) c,+(k-1)(k-2)co (30)  Var(new) = kvo + k(k - 1) co. (31)  To illustrate this procedure, in the Appendix we show how to calculate vo, v,, v2, co, c,, and c2 using the Matrix model and  we provide some numerical examples. We also show how variance components published by Murdock (1985) for the TODAM model can  be used to calculate these variances. A difference between the Matrix and TODAM models in the relative size of these variances  emerges when # is 0 or near 0. The implications of this difference will be discussed later. Analytical solutions to the  variances or variance components have not yet been published for the SAM and Minerva 11 models so we have not been able to  determine whether they make sufficiently different predictions about match strength variances to be testable.  Our conclusion from this comparison of the SAM, Minerva 11, Matrix, and TODAM models is that with respect to signal strengths,  it is almost impossible to distinguish between these models. With respect to variances there is some room to discriminate (the  Matrix and TODAM models are compared later) but both the mathematical and the psychological theories need development. On the  other hand, it does seem possible to test the global matching assumption common to all four models because they all predict  that the ratio of rearranged to mixed signal strengths is 2:1. However, before we can confidently conclude that this is indeed  a powerful test of the global matching assumption, we need to see if it still holds when more adequate versions of these  models are considered.  Does the 2:1 Ratio Hold in More Adequate Models?  Variable Encoding  Although the extent to which it occurs has been overestimated, there are undoubtedly occasions in which the study and test  encodings of an item differ (cf. Bain & Humphreys, 1988; Humphreys & Bain, 1983; Underwood & Humphreys, 1979). Furthermore,  this effect depends on whether the item is tested in an intact or in  SO HUMPHREYS ET AL.  some other pair. In the SAM model the possibility of variable encoding is accommodated with a match parameter which in effect  reduces the self strength (a) and the interitem strength (b). In the other three models a already represents the match between  study and test encodings of the same item so a could be allowed to vary between types of test pairs.  Thus all four models have a mechanism to change parameter values between intact and other test pairs. However, there is no  reason to believe that a randomly chosen old word would produce a different amount or kind of meaning change than a randomly  chosen new word. Thus the parameter values should be the same in rearranged and mixed pairs. Empirical evidence supporting  this assumption also comes from studies in which subjects are asked to recognize individual words in test pairs. Bain and  Humphreys (1988) reviewed results from several studies which found at best very small differences between the Hit Rates in  rearranged and mixed pairs and the False Alarm Rates in mixed and new pairs. With no differences between the parameter values  in rearranged and mixed pairs the three-parameter solution of the GGMM will still hold as will the 2:1 ratio.  Cue Weights  Gillund and Shiffrin (1984) incorporated cue weights into the SAM model in order to prevent pair recognition from becoming too  much better than single item recognition. That is, as the number of cues increases, accuracy would increase unless the size of  the weight on each cue (an exponent less than one) decreases. In addition to depending on the number of cues, these weights  also depend on the type of cue (e.g., context or item) and they could presumably depend on the order in which the cues are  presented (e.g., first or second). The latter could be used to produce a difference in the recognition of old-new and new-old  pairs. If we found such an effect the three-parameter GGMM model would be inadequate because not all matches with one item in  common would be equal. This, however, would not affect the basic structure or the 2:1 ratio. To see this assign one value  (Tla) to the match with an old-new pair (e.g., (AD) m(AB)) and a second value rlb to the match with a new-old pair (CB)  m(AB)). The signal strength for a rearranged pair is Tla+Tlb-2TO. The signal strength for a mixed pair, averaging over old-new  and new-old pairs, is 2(T la - TO) + z(Tlb - TO) = z(Tla + Tlb - 2TO). As long as cue weights depend on properties of the cues  alone (number, type, and position) and not on properties of the memory trace, the basic structure of the GGMM, which is a  mapping between test and study pairs, is preserved as is the 2:1 ratio.  Forgetting and Storage Failures  Both Hintzman (1986) and Murdock (1982) assumed forgetting processes in addition to the interference produced by other list  items. These forgetting processes weaken older associations relative to younger associations. The consequence for these models  is that when a rearranged pair (AB) is tested, the match with the older of the two study pairs (AD or CB) will be weaker than  the match with the more recent study pair. However, one-half of the mixed pairs match with an older study  GLOBAL MATCHING 51  pair and one-half match with a more recent pair so the matching strengths for rearranged pairs is still twice the average  matching strength of mixed pairs (the proof is the same as that for different matching strengths for new-old and oldnew  pairs). The same conclusion applies if we assume that with probability p an individual study pair is simply not learned. Here  we assume that the total memory after studying the list consists of k(1 -p) associations or image pairs so that the new pair  matching strength is k(1 - p) TO. The rearranged and mixed matching strengths are shown in  rearranged matching strength =p2[(k(1 -p) To] +2p(1 -p)[T 1 + (k(1 -p) - 1),r,] + (1 -P)(1 -P)[2T 1 + (k(1 -P) - 2) To]  =2(1 -P)(T1 -TO)+k(1 -P) To (32) mixed matching strength = p[k(1 -P) TO] + (1 -p) [T 1 + (k(1 -P) - 1) To]  = (1 -P)(T1 -To)+k(1 -P) To. (33)  When the new pair matching strength is subtracted from the rearranged and mixed matching strength the results are  2(1-p)(T1-TO) and (1-P)(T1-TO), respectively. The 2:1 ratio is preserved.  Interpair Associations  We have assumed that in the instructions subjects have been encouraged to form intrapair not interpair associations.  Nevertheless, it is possible that some interpair associations are formed. There are several ways to structure the occurrence  of interpair associations in terms of probability measures. However, the detail of any is not necessary in considering the  ratio of recognition strengths for rearranged to mixed (new-old, old-new) cue pairs.  We assume that all interpair associations are added to the original list in memory and that the ordering of the two items in  the pair presents no problem (e.g., in the matrix model the interpair associations a;a; and a;a; are both in memory).  Consider first the old-new cue. The pair a;c will be positively matched with a;b; and all interpair associations of the form  a;bj and a;aj. Similarly the new-old pair cbj will be positively matched with ajbj and all associations of the form a;bj and  bib;. In each case a single-item match occurs, with strength T1. All other match strengths are To. That is, if there is a  total of t associations in memory and s pairs are matched with strength T 1 then t - s are matched with strength TO. Also, a  new-new cue pair will match memory with strength tro. Thus the signal strength for a new-old pair is  ST1 +(t-S) To -tTO=S(T1-TO).  (34)  The rearranged pair a; b; will be positively matched with all of the above cases, i.e., a;b;, a;b; and associations of the  form aibk, akb;, aiak, and bkb;. Each of these single-item match strengths is also T1. That is, for each conceivable match in  an  52 HUMPHREYS ET AL.  old-new (or new-old) pair there are apparently two for a rearranged pair. This results in a signal strength of 2s(T, -'r0).  However, included in the matching of the rearranged pair a;b; is the possibility of a match with itself, a;bj, as an interpair  association. This is, of course, a match of both items simultaneously and thus has a strength T2, instead of twice T, were the  two items in the rearranged pair considered separately. Also, this means that the total number of positive matches in this  case is not 2s but 2s - 1. Thus the signal strength for a rearranged pair in this case is  TZ+(2s-2)T,+(t-2s +1) To -tTo=2s(T,-TO)+T2-2T,+To. (35)  Thus the expected value of the signal strength for a rearranged pair is  p(2s(T, - TO) + T2 - 2T, + TO) + (1 -p) 2s(T, - TO)  = 2s(T i - To) +P(T2 - 2T, - To), (36)  where p is the probability of the occurrence of a;b; in memory.  It is clear that p will be small in almost all experimental conditions. Only when the study list is small and the probability  of interpair associations is high will it be substantial. Also, in all models we consider that 'r2 will be larger than 2T, -  To So the value of the ratio will be somewhat greater than 2:1. Thus the possibility of interpair associations does modify the  2:1 ratio, but under most experimental conditions the change will not be detectable.  Single Matches  We have assumed that pair recognition decisions are uninfluenced by matches involving the individual words in a test pair. In  relaxing this assumption we distinguish between two situations. The first is a sequential decision strategy (cf. Humphreys,  1976). Here the subject would first try to recognize the test pair using a joint match (the pair recognition process we have  described for each of the four models). If the joint match did not exceed criterion, then the subject might still say that the  pair was intact if both items in the pair were recognizable (in all four models it is possible to match individual items  against memory). The use of such a strategy should be controllable via instructions and as we will discuss later, we think its  use should be detectable in confidence ratings.  The other way a single-match process might occur is if the single match contributed to the overall matching strength (cf.  Clark & Shiffrin, 1987). Such a process could be uncontrollable by instructions but it would still preserve the 2:1 ratio. To  see this we let 7r, be the expected value of a match between a single cue and all the memories resulting from the presentation  of a pair that contained that cue and 7ro be the expected value of a match between a cue and all the memories resulting from a  study pair which did not contain that cue. The matching strengths for rearranged, mixed, and new pairs can thus be written as  a linear combination  GLOBAL MATCHING 53  of the expected values for the joint matches (Tt and To) and the single matches (7rt and n4),  rearranged matching strength = 2T, + (k - 2) To + 2n t + (2k - 2) no (37)  mixed matching strength = T t + (k - 1) To + 7E, + (2k - 1) no (38)  new matching strength = kTo + 2k7ro. (39) Subtraction of the new pair strength from the rearranged and mixed strengths again  yields the 2:1 ratio.  Context  As Bain et al. (1988) have argued, it is clearly inadequate simply to assume that list memories are somehow isolated from all  other memories. A more adequate model must specify some mechanism to achieve the needed degree of isolation. In both the SAM  model (Gillund & Shiffrin, 1984; Raaijmakers & Shiffrin, 1981) and the Matrix model (Humphreys et al., in press)  context-to-item associations have been proposed as the mechanism which isolates current memories from preexisting memories. We  will first show how context is incorporated into the SAM model and then show how the same result (the same mapping from test  pairs to target pairs) can be achieved with the other models. We then consider an alternative way to incorporate context into  the Minerva 11, TODAM, and Matrix models. This version also produces a common functional relationship between test and study  pairs and indeed both versions are subsumed under the GGMM.  If the pair A;B; is studied in context X for the SAM model it is assumed that two context-to-item associations, S(XA;) and  S(XB;), are formed in addition to the self associations, S(A;A,) and S(B;B;), and the intrapair associations, S(A;B;) and  S(B;A;). If the test pair is A;C the matching strength summed over the two images resulting from the study pair A; B, is given  in  S(X, A;) S(A;, A;) S(C, A,)=xad +S(X, B;) S(A;, B;) S(C, B;)=xbd = x(ad + bd). (40)  In Eq. (40), x represents the strength of the context-to-item association (this will depend on the similarity of the study and  test contexts) and the result is simply x times the expression obtaining without context. This is a general result as the  introduction of context to the SAM model simply results in the multiplication of the signal strengths in Table 1 by a  constant.' Thus, the model with context incorporated is also subsumed under the GGMM and the 2:1 ratio is not affected.  ' Gillund and Shiffrin (1984) also assume that context serves to totally isolate the list memories from all preexisting  memories. In the computation of signal strengths, however, background memories drop out so in this discussion we do not assume  that list memories are totally isolated from background memories.  54 HUMPHREYS ET AL.  To achieve the same result with the other models we must store a three-way association.' In the Minerva II model, if the pair  A;Bj is studied in context X the associative vector would be (x: aj: bj) (where x is the context vector). If the test pair is  A;C the vector (x: a;: c) is matched against the memory vector (x: a;: bj),  [(x: a;: c) - (x: aj: b,)]3 = [x -x+a; - a,+ c -bj]3. (41)  If we let X be the expected value of a match between the study and the test contexts and we substitute the expected values for  the expressions in Eq. (41) the result is (X + a + #)3. The constant X has been added to the result obtaining without context  and then the sum is cubed. This result holds generally for the expressions in Table 1. Adding context in this fashion to the  Minerva 11 model also results in a model which is subsumed under the GGMM and the 2:1 ratio is not affected.  In the Matrix model we can represent a 3-way association as the 3-dimensional array xa;b; where b;' represents the repetition  of the matrix xa; in an orthogonal dimension, each xa; being multiplied by successive elements of the vector bj. The arrays  representing these 3-way associations are added together to form a composite memory which is also a 3-dimensional array. To  recognize a pair AjC in context X the array xa; c;' is matched against .M by forming the sum of the corresponding  element-by-element products (see Pike, 1984). This match with a composite memory can also be written as a sum over the matches  of the arrays formed by the study pairs with the array formed by the test cues. The match where the study and test pair have  one word in common is shown in  (xa; c;') - (xa; b,'') = (x -x)(aj - aj)(c - bi) = Xaf. (42)  The result is that the expression obtaining without context is multiplied by X. This result also holds for the other  expressions in Table 1 so this version of the Matrix model also is subsumed under the GGMM and does not affect the 2:1 ratio.  In the TODAM model we can represent a 3-way association as the 3-way convolution x * a; * bj. These 3-way convolutions are  added together to form the memory vector /#. To recognize a pair A; C in context X the vector x * aj * b; is matched against  V. The match where the study and test pairs have one word in common is shown in  (x * a; * c) - (x * a; * bj) = (x -x)(a; - a;)(c - bi) + residual  = xuf + residual. (43)  The residual component is the same for all the component matches so it drops out of the expressions for signal strengths. Thus  with respect to signal strengths the  s As we will show the results for pair recognition are very similar in the Minerva 11, TODAM, and Matrix models regardless of  whether we store 3-way or 2-way associations. However, models with only 2-way associations would make very different  predictions from those of the SAM model in cued recall (see Humphreys et al., in press).  GLOBAL MATCHING SS  TODAM and Matrix models with context added are still isomorphic when context is included.  With the Minerva II, Matrix, and TODAM models it is also possible to incorporate context by only storing 2-way associations.  That is, if the pair A;Bi is studied in context X, two context-to-item associations and the interitem association could be  stored.' Then when a test pair is presented the three associations derivable from the test pair would be formed and matched  against memory. In all three models we can conceptualize this match for each study pair as the sum over nine component  matches. That is, the three associations formed from the test pair are matched against each of the three associations formed  from the study pair. In all three models the sum over these nine component matches has one value when the study and test pairs  have two items in common, a second value when they have one item in common (the probabilities of recognizing old-new and  new-old pairs must be equal), and a third value when they have no items in common. Thus when context is incorporated in a  pairwise fashion the resulting models are also subsumed under the GGMM and the 2:1 ratio is preserved.  Calculating Signl Strengths: Preliminaries to Testing the 2:1 Ratio  To our knowledge the only pair recognition studies which have involved rearranged and mixed pairs in addition to intact and  new pairs have been reported by Bain and Humphreys (1988), Clark and Shiffrin (1987), and Humphreys (1976). None used a  confidence rating task, so signal strengths were not available. In addition the differences in intact judgments between  rearranged and mixed pairs found by Bain and Humphreys (1988) were so small that it looked as if it would be very difficult to  reliably estimate the ratio of their signal strengths.$ It seemed, however, as if subjects were simply being very conservative  in making their intact/nonintact decisions so that there was little apparent discrimination between rearranged and mixed pairs  (a floor effect). A confidence rating task was used in the following experiment in the expectation that it would alleviate any  floor effect due  In the Matrix and TODAM models an essentially equivalent result can be obtained by appending the context vector to the end of  the item vectors or by adding the context vector to the cue vector. Thus to learn AB in context X the association (matrix  product or convolution) could be formed between (a: x) and (b: x) or between (a+x) and (b+x). What all of these versions have  in common can be succinctly expressed in terms of the parameterization of Table l. In the 2-way models (separate  context-toitem and interitem associations, appending context to the end of the cue vector, or adding context to the cue  vector) the item similarities a and the contextual similarities X add. In contrast, in the 3-way model the item and contextual  similarities multiply. In the Minerva II model, appending a context vector to the end of the associative vector (a, b, x) and  adding a context vector to the cue vectors (a+x, b+x) both produce a 3-way model. That is, cross product terms involving both  a and X are produced when the match is taken to a third power.  e Clark and Shiffrin (1987) obtained larger differences among rearranged, mixed, and new pairs than did Bain and Humphreys  (1988). This occurred in spite of the fact that the level of discriminability between intact and rearranged pairs in their  study was not nearly as large as it was in the Bain and Humphreys data. Since Clark and Shiffrin's subjects made many  different kinds of judgments over the course of the experimental session, we were concerned that they might have been basing  their intact judgments, in part, on whether they recognized the individual words in a pair.  56 HUMPHREYS ET AL.  to conservative criterion placement. This experiment showed, however, that the lack of discrimination between rearranged and  mixed pairs was due to a more fundamental problem. The results are presented because they illustrate the procedures involved  in estimating signal strengths and they provide some pointers as to how the 2:1 ratio might be tested.  METHOD  Subjects  Twenty-five introductory psychology students participated in the experiment for course credit. The students were tested in  small groups of two to five.  Materials  One of the four sets of materials used by Bain and Humphreys (in press, Experiment 1) formed the study and recognition lists  in this experiment. In the original experiment four recognition lists of 80 pairs of nouns were constructed. The items were  randomly sampled from a 224-item word pool, in which all items had a Thorndike-Lorge frequency of at least 20 per million and  a concreteness and imagery rating of 6 or higher in the Paivio, Yuille, and Madigan (1968) or the Friendly, Franklin, Hoffman,  and Rubin (1982) norms.  Each recognition list formed the basis for constructing five study lists, each containing 80 pairs. Sixteen of the eighty  pairs from the recognition list were transferred intact (thus functioning as intact pairs on the recognition test). For  another 16 pairs both the left and the right hand items were paired with new items from the word pool to produce 32 study  pairs (thus functioning as rearranged pairs on the recognition test). For another 16 pairs, the right hand item of a pair was  replaced by a new item (thus functioning as an old-new test item). The left hand item was replaced by a new word on a further  16 pairs (new-old test item). Finally neither word from the final 16 pairs appeared on the study list (new-new test item).  To counterbalance possible item effects, five study lists were constructed such that each recognition pair served in all five  recognition functions (intact, rearranged, old-new, new-old, new-new) across the five lists. The order of pair presentation  was randomly permuted for each list.  Procedure  The study lists were presented in booklet form with 20 pairs on each of four pages. Subjects were instructed that they had 10  sec to study each pair and that this 10 sec should be used in rehearsing the two words of the pair together. This corresponds  to the joint rehearsal condition used by Bain and Humphreys (1988, Experiment 1). Timing was controlled by means of an audio  cassette on which a 1000-Hz tone lasting 0.5 sec was sounded every 10 sec. Subjects were instructed to start rehearsing the  first pair as soon as the first tone sounded and to continue  GLOBAL MATCHING 57  rehearsing until the next tone sounded when they should move to the next pair and start rehearsing it, and so on. An  additional 0.5 sec. was allowed at the end of a page so that the subjects could turn the page over and begin rehearsing.  At the completion of the study list the recognition list was immediately presented. The recognition test was also presented in  a 4-page booklet with 20 items per page. The instructions informed subjects about the various alterations made to the study  pairs and told them that their task was to make a judgment on how confident they were that a test pair was an intact study  pair. They made their confidence judgment using a 4-point scale. Subjects were instructed to circle a 1 if they were  "absolutely confident that it is a study pair," circle a 2 if they thought it was "likely to be a study pair," circle a 3 if  they thought it was "unlikely to be a study pair," and circle a 4 if they were "absolutely confident it was not a study pair."  Nine minutes were allocated to do the test with the experimenter indicating when each minute had elapsed.  RESULTS  In analyzing these data we started with the assumption that the matching strengths for each of the four types of test pairs  (intact, rearranged, mixed, and new) are normally distributed with possibly different means and variances.' We also assumed  that in making their decisions, subjects adopted three different criteria. The stringent criterion defines the boundary  between a response of one and a response of two, the intermediate criterion defines the boundary between a response of two and  a response of three, and the lenient criterion defines the boundary between a response of three and a response of four. With  these assumptions we can construct a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve to compare any two types of test pairs  (e.g., intact vs mixed, rearranged vs new). To do this, we calculate for each type of test pair and for each subject the  cumulative probability of being that confident or more confident in the intactness of the test pair. Thus for each type of  test pair, we have the probability that a confidence rating of one was used, the probability that a two or a one was used, and  the probability that a three, two, or a one was used. The mean cumulative probability and the standard error of the mean are  given in Table 2 for each type of test pair.  Looking at the highest confidence intact response alone, the results are very similar to those reported by Bain and Humphreys  (1988, Experiments 3A, 3B, and 3C). That is, subjects clearly discriminated between intact and all other test pairs and  although the differences were small, subjects also discriminated between rearranged, mixed, and new pairs (the differences  between the means are three to four times the standard errors of the means). When we plot the cumulative  9 A normal distribution is plausible because of the large number of independent or relatively independent component matches  which enter into the overall match. In addition it is testable. If the variances are normal the plot of z(FAR) against z(HR)  will be linear.  58  HUMPHREYS ET AL.  TABLE 2  Cumulative Probability of Being Confident in the Intactness of a Study Pair   Cumulative ratings    Type of       test pair 1 1+2 1+2+3 Ax Intact 0.60(0.06) 0.76(0.05) 0.88(0.04) 0.87(0.03) 1.67(0.32)  Rearranged 0.10(0.02) 0.24(0.04) 0.43(0.06) 0.51(0.04) -  Mixed 0.04(0.01) 0.17(0.03) 0.46(0.05) 0.44(0.02) -  New 0.01(0.01) 0.09(0.02) 0.51(0.06)  -  Slope  0.80(0.14)  Note. The area (A) under the ROC curve (the new pairs represent the noise trials) and the x intercept and slope from a graph  of the z scores for the mixed pairs against the z scores for the intact pairs. The x intercept is an estimate of (p,-pm)/v,  and the slope is an estimate of an,,/Q,. For each statistic the standard error of the mean is shown in parentheses.  "These results are based on the data of the 15 subjects who had two or more points on the ROC curve with nonzero and nonunity  values.  probabilities for the new pairs against the corresponding probabilities for the intact, rearranged, and mixed pairs and  compute the areas (A) under these ROC curves, a somewhat different picture emerges. The estimates of A (see Table 2) clearly  show that subjects discriminated intact from all other test pairs. There is no evidence, however, that they were  discriminating among rearranged, mixed, and new pairs. This inconsistency arises because of parallel high confidence false  alarms and high confidence correct rejections. A rating of one (the highest confidence intact response) was used more often  for rearranged than for mixed and more often for mixed than for new, but at the same time, a rating of four (the highest  confidence new response) was used more often for rearranged than for mixed and more often for mixed than for new.' Since there was no overall difference in the discriminability of rearranged, mixed, and new pairs it was impossible to  determine whether the ratio of signal strengths was 2:1 (with both the numerator and the denominator so close to zero,  estimates of the ratio are unstable). Nevertheless, to illustrate the procedure for calculating signal strengths we have  estimated the signal strength of intact pairs scaled in terms of mixed pair standard deviation units (mixed pairs were chosen  as there were twice as many of them as there were rearranged or new pairs). To do this we converted the cumulative  probabilities for intact and mixed pairs for each subject to z scores. We then plotted the z score for the mixed pairs against  the corresponding z score for the intact pairs. In this plot the x intercept is an estimate of the signal strength  `These data seem incompatible with the idea that subjects would identify a pair as intact simply because they recognized  both members of the pair. Such a strategy should produce a number of low confidence intact judgments (ratings of 2 or 3) with  rearranged pairs. Instead, there was an excessive number of 4 ratings and a relative lack of 2 and 3 ratings with rearranged  pairs.  GLOBAL MATCHING 59  (the difference between the means of the distributions divided by the standard deviation of the mixed distribution (,pI -  pm)Uam) and the slope is an estimate of the ratio of the standard deviation of the mixed distribution to the standard  deviation of the intact distribution (am/a,). Usable plots were obtained for only 15 out of the 25 subjects because there had  to be two points on each subject's ROC curve with nonzero and nonunity values on each dimension. The average of the x  intercept and the slope values for the 15 subjects are also given in Table 2. The estimate of the slope (0.80) is almost  certainly an overestimate due to one outlying subject. When this subject's slope value is removed the estimate is 0.67 with a  standard error of 0.07. A slope of 0.67 implies that the standard deviation of the intact matching strength is approximately  1.5 times the standard deviation of the mixed matching strength.  DISCUSSION  It had seemed possible that the small differences among rearranged, mixed, and new pairs found by Bain and Humphreys (1988)  were due to a floor effect caused by a conservative criterion placement. When we allowed subjects to indicate a lower degree  of confidence in the intactness of a pair through their confidence ratings we hoped that these differences would be increased.  Instead they were decreased. Although subjects were more likely to use the highest confidence intact response with rearranged  than with mixed and with mixed than with new pairs, they were also more likely to use the highest confidence new response with  rearranged than with mixed and with mixed than with new pairs. There are two general explanations for this pattern of results.  These explanations are compatible with the global matching models we have presented, although it must be emphasized that they  are also compatible with a wide variety of alternative models. They are presented here because they suggest different ways to  produce the larger differences among rearranged, mixed, and new pairs that are a necessary prerequisite to testing the 2:1  ratio.  The first explanation is that the mean matching strengths differed (rearranged > mixed > new), but subjects also rejected some  rearranged and mixed pairs with high confidence when they recalled the actual study trial pairing. A greater mean matching  strength produces the high confidence intact responses, and a greater probability of recalling the correct study trial pairing  (there are two recall opportunities with a rearranged pair, one with a mixed pair, and none with a new pair) produces the high  confidence nonintact responses. Bain and Humphreys (1988) have reviewed evidence that implicates recall in pair recognition  and in the recognition of single items tested in pairs (also see Humphreys, 1978; Humphreys & Bain, 1983; Mandler, 1980;  Wolford, 1971). The most important evidence concerns the ability to predict pair recognition from estimates of forward and  backward recall (Wolford, 1971), and the recognition of items tested in pairs from separate  60 HUMPHREYS ET AL.  estimates of recognition and recall (Bain & Humphreys, 1988; Humphreys, 1978; Mandler, 1980).  Of these studies the one that most directly implicates recall in the recognition of distractors was reported by Humphreys  (1978). In that study subjects studied pairs of items and were then tested on the second item in some of the pairs plus new  words. Following this test one group of subjects was asked to recognize the second member in intact and old-new test pairs.  For this group there was no overlap between the items in the two tests. The other group was given the first member of some of  the study pairs and asked to recall the second. These cues were either the first items from the pairs from which the old items  had come or the first item in old-new pairs. With this design Humphreys (1978) was able to show that the hit rate for items  tested in intact pairs equalled the hit rate when the item was tested by itself plus one minus the hit rate times the  probability of recall. Likewise the false alarm rate for new items tested in an old-new pair equalled the false alarm rate in  single-item recognition times one minus the probability that the old item in an old-new pair could be used to recall the  correct study trial pairing. The latter finding directly supports the hypothesis that subjects were rejecting distractors (new  items in old-new pairs) when the correct study trial pairing was recalled.  Bain and Humphreys (1988) also noted that the invariance in the double miss rate (the probability of recognizing neither item  in a pair) between intact and rearranged pairs and the insensitivity of pair recognition to criteria manipulation also  supported the use of a recall strategy. However, these latter findings are also consistent with the alternative explanation  for the present findings. That is, the extreme responses would be used more frequently for rearranged than for mixed and more  frequently for mixed than for new if the mean matching strengths were similar but the variances differed (rearranged > mixed >  new). If the variance of the intact matching strength is also substantially greater than the variance of the matching strength  of the other pairs then it is possible to accommodate the invariance in the double miss rate and the insensitivity of pair  recognition to criterion manipulations. With a large difference in the variances subjects could set a criterion that was  sufficiently high so that it was almost never exceeded by the match of a rearranged, mixed, or new pair. A large reduction in  this criterion would be needed to significantly increase the hit rate (identifying an intact pair as intact) and this would  come at the expense of a substantial increase in the false alarm rate (identifying the other pairs as intact). Such a poor  tradeoff could explain the insensitivity of pair recognition to criterion manipulations.  To see how a high criterion could explain the invariance in the double miss rate for items in intact and rearranged pairs we  first need to explain how single-item recognition (a single match) and pair recognition (a joint match) might combine to  produce the recognition of individual items in a pair. In recognizing an individual item we assume the subject says yes if  either the single match exceeds a criterion or the joint match exceeds a criterion. In those situations where changes in  meaning are minimized (see Bain & Humphreys, 1988) it is the joint match which produces the superior recognition of items  tested in intact pairs compared to all other test  GLOBAL MATCHING 61  pairs. It also explains why Humphreys' (1978) subjects were better able to discriminate between intact and old-new pairs than  between old and new items." To explain the invariance in the joint miss rate we must assume that the joint match never exceeds  its criterion unless at least one of the two single matches exceeds the single-match criterion. Having a high criterion for  the joint match would be one factor which would help to produce this result. A second factor would be a positive correlation  between the strength of the joint match and the strengths of the single matches.  SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS  The matching strengths in the SAM, Minerva II, TODAM, and Matrix models can all be written as a function relating test pairs  to study pairs. Under specified and realizable conditions this function takes on one value when the pairs have two items in  common, a second value when they have one item in common, and a third value when they have no items in common. It is in this  sense that we say that our simple versions of these models as well as the more adequate versions incorporating variable  encoding, cue weights, forgetting, and context are subsumed under the GGMM. Not all of the specific models subsumed under the  GGMM are isomorphic to it though, because GGMM parameters can produce matching strengths not producible from the parameters in  some of the specific models. Nevertheless, with the range of processes (e.g., variable encoding, cue weights) that can be  incorporated into these models it seems very unlikely that we could use predictions about matching strengths to decide between  these alternative ways to implement the global matching metaphor.  With respect to variances the basic similarity between the models makes it difficult to discriminate between- them (all are  subsumed under a six-parameter function relating test pairs to study pairs). This difficulty is further compounded by a common  failure to incorporate background memories into the variance predictions. Nevertheless, there is one situation where it might  be possible to reject one or more of these models. If a model predicts too large a difference in matching strength variances  it is easy to reduce this difference by incorporating additional noise (e.g., background memories). However, if the model  predicts too small a difference it may be impossible to increase this difference. When the average interitem similarity (/l)  is near zero the Minerva II, Matrix, and TODAM models all predict little difference among the signal strengths for rearranged,  mixed, and new pairs. The SAM model makes the same prediction when the average preexisting associative strength  " Clark and Shiffrin (1987) found no difference in the ability of subjects to discriminate between intact and old-new pairs  and between old and new words. This, however, appears to be due to the low level of associative learning in their experiment,  evidenced by the low level of discrimination between intact and rearranged pairs.  62 HUMPHREYS ET AL.  is near zero. In addition we have been able to show (see the Appendix) that in addition to predicting near zero differences in  signal strengths the Matrix model can also predict a substantial difference in the variances. This occurs when (a) the vector  elements are normally distributed with a mean of zero, (b) the elements are independent within and between vectors, and (c)  the number of elements in a vector is large relative to the number of items in the study list. It remains to be determined  whether the current versions of the SAM and Minerva II models or alternative versions of these models can predict sufficiently  large variance differences. The TODAM model, however, appears to have problems in predicting sufficient differences in the  variances (see the Appendix) but it will be necessary to eliminate the possibility of the use of a recall strategy before we  can use these findings to differentiate between models.  Although it seems unlikely that we could decide between these alternative ways of implementing the global matching metaphor on  the basis of pair recognition alone, simultaneously fitting these models to different paradigms could differentiate them.  There are pitfalls in this approach, however. We have already noted that modelling recall introduces special problems.  Likewise single-item and triple recognition may not be straightforward extensions of pair recognition. Humphreys et al. (in  press) have suggested that single-item recognition involves a comparison between the interactive and additive matches of the  context and item cues. To extend the model to triple recognition the same issue as that which we encountered in introducing  context to pair recognition emerges. That is, is the memory for a triple a set of pairwise associations or is it a higher  order association (e.g., (a:b:c), a * b * c, or ab'c" )? If one could establish that associations were fundamentally  bidirectional this could lead to, but would not necessitate, a preference for TODAM or the bidirectional version of Minerva II  over the Matrix or the unidirectional version of Minerva II. If, however, one could establish that some associations were  unidirectional it would necessitate a rejection of TODAM and the bidirectional version of Minerva II.  In choosing between SAM and the other models the critical question is whether the global properties of these models also  emerge in the retrieval process. If a label is associated with individual instances of a concept in the Minerva II, TODAM, and  Matrix models, the label will tend to retrieve a vector that represents the central tendency of the vectors representing the  individual instances. Eich (1982), Hintzman (1986), and Knapp and Anderson (1984) have shown how this property readily leads  to concept formation. That is, with a global retrieval process no separate abstraction process is required. There seems to be  no way in which a cue in the SAM model could come to elicit a response that was the average of (represented the central  tendency of) all the responses associated with that cue, and thus this model would require a separate abstraction process.  Although it appears that it will be very difficult to discriminate between these alternative ways of implementing the global  matching metaphor the global matching assumption itself appears to be testable. All four models predict that the ratio of  signal strength for rearranged pairs to signal strength for mixed pairs is 2:1.  GLOBAL MATCHING 63  We were able to show that this prediction is not affected by variable encoding, cue weights, forgetting, context, or the  inclusion of single-item matches, and it is affected only to a small degree by the formation of interpair associations. The  2:1 ratio also is unaffected by background memories which are a necessary but neglected requirement for an adequate memory  model. However, this prediction does not appear to be testable using conventional testing procedures and word pairs. The  problem is that either subjects are rejecting distractor pairs when the correct study trial pairing can be recalled or there  is very little difference in the mean matching strength of distractor pairs but a difference in variance. If recall is  responsible, it could be eliminated by limiting the decision time or by using pairs made from hard to recall components (e.g.,  face location or colour pairs). If it is a variance effect the solution may lie in using items that either are very similar  (the prediction from the Minerva 11, Matrix, and TODAM models) or have strong interitem associations (the prediction from the  SAM model). Note in this regard that Humphreys (1976) used very high frequency four-letter words and found substantially  larger differences among rearranged, mixed, and new pairs than those that we found in our experiment. Humphreys' word pool had  substantial interitem semantic relationships and of course the four-letter words were physically very similar.  Although it will be a technically difficult task to produce an adequate test of the 2:1 ratio the effort should be made. The  2:1 ratio in signal strengths for rearranged and mixed pairs appears to be a fundamental aspect of the SAM, Minerva II,  Matrix, and TODAM models. If the variances of the matching strengths appear to be approximately normal and if the ratio of  signal strengths is not 2:1 (finding a ratio less than 2:1 would be most damaging) then these models can be rejected. In  addition, it appears highly unlikely that any nonglobal matching model of pair recognition would predict a 2:1 ratio in signal  strengths.  APPENDIX  Variances in the Matrix Model  Consider vo= Var[(ab') - (cd') ] = Var[(a - c) (b - d) ], that is, vo is the variance of the product of two independent sums,  each sum consisting of n independent terms, each term being a product of corresponding elements of two memory vectors. Let the  sums be X and Y with terms x; = a; c; and y; = b; d;, i = 1 to n. Then  vo = Var(XY)  = E(X2Y2) - E2(XY) =E(X2) E(Y2) -E2(X) E 2(Y) = [nE(x2) + n(n - 1) E 2(x)] [nE(Y2) + n(n - 1) E 2(Y)] - n4E2(x) E 2(Y)  =n2aXQ2+n3(aYUY+a2U2).  480/33/1-5  64 HUMPHREYS ET AL.  Also, since x = ac  a =E(a2C2) -E2(ac) c =mia  since a, c are independent and similarly distributed where m2 and u refer to the raw moments of the distribution of the memory  vector elements. Similarly, a2=M 2 - ~4. So, vo=n2(m2_JU4)2+2n3[(m2-u4)u4]. Similarly,  v, =n2(n4-m2)(n2-u4)+n3[(n4-md) u4+ (M2 _u4) nd]  and  v2= n2(rn4-m2 )2+2n3[(rn4-rn2)rn2] For the covariance consider  co =Cov[(ab')-(cs-ds), (ab')-(c,dt)] =Cov[(a - cs)(b - ds), (a - c,)(b - dt)], that is, co is a covariance of two products of  sums, the vector dot products, co =E[(a-cs)(a'ct)(b-ds)(b.d,)]-E[(a'CS)(b.dj] E[(a'C,)(b-dt)] =E[(a cs)(a  c,)]E[(b-ds)(b-d,)]-E(a-cs)E(b-ds)E(a-c,)E(b-d,). The first expectation here is equal to  E[na2 cs;cti+n(n- 1) a;a;cs;cy] = EZ(c)[nag + n2 E2 (a)];  also  E(a - cg) = nE(a; c9;) = nE(a) E(c)  .'.CO = E2(C) E2 (d)[na' + n2 E2(a)] [nab + n2 E2(b)] - n4 E2 (a) E2 (b) E2(C) E2 (d)  = u~ /Id [n2adab + n3(aQu2v + abud)]  or in terms of moments  CO =y4En2(m2 _,U2)2+2n3[m2-tj2) JU2]] = n2u4(m2 _p2 )[m2+ u2 (2n _ 1)].  Similarly,  C, =u3[n2(rn2- u2)(m3-rn20+n3[(rn3-rn20 u2+ (m2_u2) rn2u]]  and  C2 =Y2 [n2(m3-m2u)2+2n3[(m3-m2u)m2u]] = n2u2(rn3 - rn20[rn3 + rn2u(2n -1)].  GLOBAL MATCHING 65  Evaluating the variances for particular element distributions is straightforward. Thus for the normal distribution with m2 =  62 + 112, m3 = 36211 +113, and moo = 364 + 662114 we can substitute values of 6 and l1. In fact, the value of 6 does not alter  the proportionality of the outcome among the four cases (intact, rearranged, new-old, new-new) so we may consider it to be  equal to 1. Then for P=0, M2= 1, M3=0, and M4=3; for y= 1, M2=2, M3=4, andM4= 10; and so on. Thus for 11= 0 the variances are  intact 4n3 + (k + 3) n2  rearranged 2n3 + (k + 2) n2 new-old n3 + (k + 1) n2 new-new kn2,  which for k = n are approximately proportional to 5:3:2:1. For n = 100 and k = 20 the proportions are approximately 21:11:6:1.  However, these large differences in variance for the case of 11= 0 decrease rapidly as 11 increases. Thus for ,u = 1, k = 21,  and large n they are approximately 25:23:20:19 and similarly for 11= 2 they are approximately 68:66:63:60. Thus the value of  11 is critical in the testing of the model and this is probably the case in the other models considered here.  Variances in the TODAM Model  Some of the corresponding variance formulae for the TODAM model have been given by Murdock (1982, 1985). It appears that he is  making the assumption that 11= 0 for all vector elements. The result of this assumption in the Matrix model is that all  covariances involved in the calculation of total variances become zero (see formulae above) and we assume that the same thing  happens in the TODAM model.  Using the expression for pair recognition given by Murdock (1985) and combining them into the expression for total covariance  as detailed in the text, we can obtain the following equations for the convolution model,  k+12 9 k intact = 3N + 3N2 + 3N3  2k+6 6 k rearranged = T NF 3N2 + 3N3  mixed = 2k N 3 + 3N2 + TV  2k k  new-new = 3N+ 3N3.  66 HUMPHREYS ET AL.  It should be noted that these expressions are in an inverse relationship to N because of an initial normalization of vector  variance in the TODAM model.  It is clear that for practically all N it is only the first term of these expressions that is important in the comparative  values and that these then depend upon k. Thus, for k=20 the comparative values are 52:46:43:40 and these values tend to  equality as k increases. For any lengths of list greater than about 50 there are only small differences in the variance for  the four cases.  The fact that the TODAM model, in contrast to the Matrix model, does not show the large range of variance for the different  test pairs, when Y=O, may possibly be explained as follows. For the Matrix model,  (ab') - (cd') = (a - c)(b - d),  whereas for the convolution model,  (a*b)-(c*d)  = (a - c)(b - d) + "noise" [or (a - d) (b - c) + "noise"].  That is, in the matching of two convolution vectors the same result as that for the Matrix model is obtained but additionally  a fair amount of noise is produced. This is due to the nature of the elements in a convolution vector (see Pike, 1984). Thus  the variance analysis of the TODAM model could proceed as with the Matrix model but in addition the extra noise variances  would have to be considered. This is the case with all four pair cases. Presumably, it is the addition of noise variance in  each case that determines the total variances to be more nearly equal.  REFERENCES  ANDERSON, J. A., SILVERSTEIN, J. W., RITZ, S. A., & JONES, R. S. (1977). Distinctive features, categorical perception, and  probability learning: Some applications of a neural model. Psychological Review, 84, 413-451.  BAIN, J. D. (1979). Item and relational information in recognition and recall. Unpublished doctoral thesis, University of  Queensland.  BAIN, J. D., & HUMPHREYs, M. S. (1988). The relational context effect: Cues, meanings or configurations? In G. Davies & D. M.  Thomson (Eds.), Memory in context: Context in memory. London: Wiley.  BAIN, J. D., HumPHREYS, M. S., TEHAN, G., & PIKE, R. (1988). What is the context in episodic decisions? Unpublished  manuscript. University of Queensland.  CLARK, S. E., & SHIFFRIN, R. M. (1987). Recognition of multiple item probes. Memory & Cognition, 15, 367-378.  ETCH, J. M. (1982). A composite holographic associative recall model. Psychological Review, 89, 627-661.  ETCH, J. M. (1985). Levels of processing, encoding specificity, elaboration, and CHARM. Psychological Review, 92, 1-38.  GLOBAL MATCHING 67  FLEXSER, A., & TULVING, E. (1978). Retrieval independence in recognition and recall. Psychological Review, 85, 153-171.  FRIENDLY, M., FRANKLIN, P. E., HOFFMAN, D., & Rubin, D. C. (1982). The Toronto word pool: Norms for imagery, concreteness,  orthographic variables, and grammatical usage for 1080 words. Behavior Research Methods and Instrumentation, 14, 375-399.  GILLUND, G., & SHIFFRIN, R. M. (1984). A retrieval model for both recognition and recall. Psychological Review, 91, 1-67.  HINTZMAN, D. L. (1984). Minerva 2: A simulation of human memory. Behavioral research methods, instrumentation and computers,  26, 96-101.  HINTZMAN, D. L. (1986). Schema abstraction in a multiple-trace memory model. Psychological Review, 93, 411-428.  HUMPHREYS, M. S. (1976). Relational information and the context effect in recognition memory. Memory & Cognition, 4, 221-232.  HUMPHREYS, M. S. (1978). Item and relational information: A case for context independent retrieval. Journal of Verhal Learning  and Verhal Behavior, 17, 175-188,  HUMPHREYS, M. S., & BAIN, J. D. (1983). Recognition memory: A cue and information analysis. Memory & Cognition, 11, 583-600.  HUMPHREYS, M. S., BAIN, J. D., & PIKE, R. (in press). Different ways to cue a coherent memory system. A theory for episodic,  semantic and procedural tasks. Psychological Review.  KNAPP, A., & ANDERSON, J. A. (1984). A signal averaging model for concept formation. Journal of Experimental Psychology:  Learning, Memory and Cognition, 10, 616-637.  MANDLER, G. (1980). Recognizing: The judgment of previous occurrence. Psychological Review, 87, 252-271.  MCCLELLAND, J. L., & RUMELHART, D. E. (1985). Distributed memory and the representation of general and specific information.  Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 114, 159-188.  MURDOCK, B. B., JR. (1982). A theory for the storage and retrieval of item and associative information. Psychological Review,  89, 609-626.  MURDOCK, B. B., JR. (1985). Convolution and 92, 130-132.  PIKE, R. (1984). A comparison of convolution Review, 91, 281-294.  RAAUMAKERS, J. G. W., & SHIFFRIN, 88, 93-134.  ROEDIGER, H. L., 111 (1980). Memory 231-246.  UNDERWOOD, B. J., & HUMPHREYS, M. S. (1979). Context change recognition. Americal Journal of Psychology, 92, 577-609. WOLFORD,  G. (1971). Function of distinct associations for paired-associate performance. Psychological Review, 78, 303-313.  WOLLEN, K. A., Fox, R. A., & LOWRY, D. H. (1976). Variations in asymmetry as a function of degree of forward learning. Journal  of Experimental Psychology, 86, 416-419.  matrix systems: A reply to Pike. Psychological Review, and matrix distributed memory systems. Psychological R. M. (1981).  Search of associative memory. Psychological Review, metaphors in cognitive psychology. Memory & Cognition, 8, and the role of  meaning in word  RECEIVED: December 17, 1985