10.1016/0022-2496(89)90014-x
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 33, 348-357 (1989)  Theoretical Perspective Neural Nets: From Hartley and Hebb to Hinton  ELIZABETH R. VALENTINE  Royal Holloway and Bedford New College, University of London  The history of neural nets is traced, beginning with the associationist ideas of Aristotle and the physiological speculations  of Hartley and Hebb. Lashley's empirical work led him to conclude that memory traces are not localized. However, it was not  until the development of the hologram by Gabor and its application to brain function by van Heerden that a possible  theoretical basis for distributed information storage was proposed. Willshaw and his colleagues demonstrated that non-linear  associative models were simpler, more efficient models, which retained the property of tolerance of degraded input. Since then  there have been improvements in the realism of these models and attempts to integrate findings from the structure and function  of the nervous system, notably the cerebellum and hippocampus. L 1989 Academic Press, Inc.  Associationism, if not as old as the hills, is at least as old as our intellectual history. Aristotle is credited with having  laid down the doctrine and applied it to memory: recollection occurs because processes naturally follow each other in an  orderly manner. Hobbes (1651) made it an all-embracing principle. According to him, all thought and action was produced by the  lawful succession of ideas, which was accountable for in terms of association: if two mental events have occurred together at  the same time, then if one occurs in the future, the other will be reinstated. David Hartley (1749) followed John Locke in  adopting the psychological association of ideas, and contiguity as its sole principle. His contribution was to provide a  speculative account of the physiological basis of association. He believed that physical objects produced vibrations in the  surrounding aether, which agitated small particles in the medullary substance of the nerves and brain, forming the physical  basis of sensation. Vibratiuncles, feebler vibrations persisting after the cessation of the stimulus, formed the physical  basis of after-images, ideas, and memory.  By the end of the nineteenth century the brain was pictured as a mass of neurons connected by synapses. The similarity of the  synapse to an association proved  Requests for reprints should be addressed to Dr. E. R. Valentine, Department of Psychology, Royal Holloway and Bedford New  College, Egham Hill, Egham, Surrey, TW20 OEX, England.  348  0022-2496/89 $3.00  Copyright , 1989 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  NEURAL NETS 349  irresistible. The basis of memory as changes in synaptic efficiency has been a reasonable hypothesis since the time of  Santiago Ram6n y Cajal (1908), who discovered neurons and suggested that learning was mediated by cell outgrowths. But even  before this, Alexander Bain made reference to "specific grouping, or co-ordination of sensations and movements, by virtue of  specific growths in the cell junctions" (Bain, 1873, p. 91) and William James wrote: "Let us assume as the basis of all our  subsequent reasoning this law: when two elementary brain processes have been active together or in immediate succession, one  of them on re-occurring, tends to propagate its excitement into the other" (James, 1890, p. 566).  Donald Hebb developed Ram6n y Cajal's idea with his notions of cell assemblies and reverberating circuits: "When an axon of  cell A is near enough to excite a cell B and repeatedly or persistently takes part in firing it, some growth process or  metabolic change takes place in one or both cells such that A's efficiency, as one of the cells firing B, is increased" (Hebb,  1949, p. 62). Hebb's rule has been made mathematically more precise by many current workers in parallel distributed processing  (PDP), e.g., Rumelhart, Hinton, and McClelland (1986).  Sensitivity to frequency (i.e., the view that the strength of an association is a function of the frequency of pairings in its  past history) and the notion of learning as some kind of statistical modelling are old ideas. The new connectionism augments  the old `co-occurrence statistics' of associationism (to borrow a term from Fodor & Pylyshyn, 1988) with hidden units, to  enable systems to deal with more global and abstract properties, and sophisticated principles for weight setting.  Besides Hebb, the other important historical figure in this area is Karl Lashley. In a personal letter written in 1957 he  gives his own account of how he became interested in the organization of the brain: "As a laboratory boy in Zoology in 1907 I  found in a box of trash abandoned by J. B. Johnston when he went to Minnesota a series of Golgi stained sections of a frog's  brain. I proposed to Reese, his successor, that I work out all the connections among the cells so that we might know how the  frog works. It was a shock to learn that the stain is selective, but I have never escaped from the problem" (Cobb, 1960, p.  xvii). Lashley became associated with Shepherd Ivory Franz, who was then at St. Elizabeth's Hospital in Washington. Franz had  been working on the functions of the mammalian brain using ablation and had shown that lesions in the frontal lobes do not  destroy long established habits; that they only abolish learned behaviour if a great deal of tissue is destroyed; and that  habits lost by such destruction can be relearned. Franz and Lashley replicated these results in 1917. This problem was to  become Lashley's life-work. Following a series of apparently `negative' results, he put forward his hypotheses of  equipotentiality and mass action "whereby the efficiency of performance of an entire complex function may be reduced in  proportion to the extent of the brain injury" (1929, p. 25). His conclusion was that memory traces are not localized in the  cerebral cortex. In his famous paper `In search of the engram' he wrote: "The mass of evidence... shows conclusively that it  is the pattern and not the localization of energy on the sense organ that determines its functional effect." (Lashley, 1950,  p.469). Lashley saw these results as militating against connec-  350 ELIZABETH R. VALENTINE  tionism. It is ironical that the `new connectionism' has provided a solution to his problem. Lashley's other great problem,  likewise solved by PDP, was the spatial representation of temporal order, discussed in another famous paper (`The problem of  serial order in behavior'), delivered at the Hixon symposium in 1948.  Neural nets, in which the activity of the brain is modelled abstractly by networks of logical neurons, were developed in the  1940s. (For a more detailed account of work dating from this period onwards, see Cowan & Sharp, 1988, to whom I am indebted.)  Hilgard and Marquis (1940) in their book Conditioning and learning discuss schematic arrangements of neurons to account for  conditioning by alteration of the synaptic threshold. Simultaneous activation from the CS and UCS increase the excitability of  a synapse, such that the CS alone is able to activate it whereas previously it was unable to do so.  The first major contribution was made by Warren McCulloch and Walter Pitts (1943) in a paper entitled "A logical calculus of  the ideas immanent in nervous activity." They applied symbolic logic to the problem of describing what neural nets can do and  proved that whatever operations and processes can be described in logical terms can be embodied in nets of formal neurons or  what became known as `McCulloch-Pitts' (M-P) nets. Each unit is activated if and only if its total excitation reaches or  exceeds zero. However, these neural nets are highly simplified and amount to no more than synchronous, discrete logical  switches.  Between the years 1946 and 1953 a series of important interdisciplinary meetings (see Heims, 1975), which gave rise to what  became cybernetics, was attended by Kenneth Craik, Gregory Bateson, Heinrich Kliiver, Theodore Schneirla, Kurt Lewin, John von  Neumann, Norbert Wiener, Warren McCulloch, Walter Pitts, Julian Bigelow, and Arturo Rosenblueth, amongst others. At the first  meeting Kluver drew attention to the problem of form perception. At a subsequent meeting there was a conflict between the  cyberneticians supporting atomistic, digital computer models, based on neurophysiology and mathematics, and Koehler  emphasizing the findings of empirical psychology and favouring dynamic field theories and mechanisms such as isomorphism.  Partly in answer to this challenge of form perception, Pitts and McCulloch (1947) in a paper on `How we know universals'  described a net of idealized neurons, similar to a digital computer, but capable of recognising forms. They even suggested  detailed cerebral cortical mechanisms.  Other developments in the fifties included the work of John von Neumann, Ross Ashby, and Albert Uttley. Uttley (1954)  demonstrated that neural nets with Hebblike modifiable connections could learn to classify binary patterns and von Neumann  (1956) dealt with the problem of reliability by introducing redundancy into M-P nets.  Wilfrid Taylor was the first to develop neural nets with associative memory. Associative memory is the ability to generate one  internal representation from another or the remainder of a complex representation from part of it (content addressability.)  His original net (1956) consisted of a layer of associative units sandwiched between arrays of sensory and motor units. The  units were analog and  NEURAL NETS 351  all contact weights modifiable. The training procedure used was Hebb's rule: activated synaptic weights are increased if they  activate their target units.  Frank Rosenblatt (1958) selected for attention a subclass of neural nets, which he called perceptrons, that consist of a space  (retina), a single set of association neurons, and response neurons. His work constituted a major approach to the problem of  pattern recognition. He showed that M-P nets with modifiable connections could be trained to classify patterns. Central to the  work was the idea of training the perceptron by reinforcement procedures while exposing it to a sequence of pattern instances.  It became popular and highly controversial, as we shall see.  Bernard Widrow and M.E. Hoff (1960) developed the adaline (adaptive linear neuron), similar to the perceptron. It has a  slightly different training procedure (what has come to be known as the `Widrow-Hoff' or `delta' rule): weight changes are  proportional to the differences between the desired activation pattern and the unit's total excitation.  A number of important advances came from the consideration of physical analogies, notably the hologram. (For a technical  account, see Willshaw, 1981, on which the following is based.) A hologram is a method of information storage employing  coherent beams of electromagnetic radiation. It provides a permanent record of the pattern of interference between two light  waves in a localized region of space. Subsequent illumination of the hologram with one of the waves effectively unlocks the  pattern from store. The hologram was invented by Gabor (1948) and achieved technical importance with the arrival of the laser.  Technological advances in the sixties led people to suggest it as a model for brain functioning, largely on account of its  properties of resistance to local damage and tolerance of imperfect input-old ideas. Van Heerden (1963a, 1963b) discussed the  similarities between the method of optical information storage in solids using coherent light and Beurle's (1956) suggestions  as to how associative learning could take place in a nerve net by means of modifiable thresholds. There are two main problems  with holographic models of memory: (1) They are very complicated systems for the relatively simple computations they perform.  (2) The fidelity of recall is not very good.  David Willshaw, and Christopher Longuet-Higgins began the search for simpler representations of holographic memory. In 1969  they published a paper entitled 'Non-holographic associative memory,' in which they argued that the features of holography  that commend it as a model of associative memory can be mimicked and actually improved on by simpler discrete non-linear  models, viz. the correlograph and the associative net, which might have been evolved by the brain. Information storage in such  a system has three important properties: Firstly, it is parallel because each mapping can be effected without reference to any  other. (`Parallel' is used in at least three different senses: (a) independent, as here; (b) simultaneous, as in Rumelhart,  Hinton, & McClelland, 1986, p. 47, "The system is inherently parallel in that many units can carry out their computations at  the same time"; (c) interactive, the most interesting usage, as in Selfridge's `Pandemonium' model of pattern recognition.)  Secondly, it is non-local or distributed: each memory  352 ELIZABETH R. VALENTINE  is represented by a pattern of activity distributed over many elements, and each element is involved in representing many  different memories. (Contrast local memory where each piece of information is stored in a separate location and can be  retrieved with perfect accuracy.) Thirdly, it is robust, i.e., resistant to local damage which causes incompleteness-hence it  can function as a content addressable memory, or inaccuracy-hence patterns can be reconstructed from degraded inputs, although  this facility is achieved at the cost of storage space. Discussion of the property of recognition of displaced patterns with  Francis Crick led to refinement of the model and the development of an associative net or matrix memory, which can be  represented as a lattice. An intersection/synapse is activated when the associated input and output are activated together,  i.e., if the pair of lines that pass through it have been activated in the association of at least one of the pattern pairs.  These ideas are clearly realizable in neural tissue: the horizontal lines of the matrix could be axons of input neurons, the  vertical lines dendrites of output neurons, and the intersections modifiable synapses which function as binary switches.  Several people have suggested that the nerve cells of the cerebellar cortex may function as an associative net: Eccles, Ito,  and Szentagothai (1976), Pellionisz and Llinas (1979) and Marr (1969) who made detailed proposals. Marr made similar  suggestions for the hippocampus, where his theory has been supported by the discovery of long-term potentiation (i.e.,  strengthening of excitatory synapses for seconds to minutes as a result of presynaptic stimulation, see McNaughton & Morris,  1987), and extended his theory more generally to the neocortex.  In the seventies the dominant research paradigm was the arch-rival, artificial intelligence (AI), committed to exploring  rule-based systems of symbols in von Neumann machines as the model of intelligent behaviour. This work was predicated on  Kenneth Craik's belief that "thought parallels reality through symbolism". It is a top-down approach, premissed on logical  atomism and the possibility of explicit knowledge. The construction of neural nets, by contrast, constitutes a bottom-up,  holistic approach, characterised by implicit knowledge. (See Dreyfus & Dreyfus, 1988, for the contrast between these two  approaches.) A substantial contributory factor to the ascendency of AI and the decline of interest in neural nets during this  period was the publication by Minsky and Papert in 1969 of their book Perceptrons. This demonstrated limits to the performance  of one-layer perceptrons: they cannot distinguish such letters as T and C independently of rotation; they have the greatest  difficulty demonstrating topological connectedness and mathematical functions such as parity (whether an odd or even number of  points are on the retina). Minsky and Papert proved that perceptrons are not computationally universal: they cannot compute  EXOR, the exclusive or, or its negation, which is computationally universal, in that all other functions can be expressed in  terms of it. They claimed that most of the work on perceptrons was "sterile" and "without scientific value" and misleadingly  implied that their conclusions extended to multi-layered perceptrons.  Papert, at the meeting of the Experimental Psychology Society in London in  NEURAL NETS 353  December 1987, rendered Geoffrey Hinton almost apoplectic. To understand why, it is necessary to have a knowledge of the  historical background. Papert (1988, p. 3-4) casts the story in terms of the myth of Snow White:  Once upon a time two daughter sciences were born to the new science of cybernetics. One sister was natural with features  inherited from the study of the brain... The other was artificial, related from the beginning to the use of computers. Each of  the sister sciences tried to build models of intelligence, but from very different materials. The natural sister built models  (called neural networks) out of mathematically purified neurones. The artificial sister built her models out of computer  programs.  In their first bloom of youth the two were equally successful and equally pursued by suitors from other fields of knowledge.  They got on very well together. Their relationship changed in the early sixties when a new monarch appeared, one with the  largest coffers ever seen in the kingdom of the sciences: Lord DARPA, the Defense Department's Advanced Research Projects  Agency. The artificial sister grew jealous and was determined to keep for herself the access to Lord DARPA's research funds.  The natural sister would have to be slain.  The bloody work was attempted by two staunch followers of the artificial sister, Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert, cast in the  role of the huntsman sent to slay Snow White and bring back her heart as proof of the deed. Their weapon was not the dagger  but the mightier pen, from which came a book-Perceptron.s-purporting to prove that neural nets could never fill their promise  of building models of mind: only computer programs could do this. Victory seemed assured for the artificial sister. And indeed  for the next decade all the rewards of the kingdom came to her progency, of which the family of expert systems did best in  fame and fortune.  But Snow White was not dead. What Minsky and Papert had shown the world as proof was not the heart of the princess; it was the  heart of a pig... Their book was read as proving that the neural net approach to building models of mind was dead. But a  closer look reveals that they really demonstrated something much less than this.  What they demonstrated was that there were serious limitations to one-layer perceptrons but it does not follow from this that  the whole neural net enterprise is doomed.  Papert acknowledges that "There was some hostility in the energy behind the research reported in Perceptrons, and there is  some degree of annoyance at the way the new movement has developed; part of our drive came, as quite plainly acknowledged in  our book, from the fact that funding and research energy were being dissipated on what still appear to me to be misleading  attempts to use connectionist methods in practical applications" (Papert, 1988, pp. 4--5).  The nineteen eighties saw the rise of neo-connectionism, with the publication by Geoffrey Hinton and John Anderson in 1981 of  their book Parallel models of associative memory. John Hopfield (1982) demonstrated a formal analogy between a net of  neuron-like elements with random symmetric connection weights (a Hopfield net) and spin glass (a magnetic material consisting  of a random mixture of ferromagnetically and antiferromagnetically interacting spins) which has the ability to store many  different patterns. (This was dependent on earlier work by Brian Cragg, a neuroanatomist, and Nevill Temperley, a physicist,  1954, who suggested analogies between the behaviour of neural nets and the properties of magnetic materials). Using Hebb's  rule Hopfield was able to show that the weights  80,33 '3-9  354 ELIZABETH R. VALENTINE  can be modified so as to stabilize net activity. The storage of information in dynamically stable configurations was an  important conceptual advance but the nets were artificial rather than neural, in that each element both excites and inhibits  its neighbours.  Geoffrey Hinton and Terrence Sejnowski (1983) were able to build on this, repeating Kirkpatrick, Gelatt, and Vecchi's (1983)  method with spin-glass problems. They introduced Boltzmann machines, which are adaptive Hopfield nets with hidden units, which  implement a Monte Carlo procedure for finding stable configurations of active and inactive (analog) units. They are  unsupervised but slow and employ only symmetric connections.  In 1986 Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams successfully implemented, in a twolayer perceptron with analog units, a procedure  originally suggested by Rosenblatt known as back-propagation, in which responses are used to adjust the weights of the motor  units and then the hidden units, the adjustment being related to weight changes of all the units downstream. These multilayer  analog perceptrons permit the investigation of supervised learning in adaptive neural nets. They can do all sorts of wonderful  things that single-layer perceptrons cannot do, e.g., solve the EXOR problem, distinguish T and C independent of translation  and rotation, and learn family trees. There are two problems: (1) They are relatively slow, and (2) procedures that work well  on small scale problems may not generalise to larger scale versions (the scaling problem). Work in the last couple of years  has been devoted mainly to improvements dealing with entrapment (i.e., getting stuck in non-optimal solutions) and scaling  problems.  The two volumes of Parallel distributed processing (the PDP `bible'), edited by Rumelhart and McClelland and published in  1986, were sold out (6,000 copies) before it went to press. What is all the fuss about? The core ingredients are very simple:  units which have a level of activation, connections which have weights or thresholds, and modification rules (typically either  -Hebbian, where, e.g., activated connections are strengthened, or the Widrow-Hoff delta rule, where weight change is  proportional to the discrepancy between obtained and desired outcome).  Some of the features of PDP that have excited people are as follows:  1. It is neurally inspired and plausible.  2. Parallel processing enables one to account for the speed with which complex decisions are made. (The hundred step  constraint.)  3. Distributed representation accounts for the resistance to damage which Lashley noted. "Information is not stored anywhere  in particular. Rather it is stored everywhere" (Rumelhart & Norman, 1981, p.3). Representation is global rather than local.  However, distributed representation is not opposed to localization of function: it occurs within localized modules.  4. Nevertheless, PDP is anti-reductionist and holistic. It is the pattern as a whole that is the meaningful level of analysis.  5. PDP can account well for pattern recognition (stereopsis and other aspects  NEURAL NETS 355  of visual perception), motor control, and learning (selection of the rule that best fits the current situation).  6. There is automatic generalisation: related representations activate units in common.  7. Distributed representation gives a realistic account of memory access and content addressability (recall from partially  incorrect or incomplete descriptions). "Information is better thought of as `evoked' than `found' "(Rumelhart & Norman, 1981,  p. 3). The blurring of the distinction between veridical recall and confabulation or plausible reconstruction seems to be  characteristic of human memory.  8. Storage and processing are not separated. All of the processing is carried out by the units: there is no executive or  overseer.  9. Knowledge is implicit rather than explicit, stored in the connections rather than the units. It is built into the processor  itself and not directly accessible to interpretation by some separate processor.  I conclude that the history of parallel distributed processing has itself been a case of parallel distributed processing.  Synaptic connectionism and distributed representation are old ideas. The employment of physical analogies (notably the  hologram and spin-glass) and the application of computer technology, logic, and mathematics has enabled these parallel  processes to interact from time to time.  REFERENCES  BAIN, A. (1873). Mind and body. London: Henry S. King.  BEURLF, R. L. (1956). Properties of a mass of cells capable of regenerating pulses. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal  Society. Series B, 240, 55-94.  COBB, S. (1960). A salute from neurologists. In F. A. Beach, D. O. Hebb, C. T. Morgan, & H. W. Nissen (Eds.), The  neuropsychology of Lashley (pp. xvii-xx). New York: McGraw-Hill.  COWAN, J. D., & SHARP, D. H. (1988). Neural nets and artificial intelligence. Daedalus, March, 85-121. CRAGG, B. G., &  TEMPERLEY, H. N. V. (1954). The organization of neurones: a cooperative analogy. EEG Clinical Neurophysiology, 6, 85-92.  CRAIK, K. J. W. (1943). The nature of explanation. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.  DREYFUS, H. L., & DREYFUS, S. E. (1988). Making a mind versus modeling the brain: Artificial intelligence back at a  branchpoint. Daedalus, March, 15-43.  ECCLES, J. C., ITO, M. & SZENTHAGOTHAI, J. (1976). The cerebellum as a neuronal machine. New York/ Berlin: Springer-Verlag.  FODOR, J. A., & PYLYSHYN, Z.W. (1988). Connectionism and cognitive architecture: A critical analysis. Cognition, 28, 3-71.  GABOR, D. (1948). A new microscopic principle. Nature, 161, 777-778.  HARTLEY, D. (1749). Observations on man, his frame, his duty, and his expectations. London: Leake and Frederick.  HEBB, D. O. (1949). The organization of behaviour. New York: Wiley.  HEERDEN, P.J. VAN (1963a). A new optical method of storing and retrieving information. Applied Optics, 2, 387-392.  HEERDEN, P. J. VAN (19636). Theory of optical information storage in solids. Applied Optics, 2, 393-400.  356  ELIZABETH R. VALENTINE  HELMS, S. (1975). Encounter of behavioral sciences with new machine-organism analogies in the 1940's. Journal of the History  of the Behavioral Sciences, 11, 368-371.  HILGARD, E. R., & MARQuts, D. M. (1940). Conditioning and learning. New York: Appleton-CenturyCrofts.  HINTON, G. E., & ANDERSON, J. A. (Eds.)(1981). Parallel models of associative memory. Hillsdale: Erlbaum.  HINTON, G. E., & SEJNOWSKI, T. J. (1983). Optimal perceptual inference. Proceedings of the Institute of Electronic and  Electrical Engineers Computer Society on the Conference of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. Washington, DC: IEEE.  HOBBES, T. (1651). Human nature, or the fundamental elements of policy. W. Molesworth (Ed.), The English works of Thomas  Hobbes (Vol. 4). London: John Bohn, 1840.  HOPFIELD, J. J. (1982). Neural networks and physical systems with emergent collective computational abilities. Proceedings of  the National Academy of Sciences, 79, 2554-2558.  JAMES, W. (1890). Principles of psychology (Vol. 1). New York: Dover, 1950.  KIRKPATRICK, S., GELATT, C. D., Jr., & VECCHI, M. P. (1983). Optimization by simulated annealing. Science, 220, 671-680.  LASHLEY, K. S. (1929). Brain mechanisms and intelligence. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.  LASHLEY, K. S. (1951). The problem of serial order in behavior. In L. A. Jeffress (Ed.), Cerebral mechanisms in behavior (pp.  112-136). New York: Wiley.  LASHLEY, K. S. (1950). In search of the engram. Symposia of the Society for Experimental Biology (No. 4, pp. 454-482).  Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.  MARK, D. (1969). A theory of cerebellar cortex. Journal of Physiology, 202, 432-470.  MCCULLOCH, W. S., & PITTS, W. H. (1943). A logical calculus of the ideas immanent in nervous activity. Bulletin of  Mathematical Biophysics, 5, 115-133.  McNAUGHTON, B. L., & MORRIS, R. G. M. (1987). Hippocampal synaptic enhancement and information storage within a distributed  memory system. Trends in Neurosciences, 10, 408-415.  MINSKY, M., & PAPERT, S. (1969). Perceptrons: An introduction to computational geometry. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  PAPERT, S. (1988). One AI or many? Daedalus, March, 1-14.  PELLIONISZ, A., & LLINAS, R. (1979). Brain modeling by tensor network theory and computer simulation. The cerebellum:  distributed processor for predictive coordination. Neuroscience, 4, 323-348. PITTS, W. H., & MCCULLOCH, W. S. (1947). How we  know universals. Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics, 9, 127-147.  RAM6N Y CAJAL, S. (1908). Structure et connexions de neurones. Les prix Nobel en 1906 (pp. 1-25). Stockholm: Norstedt and  Soner.  ROSENBLATT, F. (1958). The perceptron: a probabilistic model for information storage and organization in the brain.  Psychological Review, 65, 386-408.  RUMELHART, D. E., HINTON, G. E., & MCCLELLAND, J. L. (1986). A general framework for parallel distributed processing. In D. E.  Rumelhart, J. L. McClelland, and the PDP Research Group (Eds.). Parallel distributed processing (pp. 45-76). Cambridge, MA:  MIT Press.  RuMELHART, D. E., HINTON, G. E., & WILLIAMS, R. J. (1986). Learning internal representations by error propagation. In D. E.  Rumelhart, J. L. McClelland, and the PDP Research Group (Eds.) Parallel distributed processing (Vol. 1, pp. 318-362),  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  RUMELHART, D. E., & NORMAN, D. A. (1981). Introduction. In G. E. Hinton & J. A. Anderson (Eds. ), Parallel models of  associative memory (pp. 1-7). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  TAYLOR, W. K. (1956). Electrical simulation of some nervous system functional activities. In C. Cherry (Ed.), Information  theory (pp. 314-328). London: Butterworths.  UTTLEY, A. (1954). The classification of signals in the nervous system. EEG Clinical Neurophysiologv, 6, 479-494.  VON NEuMANN, J. (1956). Probabilistic logics and the synthesis of reliable organisms from unreliable components. In C. E.  Shannon & J. McCarthy (Eds.), Automata studies (pp. 43-98). Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press.  NEURAL NETS 357  WIDROW, B., & HOFF, M. E. (1960). Adaptive switching circuits. Institute of Radio Engineers, Western Electronic Show and  Convention, Convention Record (Part 4, pp. 96-104).  WILLSHAW, D. (1981). Holography, associative memory, and inductive generalization. In G. E. Hinton & J. A. Anderson (Eds.),  Parallel models of associative memory (pp. 83-104). NJ: Hillsdale, Erlbaum. WILLSHAW, D. J., BUNEMAN, O. P. & LONGUET-HIGGINS,  H. C. (1969). Non-holographic associative memory. Nature, 222, 960-962.  RECEIVED: December 16, 1988