10.1016/0022-2496(90)90016-3
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 34, 109-115 (1990)  Theoretical Note  The Experimental Testing of the Vidas Systems Theory  RAYMOND B. CATTELL  As systems theory, as in the Vidas model, becomes increasingly used in personality and learning, a methodological breakthrough  is demanded. It is required to discover the reservoir (trait) and channel strengths empirically, when they cannot be directly  apprehended. Fixing the model, as to traits and channels in use, it is shown that the channel widths and flow rates can be  inferred by solution of product simultaneous equations based on factorial determination of b's in the ordinary behavioral  equation. Some uses are suggested for these determinations. '.C 1990 Academic Press, Inc.  1. INTRODUCTION  Systems theory has recently entered psychology at a necessary phase of the latter's growth. Proposed concrete, testable models  are nevertheless very rare. The VIDAS model (Vector Id Analytic System) here considered goes beyond the "black box" of, say,  von Foerster or Gray Walter by taking advantage of our gains in knowledge about personality structure. As shown in Fig. l, the  human behavior system (open) contains 11 "reservoirs" of partly known content and 24 channels to which numerical path  coefficients can, theoretically, be finally attached.  The structure hypothesized in this system derives from general psychological observation and psychometric findings and  reasonings. Since direct observation of the internal action is not possible except by physiological observation (Luria, 1932),  which is too speculative and vague, the only data from which the internal structure can possibly be inferred are comparisons  and calculations of the input stimuli and the output behavior. As on all uses of structured equations one starts with  hypothesis of connections, which is given by VIDAS in Fig. 1.  Some knowledge of parts of the complex system has been gained by factor analysis in regard to the number and nature of the  "reservoir" sources. For example, by holding motivation (source E) and personality (M, (part 7), E, and GS) constant (or  cancelled as error) we have shown that reservoirs A and T contain the approximately 18 primary abilities (Hakstian & Cattell,  1976), four or five provincial ability input factors, and six general abilities commonly recognized. Similarly,  Reprint requests should be addressed to Dr. Raymond B. Cattell, 662 Kalanipuu, Honolulu, Hawaii 96825.  109  0022-2496/90 $3.00  Copyright Qc~ 1990 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  110 RAYMOND B. CATTELL  P Perception and immediate memory  PD Dynamic perception of extent of reward  Nondynamlc  traits  T  Shaping of response act  A  FIG. 1. Reproduced, by permission of the publisher, from Cattell (1980), pp. 434-435.  by ruling out the action (by selective input) of abilities, we have defined a considerable number of personality (M and T) and  motivation (E) factors. It should be noted, however, that the correlations found by these studies are not able to confirm  either the existence or the magnitudes of the path coefficients and channels in Fig. 1. These determine the final output, but  by processes that are hidden.  Even if we knew the internal correlations we should still face the fact that a given, empirically obtained pattern of output  correlations can usually-especially with complex models-be accounted for by quite a number of different patterns of path  coefficients (Cattell, 1978).  2. DESCRIPTION OF THE CAPACITY-UTILIZATION  PATH COEFFICIENTS OF CHANNELS  Let us consider, however, possible experimental designs and analyses that would get at the internal system exchanges.  Admitting from experience that factoring the outputs of Fig. 1 will yield the underlying source traits ("reservoirs," of  stated size, in systems terms) let us ask how we may use this as a step toward knowledge of the internal channels. What we  need to know about these channels is (1) What they connect, (2) What their maximum capacity to transmit is, and (3) What they  actually transmit in proceeding from a stimulus to a given response.  We will symbolize the two latter transmission concepts as c (capacity) and u (utilization) in a given case of behavior. They  represent limitations on the use of the  VIDAS SYSTEMS THEORY 11 I The Dynamic Calculus Foundations of Learning Theory  Attitu   Film   play   2 e level Sentiment level Hobby '\_ _,'  3   Wife's   hair style     photog 1---~ raph~y  4   New   York   5 J   6 ,   Taxation   accoun  7 -   Business   friend   B Divorce     reform   9   Political  10 party  President   11 of the   U.S.A.   12   13   Methodist   church   14   Country  Wife  Curiosity  Sex  Protection  Selfassertion  Hunger  Anger  FIG. 2. Reproduced, by permission of the publisher, from Cattell (1985), p. 77.  channel paths. We have to seek these values, as in much of science, by agreeing on a hypothesis on paths, as in Figs. 1 and 2,  and seeing how well it fits data. The trial of this and other alternatives will take time, but for the present let us accept  Fig. I as our first hypothesis.  Now we shall also posit that each channel has a certain width or more abstractly, an ultimate capacity, presumably reached by  the individual's previous experience, which we call c, and a degree of present flow or utilization, u-a pressure that will  vary from occasion to occasion. The flow down, say, Channel 1 in Fig. 1 will thus be  b-r=clu-Y.  If now we take into account the magnitude of a given source reservoir, say M, the flow in channel 1 in responding to a  stimulus with a response j can be conceived as  M, c, u1j = M1 bi.  WE .  God  Appeal  Selfsubmission  112 RAYMOND B. CATTELL  This use of M supposes a pressure or level in the reservoir which contributes to the flow, which will be more free with a  larger M trait input.  We are for the moment assuming that we deal only with the part of aj, namely aj.k, that derives from M, and that would appear  in the full behavioral equation from factoring aj with other variables, as a part of aij:  aj=bjpP,xbj.M; xbjeE; xbidD;andsoon. (3)  That is to say we suppose the final factor loadings of a,j, namely bj, for a given reservoir to be proportional to the product  of the contributions of the various reservoirs through the various channels that they are compelled to take. This follows the  normal rule of combining successive path coefficients in a structural correlation analysis.  We shall take for an illustration of a solution for the c's and u's first a straight three item chain with no auxiliary  tributaries. Then by the multiproduct law for path coefficients the ultimate output aj (see Fig. 1) is  aj = Ml c1 u1 _ x M2C2u2j x M3C3U3j. (5)  It is supposed here that M and c values remain fixed but the u's-the pressures in the paths-respond to the strength and nature  of the particular stimulus for aj. We can assume that the M's are known, in kind and quantity, from ordinary factor analytic  treatment of a collection of a's-behavioral responses under different varied conditions. We assume here P-technique factoring  of the single individual.  By the factor model the cu's will each equal factor loadings, b's, thus  Clulj =bjj (6)  provided the range is so moderate that the addition model is a close approximation to the product model in (5). Otherwise the  cu values will have to be obtained by use of the product form of factor analysis (McDonald, 1962).  No solution is possible for the c and u values separately from the above, but if we take a second piece of behavior, in which  the u's but not the c's will alter, one becomes possible. (The assumption, as stated, is that c's-transmission capacities-are  fixed for the individual genetically and by past urgency of the stimulus.) Then we have a new response, ak, which can be  written  ak -MICIUlk X M2C2u2k X M3C3U3k  Thus, assuming (2), we have  aj_ M1CIU1j X M2C2U2j x M3C3U3j  ak MIClUlk XM2C2U2k XM3C3U3k  U lj U2j U3j  U1kU2kU3k  Similar fractions are obtainable from other pairs and responses, m, n, o, p, etc.  Thus if  then  VIDAS SYSTEMS THEORY 113  am ulmu2mu3m (9)  ak ulku2ku3k   ad ak uliu2;u31   (10)  akam ulmu2mu3m   From such equations we can solve by simultaneous equation methods for ratios among all ul, u2, u3, etc. expressions, but for  nothing more than ratios. It will be necessary to obtain results for some other circuit in which two of the three paths are  identical with the above, and preferably acting alone. We can obtain from Fig. 1 the contrast of 2, 10, 20, 21 and of 2, 10,  18, 19, 20, 21, in which the first is a purely cognitive handling of a decision and the second, through 18 and 19, involves  the stimulation and reaction of a general psychological state (GS). A ratio of these two paths would lead to a u,8u19  solution. A second experimental analysis in which only one of these-say u,9, the effect of a psychological state-is involved  would lead to a solution for u,8.  Conceivably, iterative solution to several such simultaneous equations would be able to obtain all u's. From that point a  soution for c's is obtainable by using the u's as coefficients in equations of cu's (and M's).  We finish then with a complete solution of the closed system, knowing, for the given individual, the M, C, and values for  diverse stimulus-response combinations. The experimental procedure consists in obtaining stimulus-response, e.g., test scores  on a diverse collection of variables and factoring to obtain M's and b's on a single individual by P-technique. One then turns  to the VIDAS sets of hypotheses and classifies the responses according to the paths presumed involved. This may involve  experimental manipulation of the paths involved. For example, in the above instance we take differences of psychological  states into account in the determination of ego decisions, whereas in the other case we allow the decision to be a purely  cognitive one.  Ease response is presumably the result of the M's, c's, and u's involved in the paths. The remaining task-no light problem in  simultaneous equations-is to solve for the u's, assuming M's and c's are constants. From Eq. (6), one then solves for c;'s as  (b;/u;)'s. The M's are assessed by the usual factor analytic formula for estimating the strength of factors. It will be  recognized that in Fig. 1 each reservoir, e.g., that of E for ergic intervention, is actually a "nest" of separate factors,  which may, however, for purposes of designation of action, be considered as a whole, though the M analysis will separate them  into separate, general factors. (Ergs in the case of E.)  The chief problem in the above proposed resolution is that the factor model considers M's as operating additively, whereas, as  the VIDAS model requires, they act in many cases successively, thus requiring products of correlations, i.e.,  114 RAYMOND B. CATTELL  M,b, x M2 b2, instead of additions. This presents to factor analysis an only partially solved problem of models.  Alternatively, as suggested here, small ranges of variations in all variables should be used, which are known to permit  approximate additive solutions of product models.  Some outlying consequences remain to be discussed. There is the question of whether the ultimate effect of a trait on  performance (b m) is properly represented by a fraction (c, u,) of a fraction (c2 u2) of a fraction, each determined by the  amount that a channel is able to carry of what is given to it initially. There is the problem that though ergs and abilities,  for example, are each represented in Fig. 1 by a single source, there are at least a dozen independent ergic sources and some  20 separate abilities. We assume that their class similarity means that the same channel is used by all within a  class-prefaced of course by the strength of the particular erg or ability-EX;c, u, (In all such inner calculations the T,  i.e., sum of M's, is peculiar to the person, T;, and the use, u, is peculiar to the performance, ux, and the channel, while  the c can be investigated for constancy over persons in a common cultural upbringing. One may speculate, however, that c also  has variance among persons; e.g., a small c21 (as well as a reduced T) in a brain injured person.  One needs to consider also structured learning. A major question that arises is whether the source traits grow by the passes  of channel information through them. Almost certainly some do. For example, Channel 2 is constantly adding from perception to  the stored engrams of long distance memory in M. And the organiation of D and T data, through Paths 24 and 20, in the final  shaping of responses must increase the power of A. Accepting this does not affect our analysis above. For the factored values  for reservoirs in a given person are taken at the moment when the channels flow. But we need to add to the above analysis when  carried over long intervals of time, a model that connects the flow values with changes in the magnitude of the reservoirs  (source traits) according to propositions in structured learning theory.  Finally, and in a more philosophical sense, we may speculate as to what it is that moves along the channels. In virtually all  the uses of systems theory so far discussed the "substance" has been either information or energy, though some medical systems  deal with matter (Ashby, 1962; Bertalanffy, 1967). The input to, say, D, the ego, from the abilities, T, is surely largely a  flow of information for guidance. But that in channels 8, 14, and 19 is in common language "energy," to arouse and drive. If  we try the system in a computer simulation, energy is bound to be quantified in the same bits and bytes as information.  Certainly there would have to be a common "fluid" in the computer simulation of a system like the VIDAS, and that would be  "bits." But if, like Luria (1932) and many Russian psychologists, we want to think of systems in physiological terms then,  without any obvious difficulty, we might measure transport in matter-hormones, synapses, and the like.  Many systems have been built up by assigning a "purpose" to a system-almost always the preservation of homeostasis. The last  is an unsuitable goal for the VIDAS system model. Its aim is the aim of the instincts-the ergs-and the exter-  VIDAS SYSTEMS THEORY 115  nal feedback through "outer channel" 25 tells how far the goal has been obtained. This result is passed on through PD and  Channel 5, perhaps to reduce tension and produce reward in E. The root of all action lies in E, but with the human the goals  go beyond homeostasis to the production of often still more exciting conditions in the external world.  REFERENCES  ASHBY, W. B. (1962). Principles of the self-organizing system. In H. von Foerster & G. W. Zopf (Eds. ), Principles of  self-organization (pp. 225-238). New Yrok: McMillan.  BERTALANFFY, L. VON (1969). Robots, men and minds. Psychology in the modern world. New York: Braziller.  CATTELL, R. B. (1978). The scientific use of factor analysis in behavioral and life sciences. New York: Plenum Press.  CATTELL, R. B. (1979-1980). Personality and learning theory (Vols. 1 and 2). New York: Springer. CATTELL, R. B. (1985). Human  motivation and the dynamic calculus. New York: Praeger. FOERSTER, H. VON & ZOPF, G. W. (1982). Principles of  self-organization. New York: McMillan. HAKSTIAN, R., & CATTELL, R. B. (1976). The comprehensive ability handbook. Champaign,  II: IPAT. LURIA, A. R. (1932). The nature of human conflicts: An objective study of disorganization and control of human  behavior. Translated by Garth. New York: Liverright.  McDONALD, R. (1962). A general approach to non-linear factor analysis. Psychometrika, 27, 397-415. WALTER, W. G., et al.  (1964). Contingent negative variations or elective sign of sensory-motor association. Nature (London), 203, 300-304.  RECEIVED October 24, 1986  480'34;'1-9