10.1016/0022-2496(90)90001-p
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 34, 127-188 (1990)  Psychologically Simple Motions as Geodesic Paths I. Asymmetric Objects  ELOISE H. CARLTON AND ROGER N. SHEPARD  Stanford University  There are infinitely many ways in which an object might rigidly move between any two positions in space. Experiments on real,  apparent, and imagined motion indicate, however, that humans favor particular connecting motions. The favored motions may  reflect internalizations of principles governing the transformations of objects in the external world. This first of two  articles (Part 1) offers formalizations and preliminary evaluations of two primary candidates for principles that may have  been internalized: (a) laws of physics-especially the principle of least action, according to which, in the absence of  external forces, the center of a rigid body traverses a straight line between any two positions while any rotation is about  its rectilinearly translating center-and (b) principles of kinematic geometry-especially Chasles's theorem, according to  which, for any two positions of an asymmetric object, there exists a unique axis in space such that the object can be carried  from the one position to the other by a helical combination of a translation along and rotation about that axis. A  oneparameter family of cases intermediate between the pure cases of physics and geometry is also considered. Each case is  abstractly formulated in terms of the straightest transformational path (geodesic) that it prescribes in the six-dimensional  manifold of possible positions of the object in space. The corresponding motions are concretely illustrated for asymmetric  objects in two- and in three-dimensional space. Characterization of the additional geodesics permitted by objects possessing  various symmetries is deferred to a second article (Part 11). The formalization of internalized principles and associated  geodesics may eventually lead to a mental mechanics governing how humans and other animals interpret events and plan and carry  out actions in the world. ;C 1990 Academic Press, Inc.  INTRODUCTION  Psychological Significance of the Representation of Paths of Transformation  The idea that thinking, problem solving, and planning may largely be mental simulations of the relevant external objects and  operations, though anticipated by earlier philosophers, received perhaps its first forceful advocacy from the British  psychologist Kenneth Craik (1943). At the time of Craik's untimely death in 1945, however, the notion of mental simulation had  yet to be fully explicated and empirically evaluated. Even today, many fundamental questions remain:  (a) To what extent do such internal processes have the essential characteristic of an analog simulation (Cooper, 1976; Cooper  & Shepard, 1973; Shepard, 1975, 1978; Shepard & Feng, 1972). That is, to what extent do intermediate states of the  Correspondence should be addressed to Roger N. Shepard, Department of Psychology, Building 420, Stanford University, Stanford,  CA 94305-2130.  127  0022-2496/90 $3.00  Copyright ;c; 1990 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  128 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  internal process bear a one-to-one relation to corresponding intermediate states of the external process-if that process were  actually to be carried out? The contrast here is with discrete symbolic processes of logical inference and digital  computation, whose intermediate states have no such one-to-one correspondence to possible intermediate states in the external  world. (b) What is the nature and ultimate source of the constraints on the structural characteristics of the internal  process? If the internal process is to yield an adaptive outcome, its constraints cannot be determined by purely arbitrary  limitations on the information processing system. Rather, the system must have been shaped, by natural selection and  individual learning, to embody the most relevant constraints that govern the external world (Shepard, 1981, 1984, 1987a). (c)  Does this mean that (at a level that may be inacessible to introspection) our internal simulations are governed by  internalizations of the laws of physics? Or are these simulations primarily guided by still more abstract constraints  determined by the geometry or group structure of Euclidean space (e.g., Carlton, 1988; Cassirer, 1944 [1938]; Dodwell, 1983;  Foster, 1975; Goebel, 1990; Hoffman, 1966; Shepard, 1984)?  At the most general level, such issues could prove to be of very broad significance for the understanding of human and animal  cognition and behavior. Ideas drawn from cybernetics (Wiener, 1948; see also Powers, 1973) and its extension to symbolic  problem solving and planning (Miller, Galanter, & Pribram, 1960; Newell & Simon, 1961, 1971) when put together with the notion  that imagined operations such as "mental rotation" (Shepard & Metzler, 1971) are analog simulations of external processes,  have led to the following candidate for a central principle of adaptive behavior: At any moment, an individual first compares  the perceptually given state of the external world with an internally represented goal (or subgoal) state for that world, then  imagines possible transformations of the given state into the represented goal state, and finally selects, as a guide to overt  action, the path of transformation that proves most effective in the mental simulation (Shepard, 1981, pp. 333-334). Among  alternative states that appear more desirable than the prevailing state, the one an individual adopts as the current goal (or  subgoal) may spontaneously suggest itself by virtue of its similarity (cf., Shepard, 1987b) to the prevailing state or may be  discovered by imagining various transformations of the prevailing state.  Progress toward a more rigorous formulation of such a principle requires an explicit formulation of the internalized  constraints. We leave for possible future elucidation the internalized constraints governing transformations in  generalincluding those that are nonrigid, motoric, chromatic, irreversible (e.g., chemical or biological), or many-body, and  including those of social interaction such, perhaps, as social exchange (Cosmides, 1989) and shareability (Freyd, 1983b). For  the present, we focus only on the restricted case of rigid transformations of a single object in three-dimensional space. We  hope that the approach that we illustrate for this restricted case, in terms of group-theoretic structures and their preferred  paths (geodesics), may ultimately prove extendable to some of the other cases of potentially broader psychological  significance.  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, 1 129  Representation of Rigid Transformations  Students of perception and internal representation have long focused primarily on the perception and representation of static  stimuli. The view has recently been emerging, however, that it is not objects but their transformations that may be primary  (e.g., Freyd, 1987; Leyton, 1988; Pribram & Carlton, 1986; Shepard, 1981). Even a static object is not perceptually  interpreted as imutable and sui generis but, rather, as a member of a set of natural alternatives (Garner, 1974; Shepard,  1987b). Moreover, the natural alternatives are often just those to which the given object is related by psychologically simple  transformations (Cassirer, 1944; Leyton, 1986a, 1986b, 1986c; Palmer, 1982, 1984; Shepard, 1981, 1988).  Rigid transformations in space, particularly, should be fundamental because, as Gibson (1966, 1979) emphasized, any external  object (whether it is itself rigid or nonrigid-Shepard, 1984) undergoes a rigid transformation relative to a moving observer.  Through natural selection, too, the constraints governing rigid transformations might be expected to have become more deeply  entrenched in our representational machinery than the properties of individual objects: Rigid transformations have been  constrained by the same invariant principles of physics and/or of Euclidean geometry throughout evolutionary history. In  constrast, the sizes, shapes, colors, and textures of objects have vastly greater numbers of degrees of freedom, and the  particular combinations of these that have had biological significance for any evolutionary line have differed widely from one  epoch to another over the evolutionary history of that line (Shepard, 1987a, 1988).  Results of experiments on imagined transformations and on corresponding perceptual phenomena of visual apparent motion (both  reviewed in Shepard & Cooper, 1982) have motivated efforts toward the formulation of more refined and general principles for  the representation of rigid transformations of objects in space (e.g., Foster, 1975, 1978; Shepard, 1975, 1981, 1984; Shepard  & Farrell, 1985). In this article, we develop a more explicit and extensive mathematical basis for the formulation of  alternative perceptual/cognitive kinematics such as have begun to emerge from this preceding work. We hope this basis will  permit sharper theoretical statements and experimental tests of human and animal perception and representation of objects and  their transformations in space.  Our goal, here, is primarily theoretical. We mention previous findings (including some recent, as yet unpublished results) to  the extent that these findings motivate the particular theoretical principles we introduce. Ultimately, or course, these  principles must be justified in terms of their degrees of success in providing quantitative accounts of empirical  phenomena-particularly those of the three following types:  1. Imagined Transformation. When asked whether two simultaneously presented visual objects are (a)  identical in three-dimensional shape (despite possible differences in their positions in space) or (b) inherently different in  shape (e.g., enantiomorphic, like a right and left hand), individuals evidently make their decision by imagining one object  rigidly moved into the position of the other and by then determining whether the result yields a match or mismatch (Shepard &  130 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  Metzler, 1971). Both chronometric data and introspective reports indicate that such normalizing transformations are carried  out over a definite path-for example through either of two opposite (clockwise or counterclockwise) rotations, when the  presented objects differ in spatial oritentation by nearly 180(e.g., Cooper, 1975; Cooper & Shepard, 1973, 1975; Metzler &  Shepard, 1974).  2. Visual Apparent Motion. When two identically shaped objects differing only in position are presented successively, with a  short interstimulus interval and a sufficiently slow rate of alternation, observers experience the visual illusion of a single  object rigidly moving back and forth between those two presented positions over a definite connecting path (Farrell, 1983;  Farrell & Shepard, 1981; Foster, 1975; McBeath & Shepard, 1989; Proffitt, Gilden, Kaiser, & Whelan, 1988; Shepard & Judd,  1976). Again, the motion may be experienced in either of two opposite directions of rotation when the two positions differ by  close to 180 in the case of an assymmetric object, or by close to 90 in the (two-dimensional) case of a centrally  symmetric object (such as a rectangle), which is identical to itself under a 180rotation (Farrell & Shepard, 1981; Robins &  Shepard, 1977).  3. Perceived Real Motion. When a single object actually moves between two given positions, differing in location and/or  orientation in space, alternative paths of motion do not all appear equally simple or natural. Rather, we are finding (in  current, as yet unpublished experiments) that observers rate certain motions as simpler or more natural than others, and are  also more sensitive to changes or perturbations when these are imposed on the motions of a psychologically favored type.  Specific Statement of the Problem  Our central question is simply put: Given two positions of an object in threedimensional space, what is the psychologically  most natural or simplest motion of the object from the one position to the other-according to any of the criteria of imagined,  apparent, or actually perceived motion? We immediately encounter a complication, however: For an object that, like an unmarked  cube, possesses certain symmetries, we cannot specify a unique path of motion without first solving the correspondence problem  (e.g., see Attneave, 1974; Ullman, 1979) of which part (e.g., face, edge, or corner) of the object in the one position  corresponds to which similar part of the object in the other position. We can avoid this correspondence problem only by going  to either of the two following extremes:  On one hand, we can restrict attention to objects with complete rotational symmetry, such as points, circles, or spheres,  which correspond to themselves in any orientations. But the simplest motion is then trivially along the straight line between  the two positions. This is, in fact, the type of motion experienced between two dots in the early experiments on visual  apparent motion (e.g., Exner, 1875; Korte, 1915; Wertheimer, 1961 [1912]).  On the other hand, we can restrict attention to completely asymmetric objects,  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, I 131  so that for any two positions of the object, the orientational difference is uniquely defined and there is only one way of  establishing a correspondence between parts of the object in the two positions. This is a more interesting case. When such an  asymmetric object is alternately displayed in two positions differing in orientation as well as in location, the apparent  motion tends generally to be experienced along a particular path that is in fact curved rather than straight (Farrell, 1983;  Foster, 1975; McBeath & Shepard, 1989; Mori, 1982; Proftitt et al., 1988; Shepard, 1984).  It is on this as yet incompletely understood case of asymmetric objects that we focus in the present Part I. We leave for the  sequel (Part 11) a consideration of the still more complex case of rigid motions between objects that possess various  symmetries or approximations to such symmetries. There, we shall consider the additional paths of transformation that are  possible for objects that are identical to themselves under certain rotations, such as rotations of 90for the unmarked  square or 90 120 or 180(about different axes) for the unmarked cube.  For concrete illustration we now consider alternative motions between two positions of a cube that is rendered asymmetric by  labeling its faces "F," "T,"  A. Two Positions of a Cube  FiG. 1. (A) Two arbitrary positions of a labeled cube. (B) An arbitrary path along which the cube  might be moved from the one position to the other.  132 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  "R," - - - for "front," "top," "right," and so on. The two arbitrarily chosen positions of the cube that we have chosen for  this purpose are displayed at the top of Fig. 1 (where the cube on the right is more distant in depth.)  In the lower part of the figure, we indicate a series of intermediate positions along a particular path of motion between the  two given positions. Motion over this path would not be spontaneously imagined in comparing the two objects, would not be  experienced in visual apparent motion between the presented positions, and would not be judged simple if that motion were  dynamically displayed. What path might be favored, psychologically, depends on the underlying principles assumed. Different  paths, such as those labeled 1, 2, and 3, in Fig. 2, are in fact prescribed, respectively, by (1) the laws of physics for the  motions of rigid bodies in space, (2) the principles of geometry for the simplest transformations of three-dimensional space  into itself, and (3) the principles of geometry for the rigid transformations of objects possessing various symmetries (to be  considered in Part II). Which of such paths is psychologically favored can only be decided by emprical research. But we must  first achieve a grasp of the alternative principles, and the characters of the alternative paths that they imply.  The needed general theoretical approach has been neglected in previous discussions of perceived, apparent, or imagined  transformations. Most empirical studies have focused on the case of two-dimensional shapes differing only in their positions  in the plane and, typically, differing only in their locations or only in their orientations. In such cases, the alternative  principles make the same predictions as to which paths are simplest. When we consider motions between objects differing in  both location and orientation in three-dimensional space, however, the different  Path 3  Fic. 2. Three nonarbitrary paths of motion between the two given positions of the cube-namely, paths prescribed by physics  (Path 1), by kinematic geometry (Path 2), and by kinematic geometry together with certain symmetries of the cube (Path 3).  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, I 133  principles yield distinct paths (as indicated in Fig. 2). Thus the paths that are psychologically favored in these more  general cases provide information about our internalized principles concerning the ways in which objects transform in the  world.  Of course, when a visible object actually moves, our perception of its motion is usually veridical-even when the path of  motion is as convoluted as that illustrated in Fig. 1. This is attested by our success in intercepting or avoiding the moving  object, in discriminating whether or not the motion preserves the rigid structure of the object, in detecting that the motion  of the object is perturbed by external forces, and so on. As noted by Gibson (1966, 1979), under normal conditions of  uninterrupted illumination and unconstrained binocular viewing, the information available in the ambient optic array is  sufficient to specify the motion of the object.'  However, in order to determine the internalized principles of transformation, we need to depart from the ecologically  characteristic conditions considered by Gibson. Apparent motion offers a particularly informative case. Because no motion is  actually presented, the consistent but involuntary experience of motion over a particular connecting path provides compelling  evidence for the existence of internal principles governing the transformations of objects in space (Shepard, 1984).  Under more typical conditions of good viewing, we are not aware that we are using any such internal principles. The  psychophysical "mesh" (Shepard, 1981, 1987a) between these internal principles and external events is so complete under such  conditions that the representational process seems the result of a direct coupling to the external world. Nevertheless, this  representational process does not really result from a direct coupling in which any arbitrary events, however anomalous, would  be veridically perceived. Perhaps (as suggested by Shepard, 1984), the representational process arises, rather, as a kind of  "resonance" to external stimulation, within a system that-through natural selection and experiental fine tuning-has already  internalized the principal regularities of the world.  We can thus understand why anomalous events-those that occur only rarely, unless experimentally contrived in the  laboratory-may give rise to misperceptions and illusions (including the illusion of apparent motion). More importantly, we can  understand why, in the usual absence of such anomalies under the natural or ecologically valid conditions in which we have  evolved, we tend to perceive veridically even when, as does happen in nature, the view or the illumination of an object is  partially or intermittently obstructed. An essentially full representational response may be excited within the resonant  system by a fractional part of the external infor  ' Strictly, two further conditions are required for an unambiguous determination of the object's motion from the ambient optic  array. (a) The motion relative to the observer must not, as in a baseball pitcher's fast ball (see Bahill & LaRitz, 1984), be  so swift as to outstrip our neural circuits for sensory analysis. (b) The intrinsic size and shape of the object must be  independent of the station point from which the object is viewed. Otherwise, the same pattern in the observer's ambient array  could be attributed to any of an infinite number of tricks by Descartes's "demon" in which the object expands and  compensatingly recedes, contracts and compensatingly approaches, deforms and compensatingly rotates, and so on just to  maintain a projection identical to that of a rigid object in three-dimensional space.  134 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  mation. That is, the missing information is automatically interpolated, extrapolated, or otherwise completed by a kind of  unconscious simulation guided by internalized principles about how the world works.  In order to move toward an explicit formulation of such internalized principles, we need to develop more precise, mathematical  characterizations of the alternative types of principles and of the corresponding paths of transformation that they prescribe.  Such characterizations can help us to select and to implement stimulus displays that most sharply discriminate among  alternative candidates for the internalized principles. Such displays might consist of pairs of objects to be presented, as in  the cases of apparant or imagined transformation, or they might consist of connecting paths of transformation, as in the cases  of real motion or of the type of "path-guided" apparent motion described by Shepard and Zare (1983).  Evolutionary considerations as well as currently emerging psychological evidence motivate the mathematical formulation of  candidate internalized principles derived primarily from classical physics and from kinematic geometry. First, we need to set  forth the common geometrical groundwork that underlies all of these alternatives-including those developed for asymmetric  objects, presented in this article (Part I), and those developed for symmetric objects, presented in the sequel (Part I1).  GEOMETRICAL REPRESENTATION OF PATHS OF MOTION  The Manifold of Possible Positions of an Object in Space  Relative to a frame provided by the environment (or by the observer), any rigid body has a total of six degrees of freedom of  position. The complete specification of a position of the body requires three rectilinear coordinates of location (say, x, y,  z) and three angular coordinates of orientation (say, 0, B, 0). A space in which each distinct position of a rigid object in  three-dimensional space is represented by a distinct point must therefore be six-dimensional. Because any continuous motion of  a three-dimensional object corresponds to a continuous succession of positions of the object, that motion defines a uniquely  corresponding continuous sequence of points-that is, a unique path-in this six-dimensional space of positions.  In order to indicate something of the structure of the space of possible positions, we first consider a much simpler, more  familiar, and merely two-dimensional space; namely, the surface of a cylinder. As is indicated in the upper part of Fig. 3, a  two-dimensional cylindrical surface can be regarded as the product of two onedimensional subspaces, namely, a rectilinear  space (corresponding to the real line R') and a closed circle (which can be regarded as a "one-dimensional sphere" S').  Similarly, the six-dimensional space of possible positions of an object in three-dimensional space can be regarded as a  product of two three-dimensional subspaces, namely, the space of locations of the object (with rectilinear coordinates x, y,  z) and the space of orientations of the object (with angular coordinates 0, B, 0). The three-dimensional subspace of locations  (denoted R3) is isomorphic to  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, I 135  01  6-D space of possible positions  R3 SO(3) R3 x SO(3)  FIG. 3. Two dimensional cylindrical manifold as a product of a one-dimensional line and a onedimensional circle (top).  Six-dimensional space of possible positions of an object as a product of a threedimensional space of possible locations and a  three dimensional space of possible orientations (bottom).  Euclidean space. However, because a rotation through 2zr radians (360 brings an object back to its original orientation, the  three-dimensional subspace of orientations does not have a flat, Cartesian structure. It is multiply circular. Not only is it  spherical, but opposite points of each diameter in the sphere are identified with each other (that is, treated as the same  point). Through this identification of endpoints, each diameter becomes itself a circle. Each such circle represents a full  360cycle of orientations of the object about some fixed axis of rotation. This higherdimensional case is very schematically  illustrated in the lower part of Fig. 3-for a finite (cubical) portion of the potentially infinite locational subspace (here  R3).  Relative to an original, reference orientation of an object, any new orientation of that object can be represented by a vector  originating at the center of a sphere and lying along one of its diameters. The direction of the vector corresponds to the  direction of the axis of rotation of the object and its length corresponds to the angle of rotation about that axis. The  vector of zero length represented by the point at the center of the sphere corresponds to the original, unrotated orientation  of the object. The surface of the sphere corresponds to the set of vectors whose lengths represent rotations through 71  radians (180'). Diametrically opposite points on the surface are identified because rotations through angles 7r in opposite  directions leave the object in identical orientations.  Figure 4 shows the orientations of the marked cube that correspond to points in  136  m  8  R  m  8  8  0W  Fto. 4. Flattened portrayal of a two-dimensional section through the three-dimensional manifold of orientations of an  asymmetric object, illustrated by the labeled cube. (From Representation of the orientations of shapes by R. N. Shepard and J.  E. Farrell (1985), Acta Psvchologica, 59, p. 109. Copyright 1985 by Elsevier Scienced Publishers B. V. [North-Holland].  Reproduced by permission.)  an illustrative two-dimensional section through the three-dimensional space of possible orientations. In the center, the cube  is in a standard reference orientation (with its front, F, upright and facing the viewer). Around the perimeter, the cube is  rotated away from this reference orientation by 7r radians (so that the back, B, now faces the viewer). In accordance with the  identification of diametrically opposite points, the cube is in the same orientation in each opposite pair around this  perimeter.  Although this section through the space of orientations is here portrayed as if it were a flat disk, the natural metric for  the space of orientations confers a hemispherical shape on this section. Moreover, because opposite points around the  perimeter are identified, the section really forms a closed manifold in which the neighborhood around any point, including any  point falling on what appears as a perimeter, is equivalent to a neighborhood around any point on the two-dimensional surface  of a complete (as opposed to a hemi-) sphere. Thus, the manifold itself, unlike this flattened projection, is spatially  homogeneous and has no bounding edge.  E-1 19  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, I 137  Representation of Simplest Motions as Geodesic Paths  Abstractly formulated, our problem now becomes one of determining which one-dimensional paths in the full six-dimensional  manifold of possible positions are psychologically simplest or most natural (Shepard, 1977). We begin with two psychologically  motivated hypotheses, which are related to the two mathematically formulated "schemes" previously considered by Foster (1975,  p. 83; 1978, pp. 70 et seq.):  Uniformity Hypothesis. Between any two positions of an object in space, a psychologically simple motion is one that can be  generated by iterative application of a single small rigid transformation.  Minimum Hypothesis. For any two motions that rigidly carry an object from one of two given positions to the other, the  psychologically simpler motion is the one of smaller total extent-provided that such an extent is definable. (In the case of  transformations that are purely rotational, this extent can be defined simply as the total number of radians of the rotation).  The uniformity hypothesis resembles the Gestalt principle of "good continuation." This hypothesis is also related to the  assumption, in physics, that a motion is purely inertial (not perturbed by outside forces) and also, perhaps, the assumption  that the object's principal axes of inertia are all equal. This hypothesis is related to the assumption, in geometry, that the  motion arises from a one-parameter subgroup of the group of possible rigid motions. Clearly, pure translations and pure  rotations are uniform in this sense: A translation in any direction can be obtained by iteration of a single small translation  in that same direction, and a rotation about any axis can be obtained by iteration of a single small rotation about the same  axis. In contrast, no single transformation will yield, simply by uniform iteration, the convoluted motion illustrated in Fig.  1.  The minimum hypothesis is added because, between any two positions of an object, there often are two or more distinct motions  that satisfy the uniformity hypothesis. For example, an object can be rigidly transformed between two positions differing only  in orientation by either of two opposite rotations about the same axis. One of these rotations will be shorter than the other,  though, unless the two positions differ by exactly n radians (180'). Indeed, there will also be an infinite number of other  rotations between two such orientations-including, in addition to either of the two opposite rotations just considered, any  number of additional complete 27r turns about the same axis. But all of these are of larger extent and, also, pass through the  beginning and ending orientations more than once.  Minimum principles have been prominent in perceptual psychology since the advent of Gestalt theory (see Hatfield & Epstein,  1985). In relation to the representation of motion, the most fundamental analogue in physics is the principle of least action  enunciated by Maupertuis; refined for classical mechanics by Euler, Lagrange, and Hamilton; and extended to relativistic and  quantum physics by  138 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  Einstein, Tomonaga, Schwinger, Feynman, and others.` Minimum principles are related to the notion, in geometry, of a  geodesic-when the geodesic is interpreted as a path determined by the variational principle that between any two points along  the path, arc length (if definable) be minimum.  Principles advocated by psychologists have typically concerned limitations on processing capabilities. Restle's (1979) "coding  theory" of the representation of motion may serve as an example. Even when successful, theories based on processing  limitations leave open the question of why human processing is limited in just the way it is. Our approach has been guided,  rather, by the notion that in the long run, processing capabilities are evolutionarily shaped to mesh with the enduring  constraints in the external world (see Shepard, 1981, 1984, 1987a). What, ultimately is the source of coding principles such  as those proposed by Restle (as well as of the earlier coding principles of Leeuwenberg, 1971, or the still earlier Gestalt  principles of "good continuation," "common fate," and the like)? Do these principles reflect arbitrary constraints on the  human processing system, or have they been internalized, as we suggest, from constaints that hold in the external world? (See  Shepard, 1989, for a fuller discussion of these two possibilities).  Both uniformity and minimality appear to be relevant. The uniformity hypothesis will not alone suffice because, among paths  that are equivalently uniform, some are shorter than others. The minimum hypothesis has meaning, however, only for sets of  paths for which we can determine, for every pair, whether one path is shorter that the other. But, as we shall see, we can  make such determinations of relative lengths for all paths in the full six-dimensional manifold of positions only by resorting  to a "degenerate" metric for the manifold of positions in which the purely translational component of any difference in  position, however large, makes no contribution to the length of a path that includes any rotational component. But such a  degenerate metric appears to be incompatible with accepted evidence that translational differences can be psychologically  significant.  There is, nevertheless, a more abstract hypothesis that may be formulated to subsume both uniformity and minimality. First,  the manifold of possible positions must be endowed with a structure that is more restrictive than a merely topological  structure but that is not, as in the case of a metric structure, so restrictive that it cannot be realized in a  psychologically relevant form on the full six-dimensional manifold of possible positions. The alternative structures that we  will principally be exploring for this manifold are the structures-called connections (Helgason, 1978; Kobayashi & Nomizu,  1963)-which may be derived from alternative principles such as those of physics, kinematic geometry, and object symmetry. Such  structures are sufficient to determine the geodesics-that is, the paths that are the closest analogues of straight lines  within the curved manifold.  z Eddie Oshins (personal communication, circa 1978) first brought the attention of one of us (RNS) to the role that the least  action principle has played in modern relatively and quantum physics.  s A nondegenerate metric arises from a nondegenerate symmetric form B: B(x, y)=0 for all y implies x=0.  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, I 139  The geodesics of a connection seem well suited for modeling representational processes that are analog in the sense, put  forward by Shepard (1975) and Cooper (1976), that such internal processes pass through intermediate states corresponding to  intermediate states of the external process that they represent. For, one consequence is that if state B is among the  intermediate internal states in a transition from state A to state C, then the states traversed in going from A to B or in  going from B to C are also among the intermediate states in going from A to C. This is reminiscent of the key property of the  geodesics of a connection, namely, the "locality" property that if a path from A to C via B is a geodesic, then the portions  of the path just from A to B or just from A to C are also geodesics. Moreover, although a particular structure for the  manifold of possible positions of an object may not yield a nondegenerate metric on the manifold as a whole, it may support  the determination of relative arc lengths along any particular geodesic. Accordingly, we propose the following:  Geodesic Hypothesis. When the manifold of possible positions is endowed with the psychologically appropriate structure  (generally, the appropriate connection), psychologically natural motions of a rigid object correspond to motions over  geodesics in that manifold; and the psychologically simplest motion over any one geodesic between two given points is the  shortest path between those points over that geodesic.  Positions of an object that differ only in orientation about a given axis, then, correspond to a circular geodesic in the  manifold, and the simplest transformation of the object between any two such positions is the shortest way around the circle  between the two points corresponding to those positions. Such a path represents a rotation of the object through the smallest  angle bringing it from the one position to the other. (For orientations differing by exactly 7r radians, of course, there will  still exist two distinct but equally simple transformations.)  This hypothesis gains generality from the fact that geodesics can be established in either of two ways: First, when there does  exist a suitable nondegenerate metric on the manifold of possible positions, a geodesic can be defined as an extremal path. A  geodesic in this case, like a great circle on the surface of the earth or a string pulled taut within any curved space, is at  every point along the path locally shortest with respect to the underlying metric. Second, even when there is no suitable  metric, if we can establish an appropriate group structure on the manifold, a geodesic can be defined in terms of the  connection induced by that group structure. A geodesic in this case, again like a great circle, achieves, at each successive  point, the locally straightest continuation of the path. It thus represents the path resulting from iteration of the same  small transformation. In the case of motion on the surface of the earth, such a path arises from iteration of a small rotation  of a radial line about a fixed orthogonal axis through the center of the earth. In this example, the two ways of establishing  geodesics lead to the same great-circle paths on the curved surface.  In the (hemispherical) section through the submanifold of possible orientations  140 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  schematically depicted in Fig. 4, the geodesics corresponding to rigid rotations of the cube about fixed axes are the great  hemicircles-which are isomorphic to complete circles owing to the identification of diametrically opposite points. Other  geodesics in the three-dimensional submanifold of orientations, corresponding to rigid rotations of the cube about yet other  axes, will not all fall within this particular two-dimensional section. Rotations around the line of sight of the cube shown  in the center of Fig. 4, for example, correspond to motions along a geodesic line orthogonal to the hemispherical surface of  this section at that point. That orthogonal geodesic, being another diameter of the sphere, forms a similar circle in the  complete manifold.  We can avoid the awkwardness of having to identify diametrically opposite points around the perimeters of hemispheres by  augmenting the three-dimensional manifold of orientations so that each such hemisphere becomes a complete sphere, as  illustrated in Fig. 5. Correspondingly, the complete space of possible orientations becomes the three-dimensional sphere, S3.  embeddable in four-dimensional Euclidean space E that is, the analogue in one higher dimension of the twodimensional sphere,  S- (i.e., the familiar "spherical surface"), embedded in threedimensional Euclidean space, E'. In terms of the group of  rotations, all geodesics in this augmented representation are then complete great circles. The consequences of this  augmentation are (a) that every possible orientation is now represented twice (at antipodal points of the augmented space),  and (b) that complete traversal of a great circle then corresponds to two complete 27r revolutions (i.e., to a 47r or 720 rotation) of the object about some axis.  Such an augmented but more symmetrical representation is actually required at the level of quantum mechanics, where certain  particles-namely, all fermions (including electrons and protons)-are not returned to their initial state by a 27r rotation but  require a 4rc rotation (Dirac, 1930; see also Aharanov & Susskind, 1967; Wigner, 1959). Eddie Oshins, in first calling this  counterintuitive fact to the attention of one of us (RNS), has suggested that imagined transformations-as well as other mental  processes (see Oshins, 1984; Oshins & McGoveran, 1980)-might be usefully described in terms of the formalisms of quantum  mechanics.'  In any case, the characterization of the geodesics for rigid motions becomes more complex when the motions include both  translational and rotational components; that is, when the three-dimensional manifold of possible orientations must be  combined with the three-dimensional manifold of possible locations to yield the full six-dimensional manifold of possible  positions of an object in space. Alternative physical and geometrical bases for the representation of motions then lead to  Oshins, in calling our attention to this counterintuitive aspect of quantum mechanics (personal communication, circa 1978),  demonstrates how even a macroscopic object (e.g., the human hand) that is connected to another macroscopic object (e.g., the  human body) by a nonrigid but impenetrable link (the arm) can be brought back to its original position relative to that second  object by a certain motion that results in a 720rotation, but not by any motion that results in only a 360' rotation. (See  also Bernstein & Phillips, 1981; Misner, Thorne, & Wheeler, 1973, Chapter 41; Porteus, 1969.)  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, I 141  FtG. 5. Illustration of how the flattened representation of the two-dimensional section through the space of orientations  (Fig. 4) corresponds to a hemisphere or, if each position is represented by two diametrically opposite points in the manifold,  to the complete sphere, S2, where rigid rotations of the cube correspond to great-circle geodesics (as illustrated between  positions A and B).  different metrics or connections for the six-dimensional manifold as a whole. Consequently, these alternative theoretical  bases also single out different paths within the manifold as the geodesics-such as those illustrated in the earlier Fig. 2.  If, as we propose, geodesics are taken to represent the motions favored by the perceptual system, then empirical  investigations should reveal which theoretical basis corresponds to our internalized mechanics for the motions of objects in  space. We now turn to a consideration of the alternative theoretical bases and of the nature of the geodesic paths that each  entails.  480,-34%2-2  142 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  PATHS PRESCRIBED BY CLASSICAL PHYSICS  Introduction and Motivation  On the basis of the assumption that we have internalized the regularities that have prevailed in the terrestrial environment  throughout biological evolution, one might at first suppose that our internalized rules for the motions of rigid bodies in  space would correspond to the laws of motion of classical, Newtonian mechanics. The subsequently formulated laws of relativity  or (as we have noted) of quantum mechanics would have had less opportunity to be internalized because the deviations of those  laws from those of classical mechanics become appreciable only at scales that in comparison with the scales of human affairs,  are incomparably smaller (viz., atomic, in the case of quantum mechanics), larger (viz., cosmic, in the case of general  relativity), or faster (viz., luminal, in the case of special relativity).  The problem that the brain confronts, when attempting to construct an interpolated path of motion between two retinal images  of an object in space, may thus be similar to the problem that a classical physicist would confront when attempting to  determine what path of motion an object might have traversed between its images in photographs taken at times, t, and t,. In  both cases, the interpolation would be motivated by a fundamental principle of conservation, which favors the interpretation  that the two images are of the same continuing object, over the interpretation that one object went out of existence and  another, identical object then materialized in a nearby, but different position.  Any continuous rigid motion would be consistent with the laws of motion in the presence of arbitrarily changing forces. In the  absence of external forces (such as those of friction, air resistance, and gravity), however, the center of mass of the object  must, according to classical physics, traverse a straight line at a constant velocity between the corresponding centers of the  object as it appears in the two given images.  If the object has the same orientation in the two pictures, the motion of the object might simply have been a uniform  rectilinear translation between the two positions. Alternatively, the object might have completed any integral number of  complete rotations (through 21r radians), at a constant angular velocity, in either sense about any one of its principal axes  of inertia. Even in the absence of forces, then, there are infinitely many possible interpolated paths of motion (where,  throughout, we consider paths to be different if the motion of the object differs in either its translational or in its  rotational component). One might regard as simpler, however, those paths that include fewer complete (2n) turns.  If the object appears in different orientations in the two pictures, the interpolated path must include a rotation. If, in  addition to any required translation, a rotation of B radians around one of the principal axes of the object will bring the  one pictured object into congruence with the other, then a rotation of B plus or minus any multiple of 27r around that axis  will also achieve congruence (though, again, we might favor paths with fewer complete turns). If the two portrayed positions  differ  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, 1 143  by a rotation that is not around a principal axis of inertia of the object, then either the object is not of uniform density,  in which case the axis of rotation cannot be determined solely from the two pictures, or else the motion is of a more complex  type.  Mathematical Formulation  In classical mechanics, the behavior of a system that is not exchanging energy with its environment (that is, a conservative  dynamical system) is determined by Hamilton's least action principle. The system traverses that path, in the space of possible  configurations of the system, for which the action, defined as the time integral of an energy function, called the Lagrangian,  is stationary. In the assumed absence of external forces, the Lagrangian is simply the kinetic energy, T, of the system and  Hamilton's principle takes the succinct form  Q  a Tdt=0. P  Here, a indicates variation of the path that the physical system might traverse between initial and final points, P and Q, in  configuration space or, in our case, the initial and final positions, P and Q, of the rigid object in the manifold of its  possible positions. The path actually traversed is taken to be that path for which the total action (that is, the indicated  time integral of the energy) over that path from P to Q is minimum (or, strictly, stationary). (See Arnold, 1974; Goldstein,  1980; MacMillan, 1960, [1936]; Synge & Griffith, 1959; Whittaker, 1917.)  In what follows, we adopt the following standard notational conventions (1) a bold face symbol represents an array of  variables, with lowercase letters representing vectors (one-dimensional arrays) and uppercase letters representing matrices  (two-dimensional arrays); (2) a dot over a symbol indicates differentiation, and a double dot indicates double  differentiation, of the corresponding variable or vector (with respect to time, t, unless otherwise specified); and (3) a  vector symbol surrounded by vertical lines represents the scalar length or magnitude of the corresponding vector.  If, now, the state of a rigid object is represented, in the six-dimensional space of possible positions, by the vector q (with  components q', q2, ..., qb), then, in the absence of external forces, Hamilton's least action principle entails the following  Euler-Lagrange differential equations  _aT _ _d aT aq' dt aq'  These six equations specify how the vector, q(t) = {q'(t), q '(t), ..., qb(t)}, traverses, over time, t, a trajectory in the  six-dimensional manifold of possible positions of that object. (Again, see Arnold, 1974; Goldstein, 1980; MacMillan,  1936/1960; Synge & Griffith, 1959; Whittaker, 1917.)  144 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  The total kinetic energy can be partitioned into additive translational and rotational components: T = T~ + TR. The  translational component is proportional to the product of the object's mass, m, and the square of the velocity, c, of the  center of its mass, c:  Tc = 1 m do e = m 1,,2.M J(e1)2+(e2)2+(e3)2i. 2 ~ dt 2 2  Analogously, the rotational kinetic energy of the object depends both on the three principal moments of inertia, I;, of the  object, and on the vector specifying its instantaneous angular velocity about its center of mass, co =(cc)1, (02, (c)3)=co(t):  TR = 1111 (0j1 )I +I2((02), +I3(C03)2}.  (Here the I; are eigenvalues of the moment of inertia matrix I.)  Solutions of the Euler-Lagrange equations for the kinetic energy T = Tc + TR again yield paths in configuration space, from an  initial configuration q(tl) to a final configuration q(t2). These paths are extremals not only of the integral of kinetic  energy, T. They are extremals also of the integral of arc length ds = f dt for the metric on configuration space determined by  kinetic energy. (See Adler, Bazin, & Schiffer, 1965; Bishop & Goldberg, 1968.) Hence the paths prescribed by classical physics  are equivalently derivable (1) from Hamilton's least action principle, via the Euler-Lagrange equations of motion, and (2)  from the kinetic energy metric on the space of possible positions, as geodesic curves in that manifold.  The additive translational and rotational components of the kinetic energy can readily be separated for purposes of analysis.  In the absence of a rotational component, T= T,,, and (since qr and c` are the same, here)  aT OT  _ _ - _ = mc`. aqi aci  The Euler-Lagrange equations then simplify to  d _aT dt ac' _  -mc`=0 (i= 1, 2, 3), or c=0.  Each solution of these equations is a straight line, c(t) = at + b, determined by an initial position vector b and a velocity  vector a. Hence the center of mass undergoes uniform rectilinear motion, as already stated.  Similarly, in the absence of a translational component (or if we normalize out the translational component by referring the  object to an inertial frame that is uniformly translating along with the center of mass), T= TR, as already given. When  referred to an appropriate (orthonormal) rotating frame (e,, e2, e3), centered in the rotating body and aligned with its  principal axes of inertia, the moments of  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, 1 145  inertia, 11, 12, 13, are constant over time. The angular velocity of such a frame about the center of mass,  3  (O(t)= Y, (0'(t) ei  is determined by the Euler-Lagrange equations. For this purpose, the 0,)i are expressed in terms of three independent  parameters of orientation (which can be taken to be the Euler angles 0, 0, 0, as defined in Synge & Griffith, 1959). The  general solutions of the Euler-Lagrange equations are then elliptic functions (MacMillan, 1960; Whittaker, 1917), which  prescribe the evolution over time of the parameters of orientation (the Euler angles) and the angular velocity co(t). In the  general case, the corresponding motion of the object in physical space is a variable rotational motion about a wobbling axis  through the translating center of mass (a motion that may be familiar to many Americans as the unpredictable gyrations of a  badly thrown football). However, in the case in which the initial rotation is aligned with one of the principal axes of the  object, say w(0)=0)`(0)e,, the solution of the Euler-Lagrange equations is a rotation at a uniform speed U)'(0) about the  uniformly translating axis e,.  To obtain trajectories of the state vector q(t)= {q'(t), ..., gb(t)I in the six-dimensional manifold of possible positions of  the object, translational and rotational geodesics are combined. In the absence of external forces, the resulting motion  generally consists of a uniform translation of the center of mass along a straight line together with a simultaneous rotation  of the object (about that translating center) according to one of the rotational solutions of the Euler-Lagrange equations. If  one of the object's principal axes of inertia is aligned with the axis of the orientational difference between two presented  positions of the object or, regardless of alignment, if the object's moments of inertia are equal (as they are in the case of  a sphere or any regular polyhedron, including the cube), then the rotational component of the interpolated motion will be a  uniform rotation about the axis defined by that orientational difference.  Illustration of Predicted Paths  Graphic portrayal of the paths of motion prescribed by classical physics within the manifold of possible positions is  difficult owing to the six-dimensional, nonEuclidean nature of that manifold. Some intuitive idea of the nature of these paths  can however be gained from a consideration of the simplified case of a two-dimensional rigid object moving in the  two-dimensional plane. Such an object has only two degrees of freedom of location and only one degree of freedom of  orientation.  In Fig. 6, the horizontal coordinates c, and c2 represent the location of the center of mass of the object in the plane and  the vertical coordinate 0 represents the orientation of that object in the plane. The orientations of the object that differ  from a given orientation are thus represented by vectors orthogonal to the CIC2 plane, with the length of the vector  proportional to the angle of rotational difference, 0,  146 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  from the given orientation and with vectors for positive and negative angles of rotational difference extending above and  below that plane, respectively. As before, rotations of 7c radians in opposite directions have the same effect. Hence, the  oppositely directed vectors corresponding to rotations of +7E and -7r radians from the given orientation are identified (that  is, treated as the same vector). The manifold of possible positions of an object in the plane is thus representable as the  three-dimensional slab bounded between and including two parallel infinite planes. A finite rectangular portion of this slab  is depicted at the top of Fig. 6. Each point  Translation  P     C     0  ' a  A  B   O     cc A     P C  Q  C D   P   Q      P C D G  P   4  P   Q  FIG. 6. Representation of the positions of a two-dimensional object in a plane by points in a threedimensional manifold (top)  having two coordinates (c, and CZ) for the position of the object's center of mass and one coordinate (B) for the object's  angular orientation. Because rotation through any multiple of 271 radians returns the object to the same position, there are  infinitely many geodesic paths between any two positions (A and B) of an object, all of which take helical forms when the  identification of positions differing by 271 is achieved geometrically by rolling the (vertical) plane containing those paths  (lower left) into a cylinder (lower right).  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, I 147  on either horizontal bounding plane is identified with the corresponding point directly above or below it on the other plane,  and the straight (vertical) line through the slab between two such points becomes a complete circle-as indicated to the right  in the top part of the figure.  In the case, considered here, of a two-dimensional object confined to a plane, there is only one physically permissible axis  of rotation of the object consistent with the absence of external forces, namely, the axis through the object's center of mass  and orthogonal to the plane. Because rotation around that axis is necessarily stable, the kinetic energy metric of the  three-dimensional manifold of the possible positions of the object is such that the paths of force-free motion prescribed by  classical physics are all straight lines in the manifold as that manifold is depicted at the top of Fig. 6. Horizontal motions  of a point (i.e., motions parallel to the bounding planes) correspond to pure translations of the object, vertical motions  (i.e., motions orthogonal to the bounding planes) correspond to pure rotations of the object, and diagonal motions correspond  to combined translations and rotations of the object.  Because opposite points in the two bounding planes are identified, however, there are infinitely many straight lines and,  hence, physically admissible paths of motion between any two arbitrarily different positions of the object, such as those  represented by the two points labled A and B in the figure. Thus, in addition to the path indicated by the single straight  heavy line between A and B, there is also the path indicated by the thinner line, which goes from A to C and then (because C  is identified with C', on the other bounding plane) from C' on to B. Indeed, in this particular case, the latter path is  actually the shorter path between A and B (that is, the path corresponding to the smaller angle of rotation). Still other  straight paths, corresponding to different numbers of rotations of the object between A and B, are illustrated on the lower  left of Fig. 6, where the vertical rectangular section containing the two points, A and B, is laid out in the plane of the  picture, and where the horizontal and vertical dimensions of the rectangle then correspond, respectively, to the translational  and rotational components of all force-free motions between A and B.  The identification of opposite points along the top and bottom edges of the rectangular section can be achieved,  geometrically, by wrapping that rectangle around into a closed cylindrical surface, so that the opposite points are brought  into actual coincidence (as shown on the lower right of Fig. 6). What were formerly straight lines now become helical curves  on the surface of the cylinder. However, all such curves, like strings pulled taut within within the cyclindrical surface,  retain their geodesic quality, as the straightest (and locally shortest) paths within the manifold.  That the geodesics can be represented as straight lines, as in the opened out representation of the manifold portrayed at the  top of Fig. 6, is a consequence of the simple, additive way in which kinetic energies of rotation and translation combine.  This same simplicity facilitates the conceptualization of paths of motion in the general case of motions of three-dimensional  objects in space. There, the geodesic paths in the full six-dimensional manifold can be factored into two separate com-  148 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  ponents, a geodesic that is simply a straight line in the three-dimensional Euclidean space of possible locations and a  geodesic that (in general) is given by elliptic functions in the three-dimensional space of possible orientations. When  characterized in terms of the group structure on the manifold of positions, as developed in the next section, the  six-dimensional manifold is simply the direct product of its translational and rotational submanifolds.  The simplest three-dimensional analogue of the two-dimensional case represented in Fig. 6 would be that in which the object is  neither elongated nor flattened but has a spherical inertially equivalent ellipsoid. Rotation is then stable about any axis  through the center of the object. Although the corresponding six-dimensional manifold of positions can no longer be adequately  portrayed in a two-dimensional picture, the alternative paths of motion remain analogous to the simple straight-line paths  illustrated in Fig. 6. Between two arbitrarily different positions of such a three-dimensional object, the possible paths  prescribed by classical physics would then be those in which the center of mass of the object traverses a straight line in  ordinary three-dimensional space while the object undergoes one of the rotations that achieves congruence at the two given  positions. The (moving) axis of any such rotation would remain parallel to the axis needed to bring the object into the  correct orientation at the second position, after the object had been translated to that location from its initial position.  The simultaneous uniform rotation, of smallest angle, about that axis and uniform rectilinear translation of that axis would  then be the minimum transformation according to the kinetic energy metric.  In particular, a cube (of uniform density) is an example of a three-dimensional object with a spherical inertially equivalent  ellipsoid and for which the paths of motion prescribed by kinetic physics are therefore of the simple form just described. For  the two arbitrarily different positions of the cube initially shown at the top of Fig. 1, the shortest path of connecting  motion prescribed by classical physics is the transformation displayed as Path 1 in Fig. 2, which is also shown from different  viewpoints in Fig. 7.  One might be tempted to suppose that the perceptual system would favor this simple type of motion if the principal moments of  inertia of an object are equal-or possibly even if they are unequal, given the great complexity of the motion that classical  physics prescribes if axes corresponding to the unequal moments are not aligned with the axis of the orientational difference  between the two presented positions, and given the uncertainty of determining the principal moments of inertia from purely  visual images of an object (which may not be of uniform density).  If the visible object is markedly elongated, like a rod, or flattened, like a disk, however, the more natural presumption  might be that the inertially equivalent ellipsoid is correspondingly prolate or oblate. The principal axes of inertia would  then be more compellingly determined by the visual images, and the moments of inertia would be less justifiably treated as  equal. Even in this case, if the visually indicated principal axes happened to align with the axis of the rotational  difference between the two presented positions of the object, the interpolated motion would be identical to that for an object  whose equivalent ellipsoid is spherical.  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, 1 149  Translation  FiG. 7. A path of motion prescribed by classical physics in the absence of external forces (Path l, from Fig. 2), in which the  cube uniformly rotates around a uniformly translating axis (which, in the illustrated case, passes through two opposite  corners of the cube).  If the principal axes markedly depart from such an alignment, however, an internalized physics would prescribe an interpolated  motion different from that illustrated in Fig. 7. Both the orientation of the instantaneous axis of rotation and the  orientation of the object should then vary during the transformation. What would remain invariant is the angular momentum of  the system, which is given by the product, Ico, of the object's time varying moment of inertia matrix I and the time varying  angular velocity vector A).  Recent work by Proffitt, Kaiser, and their associates suggests that the human representational system has not internalized  enough of classical mechanics to simulate such complex motions, or even to be sensitive to such an abstract invariant as  angular momentum (e.g., see Kaiser, Grunwald, & Proffitt, 1987; Proffitt, Kaiser, & Whelan, in press). In the next section, we  argue that what has been internalized may be even more abstract and yet, in some ways, simpler than classical physics. And, in  a later section, we argue that the axes that determine the psychologically favored paths of motion are not the underlying  principal axes of inertia inferred from the visible object but, rather, certain axes of symmetry of the visible object itself.  In this way we propose to explain recently emerging empirical  150 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  evidence that the psychologically favored motions of an object possessing salient axes of symmetry-maven including an object,  such as a cube, that has no unique principal axes of inertia-are not of the kind illustrated in Fig. 7.  PATHS PRESCRIBED BY KINEMATIC GEOMETRY  Introduction and Motivation  Apart from questions of whether we may also have internalized local physical forces such as those of gravity and friction,  there are both theoretical and empirical reasons for doubting that our primary perceptual principles for interpolating and  extrapolating the motions of objects are internalizations of the just considered laws of physics. At the theoretical level, if  the most pervasive and enduring constraints governing our world tend to become the most deeply internalized, constraints that  are more general and abstract should ultimately gain ascendancy over constraints that are more specific and concrete (Shepard,  1984, 1987a). Although the laws of classical mechanics are extremely general, their application depends on the specific and  often invisible circumstances of each case. For example, even a physicist cannot interpolate or predict the motion of an  object without knowing its center of mass and moments of inertia. Moreover, as we already noted, results obtained by Proffitt  et al. (in press) indicate that we are not able to estimate or to use moments of inertia. There are, however, more abstract  and general principles that place geometrical constraints of a purely spatial character on the ways in which objects can move  relative to each other in three-dimensional space-without regard to any such physical quantities as mass, inertia, energy,  time, velocity, force, or acceleration. These are the group-theoretic principles governing rigid transformations in space, the  principles of what has been called kinematic geometry (e.g., see Hunt, 1978; and, in a psychological context, Shepard, 1984).  In fact, quite separate from the already considered evolution of the least action formulation of physics (from Maupertuis,  through Hamilton, to modern relativistic and quantum mechanics), there has been an evolution of the group-theoretic  formulation of kinematic geometry. The earliest beginnings can be discerned in Euclid's recognition that particularly  significant geometrical objects are invariant under certain associated rigid transformations (e.g., a line is invariant under  translations along its length). The attempt to base geometry on group theory was made fully explicit in Klein's 1872 Erlanger  Programm, in which all geometrical properties were to be characterized in terms of the classes of transformations under which  those properties were invariant (e.g., see Klein, 1893; 1936 [1908]). There followed a flowering of the group-theoretic  approach to geometry in the work of Lie (1888-1890), Cartan (1927), and others, whose results we shall use here. Even so, the  relevance of group theory for perception seems not to have been extensively discussed until Cassirer (1944 [1938]), and the  first serious application of Lie  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, I 151  groups to perceptual data appears to have begun, still later, with the paper by Hoffman (1966; see also the subsequent  exposition by Dodwell, 1983).  Because of their greater abstractness, the group-theoretic principles of kinematic geometry apply to many situations that fall  outside the scope of the laws of classical physics. For example, given that a table can (by some combination of rotations and  translation) be maneuvered through a certain doorway, the whole apparatus of physical dynamics (including a knowledge of the  amount and distribution of the mass of the table) is needed in order to compute locations, directions, magnitudes, and timing  of forces sufficient to carry out the maneuver physically. The prior questions, asking whether the table will in fact fit  through the doorway and, if it will, asking what is the shortest path that will carry it through, are questions of geometry  rather than of physics. The answers to these geometrical questions do not require any knowledge of the physical properties of  the table beyond the geometrical property of its rigidity. Even rigidity (which attains its physical realization through  electromagnetic forces at the invisible molecular level) is not strictly essential. Something as insubstantial and nonrigid as  a curl of smoke hanging in still air transforms as a rigid object, relative to a moving observer (Shepard, 1984).  In short, kinematic geometry tells us only about the possible motions of an object relative to other objects. Because it does  not depend on the invisible physical properties of objects, kinematic geometry does not tell us how the object will actually  move under the influence of particular forces or, even in the absence of such forces, precisely what path it will follow and  with what velocities or accelerations. Nevertheless, the formal characterization of possible motions offered by kinematic  geometry does provide a natural way of specifying which possible motions are in a natural sense the simplest. Possibly the  principles of kinematc geometry, being more general, and in some ways simpler, than those of physics, have become more deeply  entrenched in our perceptual/representational systems.  Empirical evidence, primarily from experiments on apparent motion, does suggest that the principles that govern our internal  representation of the motion of an object differ from the laws of classical mechanics. As we have noted, those physical laws  require that in the absence of external forces, the center of mass of a moving object traverses a straight line. Yet Foster  (1975) discovered that when a rectangle was alternately presented in two different positions in the frontal plane, the  rectangle was generally perceived to move back and forth over a curved path. Subsequently, evidence for such curved paths has  been obtained in our laboratory, using different procedures, (e.g., Farrell, 1983; McBeath, in press; McBeath & Shepard, 1989;  Shepard, 1984), and elsewhere (e.g., Mori, 1982; Proffitt et al., 1988).  In terms of kinematic geometry, a rigid transformation can actually be simpler when the center of the object traverses a curve  rather than a straight line. When, as in the two-dimensional case, the two positions of an object differ in orientation as  well as in location in the plane, the connecting motion must include a rotational component. According to a theorem of Euler  (1957 [1758]; see Goldstein, 1980; Whittaker, 1917), however, a planar motion can always be found that does not  152 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  include a separate translational component. Specifically, for any two positions of a two-dimensional object in the plane,  there exists a fixed point in the plane such that a rigid rotation of the entire plane about that fixed point will carry the  object from the one position to the other (see Foster, 1975; Shepard, 1984). (In the limiting case in which the two objects  differ only by a translation, the fixed point recedes to the point at infinity, in the direction orthogonal to the direction  of translational motion.) The pure rotation, which is thus always possible, could be regarded as the simplest motion. In  general, it carries the center of the object through a circular arc, as shown in Fig. 8. Any other motion would require, at  least, a rotation through the same angle and, in addition, a translation.  For two objects in the plane with centers separated by distance d and with orientations differing by angle 0, the center of  the rigid rotation that will carry the one object into congruence with the other falls on the perpendicular bisector of the  line connecting the centers of the two objects and at distance s= (d/2) cot(0/2) from that connecting line (as shown in Fig.  8). When 0 = 7r, s becomes zero and the center of rotation falls exactly between the two objects. As 0 goes to 0 (or,  equivalently, to 21r), s becomes infinite and the center of rotation recedes to infinity along the perpendicular bisector.  Whereas any rigid motion of a two-dimensional plane into itself has a fixed point, any rigid motion of three-dimensional space  into itself has a fixed line, which is mapped into itself by that motion. Accordingly, the three-dimensional generaliza  u  I I  I  FIG. 8. Two arbitrary positions of a square in a plane (top), and the unique point, p, in that plane such that the square can  be moved from the one position to the other by a rigid rotation about that fixed point (bottom).  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, 1 153  tion of Euler's theorem for the two-dimensional plane is the following theorem of Chasles (1830; see Ball, 1900; Hunt, 1978):  For any two positions of an (asymmetric) object in space, there exists a uniquely corresponding axis in space such that the  object can be rigidly carried from the one position to the other by a combination of a translation of space along that axis  together with a rotation of space about that same axis, that is, by a screw displacement. Here, the fixed axis plays the same  role as the fixed point in the two-dimensional case. Now, however, the center of the object generally traverses a helical  rather than a purely circular path. Of course pure rotations or pure translations are still realizable, as limiting cases of  the screw displacement in which, respectively, the translational or the rotational components of the screw vanish. As evidence  that Chasles's theorem has in fact been internalized, when objects differing arbitrarily in their positions in space are  presented in temporal alternation, observers under appropriate conditions do report the experience of a helical or screwlike  apparent motion (Shepard, 1984; and our more recent, but as yet unpublished results).  We have already noted that whereas the centers of mass of objects traverse straight paths according to (force-free) classical  physics, the motions that are generated by the natural transformations of kinematic geometry are generally curved. This  difference is connected with another: Whereas in the physical case, translational and rotational inertia enter into the  equations of motion on an equal footing, in the purely geometrical case, any nonzero rotational component of a motion always  dominates any translational component. This is because a translation can be interpreted, mathematically, as a rotation about  an axis at infinity. Hence (as is schematically illustrated in Fig. 9), a screw displacement can be  Circle of translation (Axis of screw displacement,  Screw displacement (in local region of Euclidean space)  V  a Circle of rotation (at infinity)  FIG. 9. Interpretation of a screw motion in space as a rotation about the axis of the screw together with an infinitesimal  rotation about the infinitely distant orthogonal axis (or circle at infinity) that produces a nonzero translation of the screw  axis into itself.  154 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  interpreted as a combination of two orthogonal rotations: an infinitesimal rotation about an axis at infinity (which axis is  conceived as a circle at infinity), together with an arbitrary rotation about an orthogonal axis (which is aligned with a  circle about that axis at infinity). But, relative to a rotation through any finite angle, a translation through any finite  distance must, because the axis of the corresponding rotation is infinitely distant, correspond to a rotation through an  infinitesimal angle. Hence, all finite rotational components, however small, dominate all finite translational components,  however large.  In the realm of kinematic geometry, rotation reigns supreme. Possibly, this deep aspect of geometry is related to the  psychological finding (anticipated just over 100 years ago by the physicist Ernst Mach, 1959 [1886]; Shepard & Cooper, 1982,  p. 8 ) that the times required to imagine the transformation of an object generally depend much more strongly on rotational  than on translational differences.  Mathematical Formulation  The geometrical laws of the rigid motions that carry an object from one position to any other are most abstractly formulated  in terms of the transformation group associated with the six-dimensional manifold of possible positions. Because every  specified position of an object in three-dimensional space can be identified with a unique transformation of space that  carries that object from some fixed reference position to the specified position (Cartan, 1927), the six-dimensional manifold  can be regarded, equivalently, either as the manifold of possible positions of the object (as we have so far been doing) or as  the manifold of possible rigid displacements of that object. Indeed, for some of our purposes the manifold is best regarded as  the manifold of possible rigid mappings of three-dimensional Euclidean space E3 into itself. An object's displacement is thus  interpreted not as a motion of the object relative to a fixed space but as the transport of the passive object by a rigid  motion of space as a whole.  Because general rigid displacements include both a translational and a rotational component, each point in the six-dimensional  manifold of rigid motions can be represented as an ordered pair (A, b) consisting of a rotation A and a translation b of  three-dimensional Euclidean space (either or both of which may be the identity transformation, which leaves space and, hence,  the position of the object unchanged). The rotation A can be specified by a three-by-three orthogonal matrix of determinant +  1. The set of all such matrices constitutes the rotation group SO(3). Elements of SO(3) are combined using the usual matrix  product.  This product is not in general commutative; the result of two successive rotations generally depends on the order in which  they are performed: A, AZ :AAZA, . This noncommutativity of SO(3) is illustrated in Fig. 10, where the result of a rotation of  the marked cube through 7r/2 radians (90 about a vertical axis followed by a 7r/2 rotation about a horizontal axis differs  from the result of the same R/2 rotation about the horizontal axis followed by the same n/2 rotation about the vertical axis.  In the two-dimensional case, successive rotations about any one point in the plane are commutative. Rotations about different  points in the plane, however, are  F  .G90'  Z _A  T  K N  fl  'Zh I90'  R  'Q' 1)900  V  FIG. 10. Noncommutative nature of rotation in three-dimensional space. Successive rotations of a labeled cube around a  vertical and a horizontal axis leave the cube in different orientations depending on the order in which the two rotations are  performed.  Successive Rotations, A & B (noncommutative: AB x BA)  FIG. 11. Noncommutative nature of rotation in the two-dimensional plane. Successive rotations about two different fixed  points, P,, and PB, leave a square in different locations, though in the same orientation.  Different positions  a  m  155  156 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  again noncommutative. (For future reference, the group, here, is R- @ S', where denotes the semidirect product-see Mackey,  1968.) This noncommutativity is illustrated in Fig. 11 for successive rotations of a square about the distinct points, PA and  PB. (Rotations about PA and then PB correspond to a single rotation about the point P,,B, while rotations in the reverse order  about PB and then P., correspond to a single rotation about the different point P,A.) In this case, however, the two orders do  not yield positions that differ in orientation (as they did for the group SO(3)-see Fig. 10); they yield positions that differ  only in location (as indicated at the right in Fig. 11).  Only translations are in general commutative. Translational commutativity is illustrated (for the Rz subgroup of RZ U S') in  the upper part of Fig. 12. In contrast, when rotations are combined with translations the final position generally depends on  whether the translation precedes or follows the rotation, as is illustrated (for the group Rz @ S') in the lower part of Fig.  12, where, again, the two resulting positions of the square differ only in location, not in orientation.  Successive Translations, a & b (commutative: ab = ba)  b  _________________i  D  a (F) Initial position  u  a(b(F)) and  a Na(F))  b  uFinal epositions  (same final locations & orientations for ab & ba)  Rotation, A, and Translation, b (noncommutative: Ab s bA)  b(F)  Final positions  (same orientations but different locations)  FIG. 12. Illustration that translations in the plane are commutative (top), but that combinations of  a translation and a rotation are not (bottom).  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, I 157  The translation b is the transformation of three-dimensional Euclidean space E3 obtained by adding the 3-component vector b to  each 3-component vector x in E3: b(x) = x + b. A transformation (A, b) that includes a rotational as well as a translational  component is a point in the six-dimensional manifold of possible transformations. The combined action of the transformation  (A, b) on any vector x in E3 is the rigid displacement (A, b)x = Ax + b. The transformation group product of two such  transformations (A,, b,) and (A2, b,) is the transformation (A3, b3) given by  (A3, b3)x=(A2, b2)l(A, b,)x} =A2{(Al, b,)x} +b2  =A2(A,x+b,)+b2=A2A,x+(AA+b2)  = (A,A,, A2b, +b2)x.  Hence the group product is (A2, b2)(A,, b,) = (A, A,, A2 b, +b2) and, as is clear from the asymmetry of the subscripts, is  noncommutative.  In a manner analogous to that illustrated for the direct product, x (Fig. 3), the transformation product confers on the  six-dimensional manifold of possible displacements (or, equivalently, positions) the group structure of the (nondegenerate)  semidirect product 0 (see Mackey, 1968) of the three-dimensional translation group R3 and the three-dimensional rotation group  SO(3):  E+=R3 0 SO(3).  The resulting six-dimensional group E+, called the Euclidean group, is the Lie group (i.e., continuous and connected group) of  rigid motions of three-dimensional Euclidean space E3 into itself (Cartan, 1927). The component translation group R3 is, as we  already noted, isomorphic to three-dimensional Euclidean space E3, while the component rotation group SO(3) is isomorphic to  the curved three-dimensional manifold of orientations (see Fig. 4). As we also noted, SO(3) has a more symmetrical  representation as the hypersphere S3, with diametrically opposite points identified (analogous to the ordinary sphere S2  illustrated in Fig. 5).  Because the translation and rotation groups combine as a semidirect rather than as a direct product, with the group product  being noncommutative for transformations that include a rotational component, kinematic geometry entails complexities that did  not arise in the treatment of classical physics. In the physical case, the simple, additive nature of translational and  rotational components of kinetic energy was compatible with the representation of the manifold of possible orientations of an  object as the simpler direct product R3 x SO(3). In a direct product (which is a special or degenerate case of a semidirect  product), multiplication acts in a simple componentwise fashion-in contrast with the mixed component multiplication already  set forth for the semidirect product.  A geodesic determined by the group product, which is the natural analogue of a straight line in a continuous group such as E+,  is derived from a one-parameter subgroup of the group (Cartan, 1927). The elements of a one-parameter subgroup  480/34-2-3  158 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  are all obtainable by iteration of one arbitrarily small transformation-in the case of E+, a small rotation, a small  translation, or a small screw displacement (which combines a small rotation with a small translation). More formally, a  oneparameter subgroup of the Euclidean group is characterized by a mapping, h, from the real line R into the group E+ (written  h: R -> E+) so that the additive structure of R is preserved. Hence, for any two values of the parameter, say s and t (which  correspond to two locations along the path of transformation), we have h(s+t)= h(s) h(t). The identity transformation, e= (1,  0), of E+, which leaves the space unchanged, is obtained when the parameter is zero, h(0).  The one-parameter subgroups, which necessarily include the identity transformation, correspond only to those geodesics in the  manifold of possible rigid displacements that pass through the point in the manifold corresponding to the identity  transformation. Equivalently, in the manifold of possible positions, these subgroups correspond to geodesics that pass through  the canonical reference position of the object. In addition, however, there are geodesics that do not pass through the  identity transformation or canonical position. For these, too, each transformation (or location) along the geodesic has a  corresponding parameter, .s, but for no value of that parameter does the transformation leave the object in the same position  (or bring the object into its canonical position). Thus, in the section of SO(3) illustrated in Fig. 4, there are infinitely  many great circles that pass through the point in the center of that section, corresponding to the canonical position of the  cube in which the F is upright and facing the viewer. But there are also infinitely many other great circles that do not pass  through that point. Each of the latter corresponds to a rigid rotation of the cube about some axis, but for no angle of the  rotation about such an axis can the F be brought to face the viewer in its upright orientation. For example, the geodesic  around the perimeter in Fig. 4, in which the cube also turns, but with only the B visible, is one such geodesic.  The geodesics that do not include the identity are obtained as translates (Helgason, 1978; Kobayashi & Nomizu, 1963) of the  one-parameter subgroups. For any two transformations in E+, (A,, b,) and (A,, bz), each consisting of a rotational component A  and a translational component b, the group product of those transformations (A,, b,)(A,, b,) is called the right translate of  (A,, b,) by (A,, bZ) or the left translate of (AZ, bz) by (A,, b,). The right and left translates must be distinguished in the  Euclidean group because of the noncommutativity of transformations in that group. A (right or left) translate of a  one-parameter subgroup of transformations is obtained by forming the (right or left) translate of the transformation  corresponding to every point on the geodesic. The result is also a geodesic in E+. However, it does not pass through the  identity, because all transformations along a geodesic derived in this way contain, in addition to the iteration of an  arbitrarily small transformation, an irreducible, fixed transformation. In short, the one-parameter subgroups and their  translates in E+ are the geodesics determined by the group product in E+ because they are the only paths for which succeeding  positions along the path are related by the group product law-so that transformations along the path are expressible as the  product of a given fixed  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, I 159  transformation (which can be the identity) and iterations of another, arbitrarily small transformation.  Taking the geodesics of E+ to be one-parameter subgroups and their translates, we immediately obtain the helical  transformations prescribed by Chasles's theorem as the simplest motions in three-dimensional space. Thus  h(t)x=p+R(at, n)(x-p)+ ftn  =R(at, n)x+ [1 -R(oct, n)]p+ ftn ={R(at,n), [1-R(at,n)]p+ftn}x  describes the helical motion consisting of rotation through angle at about axis n, R(at, n), through the point p= (pl, p2, p3)  together with translation by It along that same axis n.  To find differential equations for the translates of one-parameter subgroups analogous to the Euler-Lagrange equations for the  geodesics of classical physics, the differentiable manifold structure of E+ is combined with its group structure. For a  differentiable manifold, geodesics, the analogues of straight lines, are defined in terms of a connection on the manifold (see  Bishop & Goldberg, 1968; Helgason, 1978; Kobayashi & Nomizu, 1963; Spivak, 1979). (Readers who do not require the precise  details of differential geometry can skip over the following, more technical paragraph.)  A connection on a manifold is a rule for calculating, at any point, the rates of change of a tangent vector as it is displaced  in different directions from that point. The connection D prescribes the directional derivative of a vector field V with  respect to another vector field W: DV(W)(p) is the tangent vector at a point p that specifies the inital rate at which V  changes when p moves in the direction of W. (It is the derivative of V in the direction of W from p.) The vector field V is  said to be parallel with respect to the tangent vector W(p) at p if DV(W)(p)=0. In this case, V does not change when p moves  in the direct of W. Parallelism is defined along a path t -+ y(t) with respect to the tangent y'(t). V is said to be parallel  (with respect to y') along the path t -+ y (t) if D V(y') {y(t) } = 0 for all t, that is, if V is parallel with respect to the  tangent y'(t) at each point y(t). Finally, the path t ~ y(t) is said to be a geodesic for the connection D if the tangent y'  is parallel (with respect to itself) along the path y: Dy'(,I')Iy(t)I =0 for all t.  Expansion of the geodesic equation Dy'(y') = 0 in terms of coordinates yields differential equations analagous to the  Euler-Lagrange equations of physics. In fact, the Euler-Lagrange equations of physics are just the connection equations for a  connection, on configuration space, that is compatible with the kinetic energy metric. The group structure of an arbitrary Lie  group gives rise to a natural connection for which the geodesics are the translates of one-parameter subgroups (Cartan, 1927).  The screw displacements, h(t), are thus the solutions of the geodesic equations for the Euclidean group E+.  The geodesics of classical physics are derivable from the kinetic energy metric on  160 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  the direct product R3 x SO(3). The helical geodesics of kinematic geometry, however, are derivable only from the group  connection on the semidirect product R3 (D SO(3). Geodesics cannot be derived from a metric on E+ because the required  bi-invariant metric (see Appendix, for definition) does not exist on that manifold. As we noted, in E+ all finite rotations  dominate all translations (which are equivalent to infinitesimal rotations). Hence, the only candidate for a bi-invariant  metric in E+ is a degenerate one in which the contribution of any translational component vanishes. (In the appendix we  provide fuller substantiation for the conclusion that the helical geodesics cannot be obtained from any metric on E+.)  Michael Leyton (in reviewing our manuscript) offered the following useful clarification of our argument: If one admits a  nondegenerate semidirect product structure between the translation and rotation groups, one precludes the possibility of  having a bi-invariant metric on the product. Thus any metric that can be constructed on the group product does not have the  strong symmetry properties of the group. In this sense, it is not a geometric object of the group. However, the formalization  of classical physics is dependent on finding a bi-invariant metric because the metric is the kinetic energy function from  which the central construct of classical physics, the Lagrangian, is derived. Allowing a nondegenerate semidirect product thus  prevents the derivation of the Lagrangian and hence of physics itself.  Illustration of Predicted Paths  As we have seen, the geodesics, which we are taking to represent the simplest motions of an object in space, can be defined in  terms of alternative structures imposed on the six-dimensional manifold of possible positions of the object. In the case of  classical physics, the imposed structure is the kinetic energy metric, and the geodesics representing the simplest  transformations are derivable as the extremal (i.e., locally shortest) paths according to that metric. In the absence of a  nondegenerate, bi-invariant metric for the semidirect product structure in the case of kinematic geometry, we define the  geodesics in terms of the one-parameter subgroups arising from the natural connection for that structure. Corresponding to the  differences between the geodesics to which they give rise in the six-dimensional manifold of possible positions, principles  based on classical physics and kinematic geometry yield different candidates for the psychologically simplest motions of an  object in space.  Pictorial representation of the geodesic paths in the six-dimensional manifold is now further complicated by the semidirect  product structure for the manifold. Again, we can nevertheless provide some indication of the form that such paths take in the  simpler, three-dimensional manifold for the semidirect product group, RZ @s S', of transformations (or positions) of a rigid  object in two-dimensional space. (This manifold is three-dimensional because, in two-dimensional space, two coordinates are  required to specify the center of rotation and a third coordinate is  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, I 161  needed to specify the angle of rotation about that center.) While this manifold retains the topological structure already  illustrated in Fig. 6, the translational and rotational components no longer commute, and the geodesics no longer correspond  to paths in which the center of the object traverses a straight line.  Instead, the geodesics are now helical in form. Thus the A and B in Fig. 13, corresponding to two positions of an object in  the plane, determine the unique helical geodesic shown. In one direction of rotation, the point A is carried to the point B  along the geodesic within the portrayed slab. In the other direction of rotation, A is carried to B via the identified points  C and C' of its upper and lower planes.  C  c'  FiG. 13. Representation of the positions of a two-dimensional object in a plane by points in a threedimensional manifold (top)  having two coordinates (b, and bZ) for the translational components and one coordinate (B) for the rotational component of the  transformation that carries the object from a canonical position to each given position. Any two positions (A and B) of an  asymmetric object determine a unique helical path in the manifold that falls on a cylindrical surface (left) or, owing to the  identification of positions of the object differing by 27r radians, on a torus (right).  16)2 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  (The horizontal coordinates now represent the translational components of the rigid transformation, b, and b,.)  Because the upper and lower planes are identified, the cylinder containing the helix actually forms a torus-a surface that is  the direct product of two circles (much as the cylinder is the direct product of a straight line and a circle-see Fig. 3,  top). The way in which the helix winds around the torus is schematically illustrated, as if in three-dimensional projection,  on the right of Fig. 13. If, instead of being opened back out to form the cylinder at the left, the torus is now cut through  along the orthogonal circular line indicated at the left of the torus (at C), it can be opened out into the cylinder shown at  the bottom of the figure. By then making the remaining one of these two orthogonal cuts (through C), either cylinder can then  be opened into a flat rectangular surface called the map of the torus, illustrated between the two cylindrical forms. In the  flat map of the torus, the geodesic paths of kinematically simple motions between arbitrary positions, A and B, finally reveal  their inherent kinship with straight lines (as indicated by the straight line intersecting points A, B, and C in the  rectangular map.)  The two ways of opening a torus into a cylinder and then into its flat map are illustrated more fully in Fig. 14, where, for  ease of portrayal, the intersection of the two cuts (C in Fig. 13) is moved to the front and center of the torus. Only when  the torus is considered as embedded in four-dimensional space does the symmetry between the two ways of opening out the torus  become evident. (And only when the two circles from which the torus is formed as a direct product are of the same size does  the rectangular map become a square).  As before, the object could also undergo any additional number of complete 271 turns in going from position A to position B.  But, in the present case, the corresponding point in RZ @ S ` would simply be retracing the same helical geodesic on the  torus-and, hence, the object would be passing through the same positions A and B-on each such additional complete turn.  Presumably, motions including such extra turns would not be psychologically favored owing to their greater extents or  complexities.  Figure 13 shows the geodesic through a particular point B only for an object in the particular initial position, A, (with its  coordinates b,, b2, and B). The same rotational transformation that carries an object from position A to position B would also  carry an object in any other initial position over a helical path in this same manifold. The diagram at the top of Fig. 15  illustrates the form of these geodesics, which fall on concentric cylinders or, after the identification of the upper and  lower planes, concentric tori-as is illustrated in the lower part of Fig. 15.5 All of these helical paths, though curved, are  still the closest analogues of straight lines that are compatible with the connection conferred on this three-dimensional  manifold by its transformation group.  For any two given points, A and B, the cylindrical surface on which the corre  s This latter illustration brings out the topological equivalence of this transformational structure to the twistor structure  advocated for theoretical physics by Roger Penrose (see Penrose, 1975, p. 291).  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, I  163  cut ,  cut 1  Map of torus  FIG. 14. Two ways of opening a torus out into its flat rectangular map (via cylinders)-by making a cut along line 1 followed  by a cut along line 2 (sequence going down the left) or by making a cut along line 2 followed by a cut along line 1 (sequence  going down the right). Identification of opposite edges of the rectangular map reconstitutes the torus.  164 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  b,  2v 0  Fic. 15. Representation, in the manifold of possible positions, of geodesic paths corresponding to rotations of objects in  different locations about a fixed point (top). All helical geodesics fall on a family of concentric cylinders that following  identification of positions differing by 27r, form a family of concentric tori (bottom).  sponding helical geodesic lies (as in Fig. 13) depends on the relation between the two points A and B. The diameter of the  cylinder is smallest, and equal to the distance between A and B as projected onto a horizontal plane, when the vertical  separation between A and B corresponds to a rotational difference in the objects of 7r radians (the 180case that is  approximated in Fig. 13), and the diameter becomes infinite, and hence the trajectory approaches a straight line, when the  vertical separation between A and B approaches 0 or, equivalently, 27E radians. (In accordance with the equation mentioned in  connection with the earlier Fig. 8, the central axis of the cylinder falls in the vertical plane perpendicular to the vertical  plane containing the points A and B and at distance (d/2) cot(0/2) from the inter-  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, I 165  section of those planes, where d is the distance between A and B as projected onto a horizontal plane.)  As Fig. 15 shows, the helical geodesics become steeper for concentric cylinders of smaller radii, that is, for positions that  are closer to the center of the rotation. In the limit, the geodesic becomes a straight vertical line coinciding with the axis  of these cylinders, when the horizontal distance between A and B goes to zero. The identification of the upper and lower  planes, which brings the cylinders into toroidal form, brings this straight line (and rotational axis) into a simple circle.  For two positions of an object with a fixed difference in location, we can plot the complete family of minimal helical  trajectories between those positions that results from variation only in the orientational difference between those positions.  Suppose the position B is fixed while the orientation of the object at location A is varied through the complete circle of 2n  radians, yielding the set of positions labeled A,, A,, ..., A, in the upper diagram of Fig. 16. The corresponding geodesic  trajectories to the fixed position B are then those labeled T,, T,,..., T,. The positions A, and A,, which differ from A, by  rotations of +n and -7c radians (in opposite directions), are identical, and the series A, through A, forms, again, a complete  circle (as shown at the right). Accordingly, the trajectories T, and T,, which (except for a circular shift around the torus  with respect to the angle B) correspond to the path already illustrated in Fig. 13, fall along the same closed helical  geodesic on their torus, but in opposite directions from B. This is the geometrical representation, within the manifold of  possible positions, of the fact that for any two positions of an asymmetric object differing by n radians, there are always  two distinct, equivalent paths of rigid transformation between them.  Otherwise, each of the geodesic trajectories illustrated in Fig. 16 falls on its own torus, rendered as a correspondingly  numbered cylinder (each with its own center) in the upper diagram. (The numbers for paths going the longer way around the  torus are shown in parentheses.) The trajectory T4, arising when there is no rotational difference between the two positions  of the object, corresponds to a rectilinear translation, which is also interpretable as a helical path-but around a cylinder  (labeled 4) of infinite radius. The set of the shortest paths between any fixed position, B, and any spatially separated  postion, A, of variable orientation thus defines, within the manifold of possible positions, a continuous twisted surface as  illustrated in the lower part of the figure (with, again, the line connecting A and A' forming a continuous circle, as shown  to the right).  The motions prescribed by kinematic geometry are identical to the motions illustrated in Fig. 6 for classical physics under  just two special subcases of this twodimensional case. In terms of physics, these are the subcases in which the transformation  is purely one of rotation or is purely one of translation. In terms of kinematic geometry, these are the subcases in which the  center of rotation coincides with the center of mass of the visible object or recedes to infinity. In both cases, the motions  are then represented, in the manifolds portrayed in Figs. 6 and 13, as straight lines that are, respectively, orthogonal or  parallel to the upper and lower planes. Otherwise, the favored paths appear as straight lines in Fig. 6 and as helical  166 CARLTON AND SHEPARD (5) (4)  e  2n  t A'  FiG. 16. Representation, in the manifold of possible positions, of the family of geodesic paths between a fixed position (B)  of an object and a set of different positions (A,, A,, ..., A,) that vary only in orientation (top). All such helical paths  fall on cylinders whose vertical axes lie in a plane that is perpendicular to the plane containing all the A and B points and  that bisects each of the lines connecting the B point to the A points. The set of such helical curves generated by all  possible orientations, A, yields the two-dimensional twisted surface portrayed at the bottom (where the points A an A' are  paths in Fig. 13. (In a subsequent section we consider a generalization that subsumes both of these cases as the two extremes  of a one-parameter family of intermediate cases.)  In the general case of two positions of a three-dimensional object in space, the alternative geodesics corresponding to  different numbers of complete turns between the two positions do not all coincide as in the two-dimensional case illustrated  in Fig. 13. Instead, the successive turns of the helix are spread out by any translational component of the screw  displacement, much as was illustrated for helical paths on a cylinder on the right of Fig. 6. Again, however, the helical path  for which the total rotational component is minimum is expected to be psychologically favored.  For the two arbitrarily different positions of the cube illustrated in Fig. 1, the simplest connecting motion according to  kinematic geometry is the screw displacement including the smallest angle of rotation, labeled "Path 2" in Fig. 2. This motion  is represented again in the upper part of Fig. 17, but with the axis of the screw explicitly drawn in. This helical motion  clearly differs from the rectilinear motion prescribed by classical physics (in the absence of external forces), which was  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, I 167  FIG. 17. A path of motion prescribed by kinematic geometry for an asymmetric object (Path 2, from Fig. 2), in which the  labeled cube traverses a helical path consisting of a simultaneous translation and rotation about the same axis (top). When  the line of sight coincides with that axis, the resemblance of the rotational component to that illustrated for the  two-dimensional case (e.g., Fig. 8) becomes apparent (bottom).  labeled "Path 1." In the lower part of Fig. 17, the motion prescribed by kinematic geometry is portrayed as viewed (by  parallel projection. i.e., from a remote point) along the axis of the screw. In this projection, the rigid rotational  component is seen to be exactly like that already portrayed for the simpler, two-dimensional case (of a square) in Fig. 8.  Indeed, for any two positions of an object such as the cube illustrated in Fig. 17, the axis of a connecting screw  displacement must be parallel to the axis of the rotational difference between the positions after the locational difference  has been normalized out by a pure translation. If, then, the two positions are projected into the plane orthogonal to the  direction of that axis, the intersection of that axis with that plane can be computed to fall on the perpendicular bisector at  distance (d/2) cot(B/2) from the line connecting the centers of the two projections of the object, just as was stated for the  two-dimensional case portrayed in Fig. 8.  We now have alternative (physical and geometrical) theories that prescribe different paths of rigid motion as the simplest  transformations relating any two  168 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  presented positions of an object in three-dimensional space (the paths labeled 1 and 2 in Fig. 2). We should therefore be able  to determine whether the paths actually favored by human observers point more toward an internalization of principles of  classical physics or toward an internalization of principles of kinematic geometry. There is, of course, the additional  possibility that we have internalized some combination of or compromise between these two types of principles. We turn, now,  to a consideration of how this further possibility might be formalized in terms of geodesic paths in the manifold of possible  orientations.  TOWARD A MORE GENERAL CLASS OF GEODESIC PATHS  Introduction and Motivation  We have so far considered two alternative bases for psychologically favored paths of motion-one derived from classical physics  and one derived from kinematic geometry. Because each of these bases reflects enduring invariants in the world, something of  both may have been internalized over evolutionary history. If so, one or the other of these bases may manifest itself in  particular individuals or under particular circumstances. An alternative that is more in the spirit of the geometrical and  evolutionary arguments we have been developing, however, is that our perceptual systems may have internalized still more  general geometrical principles under which the physical and geometrical principles so far considered are both subsumable as  special cases.  We have already noted that classical physics does not by itself provide an adequate model for the psychological representation  of motion: Apparent motion between objects differing in both location and orientation has generally deviated from the straight  paths prescribed by physics in the absence of forces (e.g., Farrell, 1983; Foster, 1975; McBeath & Shepard, 1989; Proffitt et  al., 1988; Shepard, 1984). Moreover, the times required to complete imagined transformations as well as the critical stimulus  onset asynchronies (SOAs) in apparent motion, though strongly dependent on differences in orientation (Shepard & Cooper, 1982;  Shepard & Judd, 1976; Shepard & Metzler, 1971), have exhibited much less dependence on differences in location or on  differences in size (where size differences tend to be perceptually interpreted as differences in location in depth-Shepard,  1984). For examples, see Kubovy and Podgorny (1981), Kubovy and Toth (1985) and, originally, Mach (1959 [1886], p. 107; see  Shepard & Cooper, 1982).  At the same time, translational components (including the depth component corresponding to size normalizations), though  generally requiring much less time than rotational components, evidently do require times proportional to their extents  (Bundesen & Larsen, 1975; Bundesen, Larsen, & Farrell, 1981, 1983; Larsen & Bundesen, 1978; Shepard & Cooper, 1982). Such a  result is not immediately explained by the structure naturally conferred on the manifold of possible positions by the  Euclidean group E+, in which the translational component is dominated by  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, 1 16)9  the rotational component. Moreover, the experiments on apparent motion between two positions of an object in the plane provide  evidence for paths falling somewhere between the straight path prescribed by physics and the circular path so far derived from  kinematic geometry (Bundesen, Larsen & Farrell, 1983; Farrell, 1983; McBeath & Shepard, 1989; Mori, 1982; Profitt et al.,  1988).  In any case, a higher-order scheme capable of generating a one-parameter family of geodesic paths intermediate between the two  types already considered here might be useful if the circumstances of an experiment influence the particular geometrical (or  even physical) properties of a stimulus display to which a given observer most strongly "resonates." We now briefly consider  some possible ways of generating such a one-parameter family of intermediate paths in the manifold of possible positions E+.  Mathematical Formulation  We have explored a one-parameter family of intermediate models that can be formally represented as a family of curves H(t, u)  in the manifold, with  H(t, , u) = initial position P for all u,  H(t,, u) = final position Q for all u,  H(t, 1) = q(t) = the geodesic according to classical physics,  H(t, 0) = h(t) = the geodesic according to kinematic geometry,  where t, S t < t, is the parameter specifying position along any one of these curves and 0 < u < 1 is the parameter specifying  the shape of the curve and corresponding trajectory of an object in space. As a varies from 1 to 0, the geodesic trajectory,  q(t) = H(t, 1), of the sort we initially derived from classical physics deforms continuously into a geodesic trajectory of  this sort we just derived from kinematic geometry, that is, into the one-parameter subgroups of E+, h(t) =H(t, 0).  Two readers of an earlier version of our manuscript made useful points concerning our proposal for generating intermediate  paths. David Foster (personal communication, September 13, 1988) pointed out that a proposal he had made for describing  intermediate paths by variation of a weighting parameter, K', is similar to our proposal for generating intermediate paths by  variation of a (see Foster, 1975, p. 85). And David Mumford (personal communication, 1988) suggested that the most natural way  to form families of intermediate geodesic paths would be to average the connections for the two cases to be combined (such as  those of physics and geometry). One could then take the geodesics of these resulting connections. Because the space of  connections on any manifold is itself an affine space, intermediate paths obtained by such averaging would also be geodesics.'  Mumford pointed out, for instance, that "a connection on a bund'_e E is a first order differential operator D: E-EQQ' and if  D,, D. are two such operators, so is tD, +(i -t)D_'  170 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  Illustration of Predicted Paths  An idea of the nature of some intermediate paths is most easily gained from considering the two-dimensional case first. The  motion that carries the object back and forth between two presented positions (which differ in orientation by, say, 00) will  consist of two components-a uniform rectilinear translation of the center of rotation and a simultaneous uniform rotation of  the object (through 00) about that rectilinearly translating center. As the momentary center of the rotation is taken to be  closer to the center of the visible object, the motion more nearly approximates the combination of a rectilinear translation  and a simultaneous rotation prescribed by physics. As the center of the rotation is taken to be closer to a fixed point in the  plane, the motion more nearly approximates the simple rigid rotation prescribed by Euler's theorem of kinematic geometry.  Such a one-parameter family of rigid motions in the two-dimensional plane may permit an account of the various perceptual  interpretations that observers have been reported to make of rigid systems of point lights on a wheel invisibly rolling in  darkness across the frontal plane (see Cutting & Proffitt, 1982; Johansson, 1973; Proffitt & Cutting, 1979; Wallach, 1965).  When the lights are distributed over the circular wheel in such a way that the "center of mass" of the lights is close to the  center of the wheel, observers tend to extract the uniformly translating center of rotation and, thus, to experience the  system of lights as a disk-like structure rigidly rolling along a horizontal surface (and, hence, rotating around a  rectilinearly translating center). In contrast, when the lights are distributed to one side of the wheel, so that the "center  of mass" of those lights is far from the center of the rolling wheel, observers generally fail to extract the uniformly  translating center of rotation and, hence, experience the system of lights as a rigid cluster undergoing a more complex,  cycloidal motion. Under intermediate conditions, the perceived motion may then more or less approximate the uniform rolling or  the cycloidal motion, depending on the proximity of the center of the system of lights to the center of the invisible wheel,  or on the salience of other sources of support for the perceptual extraction of the translating center. Possibly, the  perceptual outcome in any one case corresponds to a compromise within the one-parameter family of possible placements of the  center of rotation as indicated in Fig. 18.  For the case of motion between two positions, A and B, of a two-dimensional asymmetric object in the plane, Fig. 19  illustrates, within the three-dimensional manifold of possible positions, both the shortest path prescribed by physics (u = 1)  and the path prescribed by kinematic geometry (u=0)-the paths that had been separately illustrated in the previous Figs. 6 and  13, respectively. The lower part of Fig. 19 includes, in addition, some of the intermediate paths in the family of paths that  can be constructed for values of u varying between 1 and 0.  Figure 20 shows intermediate paths between our two illustrative positions of the cube in three-dimensional space. The upper  part of the figure reproduces the paths (previously presented in Figs. 2, 7, and 17) as prescribed by classical physics (Path  l) and, for an asymmetric object, by kinematic geometry (Path 2). In  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, 1 171  Fo~_-__4  FIG. 18. Paths of motions between two positions of a labeled square-as prescribed by classical physics (top), kinematic  geometry (middle), and various interpolations between these (bottom). Except when stationary at P4, the center of rotation  traverses a straight line in each case.  addition, this figure includes a path interpolated, in the manner described, half way between these two paths. The lower part  of the figure illustrates how this motion is generated by a combination of a uniform translation of the axis of the screw  displacement together with a uniform helical motion around that translating axis.  The parameter a need not be confined to the interval between 0 and 1. Increasing negative values of a yield paths that might  be described as increasingly exaggerated caricatures of the curved path prescribed by kinematic geometry. For these, the  translating center of rotation (see lower part of Fig. 18) or translating screw axis (see lower part of Fig. 20) is, relative  to the object, beyond the center or axis prescribed by Chasles's theorem (that is, below the center or axis in these figures)  and translates in the opposite direction. Increasing positive values of u beyond + 1 yield paths curving in the opposite  direction and tending toward a cusp between the given endpositions. For these, the translating center or axis is beyond the  center of the object from the center or axis prescribed by Chasles's theorem and translates over a greater distance than the  object itself. (In this case, the object is displaced from the translating center or axis in the opposite or negative  direction along the  Family of intermediate  paths, with 0 <_ u <_ I:  2n 0  FIG. 19. Representation of paths prescribed by classical physics and by kinematic geometry, between points (A and B)  corresponding, in the three-dimensional manifold of possible positions of a two-dimensional object, to two different positions  of that object in the plane (top); and representation of a sample of intermediate paths for 0 <_ u S 1 (bottom).  B. Intermediate Path generated by translation  of Screw  FIG. 20. A path of motion of the cube that is intermediate between the previous Path 1, prescribed by classical physics, and  Path 2, prescribed by kinematic geometry (top), composed of a screw motion about a translating screw axis (as indicated at the  bottom).  172  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, I 173  -0.5  FIG. 21. A computer-generated family of paths of motion between two given positions of a cube (labeled u), including the path  prescribed by classical physics (u =1 ), the path prescribed by kinematic geometry (u=0), and paths both interpolated between  and extrapolated beyond these paths (with their associated values of u).  connecting radial line or stalk drawn in the positive direction in the lower part of Fig. 20.)  A family of such paths is illustrated for a particular pair of endpositions of the cube (marked "u") in Fig. 21. The number  inscribed on each intervening image of the cube along a path is the value of u determining that path. For other endpositions  of the cube, families of quite different appearances are generated, including ones whose motions, having a larger depth  component, are less adequately grasped from a two-dimensional drawing, in the absence of stereoscopic support. (In ongoing  experiments we are now presenting such motions in three-dimensional visual space by means of an IRIS color graphics system  programed to generate leftand right-eye stereoscopic projections of moving three-dimensional objects in alternating frames and  to block each frame from the other eye-right or left, respectively-by actuating liquid crystal eyepieces.)  DISCUSSION  Recapitulation  Through natural selection and experiential fine tuning, humans and other animals with highly developed visual-spatial  capabilities are likely to have inter-  480/34/2-4  174 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  nalized principles governing the ways in which objects rigidly transform in the world. The relevant principles that have been  invariant throughout evolutionary history appear to be of two general types-namely, physical and geometrical. Principles of  both types can be abstractly formulated in terms of the particular structure (metric or connection) that each confers on the  manifold of possible positions of an object in three-dimensional space. Because the position of an object has three degrees of  freedom of location and three degrees of freedom of orientation, the manifold of possible positions is six-dimensional. Two  arbitrary positions of an object in space correspond to two distinct points in this manifold, and the different connections  conferred on the manifold by the principles of physics and of geometry prescribe different paths-called geodesics-as the  natural motions of the object from the one position to the other.  According to the principles of physics, a motion that continues in the absence of external forces (and is, in that sense, a  simple motion) is one in which the center of mass traverses a straight line while any rotation is about that uniformly  translating center. The rotation, if any, is uniform, if the principal axes of inertia of the object are either equal or  aligned with the rotation. The rotation is nonuniform and wobbling, if the principal axes are both unequal and nonaligned with  the rotation. Kinematic geometry prescribes, in contrast, a motion in which the object is carried over a helical path by a  single uniform screw motion around a fixed axis in space. Weighted combinations of these two types of principles can yield a  continuous one-parameter family of geodesic paths that are intermediate between the paths prescribed by physics and by  kinematic geometry.  So far, empirical evidence indicates that the psychologically simplest motions-in real, apparent, and imagined  transformations-are not generally those prescribed by purely physical principles. The curved trajectories experienced in  apparent motion and sometimes favored in real motion suggest that the principles of kinematic geometry, which are in some ways  more general and pervasive, may be more deeply internalized than the principles of classical physics. Perhaps different  weighted combinations of the two types of principles may yield the best accounts of data from different individuals or under  different conditions. The mathematical formulations we offer should permit a sharper empirical determination of the roles of  the various kinds of principles that may have been internalized. In the sequel to this article (Part 11), we shall indicate  some of the lines of work that are currently being pursued in our laboratory, including possible differences between the cases  of real, apparent, and imagined transformations.  Relations to Previous Formulations  Few theorists appear to have formalized explicit principles governing which path of motion between two arbitrarily given  positions of an object in three-dimensional space are psychologically favored. The formulations that we have developed here,  in terms of geodesic paths determined by alternative structures on the manifold of possible positions in space, do  nevertheless have some points in common with some theories that have previously been proposed for the representation  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, I 175  of motion. Having set forth a basic framework for the discussion of different formulations, we now attempt a succinct review  of several of these, briefly summarizing what we see as their main points of agreement and difference with ours.  Restle's Coding Theory for the Representation of Motion. Whereas the coding theory developed by Restle (1979) evidently sought  determinants of the psychologically favored or simplest motions in the information processing constraints of the brain, we  seek an ultimate source for such determinants in the enduring invariants in the world in which we have evolved. Thus, while  Restle proposed that the favored motions are those that minimize the information load on the perceptual system, we take the  favored motions to be those that correspond to internalized constraints of the physics and/or geometry of the external world.  Because physics and geometry are also governed by minimum principles, the two approaches may yield similar predictions in many  cases. The full extent of agreement is as yet unspecified. Restle worked out his coding theory for motions of separate points  moving in the plane-not for motions of rigid bodies in three-dimensional space. Moreover, Restle focused on purely sinusoidal  motions; he did not explicitly treat the uniform rectlinear motions that emerge as particularly simple special cases according  either to classical physics or to kinematic geometry. As it stands, Restle's theory also assumes that motion is encoded in  relation to an environmental frame. On the basis of experimental results, we argue (particularly in Part 11) that observers  tend, instead, to represent the motion of an extended object primarily about axes that are centered in that object and that  are determined by its geometrical structure rather than about axes that are fixed with respect to the environment.  Proffitt's Contrast between Point Dynamics and Extended-Body Dynamics. The extent to which the perception and representation  of rigid transformations of extended bodies in space may reflect an internalization of principles of physics has been  investigated by Proffitt and his associates (Proftt & Cutting, 1979; Proffitt et al., in press). Proffitt et al. (in press),  for example, provided striking evidence that while we have internalized principles of physical dynamics governing point-like  objects whose dynamical behavior is determined by a single parameter, we have not internalized the physical principles  governing the rotational dynamics of extended bodies (also see Kaiser et al., 1987). Their results appear consonant with our  own tentative conclusion that the perception and representation of rigid transformation of extended objects is determined more  by one-parameter subgroups of kinematic geometry than by physical dynamics. Our purpose, here, has been to develop a  formalization for such an internalized kinematic geometry-including (in Part 11) the influence of the geometrical symmetries  of objects.  Parsons's Notion of Spin Precession. Apparently on the model of a top or a gyroscope, which spins on an axis that is itself  circularly precessing about the pedestal on which it rests, Parsons (e.g., 1987a, 1987b) proposed that the motion of a rigid  body may be representable in terms of what he termed "spin precession."  176) CARLTON AND SHEPARD  Although we have not seen a fully explicit or mathematical formulation by Parsons of his notion of spin precession, the term  itself suggests a physical more than a geometrical basis. Strictly, in the case of a top or gyroscope, moreover, precession  depends on the action of an external force, namely, gravity. As we have noted, a theory based on the classical physics of  rigid bodies in the absence of external forces does not seem capable of accounting for the curved paths of motion that have  been reported for apparent motion and that seem to be favored even for real motion. Such a theory also appears difficult to  reconcile with evidence such as that reported by Profitt et al. (in press) and by Kaiser et al. (1987) against the  internalization of physical dynamics for extended bodies. In Part II, we shall argue that motions may indeed be represented  about an axis that is itself swinging about another axis. But we shall also argue that such a moving axis of rotation (or of  "spin") is determined not by any physical properties of the object, such as its moments of inertia, but by purely geometrical  properties, such as its (global or local) symmetries.  Kubovy's Analysis of Alternative Axes Around Which a Rotation Might Be Represented. The question has often been raised, about  mental rotation, whether subjects imagine a single rotation around one axis or imagine two or more rotations (successive or  concurrent) about different axes. Actually, because multiple rotational axes might be specified with respect either to the  object or to the environment, we need to distinguish three possible types of imagined transformations: (a) rotation about a  fixed axis-which, for a correct result, must be the unique axis specified by Euler's or by Chasles's theorem; (b) a  combination of rotations about three separate axes fixed in the environment (such as the observer's canonical x, y, and z  axes); or (c) a combination of rotations about three separate axes fixed in the object and moving with it (such as the  front-back, left-right, and top-bottom axes of an aircraft or the F-B, L-R, and T-U axes of our illustrative cube). Kubovy  (1979; partly on the basis of data collected by Kubovy & Wearing, 1982), and in agreement with Metzler and Shepard (1974),  reached the following provisional conclusions: (a) Individuals first search for the Euler axis uniquely determined by the two  presented orientations and then imagine a single rotation of the object around that axis-with rotation time linearly  increasing with angular difference but largely independent of the absolute orientation of that Euler axis (as might be  expected, Kubovy noted, if the dimensions of the "mental space" in which the rotations are imagined are psychologically  "integral" rather than "separable"). (b) The time required to find that Euler axis, however, increases as it departs from  alignment with any one of the observer's environmental x, y, or z axes-with the search time generally shortest for alignment  with the (gravitationally defined) vertical or y-axis. (c) The rate of mental rotation is, however, faster when a natural axis  of the object itself is aligned with the Euler axis (a conclusion supported by results that Kubovy obtained in collaboration  with S. Schwartz). With regard to this last conclusion, Kubovy (1979) conjectured that the rate of imagined rotation may  depend on "some function of the distribution of the volume" of the object that is like-but probably not identical-to a  physically defined moment of inertia. While  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, I 177  we agree with most of Kubovy's conclusions, we shall argue in Part 11, that the psychologically natural axis of rotation of an  object is probably determined by its (global or local) symmetries rather than by a function of the distribution of its volume  as such.  Hoffman's Introduction of Group Representations into Perception. As we noted, Cassirer (1944 [1938]) made an early proposal  that perception might be best understood through an extension of Klein's (1893) Erlangen program for basing geometry on the  transformations that leave geometrical objects invariant. Still, such a proposal was not seriously pursued in psychology until  Hoffman (1966) set forth, in some detail, how Lie groups and their one-parameter subgroups might account for a number of known  perceptual illusions and other phenomena. In subsequent extensions of the application of group theory to real and apparent  motion, Caelli, Hoffman, and Lindman (1978a, 1978b) also went on to consider the Lorent-- group of relativity physics. The  particular group-theoretic treatments of the representation of motion by Hoffman, Caelli, and their associates appears, like  Restle's coding theory, to have focused primarily on the motion of simple, point-like objects in the two-dimensional plane,  however. Moreover, Hoffman explicitly tied Lie algebra to the neuroanatomical substrate, whereas we are focusing on the  capabilities and behavior of the system rather than on its physical embodiment. In short, while we have followed Hoffman and  Caelli (and Cassirer, before them) in our pursuit of a group-theoretic approach, we have sought to develop explicit  formulations for (a) the representation of rigid motions of extended objects between positions differing in both location and  orientation in three-dimensional space, (b) the representation of motions intermediate between those prescribed by Lie groups  and by classical physics, and (c) the effects of the symmetry group of an object on the representation of its simplest motions  (in Part II ).  Foster's Interpretation of Apparent Motion in Terms of the Orthogonal Group SO(3). In an early paper, Brown and Voth (1937)  had reported evidence for circular apparent motion between point-like stimuli, when such stimuli were sequentially presented,  with sufficient rapidity, around the corners of a square-a phenomenon that may be interpretable in terms of kinematic geometry  (see Shepard, 1984). Foster (1975) evidently was the first, however, to report evidence that an extended object alternately  presented in just two positions yields apparent rigid motion over a curved path. On the basis of this finding, Foster (1975;  see also Foster, 1978) made what appears to have been the first explicit proposal that apparent motion of an extended object  follows geodesic paths in the rotation group SO(3). We believe, however, that by turning to a connection, we have taken a step  toward a more general and fundamental basis for the geodesics. Moreover, like Hoffman, Foster seems not to have explicitly  treated the following extensions: (a) motion of a three-dimensional object between positions differing both in orientation and  location in space-a case that requires the six-dimensional semidirect product of the rotation group SO(3) and the translation  group R3; (b) motion over a path extrapolated beyond those prescribed by this semidirect product manifold  178 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  and those prescribed by the direct product manifold of classical physics; and (c) the influence of various symmetries of the  object on the representation of its motion (the topic of our ensuing Part II).  Quaternion Representation of Interpolated Rotation. In 1844, W. R. Hamilton, whose least action principle we have already  mentioned, announced a successful generalization of algebra beyond both real numbers, x (each of which consists of but one  component), and complex numbers, z (each of which consists of two components, x and yi). Having found that elements consisting  of three components were precluded by their inability to satisfy the required rules of vector multiplication, Hamilton  introduced quaternions, q, each of which consists of four components, q,, q2, q3, qa (Hamilton, 1844). Quaternions turned out  to provide a particularly felicitous representation for rigid rotations in space (Cayley, 1845; Hamilton, 1853). For this  reason, quaternions have been advocated in recent years for the control of the orientation of a physical space vehicle (e.g.,  Ickes, 1970), for the interpolation of intermediate frames, in computer animation, between frames portraying a rigid object in  two different orientations in space (e.g., Shoemake, 1985), and even for mental transformations (see Oshins, 1984; Oshins &  McGoveran, 1980). Indeed, interpolation in computer animation clearly bears a close affinity to the problem of mental  interpolation, and we in fact take advantage of the computationally efficient way in which quaternions handle rotations in  Part II. However, because the spherical metric of the noncommutative group of unit quaternions is the same as the angular  metric of the orthogonal group SO(3) that we have already considered (Misner, Thorne, & Wheeler, 1973), the paths of rotation  that naturally arise from quaternions (see Shoemake, 1985) are identical to the great-circle paths we have already discussed  for SO(3). Moreover, in order to accommodate general rigid motions, which include a translation as well as a rotation, the  quaternions need to be extended by R3 (see Carlton, 1988).  Podgorny's Proposal That Rigid Motions in Space Be Represented by Mobius Transformations on the Complex Plane. In an  intriguing unpublished note, Peter Podgorny (1979) discussed the psychological representation of rigid transformations in  terms of the algebra of complex numbers. Podgorny began by noting a correspondence between rigid motions of a sphere in  three-dimensional space and transformations that are induced in a fixed two-dimensional plane by the stereographic projection  of the moving sphere onto the plane. The projection maps each point of the sphere onto a horizontal plane along the straight  line through the unique north-pole point of the sphere. (That projection point itself maps into the plane's "point at  infinity.") For our purposes, the sphere can be regarded as an asymmetric object whose momentary orientation in space is  uniquely specifiable by virtue of markings on its surface. (The markings could, for example, be the projection on the  spherical surface, along rays emanating from the center of the sphere, of a concentric version of our marked cube.) The  stereographic projection of the sphere onto the plane is conformal (see, e.g., Cohn, 1967), preserving angles and hence ratios  of distances between markings within any local region of the surface.  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, I 179  Translations of the sphere parallel to the plane yield rigid translations of the projection, translations orthogonal to the  plane yield linear size scalings of the projection, rigid rotations of the sphere about its axis normal to the plane yield  rigid rotations of the projection and, more generally, any combination of a translation in any direction and a rotation about  any axis of the sphere yields a corresponding transformation of its planar projection.  Now, if the plane on which the sphere is projected is taken to be the complex plane, so that points z have coordinates x and  vi (where i = ~,/ _-1 ), the set of rigid motions of the sphere (such that the projection point remains above the plane)  corresponds to the fractional, or M6bius group of transformations on the complex plane  w={a(z)+b}/{c(z)+d}, with (a)(d)-(b)(c):?~ 0,  where w is the point on the complex plane into which the point z is carried by a given displacement of the sphere. (The  reverse mapping of the complex plane back onto the sphere converts it into the "Riemann sphere" of complex analysis-see, e.g.,  Cohn, 1967.) Noting that the specification of the positions of any three noncollinear points of a rigid object in space are  sufficient to determine the position of the object as a whole, Podgorny then makes use of the following result from complex  analysis (see, e.g., Ahlfors, 1953, p.25): Given three distinct points in the complex plane (z,, z,, z3) and the three points  in the plane (w,, w,, w3) into which those points are transformed by a given displacement of the sphere, there exists one an  only one Mobius transformation, f, such that wk = f(z,) for k = 1, 2, 3. Moreover, that unique Mobius transformation is given  by the equation  (w-WI) (W3-W2)_(z-zl) (Z3-z-') (w-W,) (w3-wJ (z-z_1) (Z3-z,)'  Because the zk and wk are known, w can be solved for in terms of z. The solution represents the unique M6bius transformation  that carries the zk into the wk and, thereby, yields the unique corresponding transformation of the three-dimensional object  represented by the sphere.  The problem explicitly addressed by Podgorny is different from ours. He sought a method (such as subjects might use in  experiments-like that of Shepard & Metzler, 1971-on mental rotation) for determining whether two given images could be of the  same three-dimensional object. Podgorny needed to determine a rigid transformation between the two shapes only in order to be  able to test for the congruence of those shapes. Nevertheless, the transformation between the two given positions of the  sphere that corresponds to his proposed M6bius transformation could be taken as a candidate for the psychologically simplest  motion between those two positions. The motion would not in general be the same as the simplest motion in the Euclidean group,  however, because the Mobius group, lacking a normal subgroup, is not isomorphic to the semidirect product Euclidean group and  cannot have the same one-parameter subgroups.  180 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  We hope to explore the theoretical and empirical implications of formalizing mental transformations in terms of the Mobius  rather than the Euclidean group and, also, in terms of more general (projective or conformal) groups. We also hope to assess  the usefulness of representations-such as biquaternions (Clifford, 1882)that naturally arise from such groups, and that Eddie  Oshins (personal communication, circa 1978) has proposed for our consideration. We believe, however, that such further  investigations will not alter the basic conclusions that we have already reached as to what motions are psychologically  favored.  Factors Remaining to Be Considered  In our account of alternative principles for the psychological representation of rigid motions of objects in space, we have so  far ignored several factors that may be significant under some circumstances. In concluding Part I, we briefly comment on some  of these additional factors.  Possible Internalization of Other Physical Factors. As we have noted, existing evidence suggests that some of the principles  of physical dynamics (even if not all such principles-see Proffitt et al., in press) may have been internalized. As we have  also mentioned, certain external forces, in addition to the physical laws of motion themselves, have been pervasive throughout  terrestrial evolution. Some of these, too, may have become internally represented, such as the forces of friction, air  resistance and, particularly, gravity (see Freyd, 1983a; Freyd, Pantzer, & Cheng, 1988; Hubbard & Bharucha, 1988; Shepard,  1982; Shepard & Hurwitz, 1984). The tasks of formalizing the internal representation of such external forces and of assessing  their importance for the representation of the motion of rigid objects remain for future exploration.  Incompletely resolved, also, is the role of the physical concept of momentum in the internal representation of motion. Freyd  and her associates have obtained evidence for "representational momentum," in which the motion implied by a sequence of  presented positions of an object tends to be carried forward to some extent in one's memory of the last presented position  (Finke, Freyd, & Shyi, 1986; Freyd, 1983a; Freyd & Finke, 1984, 1985; Freyd & Johnson, 1987; see review by Freyd, 1987; and  recent corroboration by Hubbard & Bharucha, 1988). In addition, Foster and Gravano (1982) and Ramachandran and Anstis (1983)  have reported evidence for momentum in visual apparent motion. However, whether these effects should be interpreted  specifically as simulations of physical momentum or, more generally, as extrapolations of geodesic paths, which may be  determined as much-or even entirely-by principles of kinematic geometry remains to be determined (see Shepard, 1984).  Possible Dependence on an Environmental Frame of'Reference. We have so far been considering a path of motion in terms of its  own intrinsic structure-without regard to the relation of that structure to any external frame of reference. For example, we  have regarded a rigid rotation about a fixed axis as equally simple whether  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, I 181  that axis is vertical, horizontal, aligned with the observer's line of sight, or inclined at some arbitrary angle between such  environmentally specified directions. There is evidence, however, that a rotation about an axis that is in some way aligned  with the environmental frame of the observer and, particularly, rotation about a vertical axis is psychologically simpler than  rotation about an axis that is arbitrarily oriented in space (Kubovy & Wearing, 1982; Metzler, 1973; Metzler & Shepard, 1974;  Parsons, 1987a, 1987b; Shiffrar & Shepard, in press). Moreover, the reported psychological primacy of environmentally  determined axes-particularly, the gravitationally determined vertical axis (cf., Attneave & Olson, 1967; Corballis, Nagourney,  Shetzer, & Stefanatos, 1978; Corballis, Zbrodoff, & Roldan, 1976)-is to be expected on evolutionary grounds (Shepard, 1982;  Shepard & Hurwitz, 1984) and, as we already noted, is presupposed by Restle's (1979) coding theory of motion representation.  Still, we believe that the relation of the axis of transformation to the environmental frame is generally less important than  the relation of the axis of transformation to the intrinsic structure of the transformed object itself. This takes us to the  final subsection of this article, which is, in part, an advertisement for the sequel (Part 11).  Effects of Inherent Svminetries of the Object. We began this article (Part 1) with the conjecture that the representation of  rigid spatial transformations is primarily guided by internalizations of principles that have governed such transformations in  the external world. This led us to focus on the two most obvious candidates for such external principles-those of classical  physics and those of kinematic geometry. We noted, however, that there is reliable evidence-such as the occurrence of curved  paths of apparent motion under some conditions-that is clearly inconsistent with the hypothesis that the internalized  principles are purely those of (force-free) classical physics. At the same time, the preponderance of evidence has suggested  that paths of apparent motion do not attain the full degree of curvature dictated by principles purely of kinematic geometry  (e.g., Farrell, 1983; Foster, 1975; McBeath, in press; McBeath & Shepard, 1989; Mori, 1982; Parsons, 1987a, 1987b; Proffitt et  al., 1988).  Our first attempt to accommodate such intermediate degrees of curvature was to construct the one-parameter family of  interpolated models, permitting (by variation of the parameter u) any desired compromise between the path prescribed by the  purely physical model (u=1) and the purely geometrical model (u=0). Accumulating evidence is indicating that we can indeed fit  a broader range of psychological data in this way. We are left, however, with the problem of explaining why the parameter u  must take on different values to fit the data obtained for different visual objects or for different positions of presentation  of those objects. The explanation may be that the psychological accessibility of the transformational axes prescribed by  kinematic geometry depends on the alignment of those axes with the natural axes of the environmental frame and, perhaps  particularly, with the inherent axes of symmetry of the object itself.  For simplicity in this first article (Part 1), we have set aside consideration of the  182 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  possible effects of symmetries of the object, by confining our consideration to asymmetric objects. In fact, however, most  objects of interest possess some symmetries or, at least, approximations to symmetries. We were able to treat the squares and  cubes, which we have been using for purposes of illustration throughout, as asymmetric only by virtue of the different marks  ("F", "R", etc.) that we inscribed on their faces. If we were to remove these symmetry breaking marks, the homologous but  previously distinct parts of the square or of the cube (i.e., faces, edges, or corners) would become indistinguishable. The  symmetry (under certain rotations) of the resulting objects would open the way to many more kinematically natural paths of  rigid transformation between any two positions of the object. Moreover, the resulting symmetries would determine certain  salient object-centered axes-such as any of the three axes of four-fold symmetry through the centers of opposite faces of the  cube.  In the sequel (Part II) we shall formalize the structural changes that such symmetries and approximations to such symmetries  induce in the manifold of possible positions of the object and, hence, in the set of geodesic paths that we take to correspond  to the psychologically simple transformations. In the process, we shall review accumulating evidence that while the  representation of rigid motions is little affected by the physically defined principal axes of inertia of the object, the  representation of rigid motion is strongly influenced by the degree of alignment between the transformational axis and the  geometrically defined axes of symmetry of the visible structure of the object. We shall also consider whether real, apparent,  and imagined transformations may somewhat differ in this respect.  APPENDIX: NONEXISTENCE OF A METRIC ON THE EUCLIDEAN GROUP  YIELDING GEODESICS CORRESPONDING TO SCREW MOTIONS  According to Helgason (1978), translates of the one-parameter subgroups are geodesics for a metric if and only if the metric  is bi-invariant; that is, invariant under both left and right translations on the group. The natural bi-invariant bilinear  form derived from the group product is known as the Killing form (see Helgason, 1978). For the Euclidean group E+ = R3 @ SO(3  ), the Killing form turns out to be the three-dimensional Euclidean inner product on the tangent space at the identity of the  rotation subgroup SO(3) and is identically zero on the translation subgroup R3. Thus the Killing form does not define a metric  on the full group. Moreover, Milnor (1976) has shown that a connected Lie group admits a bi-invariant metric if and only if  the group is the direct product of a compact group and an additive vector group. The Euclidean group E+ is, however, the  semidirect product, rather than the direct product, of the compact rotation group SO(3) and the commutative translation group  R3. Uniqueness of the decomposition E+=R3 Gs SO(3) precludes the possibility of writing E+ as the direct product of any other  compact group and additive vector group. For suppose E+ = V x K for vector group V and compact group K. Then V must be  three-dimensional, hence  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, 1 183  isomorphic to R3. It follows that K must be isomorphic to SO(3) and the product semidirect. Therefore E+ does not admit the  bi-invariant metric required in order that the helical paths of kinematic geometry be derivable as geodesics of the metric.  Similarly, in the context of classical physics, screw motions cannot be derived from a least action principle either. In  general, for a conservative system (in which total energy is constant along trajectories), the extremals of the integral of  the Lagrangian are geodesics of a metric on configuration space defined by the kinetic energy (see Synge & Griffith, 1959).  For the case of rigid body motion, configuration space M = R3 x SO(3) has the same differential manifold structure as the Lie  group E+ = R3 G) SO(3). Hence any metric on M is also a metric on E+. If there were a Lagrangian whose trajectories  corresponded to screw motions, then the associated kinetic energy metric on M would be a metric on E+ for which the translates  of one-parameter subgroups were geodesics. As we have just noted, no such metric exists. Therefore, either no such Lagrangian  exists or the system is not conservative.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  Supported by National Science Foundation Grants BNS 80-05517 and BNS 85-11685 to the second author and additionally, in the  case of the first author, by NIMH, PHS NRSA Postdoctoral Fellowship 5 F32 MH09103-01, 2 and, through the generosity of our  colleague Brian Wandell, by NASA research grant NCC2-307 to Stanford University. We are indebted to many students and  associates-including Dan Asimov, James Cutting, Jennifer Freyd, Patrick Goebel, Carol Krumshansl, Eddie Oshins, and Valerie  Stone, for helpful suggestions, and Michael McBeath, Maggie Shiffrar, and Susan Zare, for relevant experimental work. Finally,  for their extraordinarily painstaking readings of our manuscript and for their many insightful suggestions for its  improvement, we thank, in addition to an anonymous reviewer, David Foster, David Gilden, Michael Kubovy, David Mumford, Dennis  Profiitt, James Townsend, and, especially, Michael Leyton.  REFERENCES  ADLER, R., BAZIN, M., & SCHIFFER, M. (1965). Introduction to general relativity. New York: McGraw-Hill.  AHARANOV, V., & SUSSKIND, L. (1967). Observability of the sign change of spinors under 271 rotations. Physics Review, 158,  1237-1238.  AHLFORS, L. V. (1953). Complex analysis. New York: McGraw-Hill.  ARNOLD, V.1. (1974). Mathematical methods of classical mechanics. New York: Springer-Verlag. ATTNEAvE, F. (1974). Apparent  movement and the what-where connection. Ps vchologica, 17, 108-120. ATTNEAVE, F., & OLSON, R. K. (1967). Discriminability of  stimuli varying in physical and retinal orientation. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 74, 149-157.  BAHILL, A. T., & LARITZ, T. (1984) Why can't batters keep their eyes on the ball? American Scientist, 72, 249-253.  BALL, R. S. (1900). A treatise on the theory of screws. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press. BERNSTEIN, H. J., & PHILLIPS, A.  V. (1981). Fiber bundles and quantum theory. Scientific American, 245 (1), 122-137.  184 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  BISHOP, R. L., & GOLDBERG, S. I. (1968). Tensor analysis on manifolds. New York: Macmillan.  BROWN, J. F., & VOTH, A. C. (1937). The path of seen movement as a function of the vector field. American Journal of  Psychology, 49, 543-563.  BUNDESEN, C., & LARSEN, A. (1975). Visual transformation of size. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and  Performance, 1, 214-220.  BUNDESEN, C., LARSEN, A., & FARRELL, J. E. (1981). Mental transformations of size and orientation. In A. D. Baddeley & J. B.  Long (Eds.), Attention and performance !X (pp. 279-294). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  BUNDESEN, C., LARSEN, A., & FARRELL, J. E. (1983). Visual apparent movement: Transformations of size and orientation.  Perception, 12, 549-558.  CAELLI, T., HOFFMAN, W. C., & LINDMAN, H. (1978a). Apparent motion: Self-excited oscillations induced by retarded neuronal  flaws. In E. L. J. Leeuwenberg & H. F. J. M. Buffart (Eds.), Formal theories of visual perception (pp. 103-116). New York:  Wiley.  CAELLI, T., HOFFMAN, W. C., & LINDMAN, H. (19786). Subjective Lorentz transformations and the perception of motion. Journal of  the Optical Societv of America, 68, 402-411.  CARLTON, E. H. (1988). Connection between internal representation of rigid transformation and cortical activity paths.  Biological Cybernetics, 59, 419-429.  CARTAN, E. (1927). La geometrie des groupes de transformation. Journal de Mathematiques Pures et Appliques, 6, 11-119.  CASSIRER, E. (1944). The concept of group and the theory of perception. Philosophical and Phenomenological Research 5, 1-35  [Original French publication, 1938].  CAYLEY, A. (1845). On certain results relating to quaternions. Philosophical Magazine, 26, 141-145. CHASLES, M. (1830). Note  sur les properties generales du systeme de deux corps semblables entr'eux et places dune maniere quelconque dans 1'espace; et  sur le d6pacement fini ou infiniment petit d'un corps solide libre [A note on the general properties of a system of two  similar bodies arbitrarily positioned in space; and on the finite or infinitely small displacement of an unconstrained solid  body]. Bulletin des Sciences Mathematiques, Ferussae, 14, 321-326.  CLIFFORD, W. K. (1882). Preliminary sketch of biquaternions. In Mathematical Papers. London. COHN, H. (1967). Conformal  mapping on Riemann surfaces. New York: McGraw-Hill.  COOPER, L. A., (1975). Mental rotation of random two-dimensional shapes. Cognitive Psychology, 7, 20-43.  COOPER, L. A. (1976). Demonstration of a mental analog of an external rotation. Perception and Psychophysics, 19, 296-302.  COOPER, L. A., & SHEPARD, R. N. (1973). Chronometric studies of the rotation of mental images. In W. G. Chase (Ed.), visual  information processing (pp. 75-176). New York: Academic Press. COOPER, L. A., & SHEPARD, R. N. (1975). Mental transformations  in the identification of left and right hands. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 104,  48-56. CORBALLIS, M. C., NAGOURNEY, B., SHETZER, L. L, & STETANATOS, G. (1978). Mental rotation under head tilt: Factors  influencing the location of the subjective reference frame. Perception and Psychophysics, 24, 263-273.  CORBALLIS, M. C., ZBRODOFF, N. J., & ROLDAN, C. E. (1976). What's up in mental rotation? Perception and Psychophysics, 19,  525-530.  COSMIDES, L. (1989). The logic of social exchange: Has natural selection shaped how humans reason? Studies with the Wason  selection task. Cognition, 31, 187-276.  CRAIK, K. J. W. (1943). The nature of explanation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.  CUTTING, J. E. & PROFFITT, D. R. (1982). The minimum principle and the perception of absolute, common, and relative motions.  Cognitive Psychology, 14, 211-246.  DIRAC, P. A. M. (1930). The principles of quantum mechanics. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.  DODWELL, P. C. (1983). The Lie transformation group model of visual perception. Perception and Psychophysics, 34, 1-16.  EULER, L. (1957). Du mouvement de rotation des corps solides autour d'un axe variable. In Opera omnia, Ser. secuda (Vol. 8).  Lausannae: Orell Fusli Turrici [original publication 1758].  EXNER, S. (1875). Ober das Sehen von Bewegungen and die Theorie des zusammengesetzen Auges [On  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, I  the perception of movements and the theory of the integrative eye]. Sitzungsberichte Akademie Wissenschaft Wien, 72, 156-190.  FARRELL, J. E. (1983). Visual transformations underlying apparent movement. Perception and Psychophysics, 33, 85-92.  FARRELL, J. E., & SHEPARD, R. N. (1981). Shape, orientation, and apparent rotational motion. Journal of Experimental  Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 7, 477-486.  FINKE, R. A., FREYD, J. J., & SHYI, G. C.-W. (1986). Implied velocity and acceleration induce transformations of visual  memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 175-188.  FOSTER, D. H. (1975). Visual apparent motion of some preferred paths in the rotation group SO(3). Biological Cybernetics, 18,  81-89.  FOSTER, D. H. (1978). Visual apparent motion and the calculus of variations. E. L. J. Leeuwenberg & H. F. J. M. Buffart  (Eds.), Formal theories of visual perception (pp. 67-82). New York: Wiley. FOSTER, D. H., & GRAVANO, S. (1982). Overshoot of  curvature in visual apparent motion. Perception and Psychophysics, 5, 411-420.  FREYD, J. J. (1983a). Apparent accelerated motion and dynamic mental representations. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,  Stanford University.  FREYD, J. J. (1983b). Shareability: The social psychology of epistemology. Cognitive Science, 1, 191-210. FREYD, J. J. (1987).  Dynamic mental representations. Psychological Review, 94, 427-438.  FREYD, J. J., & FINKE, R. A. (1984). Representational momentum. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and  Cognition, 10, 126-132.  FREYD, J. J., & FINKE, R. A. (1985). A velocity effect for representational momentum. Bulletin of the Ps ychonomic Society,  23, 443-446.  FREYD, J. J., & JOHNSON, J. Q. (1987). Probing the time course of representational momentum. Journal of Experimental  Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 13, 259-268.  FREYD, J. J., PANTZER, T. M., & Cheng, J. L. (1988). Representing statics as forces in equilibrium. Journal of Experimental  Psychology: General, 117, 395-407.  GARNER, W. R. (1974). The processing of injbrmation and .structure. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. GIBSON, J. J. (1966). The senses  considered as perceptual systems. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. GIBSON, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual  perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. GOEBEL, R. P. (1990). The mathematics of mental rotations. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 34, in press.  GOLDSTEIN, H. (1980). Classical mechanics (2nd ed. ). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.  HAMILTON, W. R. (1844). On quaternions; or on a new system of imaginaries in algebra. Philosophical Magazine, 25, 10-13.  HAMILTON, W. R. (1853). Lectures on quaternions. Dublin: Hodges & Smith.  HATFIELD, G., & EPSTEIN, W. (1985). The status of the minimum principle in the theoretical analysis of visual perception.  Psychological Bulletin, 97, 155-186.  HELGASON, S. (1978). Differential geometry, Lie groups, and symmetric .spaces. New York: Academic Press. HOFFMAN, W. C. (1966)  The Lie algebra of visual perception. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 3, 65-98.  HUBBARD, T. L., & BHARUCHA, J. J. (1988). Judged displacement in apparent vertical and horizontal motion. Perception and  Psychophysics, 44, 211-221.  HUNT, K. H. (1978). Kinematic geometry of mechanisms. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.  ICKES, B. P. (1970). A new method for performing digital control system attitude computations using quaternions. AIAA Journal,  8, 13-17.  JOHANSSON, G. (1973). Visual perception of biological motion and a model for its analysis. Perception and Ps ychophysics, 14,  201-211.  KAISER, M. D., GRUNWALD, A. J., & PROFFITT, D. R. (1987). Kinematic and kinetic appreciation of angular systems. Paper  presented at the 28th annual meeting of the Psychonomic Society, Seattle, WA (November 7).  KAISER, M. K., PROFFITT, D. R., & ANDERSON, K. (1984). Judgments of natural and anomalous trajectories in the presence and  absence of motion. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 11, 795-803.  186  CARLTON AND SHEPARD  KLEIN, F. (1893). A comparative review of recent researches in geometry (D. W. Haskell, Trans.). Bulletin of the New York  Mathematical Society, 2, 215-249, [Original German publication 1893]. KLEIN, F. (1936). Elementary mathematics from an  advanced standpoint. (E. R. Hendrick & C. A. Noble, Trans.). New York: Dover [Original German publication 1908].  KOBAYASHI, S., & Nom, K. (1963). Foundations of differential geometry. New York: Interscience. KORTE, A. (1915).  Kinematoskopische Untersuchungen [Cinematoscopic investigations]. Zeitschrift fur Psychologie, 72, 193-296.  KUBOVY, M. (1979). Two hypotheses concerning the interrelation of perceptual spaces. In L. D. Harmon (Ed.), Interrelations of  the communicative senses (Proceedings of a conference held at Asilomar, CA, September 29-October 2, 1978.) Cleveland: Case  Western Reserve University.  KuBovy, M., & PODGORNY, P. (1981). Does pattern matching require the normalization of size and orientation? Perception and Ps  ychophysics, 30, 24-28.  KUBOVY, M., & TOTH, N. (1985). Parallel vs. serial mental transformations. Paper presented at the 26th annual meeting of the  Psychonomic Society, Boston, November 22.  KUBOVY, M., & WEARING, A. (1982). Is mental space isotropic? Mental rotation about arbitrarily oriented axes. Paper presented  at the 23rd annual meeting of the Psychonomic Society. Minneapolis, November 12.  LARSEN, A., & BUNDESEN, C. (1978). Size scaling in visual pattern recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human  Perception and Performance, 4, 1-20.  LEEUWENBERG, E. L. J. (1971). A perceptual coding language for visual and auditory patterns. American Journal of Psychology,  84, 307-350.  LEPTON, M. (1986a). A theory of information structure. 1. General principles. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 30, 103-160.  LEPTON, M. (1986b). A theory of information structure: II. A theory of perceptual organzation. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 30, 257-305.  LEPTON, M. (1986c). Principles of information structure common to six levels of the human cognitive system. Information  Sciences, 38, 1-120.  LEPTON, M. (1988). A process-grammar for shape. Artificial Intelligence, 34, 213-247. LIE, S. (1888-1890). Theorie der  Transformationsgruppen (Vols. 1 & 2). Leizig: Teubner. MACH, E. (1959). The analysis of .sensations (S. Waterlow, Trans.). New  York: Dover [from the 5th German edition, 1886].  MACKEY, G. W. (1968). Induced representations of groups and quantum mechanics. New York: Benjamin. MACMILLAN, W. D. (1960).  Dynamics of rigid bodies. Dover, New York: McGraw-Hill, [original publication 1936].  McBEATH, M. (in press). Comparison of four models that describe path of apparent motion. Journal of Experimental Psychology.  Human Perception and Performance.  McBEATH, M., & SHEPARD, R. N. (1989). Apparent motion between shapes differing in location and orientation: A window technique  for estimating path curvature. Perception and Psychophysics, 46, 333-337.  METZLER, J. (1973). Cognitive analogues of the rotation of three-dimensional objects. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,  Stanford University, 1973.  METZLER, J. & SHEPARD, R. N. (1974). Transformational studies of the internal representation of threedimensional objects. In  R. Solso (Ed.), Theories of cognitive psychology: The Loyola Symposium (pp. 147-201). Potomac, MD: Erlbaum.  MILLER, G. A., GALANTER, E., & PRIBRAM, K. H. (1960). Plans and the structure of behavior. New York: Holt.  MISNER, C. W., THORNE, K. S., & WHEELER. J. A. (1973). Gravitation. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman. MORI, T. (1982). Apparent  motion path composed of a serial concatenation of translations and rotations. Biological Cybernetics, 44, 31-104.  NEWELL, A. & SIMON, H. A. (1961). GPS, a program that simulates human thought. In H. Billing (Ed.), Lernende Automaten  (Proceedings of a conference at Karlsruhn, Germany, April 1961, pp. 109-124). Munich: Oldenbourg.  PSYCHOLOGICALLY SIMPLE MOTIONS, 1 187  NEWELL, A& SIMON, H. A. (1971). Human problem solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. OSHINS, E. (1984). A quantum  approach to psychology: Spinors, rotations, and non-selecting ambiguity-Part I: Quantum logic representations of psychology.  In D. McGoveran (Ed.), Discrete approaches to natural philosophy (Proceedings of the 1st Annual Western Regional meeting of  the Alternative Natural Philosophy Association). Boulder Creek, CA: Alternative Natural Philosophy Association.  OSHINS, E., & McGOVERAN, D. (1980). ...Thoughts about logic about thoughts...: The question "schizophrenia." In B. H. Banathy  (Ed.), Svstems science and .society (Proceedings of the 24th annual North American Meeting of the Society for General Systems  Research, pp. 505-514). Louisville, KY: Society for General Systems Research.  PALMER, S. E. (1982). Symmetry, transformation, and the structure of perceptual systems. In J. Beck (Ed.), Representation, and  organiration in perception (pp. 95-144). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  PALMER, S. E. (1984). The psychology of perceptual organization: A transformational approach. In A. R. Rosenfeld and J. Beck  (Eds.), Human and machine vision. New York: Academic Press. PARSONS, L. M. (1987a). Imagined spatial transformations of one's  body. Journal of E.vperimental Psychology: General, 116, 172-191.  PARSONS, L. M. (1987b). Visual discrimination of abstract mirror-reflected three-dimensional objects at many orientations.  Perception and Psychophysics, 42, 49-59.  PENROSE, R. (1975). Twistor theory: Its aims and achievements. In C. J. Isham, R. Penrose, & D. W. Sciama (Eds.), Quantum  gravity (pp. 268--407). Oxford: Clarendon Press.  PODGORNY, P. (1979). A transformational approach to the internal representation of visual objects. Unpublished manuscript.  Yale University (September 6).  PORTEOUS, I. R. (1969). Topological geometry (2nd ed). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press. POWERS, W. T. (1973), Behavior:  The control of perception. Chicago: Aldine.  PRIBRAM, K. H., & CARLTON, E. H. (1986). Holonomic brain theory in imaging and object perception. Acta Psychologica, 63,  175-210.  PROFFITT, D. R., & CUTTING, J. E. (1979). Perceiving the centroid of configurations on a rolling wheel. Perception &  Psychophysics, 25, 389-398.  PROFITT, D. R., GILDEN, D., KAISER, M. K., & WHELAN, S. (1988). The effect of configural orientation on perceived trajectory  in apparent motion. Perception and Ps ychophysics, 435, 465-474.  PROFFITT, D. R., KAISER, M. K., & WHELAN, S. (in press). Understanding wheel dynamics. Cognitive Psychology.  RAMACHANDRAN, V. S., & ANSTIS, S. M. (1983). Extrapolation of motion path in human visual perception. Vision Research, 23,  83-85.  RESTLE, F. (1979) Coding theory of perception of motion configurations. Psychological Review, 86, 1-24. ROBINS, C., & SHEPARD,  R. N. (1977). Spatio-temporal probing of apparent rotational movement. Perception and Ps ychophysics, 22, 12-18.  SHEPARD, R. N. (1975). From, formation, and transformation of internal representations. In R. Solso (Ed.), Information  processing and cognition: The Loyola Symposium (pp. 87-122). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  SHEPARD, R. N. (1977). Trajectories of apparent tranformation. Paper presented at the 18th annual meeting of the Psychonomic  Society, Washington, D.C., November 10.  SHEPARD, R. N. (1978). The mental image. American Psychologist, 33, 125-137.  SHEPARD, R. N. (1981). Psychophysical complementarity. In M. Kubovy & J. POMERANTZ (Eds. ), Perceptual organization (pp.  279-341). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  SHEPARD, R. N. (1982). Perceptual and analogical bases of cognition. In J. Mehler, M. Garrett, & E. Walker (Eds.),  Perspectives on mental representation (pp. 49-67). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. SHEPARD, R. N. (1984). Ecological constraints on  internal representation: Resonant kinematics of perceiving, imagining, thinking, and dreaming. Psychological Review, 91,  417-447.  SHEPARD, R. N. (1987a). Evolution of a mesh between principles of the mind and regularities of the world. In J. Dupre (Ed.),  The latest on the best: Essays on evolution and optimality (pp. 251-275). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press/Bradford.  188 CARLTON AND SHEPARD  SHEPARD, R. N. (1987b). Toward a universal law of generalization for psychological science. Science, 237, 1317-1323.  SHEPARD, R. N. (1988). The role of transformations in spatial cognition. In J. Stiles-Davis, M. Kritchevsky, & U. Bellugi  (Eds.), Spatial Cognition: Brain bases and development (pp. 81-110). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  SHEPARD, R. N. (1989). Internal representation of universal regularities: A challenge for connectionism. In L. Nadel, L. A.  Cooper, P. Culicover, & R. M. Harnish (Eds.), Neural connections, mental computation (pp. 104-134). Cambridge, MA: MIT  Press/Bradford.  SHEPARD, R. N., & COOPER, L. A. (1982). Mental images and their transformations. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press/Bradford.  SHEPARD, R. N., & FARRELL, J. E. (1985). Representation of the orientations of shapes. Acta Psychologica, 59, 104-121.  SHEPARD, R. N., & Feng, C. (1972). A chronometric study of mental paper folding. Cognitive Psychology, 3, 228-243.  SHEPARD, R. N. & HURWITZ, S. (1984). Upward direction, mental rotation, and discrimination of left and right turns in maps.  Cognition, 18, 161-193.  SHEPARD, R. N., & JUDD, S. A. (1976). Perceptual illusion of rotation of three-dimensional objects. Science, 191, 952-954.  SHEPARD, R. N., & METZLER, J. (1971). Mental rotation of three-dimensional objects. Science, 171, 701-703.  SHEPARD, R. N., & ZARE, S. (1983). Path-guided apparent motion. Science, 220, 632-634.  SHIFFRAR, M. M., & SHEPARD, R. N. (in press). Comparison of cube rotations about axes inclined relative to the environment or  to the cube. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance.  SHOEMAKE, K. (1985). Animating rotation with quaternion curves. Computer Graphics, 19, 245-254. SPIVAK, M. (1979).  Differential geometry, Volume 2. Berkeley: Publish or Perish, Inc.  SYNGE, J. L., & GRIFFITH, B. A. (1959). Principles of mechanics (3rd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. ULLMAN, S. (1979). The  interpretation of visual motion. Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press.  WALLACH, H. (1965). Visual perception of motion. In G. Kepes (Ed.), The nature and the art of motion (pp. 52-29). New York:  George Braziller. [Revised in Wallach, H. (1976). On perception. New York: Quadrangle/New York Times.]  WERTHEIMER, M. (1912). Experimentalle Studien Cher das Sehen von Bewegung. Zeitschrift fiir Psychologie, 61, 161-265.  [Translated in part in T. Shipley (Ed.) Classics in psychology. New York: Philosophical Library, 1961.]  WHITTAKER, E. T. (1917). A treatise on the analytical dynamics of particles and rigid bodies (2nd ed.). Cambridge, MA:  Cambridge Univ. Press.  WIENER, N. (1948). Cybernetics. New York: Wiley.  WIENER, E. P. (1959). Group theory and its application to the quantum mechanics of atomic spectra. New York: Academic Press.  RECEIVED: December 6, 1988