10.1016/0022-2496(90)90032-5
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 34, 253-275 (1990)  Possibly Dependent Probability Summation of Reaction Time  HANS COLONIUS  Purdue University  The redundant target effect is frequently observed in certain reaction time experiments. A probability summation mechanism is  commonly invoked to explain the observed decrease of reaction time (RT). Here, probability summation models of RT are  generalized by dropping the assumption of stochastic independence among processing times. An upper bound for the amount of  statistical facilitation possible under negative dependence is derived for the bivariate case. Consequences for models of  binocular summation and bisensory interaction are outlined and the main result is illustrated by a comparison of  visual/auditory RT data with a simulated dependent probability summation mechanism. The impact of a base time component of  reaction time in these simulations is characterized. Finally, it is shown that the detection paradigm can formally be treated  under the reaction time paradigm. 199o  Academic Press, Inc.  1. INTRODUCTION  Consider an experimental situation where the subject is required to discriminate between two visual targets, X and Y, say. For  example, in a two-choice reaction time (RT) task the subject may be asked to respond with a left-hand button press if target X  is detected and with a right-hand button press if Y is detected. On a given trial, only targets assigned to a single response  are displayed. Now assume the number of simultaneously presented targets is varied, e.g., two X's are presented within each  trial. A redundant targets effect is obtained if there is a decrease of (average) RT with an increasing number of targets. The  effect is pervasive; redundancy gains have been observed with visual as well as with bimodal (visual/auditory) targets in  choice RT as well as in single RT situations (e.g., Hershenson, 1962; Miller, 1982; Gielen, Schmidt, & van den Heuvel, 1983).  The presence of a redundant targets effect suggests important conclusions about fundamental characteristics of the information  processing mechanisms in a given experimental situation. For example, in the paradigm outlined above an assumption of serial  processing of the redundant targets would obviously not be compatible with a decrease in mean RT (given the assumption that  individual target processing is performed at the same average speed in both the redundant and the  Reprint requests should be addressed to Dr. Hans Colonius, Department of Psychological Sciences, Purdue University, West  Lafayette, IN 47907.  253  0022-2496/90 $3.00  Copyright ~0 1990 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  254 HANS COLONIUS  single target condition). Not only the existence but also the magnitude of the redundant target effect is of interest,  however. To see this consider the following prominent explanation of the effect, which will be the main topic of this paper.  Assume that the targets are being processed in parallel and that the processing time for each of the targets has a random  duration. If these distributions overlap, then some of the `longer' RTs to Target X will be replaced by `shorter' RTs to  Target Y. Thus, on the average, RT will be faster with multiple targets than with a single one. According to this probability  summation hypothesis, this redundancy gain is a statistical effect of facilitation. The force of this explanation, however,  hinges on whether a probability summation mechanism is able to predict the observed magnitudes of the effect. This then, as  shown in the remainder of this introduction, depends on the specifics of the postulated probability summation mechanism.  In Section 2, two RT paradigms together with some empirical evidence for probability summation will be presented. In a  subsequent theoretical section, the structure of bivariate dependence is explored. The concepts developed there are then  employed in Section 4 to specify probability summation models in general and to characterize their RT predictions under  different assumptions of dependence. Section 5 presents a small simulation study for demonstrational purposes. Moreover,  effects of a base time (e.g. motor) component of RT are discussed. In a concluding section, it is shown that the detection  paradigm can formally be treated under the RT paradigm and some open more general problems are touched upon.  The concept of probability summation has a long history in psychological theorizing (see, e.g., Pirenne, 1943; Brindley,  1963). The basic idea, in the context of a detection task, is as follows: there are n elementary detector mechanisms each  reporting the presence of a stimulus with a certain probability p; (i = 1, ..., n), say; in the redundant target situation,  each detector would be associated with one of the redundant targets. Assuming (1) that the subject reports detection if at  least one detector is in the detection state, and (2) that all n detector mechanisms are stochastically independent, the  probability of the subject reporting the presence of a stimulus amounts to  P1 ...  1 - (1 -Pi)(1 -Pz) ... (1 -Pn)- (1)  The improvement of performance ensuing from having n detectors "at work" rather than one is articulated in the inequality  following from (1),  P, ...~-, max p;. (2)  Moreover, P1...n is a nondecreasing function of n, the number of elementary detectors involved. Obviously, a number of other  decision rules are conceivable and, perhaps, more realistic in certain detection situations; for example, one might require  some fraction of the elementary detectors to report detection. The focus of this paper, however, is on modifying the other  main assumption, viz. stochastic independence.  To appreciate the effect of dropping stochastic independence, consider the special case of n = 2. Let qri denote the  probability that neither detector i nor detector j  PROBABILITY SUMMATION 255  is in the detection state. Under stochastic independence, we then have for the probability P;i of detecting the stimulus with  only detectors i and j involved  P~i=1-9y  = I - (1 -Pr)(1 -Pi). (3) Positive dependence between i and j can be defined as  9ri> (1 -Pr)(1 -Pi); (4)  this implies that P;i is smaller than under stochastic independence. Analogously, negative dependence (reversing inequality  (4)) implies that P,i becomes larger.  In what follows, simple reaction time (sRT) will be considered as a measure of sensitivity rather than detection probability.  In the last section, we show that the detection situation can be formally subsumed under the sRT situation. For RT  experiments, the idea of probability summation typically takes the form of a statistical "race" between neural activities  generated in different sensory channels. The "winning" channel will report activity to some central mechanism eliciting  programming and execution of a button press response. In the next section, we sketch two empirical situations where  probability summation mechanisms have been invoked to account for RT data. It will be argued that in order to improve  assessment of the empirical validity of probability summation mechanisms, one should consider disposing of the commonly made a  priori assumption of stochastic independence. To appreciate intuitively the effect of dropping independence, let us assume  negative dependence between the channel processing times, random variables X and Y, say. Then large values of X tend to show  up with small values of Y and vice versa. If the (marginal) distributions of X and Y are assumed invariant, increasing the  degree of negative dependence between X and Y will force the mean of the minimum of X and Y to decrease, resulting in a  speeding up to responses eventually beyond the minimum of the means of X and Y (see Proposition 4.5 below for a rigorous  version of this argument). On the other hand, introducing positive dependence between X and Y has no facilitatory effect. In  the case of very high positive correlation, for example, the mean of the minimum of X and Y cannot be inferior to the minimum  of the means of X and Y.  While it seems that stochastic independence of channel processing times has been postulated mainly for reasons of analytic  tractability, the most obvious theoretical justification for assuming negative dependent processing relies on an 'allocatable  capacity' argument. If total processing capacity is constant for two channels across trials, then a trial-by-trial  reallocation of capacity between two channels would produce negative dependence between the corresponding processing times. As  we will see, such capacity need not be limited in the usual sense of degraded average performance on a single channel with  increased load (see, e.g., Townsend & Ashby, 1983). Indeed, most of our later development will be devoted to unlimited  capacity, taken in the sense that the marginal individual channel distribution is unchanged  256 HANS COLONIUS  whether or not the channel is active. Of course, a more specific justification for dependent processing is desirable and may  in fact often be attainable by taking the particular experimental and theoretical setup into account.  2. PROBABILITY SUMMATION MODELING OF REACTION TIME:  TWO PARADIGMS  EXAMPLE 2.1: INTERSENSORY INTERACTION. A typical experimental setup is a bimodal detection task where auditory and visual  stimuli are presented and the subject is instructed to respond with a button press as soon as a stimulus is perceived. On  single-signal trials, only one signal is presented; on redundant-signal trials, both signals are presented either  simultaneously or with a short interstimulus interval (ISI). The usual finding is that RT is shorter for redundant-signal  trials. Raab (1962) proposed a probability summation mechanism ("statistical facilitation") where the two signals are  processed in parallel in different sensory channels with RT being determined by whichever stimulus modality is registered  first at some central mechanism activating the response process. Given some overlap of the distributions of finishing times  for the two response-activation processes, responses to redundant signals will be faster, on average, than responses to either  of the stimuli presented alone.  Raab's model fell slightly short of predicting all the facilitation reported in Hershenson (1962) and this was replicated in a  number of later studies. Raab assumed the response-activation processes to be independent and normally distributed with equal  variances. In a more recent study, Gielen et al. (1983) dropped these distributional assumptions by numerically estimating the  redundant-signal distribution from the single-signal distributions. Nonetheless, they found mean RT in the redundant-signal  situation to be 12-13 msec faster than predicted by their probability summation-type model (p <.05). As will become clear from  our theoretical results below, it is conceivable that introducing a maximal negative correlation in Gielen et al.'s model  could result in a better fit. On the other hand, in an interesting simulation study using the inversion method to generate  negative dependence (see Section 5 below) Miller (1986) could still reject the probability summation model for his data.  EXAMPLE 2.2: BINOCULAR INTERACTION. The superiority of binocular over monocular viewing on a variety of visual tasks is well  documented; see, e.g., the review papers by Blake and Fox (1973) and by Blake, Sloane, and Fox (1981). The phenomenon is often  referred to as "binocular summation". While most studies deal with measuring binocular sensitivity vs. monocular sensitivity  at threshold levels (e.g., Campbell & Green, 1965) or use matching procedures (e.g., Legge & Rubin, 1981), some studies have  examined probability summation in binocular RT (Blake, Martens, & Di Gianfillipo, 1980; Blake, Martens, Garrett, & Westendorf,  1980;  PROBABILITY SUMMATION  257  Harwerth, Smith, & Levi, 1980). When simple RT to the onset of sinusoidal gratings is measured, binocular stimulation  consistently yields shorter RTs regardless of grating contrast or spatial frequency. Binocular RT is about 10% faster than  monocular RT. In analogy to the intersensory interaction studies, the issue is whether (or how much of) binocular summation  could be due to a probability summation mechanism between the eyes. Again, the typical finding is that binocular probability  summation falls short of predicting all of the facilitation reported for binocular RT. This conclusion, however, is based on  assuming stochastically independent processing (see, e.g., Blake, Martens, Garrett, & Westendorf, 1980; Westendorf & Blake,  1988). On the other hand, even after negative dependence is introduced there will most likely remain a certain proportion of  the binocular advantage that may be due to some genuine neural summation. This is suggested by studies involving conditions  where neural interaction between the eyes is ruled out, such as stimulation of noncorresponding retinal areas, separation of  the two monocular inputs over time, and stimulation with dissimilar monocular targets (e.g., Eriksen & Greenspon, 1968). Under  conditions where only probability summation could be responsible for the binocular advantage, the improvement of binocular vs.  monocular RT is less than observed under conditions allowing for neural summation to occur (see Blake, Martens, & Di  Gianfillipo, 1980).  To sum up, in empirical RT studies of intersensory and of binocular interaction, the concept of probability summation is  commonly invoked to account for part-though not all-of the RT facilitation observed with bimodal or binocular stimuli,  respectively. Thus, in order to assess the true amount of neural summation showing up in these experiments, it seems essential  to estimate the limits of performance set by probability summation alone.  3. THE STRUCTURE OF BIVARIATE DEPENDENCE  To prepare the definition of probability summation models given in the next section, we need some facts from probability  theory characterizing the structure of bivariate distributions, which we collect in the lemmas below. However, readers more  interested in the applications may skip this section.  For any cumulative distribution function (cdf) F, its inverse is defined by F-'(z) =inf{x: F(x)>z}.  LEMMA 3.1 (cf. Hoeffding, 1940; Fr6chet, 1951; Whitt, 1976). Let B(FX, F,.) be the set of all bivariate cdfs H on RZ having FX  and F,, as marginal cdf 's for random variables X and Y with finite positive variances. Then  (a) for any HE B(Fx, F,.) and all (x, y) E R2,  max[Fx(x) + Fy(y) - 1, 0] < H(x, y) < min[Fx(x), FY(y)];  258 HANS COLONIUS  (b) the bounds H-(x, y)=max[FX(x)+F,,(y)- 1, 0] and H+(x, y)= min[Fx(x), Fy(y)] are elements of B(Fx, F,.) and achieve minimal  and maximal correlation between X and Y, resp., among all bivariate distributions with these given marginals;  (c) let U be a uniform random variable; then  [F,Y'(U), FY'(U)] has cdf H+  and  [FX'(U), FY'(1 - U)] has cdf H-.  An outline of the proof of this lemma is given in the appendix. The left and right hand sides of inequality (5), H- and H+,  are known as the lower and upper Frechet bounds. Both H+ and H- are singular bivariate distributions; H+ assigns probability 1  to the set {(x, y): Fx(x)=Fy(y)} and H- to the set {(x, y): Fx(x)+Fy(y)=1}. These extremal cdfs and the associated extreme  correlations will be used to characterize dependent probability summation mechanisms. Part (c) of Lemma 3.1 is instrumental in  simulating H+ and H- (see Section 5).  The sense in which the Frechet bounds constitute dependence is directly opposite to that of stochastic independence: there  exists a perfect monotone relation between the two random variables (`monotone dependence').  LEMMA 3.2 (Kimeldorf & Sampson, 1978, p. 898). Let X, Y be random variables with continuous cdf's Fx and F,.; the joint cdf of  (X, Y) is H+ (H-) if and only if there exists an increasing' (decreasing) function g for which P[Y=g(X)] = 1.  The structure of a bivariate distribution can be decomposed into two logically independent parts, the marginals and the way  the marginals are combined to generate the bivariate distribution. To be more precise, let H(x, y) be a continuous cdf with  marginal cdf's Fx and F,,. The uniform representation U,, of HZ as defined by Kimeldorf and Sampson (1975) then is  U,(u,v)=H[Fx'(u),FY'(v)], 0<u, v<1.  Observe that U,(u, v) is a cdf on the unit square with both marginals being uniform on [0, 1]. The class of all continuous  cdf's can be decomposed into equivalence classes determined by the equivalence relation  H - K if and only if U= UK.  ' Note that by 'increasing' ('decreasing') is meant 'nondecreasing' ('nonincreasing') throughout this paper.  Z Continuity is assumed here to assure uniqueness of U For a slightly more general definition ('copula') see Schweizer and  Wolf (1981).  PROBABILITY SUMMATION 259  EXAMPLE 3.3: FARLIE-GUMBEL-MORGENSTERN (FGM) DISTRIBUTION. The bivariate cdf of the FGM distribution (see, e.g., Johnson &  Kotz, 1972; for an application, see Colonius, 1986) with marginals Fx and F,. is  H(x,y)=Fx(x)Fr(y)11 +a[1-Fx(x)][1-Fy(y)]}, (6)  with a E [ -1, 1 ]; its corresponding uniform representation is  UH(u, v)=uv[1 +a(1 -u)(1 -v)] (7)  with 0,<u, v < l and a E [ -1, 11.  EXAMPLE 3.4: FRANK'S DISTRIBUTION. Frank (1979) introduced, and Genest (1987) further analyzed the bivariate cdf  H(x, Y) = toga { 1 + [(a` -1)(aGIy) _ 1)/(a - 1)] }  with a E (0, 1) v (1, oc) and marginals F(x) and G(y); its uniform representation is  UH(u, v)=toga{1 + [(a"- 1)(a1)/(ac- 1)]} (9)  with 0 < u, v < 1 and a as before.  The uniform representation of a bivariate distribution captures those properties of the joint distribution which are invariant  under increasing transformations of the random variables. This is contained in the following lemma.  LEMMA 3.5 (Kimeldorf & Sampson, 1978, p.900). Let (X Y) and (V, W) have continuous bivariate cdf 's H and K, respectively.  Then H - K if and only if there exist increasing functions g, and g2 such that the joint cdf of g, (X) and 92( Y) is K.  To summarize, any continuous bivariate distribution function can be decomposed into its `structure,' defined by the  equivalence class determined by its uniform representation, and its marginals. Conversely, given any uniform representation  and a pair of continuous univariate distributions, there exists a unique bivariate distribution with these two components.  According to Lemma 3.1, if the marginals are given, the structures achieving minimal and maximal correlation are the lower and  the upper Frechet bound, respectively, corresponding to the uniform representations max(u+v- 1, 0) and min(u, v).  On the other hand, for a given bivariate structure, one may also ask for the amount of dependence this structure allows to  occur from choosing an appropriate pair of marginals. Kimeldorf and Sampson (1978) introduced a measure of dependence that is  invariant under all order-preserving or order-reversing transformations of X and Y. Their monotone correlation rho* between  two nondegenerate random variables X and Y is defined by  rho*(X Y) = sup rho[f(X), 9(y) 1, (10)  260 HANSCOLONIUS  where the supremum is taken over all monotone functions f, g for which 0 < Var[f(X) ] < oc and 0 < Var[g( Y) ] < oo and with  rho the ordinary (Pearson product moment) correlation coefficient.  Obviously, lrho(X Y)l <rho*(X; Y). It can be shown that rho*(X; Y)=0 if and only if X and Y are stochastically independent,  and that a perfect monotone relation between X and Y implies rho* (X, Y) = 1 (see Kimeldorf & Sampson, 1978). Moreover, it  follows directly from Lemma 3.5 that  (X Y) - (V, W) implies rho*(X Y) =rho*(V W).  Thus, for a given bivariate structure, rho* characterizes the amount of dependence. In particular, as the following lemma  shows, the maximum achievable product moment correlation (from choosing an appropriate pair of marginals) is exactly the  monotone correlation rho*.  LEMMA 3.7 (Kimeldorf and Sampson, 1978, Theorem 5). Let (X Y) have a continuous bivariate cdf H. Then  rho*(X Y)=sup{lrho(V, W)J: (V W)- (X Y)}.  The usefulness of rho* is limited, however, since there is no general procedure to compute it (see, however, Kimeldorf, May, &  Sampson (1982) for the case of finite, discrete X and Y). Sometimes the possible range of dependence is severely restricted by  the very structure of the bivariate distribution. For example, it follows from a result in Schucany, Parr, and Boyer (1978)  (see also Huang & Kotz, 1984) that Irho(Y, Y) I5 a/3 for the FGM distribution (Eq.6) if X Y have absolutely continuous  marginals.  4. PROBABILITY SUMMATION MODELS OF RT  The aim of this section is to give a definition of probability summation of RT and to explore its properties. In general, we  have to discriminate between two types of experimental conditions, the single-channel condition and the multiple- or n-channel  condition, where n >, 2. For example, the monocular viewing condition where only one eye is stimulated is a single-channel  condition, while simultaneous visual and auditory stimulation in intersensory interaction experiments represents a 2-channel  condition. In accordance with most of the RT literature (see, e.g., Luce, 1986), it is assumed here that observable RT can  generally be decomposed into two additive random components, processing time and base time. In the single-channel-condition,  processing time is the time from the presentation of the stimulus to the point where neural activity in the channel is first  registered at some central mechanism. In the n-channel-condition, each channel is assigned some processing time starting from  the presentation of the stimulus. Overall processing time then is assumed to be some nondecreasing function of these channel  processing times. Probability summa-  PROBABILITY SUMMATION 261  tion models specify this function. The base time encompasses all other hypothetical components of the reaction time like motor  programming and response execution. The results in the next two sections are limited to the n = 2 case. In Section 6 specific  problems for the n > 2 case are touched upon. Since there is no extra effort involved, however, the following definitions are  written down for n > 2.  DEFINITION 4.1. Let (X, , ..., Xn) be a continuous random vector, where X; (i = 1, ..., n) represents the channel processing  time of channel i in an n-channel condition; let Z be a continuous random variable with cdf FZ representing the overall time;  an n-variate probability summation model is a pair (H, FZ), where H is an n-variate cdf of (X,, ..., X.) such that  Z = min(X, , ..., X. (11)  Thus, according to probability summation models, overall processing time is determined by the channel processing time of the  channel finishing first. Assuming the existence of a common underlying probability space for Z and B, where B is the  corresponding base time component, observable RT in the n-channel condition is  RT=Z+B  =min(X,, ..., X+B.  (12)  Commonly, stochastic independence between Z and B is surmised. In most empirical situations, including the two paradigms dealt  with in Section 2, channel processing times are unobservable in the multiple-channel condition. Even if the contribution of  the base time component is assumed negligible, the experimenter registers only the overall processing time, which-according to  the probability summation model-is the minimum of the channel processing times. This severely limits identifiability of a  given probability summation model (H, FZ): the n-variate cdf H cannot be determined without further assumptions. A popular  assumption exploits the information given from the single-channel conditions. This assumption of context independence' holds  that the processing times in single-channel conditions that correspond to a multiple-channel condition have cdf's identical to  the respective marginal cdf's in the multiple-channel condition. In binocular summation, for example, this amounts to saying.  that left and right eye processing times in both monocular conditions have cdf's identical to the left and right eye marginals  in the binocular condition.  Even under context independence, however, the n-variate cdf H is still not uniquely determined without assuming, in addition,  stochastic independence among the channel processing times. In fact, this is the starting point for considering possibly  dependent probability summation models in this paper. If observed RT in  ' This notion corresponds to Ashby and Townsend's (1986) `temporal separability' concept. It would typically be associated  with unlimited, but perhaps allocatable, capacity, as noted earlier.  26)2 HANS COLONIUS  the multiple-channel condition is found to be faster than predicted from a stochastically independent probability summation  model, introducing negative dependence may be an interesting alternative. The following fictitious example illustrates the  EXAMPLE 4.2 (LOWER FRECHET BOUND OF A BIVARIATE EXPONENTIAL DISTRIBUTION). Let X, Y be exponentially distributed random  variables with parameter 1, i.e.,  P(X,<t)=P(Y,<t)=1-e-`.  Under stochastic independence, it can be shown that E[min(X, Y)]=0.5.  To achieve maximum negative correlation we now take the lower Frechet bound H-(x, y) as the bivariate cdf of (X, Y) (see Lemma  3.1):  H-(x,y)=max[(1-e-")+(1-e-'')-1,0]  =max[1-e-'-e-1', 0).  To compute E[min(X Y)], consider first  E[max(X, Y)] =J [1 -H-(t, t)] dt 0  = J x min (2e-`, 1) dt 0  after some algebra. Obviously,  E[min(X Y)] = E[X] + E[ Y] - E[max(X Y)] =1+1-(1n2+1)  0.31.  In this case, by the introduction of negative dependence the expected value of min (X Y) has been reduced by about 40%. The  proposition below will show in which sense this example generalizes to arbitrary bivariate distributions. The following  definition is useful in this context.  DEFINITION 4.3. Let (H, F7) be a bivariate probability summation model;  PROBABILITY SUMMATION 263  assume H has marginals FX, F,.; then the uniform representation of H (cf. Section 3),  Uu, v)=H[Fx'(u), FY'(v)], 0'< u, v 5 1,  is called the type of (H, F7).  It follows from the exposition in Section 3 that the dependence structure of a probability summation model is captured in its  type. More precisely, the type of (H, FZ) remains invariant under (possibly different) increasing transformations of X and Y  and has a value of rho*, the monotone correlation, that is independent of the marginals. Given the marginals, a probability  summation model is completely determined by its type. Moreover, the class of all bivariate probability summation models can be  partitioned into equivalence classes defined by models of the same type.  EXAMPLE 4.4. The model  U,,-(u,v)=max[u+v-1,0], O'<u, v'<l,  is the type of all probability summation models having the lower Frechet bound H- as bivariate cdf. Since rho(U, V) = -1, we  have rho*(U, V) = 1.  PROPOSITION 4.5. For given marginals FX, F,,, the bivariate probability summation model of the lower Frechet bound type  achieves minimum expected overall processing time; specifically,  E[min(X, Y)]=J, [1-F.,(t)-F,(t)] dt, (13) 0  where  =inf{t : 1 -FX(t)-F,,(t)<0}. (14)  Proof. For any probability summation model with bivariate cdf H(x, y) and marginals FX, F,,, we have  P[min(X, Y)<t]= F, (t)+F,(t)-H(t, t) for all t. (15)  From Lemma 3.1, for all t  H-(t, t)<H(t, t);  thus, inserting H- for H in Eq. (15) maximizes the right hand side of Eq. (15) over all types of bivariate probability  summation models. Considering the well-known identity  E[min(X, Y)] = J y { 1 - P[min(X Y) 5 t] } dt (16) 0  264 HANS COLONIUS  settles the minimality assertion of the proposition. Inserting (15) into Eq. (16) with H= H- yields  E[min(X, Y)] =J x, {1 - [FX(t)+Fy(t) 0  -max{FX(t)+Fj-(t)-1, 0})} dt =J max{1 -FX(t)-Fy(t), 0} dt 0  =f f~ [1-FAt)-FY(t)] dt 0  with t* defined as above. Q.E.D.  Assuming context independence and neglecting the effect of the base time component, the right hand side of Eq. 13 may serve as  a lower bound for mean RT under possibly dependent probability summation in the 2-channel condition. It can be evaluated by  either simulation or numerical integration (see next section). From (13), we immediately have the upper bound  E[min(X, Y)] < t* (17)  which need not be sharp, however (consider Example 4.2, where we have t * =1n 2 z 0,69).  Proposition 4.5 gives a lower bound for the minimum achievable mean overall processing time under any probability summation  model. Thus, in view of the discussion of intersensory and binocular interaction studies in Section 2, this bound can be used  to assess the proportion of RT facilitation possibly due to a probability summation mechanism rather than some true neural  interaction. On the other hand, if observed RT facilitation is less pronounced, a probability summation model of a moderate  degree of negative dependence may be called for. In the following, we propose one way to order probability summation models by  negative dependence and give some illustrative examples. The following definition of negative dependence was introduced by  Lehmann (1966). A bivariate cdf H is negatively quadrant dependent (NQD) if  H(x, y) < Fx(x) Fy(y) for all (x, y) E R2, (18)  where FX, Fy. are the marginals of H. Using Hoeffding's Lemma (see Appendix) it is easy to show that NQD random variables have  nonpositive product moment correlation coefficients. NQD distributions can be ordered as follows (Ebrahimi, 1982): bivariate  cdf H, is more negatively quadrant dependent than H, (Hz>1NQDH1) if  Hz (x, y)<H,(x, y) for all (x, y)ER2, (19)  PROBABILITY SUMMATION 265  where both H, and Hz have marginals FX and F,., i.e., H,, Hz E B(FX, F,,). The NQD ordering of distributions implies a  corresponding ordering of correlations: let rho,(X, Y), rho2(X, Y) be the product moment correlation coefficients  corresponding to H, and H,, respectively; then, again from Hoeffding's Lemma,  H2 -NQD H, implies rho2(X, Y) ,< rho, (X, Y),<0. (20)  The requirement of identical marginals is necessary here if the degree of negative dependence is to be assessed by rho,  because rho is not invariant under monotone transformations of the scale. Note, moreover, that the above implication (20) is  not reversible in general. The following definition seems natural in view of the above.  DEFINITION 4.6. Let (H,, F7') and (H2, FZ)) be probability summation models with H,, HZEB(FX, F,); then (H,, F;)) is more  negative dependent than (H,, F;')  if H2 iNQD HI.  This definition implies, in particular, that  rho2(X Y) <, rho,(X, Y).  Now consider two bivariate cdf's on the unit square with uniform marginals, UN and UK, representing two probability summation  model types. If they can be ordered with respect to negative dependence, U-NQD UK, say, then we have an ordering of model  types which is reflected in the corresponding rho values.  Comparing two probability summation models (with identical marginals) with respect to their degree of negative dependence is  especially simple if their bivariate cdf's belong to the same one-parameter bivariate distribution family. The FGM  distribution as well as Frank's distribution we considered in Section 3 belong to this category. For these distributions, the  NQD ordering is isomorphic to the scalar ordering of the dependence parameter. In addition, if the product moment correlation  coefficient is a monotone function of the dependence parameter, then implication (20) is in fact an equivalence. Let us  consider a further example.  EXAMPLE 4.7: GUMBEL's BIVARIATE EXPONENTIAL DISTRIBUTION. Gumbel  (1960) has studied the bivariate cdf  H(Y,v)=1-e-s-e--Y+e-s-y-n-rv (X,V>0;0<a<1).  It can be shown (see also Johnson & Kotz, 1972, p.262) that rho(X Y) is a decreasing function of a, reaching the minimum value  rho(X, Y) = -0.40365... for a = 1. X and Y are independent for a = 0. Thus, the family of probability summation models  corresponding to Gumbel's bivariate exponential distribution can be ordered with respect to negative dependence by using  either the parameter values a or the NQD order relation on the bivariate cdf's.  We conclude this section by observing a simple but informative connection  266 HANS COLONIUS  between the Frechet bounds and two well-known probability distribution inequalities for the overall processing time.  PROPOSITION 4.8. Let (H-, F; ) and (H+, F7 ) be bivariate probability summation models of the lower and, resp., upper Frechet  bound type with marginals F,v and FY; then, for any bivariate probability summation model (H, Fz) with the same marginals,  F+(t) 5 FZ(t) S Fz (t) (21)  for all t, where  FZ (t)=max[FX(t), F,(t)]  and  FZ(t)=min[FX(t)+F,(t), 1].  The left (resp. right) hand side of the above inequality follows easily by insertion of H+(t, t) (resp. H-(t, t)) for H(t, t)  into Eq. (15). The upper bound in (21) was first used by Miller (1982) in testing the probability summation model. The lower  bound in (21) was utilized by Grice, Canham, and Gwynne (1984) to evaluate distraction effects in redundant target trials (see  also Ulrich & Giray, 1986). An analogous inequality is given in Ashby and Townsend (1986, Theorem 7) as a performance parity  test of temporal separability (cf. Footnote 3).  5. A STUDY OF INTERSENSORY INTERACTION  The purpose of this section is to illustrate on a set of real data (a) the effect of dropping the stochastic independence  assumption and (b) the computation of mean overall processing time according to Proposition 4.5. Moreover, eventual effects of  the base time component will be discussed.  The data are taken from a study of intersensory interaction (see Example 2.1) presented in Diederich and Colonius (1987),  where also the details of the experimental procedure can be found. Stimulus presentation in the redundant-signal condition  consisted of a flash followed by a sinusoidal tone d msec later, with d = 0, 10, ..., 80, the stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA)  values. Subjects were instructed to press the response buttons with both index fingers as soon as they detected either signal  (a double response simple RT task). In the single-signal conditions, only stimuli of one modality were presented. Each  stimulus condition was presented in 10 blocks of 20 trials each in randomized order, amounting to 2200 responses from each of  the subjects.  Let RT,., RT,,, and RTVA(d) denote random variables corresponding to reaction times under the different stimulus conditions in  obvious notation, where RT is  PROBABILITY SUMMATION  267  measured from the appearance of the (first) stimulus up to the button press. The amount of RT facilitation occuring in the  redundant-signal conditions is defined by  FAC,=min[E(RT,,), E(RT,,+d)]-E(RT,,A(d)). (22)  Ignoring effects of the base time component for a moment, the probability summation model stipulates  RT1,(d) =min(RT,,, RTA+d). (23)  The amount of RT facilitation is estimated from (22) by replacing the expected values by sample means (N=200). Observed mean  RTs for the redundant-signal distributions are listed in column 2 of Table 1 below. Observed values of RT facilitation (in  msec) are given in column 4. To estimate the amount of RT facilitation predicted from probability summation mechanisms,  simulated RTs for the redundant-signal situations were obtained by sampling two RTs (one from each single-signal  distribution), adjusting them appropriately for SOA, and selecting the minimum adjusted RT. Column 5 lists the RT facilitation  obtained under independent sampling from the two single-signal distributions (N= 1000 for all simulated values reported here).  The values in parentheses in this column indicate the percentage of observed facilitation that can be accounted for by  independent probability summation. Column 6 contains the RT facilitation that results from a probability summation model of  the lower Frechet bound type, where maximum negative correlation between the channel processing times is achieved. The mean RT  under this model could have been estimated from a numerical computation of the integral in Proposition 4.5. Alternatively, we  used a simulation by 'antithetic variates' (see, e.g., Hammersley and Handscomb, 1964; Miller, 1986). Essentially, the  procedure is to construct pairs of RTs from the two single-signal distributions as follows: take the fastest (SOA adjusted)  auditory RT and the slowest visual RT as the first pair, the next to the fastest auditory and the next to the slowest visual  RT as the second pair, and so on. As a direct consequence of Lemma 3.1(b) and (c), this procedure does establish maximum  negative correlation between the two channels (the rho values are the negative correlations so obtained for each subject). The  parentheses in column 6 are again the percentage of observed facilitation that can be accounted for by a negatively dependent  probability summation model.  Table 1 reveals a number of interesting regularities. The amount of RT facilitation observed strongly depends on the SOA  value, achieving a maximum at about a value of d corresponding to the difference E(RT,,) - E(RTA ). This is compatible with  probability summation models since increasing the SOA results in shifting the auditory distribution towards the visual  distribution. This in turn implies that, by virtue of the minimum rule, a larger proportion of the `long' auditory processing  times can be replaced by `shorter' visual processing times. If d is increased further, the RT is mostly determined by the  visual processing times alone. The exact SOA  480/34,1/3-2  268  HANSCOLONIUS  TABLE 1  Observed Mean RT and Standard Deviation, Observed and Simulated Facilitation in msec (Independence and Negative Dependence)  Facilitation  SOA Obs. mean Obs. stand.  RTVA dev. Obs. Indep. Neg. Dep.  Subject 1 (mean RTA = 126; mean RT,= 160; N=200; rho = -.865)  0 127 8.3 -1 1 2   10 135 8.8 1 0 2 (200)  20 141 7.6 5 2 (40) 3 (60)  30 149 7.9 7 5 (71) 7 (100)  40 151 10.6 9 4 (44) 6 (67)  50 154 14.2 6 2 (33) 3 (50)  60 155 11.1 5 1 (20) 2 (40)  70 160 14.0 0 1 1   80 160 15.0 0 0 1   Subject 2 (mean RT,, = 124; mean RT,, = 162; N= 200; rho = -.880)    0 120 7.5 4 2 (50) 2 (50)  10 131 6.9 3 1 (33) 2 (67)  20 139 6.9 5 2 (40) 3 (60)  30 145 8.1 9 4 (44) 6 (67)  40 150 8.7 12 7 (58) 9 (75)  50 152 11.6 10 4 (40) 5 (50)  60 155 11.9 7 2 (29) 3 (43)  70 161 13.5 1 0 2   80 163 15.0 -1 1 1   Subject 3 (mean RTA= 124; mean RTA,= 153; N=200; rho= -.642)    0 122 10.8 2 2 (100) 4 (200)  10 131 11.7 3 3 (100) 6 (200)  20 135 11.5 9 5 (56) 9 (100)  30 142 10.1 11 9 (82) 12 (109)  40 143 9.6 10 5 (50) 8 (80)  50 147 12.8 6 4 (67) 6 (100)  60 151 11.7 2 2 (100) 4 (200)  70 154 16.5 -1 1 3 )  80 153 17.1 0 2 2   Note. The parentheses in columns 5 and 6 denote the percentage of observed facilitation reached by the simulation. The rho  values refer to the maximum possible negative correlation achieved by the method of antithetic variates.  PROBABILITY SUMMATION 269  value of maximum statistical facilitation, however, will depend on the specifics of the respective shapes of the auditory and  visual distributions. On the other hand, it is obvious from the percentage values in column 5 that only part of the amount of  observed facilitation can be accounted for by an independent probability summation model. Invoking a negatively dependent  probability summation mechanism improves the prediction considerably, as can be seen from the parentheses in column 6. For  Subjects 1 and 2, however, these values indicate that the proportion of observed facilitation that can be accounted for by a  negatively dependent probability summation process reaches 100% only in two of the cases. For Subject 3, the facilitation  predicted by maximum negative dependence exceeds the facilitation observed for five out of nine SOA values. Thus, a bivariate  dependent distribution with a more moderate degree of dependence is called for in this case. One such distribution, the  Farlie-Gumbel-Morgenstern distribution (cf. Example 3.3), was proposed earlier (Colonius, 1986) but, obviously, there are  other viable candidates. We have not yet made an attempt to find the best fitting distribution for this subject (for Subjects  1 and 2, another source of RT facilitation has to be identified, anyhow).  Moreover, the pattern of rho values is somewhat puzzling. Remember that, for each subject, rho is the maximum negative  correlation between the channel processing times the marginal distributions allow to occur. For Subjects 1 and 2, the rho  values are -.865 and -.880, respectively, while for Subject 3, rho is only -.642. This is at odds with the fact that negative  channel dependence suffices to generate the amount of facilitation observed for Subject 3 but not for Subjects 1 and 2. It is  conceivable, however, that the possibly achievable degree of negative dependence varies for different SOA values due to a  violation of the assumption of context independence. To summarize these data indicate that a probability summation  mechanism-independent or negatively dependent-may be only part of a model accounting for the observed facilitation in this  bimodal detection task. Nonetheless, as this exemplary study illustrates, just how big that part is depends very much on  whether independent or dependent probability summation is taken into consideration. Whether, and under what conditions, the  marginal distribution functions remain invariant under different SOA values and/or under different redundancy conditions is an  open issue. Since the marginal distributions are not directly observable empirically (only their minima are, according to  probability summation), there is no direct way of testing context independence. Any evidence relating to it would have to  follow from particular features of the experimental situation or from the postulated processing mechanisms. Intuitively, a  violation of context independence  a The point is subtle. Given context independence, a variation of negative dependence over SOA values should show up in the  correlation parameter of a bivariate distribution fitted to the data. However, this would not explain the failure of dependent  probability summation to account for the entire amount of observed facilitation. On the other hand, if context independence is  violated, the degree of negative correlation achievable might so vary from one SOA value to the next as to prevent statistical  facilitation from occurring sufficiently often.  270 HANS COLONIUS  may appear more plausible in a system with stochastically dependent processing than in an independent one. It should be  emphasized, however, that there is no cogent statistical argument for this to be the case. For example, assume in the  visual/auditory interaction paradigm that the visual channel processing times correlate differently with the auditory channel  processing times depending on the given SOA value. Nonetheless, the marginal visual processing time distribution may well  remain the same under all SOA values.  Analyzing the RT difference distributions (left hand RT minus right hand RT) Diederich and Colonius (1987) found some evidence  for an additional facilitatory effect in the base time (motor) components of the RTs. However, the size of this effect most  likely is too small to account for all of the facilitation left. Moreover, the subsequent analysis in this section of the  influence of the base time suggests that the amount of facilitation obtained in our simulations is not a conservative estimate  of the actual facilitation occuring under a probability summation mechanism. To allow for an effect of the base time component  let us assume an additive decomposition of RT as introduced in Section 4. Specifically, let us write  RT,,=V+B,,, RT,,=A+BA, RTv,,=min(V,A)+B,,A,  where V, A denote the channel processing times and B,,, BA, BvA refer to the random base time components, resp. The following  proposition implies that the amount of facilitation obtainable from a (possibly dependent) probability summation model with  nonconstant base time may be smaller than what our simulations indicated.'  PROPOSITION 5.1. Let V, A, B,,, BA and B ,,A be nonnegative random variables on some probability space such that B y and BA  are stochastically independent and B,,, BA, B ,,A have the same marginal cdf, then for all t E R+  P[min(V+B,,, A+BA)1<t]>, P[min(V A)+B,,A<t]. (24)  Proof. For convenience, we assume the existence of a bivariate density g1A(v, a) for (V, A); it is easy to generalize the  argument. Take some fixed (v, a) and consider  P[min(V+B,,,A+BA)I<tI (V, A)= (v, a)] = P[min(v + B,,, a + BA) 1< t] =1-[1-F(t-v)][1-F(t- a)] =F(t-v)+F(t-a)-F(t-v)  F(t-a), (25)  s I am grateful to Wolfgang Schwarz (Marburg) for suggesting this inequality.  PROBABILITY SUMMATION 271  where F is the common marginal cdf of B,,, BA, B,,A. Similarly,  P[min(V,A)+BvA<tI (V, A= (v, a)]  = P[min(v, a) + BIA 1< t]  =F(t-min(v, a))  - (F(t-a) if v,<a  jl F(t-v) if a<v.  (26)  Obviously, (25) is greater or equal to (26). Multiplying both sides by gvA(v, a) and integrating over R+ x R+ yields the  result. Q.E.D.  The left hand side of inequality (24) corresponds to the probability summation mechanism underlying the simulations, while the  right hand side represents the probability summation mechanism of the model to be tested. Since stochastic ordering of  distributions implies an ordering of expected values, we have  E[min(V+ B,,., A + BA)] ,< E[min(V, A) + BVA].  This, in turn, implies that the amount of facilitation observed in the simulations may overestimate the facilitation actually  occurring.  6. CONCLUDING REMARKS  It should be mentioned that our results generalize, at least to some degree, to the case of more than two channels. The main  problem in dealing with this is to specify the multivariate dependence structure. The basic intuition that increasing negative  dependence results in reducing the mean of the minimum time has to be reconciled with the elementary fact that three random  variables cannot be negatively correlated in pairs to some arbitrary degree. There are various concepts of multivariate  positive and negative dependence in the literature (see, e.g., Joag-Dev & Proschan, 1983) that become relevant in this context.  In the introductory section we discussed the effect of dropping stochastic independence in the context of a probability  summation model in a detection task with n elementary detector mechanisms involved. As long as the number of false alarms is  small enough to be ignored (a questionable assumption, of course) the definition of probability summation models in Section 4  formally encompasses the detection situation. To see this, define for each elementary detector i (i = 1, ..., n) a binary  if i is in the detection state if otherwise.  272 14ANSCOLONIUS  Then pi = P[D; = 1 ], while the probability Pig of detecting the stimulus with only detectors i and j involved is  PP[Di=1 vDj =1].  In tight analogy to the RT situation facilitation is defined by the gain in detection probability that occurs from having two  detectors `at work' rather than one,  FACdetecn = Pii - max(pi, p;).  To model the `race' we have to associate with each detector i a nonnegative random variable  D;=1-Di.  Facilitation as defined for RT then is (see Section 5) min [E(D'), E(Dj )] - E[min(D;, D,')] =min[E(1 -Di), E(1 -Dj)] -E[min(1  -Di, 1 -D;)] =min(1 -pi, 1 -pi)-P[D;=0 n Dj=0]  = 1 -max(pi, pj)-(I -Py)  = FACdeteclion  Thus both definitions coincide.  The main finding of this paper, though, relates to the analysis of reaction time in the context of the redundant target  paradigm. It has been shown that replacing the assumption of stochastic independence by negative dependence in the probability  summation hypothesis allows a larger part of the redundancy gain to be attributed to statistical facilitation rather than to  some neural coactivation. Consequently, whenever a realistic assessment of the role of statistical facilitation for a  redundant target effect is to be made, the lower bound for the expected processing time given in Proposition 4.5 should be  taken into consideration.  APPENDIX: OUTLINE OF PROOF OF LEMMA 3.1 (a) For any (x, y) E R',  H(x, y) = P(x, x, Y, y) , P(x, x) = F, (x). Thus, by symmetry,  H(x, y) < min[ F, (x), Fy(y)],  PROBABILITY SUMMATION 273  which settles the right hand side of (5). Since  P(X>x, Y>y)=1-F,,,(x)-F,,(y)+H(x,y)>0,  we have  H(x, y)>Fx(x)+Fy(y)-1  in addition to H(x, y) > 0, so  H(x, y)>maxIFx(x)+F,,(y)-1, 0},  the left hand side of (5).  (b) Mardia (1970, p. 31) verifies sufficient conditions for H+ and H- to belong to B(F,., F,.). The extreme correlation  property is an immediate consequence of Hoeffding's Lemma (see Lehmann, 1966, p. 1139): for any random vector (X, Y) with cdf  H and marginals F,,, F,., the covariance cov(X, Y) can be represented as  [H(x, y) - F., (x) Fr(y)] dx dv.  (c) Since F[F-'(U)] > U, we have  P[F-'(U)<x, F-'(U)<yI =P[U,<F,-(x), U,<F,,(y)] =min[Fx(x), Fy(y)]  = H+(x, Y);  moreover,  P[Fxl(U),<x, F-'(1-U)5y] =P[U,<F,(x), 1-U,<Fy(y)] = P[1 - Fy(y) < U,< F_,-(x)] =max[Fx(x)+Fy(y)-1, 0].  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  This work was supported by Grants Co 94/1 + 11 from Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and by a grant from Stiftung  Volkswagenwerk to the author. Helpful comments by two anonymous reviewers and, in particular, by the Editor, Jim Townsend, are  gratefully acknowledged.  REFERENCES  ASHBY, F. G., & TOWNSEND, J. T. (1986). Varieties of perceptual independence. Psychological Review, 93, 154-179.  274  HANS COLONIUS  BLAKE, R., & Fox, R. (1973). The psychophysical inquiry into binocular summation. Perception and Psychophysics, 14, 161-185.  BLAKE, R., MARTENS, W., & Di GIANFILLIP, A. (1980). Reaction time as a measure of binocular interaction in human vision.  Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science, 19, 930-941.  BLAKE, R., MARTENS, W., GARRETT, A., & WESTENDORF, D. (1980. Estimating probability summation for binocular reaction time  data. Perception and Psychophysics, 27, 375-378.  BLAKE, R., SLOANE, M., & Fox, R. (1981). Further developments in binocular summation. Perception and Psychophysics, 30,  266-276.  BRINDLEY, G. S. (1963). The relation of frequency of detection to intensity of stimulus for a system of many independent  detectors each of which is stimulated by a m-quantum coincidence. Journal of Physiology, 169, 412-415.  CAMPBELL, F. W. & GREEN, D. G. (1965). Monocular versus binocular visual acuity. Nature, 208, 191-192.  COLONIus, H. (1986). Measuring channel dependence in separate activation models. Perception and Psychophysics, 40, 251-255.  DIEDERICH, A. & COLONIUS, H. (1987). Intersensory facilitation in the motor component? A reaction time analysis. Psychological  Research, 49, 23-29.  EBRAHIMI, N. (1982). The ordering of negative dependence. Communications in Statistics-Theory and Methods, 11, 2389-2399.  ERIKSEN, C. W. & GREENSPON, T. S. (1968). Binocular summation over time in the perception of form at brief durations. Jounral  of Experimental Psychology, 76, 331-336.  FRANK, M. J. (1979). On the simultaneous associativity of F(x, y) and x+y-F(x. y). Aeguationes Mathematicae, 19, 194-226.  FRECHET, M. (1951). Sur les tableaux de correlation dont les marges sont donnees. Annales de 1'Universite de Lyon, Section A,  Series 3, 14, 53-77.  GENEST, C. (1987). Frank's family of bivariate distributions. Biometrika, 74, 549-555.  GIELEN, S. C. A. M., SCHMIDT, R. A., & VAN DEN HEUVEL, P. J. M. (1983). On the nature of intersensory facilitation of reaction  time. Perception and Psychophysics, 34, 161-168.  GRICE, G. R., CANHAM, L., & GWYNNE, J. W. (1984). Absence of a redundant-signals effect in a reaction time task with divided  attention. Perception and Psychophysics, 36, 565-570.  GUMBEL, E. J. (1960). Bivariate exponential distributions. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 59, 698-707.  HAMMERSLEY, J. M., & HANDscomB, D. C. (1964). Monte Carlo methods. London: Methuen. HARWERTH, R. S., SMITH, E. L., & LEVI, D.  M. (1980). Supra-threshold binocular interactions for grating patterns. Perception and Psychophysics, 27, 43-50.  HERSHENSON, M. (1962). Reaction time as a measure of inter-sensory facilitation. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 63,  289-293.  HOEFFDING, W. (1940). Massstabinvariante Korrelationstheorie. Schriften des Mathematischen Instituts and des Instituts fur  Angewandte Mathematik der Universitdt Berlin, 5, 179-233.  HUANG, J. S., & KOTZ, S. (1984). Correlation structure in iterated Farlie-Gumbel-Moregenstern distributions, Biometrika, 71,  633-636.  JOAG-DEV, K. & PROSCHAN, F. (1983). Negative association of random variables, with applications. Annals of Statistics, 11,  286-295.  JOHNSON, N. L., & KOTZ, S. (1972). Distributions in Statistics: Continuous multivariate distributions. New York: Wiley.  KIMELDORF, G., MAY, J. H., & SAMPSON, A. R. (1982). Concordant and discordant monotone correlations and their evaluation by  nonlinear optimization. In S. H. Zanakis & J. S. Rustagi (Eds.), TIMS/Studies in the Management Sciences, 19, 117-130.  Amsterdam: North-Holland.  KIMELDORF, G., & SAMPSON, A. (1975). Uniform representations of bivariate distributions. Communications in Statistics, 4,  617-627.  KIMELDORF, G., & SAMPSON, A. (1978). Monotone dependence. Annals of Statistics, 6, 895-903. LEGGE, G. E., & RUBIN, G. S.  (1981). Binocular interaction in suprathreshold contrast interaction. Perception and Psychophysics, 30, 49-61.  PROBABILITY SUMMATION 275  LEHMANN, E. L. (1966). Some concepts of dependence. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 39, 1137-1153. LucE, R. D. (1986).  Response times. Their role in inferring elementary mental organization. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.  MARDIA, K. V. (1970). Families of bivariate distributions. London: Griffin.  MILLER, J. O. (1982). Divided attention: Evidence for coactivation with redundant signals. Cognitive Psychology, 14, 247-279.  MILLER, J. O. (1986). Timecourse of coactivation in bimodal divided attention. Perception and Psychophysics, 40, 331-343.  PIRENNE, M. H. (1943). Binocular and uniocular thresholds for vision. Nature, 153, 698-699.  RAAB, D. (1962). Statistical facilitation of simple reaction times. Transactions of the New York Academy of Sciences, 24,  574-590.  SCHUCANY, W. R., PARR, W. C., & BOYER, J. E. (1978). Correlation structure in Farlie-GumbelMorgenstern distributions.  Biometrika, 65, 650-653.  SCHWEIZER, B., & WOLFF, E. F. (1981). On nonparametric measures of dependence for random variables. Annals of Statistics, 9,  879-885.  TOWNSEND, J. T., & ASHBY, F. G. (1983). Stochastic modeling of elementary psychological processes. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ.  Press.  ULRICH, R. & GIRAY, M. (1986). Separate-activation models with variable base times: Testability and checking of cross-channel  dependency. Perception & Psychophysics, 39, 248-254.  WESTENDORF, D., & BLAKE, R. (1988). Binocular reaction times to contrast increments. Vision Research, 28, 355-359.  WHITT. W. (1976). Bivariate distributions with given marginals. Annals of Statistics, 4, 1280-1289.  RECEIVED: August 8, 1988