10.1016/0022-2496(90)90033-6
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 34, 276-296 (1990)  Data Aggregation in Evaluating Psychological Constructs: Multivariate and Logical Deductive Considerations  RICHARD W. .T. NEUFELD AND ROBERT C. GARDNER  Department of Psychology, University of Western Ontario  The value of a number of constructs in psychology has been impugned because of weak empirical associations between measures of  the constructs and measures of relevant behaviours. Weakness of association has taken the forms of inconsistent statistical  significance of construct-behaviour associations across studies and unacceptably low magnitudes of association within studies.  To redeem empirical support for the value of such constructs, aggregation of the behavioural measures by computation of simple  sums prior to calculation of associations with the construct has been advocated. The validity of this procedure for the stated  purposes has been the subject of considerable verbal debate, but sparse analytical treatment. The procedure is examined here  in the light of analyses of simultaneous multiple observations using techniques that have formal mathematical foundations.  Substantial differences between the two sets of procedures bearing directly on empirical support for the value of constructs  are demonstrated. In turn, the validity of data aggregation for supporting the value of constructs is rejected when the  espoused role of such support is subjected to tenets of logical deductive scientific systems. ( ) 1990 Academic Press, Inc.  INTRODUCTION  The scientific value of a psychological construct can be judged from several perspectives. One is its function in a  logical-deductive system designed to predict some target phenomenon. For example, "Gregariousness" may be a personality  construct that carries important links to other constructs such as "Social Aversiveness" and "Appraised Social Competence" in  a theoretical system put forth to account for relative frequencies of social contacts (e.g., Braithwaite, 1968). A second  perspective considers the value of a construct in terms of the degree to which it comprises mechanisms that are theoretically  meaningful in their own right. The value of Verbal-Analogy-Ability, for example, may be enhanced if it can be understood in  terms of facility with components of information processing that might  Reprint request should be sent to Dr. Richard W. J. Neufeld, Department of Psychology, University of Western Ontario, London,  Ontario, Canada N6A 5C2. Preparation of this manuscript was facilitated by Grants-in-Aid of Research from the Social Sciences  and Humanities Research Council of Canada (419-82-0760 and 410-87-1127), and the Medical Research Council of Canada (MC 5028).  Revisions were prepared while the first author was a visiting scholar at the Medical Research Council Applied Psychology Unit,  Cambridge, United Kingdom. We are grateful for the helpful suggestions of Bruce Bloxom and two anonymous reviewers, especially  regarding the orientation and organization of this paper.  0022-2496/90 $3.00  Copyright :i_. 1990 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  276  DATA AGGREGATION 277  underlie the more global ability (e.g., stimulus encoding, accessing memory-held semantic relations, etc. ). Embretson (1983)  has referred to this perspective on the value of constructs as construct representation.  A third overlapping perspective on the value of a construct, and the focus of this paper, involves the construct's association  with empirical variables to which theoretically it is connected. A collectivity of supporting empirical correlates, for  instance, was considered by Cronbach and Meehl (1955), in their original treatise on construct validity, to be vital to  establishing a construct's scientific value. More recent writings have reaffirmed this element of support. Since constructs  such as personality traits or mental abilities often are measured with psychometric tests and inventories, Messick (1981), for  one, has placed a certain emphasis on test-score correlates in the form of non-test behaviours. Similarly, Embretson (1983)  has underscored the importance of a test score's nomothetic span, meaning "the network of relationships of a test score with  other variables" (p. 179). This perspective on construct value is not unlike that put forth by Cattell over two decades ago  (Cattell, 1966; Cattell & Bjerstadt, 1967). Emphasis was placed on the expression of "source traits" (personality constructs)  in "surface traits". However, unlike the present version of this perspective, both source and surface traits tended to be  measured with psychometric tests (see also Cattell & Bolton, 1969). Our concern in this paper is with the validity of selected  methods employed to obtain support for the value of scientific constructs according to the strength of their external  correlates. Such correlates may range from performance on achievement tests, thought to be related to specific mental  abilities, to success in interpersonal relations, perhaps related to certain personality traits. The present emphasis is on  techniques of analysis applied to the measures of the external correlates.  In a number of areas of psychology, support for the value of what have been thought to be important constructs deriving from  external correlates has been disappointingly weak. Recently, a prominent proposal for redeeming this support has been that of  aggregating measurements of empirical correlates before undertaking statistical analysis (e.g., Epstein, 1986). To illustrate,  consider once more the hypothetical personality trait, Gregariousness. Behavioural expressions of this trait may include  attendance at social gatherings, percentage of leisure time engaging in conversion, participation in team sports over an  against individual sports, and so on. A measure of the trait Gregariousness may be available from a psychometric inventory,  judgments by peers, ratings from a structured interview, and the like. One or a combination of these indexes may be used to  estimate scores on the trait. The scores, in turn, may correlate with measures of the individual behaviours mentioned above.  The resulting correlations generally may be too low to render much support, from an external-correlate perspective, for the  value of the trait-construct Gregariousness. However, the measures of the separate behaviours might be aggregated to form a  sum for each subject in the sample. The correlation between the scores for the personality trait and the sums of  behavioural-measures scores may be of sufficient magnitude to convey apparent support for the value of the construct.  278 NEUFELD AND GARDNER  A property closely related to the elevated strength of association between the construct and external correlates is that of  replication of association. Statistically significant relations may be more likely to re-occur among new samples if the  behavioural-score sums, rather than individual-behaviour scores, compose the data submitted to analysis. The value of a number  of constructs has been reassessed employing measures of external correlates aggregated prior to analysis. Of special interest  have been those constructs previously judged to be of doubtful value because of low and inconsistently significant  associations with relevant external correlates. The technique of aggregation has been used to claim renewed support first and  foremost for the value of certain personality traits (e.g., Epstein, 1977); it has similarly been applied to constructs from  research topics ranging from Egocentrism in developmental-stage theory to Open-Field-Test-Exploration in the study of  emotionality among infrahuman subjects (Rushton, Brainerd, & Pressley, 1983).  The possibility of enhanced correlation between a construct and external correlates is of course hardly surprising. Effects of  aggregation of scores on computed coefficients of correlation were noted by Thorndike in 1929. A datum comprising the  collection of related observations has the following statistical property: variance emanating from sources that are  uncorrelated with the variables under study will be diminished. Such sources will tend to compensate for one another over the  successive observations (see, e.g., Keeping, 1962; Yule & Kendall, 1950). Consequently, computed correlation coefficients or  other indexes of association, will tend to increase. Associations also may more consistently reach statistical significance,  although this consequeence of aggregation has received considerably less formal examination.  In the arguments presented below, little disagreement is raised concerning the potential for aggregation to increase  associations between constructs and selected external correlates. At issue is the validity of employing such effects of  aggregation to enhance support, from the empirical-correlate perspective, for the scientific value of the constructs.  We deal with this issue by examining the practice of measure aggregation in the light of multivariate statistical procedures.  The latter procedures, like simple aggregation, accommodate multiple measures simultaneously. Unlike simple aggregation,  however, these procedures have a formal mathematical foundation (see, e.g., Bock, 1975; Rozeboom, 1966). While the  developments presented below, then, are motivated primarily by the issue of support for constructs, certain relations that are  drawn out may be of interest more generally with respect to selected statistical properties of alternate treatments of  simultaneous multiple observations.  COMPARING AGGREGATION AND MULTIVARIATE ANALYSIS  Note that in the literature advocating measure aggregation for enhanced construct support, reference has been made from time  to time to multivariate statistical  DATA AGGREGATION 279  analysis of multiple measures (e.g., Epstein & O'Brien, 1985). The products of multivariate analysis that have been of  principal interest in these references, however, have been aggregates of component measures in the form of linear  combinations. Examples of the latter include multiple-regression composite scores, discriminant scores from  discriminant-function analysis, and factor scores (see, e.g., Ossenkopp & Mazmanian, 1985). Such linear combinations, then,  rather than simple sums may represent the aggregate assessed for covariation with the construct's scores.  In practice, the degree of covariation involving the above linear combinations, and aggregates not involving differential  weightings, such as arithmetic sums, can be quite similar (Wainer, 1976, 1978; but cf. Perloff & Persons, 1988). Thus informal  methods of aggregation implicitly have attained a certain legitimacy in the minds of many investigators. The relations between  informal aggregation and multivariate analysis, however, are considerably more complex than the advocates of aggregation for  construct evaluation have indicated. Indeed, it can be shown that the two approaches differ substantially in ways that bear  directly on the issue of construct-value from the external-correlate perspective. Such differences can be examined  analytically, and certain consequences demonstrated for common sets of data.  In the following presentation, the measures subjected to aggregation are designated as aspects of behaviour that theoretically  are related to a construct. The construct consists of a hypothetical personality trait, although of course many other examples  could be used. Interest lies in the association between the measures of behaviour and scores representing the trait.  For the present purposes, we posit a situation where scores are obtained on p formats of behaviour, there being g levels of  the personality trait, with each level represented by n different subjects. This layout can be viewed simply as a completely  randomized single-factor research design, with the factor comprising g levels, and with n subjects being nested within each  level.  Our deductions would apply equally, for example, to scores obtained on p subjects for each of n behavioural formats nested  within each of g situations. The subjects, for example, all may have high levels of the trait, Aggressiveness, while the  situations may differ in their opportunities for behavioural expression of the trait. In turn, the forms of expression  (behavioural formats) in this case are not identical from one situation to the other; verbal assertiveness and high voice  volume may be relevant to a debate, while certain forms of physical intimidation may be relevant to a sports competition.  Here, support for the value of the construct may be assessed according to the strength of association between the behavioural  aggressiveness scores and situational opportunities for behavioural expression of the trait (cf. Epstein, 1986). Roughly  speaking, individuals high in the trait should manifest it behaviourally when the opportunity arises.  The metric properties of the g levels of the trait in the developments presented immediately below are allowed simply to be  categorical, vis a vis interval. Categorical status is sufficient for the present purposes of examining consistency of  associations. For a discussion of mathematical identities and similarities between  280 NEUFELD AND GARDNER  multivariate statistical methods incorporating categorical independent variables, and their counterparts employing interval  independent variables, the reader is referred to Harris (1985).  Significance Testing  Consider first the testing of significance of covariation between the values of the behavioural measures and those of the  construct. In one case, for each subject, we begin by aggregating into a composite score the respective scores obtained on the  p measures. Significance testing is then applied to the composite scores, treated as values of a single variable. This  approach clearly complies with the use of aggregation to foster empirical support for the value of the construct. In the  second case, significance testing proceeds on the basis of formally developed multivariate computations. Here, computations  begin with the p separate measures rather than their composite.  To facilitate comparison between the two cases, we allow the composite scores in case 1 to be made up of the linear  combinations produced by a multivariate analysis, as described earlier (see, e.g., Epstein & O'Brien, 1985). For the present  layout, the linear combination would be composite scores obtained from the first discriminant function. Comparison of the two  cases then proceeds straightforwardly, first by computing the eigenvalues, %;, of the matrix product, P, where P = W -'A, and  where W is the sample p x p within-level sum-of squares and cross-products matrix, and A is the sample between-levels  sum-of-squares and cross-products matrix.  For the first case, an F-ratio computed on the composite scores is equal to (ng - g)/(g - 1), with g - 1 and ng - g degrees of  freedom, A, being the first eigenvalue of P.  Computing the (approximate) F ratio in the second case is markedly different. We have  F= 1 Y yl f ms2b 2d~  with df = 2b and m s + 2d.  This is, of course, the approximate F statistic for Wilk's A, with the various parameters defined as follows:  s= f(p2(g- 1)2-4)/(p2+ (g- 1)2-5)}'/2,  in = (N- I)- 1(p +g), d= -a(p(g-1)-2), b=zp(g-1),  DATA AGGREGATION 281  h  H ICI +~;)> i=1  h = the lesser of p or (g - 1).  Or, using the more general X2 likelihood-ratio test statistic,  2 -C(N-1)-p2g]lnA  = [In ilyb(2(N- 1)-(p+g))/((y- 1)(2d+ms))] F.  Clearly, the roles of A, differ vastly between the two sets of computations. The following example illustrates how this  difference might affect the interpretation of results from a particular study.  Let A, = 0.5, and all other A; - 0, so that Wilk's A = 0.67 (i.e., group separation is encompassed by the first eigenvalue), g  = 6, p = 6, n = 10. The value for A, (gn - g)/(g - 1) = 5.40, with 5 and 54 degrees of freedom (p < 0.01). In contrast, the F  approximation based on Wilk's A = 0.70, with 30 and 198 degrees of freedom (n.s.); similarly, X's o) = 21.2, p > 0.80.  These observations suggest that the case involving formally developed multivariate computations may differ sharply from that  involving data aggregation prior to computations with respect to statistical significance of results. Of particular concern to  the issue of construct value is the consistency of statistical significance of construct-external-correlate associations  across repeated studies (see, e.g., Rushton et al., 1983). The criterion of consistency of significant associations, as used  in this context, translates into the probability of a given study producing significant findings. It follows that  discrepancies between the two cases can be approached analytically by comparing them on the basis of statistical power.  Statistical Power  The form of pre-computation data aggregation dealt with in this section is one perhaps most commonly used by practitioners of  this methodology. It comprises simply the arithmetic sum of raw scores over the p measures. To begin, we state the familiar  noncentrality parameter,  x ~2 = n Y #2Iga2  where U2 is the dependent variable's population within-level variance and /3,. is the treatment effect for level c.  Our focus is on the denominator of 02, since this is where the effects of aggregation will be registered.  282 NEUFELD AND GARDNER  The within-level variance of the sum of p measures will be  a~+62+ ... +6P +2r12616,+ ... +2rP 1.P6P-1 6P P P P  _Y~2+Y  j=1 I=1k=1 k #j  rjkaiUk  = p62 +p(p - 1) cov.  In this final form, 62 is the mean of the p within-level variances, and cov is the mean of the p (p - 1)/2 within-level  covariances. Homogeneity of within-level variance is assumed for each measure, as is homogeneity of covariance between pairs  of measures.  Note that (1) can be simplified considerably if the p measures are considered to  be statistically equivalent (parallel). In this case, 62 = 62 = ... =62 and cov 12 = cov 13 = ... = COVP _ 1. P  =cov. Such measures are considered especially suitable for pre-computation aggregation by advocates of this methodology (e.g.,  Epstein & O'Brien, 1985). Accordingly, (1) can be written as  p62(1+(p -1) r), (2)  and 02 becomes  pBi[l +(p-1) r]  since _a=1l'c would be replaced by pzy_a=1 #2,  given p statistically equivalent measures, and B = n Eg= 1 l2/9C2 or n times (standardized treatment-effect variance) for the  individual measure.  It is apparent from the structure of (2) that there will be a net decrease in , as the correlation of the constituent p  measures increases. Higher values of r also reduce the rate of increase in power with incremental p. The actual change in 02  as the number of measures increases from p to p + 1 can be expressed as the difference equation  d02= d02=0n+1 _0v  B(p+1)(1-r)  r2p(p2- 1)+pr(2p+ 1)+p-r+ 1  In turn, the effects of r on 4o2 can be expressed as a(do2)/8r.  Unfortunately this partial derivative turns out to be too complex to be informative. Its structure, however, does reduce to a  more meaningful form when evaluated at r = 0 and r = 1. Note at the same time that the values of r associated with  statistically equivalent forms range from 0 to 1. Such boundaries obviously raise difficulties with regard to the unequivocal  existence of the partial derivative at  DATA AGGREGATION 283  these values. Nevertheless, r can be arbitrarily continued leftward from r = 0 and rightward from r = 1. The values of the  derivative ensuing in these vicinities for expedience of the present purposes are appropriated to the values for r of 0 and 1.  For r = 0, then,  a(d02) (4)  _ -2Bp   Or   and    a2(d02)_2Bp(3p5+11p4+14p3+6p'--p-1) (5)  a2 r (p4+4p3+6p2+4p+1)   For r = 1,    a(402) -B (6)  _   Or p(p+1)   and    02 A02)_ 2B(2p2-1) (7)  8`r p2(p2 + 2p + 1)   In view of (3), the value of 402 at r = 0 is B, and its value at r = 1 is 0. In light of (4) through (7) and the fact that  p>2, 402 is negatively accelerating at r=0 and is "stable" at r = 1. These relations are illustrated in the response surface  of Fig. 1,  v02    o.7.  9  .,P  i  Il  FIG. 1. A02 as a function of r and p, for p = 2 through 10, n = 5, X = 4, 02 = 1, and Y- x., /3; = 1.0. 480,,34,,3-3  7  3  0.2  284 NEUFELD AND GARDNER  where B= 1.25. This surface is "representative" of those having various values of B in that the latter essentially acts as a  "scalar" of the contour presented. The current set of observations will be seen as particularly significant when we examine  the behaviour of the noncentrality parameter for the second case.  The noncentrality parameter in the second case is (gn-g) trace (P), where P = W `A, W being the p x p population within-level  sum-of-squares and crossproducts matrix, and A being the population between-levels sum-of-squares and cross-products matrix.  We wish to inspect the structure of trace(P), especially as it relates to the intercorrelations among the constituent  measures. For comparison to the first case above, emphasis is placed on the behaviour of the following difference equation,  once again primarily as it is affected by the intercorrelations among the p constituent measures:  d trace (P)  =4 trace (P).  dp  trace (P) and d trace (P) can be computed for specific values of p; d trace (P), in particular, is made somewhat more  manageable if the p measures are statistically equivalent. For p = 2, for instance, trace (P) = 2(rCbe, - Sbet)Iu2(gn - g)(r2  - I ), where Sbe, is the between-levels sum of squares for each measure and Cbet is the between-levels sum of cross products  for the pair of measures; d trace (P), in turn, is  [2rCbe,(r + 2) - Sbe,(3r2 +2r+ 1)]I [6`'(gn -g)(2r3 + r'- 2r - 1)].  For the case of p = 4,  trace(P) = 4[3r Cbet(r2 - 2r + 1) - Sbet(2r3 - 3r2 + 1)]/ {a2(gn -g)[3r4 - 8r3 + 6r2 - 1]1,  and d trace (P) now is  [4Cbe, r(3r+2)-Sbe(I3r22+6r+ 1)]/[a2(gn-g)(12r3-5r2-6r- 1)].  When r=0, d trace P in each instance becomes Sbet/[U2(gn-g)]. When r= 1, P of course cannot be computed since W is singular.  For the reasons stated above, it is of interest to consider the behaviour of trace (P) and d trace (P) with respect to  selected parameter values as r is varied. For example, let p = 2, (gn - g) U2= 116, Sbet = 60, and Cbe, = 30. If r=0.9, trace  (P)=2.99 and A trace (P)=2.55; for r=0.5, trace (P)=1.034 and d trace (P) = 0.518. If r = 0.1, trace (P) = 0.993 and d trace  (P) = 0.443. Note that in this case, the noncentrality parameter decreases as r is decreased. Furthermore, the returns, in  terms of incrementing the noncentrality parameter, on the investment of elevating p by 1 decrease as well. The direction of  these changes, as r is raised, is opposite to that of those invariably occurring in the case of pre-computation data  DATA AGGREGATION 285  aggregation. For example, as applied to the present values, and, conveniently, allowing (gn - g) = 58, 402 =0.567/g when  r=0.9; 5.030/g when r=0.5; and 20.577/g when r = 0.1.  With p = 4, trace (P) = 8.108, 2.06, and 1.857 for values of r of 0.9, 0.5, and 0.1, respectively. The corresponding values of  d trace (P) are 2.574, 0.517, and 0.401, respectively. Values for d02 with (gn -g) = 58, on the other hand, are 0.177/g,  0.201/g and 14.93/g.  Consider further trace (P) and d trace (P) for p = 2, (gn -g) v2 = 35, Sbet = 45, and Cbe, = 20. With r = 0.9, trace(P) = 8.12  and d trace (P) = 7.03. These values decrease to 2.67 and 1.40 when r becomes 0.5. For r=0.1, trace (P) is 2.48 and d trace  (P) is reduced to 1.128. The corresponding values of 4O2, given (gn-g)=58, are 1.401/g, 12.42/g and 50.82/g.  Finally, given p = 4, trace (P) = 22.23, 5.48, and 4.69 as r takes on values of 0.9, 0.5, and 0.1. The respective values of d  trace (P) are equal to 7.11, 1.42, and 1.04. Turning to 402, corresponding values become 0.438/g, 4.97/g, and 36.86/g, gn-g  again being 58.  On balance, then, there appear to be rather striking differences between the first and second cases when it comes to  considerations of statistical power. In the first case, the noncentrality parameter invariably increases as r decreases.  Furthermore, as r decreases, increases in the noncentrality parameter with added measures are enhanced. Clearly these  statements do not apply to the second case. Thus, the structure of pre-computation data aggregation and multivariate  statistical analysis differ in ways that relate directly to consistency of positive findings, or statistical power. As a  consequence, these differences might be expected to issue in discrepant values of computed statistical power.  Consider a situation where aggregation in the form of score summation is carried out across statistically-equivalent forms, as  presented, for instance, by Nicewander & Price (1983) in their study of reliability and univariate statistical power. In that  instance, p = 3, g = 2, n = 15, r = 0.75, Q'- = 20, and yg-, #2 = 12.50. The value for 0 is found to be 2.37. Entering the  Pearson-Hartley charts with v, = 1 and v2 = 28, the power for a = 0.05 was observed to be 0.89, and to be 0.74 for a = 0.01.  In the case of multivariate statistical power, 0 was available as [trace (P)/(p + 1) ] 1/2. The value of 0 was found to be  0.84. Entering the Pearson-Hartley charts with v, = p = 3 and v2 = gn - p -1 = 26, power was observed to be only 0.26 (oc =  0.05) and 0.15 (a = 0.01). The probability of a significant association between the values of the construct and those of its  behavioural correlates is substantially less in the present case than in the first.  Consider another instance, this time where g = 6, p = 6, n = 10, r = 0.4, and 62 = 11.67. The value for yg-, flz = 17.5, so  that the average squared effect of levels of the construct is equivalent to approximately 0.25Q2, or is relatively large  (Cohen, 1969). For the first case, 0=2.24, v,=5, and V2=54. According to the Pearson-Hartley charts, power for a = 0.05 is  0.999.  For the second case, we compute trace (P) and refer to Olson's (1973) Monte Carlo-produced power tables, since, when g > 2, 0  cannot be computed directly  286 NEUFELD AND GARDNER  from trace (P). The power for Pillai-Bartlett V, the statistic recommended by Olsen (1974, 1976) for use under the current  combination of g, n, and p, was found to be 0.62. Once again, considerably less support for the value of the construct would  be expected in the second case.  This is not to say that the power associated with pre-computation data analysis always exceeds that of multivariate  procedures. Take, for example, data sets presented by Stevens (1980) in his study of power and multivariate analysis of  variance (p. 732). In this instance, the measures are not statistically equivalent; they differ primarily in terms of  within-level variances, and their pair-wise intercorrelations are not identical. But the measures are similarly discriminating  of the respective levels of the independent variable. Results are presented in Table 1.  The first two sets of mean differences represent moderate effects, meaning between 0.5 and 0.7 of the corresponding  within-level standard deviations. The last set represent large effects, with mean differences above 0.8 of the corresponding  standard deviations.  In each instance, the power for the case of pre-computation aggregation is less than that for the second case. The result  apparently is attributable to the "equal weights" assigned by score summation to the non-statistically equivalent measures  (cf. Perloff & Persons, 1988). Advocates of pre-computation data aggregation have argued against summing heterogeneous  variables (e.g., Epstein & O'Brien, 1985). However, investigators may nonetheless be inclined to aggregate measures having  similar correlations with construct values, or, as in the present instance, similar between-levels discrimination. Doing so,  here, underestimates the consistency of significant construct-behaviour relations relative to more formal procedures. Further  discussion of issues surrounding heterogeneous variances and covariances as related to score summation has been presented by  Gardner and Erdle (1984).  TABLE 1  Comparison of Power between Pre-computation Score Summation and Multivariate Statistical Analyses  Mean Differences  Aggregate Analysis  Multivariate Statistical Analysis    Power  Power  0(1,28) a = 0.05 7 = 0.01 00,26) a=0.05 a=0.01  2.0, 1.5, 0.5 0.40 < 0.20 < 0.20 0.89 0.29 < 0.20  0.35 < 0.20 < 0.20 0.75 0.26 < 0.20  2.8, 2.1, 0.5 0.53 < 0.20 < 0.20 1.14 0.30 < 0.20  0.47 < 0.20 < 0.20 1.13 0.29 < 0.20  4, 3, 1 0.78 < 0.20 < 0.20 1.77 0.79 0.58  0.70 < 0.20 < 0.20 1.49 0.65 0.40  Note: g=2, n= 15, p=3, a; = 16, U2=9, v}= 1; r12=0.5 r13=0.4, r23=0.3. The second value of each pair is for higher  within-category correlations: r,2 = 0.70, r13 = r23 = 0.80.  DATA AGGREGATION 287  Magnitude of Association  Suppose that an investigator is interested in evaluating the magnitude of association between a construct and its hypothesized  behavioural correlates, as follows. Values for the construct might be obtained on q measures (ratings, test scores, etc.); in  turn, p measures of the hypothesized behavioural correlates might be available. The aim is to estimate the association between  the two batteries of measures. (The case where q= 1 is given special attention below).  Before proceeding to computations, note that another facet of empirical support for the value of a construct comprises  consistency of construct-related behaviours across situations (e.g., Epstein, 1986; Mischel & Peake, 1982). Therefore, we  might view the one set of measures as addressing p formats of behaviour each putatively expressing the construct in a given  situation; the other set of measures may be addressing q formats of behaviour that take place in a second situation.  Let the respective measures be standardized over subjects and, in this instance, have interval metric properties. The  correlation between the sums of the two sets of measures is  a ~ b  c~=1 =1 rab  rAB _ (La=1 Ya'=1 raa')1/2(E6_ 1 J:b'=  rbb') 1/2 ,  rab  112 1/2 Yaa' rbb'  where p = the number of formats in the A set and q = the number of formats in the B set.  Thus, the correlation between the aggregates would be a function of the average correlation between sets divided by the  product of the square root of the average correlation within sets. As might be expected, therefore, substantial increases in  correlation have been obtained when scores have been aggregated as compared to correlations involving the scores separately  (e.g., Epstein, 1986). The multivariate counterpart of this tactic, of course, would be to correlate the canonical variates  rendered by canonical correlation analysis. In each instance, inferences from results apply to the aggregate-score formats, be  they the summed standardized scores, above, or linear combinations associated with the first canonical correlation.  What procedure would permit inferences to subaggregate levels of observation? The appropriate statistic in that instance is  the redundancy index (Stewart & Love, 1968; Gleason, 1976; Israels, 1984). The redundancy index indicates the average  predictability of the individual measures in one set from an optimal combination of those in the other set (see, e.g., Cramer  & Nicewander, 1979). The optimal combination of the set of q measures may be taken, for example, to represent the values of  the construct, to be assessed for association with the p behavioural measures. The average predictability of the p measures  from the optimal combination of q measures takes the form:  4 V  (Vrvflp) Ar,  j= , l= i  288 NEUFELD AND GARDNER  where v f is the p-tuple vector of correlations between the individual measures in the set of p and the canonical variate  (linear combination) involving the p measures corresponding to the f th canonical correlation; a f is the square of the f th  canonical correlation; and p > q.  If p < q, f ranges from 1 to p.  The value of Yf- t R r f(p > q) is equal to the average squared multiple correlation with the respective p measures serving in  turn as predicted variables. (E.g., Johansson, 1981)  If q = 1, the value of the redundancy index becomes the average squared simple correlation between this single measure and the  respective measures composing the set of p. The canonical correlation, in turn, reduces to a multiple correlation, with the  single measure in the set of q serving as the criterion.  Inspection of the above definition of the redundancy index reveals that, in general, its value will be less than the sum of  the canonical correlations or squared canonical correlations; in the case where q= 1, it will be less than the multiple  correlation or squared multiple correlation.  The discrepancy between measures of association applicable to a weighted aggreate, and the redundancy index, regarding  conclusions about the value of a construct, can be illustrated with a study of the construct "thought disorder" carried out  among psychiatric patients by Neufeld and Broga (1977). Two sets of measures were administered to hospitalized schizophrenics.  One set addressed diagnostic and demographic variables, such as reported paranoid-nonparanoid schizophrenic behaviours and  severity of symptomatology; the other set tapped the construct of "thought disorder" with measures such as object-sorting  performance, proverbinterpretation, and short-term memory performance. The first squared canonical correlation was an  impressive 0.96, and the second was 0.92. The remaining canonical correlations were not retained for further consideration  since they were not significant, despite the positive bias of the statistical test (Harris, 1985). In contrast to the squared  canonical correlations, the redundancy index was a sobering 0.19. The squared first canonical correlation indicated the  maximum predictability of one canonical variate from the other for the current sample. The actual "clinical significance,"  however, of the construct of "thought disorder" was considered to be more closely approximated by the redundancy index.  The foregoing observations on redundancy analysis and canonical correlation should be qualified as follows. Although  instructive regarding the analytical issues under discussion, they nonetheless are carried out in the company of the complex  problem of the indeterminacy of factor scores (e.g., McDonald & Mulaik, 1979; Rozeboom, 1988). As stated by McDonald and  Mulaik (1979)  Factor-score indeterminacy refers to the fact that the common and unique factor scores in the common factor model are not  uniquely determined by the observed variables whose correlations they explain, since in general the multiple correlation  between a common or unique factor and the observed variables is less than unity (p. 297).  With respect to the present context, Kettenring (1971) has shown that the first  DATA AGGREGATION 289  canonical correlation between the sets of p and q measures is a function of A., , where A, is the first eigenvalue of the  matrix Z1P+e),1P+vl. The matrix Z'P+v).IP+y>, in turn, is a correlation matrix whose elements consist of the correlations  among the factor scores associated with the unrotated principal components of X(P'P) and of Y(y"")_ Here, VPkP' is the  correlation matrix for the set of p measures, and Y(NXq) is that for the set of q measures (see also Rozeboom, 1965).  Note, however, that the problems of factor-score indeterminacy occur both at the aggregate level of inference-that  specifically addressed to the canonical correlation(s)-and at the subaggregate level of inference-that involving the  redundancy index, in which the canonical correlations participate.  By way of further qualification, it should be stressed that based on the literature on multivariate procedures, redundancy  analysis is the method of choice for inferences to subaggregate levels of observation. However, as pointed out by Cramer and  Nicewander (1979) and reiterated by Cohen (1982), redundancy analysis is not truly "multivariate." Neither is it symmetrical  between the p and q sets of measures, nor is it invariant with linear transformation of the p and/or q set(s) of measures.  Reliability Issues  A psychometric property of a simple data aggregate (e.g., arithmetic sum) assumed to be responsible for its enhanced  association with construct values is that of improved reliability. This assumption arises from the mutual increase of  reliability of the aggregate measure and of its association with construct values as the number of measures contributing to  the aggregate increases (e.g., Epstein & O'Brien, 1985; Rushton et al., 1983). The composition of the reliability of the  aggregate as compared to that of its correlation with construct values, however, shows this assumption to be highly equivocal.  Consider, first, Nunnally's (1978) formula for internal-consistency reliability of an aggregate score, x, which is  Y P= 1 6j - Lip = 1 rjj 6j  r.c.r- 1 YP=1 '7;+Y-P= 1 Y_k=1 rjk.j#k 6j6k  62- rjj 6~  62 + (p - 1 ) rjk 6j 6k  where rjj = the reliability of the measure j; rjk = the correlation between measures j and k; 62 = the mean of the p variances  (the sample size is considered to be sufficiently large to permit the use of 62, rather than sue; rjk 6 j 6k = the mean  covariance over the p(p - 1)/2 unique pairs of measures; and r j62 = the mean covariance of the p measures, involving rjj.  The reliability of the aggregate score increases as rjk and rjj increase, all else being equal. Second, other things being  equal, greater values for rjk evidently enhance the increase in r,, that occurs when p is increased.  The correlation of an aggregate, x, with a construct, y, rx, is equal to  rP r. 6.  ~'j1 J.ti~ l _ p Yj y. 6 j  (p-_ I Yk_ I rjk 6iUk)"' (p6j +p(P- 1) rjkQjak)1/2 1  290 NEUFELD AND GARDNER  where rj,, is the correlation between measure j and the construct; 7j,- is the mean value of rj,,uj, taken over the p  measures; d'` is the mean value of Ui taken over the p measures; rjk is the correlation between measures j and k; and rjko-jak  is the mean covariance taken over the p(p - 1)/2 unique pairs of measures.  Here, elevation in rjk.j # k evidently diminishes r,x,. and also detracts from increases in rrY occurring to incremental p.  Pursuant to the latter increase, allowing rj,-, di , and rjko  jak to remain constant with incremental p, we obtain  arY,._ prj,.a,(dJ -rjkajUk)  ap 12[63+rjkajak(p-1)]1/Zps/Z~U?+YjkajU,(p1  (Note that the constancies are invoked because it is not possible to specify arjyajap, ad;/op or arik UjUklap.  The considerable involvement of rjk,j#k in Or,,/0p is indicated here by the simultaneous influence of the numerator of  Or,,./0p downward, and denominator upward, as rjkj1k increases. Of course, in practice, p is raised in steps of 1, rather than  continuously, as indicated here. Nevertheless, a unit-value increase may be represented by fn+'r_x,,(p)dp, where  r_CY(p)=ar.xY/ap; the effects of rjk,j#k on the increase in r,, with incremental p are considerably more apparent in  derivative form because of the terms that disappear as dp -+ 0. Overall, then, both r,, and r,-,, do increase with incremental  p. However, r,Y will increase but rr,, will decrease as rjk. j * k increases, other things being equal. Furthermore, elevation  in rjk, j # k has opposite effects on r,, and r,, with respect to their rate of increase with incremental p. These  dissimilarities qualify substantially the attributing of enhanced constructaggregate-score associations to the aggregate's  psychometric property of reliability.  DISCUSSION  The developments presented above show that differences between precomputation data aggregation and formal methods for treating  multiple measures can be substantial. These differences are demonstrated to have an immediate bearing on the assessed value of  constructs from an empirical-correlate perspective. In particular, the two methods differ structurally in ways that implicate  the consistency of significant construct-behaviour associations. Such differences are seen to issue in substantial divergence  in consistency of these associations, considered in terms of statistical power.  Turning to estimates of association magnitude, clearly, the redundancy index can differ considerably from measures of  association whose main "data mode" is the weighted aggregate (see also Lambert, Wildt, & Durand, 1988). Redundancy index  values address strengths of association at the subaggregate level of observation. For this reason, redundancy measurement is  the method of choice if desired inferences lie at this level.  The divergences between aggregation and multivariate procedures (including  DATA AGGREGATION 291  redundancy analysis) described here straightaway give rise to several questions, as follows. Since the two methods disagree,  is one correct and the other incorrect on technical grounds? If adjudication on purely technical grounds is unavailable, how  can the divergences be reconciled? Furthermore, how might the resolution bear on the issue of support for the value of  constructs from an empirical-correlate perspective ?  With respect to the first question, neither procedure readily can be disqualified because of technical errors, but if neither  approach is invalidated on sheer technical grounds, it follows that the discrepant results cannot apply to identical  observations. A consideration of the procedures composing the two methods, in conjunction with certain tenets of  logical-deductive scientific systems, clearly indicates this to be so.  Consider first the case of pre-computation data aggregation. Results here apply to the aggregate data upon which computations  commence. Specifically, probabilities of significant associations refer to the values of the p measures in the aggregate  These inferences contrast with those appropriate to the case of formal multivariate procedures. Results now apply to the  individual behaviours of the respective units of measurement composing the battery of p measures, including overlap in  behaviour among the measures, taken pairwise (e.g., Morrison, 1976). The individual behaviours are quantified as the between-  and within-level variances and covariances. The p measures may be thought of as potentially p "replications" of between-levels  effects (cf. Smith, 1972). Returning to the first case, aggregate scores are certainly affected by their individual  constituents, but analysis of these scores is insensitive to the magnitude of p making up the composite, as well as to the  pattern of behaviours and overlap in behaviours among the p measures.  The problems involved in making inferences from one method of analysis that are really appropriate to another mode of analysis  are evident from a consideration of logical deductive systems in science (see, e.g., Giere, 1983). The present arena of  research exemplifies a "mixed deductive system" because it is composed of "impure and pure subsystems of logic" (Braithwaite,  1968). The impure subsystem comprises the reasoning that leads to the hypothesis that a certain association should occur in  nature (e.g., that between a construct and designated behavioural correlates). A label, "impure," is applied mainly because  the hypothesis usually is arrived at informally through verbal reasoning rather than through mathematical deduction. The pure  part of the system, on the other hand, refers to the mathematical apparatus used for data analysis:  A scientist developing the consequences of a scientific hypothesis can then construct a deductive system by taking over from  these books the pure mathematics he requires, and implicitly incorporating this as a subsystem... Indeed, all he need do  explicitly is to select from his "Methods of Mathematical Physics" or "Statistical Methods for Biologists" those theorems  which he needs directly to apply to his subject matter. (Braithwaite, 1968, p. 48)  In the case of pre-compuation aggregation, what is submitted to the pure part of the system is a set of summed scores, along  with the values for the construct, that  292 NEUFELD AND GARDNER  also may or may not be the product of some form of aggregation. In turn, the mathematical apparatus representing the pure part  of the mixed deductive system is a simple correlation, univariate analysis of variance, or t-test. This combination contrasts  with the case where a multiple-measure array of data enters the pure part of the system, and where the mathematical apparatus  is the adopted multivariate statistical analysis. Adherence to the rules of mixed deductive systems categorically prohibits  the transference of inferences between these two cases because of the inequalities in data submitted to the pure  (mathematical) subsystem, and in the pure subsystem itself.  Thus, the discrepancies between the first and second cases point to differing levels of observation to which their results  pertain. What, then, is the level of observation relevant to the empirical-correlate assessment of construct value? This  question can be approached by considering the goal of employing the strength of a construct's empirical correlates as a source  of support for its "scientific" value. The goal is to demonstrate that, although other sources of variance may influence  designated behavioural measures, their association with values of the construct remains acceptably high. Meeting this  criterion is explicitly and implicitly adhered to by proponents and opponents of the value of constructs in personality and  related research (e.g., Day, Marshall, Hamilton & Christy, 1983; Epstein, 1986; Mischel & Peake, 1982). Accordingly,  consistently significant and sizeable associations between a construct and behaviours hypothesized to be correlates of the  construct can be meaningful only if they occur amidst competing sources of behavioural variance.  Therefore, the results that are relevant to the assessment of construct scientific value necessarily are those of the second  case. Pre-computation aggregation in the evaluation of constructs takes the untenable position of evaluating the degree of  influence of an independent variable while building in as a feature of the evaluation procedure suppression of competing  sources of variance. A consequence of this practice on statistically equivalent measures is the inflation of apparent  betweenlevels effects, defined as Y_c-1I'c/9Qwithin-levels' This consequence is shown in the developments presented above to  be exacerbated as the within-levels correlations among the measures decrease. Overall, consistency of significant resuts that  belong to effects having a certain magnitude at the outset is attributed to effects that attain this magnitude only after the  aggregation process has taken place. In one of the earlier examples, virtually 100% consistency of statistically positive  finding was attained, an inflation by 38% over that for the multivariate counterpart.  As mentioned toward the outset, the value of a number of personality-trait and related constructs has been called into  question on the basis of weak associations with the hypothesized external correlates. Interestingly, the exernal correlates  referred to in general have been subaggregate measures (cf. Day et al., 1983; Mischel & Peake, 1982; Rushton et al., 1983).  The counterargument presented by advocates of pre-computation aggregation has depended on results obtained from what the  current developments graphically show to be an inappropriate and essentially irrelevant level of observation.  DATA AGGREGATION 293  Note that issues surrounding aggregate versus subaggregate levels of observation have been discussed at some length in past  writings, especially within disciplines such as sociology and economics (see, e.g., Blalock, 1985; Borgatta & Jackson, 1980).  The aims of these analyses for the most part have been quite different from those of the present treatment.  In this paper, we have emphasized the implications of creating aggregates from constituent scores and submitting the  aggregates to statistical analysis. In contrast, emphasis in earlier treatments, especially in the disciplines mentioned  above, has been on the veridicality of relations obtained at "macro-levels of observation" with those occurring at  "micro-levels of observation" (see also Estes, 1956). The former levels are identified with aggregate scores and the latter  with subaggregate scores. Macro-level observations often may be all that are available for study. For example, in  investigating the demand for a specific commodity as a function of household income, an economist may have to make use of  figures representing national consumption of the commodity. National consumption is taken to represent the sum of  individual-households consumption, and national income the sum of the incomes of households (Hannon, 1985). Of vital interest  is the consistency of inter-variable relations obtained at the macro-observation level with those obtained at the  micro-observation level, if the latter were available.  The meaning of consistency in this context can be illustrated by referring to a familiar assumption in the analysis of  covariance (e.g., Hannon, 1985; Moorman, 1980; Robinson, 1950). It is assumed in analysis of covariance that the population  between-groups regression of the dependent variable onto the covariate is interchangeable with its within-group counterpart.  Thus, in the writings referred to here, the magnitude of correlation and proportions of variance accounted for have been of  relatively little concern in their own right, in deference specifically to the direction and magnitude of regression.  Consequently, unlike in the present treatment, the effects of aggregating observations prior to statistical computations have  not been examined in the light of multivariate statistical power or subaggregate estimates of association.  The above concerns regarding the consistency of relations as posed largely within other social sciences do resemble certain  issues raised in the psychology literature, though not those addressed in this paper. The former concerns in good part have  centered on the possibility that aggregate data may be "biased" by factors that have little influence at subaggregate levels  (see, especially, Hannon, 1985). Thus, association between aggregates may depart systematically from an association that more  or less homogeneously characterizes subaggregate observations. On the other hand, relations may vary systematically over the  measures composing the aggregate. With respect to the principal layout presented in this paper, relations between construct  and behavioural-measure values may vary systematically over the p measures. Consequently, estimates of association based on  aggregate scores may represent the net effect of a heterogeneous composite of relations. A resulting regression coefficient  may be unrepresentative once again of that for any single measure contributing to the aggregate; in this instance, the  heterogeneous  294 NEUFELD AND GARDNER  aggregate relations also are unrepresentative of each other. This problem was referred to indirectly here under consistency of  significant results with respect to aggregation of non-statistically equivalent measures. It has received more thourough  consideration in discussions by Cattell (1984) and Nunnally (1978), among others.  Finally, by way of additional contextual considerations concerning the current work, comment should be made on meta-analysis  of data sets (Glass, McGraw & Smith, 1981; Hedges & Olkin, 1985). Meta-analysis deals with procedures and computations  involved in estimating population parameters when studies addressing similar research questions are grouped together.  Estimation of treatment-effect sizes, regression coefficients, and related parameters is a prominent topic in meta-analysis,  as is the homogeneity of such parameters across similar studies. Meta-analysis takes pains to estimate as precisely as  possible all sources of variance affecting one or more dependent variables (cf. Hedges & Olkin, 1985). Therefore, aggregation  occurs with respect to the data sets supplied by various studies; it does not take place on observations within studies.  Treatment-effect sizes, for example, are defined specifically with reference to the magnitude of competing sources of variance  (see also Cohen, 1969). Aggregation, in the case of meta-analysis, is undertaken to undermine effects that might obscure the  estimation of each component source of variance.  In conclusion, it is apparent that the topic of aggregation has commanded appreciable interest among statisticians and  empirical researchers. The topic raises important and potentially complex questions regarding data analytical procedures and  validity of inferences drawn from these procedures to alternate levels of observation. The current treatment has examined  selected alternatives for treating simultaneously multiple measures, with emphasis on validity of inferences concerning  consistency and magnitude of computed associations.  REFERENCES  BLALOCK, H. M., JR, (Ed.) (1985). Causal models in the social sciences. New York: Aldine.  BOCK, R. D. (1975). Multivariate statistical methods in behavioral research. New York: McGraw-Hill. BORGATTA, E. F., &  JACKSON, P. J. (Eds.) (1980). Aggregate data: Analysis and interpretation. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.  BRAITHWAITE, R. B. (1968). Scientific explanation. London: Cambridge Univ. Press.  CATTELL, R. B. (1966). Evaluating therapy as a total personality change: Theory and available measurements. American Journal  of Psychotherapy, 20, 69-88.  CATTELL, R. B. (1984). The voyage of a laboratory, 1928-1984. Multivariate Behavioural Research, 19, 121-174.  CATTELL, R. B., & BJERSTEDT, A. (1964). The structure of depression by factoring Q-data in relation to general personality  source traits in normal and pathological subjects. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 8, 17-24.  CATTELL, R. B., & BOLTON, L. S. (1969). What pathological dimensions lie beyond the normal dimensions of the 16PF. Journal of  Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 33, 18-29.  COHEN, J. (1969). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. New York: Academic Press.  DATA AGGREGATION  295  COHEN, J. (1982). Set correlation as a general multivariate data-analytic method. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 17,  301-341.  CRAMER, E. M., & NICEWANDER, W. A. (1979). Some symmetric, invariant measures of multivariate association. Psychometrika, 44,  43-54.  CRONBACH, L. J., & MEEHL, P. E. (1955). Construct validity in psychological tests. Psychological Bulletin, 52, 281-302.  DAY, H. D., MARSHALL, D., HAMILTON, B., & CHRISTY, J. (1983). Some cautionary notes regarding the use of aggregated scores as  a measure of behavioural stability. Journal of Research in Personality, 17, 97-109.  EMBRETSON (WHITELY), S. (1983). Construct validity: Construct representation versus nomothetic span. Psychological Bulletin,  93, 179-197.  EPSTEIN, S. (1977). Traits are alive and well. In D. Magnusson & N. S. Endler (Eds. ), Personality at the crossroads: Current  issues in interactional psychology (pp. 83-98). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  EPSTEIN, S. (1986). Does aggregation produce spuriously high estimates of behavior stability? Psychological Bulletin, 53,  134-140,  EPSTEIN, S., & OBRIEN, E. J. (1985). The person-situation debate in historical and current perspective. Psychological  Bulletin, 98, 513-517.  ESTES, W. K. (1956). The problem of inference from curves based on group data. Psvchological Bulletin, 53, 134-140.  GARDNER, R. C., & Erdle, S. (1984). Aggregating scores: To standardise or not to standardise? Educational and Ps vchological  Measurement, 44, 813-821.  GARDNER, R. C., & ERDLE, S. (1986). Aggregating standard scores or raw scores: Whither the controversy? Educational and  Psychological Measurement, 46, 533-536.  GIERE, R. N. (1983). Testing theoretical hypotheses. In J. Earman (Ed.), Testing scientific theories. Minnesota studies in the  philosophy, of science (Vol. X, pp. 269-298). Minneapolis: Univ. of Minnesota Press.  GLASS, G. V., MCGRAW, B., & SMITH, M. L. (1981). rY]eta-analysis in social research. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.  GLEASON, T. C. (1976). On redundancy in canonical analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 83, 1004-1006. HANNON, M. T. (1985).  Problems of aggregation. In H. M. Blalock, Jr. (Ed.), Causal models in the social sciences (pp. 403-440). New York: Aldine.  HARRIS, R. J. (1985). A primer of multivariate .statistics, 2nd ed. New York: Academic Press.  HEDGES, L. V., & OLKIN, 1. (1985). Statistical methods for meta analysis. New York: Academic Press. ISRAELS, A. Z. (1984).  Redundancy analysis of qualitative variables. Psychometrika, 49, 331-346. JOHANSSON, J. K. (1981). An extension of  Wollenberg's redundancy analysis. Psychometrika, 46, 93-103. KEEPING, E. S. (1962). Introduction to statistical significance.  New York: Van Nostrand.  KETTENRING, J. R. (1971). Canonical analysis of several sets of variables. Biometrika, 58, 433-451. LAMBERT, Z. V., WILDT, A.  R., & DURAND, R. M. (1988). Redundancy analysis: An alternative to canonical correlation and multivariate multiple regression  in exploring interset associations. Psychological Bulletin, 104, 282-289.  MCDONALD, R. P., & MULAIK, S. A. (1979). Determinancy of common factors: A nontechnical review. Psychological Bulletin, 86,  297-306.  MESSICK, S. (1981). Constructs and their vicissitudes in educational and psychological measurement. Psychological Bulletin,  89, 575-588.  MISCHEL, W., & PEAKS, P. K. (1982). Beyond deja vu in the search for cross-situational consistency. Psychological Review, 89,  730-755.  MOORMAN, J. E. (1980). Aggregation bias: An empirical demonstration. In E. F. Borgatta & D. J. Jackson (Eds.), Aggregate data:  Analysis and interpretation (pp. 131-156). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. MORRISON, D. F. (1976). Multivariate statistical methods.  San Francisco: McGraw-Hill.  NEUFELD, R. W. J., & BROGA, M. 1. (1977). Relations between diagnostic-demographic variables and thought-disorder  symptomatology among process schizophrenic patients. Multivariate Experimental Clinic Research, 3, 133-145.  296 NEUFELD AND GARDNER  NICEWANDER, W. A., & PRICE, J. M. (1983). Reliability of measurement and the power of statistical tests: Some new results.  Psychological Bulletin, 94, 524-533.  NUNNALLY, J. C. (1978). Psychometric theory. New York: McGraw-Hill.  OLSON, C. L. (1973). A Monte Carlo investigation of the robustness of multivariate analysis of variance. Unpublished Ph.D.  dissertation, University of Toronto.  OLSON, C. L. (1974). Comparative robustness of six tests in multivariate analysis of variance. Journal of the American  Statistical Association, 69, 894-908.  OLSON, C. L. (1976). On choosing a test statistic in multivariate analysis of variance. Psychological Bulletin, 83, 579-586.  OSSENKOPP, K. P., & MAZMANIAN, D. S. (1985). The measurement and integration of behavioural variables: Aggregation and  complexity as important isues. Neurobehavioural Toxicology and Teratology, 7, 95-100.  PERLOFF, J. M., & PERSONS, J. B. (1988). Biases resulting from the use of indexes: An application to attributional style and  depression. Psychological Bulletin, 103, 95-104.  ROBINSON, W. S. (1950). Ecological correlations and the behaviour of individuals. American Sociological Review, 15, 351-357.  ROZEBOOM, W. W. (1965). Linear correlations between sets of variables. Psychometrika, 30, 57-71. ROZEBOOM, W. W. (1966).  Foundations of the theory of prediction. Homewood, IL: Dorsey Press. ROZEBOOM, W. W. (1988). Factor indeterminacy: The saga  continues. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 41, 209-226.  RUSHTON, J. P., BRAINERD, C. J., & PRESSLEY, M. (1983). Behavioural development and construct validity: The principle of  aggregation. Psychological Bulleton, 94, 18-36.  SMITH, 1. L. (1972). The eta coefficient in MANOVA. Multivariate Behavioural Research, 7, 361-372. STEVENS, J. P. (1980).  Power of multivariate analysis of variance tests. Psychological Bulletin, 88, 728-737.  STEWART, D., & LOVE, W. A. (1968). A general canonical correlation index. Psychological Bulletin, 70, 160-163.  WAINER, H. (1976). Estimating coefficients in linear models: It don't make no never mind. Psychological Bulletin, 83, 213-217.  WAINER, H. (1978). On the sensitivity of regression and regressors. Psychological Bulletin, 85, 267-273. YULE, G. U., &  Kendall, M. G. (1950). An introduction to the theory of statistics. London: Charles Griffin.  RECEIVED: August 12, 1988