10.1016/0022-2496(90)90024-4
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 34, 460-465 (1990)  Book Review The Integrating Consumer  JORDAN J. LOUVIERE. Analyzing Decision Making: Metric Conjoint Analysis. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications, 1988. Pp. 95.  $6.50 (paper).  Reviewed by CAROL A. NICKERSON'  Jordan J. Louviere (author) earned his Ph.D. in geography at the University of Iowa in 1973 and has been on the faculties of  the Florida State University, University of Florida, University of Wyoming, University of Iowa, and the Australian Graduate  School of Management. Currently he is Professor of Marketing and Economic Analysis at the University of Alberta. His research  interests include consumer decision making and choice behavior, quantitative methods, and transportation and travel behavior.  He has published numerous articles in the Journal of Consumer Research, Journal of Marketing Research, Transportation  Research, Journal of Retailing, Transportation Research Record, Journal of Applied Psychology, and others. Carol A. Nickerson  (reviewer) recently completed her Ph.D. in quantitative psychology at the University of Colorado at Boulder. Her research  interests include judgment and decision making, social cognition, measurement and scaling, and medical ethics. ?' 1990 Academic  Press, Inc.  The papers in the Sage University series on "Quantitative Applications in the Social Sciences" are designed to provide social  scientists with introductory and nontechnical explanations and demonstrations of various data analysis techniques. A recent  entry (#67) in this series, Analyzing Decision Making: Metric Conjoint Analysis, is a brief tutorial that presents a  theoretical model and methodology for studying consumer decision processes. Chapter 1 of this tutorial introduces the general  four-stage (judgment, valuation, integration, choice) model of multiattribute decision making that underlies much of  consumer/marketing research. Anderson's (1981, 1982) information integration theory/functional measurement is then presented  as a technique for determining the algebraic model describing the integration process and for estimating attribute-level scale  values (called "part-worth utilities" in consumer research). Several possible integration models (additive, multiplicative,  distributive, dual-distributive) are described and shown to be special cases of the more general multilinear model. The  information integration theory/functional measurement approach to model testing and value estimation, called "metric conjoint  analysis" by Louviere, is then briefly compared to axiomatic  ' Appreciation is due the Statistical Computing Facility of the University of California at Berkeley. Requests for reprints  should be sent to the Publications Librarian, Center for Research on Judgment and Policy, Campus Box 344, University of  Colorado, Muenzinger Psychology Building, Boulder, CO 80309.  0022-2496/90 $3.00  Copyright , 1990 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  460  BOOK REVIEW 461  conjoint measurement (Krantz, Luce, Suppes, & Tversky, 1971) and to traditional nonmetric conjoint analysis (also known as  numerical conjoint measurement) (Green & Wind, 1973).  The design of factorial and fractional factorial conjoint analysis studies is described in Chapter 2. The confounding  properties of fractional factorial designs are emphasized and guidance is provided in choosing an appropriate design. Analysis  of variance and multiple regression procedures for testing integration models and estimating scale values are discussed.  Emphasis is placed on the analysis of individual rather than aggregated data.  Chapter 3 discusses practical problems encountered in the application of metric conjoint analysis. It treats such issues as  the identification of the attributes and attribute levels to be included in a study, the development of "product positioning  [belief or judgment] measures," the design of the response scale, the detection of nonlinearities and nonadditivities in  responses, and the adaptation of conjoint analysis techniques to field research settings. The application of metric conjoint  analysis to real-world problems is illustrated with studies of transportation preference, supermarket choice, and residential  location and housing preferences.  The "simulation" (prediction) of aggregate market choices from individuals' "overall utilities" (scaled responses) for  multiattribute alternatives is described in Chapter 4. A methodology that combines discrete choice experiments with conjoint  analysis techniques as an alternative to simulation is also discussed. Both the simulation and the discrete choice  methodologies emphasize the use of multinomial logit models.  Both Louviere's book and his approach to conjoint analysis have several clear strengths. The emphasis on testing rather than  assuming integration models is to be applauded. With the information integration theory/functional measurement approach,  integration models are tested with rigorous statistical and graphical techniques prior to the estimation of scale values.  Traditional nonmetric conjoint analysis deemphasizes model testing and focuses on the estimation of scale values. Typically,  an iterative scaling algorithm such as MONANOVA (Kruskal, 1965; Kruskal & Carmone, 1969) is used to search for an appropriate  monotonic transformation of the individual's nonmetric (rank-order) responses to the multiattribute alternatives that best  satisfies an assumed-usually additive-integration model. These algorithms evaluate the correspondence between the assumed  model and the scaled responses with a badness-of-fit measure called "stress." This measure is related to the coefficient of  nondetermination (1 - RZ) in multiple regression. There have been several demonstrations in the literature that correlation  coefficients often fail to detect inappropriate models in regression analyses. Louviere suggests that this failure may also be  true of the stress measure in nonmetric conjoint analysis. He is quite correct. As we have demonstrated (Nickerson &  McClelland, 1984), stress can fail to detect an assumed but inappropriate integration model, and reliance on it as an  indicator of model fit may lead to a distorted scaling.  Also commendable is the detailed discussion of fractional factorials for the design of conjoint analysis studies. Such designs  are uncommon in information integration  462 BOOK REVIEW  theory/functional measurement studies, probably because these studies are most often conducted by psychologists who are  primarily interested in describing the integration process. Small sets of multiattribute alternatives created from full  factorial combinations of only a few attributes with only a few levels each are usually quite adequate for studying  process-related questions. However, the primary interest in most consumer/marketing research is not in describing the  integration process but in determining the values (part-worth utilities) that consumers attach to the attributes and attribute  levels characterizing various consumer products and services. Many if not most consumer goods are characterized by a  relatively large number of attributes and attribute levels. For example, vacation travel packages might be described by the  quality of the hotel accommodations (excellent, good, average), cost (expensive, moderate, inexpensive), number of meals  included (continental breakfast only, breakfast and dinner, all three meals), sightseeing opportunities (excellent, good,  average), length of stay (7 days, 10 days, 2 weeks), and so on. A full factorial combination of more than just a few  attributes with more than two or three levels each results in a very large set of multiattribute alternatives for respondents  to evaluate (e.g., five attributes with three levels each yields 243 alternatives). Such large sets of alternatives run the  risk of "information overload," resulting in respondent fatigue and boredom. In order to maintain respondent interest, prevent  information overload, and limit the amount of time necessary for collecting each respondent's ratings or rankings, it is  recommended that conjoint analysis studies use no more than about 30 or 35 alternatives (Green & Srinivasan, 1978).  One method of reducing the number of alternatives in conjoint analysis studies is to combine the attribute levels according to  a fractional factorial design. The set of alternatives so created is a subset of the complete set of alternatives formed by  full factorial combination. Fractional factorial designs are problematical, however; in these designs, some effects (terms in  the full analysis of variance or regression model of the integration process) cannot be tested at all, and some effects can be  tested but are confounded (correlated) with other effects. Louviere presents a clear and very convincing demonstration of the  confounding properties of fractional factorial designs. (The demonstration is marred just a bit by an error in Fig. 2.2;  Column S, S, of Fraction A should be -1, -1, + 1, + 1, not - 1, + 1, -1, + 1, as shown). The design issue is crucial because  confounding can produce bias in scale value estimates. Far too many researchers have used "main effects only" designs in  conjoint analysis studies without being aware of this pitfall.  Another noteworthy aspect of the book is the attention paid to the judgment or belief stage of decision making. Beliefs  reflect an individual's perceptions of the level of each attribute that characterizes a real consumer product or service and  may be either descriptive or probabilistic. Beliefs are the cognitive components of decisions, whereas values or utilities are  the affective components. Beliefs are almost universally neglected in psychological studies using information integration  theory/functional measurement or axiomatic conjoint measurement (but see Jaccard & Becker, 1985., and Nickerson & McClelland,  1988, for two exceptions) and are very often neglected  BOOK REVIEW 463  in marketing studies using traditional nonmetric conjoint analysis. The multiattribute alternatives created via the factorial  or fractional factorial combination of the levels of various attributes are hypothetical; that is, each alternative is  described by its attributes or characteristics but not named. In a study of automobile preferences, for example, each  alternative would be described by its selling price, miles per gallon, warranty period, ride comfort, etc., and not by its  make and model number (e.g., Mazda 626). Individuals may hold different beliefs about real or named alternatives; with  hypothetical alternatives, beliefs are held constant across individuals. Holding beliefs constant prevents them from  interacting with values to determine preferences. For some applications, particularly those concerned with the development of  new or improved products, this neglect of beliefs is not a problem because the interest is only in determination of the  most-valued attributes and attribute levels of those products.  However, relying solely upon value estimation in determining preferences for existing products or for products that are  difficult to modify (e.g., contraceptive methods) is likely to be inadequate. Beliefs about such products tend to vary greatly  and these beliefs no doubt play a large role in determining product acceptability. Louviere demonstrates the use of "product  positioning measures" for incorporating beliefs into decision-making studies. This technique involves designing a set of  hypothetical multiattribute alternatives from product attributes with realistic product levels, and then matching each real  product of interest to one of the hypothetical alternatives on the basis of the individual's beliefs about the real product.  The technique is not limited to studies of preferences for consumer products and services; it also shows real promise as a  means whereby respondents' attitudes toward hypothetical social situations assessed in the laboratory can be related to their  real-world attitudes (e.g., Jaccard & Becker, 1985). Although not mentioned by Louviere, the incorporation of beliefs into  conjoint analysis models also provides a way of implementing expectancy-value models (such as the Fishbein-Ajzen behavioral  intentions model) without the usual methodological flaws of those models (Lynch, 1985; Nickerson & McClelland, 1988).  Unfortunately, the text of Analyzing Decision Making is marred by numerous small errors; most of these are unimportant but  irritating, a few may hinder comprehension by the reader without prior familiarity with the methodology being described. There  are some organizational problems, mainly manifested in a tendency to use terms and concepts before they have been defined  (e.g., "levels" appears on pp. 12-13 but is not defined until p. 17; "MONANOVA" is referenced on p. 15 but not described until  p. 26) and in stretches of repetitive writing (e.g., pp. 38-40). There are several errors in figure and section references  (e.g., p. 48 refers to a nonexistent Section 3.3.10) and in the tables, as noted above. Slight inaccuracies in the text may  confuse the reader. For example, p. 70 states that "the predicted probabilities for a particular treatment combination in a  particular competitive scenario are summed over all the sample individuals to generate the expected market share for that  treatment in that scenario," but omits that the sum needs to be divided by the total number of individuals in the sample.  There is a tendency to  464 BOOK REVIEW  reference technical reports that may not be easily obtainable and there are also several references to oral presentations and  technical reports that have long since appeared in the published literature (e.g., Adelman, Stewart, & Hammond, 1975; Lopes,  1987; McClelland, 1980). Other references are inaccurate (e.g., the Myers and Shocker article appears in volume 5, not 4, of  Research in Marketing).  The major weakness of Analyzing Decision Making, however, stems from its attempt at comprehensiveness. Louviere states that  his objective in writing the text was to "bring together information on theory and practical applications so that [consumer]  researchers who want to solve practical problems with a sound theoretical approach that has had considerable empirical success  could find much of what they need in one volume" (p. 8). This goal, although laudable in itself, was doomed to failure in such  a short book. Information integration theory/functional measurement and traditional nonmetric conjoint analysis are not  difficult techniques mathematically, and, as Louviere notes, can be mastered by anyone with a basic knowledge of analysis of  variance, multiple regression, and experimental design. But proper application of these techniques requires that close  attention be paid to a whole host of methodological issues, and many of these issues-particularly those related to the topics  discussed in Chapters 3 and 4-are given only brief treatment. Readers interested in actually using these techniques will  undoubtedly both want and need to supplement Louviere's book with Anderson's (1981, 1982) two volumes, with various nonmetric  conjoint analysis references (e.g., Green & Srinivasan, 1978; Green & Wind, 1973), and with several examples of empirical  studies using these techniques.  The concise, densely packed presentation will also make the book difficult to read for someone without prior knowledge of  information integration theory/functional measurement, nonmetric conjoint analysis, decision making, or consumer research.  Unlike most of the papers in the "Quantitative Applications" series, this is not an easy how-to book. Thus it cannot be  recommended as an introductory text. On the other hand, consumer researchers in both academic and commercial settings should  find Analyzing Decision Making to be very useful indeed. Louviere's approach meshes very nicely with the increasing tendency  of conjoint analysis studies to collect metric rather than nonmetric data, and with a growing concern regarding the  incorporation of interactions in preference models (Cattin & Wittink, 1982; Wittink & Cattin, 1989). For researchers who  routinely use information integration theory/functional measurement, Louviere's interesting applications, well-designed and  sophisticated studies, and unusual extensions of the technique should be eye-openers. The inspiration value alone of the book  is worth several times its purchase price of $6.50.  REFERENCES  ADELMAN, I,., STEWART, T. R., & HAMMOND, K. R. (1975). A case history of the application of social judgment theory to policy  formulation. Policy Sciences, 6, 137-159.  ANDERSON, N. H. (1981). Foundations of information integration theory. New York: Academic Press.  BOOK REVIEW  465  ANDERSON, N. H. (1982). Methods of'information integration theory. New York: Academic Press. CATTIN, P., & WITTINK, D.  R. (1982). Commercial use of conjoint analysis: A survey. Journal of Marketing, 46 (Summer), 44-53.  GREEN, P. E., & SRINIVASAN, V. (1978). Conjoint analysis in consumer research: Issues and outlook. Journal of Consumer  Research, 5, 103-123.  GREEN, P. E., & WIND, Y. (1973). Multiattribute decisions in marketing: A measurement approach. Hinsdale, IL: Dryden Press.  JACCARD, J., & BECKER, M. A. (1985). Attitudes and behavior: An information integration perspective. Journal of Experimental  Social Psychology, 21, 440-465.  KRANTZ, D. H., LUCE, R. D. , SUPPEs, P., & TVERSKY, A. (1971). Foundations of measurement (Vol. 1). New York: Academic Press.  KRUSKAL, J. B. (1965). Analysis of factorial experiments by estimating monotone transformations of the data. Journal of the  Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 27, 251-263.  KRUSKAL, J. B., & CARMONE, F. J., JR. (1969). MONANOVA-Monotone analysis of variance: A FORTRAN IV program for nonmetric  analysis of factorial experiments. Journal of Marketing Research, 6, 497.  LOPES, L. L. (1987). Between hope and fear: The psychology of risk. Advances in Experimental Social psychology, 20, 255-295.  LYNCH, J. G., JR. (1985). Uniqueness issues in the decompositional modeling of multiattribute overall evaluations: An  information integration perspective. Journal of Marketing Research, 22, 1-19. MCCLELLAND, G. H. (1980). A psychological and  measurement theory approach to fertility decisionmaking. In T. K. Burch (Ed.), Demographic behavior: Interdisciplinary  perspectives on decisionmaking (pp. 141-161). Boulder, CO: Westview Press.  MYERS, J. H., & SHOCKER, A. D. (1981). The nature of product-related attributes. Research in Marketing, 5, 211-236.  NICKERSON, C. A., & MCCLELLAND, G. H. (1984). Scaling distortion in numerical conjoint measurement. Applied Psychological  Measurement, 8, 183-198.  NICKERSON, C. A., & MCCLELLAND, G. H. (1988). Extended axiomatic conjoint measurement: A solution to a methodological problem  in studying fertility-related behaviors. Applied Psychological Measurement, 12, 129-153.  WITTINK, D. R., & CATTIN, P. (1989). Commercial use of conjoint analysis: An update. Journal of Marketing, 53 (3), 91-96.  480..,34,4