10.1016/0022-2496(90)90025-5
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 34, 466-471 (1990)  Book Review  On Taming Uncertainty  .I. DOWIE AND A. ELSTEIN (Eds.). Professional Judgment: A Reader in Clinical Decision Making. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ.  Press, 1988. Pp. xvi + 565. $19.95.  Reviewed by LEE ROY BEACH AND KARL HALVOR TEIGEN  J. Dowie received his Ph. D. in economic history at the Australian National University in 1966, was then a member of the  Department of Economic History at the University of Kent for several years, and is currently in the Faculty of Social Science  at the Open University. His major research interest is probability judgment. A. Elstein's Ph. D. was received in 1960 from the  Committee on Human Development at the University of Chicago. He has extensive experience in clinical psychology and medical  education and was President of the Society for Medical Decision making in 1981-82. He is currently a professor in the  Department of Medical Education, School of Public Health, University of Illinois at Chicago. He has published extensively in  his areas of interest, which include medical ethics, evaluation of clinical competence, and application of decision analysis  to clinical decisions.  Lee Roy Beach received his Ph. D. in psychology in 1961 at the University of Colorado, and has spent the major portion of his  academic career since then in the Department of Psychology, University of Washington. He has recently become a professor in  the Department of Management and Policy, University of Arizona. His new book Image TheorI,: Decision Making in Personal and  Organizational Contexts has recently been published by Wiley. Karl Halvor Teigen is a senior lecturer in the Department of  Cognitive Psychology, University of Bergen, and his major research interests are cognitive psychology and the history of  psychology. 'C: 1990 Academic Press, Inc.  The assumption that drives much of the work in behavioral decision research is that uncertainty is inherent in judgment and  decision making. Because the stakes are perceived to be so high in medicine, the search for methods for managing uncertainty  in clinical settings has been given a high priority. The essays in this book, which are drawn from the last decade of  literature on medical and related decision research, describe the current state of the search.  Those readers who have a mathematical bent may consider this search a simple task-probability theory and decision analysis  present themselves as clear choices. However, as is demonstrated by the essays in this book, and by the behavioral decision  literature as a whole, these clear choices are not clear to everyone. Indeed, the dominant themes in this collection of essays  reflect most of the major differences in opinion within the larger decision literature: analysis versus intuition, statistical  0022-2496/90 $3.00  Copyright .(-; 1990 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  466  BOOK REVIEW 467  versus causal reasoning, repeated versus unique decisions, laboratory versus field studies, normative versus descriptive  models, and so on. That is, these essays recapitulate within the clinical context the arguments that rage within behavioral  decision research as a whole.  AN OVERVIEW  The book begins with four works that examine the problem of clinical uncertainty and that define the dominant viewpoints about  how to conceptualize it. Each essay is insightful, each is persuasive, and in the end they leave the reader rather  confused-which may be the next best thing to being open minded.  With the stage thus set, the second section of the book contains essays that examine how, and how well, clinicians deal with  uncertainty. In general, the criteria for appropriateness and adequacy are one or another normative concept: probability  theory, Bayes' theorem, Brunswik's Lens Model, bootstrapping, and other correlational notions, using process tracing, protocol  analysis, computer tasks, and similar methods for eliciting and processing judgments in the face of uncertainty. The selected  essays present an overview of these topics within the unifying context of clinical judgment.  The third section contains applications of the decision analytic approach to clinical decision making. Again there are  discussions of methods of handling uncertainty, only this time the emphasis is on ways of representing it for use in decision  analyses. In addition, there are essays on how clinicians' values can be represented for decision analysis. It must be noted  that while the general tenor of these esays is that decision analysis may prove to be valuable, judicious doubts are expressed  and questions are raised, with the result that the picture that is presented is a reasonably balanced one.  The book closes with three sets of essays that serve to broaden the arena of discourse and place clinical judgment and  decision making in a wider context. The first set of essays examines the economic issues surrounding health care, including  delivery costs and resource allocation decisions. The second set examines ethical and legal considerations in clinical  judgment and decision making. The third set explores professional issues such as the definitions and attributions of medical  errors as well as prohibitions against revealing clinical uncertainty to patients. These three sets of essays treat topics  that usually are absent from discussions of behavioral decision research, and their presence is a valuable addition to an  already excellent book.  TWO THEMES  Clearly, medical practice would be easier and more pleasant for all concerned if uncertainty could be reduced, or at least  tamed. The big questions seem to revolve  468 BOOK REVIEW  around how properly to conceptualize uncertainty and, having done that, how to take it into account in medical decision  making. Some contributors to this volume give these questions the usual, well-rehearsed answers-probability theory and  decision analysis. Others, however find fault with such answers on many grounds.'  Uncertainty. One ground for faulting probability theory as a characterization of uncertainty is that, like lay persons,  physicians clearly feel uncertain but their descriptions of these feelings seldom conform to probability theory [reviewed by  Fischoff & Beyth-Marom (16); Christensen-Szalanski & Bushyhead (18) on diagnostic overconfidence; Wolf, Gruppen, & Billi (17)  on comparing diagonostic hypotheses; Arkes (19) on hindsight biases for unlikely diagonoses]. Indeed, this inability or  unwillingness to deal with uncertainty in the manner prescribed by probability theory has been documented so thoroughly it is  surprising that anyone familiar with the literature would seriously propose the theory as a characterization of uncertainty in  any but the most constrained circumstances (e.g., actuarial tasks).  However uncertainty may be characterized, the related and important question remains about whether physicians should keep  their uncertainty to themselves or should share it with their patients. The seemingly most obvious answer is that the  physician should be honest with his or her patients. However, as persons who sometimes are patients, and who never are  physicians, we suggest that such honesty may not always be welcomed.  To make our point, we resort to a time-honored device in decision research-a highly contrived, grossly unrealistic thought  problem in which the probabilities are all held constant and the reader is asked to make a choice anyway. Suppose that there  were a rare disease that could be treated in either of two ways, but the greater effectiveness of one treatment over the other  has not been established. Suppose further that in your town there are two hospitals: Hospital A always uses treatment 1 and  Hospital B always uses treatment 2. Also suppose that a patient who contracts the disease in your town has an equal chance of  being admitted to either hospital, but once admitted he or she automatically receives that hospital's preferred treatment.  Finally, suppose that in a nearby town there is a hospital, Hospital C, which is more enlightened than the two in your town,  perhaps because its administrators read the present collection of essays. Hospital C offers both treatments, and has a policy  of clearly stating that it is not clear which treatment is better. While visiting the nearby town, your minor child contracts  the disease and is rushed to Hospital C. The hospital calls you, and upon your arrival you are asked to join the physicians in  a round-table discussion of the treatments and the associated uncertainty. Then you are handed the Hospital Coin and asked to  toss it in order to determine whether treatment 1 or treatment 2 will be administered to your child. Now, honestly, in your  heart of hearts, which would you really prefer, Hospitals  `In the remainder of this review, a number after author(s) name(s) indicates the relevant chapter in the book reviewed.  BOOK REVIEW 469  A/B where the physicians make the choice or Hospital C where you and the Hospital Coin make the choice? While we are not too  sure which we would prefer, we are sure that we would not be comfortable about tossing the Hospital Coin, however well it  characterized the inherent uncertainty. Indeed, we would not appreciate the honesty of Hospital C nearly as much as seems to  be assumed by those who criticize physicians' lack of candor. This is not to say that we, as patients, would want to be  completely shielded from the physicians' uncertainty, it merely is to say that the alternative, total honesty, would not  always be welcomed either.  Analysis. Quite aside from the problems of characterizing and communicating uncertainty, there are formidable obstacles to the  use of decision analysis in clinical settings. One is that decision analysis is relatively cumbersome and time consuming, even  when it is automated. Second, decision analysis requires a considerable amount of information-the decision alternatives, their  possible outcomes, the decision maker's utilities for these outcomes, as well as the probabilities of the outcomes occurring  if the alternative is chosen-most of which seldom are clear. Moreover, decision analysis requires that the probabilities and  utilities be multiplicative, and that the resulting products be additive in order for them to be compensatory. Compliance with  and violations of these requirements in clinical settings are discussed by Doubilet and McNeil (13) and Eraker and Politser  (20). Illustrations of the application of decision analytic concepts to concrete problems are provided by Klein and Pauker  (14), Einstein et al. (15), Boyle et al. (25), and Candee and Puka (26).  A further problem in the clinical application of decision analysis is that the alternatives seldom are nicely laid out, so  there always is a danger that the "correct" or best alternative (diagnosis, hypothesis, or treatment) may not be included in  the analysis (Elstein & Bordage, 4). Equally unsettling, the consequences of alternatives other than the most promising one  often are not thoroughly examined (Eddy & Clanton, 10).  Decision analysis requires fairly precise measurement of utilities. The present essays make it clear that the  conceptualization and measurement of utility in medical settings is as knotty a problem as the conceptualization and  measurement of uncertainty. Drummond (24), for example, discusses how to measure the outcomes of health care programs in order  to have a standard against which to compare health costs-a complex, but probably necessary, way of addressing the relative  utility of health costs. Indeed, from virtually any perspective it is not wholly clear how to measure the utility of health  costs-long term versus short term consequences, direct versus indirect effects, health effect measures, economic benefits,  quality of life assessments? Add to this the difficulty of assessing preferences and things become very complicated. For  example, Llewellyn-Thomas et al. (21) show that the ,standard gamble' technique for assessing utilities of health states can  yield inconsistent results. Indeed, given the problems that lay persons and physicians alike have in appreciating  probabilities, it is natural to question whether a betting technique  470 BOOK REVIEW  should routinely be regarded as the most direct route to the quantification of preferences.  All of this is complicated by the fact that decisions often are influenced by far more than just the decision maker's private  utilities. For example, Schwartz and Aaron (23) explain that decisions about scarce resource allocation often are recast as  medical problems, for example by redefining what constitutes "routine treatment" for certain medical problems. McGuire (27)  points out that medical actions seldom are judged solely in terms of their consequences (Candee & Puka, 26), but also in terms  of duty, rights, and principle. Accordingly, some actions are performed or not performed as a result of their inherent moral  worth, irrespective of what might be gained or lost in other realms. This is reinforced by Bosk's (29) sociological analysis  of how the medical profession reacts to different types of errors. The most important errors in medicine are not technical or  judgmental, they are failures to conform to the moral standards and conventions of the medical community. Medical decisions  that fail to take these "medically irrelevant" constraints into account simply will not prove viable. Yet seldom are such  constraints included in descriptions of how to use decision analysis in medical decision making.  Several contributors suggest that the major power of decision analysis lies in its divide and conquer approach. Even if the  alternatives, probabilities, and utilities all are based on the decision maker's own fallible judgment, the analysis may prove  helpful in making explicit that which ordinarily is hidden, and in providing rules for putting it all together in a coherent  manner. For example, in the Elstein et al. (15) essay, physicians' intuitive recommendations about estrogen treatment could be  seen to be systematically and conservatively biased when they were compared to the results of analyses based upon these same  physicians' own assessments. However, one supposes that the problem lies in knowing what is biased relative to what-the  analytic synthesis of the physicians' (micro) assessments or their unaided (macro) recommendations.  In closing, let us turn to the issue that invariably surrounds any discussion of judgment and decision making, namely the  relative merits of analytic and intuitive decision strategies. Certainly the first step in confronting this issue must be to  obtain a reasonably clear idea about what is implied by the two alternatives. However, as the essays in the present collection  suggest, no such clarity seems to exist. In particular, esays by Schon (2), Hamm (3), Dawes (6), Einhorn (8), and Fischhoff  (22) make it clear that there is little common understanding of what an intuitive strategy might be, except insofar as it can  be contrasted with analytic strategies. So, for instance, if analysis is "scientific," intuition is "artistic." If analysis is  slow, conscious, and consistent (Hamm, 3), then intuition must be rapid, unconscious, and inconsistent. But this will not do;  intuition must be better represented than this or the debate is bound to be muddled. And muddled it is-and muddled it is  likely to remain for the foreseeable future unless greater attention is given to nonanalytic decision strategies, what they  are, and how they work [e.g., Eddy & Clanton (10)].  No review can do justice to the complexities of the book that is its subject. This  BOOK REVIEW 471  is never satisfying, and it is even less satisfying for a collection of readings such as this one. However, with the present  book the interested reader is uncouraged to examine the editors' introduction. This is a comprehensive overview of the  contents of the book and a concise description of the present state of the field. After reading it, most readers will want to  read the remainder of the book.