10.1016/0022-2496(90)90028-8
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 34, 489-498 (1990)  Book Reviews Towards a Believable Theory of Planning  D. E. WILKINS. Practical Planning. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988. Pp. xii + 205. $49.95. S. L. FRIEDMAN. E. K.  SCHOLNICK, AND R. R. COCKING. Blueprints for Thinking, London/New York: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1987. Pp. xv + 559. $58.50 K.  HAMMOND. Case-Based Planning. San Diego: Academic Press, 1989. Pp. xviii + 277. $34.95.  Reviewed by DAVID P. MILLER  Wilkins received his Ph. D. from Stanford University in Computer Science. He is currently a Senior Computer Scientist at the  Artificial Intelligence Center at SRI International, where he has been since 1979. Recently, he was instrumental in initiating  the Australian Artificial Intelligence Institute, and while in Australia he successfully applied his planner (Sipe) to the  scheduling of production lines in a real-world manufacturing environment.  Friedman received her Ph. D. in Psychology from George Washington University, and is currently a Health Science Administrator  at the Human Learning and Behavior Branch of the Center for Research for Mothers and Children, National Institute of Child  Health and Human Development. Her primary research interest is cognitive development, with a secondary interest in the effects  of social, medical, and psychiatric influences on such development. Scholnick received her Ph. D. in Psychology from the  University of Rochester, and is currently a Professor at the University of Maryland. Her primary research interests are  cognitive and linguistic development in children. Cocking received his Ph. D. in Psychology from Cornell University, and is  currently Acting Chief, Behavioral Sciences Research Branch, and Chief, Cognition and Learning, at the National Institute of  Mental Health. His primary research interests are cognition and psycholinguistics.  Hammond received his Ph. D. in Computer Science from Yale University, and is currently an Assistant Professor of Computer  Science at the University of Chicago.  Miller, the reviewer, received his Ph. D. in Computer Science from Yale University, and is now Group Supervisor, Robotic  Intelligence Group, at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory of the California Institute of Technology. His main research interests  are automated planning and scheduling, robotics, and interactions between strategic and reactive systems. "" 1990 Academic  Press, Inc.  1. INTRODUCTION  Each of the three books being reviewed in this article tries to develop a theory (or theories) of planning. Each of the books  approaches this task in a different way:  Requests for reprints should be sent to Dr. David P. Miller, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology,  Mail Stop 301-440, 4800 Oak Grove Dr., Pasadena, CA 91109.  489  0022-2496/90 $3.00  Copyright,(; 1990 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  490 BOOK REVIEWS  Practical Planning takes a well established theory of machine planning, and pushes the theory to its outer limits. Case-Based  Planning introduces a new theory of planning, and elaborates on the theory by using a partial implementation. Blueprints for  Thinking uses psychological surveys and experiments to try and home in on where particular theories of planning are most  All three books appear to achieve their authors' goals. All three books are valuable additions to the planning literature. Not  at all surprising is that none of the three represents the definitive book on planning. What is more surprising is that the  three books cannot agree on what planning is (Blueprints for Thinking, with its multi-author format, does not even have an  internally consistent definition). Readers of these books will, and should, get the impression that there still remains a  sizable amount of work to be done in the field. Readers who expect to find out how to build a Practical Planning system, or to  uncover Blueprints for Thinking, will be sorely disappointed.  My goal in planning research is to learn how to make a robot exhibit planful behavior-to have a robot be able to pass a  planning version of the Turing test. Whether or not a robot uses the same computational methods as a person is, to me,  unimportant. However, it is important to me that a robot exhibit the same type of behavior as a person, and not simply come up  with a "correct" behavior. One should keep these biases in mind as these reviews are read. For if you have different interests  in planning you will certainly have somewhat different opinions of these books.  Z. PUSHING OUT THE ENVELOPE OF CLASSICAL PLANNING  David Wilkins' Practical Planning (Wilkins 1988) is the long awaited final report on the Sipe planning system. Reports and  articles about Sipe have been coming out of SRI since the early eighties, but they were never quite enough to really sink your  teeth into. This book provides a clear and fairly comprehensive overview of the Sipe system.  Sipe is a planning system in the classical model. Like Strips (Fikes & Nillson 1971) and Noah (Sacerdoti 1977), Sipe solves  the frame problem by the Strips assumption; i.e., the planner assumes that when an operator is enacted the only changes that  will happen to the world are those explicitly encoded into the operator (p, 67). Sipe can also encode effects in its domain  heuristics. This makes it easier for the user to modify the system, but does not affect the system's abilities compared with  encoding all the information in the operators. Also like its predecessors, Sipe's tendency is to plan out a complete course of  action before beginning execution (though this can be relaxed somewhat).  Psychologically, Sipe follows the Mission Impossible model of planning. A complicated initial situation is defined. A  (possibly) interacting set of goals is issued. The planner's mission is to then produce a series of actions, which if executed  correctly, will generate a final state where the set of goals are achieved. At each step  BOOK REVIEWS 491  of the planning it is supposed that the planner has a complete and accurate model of the world under which the next operation  will be executed.  Chapman (Chapman 1985) and Joslin (Joslin and Roach 1986) have shown that this type of planner, if complete and correct, is  trying to solve a problem that is NP-complete, and therefore, in the worst case, intractable. Wilkins freely admits that this  is true. This is one of the strong points of the book. Things that have been found to be problems are clearly marked as such  in the book.  Wilkins introduces the term "heuristic adequacy" to explain how to get around some of these computational problems. Basically,  Sipe uses heuristics and search shortcuts to ensure that it finishes in a reasonable time. Heuristic adequacy means that the  system contains enough heuristic techniques to solve the problem in an adequately short time. The bottom line is that Sipe is  neither provably complete or correct.  Another break from previous systems is that Sipe can model some forms of consumable resources. To do this, Sipe represents  numeric quantities in its preconditions and matching constraints. Unification over numerical variables can be an extremely  expensive undertaking. Sipe uses a number of heuristics to make this more tractable. The heuristics all rely on user specified  information. This information includes range estimates and a list of other variables whose value might affect the value of  this variable. This is a very effective way of reducing the search. It is also typical of how Sipe gets around most of the  computational blackholes in the classical planning model.  Sipe, like all classical planners, relies on the user to provide it with domain specific operators. In addition, Sipe requires  the user to coordinate the levels of abstraction (decide how far each branch of the plan should be expanded before some other  branch of the plan should be expanded (Noah simply used a breadthfirst search and left the user out of it). Also, Sipe puts  the burden on the user of "...encoding the domain in such a way that incorrect evaluation of conditions will not produce  applications of operators that prevent solutions from being found (p. 53)."  These are all reasonable demands to put on the user if the user wants to get reasonable performance out of a classical style  planner. The user, and the reader of Wilkins' book, must ask themselves if that is a reasonable goal.  Historically, the reason for the classical planning paradigm was to provide a domain-independent mechanism for planning. It  appears as if Wilkins is making domain-independent claims for Sipe. However, it is not clear if domain-independence is a  meaningful term. He discusses using Sipe for several different domains. But from the way the book is written, it sounds as if  Sipe goes through major changes for each of those domains. On p. 93 he says "It is hard to make efficiency comparisons, as it  appears no [other] domain-independent AI planning systems have been tried on a problem of similar complexity..." Why is it  difficult to make comparisons? If domain-independence really exists, then it should be trivial to try a domain-independent  planner on the problem domains that other domainindependent planners have used. Additionally, on the previous page, Wilkins  men-  492 BOOK REVIEWS  tions that 73 % of the computation time that Sipe spent on this complex problem was spent deducing effects from the domain  rules. Does this mean that three-quarters of the planning process in Sipe is domain specific? The reader is left thinking that  domain-independent means that the basic inference algorithms are unaffected by the domain. I believe this is an accurate  perception, and one that brings into question the true value of being domain-independent. Inference engines, pattern matching,  and deduction algorithms are basic tools of Al. I had though that they were always considered domain-independent.  Unfortunately, only two domains are discussed with any examples. They are a modified block-world and a simplified mobile robot  domain. The presentation of the robot domain makes it seem identical to that done with Strips and the Shakey robot in the  early 1970s (Munson 1972). At the level that Sipe appears to deal with the problem, the robot must get from its initial  position to its final position while having achieved being next to a few intermediate objects on the way. In most cases the  robot executes its instructions perfectly (or any errors are taken care of by the low level control). The robot operates in a  well known and closed world. Only when the world model is substantially flawed and a task fails does Sipe show its differences.  In such cases the Sipe system will try to replan. Unfortunately, replanning is another computational blackhole. In many  instances it is much more expensive to replan (modify the existing plan) then it is to start completely from scratch. Because  of this, Sipe has been programmed to give replanning but a single try, and if that fails to plan from scratch.  The classical planning model is (in the timescale of AI) an old model. Its psychological validity is no longer believed even  by its creators (e.g., from (Fikes 1982) "simple program execution is ... misleading as a metaphor for understanding the  skills and knowledge needed by computers or people to do the work"). With the exception of Sipe, none of the classical  planners has been able to do anything of more than intellectual interest. Sipe pushes the definition as far as it will go, and  perhaps further. Yet the system is not much more capable than its predecessors (albeit much faster). This is primarily due to  the Strips assumption. We do not operate in a closed world, and neither will our robots. The world has a much richer physics  than can be easily and efficiently represented by a monotonic database of fopl (first order predicate logic) statements.  One gets the feeling when reading Wilkins' book that he is perhaps a little defensive. When talking about a new capability he  always stresses that no other classical planner can do this; when talking about a shortcoming he excuses himself by mentioning  that other classical planners don't have the ability either. These statements are all pretty much correct, but so what? None  of the abilities of Sipe are unique to Sipe in the Al world. The book would have been more valuable, and perhaps more  instructional, if Wilkins had compared Sipe's abilities to other systems with the same abilities (comparions are given to  Forbin (Dean et al. 1988) and ISIS (Fox 1983) but they were very brief). What were the differences, advantages, and  disadvantages? What did he gain by following the classical model that made it  BOOK REVIEWS 493  worth keeping even when it got in his way? One finishes the book with the impression that Wilkins is very proud (perhaps  justifiably so) that he was able to accomplish so much with so little. I would have preferred an analysis of the classical  model that explained what has kept Wilkins' interest in it for so long.  3. A SURVEY OF THE PSYCHOLOGY OF PLANNING  The classical planning model is among the many that are discussed in the collection of articles in Blueprints for Thinking  (Friedman, Scholnick & Cocking 1987). This book is a collection of 14 articles on various aspects of the role of planning in  cognition and cognitive development. As in all such collections, quality and subject matter drift more than one would like.  The first article is a survey of the psychological planning literature. It highlights one of the chief problems of the book  and of the literature in general: a lack of agreement about what constitutes planning. Cases from abstract problem solving to  the rote execution of monotonous tasks are all presented as examples of the prevalence of planning and planful behavior.  Fortunately, subsequent articles explicitly define these terms in narrower senses for their particular treatises.  Some of the articles take a view of planning that differs widely from that taken by Wilkins; for example, Goodnow's article on  the social aspects of planning. In this article she discusses three assumptions that are commonly (and in her opinion  erroneously) made. These are the belief that advance planning is in itself a good thing; that plans don't involve people (this  is just another way of expressing the closed world assumption); and last that plans are strictly for highly cognitive  activities (solving puzzles, means-end analysis). She observes that these assumptions do not fit well with the way people live  their lives, and that if planning is supposed to reflect a common activity of people it must be able to be applied in common  situations, not the rare occasions suggested by those assumptions.  Goodnow goes on to give examples of planful behavior that occur outside the classical model. The article concludes with some  examples of Philippine culture that suggest that in some cultures a more reactive behavior is preferred to the highly  strategic model of planning discussed earlier.  Other articles are less enlightening. Randall's chapter on planning in crosscultural settings seemed at first to hold great  promise. I was hoping that it would contain studies of how a strategic planner (typical Western intellectual) made out when  dropped in a culture where strategic planning was held in low esteem, or viceversa. Instead, the article shows that Samal  fishermen have approximately the same cognitive abilities to recall standard plans as Westerners do. On the positive side, one  can gather from Randall's piece that key elements of planning are common to all humans, and that planning is not a cultural  artifact. Yet the focus of the study is so narrow, and the example plan so well established in the people's culture that it is  not at all clear if any planning process is actually occurring. The few comments on process that Randall makes (e.g., "It  would be highly inefficient for a memory  494 BOOK REVIEWS  to store separate subplans for buying each and every item that might be bought...," p. 61) are made without any regard to the  hardware (in this case the human brain) on which the process runs, and are therefore specious.  The collection also contains a number of plan taxonomies. These are based on the level of strategy of the plan, the level of  development of the planner, and other factors. They would be interesting to compare to the taxonomies that have been produced  by the robot planning community (e.g., Drummond & Tate 1989, Chapman 1985, Miller & Gat 1988). These, along with several  studies that examine when various planning abilities develop in humans, make up the remainder of the volume. The developmental  studies are of interest because they seem to indicate that there exists an ability to execute plans that is independent of the  ability to form them. This may be of interest to those designing planning architectures.  4. PLANNING WITH MEMORY  Hammond's book Case-Based Planning (Hammond 1989) is in many ways the missing link between Practical Planning and Blueprints  for Thinking. The Chef program, which is the subject of the book, was developed from a memory-based theory of planning. The  Chef system does not create new plans for old situations, it simply recalls old plans. For new situations, it tries to modify  old plans until they fit. When a plan fails, it tries to remember the failure, not just for that plan, but also indexed under  the key elements of the situations that led to the failure.  From simple introspection it appears that this must be a valid theory of planning. In general, more experienced doctors,  engineers, etc., are preferred over novices because their wealth of experience appears to give them better problem solving  abilities and more appropriate reactions.  However, this is not a universal solution to all of the problems that have been called planning problems. When there is no  proper experience in memory, a casebased planner is at a complete loss. At such times a backup planner, capable of reasoning  from more basic principles is needed-or the system must put away the idea of planning and just react-trying to gain experience  in the process. Even though this method of planning is not always applicable, it is clear that case-based planning has an  important role to play, and that the basic theory proposed by Hammond is a valid one.  The Chef system (as the name implies) works in the domain of cooking, Szechwan cooking to be precise. The system is asked to  construct recipes given constraints on ingredients and desired tastes. This domain is much richer than the typical block-world  domain (more so even than the modified block-world used by Wilkins), as Hammond includes characteristics on size, texture,  several different types of taste, appearance, etc. The Chef system starts out with a list of ten recipes and knowledge about  dozens of ingredients. The planner is then given the goal of producing a certain type of meal (e.g., a stir-fry containing  beef and broccoli). The planner uses its memory of previous experiences (its list of recipes) to find a similar  BOOK REVIEWS  495  experience (in this case recipes for beef and green beans and a recipe for tofu and broccoli). Through a variety of  heuristics, it chooses the recipe that is closest to the goal (in this case the protein ingredient similarity wins out and it  then chooses beef and green beans). The program substitutes new ingredients into the recipe (broccoli for green beans),  modifies the cooking times based on the new ingredients, and simulates the cooking.  The Chef planner does not perform an internal simulation to do planning. The simulation performed by the program is supposed  to be a substitution, for convenience only, for actually cooking the recipe. The program examines the results of the "cooking"  and decides whether or not the recipe is a success. If it is, it adds it to its memory. If the recipe is a failure (as in this  case; the broccoli ends up rather limp) it adds the recipe to its memory as a failed recipe with a notation of what the  failure was and why (the broccoli ended up being boiled in the juices from the beef). The recipe is patched using a set of  heuristics to decide between possible fixes (cooking the broccoli separately for most of the time or draining the beef) and  creates a new recipe which is then added to the memory.  The key element in how this theory actually works is the indexing used in memory. The planner must be able to quickly find the  relevant recipes. It must be able to be reminded of similar cooking experiences, and of the difficulties that cropped up in  those experiences. It must be able to associate warning flags with combinations of ingredients, their features and cooking  styles. These are not trivial tasks, and Hammond takes the reader step by step through the representations he has created to  perform the indexing.  In a real case-based planner, one would want the planner to be able to draw from experiences that are actually in other  domains. Hammond addresses this in his discussion of Top theory (Schank & Abelson 1982). Hammond's book supplies the reader  with large chunks of code and numerous detailed examples. One feels that one really could recreate the system after reading  the book.  However, there does appear to be a major fly in the ointment. Virtually all the indices are keyed to events that happen during  execution of a plan. In the Chef system, the execution is simulated. Lots of assumptions are hidden in the interaction between  the planner and the simulator.  An example should help clarify this point. When creating the beef and broccoli recipe, Chef first creates a failed recipe; the  simulator decides that the broccoli is soggy. This is a reasonable thing for a simulator to do. The questionable actions take  place in diagnosing why the broccoli is soggy. The system decides it is soggy because the broccoli was boiled rather than  fried; it decides this because there are a couple of teaspoons of liquid in the wok. The system then decides the liquid came  from the beef (that the beef sweats when stir-fried). All this is valid cooking physics, but it is not at all obvious how the  planner could recognize these events. The simulator makes this step much easier than would an actual cooking experiment. The  simulator has very sparse physics, and to a large extent only simulates the part of the world that Chef needs in order to  generate its memory indices.  In the real wok, spotting that there is a little liquid is no easy task. When broc-  496  BOOK REVIEWS  coli is added to the hot wok, even if the wok is previously empty, it usually crackles and sizzles from the moisture in the  broccoli (why doesn't the system assume that the liquid was clinging to the broccoli?). If broccoli is cooked too long, or if  the broccoli is old, it could become limp (these are not even hypothesized in Hammond's system). Undoubtedly the program could  be supplemented to get around these problems in a reasonable manner. But this is a simple example. Other recipes in the book  have more complicated problems (determining why a souffle did not rise, for example). When the method of planning is  generalized outside of the cooking domain, it becomes obvious that much work is yet to be done. The book provides no clue as  to how the diagnostic determiners are decided upon. For a robot operating a piece of machinery, deciding why the results are  not as expected could be a horrendous task (work on execution monitoring has been done (e.g., Gat et al. 1989) but that type  of monitoring does not ht in well with Hammond's models).  A final note about the book itself. The book is well written and filled with examples. But the bibliography is a mess. Very  few works are cited in the text, and they are cited by author and year. The bibliography is much richer, but is organized by  completely different abbreviations. The authors of all the works in the bibliography are in the index. But the pages they are  indexed to are the bibliography, not the references in the text. While I was reading the book, I was reminded of other  planning systems, and the problems that they had. Unfortunately the way the references were organized and indexed in Hammond's  book made it difficult to compare those experiences (a glaring error for a book on indexing!)  S. A PLAN FOR PLANNING  It is interesting to compare Wilkins' and Hammond's systems in the context of the articles in Blueprints for Thinking. In that  volume, the most commonly referenced AI system was Schank & Abelson (1977), which describes script theory. Yet most of the  activities that are described as planning (in Blueprints for Thinking) do not appear to be script based. They appeared to be  evenly divided between classical problem solving and case-based activities, and in almost all cases the research concentrated  on novel plans rather than the use of scripts.  The problem solving activities that are described are scheduling and puzzle solving. Both of these activities are ones that  Wilkins has largely abandoned in the Sipe system because they appear to require special purpose algorithms that go against the  model of a domain independent planner. It is therefore very uncertain if the psychological community has any interest in the  type of planning done by the Sipe program.  All the case studies of Philippine fishermen appeared to be examples of casebased planning. Yet none of the work in case-based  planning was cited anywhere in the volume. So attempts were made to classify this into script theory, if any real attempt was  made to classify it at all. The psychological community must become  BOOK REVIEWS 497  aware of automated planning research that has gone on since 1980. All the references were to scripts and Strips; much has gone  on since then.  Both Wilkins' and Hammond's works could benefit from some experimental support in the form of structured protocols. Neither of  their systems is really capable of dealing with real-world problems (those real-world problems that they can handle can be  trivially solved by humans in insignificant time). Therefore, evidence of psychological validity could provide important  justification for pursuing their work. This is probably a harder task for Wilkins than for Hammond.  Wilkins discussed the complexity of most of his algorithms, as well as the shortcuts he had to take to maintain acceptable  performance. Hammond's book was totally lacking any form of mathematical analysis or performance discussions. This was a  serious lack, and one that will hopefully be corrected in later publications.  All three of these works, while well written, were rather dry. Hammond, though, includes his somewhat infamous Yale (perhaps  now Chicago) robot joke in his book's introduction:  The Yale Robot Joke  It was the year 1995 and the DOD finally decided that it wanted to see some results. So the head of research called together  all of the scientists doing work in robot planning to demonstrate their work. Everyone faced the same task-get a robot to  cross a busy street.  The first robot was a first-principles planner from Stanford. After walking to the curb, it looked left, then right and sat  for 20 minutes planning and projecting until it found a provably correct plan of action. Once finished, it stepped into the  road, screamed, "I thought this was a closed world," and was hit by a speeding truck.  The next robot was the JPL Mars Rover. Integrating planning and execution, it began to slowly step out into the street,  probing the ground every two feet for "deadly Martian dust pits." For ten hours it probed and stepped, stepped and probed.  Eventually the sun set, the solar powered Rover ground to a halt and was immediately hit by a speeding truck.  This was quickly followed by the CMU robot pogo stick that jumped madly about, dodging trucks left and right until it hopped  happily into an open manhole.  After this came the MIT situated activity device. It leapt into the road and deftly skipped between cars. It dodged traffic  impressively until, pinned on each side by ice trucks, it was nailed by a van from Bee Line Movers.  And so it went. The day wore on, and after countless tries, no robot made it across the street. Finally, there was only one  robot left-the Yale robot.  Unlike the others, it was not clean and shiny. It was not silvery and smooth. It was dented and bashed, with little to be said  for it. But still it moved bravely up to the curb.  It looked at the battered bits of steel and wire in front of it. It listened to the faint echoes of the now distant robot  pogo. It looked at the expectant faces in the crowd.  Then it paused, put its scruffy robot hands in its scruffy robot pockets, eased back on its rear wheels and said, "You know,  this reminds me of a story...."  480/34/4-9  498 BOOK REVIEWS  The biggest disappointment of all of these books, interesting as they are, is that they really get you no closer to being able  to build a robot that can cross a busy street.  REFERENCES  CHAPMAN, D. (1985). Planning for conjunctive goals. Technical report 802, MIT Al Laboratory.  DEAN, T., FIRBY, R. J., & MILLER, D. P. (1988). Hierarchical planning involving deadlines, travel time and resources.  International Journal of Computational Intelligence, 4(4).  DRUMMOND, M., & TATE, A. (1989). AI planning: A tutorial and review. University of Edinburgh AIAA Technical Report TR-30.  FIKEs, R., & NILLSON, N. J. (1971). STRIPS: A new approach to the application of theorem proving to problem solving.  Artificial Intelligence, 2, 189-208.  FIKEs, R. (1982). A commitment-based framework for describing informal cooperative work. Cognitive Science, 6, 331-348.  Fox, M. S. (1983). Constraint-directed search: A case study of job shop scheduling. Technical report CMU-RI-TR-83-22, CMU  Robotics Institute.  FRIEDMAN, S. L., SCHOLNICK, E. K., & COCKING, R. R. (1987). Blueprints for thinking. London/New York: Cambridge University  Press.  GAT, E., FIRBY, R. J. & MILLER, D. P. (1989). Planning for execution monitoring on a planetary rover. In Proceedings of the  1989 SOAR Conference, NASA, Houston, Texas, July 1989.  HAMMOND, K. (1989) Case-based planning. San Diego: Academic Press, 1989.  JOSLIN, D. E., & Roach, J. W. (1986). An analysis of conjunctive goal planning. Technical report TR-86-34, Virginia Tech  Computer Science.  MILLER, D. P., & Gat, E. (1988). A taxonomy of planning problems for automating planning strategy selection. JPL working paper.  MUNSON, J. H. (1972). Robot planning, execution and monitoring in an uncertain environment. In Proceedings of the  International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Stanford, California, September 1972 (pp. 338-349).  SACERDOTI, E. (1977). A structure for plans and behavior. New York: American Elsevier.  SCHANK, R. C. & ABELSON, R. (1977). Scripts Plans Goals and Understanding. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.  SCHANK, R. C. (1982). Dynamic memory: A theory of learning in computers and people. New York/ London: Cambridge University  Press.  WILKINS, D. E. (1988). Practical planning. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.