10.1016/0022-2496(90)90017-4
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 34, t 16-122 (1990)  Book Review Can We Help People Make Rational Decisions?  DETLOF VON WINTERFELDT AND WARD EDWARDS.  Decision Analysis and Behavioral Research.  London/New York: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1986. Pp. 604. $59.50 (cloth), $14.95 (paper).  Reviewed by JEROME R. BUSEMEYER  Detlof von Winterfeldt is Professor of Systems Science with the Institute of Safety and Systems Management at the University  of Southern California. He obtained his Ph. D. at the University of Michigan in 1976 and was a Research Scholar at the  International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis from 1975 to 1978. His major research interests are decision and risk  analysis. Ward Edwards is Professor of Psychology and Systems Engineering and Director of the Social Science Research  Institute, at the University of Southern California. He received his Ph. D. in 1952 at Harvard and was a Research Psychologist  with the US Air Force from 1954 to 1958. He was associated with the Psychology Department at the University of Michigan from  1958 to 1973, being Head of the Engineering Psychology Laboratory from 1963 to 1973. He has published extensively in his areas  of interest, which focus on human information processing and decision making and application of multi-attribute utility theory  to the evaluation of social programs; many of his articles are considered "classics" and have guided the field for many years.  The reviewer, Jerome R. Busemeyer, received his Ph. D. in Psychology at the University of South Carolina in 1979 and has been  associated with the Department of Psychology at Purdue University since 1983. His research interests are centered on the  psychology of judgment and decision making, topics on which he has recently coauthored a comprehensive tutorial review.  [STEVENSON, M. K. S., BUSEMEYER, J. R., 8t NAYLOR, J. C. (In press).] Judgment and decision making theory. In M. Dunnette  (Ed.). Handbook of Industrial/Organizational Psychology (Vol. 1) (2nd ed.). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.  The authors begin the first chapter with a bold assertion-their intention is to help people make rational inferences and  decisions. Such an assertion may raise skeptical eyebrows from many decision researchers. At present, there is substantial  disagreement about what it means to be rational. This controversial claim will not go unchallenged, but first let's focus on  the content and substance of the book.  Given the stated goal, it comes as no surprise to find that the main thrust of this textbook is an introductory but  comprehensive description of the current method and techniques for performing what is known as decision analysis. Sprinkled  here  Requests for reprints should be addressed to Dr. Jerome R. Busemeyer, Department of Psychological Sciences, Pierce Hall,  Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907.  0022-2496/90 $3.00  Copyright q'~ 1990 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  BOOK REVIEW  and there are brief digressions to judgment and decision making research, but by and large, the book was written to prescribe  how one should (a) organize events, values, and actions using tree structures (Chap. 2 and 3), (b) make inferences using  principles of Bayesian statistics (Chaps. 4, 5, and 6), and (c) evaluate consequences and choose uncertain courses of action  using multiattribute expected utility theory (Chaps. 7, 8, and 9). Overall, the book is well written and loaded with  interesting examples, and the reader will detect some of the light hearted humor that is characteristic of the authors.  The first question that may pop into your mind is what makes this book different from the classic by Keeney and Raiffa (1976).  There are a number of important differences. First and foremost, von Winterfeldt and Edwards place a lot more emphasis on the  practical aspects of decision analysis. They spend a considerable amount of time discussing (a) simple rating techniques  (Chaps. 4 and 8), (b) qualitative model tests and consistency checks (Chap. 9), (c) problems of judgmental inconsistency  (Chap. 10), (d) methods for sensitivity analysis (Chap. 11), and (e) potential pitfalls of decision analysis (Chap. 12).  A second major difference is that the authors provide a lucid and detailed discussion of Bayesian inference techniques.  Chapter 4 introduces the reader to the diverse interpretations of probability and various assessment techniques (including a  lengthy discussion of calibration and proper scoring rules). Naturally, the authors adopt a personalistic view-probabilities  are degrees of belief about unique uncertain events. They ctiticize the relative frequency interpretation by pointing out that  it also suffers from subjectivity-How does one determine whether or not conditions are identical across replications? Chapter  5 is largely an adaption of the classic article by Edwards, Lindman, and Savage (1963).  Chapter six is quite new and unusual-the authors consider complex multistage inference problems involving several dependent  sources of information with different degree of credibility. The chapter is based on previous work by David Schum and it  includes a provocative legal example of inferences drawn from testimony given at a criminal trial. The mathematics is worked  out in great detail and psychological interpretations of the various stages of the analysis are provided.  A third unique feature is the strong position taken by the authors on the value-utility distinction. To illustrate this issue,  suppose that we are interested in measuring the worths of jobs described by two attributes-salary (in dollars per week) and  labor (in hours per week). A job is defined by a point J= (s, 1) from the two dimensional salary x labor plane. Consider two  methods for obtaining worth scales-one is based on a strength of preference relation and the second is based on a risk  preference relation.  In the first case, an individual is asked to judge whether the difference in value between two jobs (J, , J,) is at least as  large as the difference in value between to other jobs (J3, Jq). If one assumes that the strength of preference relation  conforms to a difference structure, then one can construct an interval level value scale for the jobs denoted V(J) (cf.  Krantz, Luce, Suppes, & Tversky, 1971, Chap. 4).  In the second case, an individual is asked to judge whether one gamble is  118 BOOK REVIEW  preferred over another, where the gambles are defined as probability distributions over the salary x labor plane of possible  jobs. If one assumes that the preference relation conforms to the axioms of expected usility theory, then one can construct an  interval level utility scale for the jobs denoted U(J) (cf. Fishburn, 1982).  At this point, there is no necessary relation between the two sets of scales even though they are both interval level scales  defined on the same set of jobs. In fact, research on preference reversals (see Slovic & Lichtenstein, 1983) suggests that the  rank order of the value scale V may not agree with that obtained from the utility scale U.  The authors (Chap. 9) point out that if we assume that (a) the rank orders agree,  VV,) 1> V(JI-) if and only if UV,) 1> U(JZ),  and (b) the multiattribute consequences can be decomposed into an additive combination of the components,  V(J) =u,(s)+v,(I) and U(J) =u,(s)+u,(1),  then the two scales U and V are linearly related.  Of course, the multiattribute consequences may be represented by a multiplicative rather than an additive model, and in this  case the two scales are related by a simple non-linear relation. However, they argue that even in this case the disagreement  between the scales is too small to detect in the presence of judgmental error, and for all practical purposes the  discrepancies can be ignored. Given that it is simpler to obtain value scales using strength of preference judgments than  utility scales using risk preference judgments, the authors argue that value scales V can be substituted for the utility  scales U for multiattribute expected utility analysis.  A fourth feature that makes this book unique is the heavy reliance on rating scales and the frequent reference to  psychophysical research. On the one hand, I heartily agree with the authors' view that decision analysts can learn much from a  study of psychophysics. On the other hand, I find myself in disagreement with the authors' heavy reliance on rating scales.  For example, the SMART technique relies on ratings of subjective scale values for each attribute in a multiattribute decision  problem. Many rating techniques are available such as, for example, category or magnitude ratings. It is assumed that these  ratings are linearly related to subjective value. It is a fact, however, that category rating scales are non-linearly related  to magnitude ratings (Stevens & Galanter, 1957), in contradiction to the linearity assumption.  A related concern is that the various methods for assessing weights in the SMART model may be inconsistent. The weights serve  two independent purposes-one is to reflect psychological importance (e.g., race is relevant for scholarship decisions but  irrelevant for promotion decisions), and the other is to reflect the range of attribute values. The swing weight technique  emphasizes attribute range, but the rated importance technique emphasizes attribute importance. Thus the two procedures may  produce inconsistent judgments of weights.  BOOK REVIEW 119  Finally, the authors fail to point out that it is possible to estimate weight independent of range with an averaging model  defined on a set of consequences with a variable number of attributes (see Anderson, 1982; Luce, 1981).  Although the main focus of the book is on prescriptive procedures, it does include two chapters that review empirical research  on utility estimation (Chap. 10) and cognitive illusions (Chap. 13). However, Chap. 10 is much too brief (considering the vast  amount of research on utility assessment and risky decision making), and it seems to downplay the implications of this  research for decision analysis. For example, the authors state (p. 363) "The problem with axiomatic tests is that they are  very strong and almost inevitably prove the model wrong. Consequently, the analyst has to ask how seriously one should take  such violations." I hope the analyst begins looking for alternative axioms! For example, a considerable amount of research  suggests that Savage's "sure thing principle" is not accepted by many decision makers, and consequently a great deal of  theoretical effort has been directed at the identification of new axiom systems and the construction of weaker utility models  (Allais & Hagan, 1979).  Chapter 13 on cognitive illusions begins with a recital of the standard list of heuristics and biases. Given the authors'  mathematical inclination, I expected a more formal framework for understanding these issues. Formal models of psychological  reasoning under uncertainty have been developed (e.g., Birnbaum & Mellers, 1983; Shanteau, 1975; Wallsten, 1976; Wyer, 1975),  and it would have been refreshing to see a more systematic treatment of this approach. But there is no mention of it. One  positive feature is the thought provoking final section titled "reflections on cognitive illusions" in which the authors use a  mental arithmetic analogy to make sense out of cognitive illusions.  Overall, the book contains few errors. However, there are a couple of problems that appear in scattered places. One occurs at  the end of Chap. 6 on multistage inference. Notation is introduced without adequate definition, and this together with a few  apparent misprints makes the final analysis a bit confusing. For example, on p. 189, Eq. 6.40 introduces a foreign notation  for conditional probabilities, e.g., P[C; I DO d,; H,], where Cj, Dk, dl, and H; are events. The text immediately following  Eq. 6.40 suggests that the distinction between the comma and the semicolon is important, but this conditional was never  explicitly defined in terms of joint probabilities and marginals. Later (last paragraph of p. 189), the authors refer to this  same conditional in the text, but now it is denoted in Eq. 6.41 as P[Cj I Dk; H;, d,]. Either this is a misprint, or the  position of the semi-colon has changed without explanation. Finally, in Eq. 6.44 of p. 190, the following undefined  conditional probability appears-P[Dk I Cj; H,]. Later, the last paragraph of p. 190, the authors refer to this same  conditional probability in the text but use the notation P[Dk I Cj, H;]. If the latter term is interpreted as the probability  of the event Dk conditioned on the joint event (C; and H;), then it is inconsistent with Eqs. 6.43 and 6.44.  Another problem occurs in Chap. I1 on sensitivity analysis (p. 394) within their discussion of higher level dominance. In this  section, the authors make a distinction  120 BOOK REVIEW  between a finite set of n events (E,, ..., E;, ..., E and a finite set of K information states {x,, ..., xk, ..., xK}, where  the latter provides information about the former. A gamble g is defined as a vector, where element g; is the payoff that is  obtained when event E; occurs. A decision rule is represented by a (K x n) matrix denoted d, where row k contains the gamble  that would be selected if information state xk is observed, and each element d, represents the payoff that results when  information state xk and event E; occurs. CV;(d) represents the expected value of a decision rule, conditioned on the  occurrence of the event E;. The authors define this conditional expected value in Eq. 11.6, but there appears to be a misprint  in this equation-the symbol d;; in their text should be changed to dki, to read  CV;(d)=Y P(xkI Ej dki,  where the summation ranges from k = 1, ..., K. Table 11.3 provides some example calculations for five different decision rules  based on probabilities provided on p.394 (e.g. P(x, j E,) = 2/3, P(xz I E,) = 1/3 ), but these calculations are also  incorrect. For example, consider the decision rule  d=[  6].  6  In this case, CV,(d)=(2/3)(2)+(1/3)(6)=10/3, but the answer given in the table is 8/3. My calculations for the five decision  rules yield the results shown in Table 1. The book concludes with Chapter 14 which provides an historical background and  predictions about the direction of future research. One important direction for the future is research on problem structuring.  This is one of the main weak points of current theory. In fact, I would argue that decision analysis remains more a humanistic  art than a rational science because we know so little about problem structuring.  The importance of structuring can be illustrated by one of the authors' examples. In Chap. 2, the authors present an analysis  of an actual decision: Whether or not to file suit for damages in a car accident. The initial problem structure (Fig. 3.3,  which apparently was used to make the actual decision) led to the choice of filing the suit (see p. 69). A post mortem  analysis (Fig. 3.4) led to the opposite conclusion (and after a frustrating experience with the California court system, the  authors  TABLE 1  Corrections for Table 11.3 in Book  CV,(d,)=2 CV2(d,)=6 CV,(d,)=10/3 CV,(dz)=14/3 CV,(d,) = 11/3 CV,(d,) = 14/3 CV,(d4)=19/3 CV,(d4)--10/3 CV,(ds)=7 CV,(d,)=3  BOOK REVIEW 121  apparently believe that it would have been better not to file). Which structure is most appropriate, and how do we choose  between problem structures?  Although this topic is addressed in Chap. 2 (and it appears throughout the book including scenario structuring for Bayesian  analysis), there is very little formal, axiomatic, or rational theory that the authors can offer (the same cirticism applies  to Keeney and Raiffa, 1976). Until this problem can be solved, I do not believe that one can claim to have a rational  procedure for making decisions.  Another weak point of decision analysis is the problem of choosing axioms. There are two distinct methods (cf. MacCrimmon &  Larsson, 1979, p. 334): one is to consider the abstract statement and accept or reject the axiom on the basis of its appeal to  reason; the second is to consider concrete examples that test the implications of the axioms and accept or reject the axiom on  the basis of personal experience.  For example, suppose that an individual finds Savage's sure thing principle very compelling in the abstract. But when faced  with a set of concrete decision problems, the individual feels compelled by personal experience to violate the principle. Upon  which intuition should the individual rely? Luce and Raiffa (1957, pp. 123-124) warn their readers that it is very difficult  to asses how reasonable an axiom is in its abstract setting, and they recommend considering concrete examples. I would go with  personal concrete experience, whereas the authors would rather trust the abstract principles (see p. 386, last paragraph).  One final weak point of decision analysis is the assumption that individuals have well-defined, stable, and infinitely precise  preferences. For example, most of the assessment techniques for value or utility estimation assume that individuals can solve  certain indifference equations. As the authors point out (p.217), in practice this assumption is almost never satisfied. For  example, I cannot honestly give a precise and confident answer to the following relatively simple problem-find the monetary  value X that makes you completely indifferent between (a) winning or losing $10,000 with equal probability or (b) receiving $X  for certain). Preferences tend to waver from moment to moment according to an underlying dynamic conflict resolution process.  By labeling this deliberation process as "judgmental error" and ignoring the issue, we may be leaving out the very essence of  what it means to make a decision.  One topic that is notably absent is the problem of long range planning and the evaluation of future consequences. Decision  analysts often strive for simplicity, and consequently, the analysis is often limited to short time horizons. Short sighted  planning by government and industrial policy makers may be the cause of some of the most serious problems that our world faces  in the future.  For several years the field of behavioral decision making has been in need of basic textbooks for introducing new researchers  to the theory and empirical findings of the field. The book under review partly fulfills this need by providing a  comprehensive overview of decision analytic models and techniques, and I highly recommend it for this purpose.  122  BOOK REVIEW  REFERENCES  ALLAIS, M., & HAGAN, O. (1979). Expected utility and the Allais paradox. Dordrecht: Reidel. ANDERSON, N. H. (1982). Methods of  information integration theory. New York: Academic Press. BIRNBAUM, M., & MELLERs, B. (1983). Bayesian inference: Combining  base rates with opinions of  sources who vary in credibility. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45, 792-804. EDWARDS, W., LINDMAN, H., &  SAVAGE, L. J, (1963). Bayesian statistical inference for psycological research. Psychologial Review, 70, 193-242.  FISHBURN, P. C. (1982). The foundations of expected utility. Dordrecht: Reidel.  KEENEY, R. L., & RAIFFA, H. (1976). Decisions with multiple objectives. New York: Wiley.  KRANTZ, D. H., LUCE, R. D., SUPPES, P., AND TVERSKY, A. (1971). Foundations or measurement (Vol. 1). New York: Academic Press.  LUCE, R. D. (1981). Axioms for the averaging and adding representations of functional measurement. Mathematical Social  Sciences, 1, 139-144.  LUCE, R. D., & RAIFFA, H. (1957). Games and decisions. New York: Wiley.  MACCRIMMON, K. R., & LARSSON, S. (1979). Utility theory: Axioms versus "paradoxes." In M. Allais and O. Hagan (Eds.), Expected  utility and the Allais paradox, Dordrecht: Reidel.  SHANTEAU, J. (1975). Averaging versus multiplying combination rules of inference judgment. Acta Psychologica, 39, 83-89.  SLOVIC, P., & LICHTENSTEIN, S. (1983). Preference reversals: A broader perspective. American Economic Review, 73, 596-605.  STEVENS, S. S., & GALANTER, E. H. (1957). Ratio scales and category scales for a dozen perceptual continua. Journal of  Experimental Psychology, 54, 377-411.  WALLSTEN, T. S. (1976). Using conjoint measurement models to investigate a theory about probabilistic information processing.  Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 14, 144-185.  WYER, R. S. (1975). The role of probabilistic and syllogistic reasoning in cognitive organization and social inference. In M.  F. Kaplan and S. Schwartz (Eds.), Human judgment and decision processes. New York: Academic Press.