10.1016/0022-2496(90)90022-2
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 34, 435-444 (1990)  Theoretical Note The Mathematics of Mental Rotations  R. PATRICK GOEBEL  University of Toronto  A mathematical analysis of the structure of rotations and the dynamics of linear recurrent connectionist networks suggests a  simple strategy for implementing mental rotations on a parallel distributed processing (PDP) architecture. Rather than encode  a separate map for each combination of rotation axis and degree of rotation, the net embodies generators for infinitesimal  rotations about three linearly independent axes. Finite rotations about an arbitrary axis are then generated in real time by  the natural dynamics of the net operating under the influence of the appropriate linear combination of the three generators.  The resulting transformation proceeds at a constant rate. 17' 1990 Academic Press, Inc.  One advantage conferred upon creatures with complex brains is the potential to solve problems through mental simulation of  real-world transformations (Craik, 1943; Piaget, 1952; Holland, Holyoak, Nisbett, & Thagard, 1983; Rumelhart, Smolensky,  McClelland, & Hinton, 1986; Rumelhart & Norman, 1988; Shepard, 1988; Mel, 1989). Such an ability would enable the organism to  evaluate the consequences of hypothetical actions without actually engaging the corresponding behaviors. Given the  computational complexity of such simulations, natural selection may have favored neural systems capable of simplifying the  task by exploiting structure inherent in the set of transformations to be modelled (Cassirer, 1944; Foster, 1975; Shepard,  1981, 1984; Carlton, 1988; Carlton and Shepard, 1990.  The set of rotations of an object or frame of reference in three-dimensional space forms a connected and compact  three-parameter Lie group (e.g., Sagle and Walde, 1973; Schutz, 1980; Cornwell, 1984). An r-parameter Lie group is  simultaneously an r-dimensional differentiable manifold and an algebraic group and consequently bears a rich mathematical  structure. To the extent that a neural system is able to encode this structure (Cassirer, 1944; Hoffman, 1966, 1968, 1970,  1984; Shepard, 1981, 1984; Dodwell, 1983; Carlton, in press; Carlton and Shepard, submitted for publication), mental rotations  can be effected through a relatively simple linear dynamics.  Reprint requests should be addressed to R. Patrick Goebel, Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences, 202 Junipero  Serra Blvd., Stanford, California 94305, USA.  435  0022-2496/90 $3.00  Copyright ti'; 1990 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  436 R. PATRICK GOEBEL  THE STRUCTURE OF ROTATIONS'  Intuitively it is clear that a rotation of an object or frame of reference about a fixed axis n can be obtained by  successively applying a smaller rotation about the same axis. The smaller rotation itself can be conceived of as a combination  of an identity operation and a "twitch" about the fixed axis. If 1 is the identity operator and Lis the twitch operator then  R60) =1 + 60 L is an operator approximating a rotation about the twitch axis through a small angle 60. If a finite rotation through angle d0  is required, we can decompose the rotation into a succession of N smaller rotations each through the angle 60 = d0/N. In this  way we have  R40) (1+b0L-(1+S0L' ... -(1+b0L,  where there are N factors in the product. Since 60 =J 0/N, we can write  .)N.  Taking the limit as N goes to infinity and the small rotations become infinitesimal, we obtain  R40)=exp(d0L.), (1)  where the exponential of an operator A is defined by the series expansion  exp(A)=1+A+Az/2!+A3/3!+...  and where the indicated series can be shown to converge for all matrix representations of A (Cornwell, 1984).  Equation 1 indicates that a rotation through the angle 40 about a fixed axis n can be obtained by exponentiating the  corresponding twitch operator Lthrough the parameter distance d0. We say that Lgenerates the one-parameter subgroup of  rotations about n.  Since the space of rotations about a fixed point is isotropic, it is clear that the above arguments hold for an arbitrarily  chosen rotation axis. To each of the noncountably infinite space axes n corresponds a one-parameter subgroup of rotations and  the twitch operator Lthat generates it; however, the set of twitch operators  Most of the conclusions of this section reflect standard results in the theory of Lie groups. Supporting proofs and further  elucidation of the ideas presented here can be found in a number of excellent texts on the subject; for example, Sagle and  Walde (1973), Schutz (1980), and Cornwell (1984).  THE MATHEMATICS OF MENTAL ROTATIONS 437  is not formless but inherits its own structure from the structure of the rotation group. In fact, it is a basic result in the  theory of Lie groups that the twitch operators form a three-dimensional linear vector space which is closed under commutation  of operators.' As a corollary, we can conclude that the space of twitch operators is spanned by just three linearly  independent twitch operators. For concreteness, let L;, LI, and Lk be the twitch operators corresponding to the x, y, and z  axes of a Cartesian coordinate frame of reference. Furthermore, let a, /l, and y be the direction cosines of an arbitrary unit  vector n with respect to the Cartesian frame. Then the twitch operator that generates rotations about n is given by  LaLi+/ELI+yLk,  where a' + fl' + y` = 1, and a finite rotation through angle A6 about n can be expressed as  RAB) = exp[AB(aLi + #Li + yLk)].  Since every rotation about a fixed point belongs to a one-parameter subgroup of rotations about some axis through the point,  we can conclude that the rotation group can be completely characterized in terms of just three linearly independent twitch  operators.  Let us summarize the preceding development in formal terms. The set of rotations of an object or frame of reference in  three-dimensional Euclidean space forms a connected and compact three-parameter Lie group called SO(3). The three-dimensional  vector space of twitch operators or "infinitesimal generators" constitutes the Lie algebra of the rotation group and is  symbolized by 00(3).3 The Lie algebra of twitch operators maps bijectively onto the rotation group by way of exponentiation;  thus, a given twitch operator Lin j0(3) generates the oneparameter subgroup of SO(3) given by Ro(A6)=exp(ABL. Conversely,  starting with a one-parameter subgroup of rotations about an axis parallel to unit vector n, we can find an element of j0(3)  that generates it: let L;, Ll, and Lk be a basis for j0(3) generating rotations about Cartesian axes x, y, and z,  respectively. If n has direction cosines x, /3, and y, then the element of oa(3) defined by L= aL; + #Lj + yLk generates the  given subgroup.  z If L. and L are twitch operators, their commutator is the operator defined by [L L] L - LL..  s In general, a Lie algebra is defined as a vector space V together with a binary operation  VXV -. V, such that V is closed under [ .,. ] and [,,. ] is bilinear, antisymmetric, and satisfies the Jacobi identity, [a,  [b, c] ] + [b, [c, a] ] + [c, [a, b] ] =0 Va, b, ce V. Such a binary operation is called a Lie bracket or Lie product. If [a,  b] = 0 Va, b e V, then the algebra is said to be Abelian. The commutator of twitch operators defined above is bilinear,  antisymmetric, and satisfies the Jacobian identity. It is therefore a valid Lie bracket. However, 00(3) is not an Abelian Lie  algebra. In fact, the non-Abelian nature of 00(3) lies at the heart of the theory of angular momentum in quantum mechanics  (CohenTannoudji, Diu, and Laloe, 1977). It is unclear whether this same property has any testable implications for mental  rotations.  438 R. PATRICK GOEBEL  THE STRUCTURE OF LINEAR RECURRENT NEURAL NETS  Consider a PDP network comprising N linear units (Rumelhart, Hinton, and McClelland, 1986). Let the activation pattern across  the N units be specified by the N-dimensional vector ~(t). Let the connective links between units be described by the N x N  matrix C(t). If the net operates recurrently in continuous time, then in the absence of sustained external input its dynamics  satisfies the differential equation  do (t)/dt=C(t)~(t) (2)  (Kohonen, 1984). For relatively constant connection strengths, Eq.2 has the solution  ~(t+dt)=exp(dtC)O(t),  which can be verified by substitution, so that the time evolution of the activity pattern over the network is generated by  exponentiation of the connectivity matrix.  IMPLEMENTING MENTAL ROTATIONS ON A  PARALLEL DISTRIBUTED PROCESSING ARCHITECTURE  It has been shown that the structure of rotations and the dynamics of a linear recurrent PDP network are both generated by an  exponential map. It is clear that if the connectivity matrix C encodes a representation of a twitch operator L then the  dynamics of the net produces a transformation on the activity pattern corresponding to a rotation about axis n. It is also  clear that the transformation proceeds with a constant rate determined by the magnitude of C. This last observation is  consistent with the linear reaction time functions found for mental rotations in human subjects (Shepard and Metzler, 1971;  Metzler and Shepard, 1974; Cooper and Shepard, 1975; Cooper, 1976).  To support mental rotations about an arbitrary axis in space, three linearly independent connectivity matrices must be  encoded. For concreteness, let C;, C;, and Ck correspond to rotations about the x, y, and z axes of a Cartesian frame of  reference. Superimposing these three connectivity patterns on the same network would require three connective links between  each pair of units. To mentally simulate a rotation about axis n with direction cosines a, P, and y, the overall network  connectivity matrix would have to be set to  CaC;+ #C;+7Ck.  Such linear combinations could be created on the fly using variable weights on the three links between units. The variable  weights might be produced dynamically through the use of "sigma-pi" units in the net (Feldman and Ballard, 1982;  THE MATHEMATICS OF MENTAL ROTATIONS 439  Rumelhart, Hinton and McClelland, 1986) in a fashion resembling presynaptic facilitation and inhibition. (See Fig. 1.)  If the activation pattern across the control units A, B, and C in Fig. 1 is normalized to have unit magnitude, then the  individual activities a, /l, and y can always be interpreted as the direction cosines of some axis in space. The control units  act multiplicatively on the connective links between Z-17 units in the net at the junctions indicated by the small solid  squares in the figure such that unit A multiplies all C; connections by a factor a, unit B multiplies all C; links by a factor  P, and unit C multiplies all Ck connections by a factor y. The three connective links, modulated in this way by the control  units, are summed where they converge on a X17 unit.  For example, suppose that the Ci, C;, and Ck connection strengths from unit 1 to unit 2 in Fig. 1 are 1.21, 0.06, and -0.79,  respectively. To effect a mental rotation about the x-axis, the control cells would have activations a = 1 and /3 = y = 0,  since these are the direction cosines of the x-axis, so that the resultant connection strength from unit 1 to unit 2 would be  (1 x 1.21) + (0 x 0.06) + (0 x -0.79) = 1.21. This is just the Ci connection itself, as we would expect. Alternatively, a  rotation about the diagonal axis in the positive octant of the Cartesian frame would require control activations a = J1= y =  1//3 yielding a net connection from unit 1 to unit 2 of strength (1//3 x 1.21) + (1/,/3 x 0.06) + (1/,/3 x -0.79) = 0.28. Note  the multiplicative action of the control cells and the additivity over the C;, Ci, and Ck connections; hence the term  "sigma-pi" to describe the units in the net.  FIG. 1. Connective weights modulated by three control units, A, B, and C. The small solid squares indicate presynaptic-like  multiplicative connections described in the text. Lines joining E'-17 units represent pairs of mutual connections. The i, j,  and k indices denote lines comprising the C;, Cj, and C,, connectivity matrices, respectively.  440 R. PATRICK GOEBEL  In general, suppose that as a result of some perceptual preprocessing of an image, we are given the direction cosines a, /l,  and y of the desired rotation axis. Such a process might utilize the principal axes or axes of symmetry of an image to locate  the desired rotation axis (Gonzalez and Wintz, 1987; Carlton and Shepard, 1990). If the A, B, and C control units are  activated in the ratios a y, the resultant connectivity matrix is given by  C= K(aCi + #C; + yCk)  where K is an arbitrary scale factor. (If we assume, as suggested earlier, that the pattern of activity over the control units  is normalized to unity, then K = 1.) The subsequent dynamics of the net would then yield the evolution  0(t+At)=exp[KAt(aC;+/3C;+yCk)] 0(t),  which represents an image transformation homomorphic to a rotation about axis n with constant angular velocity.  ENCODING THE TWITCH OPERATORS  Before the neural net can produce mental rotations, the connections between units must come to encode twitch operators. Such  an encoding may have taken place over the course of evolutionary history (Shephard, 1981, 1984; Carlton and Shepard, submitted  for publication), or it may be learned during individual development. Formally we say that the net must come to encode a basis  for a representation of the Lie algebra oo(3).  As an illustration, consider the encoding of a single twitch operator using the delta learning rule of McClelland and  Rumelhart (1985). To rotate an arbitrary image about the axis corresponding to the twitch operator, the net must be trained on  a set of "basis" images that span the image space. If the net is arrayed as a twodimensional "retina," perhaps with the  addition of retinal disparity cells to encode depth, one possible basis set of images consists of point spread gaussians  centered on each cell's receptive field. A less artificial basis would consist of real-world images drawn randomly from a set  of images embodying enough diversity to span the image space.  In any case, the learning procedure would be the same. Present the net with an image from the training (basis) set. Sample the  image over the net, thereby creating a finite-dimensional input vector  Determine the response of the net to the input  vector by transforming it through a small temporal parameter distance St via the exponential of the current connectivity  matrix, 0 =exp(bt C)0. Compute the target vector, T, by actually rotating the input image through a small angle and then  THE MATHEMATICS OF MENTAL ROTATIONS 441  sampling over the net. Compare the response vector 0 and the target vector T by subtraction to form the delta vector, D = T -  0. Update the connectivity matrix by a multiple of the outer product of the delta vector and the input vector: C -C + IDOT,  where rl is a learning rate parameter and OT is the transpose of the vector 0. Repeat the procedure with a newly selected  image until an error criterion is met.  Computer simulations based on the above algorithm produced smooth image rotations over a 15 x 15 retina without error through  a full 360 degrees. It has been suggested (Eloise Carlton, personal communication) that the N-dimensional representations of  o0(3) formed by such a learning algorithm might bear an interesting relationship to the irreducible representations of Ja(3)  (or Ju(2)) studied by mathematicians and theoretical physicists. Such a possibility is currently being investigated.  DISCUSSION  By exploiting the structure inherent in the set of rotations in 3-space, a simple linear connectionist network can perform  transformations on activation patterns which are homomorphic to real-world rotations. Rather than encode a separate map for  each combination of rotation axis and degree of rotation, the net embodies generators for infinitesimal rotations around three  linearly independent axes. Finite rotations about an arbitrary axis are then generated in real time by the natural dynamics of  the net operating under the influence of the appropriate linear combination of the three generators.  The present analysis can be contrasted with the use of Lie groups and Lie algebras proposed by Hoffman (1966, 1968, 1970,  1984) and Dodwell (1983) to characterize visual object perception. In their "Lie transformation group model of visual  perception," rotations (and translations) are represented as transformations of a two-dimensional visual cortical manifold  rather than the N-dimensional activation space of the neural network. The actions of group operators define families of  contours on the cortical manifold which are the orbits of the transformation group. For example, the orbits of the rotation  group in the plane are concentric circles. The authors note that such contours are invariant under the action of the group  operators and might therefore provide the basis for some form of object constancy. The authors suggest that more complex  invariant contours might be found among the orbits of higher-order prolongations of the infinitesimal generators of the basic  transformation group.  The present analysis utilizes the exponential relation between a Lie group and its Lie algebra of infinitesimal generators to  suggest how a network of simple processing units might dynamically transform an encoded image in a manner consistent with a  rotation of its corresponding real-world object. In contrast, group generators are used in Hofl'man and Dodwell's model to  define a family of invariant contours which can then be employed as a kind of filter to subtract from an image variations  442 R. PATRICK GOEBEL  due to spatial transformations. Though a deeper relation may exist between these two analyses, its elucidation must await  further deliberation.  It should be emphasized that the only function of the net described herein is to produce transformations that simulate  rotations. It cannot, for example, determine the direction cosines characterizing the desired axis of rotation. Following  Hinton (1981), it would be possible to design a net which, given a fixed input, would simultaneously perform the rotation and  settle into a "best" activation pattern over the A, B, and C control units in order to match a prototype stored in memory in  some canonical orientation.  For the sake of concreteness, it was decided to focus the exposition on the transformation of visual images; however, it is  clear that the mathematical analysis requires only that the activation space of the net support a representation of a basis  for j,(3). If activation patterns can code for frames of reference, as suggested by Hinton and Parsons (1981), then the net  will produce mental rotations on frames rather than images. Moreover, if i4(3) is extended to cover a product group  encompassing multi joined limb movement, then "mental rotations" might simulate limb trajectories generated when reaching for  a target. These possibilities are currently under investigation.  Finally, since translations and dilatations also form Lie groups, additional infinitesimal generators could be encoded to deal  with displacements and scale changes. As with rotations, the transformations would occur linearly in time, which is consistent  with data obtained from studies of visual imagery in humans (Kosslyn, 1980).  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  This work was supported by Grant APA 146 awarded to Bennet B. Murdock by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council  of Canada (NSERC) and by an NSERC Postgraduate Fellowship awarded to the author. I thank Ben Murdock, Eloise Carlton, Dave  Rumelhart, Roger Shepard, and Geoffrey Hinton for their helpful comments and suggestions while the manuscript was in  preparation. The manuscript was written while visiting the Department of Psychology at Stanford University under the auspices  of Roger Shepard and David Rumelhart.  REFERENCES  CARLTON, E. H. (1988). Connection between internal representation of rigid transformations and cortical activity paths.  Biological Cybernetics, 59, 219-429.  CARLTON, E. H., & SHEPARD, R. N. (1990). Psychologically simple motions as geodesic paths: I. Asymmetric objects, Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 34, 127-188.  CASSIRER, E. (1944). The concept of group and the theory of perception. Philosophical and Phenomenological Research, 5, 1-35  [Original French publication, 1938].  COHEN-TANNOUDat, C., DIu, B., & LALOE, F. (1977). Quantum mechanics. Toronto: Wiley.  COOPER, L. A. (1976). Demonstration of a mental analog of an external rotation. Perception and Psychophysics, 19, 296-302.  THE MATHEMATICS OF MENTAL ROTATIONS 443  COOPER, L. A., & SHEPARD, R. N. (1975). Mental transformations in the identification of left and right hands. Journal of  Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 104, 48-56. CORNWELL, J (1984). Group theory in physics. New  York/London: Academic Press.  CRAIK, K. (1943). The nature of explanation. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press.  DODWELL, P. C. (1983). The Lie transformation group model of visual perception. Perception and Psychophysics, 34, (1), 1-16.  FELDMAN, J. A. & BALLARD, D. H. (1982). Connectionist models and their properties. Cognitive Science, 6, 205-254.  FOSTER, D. H. (1975). Visual apparent motion of some preferred paths in the rotation group SO(3). Biological Cybernetics, 18,  81-89.  GONZALEZ, R. C., & WINTZ, P. (1987). Digital image processing (2nd ed.). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.  HINTON G. E., & PARSONS, L. M. (1981). Frames of reference and mental imagery. In J. Long & A. Badeley (Eds.), Attention and  performance IX, Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  HINTON, G. E. (1981). A parallel computation that assigns canonical object-based frames of reference. In Proceedings of the  seventh international joint conference of artificial intelligence, Vancouver, pp. 683-685.  HOFFMAN, W. C. (1966). The Lie algebra of visual perception. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 3, 65-98.  HOFFMAN, W. C. (1968). The neuron as a Lie group germ and a Lie product. Quarterly Journal of Applied Mathematics, 25, 423-441.  HOFFMAN, W. C. (1970). Higher visual perception as prolongations of the basic Lie transformation group. Mathematical  Biosciences, 6, 437-471.  HOFFMAN, W. C. (1984). Figural synthesis by vectorfields: Geometric neuropsychology. In P. C. Dodwell & T. M. Caelli (Eds.),  Figural synthesis. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  HOLLAND, J. H., HOLYOAK, K. J., NISBETT, R. E., & THAGARD, P. R. (1983). Induction: Processes of inference, learning, and  discover v. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  KOHONEN, T. (1984). Self-organization and associative memory (2nd ed.). Berlin/New York: SpringerVerlag.  KOSSLYN, S. (1980). Image and mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press.  MCCLELLAND, J., & RUMELHART, D. (1985). Distributed memory and the representation of general and specific information. Journal  of Experimental Psychology: General, 114 (2), 159-188.  MEL, B. W. (1989). MURPHY: A neural Iy-inspired connectionist approach to learning and performance in vision-based robot  motion planning. Technical Report CCSR-89-17A, Center for Complex Systems Research, Beckman Institute, University of Illinois.  METZLER, J., & SHEPARD, R. N. (1974). Transformational studies of the internal representation of threedimensional objects. In  R. Solso (Ed.), Theories of cognitive psychology: The Loyola symposium, pp. 147-201. Potomac, MD: Erlbaum.  PIAGET, J. (1952). The origins of intelligence in children. New York: International Universities Press. RUMELHART, D. E.,  HINTON, G. E., & MCCLELLAND, J. L. (1986). A general framework for parallel distributed processing. In D. E. Rumelhart & J. L.  McClelland (Eds.), Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition (Vol. 1, pp. 45-76).  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. RUMELHART, D. E., & NORMAN, D. A. (1988). Representation in memory. In R. Atkinson, R. Herrnstein,  G. Lindzey, & R. D. Luce (Eds.), Steven's handbook of experimental psychology (2nd ed., Vol. 2, pp. 511-588). New York: Wiley.  RUMELHART, D. E., SMOLENSKY, P., MCCLELLAND, J. L. & HINTON, G. E. (1986). Schemata and sequential thought processes in PDP  models. In D. E. Rumelhart & J. L. McClelland (Eds.), Parallel distributed processing: explorations in the microstructure of  cognition (Vol. 2, pp. 7-57). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  SAGLE, A. A., & WALDE, R. E. (1973). Introduction to Lie groups and Lie algebras. New York: Academic Press.  SCHUTZ, B. F. (1980). Geometrical methods of mathematical physics. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.  444 R. PATRICK GOEBEL  SHEPARD, R. N. (1981). Psychophysical complimentarity. In M. Kubovy and J. Pomerantz (Eds. ), Perceptual organization (pp.  279-341). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  SHEPARD, R. N. (1984). Ecological constraints on internal representations: Resonant kinematics of perceiving, imagining,  thinking and dreaming. Psychological Review, 91 (4), 417-447.  SHEPARD, R. N. (1988). The role of transformations in spatial cognition. In J. Stile-Davis, M. Kritchevsdy & U. Bellugi  (Eds.), Spatial cognition: Brain bases and development (pp. 81-110). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  SHEPARD, R. N. & METZLER, J. (1981). Mental rotations of three dimensional objects. Science, 171, 701-703.  RECEIVED: December 6, 1988