10.1016/0022-2496(90)90006-u
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 34, 246-249 (1990)  Book Review  The Development of New Foundations for Decision Making  PETER C. FISHBURN. Nonlinear Preference and Utility Theory. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1988. Pp. xii + 259,  $47.50.  Reviewed by PETER H. FARQUHAR  Peter Fishburn is a member of the Mathematical Studies Department of AT&T Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, N. J. He obtained  his Ph. D. from Case Western Institute of Technology in 1962, and has previously been a Research Professor of Management  Science at Pennsylvania State University and a Visiting Scientist at the Institute of Advanced Study, Princeton. He has  published extensively in the area of discrete and combinatorial mathematics, including measurement, preference, utility, and  voting. His most recent book, with I. LaValle, is Choice under Uncertainty, 1989 (J. C. Baltzer AG Scientific Publishing Co.).  The reviewer, Peter H. Farquhar, is an Associate Professor of Industrial Administration, and the Director of the Center for  Product Research, in the Graduate School of Industrial Administration at Carnegie Mellon University. His research interests  include multiattribute utility theory, human and machine learning, and discrete choice theory. His recent publications include  work on utility assessment methods and applications of utility theory in artificial intelligence research. 1( 1990 Academic  Press, Inc.  On a recent flight from Chicago to Los Angeles, I was engrossed in Peter Fishburn's new book, "Nonlinear Preference and  Utility Theory." I had read the book some time earlier, but was studying it again to prepare this review. After finishing  several magazines, the passenger sitting next to me glanced at the book and commented, "It seems like heavy reading for an  airplane flight."  The ensuing discussion was longer than either of us anticipated. Drawing on material from the first chapter of the book, I  retraced the history of utility theory from Bernoulli and Cramer in the early 1700s to von Neumann and Morgenstern in the  1940s. I continued for several minutes describing the great excitement today among researchers working in utility theory as I  pointed to other chapters in the book. My fellow passenger was delighted by the story, but was also pleased when a flight  attendant arrived with more magazines.  The new book "Nonlinear Preference and Utility Theory" captures much of the excitement of current research in utility theory.  The book was written in conjunction with the Mathematical Sciences Lecture Series that Peter Fishburn presented at Johns  Hopkins University in the summer of 1986. The book is a very readable account of the background and issues motivating research  in utility theory. Three central questions guide the exposition: (1) What is expected utility theory?  0022-2496/90 $3.00  Copyright 2'. 1990 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  246  BOOK REVIEW 247  (2) What is wrong with it from a rational perspective? and (3) What has been proposed to correct the problems?  Chapter 1 begins with a crisp review of the history of utility theory. The chapter then covers the axioms and fundamental  results of von Neumann-Morgenstern utility theory. The chapter concludes with a brief description of research on risk  attitudes, multiattribute utility, and other extensions. This chapter is an excellent introduction to utility theory for  students and researchers alike.  Chapter 2 is a balanced critique of expected utility theory from an economic and a psychological perspective. The chapter  opens by examining the distinction between normative and descriptive theory. On one extreme, Bernoulli sees no difference  between the two; at the other end, Tversky and Kahneman (1986) argue that "no theory of choice can be both normatively  adequate and descriptively accurate." The author carefully plots his own course between these extremes.  This chapter covers the psychological literature on framing effects, evaluation in terms of gains and losses versus levels of  wealth, the transformation of subjective probabilities, and especially the evidence on violations of the independence axiom.  The author concludes, "Some people stand by the independence axiom, but many theorists no longer accept its normative  inviolability and have replaced it with weaker conditions."  The discussion on preference cycles, money pumps, and the preference reversal phenomenon is most thought provoking. Fishburn  states, "My own view that transitivity can no longer be regarded as a tenet of the normative creed is presently a minority  position." As a result of this powerful statement, I needed to put the book aside to reflect on the rationality of  intransitive choice. For instance, Bar-Hillel and Margalit (1988) and Cowan and Fishburn (1988) describe how "rational  reflective decision makers in transparent contexts could make intransitive choices. Loonies, Starmer, and Sugden (1989) report  evidence, from experiments involving only choices, that reveals predictable violations of transitivity. Each reader must now  take a position on this "tenet of the normative creed" as the debate heats up around transitivity. Fishburn's book helps in  understanding this and other normative issues in decision making.  Chapter 3 explores the generalizations of expected utility. The scattering of results across different journals, conference  proceedings, working papers, doctoral theses, and unpublished technical reports is a major obstacle in locating recent  research. Even if one can find these materials, the marked differences in notation and assumptions make comparisons difficult.  Chapter 3 does a fine job of organizing this research into a coherent system and providing a common language for explaining  Chapter 3 summarizes alternatives to expected utility in four categories. The first category of research includes  generalizations of the von Neumann-Morgenstern theory made in the 1960s that preserve linearity and transitivity of strict  preference, but weaken some of the ordering assumptions. Unlike those in subsequent categories, these theories do not  accommodate violations of the independence axiom.  248  BOOK REVIEW  The second category includes Allais's nonlinear intensity theory, Machina's smooth preferences, and the decumulative  representations by Quiggin, Yaari, and others. The third category considers the weighted utility theory introduced by Chew and  MacCrimmon and refined by Chew, Fishburn, Nakamura, Dekel, and others. The fourth category covers nonlinear, nontransitive  theory on skew-symmetric bilinear (SSB) representations by Kreweras, Fishburn, and others. This chapter carefully compares the  axioms used in constructing each nonlinear theory. Two sections explain how these theories handle various violations of  independence and transitivity.  Chapter 4 provides an in-depth treatment of the SSB utility theory. This chapter integrates and explains the many results  obtained by Fishburn and others in the last few years. Chapter 5 adds transitivity to the SSB axioms and explores various ways  of generating the weighted linear utility representation. Chapter 6 examines how the results on SSB utility and weighted  linear utility can be applied to problems in cyclic preferences, social choice theory, noncooperative game theory, multiple  attributes, mean value, and risk attitudes. The list is still growing; this chapter suggests many paths for further research.  The first six chapters of "Nonlinear Preference and Utility Theory" cover decision making under risk (i.e., when the various  outcomes occur with known probabilities); the remaining three chapters consider decision making under uncertainty (i.e., when  the various outcomes are tied to uncertain events whose probabilities are not known). Chapter 7 reviews Savage's additive  expected utility theory, its antecedents, and related developments. Chapter 8 provides a short critique of this theory to  motivate recent generalizations that fall into eight categories. This chapter describes contributions on expected regret  theory by Bell and by Loomes and Sugden, on skew-symmetric additive (SSA) theory by Fishburn, on additive SSB theory by  Fishburn and LaValle, on dual bilinear utility representations by Luce and Narens, and on various nonadditive linear theories  by Schmeidler, Gilboa, Wakker, and others. Chapter 9 focuses on extending the SSA and additive SSB theories to additive  nontransitive nonlinear representations.  The Preface notes that Chapters 1, 2, 3, 7, and 8 form a "book within a book." This "basic book" offers a broad perspective on  contemporary and classical research in utility theory. Fishburn's explanations and commentaries provide important insights for  fitting the pieces of contemporary research together. The "second book," consisting of Chapters 4, 5, 6, and 9, integrates  contributions made primarily by Fishburn into one convenient volume.  Peter Fishburn's book "Nonlinear Preference and Utility Theory" is essential reading for anyone interested in the rapidly  expanding field of utility theory. You can either obtain your own copy or sit next to me on a future flight.  BOOK REVIEW  249  REFERENCES  BAR-HILLEL, M., & MARGALIT, A. (1988). How vicious are cycles of intransitive choice? Theory and Decision, 24, 119-145.  COWAN, T. A., & FISHBURN, P. C. (1988). Foundations of preference. In G. Eberlein & H. Berghel (Eds. ), Essays in Honor of  Werner Leinfellner, pp. 261-271. Dordrecht: Reidel.  LooMES, G., STARMER, C., & SUDDEN, R. (1989). Preference reversal: Information processing effect or rational nontransitive  choice? Economic Journal, 99 (Conference 1989), 144-151.  TVERSKY, A., & KAHNEMAN, D. (1986). Rational choice and the framing of decisions. In R. M. Hogarth & M. W. Reder (Eds.),  Rational Choice, pp. 67-94. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.