10.1016/0022-2496(90)90010-7
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 34, 2-41 (1990)  Modeling Imageless Thought: The Relative Judgment Theory of Numerical Comparisons  STEPHEN LINK  McMaster University  The mental process of comparing numbers is shown to follow the principles of Relative Judgment Theory. Martingale predictions  of the theory are confirmed in an extensive study of numerical comparisons using the Method of Symmetric Differences. The  theory is then used as a tool to reveal the Psychonumeric Function relating psychological difference to numerical difference.  This function transforms a difference between numbers into a sextal valued (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5) number with zero as a unit  psychonumeric value. The Psychonumeric Function combined with the theory's prediction of response times gives a close account  of the numerical comparison Chronometric Function. (G- 1990 Academic Press, Inc.  INTRODUCTION  For many early experimental psychologists introspection seemed as natural a method for viewing mental phenomena as looking  toward the heavens seemed an obvious means of viewing the stars. The author of the first English book on the new psychology,  Sully (1884), described introspection as a method for directing  our attention to what is going on in our mind at the time of its occurrence, or afterwards. We have the power of turning the  attention inwards on the phenomenon of the mind. Thus I can attend to a particular feeling say, admiration for a beautiful  object, in order to see what its nature is, of what elementary parts it consists, how it is affected by the circumstances of  the moment, and so on.  Later critics, however, were quick to seize upon examples of mental processes that defied introspective analysis; in  particular Ach (1905) who used the mental addition or subtraction of digits in studies of "imageless thought" (Boring, 1957;  Woodworth, 1915, 1938). Another form of imageless thought that may precede the operation of mental arithmetic ( Groen, 1967;  Restle, 1970), is the mental comparison of numbers. The number three is easily judged to be smaller than seven, but no amount  of searching the mind illuminates the mechanism, or elements of mind, that give rise to the judgment. The failure of  introspective analysis to shed light on imageless thought proved to be a pitfall for introspectionism, but a positive  increment in the drift of experimental psychology toward a more behavioristic ideology. Meanwhile, the mechanism for imageless  thought lost theoretical significance, as behavior, rather than mind, became the newer psychology's principal interest.  Reprint requests should be addressed to Dr. Stephen Link, McMaster University Hamilton, Ontario, Canada L8S 4K1. This research  is supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada.  0022-2496/90 $3.00  Copyright t 1990 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  2  MODELING IMAGELESS THOUGHT 3  Today, the use of behavioral measurements combined with mathematical models of thought processes permits deeper analysis of  psychological mechanisms than those afforded by either behaviorism or introspective analysis. These powerful "approches  nouvelles" lead toward greater understanding of the mechanisms of thought and, in this paper, provide a description of a  mental mechanism engaged to form a comparative judgment about numbers.  Because human judgments of quantity are inexact and variable the use of numbers is a practical everyday necessity. The  precision we attribute to these numbers leads us to believe that our mental comparison of numbers is equally precise. We know  that seven is larger than three and certainty smaller than nine. Thus it comes as a surprise to discover, as did Moyer and  Landauer (1967), that such mental judgments are prone to systematic error and that the time required to judge whether one  number is larger than another depends upon the size of the difference between them.  Results from other paired comparison studies of digits (Sekuler, Robin, & Armstrong, 1971; Moyer & Landauer, 1973; Buckley &  Gillman, 1974) demonstrated that as the difference between digits increased, the response time and/or the probability of  responding in error decreased; although a frequently encountered finding was that the number 1 produced a peculiar result and  seemed to be treated in a fashion different from that for other digits. In some experiments response errors were somehow  ignored, and not reported, on the presumption that errors represent only random effects rather than a consequence of the  comparison process itself (cf. Sekuler et al., 1971). However, an exceptional experiment investigating comparisons of  two-digit numbers, by Hinrichs, Yurko, and Hu (1981), and a subsequent experiment on multidigit number comparison (Hinrichs,  Berie, & Mosell, 1982) did summarize error probabilities as a function of the difference (An) between a fixed standard and a  variable comparison. Their results replicate the decline in the probability of an error, as do deviates from zero, first shown  by Moyer and Landauer (1967). In a comprehensive doctoral dissertation' on the application of Relative Judgment Theory to  digit comparisons, Foltz (1982) found the theory to yield a close account of results from three experiments. These remarkably  complete reports of experimental results provided a starting point for the experimental studies reported here.  CORROBORATIVE INVESTIGATIONS: EXPERIMENTS 1 AND 2  The phenomena of numerical comparisons are illustrated by a serial paired comparison experiment' using two-digit numbers  ranging from 11 to 99. The experimental procedure required each of four university students to compare a  ' Dr. Stephen Poltrock supervised Dr. Foltz's dissertation.  Z Miss Karen Rankin (1984) performed Experiments 1 and 2 as part of a B.Sc. thesis project directed by the author in his  laboratory and assisted by Mr. Bodo Bilazewski.  4 STEPHEN LINK  randomly selected, visually displayed number, such as 37, against the previously presented number, say 85. In order to begin a  self-paced trial and display a comparison number on a computer controlled X-Y display screen, a subject used the index fingers  of each hand to depress and then release together two choice response keys. The subject depressed a response key labelled  "SMALLER" to indicate that 37 was smaller than 85, or "LARGER" to indicate that 37 was (erroneously) thought to be larger than  85. The response terminated the visual display and stopped a clock which measured response times to an accuracy of 1 msec. No  feedback was given. The reported response times are the durations from the first display of the comparison stimulus to the  moment a response occurred. Subjects were seated 1 m from the X-Y display screen (Tektronix 602, white on black display, P4  phosphor). Single digits were 2 cm high and 1 cm wide.  Each subject participated in five consecutive daily sessions containing three blocks separated by 5-min rest periods. Each  block began with a standard of 55 followed by 18 practice numbers (each digit presented in the tens and units position twice),  followed without pause by four randomizations of 88 different stimuli. Thus, three blocks yielded 1056 experimental trials.  The first two sessions familiarized the subject with the task and do not enter into the analysis of data. The remaining three  sessions contributed 1056 experimental trials each day for each of four subjects for a total of 12,672 trials. This Serial  Method of Paired Comparisons provides for a broad range of differences between the comparison stimulus and standard to be  obtained without using the 7,744 trials per subject required for a complete paired comparison design.  Shown in Fig. 1 are mean response times (correct and error responses included) as a function of An, the difference between the  comparison and variable standard. This function, which was defined previously as the Chronometric Function (Link, 1984), shows  clearly that response time declines dramatically as the difference between numbers increases.  Shown in Fig. 2 are the proportions of error responses for the Serial Method of Paired Comparisons. These proportions are  computed for half-decade intervals of do ranging from -88 to 88. As the value of do increases from -88 the proportion of  "Larger" responses also continually increases. "Larger" responses to stimuli smaller than the standard are error responses. As  do increases beyond zero the proportion of "Smaller" responses, errors in judging a larger comparison to be smaller, steadily  decreases. The proportion of errors is greatest near do = 0. The error proportion is surprisingly large for numbers quite near  each other. When the numbers differ by 1 to 4, the proportion of errors is 0.14. When the numbers differ by 5 to 9 the  proportion of errors is 0.08 and when they differ by 10 to 14 the proportion declines to 0.056.  For purposes of comparison, a second study using the same apparatus as in Experiment 1 employed the Method of Constant  Stimuli. The numbers 11-99, exclusive of 55, were randomly permuted and then serially presented to subjects, who again  self-paced the visual, response-terminated presentations. In contrast to Experiment 1, these subjects maintained in memory a  fixed standard of 55. Five  MODELING IMAGELESS THOUGHT $  620 - 600 - 580 - 560 - V 540 - O  E  520 - 500 -  F  w 480 - 0 460 -{ 440  420 ^ 400 380 360 340 RANKIN DATA(1985) 320  -82 -62 -42 -22 -7 7 22 42 62 82  v  CHRONOMETRIC FUNCTIONS CONSTANT STIMULI AND SERIAL COMPARISONS  VALUES OF 0n  CONSTANT STIMULI O SERIAL COMPARISONS  FIG. 1. Mean response time as a function of the difference between comparison and standard  numbers for two numerical comparison experiments.  PSYCHOMETRIC ERROR FUNCTIONS  CONSTANT STIMULI AND SERIAL COMPARISONS  0.30 0.28 - 0.26 - 0.24 ^ 0.22  71  0 0.20 K  0.78 ^  0 0.16 -  O0 0.14 - 0 0.12 ^ a  0.10  a  0.08 - 0.06 0.04 0.02 0.00  VALUES OF ,An  o CONSTANT STIMULI o SERIAL COMPARISONS  FIG. 2. The proportion of errors as a function of dn.  6 STEPHEN LINK  university students engaged in five consecutive daily sessions. A session of 1320 experimental trials contained three blocks,  each consisting of 18 practice trials (each digit presented in the units and tens positions twice) followed, without pause, by  trials formed from five randomized sequences of the 88 numbers. Again, two response keys were used, one key indicating a  "Larger" and the other a "Smaller" judgment. The comparison number remained visible until a response occurred. The first three  sessions and all practice trials were used as familiarization trials and were excluded from this analysis.  The mean response times for this experiment (shown in Fig. 1) and the proportion of errors (in Fig. 2) support and extend the  findings of Hinrichs, Yurko, and Hu (1981) and demonstrate how mean response time and the relative frequency of an error  decline as do diverges from zero. Although the range of do is considerably smaller in this experiment than that afforded by  the Method of Serial Paired Comparisons, the decline in response time and error rate as do deviates from zero is substantial.  Results from both experiments appear to be in keeping with predictions of the Relative Judgment Theory of the Psychometric  Function (Link, 1975; Link, 1978a). The simplest of many predicted empirical laws, relating Chronometric and Psychometric  (Urban, 1908) Functions, tested this hypothesis. In the case of data produced by the Method of Constant Stimuli (Experiment  2), good support for the theory of comparisons was obtained. The data from the Method of Serial Paired Comparisons (Experiment  1) yielded a decidedly poor fit of the data to predicted empirical relations.  Further analysis of data from Experiment 1 produced a familiar finding (Sekuler et al., 1971; Link, 1984) shown in Fig. 3. The  figure shows that for responses conditioned on the decade of the standard, the mean response time for "Smaller" responses is  greater than for "Larger" responses when the decade of the standard is less than fifty. This relation reverses as the decade  of the standard increases beyond fifty.  Response proportions, also presented in Fig. 3, show a marked change as a function of the decade of the standard. The  proportion of "Larger" responses steadily decreases as the decade of the standard increases to 90 from 10. Naturally, when the  standard is small there is a high probability that the comparison will be larger than the standard. Thus the most prevalent  correct response is "Larger." When the standard is large there is a high probability that comparison stimuli are smaller,  resulting in a smaller number of "Larger" responses. The linear decline in the probability of a "Larger" response, as the  decade of the standard increases, is a feature of the paired comparison design.  This experimental design ensures that the a priori probability of a standard in the 10's decade being followed by a larger  comparison stimulus is 727/755, or nearly 1.0. A subject can perceive, from experience with previous trials, that a small  standard is likely to be followed by a larger comparison. When this bias is taken into account, a much better fit of the data  to the predictions of this theory are obtained, not only in this case, but also in results reported by Poltrock (1989).  MODELING IMAGELESS THOUGHT  u w  N E w s  F w  0 a s  SERIAL PAIRED NUMERICAL COMPARISONS MEAN RT AND PrLARGER" RESPONSE }  T 10  20  i  70 BO  90  DECADE OF THE STANDARD  O PRl"LARGER"1 G LARGER RTS V SMALLER RTS  FIG. 3. Mean response times for "Larger" and for "Smaller" responses and the proportion of "Larger" responses (scaled on the  righthand ordinate).  Yet methodological problems inherent in the Method of Paired Comparisons are particularly evident in this study of numerical  differences. The first problem derives from the influence of the size of a standard on response bias. The amount of response  bias may remain constant for a fixed standard, but each comparison against the fixed standard produces a different value of  dn. In the most extreme cases, at the two off-diagonal corners of the design matrix, exist the maximum values for dn. These  allow for the maximum influence of standard-induced response bias and, of all the dn's, produce the smallest number of  observations. At these extremes, estimates of effects due to do become particularly difficult to interpret because extreme  values of do and response bias jointly influence performance. For some theories, separating these confounded effects of  response bias and do is difficult. For experiments which investigate these theories, simultaneous stimulus presentation  thwarts the analysis of these confounded effects.  The influence of such confounding on response times is quite evident. In particular, when response times for the "Larger" and  "Smaller" responses are viewed as a function of the magnitude of the standard, as shown in Fig. 3, the response time is fast  whenever the response proportion is large. When the standard is within the 10's decade the most likely response is "Larger,"  because most comparison stimuli are, in fact, larger than the standard. Bias toward a "Larger" response reduces the mean  response time, as might be expected. However, response time is  STEPHEN LINK  also affected by dn. For "Larger" comparisons the average do is greatest when the standard is in the 10's decade but  continually diminishes as the decade of the standard increases. As do increases response time decreases, as shown in Fig 1.  Thus, two influences on response time both suggest a decrease in "Larger" response time as the decade of the standard  decreases. How can these influences be successfully measured using a paired comparison design that confounds them?  The effect of these two factors on response time is evident in Fig. 4. Here, twodigit stimuli are grouped with respect to  decade values. This perspective view of the mean response time surface for the Method of Serial Paired Comparisons shows how  response time declines as the magnitude of do increases. Comparisons within decades, which correspond to the small dn's  occurring on the major diagonal, require greater response time than comparisons between decades. Even within decades, however,  the shortest response times occur when the standard is extreme, in the 10's or 90's decade. The fastest response times also  occur for these standards when they are combined with comparisons at the opposite extremes of 90 (408 msec) or 10 (388 msec),  respectively. Note that response time is a maximum (610 msec) for comparisons within the 50's decade. Comparisons within the  10's and 90's decades require equal times of 514 msec. A quite noteworthy feature of this image is the symmetry of these mean  response times with respect to the major diagonal.  The second methodological problem is that response bias and numerical difference both influence response probability. Thus, in  the case of a standard stimulus in the 10's decade, both a bias toward responding "Larger" and the large average value for do  combine to produce an exceptionally high probability of a correct response when a larger comparison stimulus is presented. The  probability of a  PA IRCD COMPARl.5 ON MEA N Rf SP ON.SP I%L9L  EFFECTS OF lUUMERICAL DlF~ERENCE AND VALUE OF THE 57A&D,A,YD  FIG. 4. Mean response time as a joint function of the decades of the standard and comparison numbers (from Experiment 1).  MODELING IMAGELESS THOUGHT 9  correct "Smaller" response is diminished for the few smaller comparison stimuli. Consequently, Psychometric or Chronometric  Functions derived from the Method of Paired Comparisons require a correction for response bias in order to measure the  unperturbed effect of stimulus difference. Third, with respect to a theory such as Relative Judgment Theory, a paired  comparison design renders the estimation of parameters particularly difficult, due to the confounding of response bias and dn.  More specifically, parameters are estimated easily when there are two stimulus conditions producing equal but opposite  effects, such as comparing the numbers 70 to 30 or 30 to 70. However, for a paired comparison design matrix, such pairs have  different standards and, therefore, potentially different response biases that invalidate the assumption of a fixed bias that  leads to a simple method of obtaining parameter estimates. Within the middle of a paired comparison matrix it is possible to  compare, say, 51 or 57 to a fixed standard of 54 in a manner consistent with the assumption of equal but opposite effects and  fixed response bias. Yet, in this range the influence of response bias may be small anyway, and, as the standard diverges  increasingly from the median value of 55, this method becomes less useful as the possible number of such comparisons dwindles  to zero.  NUMERICAL REPRESENTATIONS  Much previous analysis of the process of numerical comparison assumes that the standard and comparison numbers are transformed  into an analog quantity (e.g., Moyer & Landauer, 1967). A more specific translation specifies that numbers are represented  logarithmically (Buckley & Gillman, 1974). As Shepard, Kilpatric, and Cunningham (1975) also argued:  ... it is not unreasonable to suppose that the psychological spacing of numbers is essentially logarithmic in view of (a) the  observation that the recovered separation between adjacent numbers was generally greater for small than for large numbers in  the present Figs. 13-16, (b) the prevalence of the Weber-Fechner effect for magnitude continua of all sorts, and (c) Moyer and  Landauer's (1967) finding that reaction times were more closely related to ratios than to differences between numbers.  The assumption that Weber's Law applies to numbers leads to the further assumption that Fechner's Law also applies. It is  Fechner's Law which yields a logarithmic representation for numbers. If Weber's Law does not apply, then the resulting  logarithmic assumption is called into question.  When it comes to judgments of numerical difference the evidence in support of the logarithmic assumption is slim indeed. For  example, the results of Shepard et al. (1975) are based on similarity judgments, not judgments of difference. Buckley and  Gillman (1974) claimed support for the assumption that mean response time for digit comparisons is a linear function of the  reciprocal of the difference between logarithmically transformed numerical values. The support weakens, however, when their  methodology is reviewed in detail. First, the data derive from digit comparisons that were forced to be error free by  re-running all error trials until a  10 STEPHEN LINK  correct response occurred. Second, the two digits, d, and d2, were presented side by side and the correct times to (d,, d2)  and (d2, d,) were averaged, thus obscuring, but not eliminating, effects due to digit position. Third, the mean response times  were ordered and the ordinal values, not actual values, were analyzed by a multidimensional scaling program, MD-SCAL, which  recovered a two-dimensional stimulus representation.  Looking to Wald's (1947) sequential analysis model to account for their forcedcorrect response times, Buckley and Gillman  presumably computed mean response times based on the general prediction from bounded random walk theory that the mean response  time to a stimulus (that is, correct and error times included) equals the average distance travelled by the walk divided by  the rate of drift. By defining the bounds of the random walk space to be equally distant from the starting position (which  expresses the idea of unbiased responding), by assuming that the walk travelled only toward the correct response threshold (so  there were no errors), and by assuming that the rate of drift equalled the difference between logarithms of d, and d2 they  generated several sets of mean response times for various values of the random walk boundaries (response thresholds). They  then analyzed these means using the MD-SCAL program. For certain boundary positions the recovered stimulus representation was  two-dimensional and appeared to be similar to that obtained from the ordinal data. On this basis the authors conclude that the  logarithmic assumption is supported by the data.  There is a disturbing gap between the theory advanced by Wald and the application of it to numerical comparisons suggested by  Buckley and Gillman. Most troubling is the fact that no predictions based on the theory are tested with the data. Also  troubling is the idea that removing errors produces data in better correspondence with the theory. Major predictions from  random walk theories concern errors. By specifically deleting them the theory is stripped of its distinctive predictions. The  authors do comment that "Error rate was less than 3 % and was positively correlated with correct time (r =.68, p <.001); there  were too few errors for more systematic analysis."  If anything this observation concurs with the more general psychophysical literature on comparative judgment. Apparently, the  authors omitted error responses that provide support for some kind of random walk theory. For such theories, as the difference  between stimuli decreases the rate of drift decreases and error rate increases. As the difference between stimuli decreases  the rate of drift decreases and the mean response time increases, thereby producing a positive correlation between error rate  and mean response time. But Wald's theory, in particular, predicts that error and correct times, conditioned on the response  made, must be equal. This prediction is seldom observed in either choice or discrimination response times, and probably not in  the Buckley and Gillman experiment.  Producing a random walk theory of comparative judgment that avoided this awkward prediction was one reason the author  introduced a new random walk theory in 1972/73 that appeared in publication in 1975 (Link & Heath, 1975; Link, 1975). The  sequential theory adopted by Buckley and Gillman attempted to apply these  MODELING IMAGELESS THOUGHT I I  random walk ideas, but without a clear understanding of the relationship between theory and data. By artificially restricting  the results only to correct performance, the error data needed to show that the theory requires a logarithmic transformation  of numerical value to account correctly for errors are lost. As far as the mean response times are concerned, even a linear  transformation might do equally well (Link, 1978a).  Weber's Law predicts that discriminability declines for a fixed do but increasing values of the standard. From numerous  psychophysical studies where Weber's Law does hold (Luce, 1986; Welford, 1980), response time, for fixed An, is expected to  increase as values of the standard increase. This does not occur in Experiment 1. Instead, the mean response time for  comparisons within the 10's decade, which are based on small values of An, equals 514 msec. The mean response time for  comparisons within the 90's decade, which are also based on small An, also equals 514 msec. Further analysis of the serial  paired comparison experiment reported above shows no tendency for mean response time to increase for a fixed do = 1 as the  magnitude of the numbers being compared increases. In fact, as seen in Fig. 4, the mean response times for small dn's, which  correspond to the within-decade comparisons shown on the major diagonal, decrease as the value of the standard deviates in  either direction from its mid-range-a result consistent with the effect of response bias. Thus, the assumption that Weber's  Law applies to numerical comparisons receives no support from these studies.  Similar conclusions might be drawn from previous paired comparison studies were it not for the undesirable amalgamation of  response times across the main diagonal of the paired comparison design matrix. This method of averaging data combines  response times for pairs such as (1, 9) and (9, 1), thereby obscuring the influence of the standard. In yet other studies the  two numbers were presented simultaneously, thereby successfully removing the possibility of ever determining whether one  stimulus acted as a standard that promoted response bias, and another as the comparison.  None of these various results provides support for the assumption that Weber's Law applies to the comparison of numbers.  Furthermore, the often observed decline in response time as a function of stimulus difference, that is, the Chronometric  Function, is easily accounted for by the assumption of a linear transformation of stimulus difference, even in psychophysical  studies (Link, 1975, 1978a). Thus the decline in response time as a function of numerical difference does not require the  assumption of a logarithmic transformation for a successful account of the Chronometric Function.  Some researchers suppose that the representation of number is invariant across different tasks. Others, such as Banks and  Coleman (1981), suppose the scale of numbers depends upon the task. Weissmann, Hollingsworth and Baird (1975) imply "that  numbers are processed in the same manner as other physical attributes and, consequently, can be catalogued according to  measures such as difference limen, d', and information transmitted" (Baird, 1975). Baird (1975) postulates that "`all continua  are transformed by characteristic combinations of base systems  12 STEPHEN LINK  operating in the manner described for numbers' (Noma & Baird, 1975)." But Noma and Baird (1975), investigating digit, base,  and quarter models of the generation of numbers greater than an experimenter-defined lower bound, conclude that "a combination  of models seems necessary to adequately predict number generation," and presumably number representation, as well. Thus, many  assumptions are made concerning the form of a transformation of a number into an internal representation used in a numerical  comparison task, but there is still substantial uncertainty regarding what that transformation may be, and whether a single  transformation applies to all numerical tasks.  Furthermore, studies of numerical comparisons have yet to establish that whatever transformation does occur is based upon the  individual numbers rather than the difference between them. The importance of obtaining an internal representation for  individual stimuli derives from the belief, commonly held among psychophysicists, that a comparative difference is derived  from the internal representations of individual stimuli. In the case of numerical comparisons, there is no evidence to show  this to be the case. The difference between numbers may be determined first, then the comparison process acts on the  transformed difference.  These various considerations directed the present investigation toward a less restrictive assumption-that for a fixed standard  the effect of a positive discrepancy is equal but opposite to the effect of a negative discrepancy of equal absolute value. No  assumption is made about the nature of the numerical representation. If the theory accounts for results obtained under this  weak assumption, then the way in which performance changes, as a function of the magnitude of the discrepancy, can be explored.  The study of comparative judgments based on equal but opposite stimulus differences is facilitated by a new experimental  design called the Method of Symmetric Differences. This design removes the confounding of response bias and stimulus  difference and gives a stringent test for the theory that describes how these judgments are made. Before this design is  introduced, the theory and its implications are presented.  THE THEORY OF RELATIVE JUDGMENT  Relative Judgment Theory (RJT) describes a sequential sampling model of the sensory and psychological processes used to form  mental judgments. The theory postulates that a comparison stimulus, S, is transformed into a waveform having an amplitude at  time t, s,(t), which is compared against an internal psychophysical referent represented by another waveform, s,(t). In the  case of numerical comparisons the standard, Nis transformed into a waveform n,(t). The comparison number, Nis transformed  into another waveform n,(t). The comparison between N, and N, must produce a waveform dn(t) that contains information about  the difference between N, and N,. These waveforms characterize the electrical signals representing the stimuli and their  difference.  MODELING IMAGELESS THOUGHT 13  For comparisons between numbers the information in dn(t) is extracted by a mental algorithm, @, which operates on dn(t) to  produce a comparative value. These values, @[dn(t)], are accumulated over time during a trial either until enough positive  values produce an accumulated total equal to, or larger than, the response threshold for a "Larger" response, R,, or until  sufficient negative values accrue to produce a "Smaller" response, RS. The process of accumulation is illustrated in Fig. 5,  where the starting position of an accumulation of comparisons is labelled C and the two possible terminal values are labelled  A and -A. During each unit of time a new value of the waveform dn(t) is sampled and the value of @[dn(t)] is added to  previously accumulated values. Note that these values are variable; thus the sum performs a random walk, with drift, toward  thresholds, A or -A, and produces stochastic paths such as the one illustrated.  The values of A, -A, and C are assumed to remain constant during an experimental trial. Across trials these values may change  to meet experimenterimposed task demands. The value of A can be reduced to meet response time deadline restrictions. For  smaller values of A, the subject emits faster responses and is more responsive than for larger values of A. Thus, the  reciprocal of A is an index of responsiveness.  For the purpose of discussion and derivation the standard, N,, is assumed to be a fixed number such as 55, while the  comparison, Nc, varies. Many experimental results are conditioned upon a given value for the standard, in accordance with this  assumption. For results averaged across standards the expected value calculations treat the standard as a variable quantity  without doing any injustice to theoretical derivations.  TWO-THRESHOLD RANDOM WALK MODEL  ACCUMULATED C COMPARATIVE DIFFERENCE  RESPOND R L  RESPOND RS  TIME  FIG. 5. A stochastic path shown to absorb at the value A after a number of accruals of comparative difference.  14 STEPHEN LINK  Obvious qualitative predictions derive from this theory. For example, when the physical difference between a comparison  stimulus and standard is positive, the expected value of E@[dn(t) I Nc, N,] should be positive. For the present purposes, the  mental algorithm, @, is assumed to generate a constant expected value for the duration of the judgment process. This provides  that for any value of t, the mean or expected value, E@[dn(t)I N,, NJ equals M. This is the rate at which the sum of  differences drifts toward the "Larger" response threshold positioned at the value A. Thus, large values of M lead to quick  termination at the response threshold, while smaller values result in longer termination times. The termination time for  reaching the response threshold is the decision time and forms the component of response time that is of major interest,  A second qualitative feature depends upon the effect of an initial predisposition toward one response at the expense of the  other. This predisposition is measured by the amount of response bias, C. When the bias assumes a positive value, representing  a predisposition to favor the response "Larger," a shorter time will be needed to reach the "Larger" response threshold than  when there is no response bias at all and the value of C equals zero. When the response bias is negative, the response  "Smaller" is favored and the time required to reach the "Larger" response threshold will increase beyond the time required  when the response bias is zero. Other factors remaining constant, when response bias changes from a value of + C toward a  value of - C, the time to correctly decide "Larger" increases.  A third qualitative prediction derives from the stochastic nature of the process of comparison and accumulation. Because the  values @[dn(t)] are continually sampled during the decision process, and because these values are variable, there will be  instances when a stochastic path with positive expected value terminates at the -A threshold, resulting in an erroneous  response. That is, in spite of a positive rate of drift, the response made on a trial can be "Smaller" rather than "Larger."  Other things being equal, such errors are more likely to occur when there is substantial bias toward responding "Smaller," and  to decline steadily as the response bias reaches zero and then turns positive, indicating a predisposition to favor the  response "Larger." Also, for comparisons between quite similar numbers, that is, for values of y near zero, there should be a  higher error rate than when Y deviates substantially, either positively or negatively, from zero. The error rate is also  influenced by variability in the values accumulated. When the drift rate is near zero, the influence of variability in these  values is more significant than when there is a non-zero drift rate that pushes the process to completion quickly.  The agreement between the data in Figs. 1, 2, and 3 and these qualitative predictions provides a solid base for launching a  more formal investigation of theoretical predictions. This investigation requires a new experimental technique in order to  test important predictions concerning changes in response time and response probability, which result from variations in  theoretical parameters. Understanding the advantages of this new experimental technique is facilitated by discussing the more  formal properties of the theory.  Theoretical predictions are easily derived when an ideal pair of stimuli have  MODELING IMAGELESS THOUGHT 15  symmetric effects on performance, such as those suggested by the data in Fig. 1. Let Nr, i be a comparison stimulus Ai units  greater than the standard Nr. "Symmetric effects" means that when N,, i is judged against a standard, Nthe comparison  created is the mirror image, with respect to zero, of the comparison when N,-i is presented. That is, @[dn(t)] is a  reflection, with respect to zero, of @[-dn(t)]. For a fixed standard, the mean comparison values, pi and y_;, are equal but  opposite in sign, so that pi= -y_;.  While a previous analysis of this process (Link & Heath, 1975) used the mathematical approach of random walk theory, the  weaker assumptions used here permit the application of the Theory of Martingales (Doob, 1953; Hall, 1969; Shiryayev, 1984).  Assuming stationarity of @[n(t)], there exist two Martingales, a subMartingale and a super- Martingale, with parameters Oi=  -0--i. These satisfy two Wald Identities (Wald, 1947),  E{exp-@ [dn(t)] BiI =1  E{exp-@[-dn(t)] B_;} = 1.  The value of Bi, like that of pi, generally increases with stimulus difference. These values of 9 play an important supporting  role in the theory, because response probabilities depend upon them directly. For example, a number that is larger than the  standard produces a correct response, RL, with probability  PL,i = Pr(RL, "Larger" I Stimuli N,, i, Nr and Bias C)  _ exp(9; A) - exp - (Oi C) exp(OiA)-exp-(OiA)'  The probability of response RL, given the mirror-image stimulus N, ;, is the probability of responding in error to a stimulus  smaller than the standard. This probability is  PL, i= Pr(RL, "Larger" ( Stimulus Nr i, Nr, and Bias C)  exp(O ;A)-exp-(9-i C) exp(B_iA)-exp-(6-iA).  These results from ideal symmetric stimuli yield as estimators of the distance from the common starting position, C, to the  common response thresholds at A  and -A, the terms Oi (A - C) and Bi (A+ C),  ln[PL,r/PL,-i] = [ei(A-C)] (3)  and  In [(1 -PL,-Sll -PL.i)] = [ei(A+C)].  Equations (3) and (4) add to give 20iA, while the difference between (4) and (3) yields 20iC. In this way, the previously  unknown response threshold values, A and  480'34,1 -,  16  STEPHEN LINK  -A, and the amount of response bias, C, are estimated from response proportions up to a multiplicative constant, B;, which  depends upon the difference between the stimuli.  Changes in the values of B, A, and C each cause changes in response probabilities. First, increases in the value of 9, which  typically occur when the magnitude of the difference between stimuli increases, will cause increases in the values of BA and  9C even though A and C remain constant. An increase in the value of BA is often, correctly, interpreted as an increase in  discriminability as measured by B. Even so, a change in BA cannot, in its own right, be distinguished from a change in BA due  to a change in the value of the response threshold, A, used to reach a judgment. By comparison, in Signal Detection Theory  (Swets, Tanner & Birdsall, 1955), there is a single measure of discriminability, d', for which estimates can be made from  equations identical to (3) and (4) (Noreen, 1979; Ogilvie & Creelman, t968). Within Signal Detection Theory an increase in d'  can only be attributed to an increase in sensitivity. Changes in the response threshold value, A, which alter the subject's  responsiveness would be misinterpreted as a change in sensitivity. To avoid this possible misinterpretation, an experimental  design that shows the separate influences of B and A is desirable (Link, 1978b).  Another important but unexpected effect is that as the value of B increases the estimated values of response bias, BC, must  also increase, although the actual bias, C, remains constant. For small values of 9, the value of BC will remain near zero,  but as the value of 9 increases the estimate of 9C must also be seen to increase. There is no similar prediction in the Theory  of Signal Detection (Green & Swets, 1961), where such a change would be attributed to an inexplicable change in response bias  as a function of discriminability. A carefully designed experiment that tested this prediction in the context of memory  judgments, thought to occur by the process described here, demonstrates quite clearly this apparent increase in response bias  as 9 increases (Noreen, 1979).  RESPONSE TIME PREDICTIONS'  Random walk theory is simplified by Martingale analysis. In particular, response time predictions, response probability  derivations, and relations between response  ' Work on this topic began in 1972 and was suggested to John Theios at the University of Wisconsin in a manuscript submitted  to Psychometrika in February of 1973. An early investigation based on Wald's sequential model and a logarithmic transformation  of number was presented by Gillman and Buckley at the 6th Annual Theoretical and Mathematical Psychology Conference,  University of Indiana, April, 1973, and at the Sixth Annual Mathematical Psychology Meeting held in Montreal in August of 1973  in a session on discrimination and reaction time chaired by the author. At that time the author had just completed the  re-development of random walk theory that showed to be false the commonly believed prediction that correct and error times  (conditioned on the response made) must be equal, not only in mean but also in distribution (Link & Heath, 1975). The  prediction is true for a limited class of random walk models, such as Wald's (1947) sequential analysis theory. However, the  myth that random walk theories must predict equal correct and error times persists in the cognitive literature (e.g., Banks,  Fujii, & Kayra-Stuart, 1976).  MODELING IMAGELESS THOUGHT 17  times and response probabilities follow from Wald's Identity (Wald, 1947) which follows from Martingale Theory (Doob, 1953;  Shiryayev, 1984). While the results are the same as those obtained from the stationary random walk analysis at the heart of  Relative Judgment Theory, a greater degree of generality applies, especially to the predictions concerning response times. The  prediction that the expected time to reach one or the other of the two response thresholds equals the average size of the  accumulated discrepancies divided by the rate of accumulation remains unchanged. Thus nothing is lost while the Martingale  context suggests new techniques for theoretical analysis.  When number Nr+; is presented, the rate at which discrepancies accrue, commonly referred to as pi, is equal to the expected  value of @ [dn(t)]. This average decision time is one component of the observed response time which is postulated to be the  sum of the decision time and a mean time representing all other nondecision response time components. Thus, the equation for  the time taken to respond to number N,+; is  RTi = Decision Time to Nr+; + Non-decision Time. (5)  The average response time can be written in a form that shows its theoretical origins, that is, as  Average Amount of Accumulated Difference  R Ti = Rate of Accumulating Differences + K  =PL.i(A-C)+(1-PL,i)[-(A+C)l+K Rate of Accumulating Differences  =A(2PL.i-1)-C+K  Pi  where PL, i = Pr(RL, "Larger" I Nr+i, Nr, and C), and K is the mean non-decision component of response time. It is easily seen  that with no response bias the value of C is 0 and the response time then becomes  RTi=A(2PL'`-1)+K (7) pi  Many previous psychophysical experiments confirm this relation between response time and response probability. An exemplary  experiment is that by Kellogg (1931), who measured the response times and response proportions of wellpracticed subjects who  discriminated differences in luminance. For seven luminance differences, he discovered that the response time became longer as  the difference between luminances decreased. Using this assumption that the value of pi is a linear function of the deviations  between such luminances, Link (1978a) showed the empirical relation described by Eq. (7) to obtain good support from Kellogg's  18 STEPHEN LINK  Further evidence is provided by data from a classic experiment on line-length discrimination reported by Shallice and Vickers  (1964), as well as from later experiments by Link and Tindall (1971).  When the assumption of a known relation between physical stimulus differences and psychophysical differences is undesirable or  an impossibility, as it is for stimuli having no physical measurements, Relation (6) can be rewritten to provide a separate  method of testing the relationship between response time and response probability. This alternative form permits evaluation of  theoretical predictions in experimental paradigms that commonly employ two stimuli having the property of symmetry.  Multiplying both the numerator and denominator of (6) by the unknown 6; gives the equations  RT.=6;A(2PL,i- 1)-B;C+K (8a) r  8; 9;  =(Bipr)-' [ejA(2PLJ-1)-ejC]+K  = (0;u;)-' [Z;] + K, (8b)  where the value Z; can be estimated from observed response proportions and the application of (3) and (4).  For a pair of stimuli, Nr and N,+;, the values of both B; and p; remain constant, while changes in A and C produce changes in  response times and response probabilities. When plotted against Z;, values of response time should exhibit a linear increase  with slope equal to the reciprocal of 8;p; and an intercept that estimates the unknown value of the mean non-decision time.  This is the welldocumented RT vs Z relation characteristic of random walk theories and supported by many experiments (Link,  1975; Noreen, 1979; Link, 1978b).  A similar equation for response time applies to presentations of the symmetric comparison N,_;. In this case, by replacing in  (8a) B; with 9_;, Y; with p_;, PL.i  with PL, ;, and then noting that 8; = -B _; and p; = -p we find that the mean  time to respond to N,_; given Nr and bias C equals   RT_.-A(I-2Ps._;)-C+K (9a)  11 i   -A(2Ps._;-1)+C+K   ut   =(Bipi)-' [BjA(2Ps._;-1)+B;C]+K   = (BiNj)-' [Z_;] + K, (9b)  where Ps, _; is the probability of response "Smaller" given stimulus N,_;.  As an investigative tool, these analyses can isolate causes of changes in response time and response probability and permit  response times to be corrected for the influence of response bias. Although the correction for response bias is implicit in  MODELING IMAGELESS THOUGHT 19  previous papers on Relative Judgment Theory, the present circumstance provides an opportunity to illustrate the use of this  correction in detail. Note that the difference between (8b) and (9b) gives  [Zi - Z-i] = 0iyi CRTi - RT-J  which gives a direct estimate of  Biui= CZi-Z_i7/[RTi-RT-i]. (10)  Alternatively, oiui is estimated better when several experimental conditions provide data for a regression estimate of the  slope of this similarity transformation. Because 0ipi is known and because 0iA and 0iC are available from (3) and (4) it is  possible to estimate K in either (8b) or (9b). Correcting the observed response time for response bias follows from computing  the theoretical value for the response times, with the parameter C set equal to zero. Note, however, that BC is also a  component of the response probability which enters into the equation for decision time. Thus, a procedure that merely  subtracts a component of response time, such as C/,,, is not sufficient to correct for response bias. More directly, an  additive model of the effect of response bias on response time is not adequate because the response probabilities also  influence the response time through the multiplication of A/pi.  Previously, the measure of discriminability, d', used in the Theory of Signal Detection had no comparable measure obtained  from response time data. How, however, it is apparent from (8a) and (9a), relating response time and response probability,  that a component of response time due to bias depends upon C/yi and another component due to discriminability depends on A/pi.  These considerations suggest a new measure of relative discriminability equal to y,/A, that is, the expected difference  divided by the amount of discrepancy needed to generate a response. Because (10) yields an estimate of Ni0i and (3) and (4)  give a value of OiA, the estimate of the unknown relative discriminability is  Yi_ Zi-_Z i 1 PL,iPS,_I/  A - IRTi - RT J/21n IPL, - Ad (11)  The values of pi/A are relative psychological differences that depend upon the difference between a standard, Nr, and a  comparison, N,+i.  This analysis reveals that decision times are largely a consequence of three factors: the effect of stimulus difference as  measured by 0 or u; responsiveness, 1/A; and response bias, C. The fact that these various parameters are estimated from a  pair of responses, to stimuli having symmetric effects, suggests immediately that any direct evidence regarding the  application of the theory to judgments of differences between numbers will require an experimental design based upon the idea  of stimulus symmetry. Moreover, an experimental design that treats the effects of discriminability and response bias as  orthogonal will permit straightforward estimation of the amount of influence of each of these factors.  20 STEPHEN LINK  While the Method of Constant Stimuli used in Experiment 2 retains the very useful feature of presenting comparison stimuli  that are both larger and smaller than a fixed comparison stimulus it provides no way to estimate any effects of response bias.  Extending the Method of Constant Stimuli, by adding a design feature that allows for the occurrence and estimation of response  bias, permits the response bias to become apparent.  Experimental Design: The Method of Symmetric Differences  To achieve this end, each standard stimulus is followed by a comparison stimulus that is larger or smaller than the standard,  with probability 0.50. In contrast to the standard presented in the Method of Paired Comparisons, the standard now conveys no  information concerning the possible direction of a stimulus difference. The potential for manipulating or measuring the  existence of response biases is provided for by permitting the standard to vary across a range of values, so that information  other than the value of the standard may be introduced by the experimenter, or used by the subject, in order to bias  performance. For example, payoffs may heavily reward particular stimulus-response combinations. Given the predictions of  Relative Judgment Theory, this influence is measurable for each value of the standard and for each symmetric stimulus  difference.  In the parlance of experimental designs, the Method of Symmetric Differences is a novel factorial arrangement of standards and  stimulus differences that generates, by necessity, a rectangle with as many columns as there are standards and as many rows as  there are positively and negatively valued deviations from the standards. The particular design of the experiment described  below employs standards ranging from 33 to 77 (including 55) and stimulus differences, An, ranging from -22 to +22 (excluding  the case of zero) for a total of.1936 trials. A selected standard and value of stimulus difference, An, generate a comparison  stimulus value equal to the value of the standard plus the value of dn.  Figure 6 illustrates the features of the experimental design used in Experiment 3.4 The Method of Symmetric Differences  includes many useful features of the Method of Constant Stimuli, while avoiding the features of paired comparison design  matrices that confound the influences of response bias and stimulus difference. This is accomplished by allowing the range of  the comparison stimuli to depend upon the value of the standard in such a way that, for any standard, the probability of a  larger comparison stimulus equals 0.50. At the same time, the range of possible comparison stimuli remains constant (the  matrix will be called "complete" for this reason). A consequence of the "complete" design is that the probability distribution  for the comparison stimuli is triangular, unlike the uniform probability distributions for comparisons characteristic of the  Methods of Constant Stimuli and Paired Comparisons.  An implication of a design matrix that produces a marginal probability of a  Miss Mary Ann Azzarello (1985) performed Experiment 3 as part of a B.Sc. thesis project directed by the author in his  laboratory and assisted by Mr. Bodo Bilazewski.  MODELING IMAGELESS THOUGHT 21  Method of Symmetric Differences Design Matrix  AS  -22-21 ... ...21 22 77  55 56 ... ... 98 99  54 551- . ... 97 98   Comparison     Values    12 13 .. ...55 56  11 12 .. ...5455   76  34 33  c  O T  -n c  m n N O m  a a  0  Probability Distribution of Comparisons  R  FIG. 6. The design matrix for the Method of Symmetric Differences produces uniform distributions of standards (rows) and dn's  (columns). Entries are values of comparison stimuli obtained by adding values for the corresponding row and column.  ...5456... ...99 Comparison Values  larger comparison equal to 0.50 is that the waiting time for a repetition of a positive difference is asymptotically negative  binomially distributed. Thus, no information regarding which correct response will be required can be drawn from the value of  the standard presented to the subject, or from the preceding sequence of trials.  EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE  The design matrix illustrated in Fig. 6 contains 1936 possible pairs of standard and comparison stimuli. Presenting all these  combinations requires more than a single 1-hr subject session. To meet various procedural demands, the matrix was partitioned  into blocks of trials requiring no more than 1 hr to complete. Each within-subject block consisted of 22 practice trials  followed, without pause, by 462 experimental trials. The practice trials were drawn from the 88 elements that define the two  diagonals of the design matrix, so that only during a series of practice trials did the subject ever see a comparison number  equal to the average value of all comparison numbers, 55. Within each series of practice trials the comparison value 55  occurred 11 times, while the remaining comparison values were drawn at random from the alternative diagonal entries (11,  13,..., 53, 57,..., 97, 99). This selection procedure also ensured that the 88 practice trials contained one instance of each  value of the standard and two instances of each value of dn. During a subject session of 1 hr, two different blocks containing  half the randomly-selected trials of the design matrix were used. By combining four different blocks, a complete replication  was obtained in two 1-hr sessions which occurred on successive days.  Each of five subjects participated in this experiment for a payment of $35 for 7 days. During the first 2 days the complete  design matrix occurred once. These  22 STEPHEN LINK  data were treated as familiarization and do not enter into the analysis of data. The next 4 days yielded two replications of  the design matrix and 2 x (1936 - 88) = 3696 experimental trials per subject, for a total of 18,480 trials.' The last day was  reserved to present several blocks of the 88 practice trials in order to examine the influence of stimulus difference and  magnitude of the standard by using familiar stimuli presented with a greater frequency than before. These data are not a part  of analysis reported here but will be reported elsewhere.  For each experimental session the subject sat in a darkened room 1 m from a Tektronix 602 (P4 phosphor; white on a black  background) display screen (8 cm in height and 10 cm wide), surrounded by a large (71 cm wide by 61 cm heigh) flat black  screen that prevented the seated subject from looking behind the display screen. The experimenter instructed each subject to  "decide if the second number presented is numerically larger or smaller than the first... Make your response as quickly and as  accurately as possible."  To begin a trial, the subject depressed and then released two response keys by using the index fingers of each hand.  Thereafter, the standard stimulus, a two-digit numeral, with single digits approximately 2 cm wide and 1 i cm high, remained  visible for 1000 msec followed by an empty, dark display screen for 500 msec, followed by the continuous display of the  two-digit comparison number until the subject responded. A Digital Equipment PDP-11/34 computer programmed to control the  experiment also recorded the response choice and response time, accurate to 1 msec. Subjects received no indication of whether  a response was correct or in error.  EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS  To simplify the data, the design matrix was collapsed into do ranges of plus or minus 1-3, 4-6, 7-9, 10-12, 13-15, 16-18, and  19-22 (a copy of the complete matrix of results is available upon request). A similar reduction of data across the decades of  the standard (30, 40, 50, 60, and 70) yielded the results in Table 1. The entries in this table are based upon data obtained  from all five subjects across 4 days. The entries in each cell of Table 1 correspond to the total number of "Smaller" or  "Larger" responses and the mean response times for "Larger" and "Smaller" responses. From cell to cell there may be differing  numbers of observations. The variation is due to the differing numbers of standard-An pairs, the reductions to decades of  standards, and the loss of eight trials due to a computer memory malfunction.' There are a total of 5 x 2 x (44 x 44 - 88) - 8  5 Eight trials were lost through a memory failure that duplicated the results of eight contiguous trials as if they were  normal experimental trials. The eight trials that were so replaced were permanently lost, thereby reducing the total to  18,472. One bizarre response time of 8700 msec for Subject 5 in responding "Larger" to a standard of 62 and a comparison of 80  was replaced by the subject's second datum value of 629 msec.  TABLE 1  Number of Observations and Mean Response Times for Smaller and Larger Responses for Symmetric An Values across the Standard  Stimulus Decades  Range of Standards  33-39 40-49 50-59 60-69 7077 Average  An Smaller Larger Smaller Larger Smaller Larger Smaller Larger Smaller Larger Smaller Larger  N 5 235 13 387 5 355 6 394 1 279 30 1650 +19...+22 MEAN 990.4 709.9 983.3 705.1 820.4 689.5 786.3 674.1 508 661.5 902.1 687.7  N 238 1 399 1 356 4 393 7 267 13 1653 26 -19...-22 MEAN 670.4 1316 643.2 987 689.5 1045.7 694.0 835.4 718.3 708.0 681.3 828.3  N 8 172 3 297 2 268 4 296 2 207 19 1240 +16...+18 MEAN 866.7 778.9 858.3 717.0 561.5 707.9 711.5 682.5 717.0 674.4 784.8 708.3  d N 179 1 296 4 268 2 298 2 206 4 1247 13 r. -16...-18 MEAN 650.4 734 654.3 487.5 699.7 646.0 726.4 728.0 742.4 1105.0 695.3  757.8 2 N 7 203 7 263 10 260 3 277 1 229 28 1232 C~ +13...+15 MEAN 1066.4 711.9 709.1 715.0 817.8 687.9 939.0 682.7 641 665.2  859.4 692.3 N 210 0 267 3 265 5 272 8 219 11 1233 27 y -13...-15 MEAN 673.0 0 693.3 1146.3 686.6 771.0 746.9 788.8 723.8 758.0  705.6 812.7  N 7 203 7 263 5 264 0 270 0 240 19 1240 r +10...+12 MEAN 800.7 722.4 815.0 704.0 703.0 706.9 0 685.0 0 675.3 780.2 697.9 N 210  0 270 0 266 4 264 6 235 5 1245 15 -10...-12 MEAN 640.6 0 694.3 0 721.8 800.0 709.8 834.1 723.9 811.4 700.0 817.4  N 8 202 6 264 6 264 3 267 2 238 25 1235 0  +7...+9 MEAN 756.0 754.8 908.0 721.3 1422.8 733.0 580.3 708.4 526.0 673.2 913.0 717.2 C N 207 2 268 2 267 3 259 10 226 14 1227  31 -7...-9 MEAN 668.0 546.0 685.1 1463.0 724.9 965.0 747.4 754.2 756.5 726.4 717.2 794.3 a  N 12 198 6 284 6 234 6 274 3 237 33 1227 +4...+6 MEAN 768.8 743.7 1068.5 730.9 1474.6 719.4 966.1 710.1 1002.0 689.2 1008.7  718.1 N 210 0 285 5 231 9 272 8 238 2 1236 24 -4...-6 MEAN 696.3 0 726.5 734.6 757.6 1221.2 783.7 837.1 768.4 737.0 747.8  951.4 N 7 203 8 291 10 200 8 292 5 235 38 1221 +1...+3 MEAN 901.2 789.5 828.7 741.2 773.9 755.1 1617.1 748.1 603.8 752.4 964.0  755.3 N 206 4 293 7 204 6 291 7 228 12 1222 36 -1...-3 MEAN 777.2 1081.5 751.7 665.0 762.9 1128.0 790.5 844.5 814.0 678.0  778.7 827.6  N 54 1416 50 2049 44 1845 30 2070 14 1665 192 9045 +  TOTAL MEAN 861.8 742.9 890.3 718.7 955.5 711.6 1028.5 697.5 690.0 684.1 903.9 709.8 N 1460 8 2078 22 1857 33 2049 48 1619 61  9063 172 -TOTAL MEAN 682.5 933.5 690.0 801.3 716.8 1005.5 740.1 807.7 749.1 750.8 716.2 830.5  N w  24 STEPHEN LINK  11 IRS L IM()M()MF l Mk; l I -INCTIMM'J ! ; f i . IJO~L L !~i/.  FIG. 7. Three Chronometric Functions illustrate the influence of response bias on mean response time. The base response time  is 640 msec, which equals the mean response for -7 to -9 do for standards in the 30's decade.  Mean response times as a function of An, but averaged within ranges of the standard, are shown in Fig. 7. These Chronometric  Functions are similar to those obtained using the Methods of Constant Stimuli and Paired Comparisons. For the standard in the  range 50--59, the symmetry with respect to do = 0 is obvious. Also shown in Fig. 7 are the conditional Chronometric Functions  based on the two extreme ranges of the standards, those ranging between 33 and 39 and those between 70 and 77, inclusive. The  influence of the decade of the standard on the mean response time is readily apparent. When the standard is drawn from the  30's decade, mean response time is fast for negative values of An, that is, for values of the comparison number smaller than  the standard, but is substantially slower for symmetric positive values of dn. At the other extreme, when the standard is in  the 70's decade, a negative value for do produces a slow response time when compared with the response times for corresponding  positive values of dn. The difference between the Chronometric Functions for the 30's or 70's decade and the 50's decade,  where there is no response bias, measures the effect of bias on response time.  The Psychometric Error Functions conditioned on the 30's, 50's, and 70's decades of the standard are not illustrated, but also  show the influence of the decade of the standard on response errors. When the standard is drawn from the 30's decade, error  response proportions are low for negative values of An, but when the standard is from the 70's decade the error response  proportions are lower for the positive values of dn. For the 50's decade, the Psychometric Error Function reveals little  tendency for either positive or negative dn's to generate more errors.  Error response proportions are summarized in Fig. 8. For the 30's decade the "Larger" error response proportion is 0.005. This  proportion rises to .035 at the 70's  MODELING IMAGELESS THOUGHT 25  N K O K O 2 O O a O a a  RESPONSE ERRORS VS DECADES ERROR PROPORTIONS FOR EACH RESPONSE  DECADE OF THE STANDARD  A LARGER I -On v SMALLER I +On  FIG. 8. The low, but informative, error rates for "Smaller" and "Larger" responses depend in part  upon the magnitude of the standard.  decade. Conversely, the "Smaller" error response proportion equals .036 for the 30's decade and declines to .009 in the 70's  decade. The marginal proportion of errors is only 0.02. This small error rate is characteristic of a sequential mechanism that  operates quickly with a high probability of success but suffers an occasional error. Typically, sequential sampling devices  require fewer samples of @[dn(t)] to reach a decision than do fixed sample size systems operating at the same error rate. Of  course, when error rates are low, large numbers of trials are required for one to observe that the predictions about errors  are accurate.  In spite of the design considerations for the Method of Symmetric Differences, these results suggest that the value of the  standard still promotes response bias. That substantial bias does exist is seen in Fig. 9, where mean response times for  larger and smaller comparison stimuli are shown for two similar experiments. The paired comparison experiment, whose  Chronometric Function is shown in Fig. 1, has mean response times for larger and smaller comparison stimuli that also vary as  a function of the decade of the standard but in a manner exactly opposite to those obtained from the Method of Symmetric  Differences. Paired comparison method response times for comparison stimuli larger than a standard are fast for small values  of the standard and increase with increases in the value of the standard. For the Method of Symmetric Differences, the mean  response times decline for the larger comparisons, as the value of the standard increases. A similar reversal is  26 STEPHEN LINK  V 41 41  E w P w  0 x 0 a a  MEAN RESPONSE TIMES LARGER AND SMALLER COMPARISONS  DECADE OF THE STANDARD  o SMALLER G LARGER x LARGER v SMALLER  FIG. 9. Mean response times (including correct and error responses) for larger and smaller comparison stimuli in the Method of  Paired Comparisons and the Method of Symmetric Differences, shown as a function of the decade of the variable standard  stimulus.  evident for the smaller comparison stimuli. Because results from the Method of Symmetric Differences are different from those  for the Method of Paired Comparisons, it is apparent that previous conclusions drawn from the Method of Paired Comparisons  need careful interpretation.  THEORETICAL ANALYSIS  Three parameters are the basis for the variations in response proportions and times characteristic of numerical comparisons.  The purpose of this section is to estimate these parameters, or functions thereof, and show how they change as a function of  the factors of the Method of Symmetric Differences design matrix. Equation (3) and (4) were used within each combination of An  level and decade of the standard to obtain the estimates of BA and BC reported in Table 2. When marginal results are referred  to, they are the averages of these estimators, rather than estimates based on marginal averages of the data, although the two  methods of estimation lead to similar numerical values.  The parameter 9, like y, is determined by numerical difference. Although the function relating O to An is unknown, generally,  as An increases in value, so  MODELING IMAGELESS THOUGHT 27  TABLE 2  Estimates of BA and BC Based on Data within Intervals of An and Decades of the Standards  Range of 1-3 4-6 7-9 10-12 13-15 16-18 19-22 Average  standard             <BA      33-99 3.65 4.42 3.93 4.70 4.70 4.13 4.66 4.32  40-49 3.66 3.95 4.34 4.96 4.06 4.45 4.69 4.30  50-59 3.22 3.45 4.14 4.08 3.61 4.90 4.38 3.97  60-69 3.66 3.67 3.87 5.04 4.03 4.65 4.11 4.15  70-77 3.40 4.57 3.78 5.01 4.21 4.29 4.33 4.23  Average 3.52 4.01 4.01 4.76 4.12 4.48 4.43 4.19     <0C>      33-39 -0.27 -1.56 -0.68 -1.30 -1.30 -1.02 -0.79 -0.99  40-49 -0.07 -0.09 -0.54 -1.31 -0.42 0.14 -1.27 -0.51  50-59 -0.29 0.20 -0.34 -0.11 -0.34 0.00 -0.11 -0.14  60-69 -0.06 0.14 0.59 1.23 0.48 -0.34 0.08 0.30  70-77 0.42 -0.20 0.95 1.14 1.18 0.34 1.26 0.73  Average -0.05 -0.30 .00 -0.07 -0.08 -0.18 -0.17 -0.12  should 0. When there is no difference, and An = 0, the value of 0 must also equal zero. To examine how 0 varies, two different  views of the joint value, BA, were obtained. The changes in BA as a function of An, viewed in Fig. 10, shows that as An  increases, the value of BA also increases steadily. This must be the case for the theory to have any application to  psychophysical studies. The apparently small increase in BA over the full range of An is, in fact, a full log unit change.  This rate of change promotes a large reduction in the percentage of error responses as An increases.  One could argue that this increase in BA is due to simultaneous changes in 0 and A, and not to 0 alone. Therefore, to show  that A does not change, a second view of BA is obtained by viewing BA as a function of the magnitude of the standard for the  five decades: 30's, 40's, 50's, 60's and 70's, where 0 characterizes average performance obtained by averaging across values  of An. As seen in Fig. 11, the value of BA remains fairly constant. The constancy also suggests that discriminability, as  measured by 0, does not decline as the standard increases in magnitude. Hence, unlike peripheral stimuli that for a fixed An  often generate poor performance as the standard increases, these results show no evidence of a Weber effect.  Response bias is determined by the value of C. For large positive values of C performance is biased toward the response  "Larger." As C shifts toward zero and becomes increasingly negative, performance reflects a bias toward the response  "Smaller." Although C determines the amount and direction of response bias only  2s  STEPHEN LINK  METHOD OF SYMMETRIC DIFFERENCES DISCRIMINABIL.I Y AND RESPONSE BIAS  VALUES OF on  O GA + 6C  FIG. 10. Marginal estimates of BA and BC as a function of the differences between comparison and standard numbers.  5  METHOD OF SYMMETRIC DIFFERENCES DISCRLMINABILrrY AND RESPONSE BIAS  4  E3 E3 DLSCRMINA131LITY n  3  2  0  -2  33-39 40-49 50-59 60-69 70-77 RANGES OF THE STANDARD  O GA + AC  FIG. 11. Marginal values of BA and BC as a function of the decade of the standard.  MODELING IMAGELESS THOUGHT 29  B times C, that is BC, can be determined from equations 3 and 4. To simplify the analysis of changes in BC the data were  averaged across values of An to produce only a single value of 9 representative of the averaged data. For these data, values  of 9C are also shown in Fig. 11.  Somewhat surprisingly, BC shows a linear increase as the standard increases to the 70's from the 30's decade. This change in  response bias affects the Chronometric and Psychometric Functions. On the average the value of 9C is nearly zero, indicating  no bias at all, and for the 50's decade the value of BC is also nearly zero. This unbiased performance is reflected in the  Chronometric Function for the 50's decade shown in Fig. 7. One unit of response bias toward the "Smaller" response threshold  is evident in the 30's decade and the Chronometric Function for the 30's decade illustrates the influence of this bias. The  mean response times for negative values of An, that is, for comparison numbers smaller than the standard, are less than times  for responses to comparisons larger than the standard. Equally important, the mean "Smaller" response times in the 30's decade  are also smaller than corresponding times in the 50's decade where performance is unbiased. For positive values of An mean  response times are longer in the 30's decade than in the 50's decade. When the response bias changes to favor the "Larger"  response, as in the 70's decade, the mean response time for positive values of An is lower than for negative values of An.  Also, the positive values of An generate mean response times less than those in the 50's decade, where performance is  unbiased. The large mean response times for negative An's are less than corresponding results for the unbiased performance of  the 50's decade. These results are consistent with theoretical predictions.  A major prediction of this theory relates measures of response time and response probability. The theory predicts the  existence of a linear function having an intercept that measures non-decision aspects of the discrimination task, while the  slope is a measure of discriminability, (8b) and (9b). To analyze this prediction, averages across larger or smaller  comparison stimuli were used to generate 10 mean response times, two for each of the five decades of the standard. For each of  these 10 cases, the corresponding marginal values for BA and BC were computed and used to determine the values of Z in (8b)  and (9b). The obtained relation is shown in Fig. 12, where there is little question about the predicted linearity. The  correlation between RT and Z proves to be 0.88, which is quite satisfactory for ten data points obtained by averaging the data  across all values of An.  To investigate the RT vs Z relation further, values of An were collapsed into three levels, 1-7, 8-14, 15-22, and the same RT  versus Z relation was calculated for each of the three levels. The correlations between RT and Z are of particular interest  here, because for small values of discriminability the values of U and 0 are small, leading to long response times but a  restricted range of values for RT and Z. A strong correlation is more easily shown when the ranges of RT and Z are large, as  they are for higher versus lower discriminability. For these three levels (1-7, 8-14, and 15-22), the ranges of RT and Z  became less restricted as the values of An increased and, as expected, the correlations increased from 0.37 for the 1-7 range  to 0.86 and 0.91 for the 8-14 and 15-22 ranges, respectively.  30 STEPHEN LINK  V U N E v W F W W Z 0  a K 3  METHOD OF SYMMETRIC DIFFERENCES AVERAGE DATA FOR + AND -fin  800 790 780 770 760 760 740 730 720 710 700 690 680 670 660 680 640 630 620 610 600  3 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.6 4 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 6  VALUES OF ZA OR ZB  O CORRELATION - .876 - BEST IJNEAR FIT  FIG. 12. The linear prediction for RT vs Z in (8b) and (9b) is shown to fit larger and smaller  comparisons for five decades of the standard.  The RT versus Z relation is but one of many predictions leading to the conclusion that Relative Judgment Theory describes  accurately the mental process activated when visually-presented two-digit numbers are compared. Systematic changes in  parameter estimates also show the Method of Symmetric Differences to separate the influences of stimulus difference and  response bias. The action of these two experimenter-controlled variables in promoting changes in response time, seen through  the conditional Chronometric Functions in Fig. 7, illustrates again how response bias plays its role in determining response  time.  More important, a theory that describes the precise way in which response bias affects response time also provides a method of  correcting response times for response bias. For those researchers who readily measure response time, rather than response  proportions, this theory provides an answer to the question of how an RT bias measure can be computed. The values of 9C give a  direct measure of response bias, but when they are combined with estimates of ltd, BA, and K, all components of the response  time equations are available and the influence of response bias can be removed.  THE NUMERICAL TRANSFORMATION C[dn(t)]  The final question to be treated here is: How does a difference between numbers give rise to the differences in mean response  time that are so clearly evident in the  MODELING IMAGELESS THOUGHT 31  0 a 11 0  N v  W F W N z 0 a  CHRONOMETRIC FUNCTIONS 4 SUBJECT VERSUS s SUBJECT MEANS  T- rTrrTi T_ rTr- r __ " -.. , " ~ -21-19-17-15-13-11-9 -7 -5 -3 -1 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21  NUMERICAL DIFFERENCE  0 4 SUBJECT DATA v 5 SUBJECT DATA  FIG. 13. Average Chronometric Functions for four and five subjects show the large increase in mean response time due to  subject five.  Chronometric Functions shown in Fig. 13? The upper function shows results for all five subjects. Analyses of individual  performances discovered that the last of five subjects was far more variable in performance than the others. This variability  had a volatile influence on the Chronometric Function and explains, in part, the large difference in response time between the  two sets of results shown in Fig. 9. Removing this subject from the analysis, in order to reduce variability in the  Chronometric Function, did not alter conclusions concerning the role of response bias, or other conclusions drawn from the  previous analyses. However, the mean response time based on four subjects was substantially reduced, as seen in Fig. 13.  In order to further refine the Chronometric Function, response times to symmetric differences were averaged. This average  response time, which is half the sum of (8a) and (9a), removes the unknown value of C/y from this mean. The mean response time  for an absolute numerical difference of size i is  RT - [PL.i+Ps,-i I  iii- Pi -1 +K. (12)  Note that both PL,; and Ps,-; still contain the effect of response bias, but, because they can be estimated from the  experimental data, the mean response time can be plotted as a function of the term in brackets. When the value of Iti is  substituted the values of RT,;i and the term in brackets should provide a linear function.  480;34,,1-3  32 STEPHEN LINK  u u m E w F w z 0  a rc s  r 3  CHRONOMETRIC FUNCTIONS u - p*[dn) + (1-p)'<dn> + 1  1 4  5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 ABSOLUTE NUMERICAL. DIFFERENCE Ion I  - THEORY O DATA  FIG. 14. The average Chronometric Function is closely fit by the theoretical function based on a sextal number system.  The Chronometric Function based on (12) is shown in Fig. 14. The figure suggests that there are definite periods in the  Chronometric Function. There is a steady decline in response time until a numerical difference of 6 occurs; then response time  increases, only to once again begin a decline that is halted by an increase in response time, followed by another decline, and  so forth. Similar results are evident in Fig. 1 and in the figures of Hinrichs et al. (1981, 1982). In previous studies of  numerical comparisons the value of h was assumed to derive from a monotonic function. On the basis of (12), a clear view of  the value of u, uncontaminated by response bias, gives the first inkling that C, is not a simple transformation of numerical  difference.  These systematic declines followed by increases in RT suggest a mechanism for determining the value of y quite distinct from a  similarity transformation of a difference that is the basis for many simple psychophysical judgments.  Rather, the Chronometric Function suggests that the difference between the numbers N,+; and Nr, dn(t), is acted upon by a  mental algorithm, a[dn(t) ], to produce a two-digit number based on the values (0, 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5), that is, a base-6 or  sextal number. At most, two base-6 places are required to describe the small range (1-22) of differences used here. These will  be designated by the symbols [ ] for the most significant and < > for the least. The decimal numbers 1 through 5 correspond to  their sextal equivalents. The decimal difference of 6 equals a sextal value of 10, i.e., 6,,= 10,= [1] *6'+ <0> *6'.  MODELING IMAGELESS THOUGHT 33  The equation used above weights each digit by its appropriate power of 6 for an unambiguous monotonic transformation of a  difference base 10 into a difference base 6. However, the weights attached to the sextal digits extracted from the numerical  difference are not necessarily those of the sextal number system. They are weights that depend upon the importance of each  digit to the subject making numerical comparisons. Of the total weight, a proportion p is applied to the most significant  digit, and a proportion (1 - p) to the least. This algorithm produces a value of p equal to p[dn(t)] + (1- p)<dn(t) >, as  shown in Fig. 16.  A last feature of numerical comparisons concerns the meaning and representation of zero. For sensory stimuli, the absolute  threshold stimulus produces a psychophysical representation value equal to zero. The stimulus magnitude at absolute zero is  not zero but some physical value. The actual presentation of no stimulation produces, theoretically, an infinitely large  negative sensation. For numbers, however, the presentation of zero is hardly the same as the presentation of nothing.  Psychologically, zero is something and therefore must be represented as a value. The numerical difference adds to the  representation for zero. Although the value representing zero is not known, it can be used as a unit of numerical  representation having a value equal to 1.0. For this reason the results of a numerical comparison, (a [dn(t)], are added to  the value 1.  These considerations lead to the determination of p from the equation  ,u= p[dn(t)] +(1 -p)<dn(t)>+ 1 =p{[dn(t)]+1}+(1-p){[dn(t)]+1}. For example, when do = 6, the value of u is  p=p[1]+(1 -p)<0>+1  (13)  When do = 5 the value of p is  M=p[0]+(1 -p)<5>+1 =6-5p.  Therefore, if p is less than 5/6, as would seem natural for weights applied to digits whose importance depends upon their  position or order of extraction, then the effective comparative difference for a numerical difference of 6 is smaller than  that for a numerical difference of 5. Although u does not increase monotonically, values of p increase in unit steps for  numerical differences of 7, 14, 21, and so forth.  To determine a suitable value for p, the VT 111 vs Zl;, relation of (12) was used with values of uiri substituted into the  denominator. The linear relation shown in Fig. 15 resulted from a value of p =.78. Ninety-five percent of variance in the 22  mean response times was accounted for by this linear relation. The visual fit of theory and data shows that (13) is very  sensitive to p. Values of p of .75 or .80 produced  34 STEPHEN LINK  RT vs Z FOR NUMERICAL COMPARISONS p'[dn] + (1-p)*<dn> + 1  7,50 740 730 720 y u 710  u  u  E 700 -  N  p 670 -  a  660 630 640 yl fiso 620 610 -' 600 -I  0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1  Z - (PL + PS - 1)/u  u - k-(An) -- BEST IJNEAR FIT o CORRELA11ON=.971  FIG. 15. The linear relation expected on the basis of (8a) does not occur when p is a similarity transformation of numerical  difference. It does occur for It resulting from the mental algorithm described by (13).  obviously poor fits to the data. For purposes of comparison, Fig. 15 also shows the relation obtained if p is taken to be the  best fitting similarity transformation, p = a * An, of the numerical difference. There is little doubt that the similarity  transformation, although simple, is quite inferior to the values of p obtained from (13).  A convenient way to illustrate how numerical differences produce a Chronometric Function is to treat the value of ft as a  function of numerical difference. In order to distinguish this function from the Psychophysical Function, often applied to  sensory continua, this function of numerical difference will be called the Psychonumeric Function. Its values are illustrated  in Fig. 16. The linear increases occur within sextades, that is, intervals containing the digits 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, of the  sextal transformation of a base-10 numerical difference. Declines in the value of p occur at the beginning of each sextade.  The failure of Y to increase linearly is due to the weights applied to the most and least significant digits of the sextal  transformation. Unit increases in ju occur for decimal differences equal to 0, 7, 14, 21, and so forth. Averaging data over  several values of An, as is often done to increase the number of observations per mean response time, would tend to reduce, if  not eliminate, these discontinuities. The result would yield a nearly linear relation between y and dn.  The best linear fit in Fig. 15 generated the predicted Chronometric Function in Fig. 14. This two-parameter fit to the  decision component of response time (the  MODELING IMAGELESS THOUGHT 35  5  THE PSYCHONUMERIC FUNCTION u - pdn] + (1-p)*<dn> + 1  2_  G  i r__-F I _T___r r _T__r I n I - _r__i r -_F_ i 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22  ABSOLUTE NUMERICAL DIFFERENCE Ion I UNIT STEPS  FIG. 16. The Psychonumeric Function shows how numerical differences are transformed into rates of drift for the numerical  comparison process.  number base is usually not considered as part of the goodness of fit) provides an excellent account of performance. The rate  of descent of mean response time depends on the value of p, while the discontinuities occur at the beginning of each sextade.  The small perturbation at the numerical difference of 17, rather than 18, may be due to a faulty determination of a relatively  large difference between a standard and comparison. Or it may follow directly from a recursive application of the algorithm  for 0-11, to the numbers 12-23, etc. This deviation is worthy of further study, but is small compared to the overall  performance of this theory of numerical transformation and comparison.  CONCLUSION  The discussion of the theory of numerical comparisons focuses on four questions. First, what is learned from the theoretical  account of changes in response probability and response time? Second, in what way does the theory's description of numerical  representation change previously held views regarding the conception of number? Third, to what extent do these results  generalize to other psychophysical tasks? Last, what are the implications of these results for the teaching of arithmetic  skills?  36 STEPHEN LINK  With regard to the theoretical account of performance measures, such as response time and probability, there are substantial  changes that concur with the general finding in psychological research, that the greater the separation between stimuli the  faster the time to distinguish between them. However, on the basis of Fechner's interpretation of Weber's Law, experiments  using sensory stimuli should show that as the magnitude of a standard stimulus increases in value, a fixed difference becomes  more difficult to judge. This is clearly not the case with two-digit numbers, as is shown by estimates of 6A. This measure of  discriminability remains constant across changes in the decade value of the standard, which ranges from 30 to 70, more than a  two-fold increase in magnitude. Thus, discriminability does not decline as the magnitude of the standard increases.  The kind of error changes as a function of the magnitude of the standard. For small standards there is a higher probability of  an error in responding "Smaller" to a larger comparison. This is due to a bias toward responding "Smaller" when the standard  is small. A concomitant reduction in response time for smaller comparisons, and an increase in response time for larger  comparisons, is predicted to, and does, occur. When the standard is large, the response bias is toward the "Larger" response.  The probability of an error to smaller comparisons is relatively high. Futhermore, the response time to smaller comparisons is  slow when compared to responses to larger comparisons.  Similar changes in response times were characterized by Banks, Fujii, and KayraStuart (1976) as due to a "semantic congruity  effect." Their account does not explain the concomitant changes in response proportions. The "semantic congruity effect" seems  to come and go, depending upon the circumstance of the experiment. For the Method of Paired Comparisons, where the bias is  opposite to that obtained using the Method of Symmetric Differences, consistency forces one to argue that there is a "semantic  incongruity effect." There seems to be little value in creating yet another name to describe experimental results due to  response bias.  There is a legitimate question regarding the change in response bias found in numerical comparisons performed using the Method  of Paired Comparisons and that found using the Method of Symmetric Differences. For paired comparisons the reason for response  bias is readily apparent-there is a high probability that a small (large) standard will be followed by a large (small)  comparison. The subject will perform better by taking advantage of this information.  For symmetric differences the response bias reverses. The reversal may be due to the association that occurs between a  comparison stimulus N,+;, and the subsequent numerical difference, An = Nr+; - N,. The expected value of this difference,  conditioned on a fixed value of the comparison number,  E[An I Nr+rl =Y P[An I Nr+J An,  increases linearly from the smallest to the largest comparison stimuli. For example, for a comparison of 11 this expected  difference is -22, while for the largest com-  MODELING IMAGELESS THOUGHT 37  parison of 99 the conditional expected difference is 22. The subject may associate the magnitude of a difference with the  value of the comparison stimulus. Later, when a standard is presented, this information is applied to the value of the  standard, resulting in a bias toward responding "Smaller" when the value of the standard is small and "Larger" when the  standard is large.  The difference between numerical stimuli determines the value of U which is critical to the prediction of response times. The  three major components of the representation are: a base-6, or sextal, transformation of the base-10 difference between the  comparison and the standard stimulus; a differential weighting of the most and least significant place values for the  difference; and a representation for zero that characterizes it as a non-zero value. From this mental algorithm comes a  general formula for the Chronometric Function,  T= A[2Pc-1]-C +K, p[Anb]+(1-p)<Anb>+1  where Anb is the sextal value of the base-10 difference A is the response threshold  C is the response bias  Pc is the probability of a correct response An is the base-6 numerical difference  p is the weighting of importance given to the most significant digit, [An], (1 - p) is the weight given to the least  significant digit, < An >, and  K is the non-decision time component of RT.  The psychophysical representation of these numerical differences depends upon a base-6 transformation. This base system has  digit values 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, the same as the Chinese abacus and the numerical system of Finno-Ugrian. More obviously it  is also the numerical base used for counting on the fingers and thumb of one hand. In the psychophysical production of  numbers, studied extensively by Baird (1975), various base systems proved to be the basis for performance. In these results  the base-6 system is the clear choice.  Of particular significance is the role played by the representation of zero. From a theoretical point of view every waveform,  s(t), must have values in order for it to characterize a stimulus. If the mental representation of zero is allowed to equal  nothing, then there is not even a waveform for its characterization. This enigma is settled by giving a non-zero value to the  representation of zero.  Previous analyses of numerical comparison judgments showed that the number one required special treatment. On the basis of the  present results, the psychophysical value of one is still intermediate between zero and two, but the starting point for the  numerical representations is a unit, not zero. Earlier results may profit from re-examination under the assumption that zero  must be given a non-zero value. The  38 STEPHEN LINK  need for a non-zero psychological representation for nothing seems clear, even in the case of such a well-known anomaly as,  "Every set contains the empty set, which contains nothing except the empty set." Obviously, the empty set must be a mental  something that cannot equal a mathematical nothing.  The results from this study of numerical comparisons do not prove that the standard and comparison stimuli are first converted  to a sextal representation and then compared. At this point, we can only conclude that the difference between stimuli is  converted. The path from the presentation of the stimulus into its characteristic waveform, followed by its use in the  judgment process, is quite likely a series of queued mental algorithms operating on waveforms carrying information about the  stimuli being compared. The algorithms and their use are the focus of simple experiments which are now underway.  The implications of these results for the teaching of numerical skills requires special mention. Mathematicians hold the  common belief that the brain is an orderly device, if not an algebraic machine, that is subject to error because the student  is lax in his or her studies. They are uniformly astonished to discover that the Chronometric Function is not flat, but shows  instead that different times are required to judge whether 47 is smaller than 59 or whether 47 is smaller than 51.  The arithmetic of the schoolbook is not the calculation of the mind, as the many studies of numerical comparisons bear out. An  important step forward in the instruction of children about numerical processes is to separate out errors due to the  comparison process itself and errors due to misconceptions about the mental algorithm that should be applied. The recognition  by mathematicians and educators that the brain in not an arithmetic device, needing only to be teased, if not reinforced, into  accurate performance, can lead to improvements in the quality of mathematical training.  The results reported here show that the same process of comparison is at work as was previously shown (e.g., Link, 1975; Link  & Heath, 1975; Noreen, 1979) to account for the psychophysical discrimination of difference. The process of judgment depends  on information extracted from the waveform which characterizes a difference between numbers. Sometimes an error occurs. Such  errors are predictable in terms of both response time and frequency. Because they are predictable they are not the random  intrusions of experimental error so often assumed by 19th century theoreticians, and systematically ignored by some accounts  of numerical comparisons. Rather, errors are inherent part of the process of making judgments.  Response bias plays a significant role in limiting the accuracy of performance, yet reduces the average time taken to respond.  The form of the response bias shown by these subjects is compatible with the "semantic congruity effect," where smaller  standards generate a bias to respond "Smaller" and larger standards lead to a bias to respond "Larger." Judging from the  reports of Banks et al. (1976), Banks and Flora (1977), and the more psychophysical investigations of Jamieson and Petrusic  (1975), the semantic congruity effect is simply a manifestation of response bias rather than a result of a linguistic theory  that neither predicts response time nor response errors. According to Poltrock's analysis of paired comparisons (1989),  MODELING IMAGELESS THOUGHT 39  response bias helps account for paired comparison results when the direction of response bias is opposite to that expected by  the semantic congruity effect.  The process of comparing numbers is not directly observable through the mind's eye. Thus, speculation about the processes  giving rise to these "imageless thoughts" is often difficult to disconfirm. Yet, the methods for analyzing "imageless thought"  illustrated here show how elusive thought processes may be brought under control in a laboratory setting, as Kulpe argued many  years ago, and how their basis can be profitably explored through the application of modern psychophysical theory.  REFERENCES  ACH, N. (1905). Ueber die Willenstatigeit and das Denken.  AZZARELLO, M. A. (1985). Numerical comparisons: An application of relative judgment theory. Bachelor of Science Thesis.  McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario.  BAIRD, J. C. (1975). Psychophysical study of numbers. V. Preferred state theory of matching functions. Psychological Research,  38, 189-207.  BAIRD, J. C., & NOMA, E. (1975). Psychophysical study of numbers. I. Generation of numerical responses. Psychological  Research, 38, 281-297.  BANKS, W. P., CLARK, H. H., & Lucy, P. (1975). The locus of the semantic congruity effect in comparative judgments. Journal of  Experimental Psychology, Human Perception and Performance, 104 (1), 35-47.  BANKS, W. P., & COLEMAN, M. J. (1981). Two subjective scales of number. Perception and Ps vchophysics, 29 (2), 95-105.  BANKS, W. P., & FLORA, J. (1977). Semantic and perceptual processes in symbolic comparisons. Journal of Experimental  Psychology, Perception, 3, 278-290.  BANKS, W. P., & HILL, D. K. (1974). The apparent magnitude of number scaled by random production. Journal of Experimental  Psychology Monograph, 102 (2), 353-376.  BANKS, W. P., Funt, M., & KAYRA-STUART, F. (1976). Semantic congruity effects in comparative judgments of magnitudes of  digits. Journal of Experimental Psychology, Human Perception and Performance, 2 (3), 435-447.  BIRREN, J. E., & BOTWINICK, J. (1955). Speed of response as a function of perceptual difficulty and age. Journal of  Gerontology, 10, 433-436.  BORING, E. G. (1957). A history of experimental psychology (2nd ed.). New York: Appleton-CenturyCrofts.  BRAINERD, C. J. (1973). The origins of number concepts. Scientific American, 228, 101-109.  BUCKLEY, P. B., & GILLMAN, C. B. (1974). Comparisons of digits and dot patterns. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 103 (6),  1131-1136.  CROSSMAN, E. R. F. W. (1956). The measurement of discriminability. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 7, 176-195.  CURTIS, D. W., PAULOS, M. A., & RULE, S. J. (1973). Relation between disjunctive reaction time and stimulus difference.  Journal of Experimental Psychology, 99, 167-173.  DOOR, J. L. (1953). Stochastic processes. New York: Wiley.  FOLTz, G. S. (1982). The representation and processing of number. Doctoral dissertation, University of Denver, Denver, CO.  GARNER, W. R., PODGORNY, P., & FRASCA, E. M. (1982). Physical and cognitive dimensions in stimulus comparison. Perception and  Psychophysics, 31 (6), 507-522.  GILLMAN, C. B., & BUCKLEY, P. B. (1973). A model for numeric comparison. Paper presented at the Sixth annual mathematical  psychology meeting, Montreal, Canada.  GILLMAN, C. B., BUCKLEY, P., & THEIOS, J. M. (1973). Numeric comparison. Paper presented at the Fourteenth annual meeting of  the psychonomic society, St. Louis, MO.  40  STEPHEN LINK  GREEN, D. M., & SWETS, J. A. (1961). Signal detection theory and psychophysics. New York: Wiley. GREEN, G. J. (1967). An  investigation of some counting algorithms for simple addition problems, (Technical Report No. 118). Stanford, CA: Institute  for Mathematical Studies in the Social Sciences, Stanford University.  HALL, W. J. (1969). Embedding submartingales in Wiener processes with drift, with applications to sequential analysis. Journal  of Applied Probability, 6, 612-632.  HINRICHS, J. V., BERIE, J. L., & YURKO, D. S. (1979). Multidigit number comparisons: Use of place value information. Paper  presented at the Twentieth annual meeting of the psychonomic society, Phoenix, Arizona.  HINRICHS, J. V., YURKO, D. S., & Hu, J. M. (1981). Two-digit number comparison: Use of place information. Journal of  Experimental Psychology, Human Perception and Performance, 7, 890-901. HINRICHS, J. V., BERIE, J. L., & MOSELL, M. K. (1982).  Place information in multidigit number comparison. Memory and Cognition, 10, 487-495.  HINRICHS, J. V., & NOVICK, L. R. (1982). Memory for numbers: Nominal vs magnitude information. Memory and Cognition, 10,  479-486.  JAMIESON, D. G., & PETRUSIC, W. M. (1975). Relational judgments with remembered stimuli. Perception and Psychophysics, 18 (6),  373-378.  KELLOGG, W. N. (1931). The time of judgment in psychometric measures. American Journal of Psychology, 43, 65-86.  LINK, S. W. (1975). The relative judgment theory of two choice response time. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 12, 114-135.  LINK, S. W. (1978a). The relative judgment theory of the psychometric function. In J. Requin (Ed.), Attention and Performance  VII. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  LINK, S. W. (1978b). The relative judgment theory analysis of response time deadline experiments. In N. J. Castellan, Jr., &  F. Restle (Eds.), Cognitive Theory, (Vol. 3). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  LINK, S. W. (1984, November). The relative judgment theory of numerical comparisons. Paper presented at the Twenty-fifth  annual meeting of the psychonomic society, San Antonio, TX.  LINK, S. W., & HEATH, R. A. (1975). A sequential theory of psychological discrimination. Psychometrika, 40, 77-105.  LINK, S. W., & TINDALL, A. D. (1971). Speed and accuracy in comparative judgments of line length. Perception and  Psychophysics, 9, 284-288.  LUCE, R. D. (1986). Reaction times. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.  MOYER, R. S. (1973). Comparing objects in memory: Evidence suggesting an internal psychophysics. Perception and Psychophysics,  13 (2), 180-184.  MOYER, R. S., & BAYER, R. H. (1976). Mental comparison and the symbolic distance effect. Cognitive Psychology, 8, 228-246.  MOYER, R. S., & LANDAUER, T. K. (1967). The time required for judgments of numerical inequality. Nature, 215, 1519-1520.  MOYER, R. S., & LANDAUER, T. K. (1973). Determinants of reaction time for digit inequality judgments. Bulletin of the  Psychonomic Society, 1, 167-168.  NOMA, E., & BAIRD, J. C. (1975). Psychophysical judgment of numbers. II. Theoretical models of number generation.  Psychological Research, 38, 81-95.  NOREEN, D. L. (1979). Analysis of some mathematical models for choice and decision. Doctoral dissertation, The Rockefeller  University, New York.  OGILVIE, J. C., & CREELMAN, C. D. (1968). Maximum likelihood estimation of receiver operating characteristic curve parameters.  Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 5, 377-391.  PARDUCCI, A. (1965). Category judgment: A range-frequency model. Psychological Review, 72 (6), 407-418.  PARKMAN, J. M. (1971). Temporal aspects of digit and letter inequality judgments. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 91 (2),  191-205.  PARKMAN, J. M., & GREEN, G. J. (1971). Temporal aspects of simple addition and comparison. Journal of Experimental Psychology,  89, 335-342.  MODELING IMAGELESS THOUGHT 41  PIAGET, J. (1953). How children form mathematical concepts. Scientific American, 189, 74-79. POLTROCK, S. E. (1989). A random  walk model of digit comparison. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 33 (2), 131-162.  POTTS, G. R. (1974). Incorporating quantitative information into a linear ordering. Memory, and Cognition, 2 (3), 533-538.  POTTS, G. R., BANKS, W. P., KOSSLYN, S. M., MOYER, R. S., RILEY, C. A., & SMITH, K. H. (1978). Encoding and retrieval in  comparative judgments. In N. J. Castellan & F. Restle (Eds.), Cognitive Theory (Vol. 3, pp. 243-308). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  RANKIN, K. E. (1984). Numerical comparisons using fixed and roving standards: Application of relative judgment theory.  Bachelor of Science Thesis. McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario.  RESTLE, F. (1970). Speed of adding and comparing numbers. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 83, 274-278.  SEKULER, R., RUBIN, E., & ARMSTRONG, R. (1971). Processing numerical information: A choice time analysis. Journal of  Experimental Psychology, 90, 75-80.  SHALLIcE, T., & VICKERS, D. (1964). Theories and experiments on discrimination times. Ergonomics, 7, 37-49.  SHEPARD, R. N., KILPATRIC, D. W., & CUNNINGHAM, J. P. (1975). The internal representation of numbers. Cognitive Psychology, 7,  82-138.  SHIRYAYEV, A. N. (1984). Probability. New York: Springer-Verlag.  SMITH, E. E. (1968). Choice reaction time: An analysis of the major theoretical positions. Psychological Bulletin, 69 (2),  77-110.  SMITH, K. H., & Foos, P. W. (1975). Effect of presentation order on the construction of linear orders. Memory and Cognition, 3  (6), 614-618.  SMITH, K. H., & MYNATT, B. T. (1977). On the time required to construct a simple linear order. Bulletin of the Psychonomic  Society, 9 (6), 435-438.  SULLY, J. (1884). Outlines of psychology. London: Longmans, Green.  SWETS, J. A., TANNER, W. P., JR., & BIRDSALL, T. G. (1955). The evidence for a decision-making theory of visual detection  (Technical Report No. 40). Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan: Electronic Defense Group.  URBAN, F. M. (1907). On the method of just perceptible differences. Psychological Review, 14, 244-253. URBAN, F. M. (1908).  The application of statistical methods to the problems of psychophysics. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania.  VAN OEFFELEN, M. P., & VOS, P. G. (1982). A probabilistic model for the discrimination of visual number. Perception and  Psvchophysics, 32 (2), 163-170.  VICKERS, D. (1979). Decision processes in visual perception. New York: Academic Press. WALD, A. (1947). Sequential analysis.  New York: Wiley.  WALD, A. (1945). Sequential tests of statistical hypotheses. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 16, 117-186.  WATT, H. J. (1905-6). Experimental contribution to a theory of thinking. Journal of Anatomy and Physiology, 40, 257-266.  WATT, H. J. (1905). Experimentelle Beitrdge zu einer Theorie des Denkens. Archiv fair die gesamte Ps vchologie, 4, 289-436.  WEISSMANN, W. M., HOLLINGSWORTH, S. R., & BAIRD, J. C. (1975). Psychophysical study of numbers. 111. Methodological  applications. Psychological Research, 38, 97-115.  WELFORD, A. T. (Ed.) (1980). Reaction times. New York: Academic Press.  WOODWORTH, R. S. (1915). A revision of imageless thought. Psychological Review, 22, 1-27. WOODWORTH, R. S. (1938).  Experimental psychology. New York: Holt.  RECEIVED: November 24, 1986