10.1016/0022-2496(90)90036-9
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 34, 332-335 (1990)  Book Review  ROBYN M. DAWES. Rational Choice in an Uncertain World. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1988. Pp. xi + 346, $10.00  (paper).  Reviewed by BARBARA MELLERS  Robyn Dawes is a Professor of Psychology at Carnegie Mellon University and Head of the Department of Social and Decision  Sciences. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Michigan in 1963. His research interests are in individual decision  making, with particular emphasis on intuitive probability estimation and prediction and in group decision making in dilemma  situations.  The reviewer is an Associate Professor of Psychology at the University of California, Berkeley. Her research interests are in  human judgment and decision making.  In the recent past, some researchers in the field of decision making have suggested that the distinction between normative and  descriptive approaches should be widened to include a third category-prescriptive decision making. This area of decision  making focuses on helping people to make good decisions and training them to make better ones. Prescriptions may be based on  normative theory, but might also be modified in light of human cognitive limitations. Rational Choice in an Uncertain World is  a good example of a book that falls primarily into this third category. Dawes writes that "... this book is conceived in the  spirit of Ben Franklin who wrote a letter to his friend, Joseph Priestley (September 19, 1772) which began: `I cannot, for  want of sufficient premises, advice you what to determine, but if you please, I will tell you how.'"  The other two approaches to decision making are by no means ignored. Some normative theories are presented, such as subjective  expected utility theory. Some descriptive models are discussed, including prospect theory and single peaked preference  functions. But for the most part, this lively and entertaining book discusses principles of good decision making (e.g., don't  honor sunk costs, beware of scenario thinking, watch out for biased probability estimates) together with an interesting and  sometimes unusual assortment of empirical results that illustrate how we can, and quite often do, make poor decisions.  Requests for reprints should be sent to Dr. Barbara Mellers, Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, CA  94720.  0022-2496/90 $3.00  Copyright ?'; 1990 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  332  BOOK REVIEW 333  Rational Choice in an Uncertain World is organized into three main parts. The first section discusses decision making problems  in terms of weighting the consequences of various courses of action and choosing among options. Topics include variables that  "should not" influence our assessments of the consequences such as sunk costs, framing effects (changes in the description of  normatively equivalent options), and the ordering or grouping of alternatives. The second section discusses our evaluations of  probabilities when the consequences of choice are uncertain. This section includes an extended discussion of judgmental biases  and heuristics. The third section covers some methods of making decisions. Topics include subjective expected utility theory,  dominating strategies, social dilemmas (situations in which individual choices of dominating strategies may have disastrous  effects), linear models for situations in which no dominating alternatives exist, and the value of uncertainty (or the power  of choice). Finally, there is an appendix that includes three chapters on elementary probability and statistics.  The strength of the book lies in the author's engaging style of writing and his ability to convey not only ideas, but the  importance of those ideas. Throughout the book, Dawes gives numerous opinions, tells several anecdotes, and discusses many  personal experiences to illustrate how our judgments and decisions can deviate from simple principles of rationality. Certain  topics are exceptionally well done, including the chapters on dominating strategies and linear models. Dawes omits the  mathematical content and formal development of theories, with only a few exceptions, such as an extended discussion of the  axioms of expected utility theory. I suspect that the informal, conversational style will serve to spark the interest of  students and motivate them to delve deeper into the field of decision making.  The weakness of the book lies in the somewhat biased picture that is painted of judmental "biases." Much of the empirical  research on descriptive decision making is devoted to the psychological literature on cognitive errors. It is easy to get the  impression that a consensus has been reached. When discussing representative thinking, Dawes writes that, "... a great deal of  experimental evidence has been conducted... and it has uniformly been confirmatory. For example, naive subjects simply don't  distinguish between P(A/B) and P(B/A) in most circumstances, and when given one conditional probability they attempt to  estimate the other without reference to the base rates P(A) and P(B), which must be considered according to the ratio rule."  He does add, "There is one important exception to the generalization about not attending to base rates. If people ascribe some  causal significance to discrepant rates, they will often incorporate them into their reasoning... But study after study has  shown when these rates are `merely statistical' as opposed to `causal' they tend to be ignored."  Despite the overwhelming popularity of the study of biases and heuristics, there is a considerable amount of controversy about  both the findings and their interpretations (see e.g., Wallsten, 1983, or Shanteau, 1989). Some have argued that the empirical  results are often overstated. For example, there are a number of variables, in addition to the causal significance of the  probabilities, that appear to influence the use of base rates. Prior training and experience seem to have a  334 BOOK REVIEW  role. Wallsten (1981) and Christensen-Salanski and Bushyhead (1981) have demonstrated that physicians can be sensitive to base  rate information. The salience of the information also influences the use of base rates. Within-subject designs typically show  large effects of base rate information (Fischhoff, Slovic, & Lichtenstein, 1979; Birnbaum & Mellers, 1983). Those who advocate  the use of within subject designs have pointed out that it is difficult to measure the effect of a variable that is not  manipulated. Finally, the specificity of the information appears to make a difference. Carroll and Siegler (1977) found that  subjects are more likely to use base rate information when the base rate refers to a small sample, each member of which is to  be judged, then when it refers to a large population. In sum, there are quite a number of factors that influence the use of  base rate information, and the situation is much more complicated than Dawes leads us to believe.  The interpretation of the findings is another area of disagreement. Many of the behavioral phenomena presented as support for  the ideas are based on the null hypothesis. Supporting evidence has often come from reports that people ignore base rates,  neglect sample size, and overlook regression to the mean. A stronger case for judgmental biases and heuristics would be  grounded in theories that specified in advance the conditions under which the behavioral phenomena would and would not occur.  Dawes seems sensitive to this point when he writes, "If a theoretical position cannot state when an event will occur, a  skeptic might ask, what good is it?" He responds by saying, "The answer is that insofar as we are dealing with mental events  and decisions of real people in the `booming buzzing confusion' of the real world, we can neither predict nor control it with  perfect accuracy". I certainly agree that prediction is difficult, and perfect prediction perhaps impossible. However, I would  argue that progress has been made if there were more instances in which we could make reasonable, theoretically-based  predictions, let alone perfect ones!  In conclusion, Rational Choice in an Uncertain World was not written to provide an in-depth review of normative or descriptive  theories of decision making. Rather, the author intended to present some "rational" principles to consider when making  decisions. He reminds us not to honor sunk costs, be swayed by framing and group effects, systematically misjudge  probabilities, or think in scenario terms. In addition, the author intended to steer us away from various pitfalls and  thinking styles that might lead to irrational choice. To this end, Dawes has succeeded in giving us a masterful collection of  ideas, stories, anecdotes, and all-around good advice.  REFERENCES  BIRNBAUM, M. H., & MELLERS, B. A. (1983). Bayesian inference: Combining base rates with opinions of sources who vary in  credibility. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45, 792-804. CHRISTENSEN-SZALANSKI, J. J. J., & BUSHYHEAD, J. B.  (1981). Physicians' use of probabilistic information in a real clinical setting. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human  Perception and Performance, 7, 928-935.  BOOK REVIEW  335  CARROLL, J. S., & SIEGLER, R. S. (1977). Strategies for the use of base rate information. Organizational Behavior and Human  Performance, 19, 392-402.  FISCHHOFF, B., SLOVIC, P., & LICHTENSTEIN, S. (1979). Subjective sensitivity analysis Organizational Behavior and Human  Performance, 23, 339-359.  SHANTEAU, J. (1989). Cognitive heutistics and biases in behavioral auditing: Review, comments, and observations. Accounting  Organization and Society, 14, 156-177.  WALLSTEN, T. (1981). Physician and medical student bias in evaluating diagnostic information. Medical Decision Making. 1,  145-164.  WALLSTEN, T. (1983), Judgmental heuristics. In R. W. Scholtz (Ed.), Decision making under uncertainty, Amsterdam:  North-Holland.