10.1016/0022-2496(90)90013-y
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 34, 81-H7 (1990)  A Historical and Contemporary Perspective on Random Scale Representations of Choice Probabilities and Reaction Times in the  Context of Cohen and Falmagne's (1990, Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 34) Results  A. A. J. MARLEY  McGill Universitv  A system [P;;; i, j e 111, 2, ..., n l, i 0 j, PJ + P;, = 1 ] of binary probabilities satisfies a (binary) random utility  model if there exists a family U = [U, l i c { 1, 2, ..., n } ] of jointly distributed random variables such that Pii = Pr[U,  > U.] for distinct i, j e { 1, 2, ..., nj. Cohen and Falmagne (1990) give a set of necessary conditions for a system of binary  probabilities to satisfy such a (binary) random utility model. The present note places that paper in historical and  contemporary perspective, with additional comments on related work involving both binary and non-binary probabilities, and  reaction times. !C 1990 Academic Press, Inc.  As presented in Cohen and Falmagne (1990), a binary choice system (n, P) consists of a set n = 11, 2, ..., n } and a  nonnegative function P on { (i, j): i, j E n, i :A j } that, with Pij = P(i, j), satisfies Pij + Pji = 1 for distinct i, j E  n. The classical problem in choice theory that they discuss is under what conditions a binary choice system (n, P) is  representable by a (binary) random utility model, i.e., when does there exist a family U = [Ui I i E { 1, 2, ..., n } ] of  jointly distributed random variables such that Pij = Pr[Ui > Uj ] for distinct i, j c { 1, 2, ..., n }. For brevity, we refer  to this as the binary representation problem. Also, (n, P) is representable by an independent random utility model when the  random variables U,, i E n, are independent: again, for brevity, we refer to this as the independent binary representation  problem. Marschak (1960) conjectured without conviction that such a (possibly dependent) random utility representation exists  if and only if the triangle condition holds:  Pij + Pjk > Pik for all distinct i, j, k E n,  or equivalently  Pij +Pjk + Pki < 2  for all distinct i, j, k e n.  Marschak noted that the triangle condition is clearly necessary for all n > 2, is sufficient when n = 3, and remarked that T.  Motzkin had a proof of sufficiency for  Reprint requests should be addressed to Dr. A. A. J. Marley, Department of Psychology, McGill University, 1205 Ave. Dr.  Penfield, Montreal. Quebec, Canada H3A 1B1.  81  0022-2496/90 $3.00  Copyright ;c, 1990 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  82 A. A. J. MARLEY  n = 4, 5. Although there are at least two published "proofs" of sufficiency for general n (Guilbaud, 1970, and Bowman, 1972,  Theorem 2), Marschak's conjecture has been independently disproved by McFadden and Richter (1970a), Cohen and Falmagne (1978),  Dridi (1980), and Campello de Souza (1983)--each of these authors constructed the identical counterexample with n = 6 that  satisfies the triangle condition but that cannot be represented by a (binary) random utility model. Cohen and Falmagne (1990)  is essentially identical to the Cohen and Falmagne (1978) manuscript, and the main purpose of the present note is to discuss  why that manuscript has not been previously published, and why it is appropriate to publish it now.  Cohen and Falmagne (1978) presented a set of testable necessary conditions (which did not include the triangle condition) for  a system of binary probabilities to satisfy a (binary) random utility model. They then constructed the example, with n = 6,  that satisfies the triangle condition but not their set of necessary conditions. When the manuscript was submitted for  publication (not to this journal), the reviewer recommended its rejection, noting that the counterexample was "wellknown"' and  stating that the general solution of the binary representation problem would probably soon be found. Of course, it was not  soon found (at least not in the strong sense discussed below), there is currently renewed interest and progress on the problem  (summarized below), and therefore it is appropriate to publish the Cohen-Falmagne result in this journal.  In the following, we initially focus on the binary representation problem, later briefly discussing nonbinary representations  and related issues.  In a subtle way, the reviewer of the Cohen-Falmagne manuscript was both correct and incorrect in the judgment regarding the  solution of the binary representation problem. With the problem stated very generally (as above), it had already been solved  by McFadden and Richter (1970b), who show that their axiom of revealed stochastic preference (ARSP) is necessary and  sufficient-not only for the binary case, but for general sets of (choice) probabilities (see below). However, the ARSP  involves a denumerable set of conditions, even in the binary case with n = 3, yet we know that a single condition (the  triangle condition) is both necessary and sufficient in this case. Thus the conditions in the ARSP do not form a minimal  (independent) set of necessary and sufficient conditions, and therefore some of the open questions (as McFadden and Richter  1. For each n > 3, is there a particular finite set of necessary and sufficient conditions that solve the binary (and general)  representation problem? (Falmagne, 1978, discussed later, gives a positive, constructive answer in the general case, although  he does not concern himself with developing a minimal (independent) set of conditions for each n > 3. Fishburn (personal  communication, March 29, 1989)  ' Unfortunately, from unpublished manuscripts. In fact, there has been a disturbing tendency for related results to only  appear in unpublished manuscripts, a tendency that we hope the publication of the Cohen-Falmagne paper will reverse.  RANDOM SCALE REPRESENTATIONS 83  has proved the existence of a finite set of conditions in the binary case, but the proof technique (using standard results  concerning polyhedral convex sets and functions) does not lead to the explicit construction of the relevant conditions or  solutions (Fishburn's proof is available from A. A. J. Marley).)  2. Is there a finite (in a sense to be defined) set of necessary and sufficient conditions that solve the binary (and general)  representation problem simultaneously for all n >, 3? (Fishburn (1989) gives one precise formulation of this question in the  binary case, and the following illustrates the idea: if the triangle condition had turned out to be necessary and sufficient  for all n >, 3 we would have had a positive answer to the question, even though the condition would have to be tested on a  denumerable set of triples).  These, then, are the relevant questions for recent papers on this topic. Although each of the conditions in the (finite) sets  of necessary conditions mentioned below is a quite obvious special case of McFadden and Richter's ARSP condition (once someone  else has developed them!), it is not so easy to develop the conditions in the first instance and to show their properties,  e.g., that they are independent of each other (when they are) and that they are not sufficient. Also, the reason that the ARSP  involves a denumerable set of conditions is that it allows duplicates of various (choice) sets; of the more recent  contributions (Cohen and Falmagne, Fishburn, Gilboa, Koppen), only Gilboa's conditions allow limited set duplication.  Turning now to this recent work on the binary representation problem (other than by Cohen and Falmagne), Fishburn (1989) was  led to study the problem through discussions with W. T. Trotter, who in turn had recently discussed it at a conference with  Falmagne. Somewhat surprisingly, Fishburn was not led to the problem as a consequence of his own work on decomposing weighted  digraphs (Fishburn, 1987). Fishburn, using the basic theorem for the existence of solutions to finite systems of linear  inequalities, first develops a solution to the binary representation problem (his Lemma 1) that essentially agrees with that  given by McFadden and Richter (1970b, Theorem 2) when applied to binary probabilities (their Section 8, and McFadden, 1976,  Section 2); however, whereas McFadden and Richter "hid" the complexity of the result in duplication of (binary choice) sets,  Fishburn puts it "up front" by involving real-valued weighted combinations of binary probabilities in the solution. He then  specializes this result to weights in the set { - l, 0, 1 } and obtains a new set of necessary conditions for solving the  binary representation problem; shows that his conditions are independent of the CohenFalmagne set (and of the triangle  condition); and shows that no finite set of a particular type of simple necessary conditions is sufficient for the desired  representation when the alternative set n can be of arbitrary finite size. Fishburn and Falmagne (in press) summarize this  work and that of Cohen and Falmagne.  Gilboa (1989) introduces a third set of necessary conditions that he calls the diagonal inequality-this set includes the  Cohen-Falmagne conditions and the triangle condition as special cases and (even in conjunction with Fishburn's conditions) is  not sufficient for a (binary) random utility representation to exist. Koppen  480,'34,'l -7  84 A. A. J. MARLEY  (1988) presents a set of necessary conditions that generalizes that of Cohen and Falmagne and that is a special case of  Gilboa's diagonal inequality.  Having summarized current work on the binary representation problem, I return to earlier work, some of which seems not to be  well known, and then comment on related problems and possible extensions.  Colonius (1984, pp.85-95 ), reviewed by Bockenholt (1988), gives an excellent summary of work to that date, including work by  various authors on the paradox of n random variables. This "paradox" can be described in the case n = 3 by the fact that it is  possible in a (binary) random utility model to have  Pr, > , pjk > ;,  and  i.e., an intransitive cycle. Many results are known about this paradox for arbitrary n (see Colonius for details and  references)-for instance, again with n = 3, if the random variables are required to be independent, then with U = U, , U2, U3,  max min{P(U, > UZ), P(U2 >U3), P(U3 >U01 u  5-1)-0.618,  whereas without independence being required the value is 3. Also, necessary and sufficient conditions are known for a system  of binary probabilities for n = 3 to be represented by an independent random utility model (Trybula, 1961; Colonius, 1984,  Satz 7.9, p. 92). However, to my knowledge no such necessary and sufficient conditions are known for n > 3, although Trybula  (1965) is of possible relevance.  Departing from the binary case, there is a large literature on systems of probabilities  {P(x,X):XC-X~S,P(x,X),0, Y P(x,X)=l,x~0} C XEXX  in which P(x, X) is interpreted as the probability that alternative x will be chosen from the set X when X is the available  set of alternatives from a potentially relevant set S. Falmagne (1978) gives a (finite) set of necessary and sufficient  conditions for such a system of (choice) probabilities (on a finite set S) to be representable as a random utility model in  the sense that there exists a family of random variables U = {U,. I y E S} such that for each x E X~-:S,  P(x, X) = Pr(U.x > U,., Y e X - {x I).  He also states the uniqueness properties of the underlying random variables. Barbera and Pattanaik (1986) rediscovered  Falmagne's result-their paper summarizes the result and mentions the earlier (ARSP) characterization of  RANDOM SCALE REPRESENTATIONS 85  McFadden and Richter (1970a), which also appears in McFadden and Richter (1970b). As in the binary case (discussed above),  McFadden and Richter's ARSP in the general case involves a denumerable set of conditions for each n = I S1, whereas Falmagne's  conditions are finite for each n; however, if Falmagne's conditions are used to characterize the general representation for  all n, then his set of conditions is denumerable. Related results are: Cohen (1980) extends Falmagne's result to infinite  (countable or not) sets S and Colonius (1983) proves that the multiplicative property is a necessary condition for an  independent random utility model.  Note that one can generalize the above problem to other cases, including the binary case. Thus, we can require that the random  utility representation only hold on sets X - S with ~Xj < k for some k < n (or even on sets X s~ S with ~X j = k for some k <  n). It would also be of interest to obtain characterizations of the parallel independent random utility models.  One can also study random utility models that apply to (choice) probabilities and reaction times. In this case, we have a set  of distributions {PX(x;t): x E X ~ S, t > 0}, where PX(x; t) is interpreted as the probability that alternative x is chosen  after time t > 0 when the set X is the available set of alternatives from the potentially relevant set S. Horse race random  utility models (e.g. Marley, 1989) then assume that there exists a family of non-negative random variables t = { t,. I y E S }  such that for xc-X~S and t>0 PX(x;t)=Pr[t<t(x)<t(y),yc-X-ixt]. Given the complexity and difficulty of characterizing random  utility models for choice probabilities, one might expect that it would be difficult to obtain equivalent characterizations of  sets of choice probabilities and reaction times. However, the additional structure and information given by the reaction times  make it very easy to give characterizations of choice probabilities and reaction times that satisfy independent horse race  random utility models (Marley, 1976, based on Berman, 1963). Such characterizations apply equally to binary and larger set  sizes. To my knowledge, no one has developed equivalent characterizations without the independence assumption.  Finally, there are various results characterizing specific (random utility) models in terms of observable properties. Luce  (1977a, b) and Marley (1988, 1989) summarize much of that work, especially that concerned with Luce's choice model and its  extensions, with Iverson (1987) presenting interesting results for Thurstonian (normal) models.  In summary, various finite sets of necessary conditions are now known for a set of binary probabilities to be representable as  a (binary) random utility model, but it remains for someone to discover finite sets of necessary and sufficient conditions for  such representations for each particular n > 6. It would also be of interest to develop such conditions for representations by  independent random variables-some of the results discussed above suggest that such conditions might be simpler than those of  the general case. Finite sets of necessary and sufficient conditions are known for representing probabilities on all subsets  of a given set by a (general) random utility model, although in this case also no such conditions are known for the  independent case. Finally, necessary and sufficient conditions are  86 A. A. J. MARLEY  known for representing choice probabilities and reaction times by independent horse race models, but not for the general  (possibly dependent) case.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  I thank Jean-Claude Falmagne, Peter Fishburn, and Hans Colonius for their comments on the manuscript and for historical  information regarding their work on this topic. This work was supported in part by the Natural Sciences and Engineering  Research Council of Canada.  REFERENCES  BARBERA, S., & PATTANAIK, P. K. (1986). Falmagne and the rationalizability of stochastic choices in terms of random orderings.  Econometrica, 54, 707-715.  BERMAN, S. M. (1963). Note on extreme values, competing risks, and semi-markov processes. Annals of Mathematics, 34, 1104-1106.  BOCKENHOLT, D. (1988). A review of Stochastische Theorien individuellen Wahlverhaltens (Stochastic Theories about Individual  Choice Behavior) by Hans Colonius. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 32, 350-354.  BOWMAN, V. J. (1972). Permutation polyhedra. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics, 22, 580-589. CAMPELLO DE SOUZA, F. M.  (1983). Mixed models, random utilities, and the triangle inequality. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 27, 183-200.  COHEN, M. A. (1980). Random utility systems-the infinite case. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 22, 1-23.  COHEN, M., & FALMAGNE, J. C. (1978). Random scale representations of binary choice probabilities: A counterexample to a  conjecture of Marschak. Unpublished manuscript, Department of Psychology, New York University, NY.  COHEN, M. & FALMAGNE, J. C. (1990). Random utility representation of binary choice probabilities: A new class of necessary  conditions. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 34, 88-94.  COLONIUS, H. (1983). A characterization of stochastic independence by association, with an application to random independence,  by association, with an application to random utility theory. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 27, 103-106.  COLONIUS, H. (1984). Stochastische Theorien individuellen Wahlverhaltens. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. DRIDI, T. (1980). Sur les  distributions binaires associ6s a des distributions ordinales. Mathematique et Sciences Humaines, 69, 15-31.  FALMAGNE, J. C. (1978). A representation theorem for finite random scale systems. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 18,  52-72.  FtsHBURN, P. C. (1987). Decomposing weighted digraphs into sums of chains. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 16, 223-238.  FISHBURN, P. C. (1989). Binary probabilities induced by rankings. Unpublished manuscript, AT&T Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill,  NJ.  FISHBURN, P. C., & FALMAGNE, J.-C. (in press). Binary choice probabilities and rankings. Economics Letters.  GILBOA, 1. (1989). A necessary but insufficient condition for the stochastic binary choice problem. Unpublished manuscript,  Department of Managerial Economics and Decision Sciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.  GuILBAUD, G. T. (1970). Pr6f6rences stochastiques. Mathematiques et Sciences Humaines, 32, 45-56. IVERSON, G. I. (1987).  Thurstonian psychophysics: Case III. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 31, 219-247.  RANDOM SCALE REPRESENTATIONS 87  KOPPEN, M. (1988). Note on necessary conditions for a random scale representation of binary choice probabilities. Unpublished  manuscript, Department of Psychology, New York University, New York, NY.  LUCE, R. D. (1977a). The choice axiom after twenty years. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 15, 215-233.  LUCE, R. D. (1977b). Thurstone's discriminal processes fifty years later. Psychometrika, 42, 461-489. MARLEY, A. A. J. (1976).  The compatibility between random utility models of choice and competing causes models of reaction time. Unpublished  manuscript, Department of Psychology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.  MARLEY, A. A. J. (1988). Random utility models with binary tree decomposable rank orders satisfy Tversky's  elimination-by-aspects model. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 32, 436-448. MARLEY, A. A. J. (in press). A random utility  family that includes many of the "classical" models and has closed form choice probabilities and choice reaction times.  British Journal of Mathematical Psychology.  MARSCHAtc, J. (1960). Binary choice constraints and random utility indicators. In K. J. Arrow, S. Karlin, and P. Suppes  (Eds.), Mathematical methods in the social sciences 1959, pp. 312-329, Stanford, CA: Stanford Univ. Press.  MCFADDEN, D. (1976). Quantal choice analysis: A survey. Annals of Economic and Social Measurment, 5, 363-389.  McFADDEN, D., & RICHTER, M. K. (1970a). Revealed stochastic preference. Unpublished manuscript, Department of Economics,  University of California, Berkeley.  McFADDEN, D., & RICHTER, M. K. (1970b). Stochastic rationality and revealed stochastic preference. Unpublished manuscript,  Department of Economics, University of California, Berkeley.  TRYBULA, S. (1961). On the paradox of three random variables. Zastosokvania Matematyki, 5, 121-132. TRYBULA, S. (1965). On the  paradox of n random variables. Zastosox,ania Matematyki, 8, 143-156.  RECEIVED: April 26, 1989