10.1016/0022-2496(90)90027-7
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 34, 483-488 (1990)  Book Review  Neural Networks and Human Intelligence  RONALD J. MACGREGOR. Neural and Brain Modeling. San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 1987. Pp. xii + 643. $95.00 (cloth), $ 37.50  (paper).  Reviewed by RON SUN AND DAVID WALTZ  MacGregor received his Ph.D. in 1967 from Purdue University, and was a member of the RAND corporation 1965 to 1970. He is  currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Aerospace Engineering Sciences at the University of Colorado. His  primary research interest is neural modeling.  Sun is a Ph.D. candidate in the Department of Computer Science, Brandeis University, whose main research interest is  connectionist models, especially as applied to reasoning and learning. Waltz received his Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering in  1972 at MIT, was at the University of Illinois, Urbana, until 1984, and is currently a Professor of Computer Science at  Brandeis University. He was Executive Editor of the journal Cognitive Science from 1984 to 1986 and is currently also Director  of Advanced Information Systems with Thinking Machines Corporation. He has edited Connectionist Models and Their Implications  (with J. A. Feldman), Ablex, 1988, and Semantic Structures: Advances in Natural Language Processing, Erlbaum, 1989. I- 1990  Academic Press, Inc.  1. INTRODUCTION  The book Neural and Brain Modeling by Ronald MacGregor is a timely contribution to the neural network literature as well as to  the disproportionately small but very much needed selection of textbooks in this area. It is unique in its broad coverage of  current (and past) research and in its insightful summary of a number of subfields. It is useful for people working in this  field to broaden their perspectives as well as for people new to the field to get started.  Neural network modeling has been a booming field, with many discoveries and breakthroughs, and phenomenal growth in both  theoretical research and implementational techniques and applications. The research covers a broad spectrum from experimental  neurophysiology to mathematical analysis, from pattern recognition to associative memory, from network dynamics to optical or  VLSI implementation, and from robot control to conceptual representations. To add to all this, the field is still the subject  of controversies ranging from neural nets vs. statistical techniques to neural nets (or connectionism in this context) vs.  symbolic paradigms of artificial intelligence. For people working on brain and neural modeling, it is crucial to sort out  useful ideas from the myriad of research papers contributed by people from  483  0022-2496/90 $3.00  Copyright ~C, 1990 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  484 BOOK REVIEW  almost every discipline of science. On the other hand, for people wishing to get into this field, it is important to put  everything into perspective and a summarizing overview is what is needed.  This book provides such an overview and an assortment of important, interesting, and useful ideas. The contents of the book  include  an extensive review of the field  detailed explanation of models  ready-to-use computer programs.  The approach this book represents is normally referred to as computational neuroscience, except for those few chapters in the  book that talk about high level cognitive modeling. This approach is oriented towards developing mathematical and  computational models that describe how the nervous system (neural networks) carries out various operations: low level (such as  Hebbian learning, central pattern generators, and motor control) or high level (such as vision, catagory learning, and  attention). In other words, it tries to understand intelligence (ultimately human intelligence) in terms of the basic building  materials: neuronal networks. It differs from artificial intelligence/cognitive science and cybernetics, in that it tries to  open up the "black boxes" and work out detailed neural circuits for them (in contrast to cybernetics), and also in that it  tries to understand the intelligent behavior not in terms of abstract principles and computer program metaphors but concrete  examples of biological systems (compared with the AI/cognitive science approach). As a footnote to this, cognitive science is  undergoing a paradigm shift because of influences from the neural network modeling side. The difference can also be  characterized by the relationship between top-down and bottom-up processes. The neural network people try to advance  understanding of intelligence from the substrate by exploring simple neural modules for various tasks and, hopefully, putting  those blocks together later on. The more traditional approach as manifested in Artificial Intelligence, cognitive science, and  cybernetics is to analyze phenomena and to derive functional components. This functional anatomy does not necessarily  correspond to the actual anatomy, and thus can be misleading if not verified by a large number of real world data. The  bottom-up approach can help remedy this problem.  It is interesting to compare this book with other books on the same subject. A book titled Methods in Neuronal Modeling: From  Synapses to Networks edited by Christof Koch and Idan Segev discusses basically the same set of topics. But that book presents  detailed descriptions of current research, while MacGregor's book serves a different purpose. Instead of having deep, detailed  and narrative descriptions of research projects, it merely gives an extremely brief summary of approximately 1200 research  publications and it adds a set of examples in Part II of the book to give readers some sort of hands-on experience. As the  author points out: "This book is intended to be more broad than deep ... containing a methodology that should be useful in  enhancing and deepening understanding in a variety  BOOK REVIEW 485  of applications, to degrees beyond that described by any of the illustrative applications included here".  2. A DETAILED LOOK  The book is divided mainly into two parts: part I contains a review of the literature in the field, and part 11 presents a  number of models of synapses, single neurons, and neuronal networks with various degrees of simplification. Several appendices  contain all the computer programs described in the book. The two parts of the book are quite different, in terms of style and  content. The first part is a review, very sketchy and dense, bringing together almost all theoretical and experimental  approaches in brain and neural modeling that exist today, while the second part is a detailed presentation of several  simplified neuronal models, described with lots of differential equations. As a matter of fact, these two parts can be used  separately, independent of one another. When they are used together, the first part serves as a background against which the  models presented in the second part can be understood and evaluated. And the second part can serve as a source of explanatory  examples that illustrate, clarify, and strengthen the ideas sketched out in the first part. Overall the book has a clear  organization that helps readers to grasp and comprehend the material presented in the book.  Because the materials are densely organized, it is worthwhile to take a detailed look at each part, and then further down to  each chapter. The first part is entitled "Models of the Nervous System: A Review of the Literature." Although only about 200  pages long including bibliography, it contains a vast amount of information, useful for people ranging from neurobiologists to  cognitive scientists. It includes twelve chapters plus an epilogue. Those chapters are grouped into the following topics: (1)  generic mechanisms, (2) models of specific neuronal systems and networks, and (3) generic operations, systems, and networks.  The first topic includes everything related to single neuron models, at varying degrees of detail, including action potential,  dendritic trees, and synaptic processes. The last two topics deal with network levels, one for specific neural circuits, and  the other for generic network models. Overall the presentation is oriented more towards solutions than questions, tangible  results than speculation. It seems that the book is written with an eye towards engineering applications. This is not  necessarily a drawback, but not necessarily a blessing either for a new field which is just taking shape.  The first chapter is an introduction, in which the author reiterates a concept proposed by himself years ago: stratification  of variables, that is, dividing models of cognition and intelligence into several different levels and accounting for  different parameters in their correspondingly appropriate levels. From top down, those levels are (1) behavior and  consciousness, (2) drive, ego, cognitive maps and cell assemblies, (3) potentials and spike trains, (4) membrane conductances,  and (5) molecular and chemical processes. According to the author, a model will be most useful if it  486 BOOK REVIEW  bridges the gap between two or more levels. While the idea is certainly on the right track, the division of levels is  questionable. For example, the difference between the first two levels (direct observations vs. theoretically inferred  constructs) is not that clear.  Chapters 2-4 are about single neuronal models. Chapter 2 describes models of spike generation on isolated patches of neuronal  membrane. It includes well-known models such as those of Goldman, Hodgkin and Huxley, and even McCulloch and Pitts. Chapter 3  covers various dendritic tree models, taking into consideration the spatial characteristics of single neurons. The cable  theory of core conduction is explained in detail. Some extensions of it, i.e., the equivalent cylinder model and active  dendritic conductance, are also described. Models of intercellular communication at biophysical and chemical levels are  presented in Chapter 4. This chapter is at the lowest level according to the idea of stratification of variables.  The next four chapters present models of specific networks, such as rhythmic oscillators, sensorimotor systems, and the  hippocampus. Chapter 5 considers systems in invertebrates, Chapter 6 considers systems at the reptilian level, Chapter 7  considers systems at the limbic levels, and finally Chapter 8 contains models at the neocortical and thalamocortical level. We  found Chapters 7 and 8 to be wellwritten, and very interesting too, because they are most relevant to the endeavor of  understanding cognition and the nature of intelligence. The author emphasizes Grossberg's work, which tends to link data from  several different levels of descriptions, according to the concept of Stratification of Variables, and is thus most  illuminating.  Chapters 9 to 12 are on neural network models in general and on cognitive and psychological theories of brain functions.  Chapter 9 describes generic neural network models. First it presents results concerning representation and analysis of neural  networks, including ones using chaotic dynamic system concepts. It also presents models based on stochastic system theory,  such as the Boltzman Machine and Hopfield models. The fluid mechanical models described here are not very familiar to  cognitive scientists and psychologists. The review on learning models is extensive and quite complete. The last section of the  chapter is a brief review of cognitive neural network models, such as the work by Feldman, Anderson, and McClelland and  Rumerhart. Chapter 10 basically reviews the work by AI researchers, cognitive psychologists, and linguists. Most of the topics  in this chapter are not based on neural networks. They are rather based on phenomenological analysis of behaviors or on  philosophical grounds. The last two chapters, Clinical Models (Chapter 11) and Outer Limits (Chapter 12), are only  bibliographies in areas where the author claims no expertise. They are only remotely relevant to the neural network and brain  modeling area.  The second part of the book contains 12 chapters of computer simulation models. All of these models are accompanied by  computer programs written in FORTRAN. The programs are written mostly in standard language without much bias toward specific  machines or specific installations, making it usable for a large variety of users. One problem is that there is no manual for  the programs, and  BOOK REVIEW 487  instead the explanations of the program are mixed with the explanations of the models in the text. This way either there is no  adequate documentation for the programs, or too much detail in the text, so that readers can easily get lost. The organization  of each chapter is the same: Section A is the use of the program, Section B is the model description, equations and discussion  (inappropriately titled "program listings"), and Section C is the theoretical background. We found it very difficult to  understand the model in the order presented in the text. Actually at least Section B (maybe Section C too) should be read  before Section A. With the altered order (C, B, and then A), readers can first get a good idea of the context and the concepts  involved, then get to the precise descriptions of the model, and finally get to the use of the program and its input and  output format.  Chapter 13 is an introduction, which classifies and describes the models and programs presented in the rest of the book.  Chapter 14 and 15 are for single neuron models, with and without synaptic connections. Chapters 16, 17, and 18 are for small  neural networks: junctions, neuronal pools, and local networks, exploring properties such as lateral inhibition, recurrent  connections, and internal states. Chapters 19 and 20 deal with multiple neuronal populations. They can be used to study the  hippocampus, auditory information processing, and memory traces.  Chapter 21 goes back to single neuron models, with complicated dendritic models. It is a refinement of the models in Chapters  14 and 15. Chapter 22 describes propagation of action potentials along axons. The following Chapter 23 presents models similar  to the models presented in Chapters 17, 19, and 20, but instead of using point neuron models in the network, it uses the more  complete models with dendritic trees as in Chapter 21.  Part Il of the book ends with a closing remark, Chapter 24-The place of computer modeling in neuroscience. As a matter of  fact, the importance of computer and mathematical modeling and simulations of neural networks in understanding nervous systems  and even in understanding human intelligence and brain functions is already accepted in the community.  3. CONCLUDING REMARKS  We think that it is very difficult to put such diverse ideas of various focus, depth, and scope from various different fields  into one single cohesive framework. The author has done a remarkable job on this, and he develops a unique personal  perspective of the material, making it very interesting and intriguing.  This book assumes the reader knows only the basics of neural science at a level close to Kandal and Schwartz's book, and some  basic knowledge of differential equations, stochastic process, and electronics. So it is accessible to a large readership.  In terms of the use of the book, it is very useful as some sort of a handbook for researchers in related fields. This book  alone is not sufficient as a textbook, but if supplemented with a set of major papers referenced in the book, it could be used  488 BOOK REVIEW  for a graduate course on neural modeling. Comparing it with Koch and Segev's book, we felt that, while Koch and Segev is more  suitable as a textbook for an advanced undergraduate or graduate course, it lacks the breadth and integrating perspective that  MacGregor has.  A drawback is that this book only covers research up to the early 1980s. Since this field is very dynamic and vigorously  growing, many new important developments are inevitably missing from the book.  Overall, this is an interesting, useful, and well-crafted book. We strongly recommend it to people working in fields such as  biology, neural networks, brain modeling, artificial intelligence, psychology and cognitive science.  REFERENCES  KANDEL, E. R., AND SCHWARTZ, J. H., Eds. (1984). Principles of Neural Science. New York: Elsevier. KOCH, C. AND SECEV, I.  (1989). Methods in neuronal modeling. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. SMOLENSKY, P. (1988). On the proper treatment of  connectionism. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 11, 1-74.  SUN, R., MARDER, E., AND WALTZ, D. (1989). Model local neural networks in the Lobster stomatogastric ganglion. In Proceedings  of International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (Washington, DC, 1989), pp. II-604. IEEE Neural Network Committee.