10.1016/0022-2496(91)90040-z
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 35, 131-148 (1991)  Book Review  Are You Sure That's What You Really Want to Do?  P. C. FISHBURN AND 1. H. LAVALLE (Eds.). Choice under Uncertainty. Basel: J. C. Balzer AG, 1989. Pp. 504.  Reuiewed by A. A. J. MARLEY  Peter Fishburn is a member of the Mathematical Studies Department of AT&T Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, N. J. He obtained  his Ph.D. from Case Western Institute of Technology in 1962, and has previously been a Research Professor of Management  Science at Pennsylvania State University and a Visiting Scientist at the Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton. He has  received numerous honors and awards including the Ramsey Medal of the Operations Research Society of America for contributions  to decision analysis. He has published extensively in the area of discrete and combinatorial mathematics, including  measurement, preference, utility, and voting. His other recent books include lnterprofile conditions and impossibility  (Harwood Academic, 1987) and Nonlinear preference and utility theory (The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1988).  Irving LaValle is Professor of Management Science at Tutane University, where he has been since obtaining a D. B. A. in  Managerial Economics at Harvard University in 1966. He is Departmental Editor for Decision Analysis of Management Science,  having served as an Associate Editor from 1982-1988, and was Associate Editor of Operations Research Letters from 1983-1988.  His research interests center on utility, decision, and game theory.  The reviewer is Professor of Psychology at McGill University, where he has been since 1969. Prior to going to McGill, he was a  Fellow of the Miller Institute, University of California at Berkeley, and a Killam Fellow, University of Alberta at Edmonton.  He was Editor of the Journal of Mathematical Psychology from 1980-1985, and his main research interests are probabilistic and  computational models in decision and psychophysics. 16 1991 Academic Press, Inc.  INTRODUCTION  Choice under uncertainty, broadly defined, involves decision making for situations in which the consequences of actions may  depend on events not controlled by the decision maker. There are three approaches to studying such choice under uncertainty:  normative, descriptive, and prescriptive. The normative approach focuses on rationality and how individuals ought to make  decisions, the descriptive approach is concerned with how individuals actually do make decisions, and the prescriptive  approach aims to help people make good decisions under realistic constraints on cognitive abilities and available resources.  All three approaches are  Requests for reprints should be sent to Dr. A. A. J. Marley, Department of Psychology, McGill University, 1205 Avenue Docteur  Penfield, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 1131.  0022-2496/91 $3.00  Copyright (C) 1991 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  132 BOOK REVIEW  well represented in Choice under Uncertainty. This collection of 27 papers is based on presentations at a Symposium on Choice  under Uncertainty, organized by Peter Fishburn and Irving LaValle for the 1987 joint national meeting of the Operations  Research Society of America and the Institute of Management Sciences (ORSA/TIMS), plus invited contributions from other  leading researchers who did not participate in the Symposium. As can be seen from the list of contributors (see the Table of  Contents at the end of the review), and as discussed below, the editors obtained excellent contributions from many of the  leading researchers in the relevant fields.  The collection is divided into five parts that relate quite directly to the descriptive, normative, and prescriptive modes  mentioned above. Part I (by Fishburn) is a survey of recent generalizations of expected utility theories; Fishburn emphasizes  generalizations with significant normative interest, although these developments have frequently been driven by the  descriptive inadequacy of previous normative theories. Part II presents some alternative descriptive theories and the results  of empirical tests of both these theories and of some of the revised normative theories of Part I. Part III includes  theoretical and empirical work on the measurement of preference intensity and of risk attitudes in recent theories. Part IV  contains new results in nonlinear preference theory, these result's again being frequently normative but driven by descriptive  concerns. Part V concludes the book with discussions of prescriptitve decision making.  In this review, I discuss each section in turn, briefly mentioning each chapter; thus the review is also a summary that I hope  will be valuable to potential readers of the book. I use two forms of citation: Chapters in the book are referenced by the  author, e.g. Hogarth, and given in the Table of Contents of the book at the end of the review; additional references are given  in the usual form, e.g., Machina (1985), and given in the Additional References at the end of the review.  PART I. SURVEY  Part I consists solely of a paper by Fishburn that contains exactly what one would expect in a chapter with the title  "Generalization of expected utility theories: A survey of recent proposals." The major portion of the chapter is adapted from  Fishburn (1988), and in fact can be used very constructively as an integrative summary when reading that book. The survey is  divided into two parts corresponding to the usual distinction between decisions under risk where objective outcome  probabilities are given as part of the formulation, and under uncertainty where subjective outcome probabilities for the  states are derived in some way.  I now discuss this review chapter relatively extensively as it is clearly of major importance in its own right as well as for  understanding the remainder of the book. Numerous other chapters duplicate parts of Fishburn's survey, to the extent that the  material is relevant to the given chapter. This duplication is in fact quite helpful, since each author presents the relevant  material in his or her own  BOOK REVIEW 133  fashion, allowing readers, through repetition, to strengthen and reorganize their understanding of the material.  Fisburn begins the sections on decision under risk with a statement of the core axioms and representation theorem of the yon  Neumann-Morgenstern utility theory. In particular, he lets P stand for a convex set of probability measures p, q,... on a set  X of decision outcomes. (Convexity means that if p, q E P and 0 < ~ < 1, then .lp+(l -))q is also in P, where (tip +(1  -).)q)(A)=tip(A)+(1-).)q(A) for each A 9 X in the algebra of subsets of X on which the measures are defined). He also assumes  an asymmetric binary relation > on P with symmetric complement -, i.e., p - q if neither p > q nor q > p. The relation > is  interpreted as is preferred to, and ti as is indifferent to. The basic von Neumann-Morgenstern expected utility representation  then requires that there exist a functional (i.e., real valued function) u on P (unique up to a positive affine  transformation) such that for p, q in P and 0<)~<1,  p>q-u(p)>u(q),  with u linear, i.e.,  u(.ip+(1-;~)q)=.iu(p)+(1-A)u(q).  After discussing this standard expected utility representation, Fishburn summarizes the core axioms associated with the  derivation of such a representation as being:  (1) transitivity: each of > and on P is transitive;  (2) independence: if p > q, 0 < < 1, and r c P, then ).p + (1 - A) r > tiq + (1-%')r; and  (3) continuity: if p>q>r, then ap+(1-a)r>q and q>fp+(1-f3)r for some a and f strictly between 0 and 1.  He then summarizes the empirical evidence showing that each of these axioms is violated in various circumstances, and proceeds  to a discussion of the generalizations of expected utility theory that have been proposed to handle these violations. Thus he  accepts that the standard von Neumann-Morgenstern expected utility representation is descriptively inadequate, and looks for  descriptively adequate generalizations. Not until Part V of the book is the question raised as to whether one should concern  oneself with developing such descriptively adequate theories, as opposed to "simply" teaching people to behave "normatively",  i.e., as prescribed by expected utility theory.  Generalizations of expected utility theory for decision making under risk involve weakening one or more of the above  transitivity, independence, and continuity axioms. Fishburn places each of the vast number of recent such generalizations into  one of 11 possible classes, these classes being defined by which axioms are weakened. For instance, Machina's (1982) locally  linear utility representation need not satisfy independence; Fishburn's (1988) skew-symmetric bilinear (SSB) represen-  134  BOOK REVIEW  tation need not be transitive; non-archimedean theories (e.g., Hausner, 1954) do not assume continuity, and yield  representations in a linear vector space whose elements are ordered lexicographically. As a final detailed example, consider a  rank dependent representation (e.g., Quiggin, 1982; Chew & Epstein, 1989) of > on P. (For simplicity I only present the  representation for simple prospects P-i.e., where a finite ordered set of outcomes x;, I <, i < n, with x, < ... < xoccur  with probabilities p(x;), 1 <, i < n.) Then the rank dependent representation is  p > 9- V(p) > V(9)  where  V(P) =u(x,)+ [u(xi)-u(xi-i)]YC.~.P(xr)J  i=2 r-7  with a continuous and increasing over X, and y continuous and non-decreasing from [0, 1 ] onto [0, 1 ] with y(0) = 0, y(I ) =  1. Note that such a representation satisfies the continuity and transitivity axioms, but does not satisfy independence (since  it is nonlinear in the probabilities) unless Y(~)=:t for all a, in which case the rank dependent representation reduces to the  expected utility form.  Fishburn begins the sections on decision making under uncertainty by presenting both the acts and the lottery acts formulation  of the basic additive (expected or linear) utility representation. In both formulations, one has a set of states S with  subsets of S called events, and event A obtains if it contains the true state. As in the risk formulation, X is the set of  decision outcomes and (here) P is the set of all simple probability measures on X. The acts formulation for preferences under  uncertainty developed by Savage (1954) and others applies > to the set of acts f, g,... defined by  F= {f : f is a function from S into X},  i.e., each act f c- F assigns an outcome f(s) e X to each state in S. (In the lottery acts formulation, f would assign a  lottery, not necessarily a single outcome, to each state). Savage used seven axioms for > on F to obtain his subjective  probabilityexpected utility representation:  f > g- f s u(f(s)) d17(s) > f S u(g(s)) dn(s),  where u is a bounded functional on X and 11 is an additive probability measure on the subsets of S. Savage's axioms include  transitivity (weak order), nontriviality and continuity conditions, and a few independence axioms. Again, Fishburn organizes  the vast number of recent generalizations of this representation by placing each in one of 8 categories created by the  following dichotomies: additive versus nonadditive subjective probability; transitive versus nontransitive preference; basic  (Savage) acts versus lottery acts. For instance, Bell's (1982) and Loomes and  BOOK REVIEW 135  Sugden's (1982, 1986) expected regret representations are additive and nontransitive on Savage acts; Luce and Naren's (1985)  biexpected utility representation is nonadditive and transitive on Savage acts. As a final detailed example, consider one of  Fishburn's own models, which has the form  .f>g-V(f>g)>0  where  V(f, g) = Y_ Ms) OAS), g(s) ) ,Es  Y n(S)y(t)CIo(.f(S),.f(t))l-I0(g(s),g(t))17, rE S is S  H(s) > 0, Y,Es H(s) = l, each y(t) is a real number, and is a skew-symmetric function on X x X This is a generalization of  Fishburn's (1988) skew-symmetric bilinear (SSB) model, and reduces to various other models, e.g., Schmeidler's (1984)  nonadditive linear model, under appropriate restrictions. In its general form it is nonadditive and nontransitive on lottery  acts.  As the above illustrates, the various proposed generalizations of expected utility theories are complex. Although numerous of  the proposals are quite similar in many respects, others (e.g., the rank dependent and the skew-symmetric bilinear models  mentioned above) seem to have little in common-a major research goal in the future must be to obtain a more integrative  perspective on these various models, perhaps even developing an even more general framework that includes these models as  special cases. Also, since a major motivation for these proposals is to be able to handle the various data that contradict the  "classical" normative models, it is regrettable that in this chapter (and to a significant extent in his 1988 book) Fishburn  did not clearly tabulate which of the various data (nontransitivity, preference reversal, certainty effect, Allais paradox,  etc.) are compatible with which model. Obviously, this would be a major task on top of the one (summarizing the models) that  he has expertly completed. Nonetheless, I hope that someone will carry out this task in the near future so that we can all  have a clearer picture of which model predicts which data.  PART 11. BEHAVIORAL MODELS AND EMPIRICAL FINDINGS  Part II consists of five papers that develop behavioral (i.e., descriptively motivated) models of decision making and present  empirical studies of such models. In the first paper, Hogarth tests his anchoring-and-adjustment model in a pair of  experiments. This model was developed to handle situations where the decision maker may have less than complete knowledge of  the values of the relevant probabilities-i.e., these probabilities may be ambiguous. Such ambiguity is assumed to influence  decisions via a set of decision weights, the values of which are  136 BOOK REVIEW  dependent on some anchor probabilities (determined by the choice situation) and on the values of the possible consequences.  The resulting decision weights combined with the outcome values (e.g., as in expected utility theory but with the decision  weights replacing the objective probabilities) determine the actual decision made in a given situation. Hogarth's experiments  used hypothetical two-person games (e.g., involving "plaintiffs" and "defendants"), in which the probabilities of the various  possible consequences were expressed either precisely or ambiguously, with the subjects choosing a strategy (option) from  those available (e.g., "settle out of court," "go to trial"). The data supported the specific ambiguity functions (values of  the decision weights) that Hogarth proposed.  Goldstein and Einhorn present an axiomatization of their expression theory (Goldstein & Einhorn, 1987). Expression theory was  developed to handle various preference reversal phenomena, with a basic theme of the theory being that people making choices  must map various quantities (e.g., amounts of money) onto the relevant bounded response scales (e.g., ratings). In particular,  Goldstein and Einhorn assume that most such judgments are relative and that the mapping is a form of cross-modality matching;  for related ideas in other domains, see Krantz (1972), Marley (1972), and Shepard (1981). The present axiomatization is  fascinating in that it simultaneously gives the proposed representations of preference (choice), minimum selling price, and  attractiveness rating. As mentioned by the authors, a rather different approach is presented by Tversky, Sattath, and Slovic  (1988), who suggest that subjects give more weight to stimulus dimensions that are compatible with the response scale. It  would be particularly useful to see these two approaches compared in some direct fashion as each has considerable intuitive  plausibility.  Starmer and Sugden present new techniques for testing the predictions of generalized expected utility theory (Machina, 1982),  prospect theory (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979), and rank dependent theory (Quiggin, 1982; Yaari, 1987). The authors draw attention  to the important difference between choice theories formulated in terms of actions, in which the available options are  specified in terms of a common set of states of the world and the associated outcomes for each option/ state pair, and  theories formulated in terms of prospects, in which each option is specified independently in terms of its probability  distribution over the possible outcomes. As the authors point out, the above three theories are usually formulated over  prospects, whereas regret theory (e.g., Loomes & Sugden, 1982) is formulated over actions. The choice situations presented to  the subjects in the experiments described in this chapter (in the form of a choice between two possible actions) were so  designed that each of the above mentioned prospect-based theories (when they differ from expected utility theory) predicts  specific dependencies of choices on the experimental variable (an event probability), whereas regret theory, an actionbased  theory, predicts no such dependency. In general, the experimental results were compatible with the predictions of the standard  version of expected utility theory; where the data did not satisfy this theory, they also did not exhibit the patterns  predicted by the prospect-based theories. These results are somewhat  BOOK REVIEW  137  suprising given the known violations of expected utility thery and at the very least suggest that experimenters must pay  attention to whether options are presented as actions or prospects.  Loomes provides additional experimental results relevant to this distinction between options as actions or prospects, again  showing the failings of prospectbased theories for the given experimental design. Unlike Starmer and Sugden, however, Loomes  did not find support for the predictions of regret theory, leading him to discuss the disappointment generalization of that  theory (Loomes & Sugden, 1986).  In the final paper of Part II, Wehrung reports some of the data from his large ongoing study of experienced executives making  hypothetical decisions that involve the possibility of significant gains and/or losses. These executives are experienced in  making real decisions involving large amounts of money and significant risk, and thus one can hope, even though the studied  decisions are hypothetical, that the executives consider them realistic, take them seriously, and make judgments similar to  those they would make in a real situation. It is thus reassuring (scientifically if not socially or politically) to learn that  the results of this study are similar to the results of studies using college students as decision makers. Although about half  of the executives fully conformed to expected utility theory (with various patterns of risk propensities over gains and  losses), many others revealed systematic violations of the theory. Kahneman & Tversky's (1979) prospect theory fared no better  or worse, with some predictions (such as risk taking over losses) being strongly substantiated, whereas others (such as the  reflection effect) were not so evident in the data; however, these results also parallel those found with student subjects.  In summary, the results of Part II show the variety and sophistication of current experimental studies, and highlight the  difficulty of finding one "correct" or "best" descriptive theory that fits the data of every person. It may be the case that  not only do different people vary in "parametric" ways (e.g., different shapes of utility function), but dependent on their  cognitive abilities and training they may also differ in the class of descriptive theory that fits their choices.  PART 111. RISK ATTITUDES AND PREFERENCE INTENSITY  The five papers in Part III focus on theoretical and empirical work on the measurement of preference intensity and of risk  attitudes in recent generalizations of expected utility theory. They do not form as coherent a whole as do the papers in other  sections. Harvey presents a prescriptive model for choice under risk that assumes that a person's choices may be influenced  not only by the actual monetary outcomes, but also by "the anticipation of his psychological responses to the possible  financial outcomes of his decision." Unfortunately, Harvey never adequately describes how one models these "psychological  responses," but simply constructs various examples. For example, in the simplest case, the "psychological  138 BOOK REVIEW  response" leads to adding a constant positive (respectively, negative) quantity in a nonlinear fashion to a measure of the  utilities of the positive (respectively, negative) outcomes. Harvey mentions regret theory but does not give a detailed  comparison of his model with that theory, which might have given the reader a clearer understanding of the advantages of his  approach. This paper illustrates (by default) the advantages of the axiomatic approach to theories-if Harvey had presented a  (partial or complete) axiomatization of his representation, the similarities and differences between his theory and other  theories would have been more apparent.  Bordley draws attention to important results in the economic literature on consumption streams, situations in which one can  again or lose various amounts of a resource (e.g., money) over time, and can, in addition, "consume" or use up some of the  resource. In these situations it is important to distinguish the direct utility function on the consumption stream, which can  depend on intermediate levels of the resource being consumed, and the indirect utility function, which depends only on the  final wealth level, with intermediate consumption assumed to have been selected in such a way as to maximize the overall  utility for the given final wealth level. Bordley's focus is Kahneman and Tversky's (1979) reference point effect which  requires that the indirect utility function be concave in gains and convex in losses. He shows that one can reinterpret  Kahneman and Tversky's examples in terms of two-period consumption streams, and demonstrates that it is possible for the  direct utility function to be everywhere concave (the usual assumption in economics), while the indirect utility function is  concave in gains and convex in losses. This is an interesting paper and result, which I see as important not so much for its  derivation of indirect utility functions with particular shapes, but rather for its bringing temporal utility (over  consumption streams) into the noneconomic literature on choice under uncertainty. Unfortunately, Bordley's conceptual and  mathematical presentations are poor and are confined to the two-period situation.  Krzysztofowicz and Koch study the subjective expected utility representation of simple gambles over an interval [0, X* ], X *  > 0, elements of this interval being interpreted as gains relative to the status quo. They consider gambles of the form (x, p)  where x E [0, X* ] is received with probability p, p E P = [0, 1 ], otherwise the status quo occurs with probability 1 - p,  and they study the utility representation  u(x, p) = v(x) r(p),  where v is a utility function encoding strength of preference for outcomes in X* and r is a risk (subjective probability)  function encoding risk attitude toward the gambles. Krzystofowicz and Koch do an examplary job of developing and using  procedures to fit the above (subjective expected utility) model to a set of data, showing that, in general, the subjective  probability function r is nonlinear, and illustrating the distortions that can arise in the fitted utility function if r is  forced to be linear. This paper will be very useful to anyone seriously interested in fitting utility theories to data. The  authors in their introduction state that the object of their investigation  BOOK REVIEW 139  is to derive a (cardinal utility) function v that represents a relation > on X* x X* with the property that for x, y, z, w E X*  yx%wz<--+v(y)-v(x)>v(w)-v(z).  (Some terms are reversed in their statement of this condition). Thus > is to be interpreted as "the strength of preference for  y over x is at least as great as the strength of preference for w over z". However, I do not believe that the authors ever  again discuss this relation >,, only deriving v in the context of simple gambles-see the comments regarding such a procedure  given in the next paragraph.  Farquhar and Keller discuss whether it is possible to measure "strength of preference" relations > of the type mentioned  above. They require that any such measurement procedure satisfy three criteria: (1) It must be actionable (i.e., be revealed  through some action of the decision maker-a rating judgment is not considered actionable); (2) it must be compatible with the  existing structure of the decision problem (i.e., no extraneous elements should be introduced-thus, gambles on the elements  with probabilities of 2 cannot be used); (3) there must be no confounding of extraneous factors (e.g., comparisons should  satisfy the independence of irrelevant alternatives condition). In accordance with these criteria, the authors examine and  reject the direct estimation, willingness to pay, and lottery methods, but are relatively positive toward the replication  method.  Wakker presents elegant axiomatizations of subjective expected utility models in which the utility function (preference  relation) satisfies specific risk relations such as absolute (nondecreasing, constant, nonincreasing) risk aversion and  constant relative risk aversion. Wakker notes that these risk conditions imply specific properties (e.g., concavity) or  specific functional forms (e.g., power, exponential, log) for the utility functions; however, he also notes that it is  customary first to axiomatize the subjective expected utility model and then to add the relevant risk axioms. His interesting  contribution is to construct his axiom set around the risk conditions, showing that a few additional axioms (continuity,  monotonicity, and the sure-thing principle) then yield the subjective expected utility model with the specific properties or  functional forms mentioned above. The resulting axiom system is much more concise and gives deeper insight into the role of  the risk axioms than do previous axiomatizations. (Except that the theory is linear, the paper could have been placed in Part  IV, New Results in Nonlinear Preference Theory).  PART IV. NEW RESULTS IN NONLINEAR PREFRENCE THEORY  The twelve papers in Part IV extend and apply recent nonlinear preference and utility theories. Blume, Brandenburger, and  Dekel provide an excellent review of recently developed lexicographic models that motivates the reader to think about  multicriterion problems in general. For instance, one of their examples involves the lexicographic use of "ruin" (e.g.,  bankruptcy) and "aspiration level" as the choice  480/35/1-10  140 BOOK REVIEW  criteria. One can alternatively consider these as the criteria in a vector optimization problem, an approach that can lead, in  the case of nonlinear utility theories, to predictions of stochastic choice (Machina, 1985; Fishburn & LaValle, 1988; Clark,  1990; Marley, 1990).  LaValle and Fishburn show that so-called "purely technical" assumptions regarding the space over which the relevant utility  functions are defined can, in the context of other axioms, have important consequences such as whether or not the preference  relation is transitive.  The two chapters by Chew, and Chew and Epstein, study utility theories that satisfy betweenness (P > Q and A E (0, 1) imply P  > ~P + (1 - ~) Q > Q), and relate such theories and their representations to generalized means and to M-estimators in  statistics. Chew and Epstein's paper applies these ideas to the measurement of inequality, such as in income, organizing in a  common framework various previously studied inequality measures such as rank dependent and Gini forms.  Nakamura nicely generalizes the classic definitions and results concerning measures of risk aversion, and derives conditions  under which skew symmetric bilinear (SSB) utility functions satisfy these generalized measures. (This paper allows one to get  a better "feeling" for various SSB forms such as O(x, y) _ W(x) w(y) f(x- y)).  Quiggin applies the classic technique of using stochastic dominance to characterize a class of "order preserving" utility  functions to the recent generalizations of expected utility theory. For instance, a first order stochastic dominance rule is  one that gives conditions under which one prospect is preferred to another for all utility functions that "preserve the  preference order" on the outcome space; ideally, such conditions should be necessary as well as sufficient. Quiggin gives such  necessary and sufficient conditions for various recent theories, including rank- and statedependent utility theories and  regret theories. Many of these conditions are surprisingly simple to state (once discovered) and are aesthetically pleasing.  Segal generalizes rank-dependent utility theories by axiomatizing a representation in which the utility of a gamble specified  in terms of a probability distribution over the possible outcomes is given by some measure of the area above the graph of the  associated cumulative probability distribution.  Nau presents a complex discussion of how one can attach confidence judgments to a series of judgments regarding "plausible"  intervals for the probability of some event. In an interesting minor aside, Nau points out that his techniques enable one to  develop a method for pooling probability judgments (of, say, several experts) that satisfies both marginalizability and  external Bayesianity-it is known that these two conditions are incompatible when applied to the usual "sharp" probabilities  (Barrett and Pattanaik, 1987).  Gilboa's conceptually and technically difficult paper discusses generalizations of expected utility theory involving  non-additive probability measures. Various difficulties of interpretation arise in such models due, for instance, to the fact  that for any such model with (nonadditive) probability measure v on the set of states S there is a parallel dual model where  the measure v is replaced by the dual measure  BOOK REVIEW 141  v, where for A g; S, v(A) = 1 - v(A'), with A` the complement of A. Note that in general v(A) j4 v(A), although it does if  v(A) = 1 - v(A'), i.e., if v(A) + v(A') = 1. Gilboa calls a measure with v(A) + v(A') = 1 for all A 9 S symmetric, shows that  various models and their duals give the "same" results when the measure is symmetric, and gives a characterization of such  symmetric measures in terms of the primitives of his model. He finally also gives some arguments as to why one might even  expect v to be additive.  Hazen discusses his subjectively weighted linear utility model, which is of the same form as Chew and MacCrimmon's (1979)  weighted linear utility model. However, Hazen explicitly associates his weighting function W with a measure of attitude  towards ambiguity (of probabilities), so that the function T would be constant in nonambiguous situations. He characterizes  the notion of ambiguity, attitude-averse, seeking, and neutral-in a way that parallels the more traditional notions of risk  aversion. The basic idea is to consider a decision maker who must choose between a pair of objectively equivalent uncertain  prospects f, p (i.e., each of f, p has the same outcomes occurring with the same probabilities), but f is presented as an  uncertain prospect (i.e., outcome probabilities "ambiguous"), and p is presented as a pure risk lottery (i.e., outcome  probabilities known). Then a decision maker is (by definition) ambiguity averse (respectively, seeking) if he/she weakly  prefers p to f (respectively, f to p). Hazen shows that such is the case for every such f, p pair provided the decision  maker's weighting function 'P' is nowhere increasing (respectively, decreasing). (Some of the inequalities in Hazen's proof of  this result, Theorem 1 on pp. 421-422, appear to be reversed although the final result remains correct). The only possible  objection to this definition is that the objective probabilities are assumed to be the same in the comparisons of f, p,  although subjective probabilities, i.e. monotonic transforms of the objective probabilities, are allowed in the representation  of f. However, Hazen is surely not saying that in an actual judgment under uncertainty the decision maker mysteriously has  access to the objective probabilities, only that one can sensibly define ambiguity attitude in the above way-presumably, in an  uncertain situation, the decision maker has to use some other means to "estimate" the subjective probabilities. Hazen also  develops relations between second degree stochastic dominance (on his induced subjective expected utility distributions) and  ambiguity attitudes that parallel the classic expected utility results relating stochastic dominance and risk attitudes.  Karni and Safra discuss behavior in ascending bid auctions in which the auctioneer begins at some price and proceeds to  increase the price until exactly zero or one bidder remains; in the former case, Karni and Safra assume (with significant  simplification of their results) that no bidder receives the item. At each price level, each bidder can either remain in the  bidding or withdraw without chance of reentry. By generalizing techniques developed for the study of intertemporal decisions  with time dependent discount rates, the authors are able to develop equilibrium strategies in such auctions for non-expected  utility models. This is a complex task since, without the independence axiom (or the sure thing principle),  142 BOOK REVIEW  the optimal strategy may be dynamically inconsistent-that is, the continuation of an optimal strategy (formulated at a prior  node) at the present node may not be the optimal strategy at that present node. Nonetheless, with the appropriate definitions  of optimal strategy and of sequential equilibrium, the authors are able to show that for preference relations satisfying  betweenness (if F > H, then for :t e (0, 1), F > .1F+ (1 - ~) H > H), one can associate a value to each item for each bidder  such that the bidder withdraws from the auction at the point where the price of the item exceeds its value for that bidder,  and that such a set of bidding strategies is Pareto optimal in the sense that the bidder who values the item the most is the  winner. (The authors also present a weaker version of this result). These are fascinating results and remind me of Gittins's  (1989) work on dynamic allocation indices, where various dynamic decision problems are shown to be optimally solved by the use  of similar cutpoint decision rules.  LaValle's complex technical paper discusses the simplification of decision problems with multidimensional outcomes that is  achieved by replacing those outcomes with "equivalent" simpler proxy outcomes, and proceeding with the analysis on those proxy  outcomes. For instance, one might evaluate the outcomes of a series of medical treatment plans of varying duration, cost,  discomfort, quality of life, etc., by finding for each plan its "equivalent" duration for living an unimpaired life. If f, g  are original options, f', g' their proxy equivalents, and if f is preferred to g, then for this replacement procedure to work  f must be preferred to g'. Unfortunately, this condition and other similar ones are not necessarily satisfied outside the  domain of expected utility theory. LaValle discusses conditions that must be satisfied for proxy substitution to make sense  (i.e., for the associated choices to be neutral), and demonstrates which generalizations of expected utility theory satisfy  such conditions. (He also discusses the weaker notion of semineutrality). Unfortunately, the material is presented entirely at  the abstract level with no examples and only comments on specific choice models in the final section.  PART V. HELPING PEOPLE TO MAKE GOOD DECISIONS  The four papers in Part V touch upon issues associated with the prescriptive use of decision theory and the relations between  descriptive, normative and prescriptive approaches. Brown describes a decade long program of research and application on (my  term) combining expert opinions, specifically in combining (for the Navy) multiple estimates of the range of a target. He  emphasizes the "build-test-build-test" cycle, and gives strong arguments for practitioners' reserving time to communicate  their experience to others (researchers?) and for researchers getting their hands dirty (or their feet wet?) in real-world  applications of decision theory. Keller makes general comments regarding problem representation and structuring, with a call  for more concern with knowledge structures in decision research. Fischer's brief, excellent paper summarizes a multitude of  issues, and refers to important work outside the domains of the other papers in this collection: He first questions whether it  is possible to develop an appropriate basis for prescriptive decision analysis,  BOOK REVIEW 143  given the pervasiveness of reference, framing, and preference reversal phenomena. He nonetheless goes on to suggest that it  might be possible to argue for the use of a particular assessment technique on the basis of the extent to which responses  using that technique agree with expected utility. Sections on "Structuring Inference and Decision Problems" and "Decision  Analysis and Artifical Intelligence" are where he (regrettably, briefly, but nonetheless carefully) presents issues of  importance to decision making under uncertainty that are not considered elsewhere in the book. For example, reference is made  to non-Bayesian approaches to uncertainty analysis in artifical intelligence, the use of influence diagrams to analyze complex  diagnostic decision problems, and the use of knowledge representations and heuristic methods from artifical intelligence for  problem structuring. In this context, Fischer suggests that an approach that combined artifical intelligence methods for  structuring decisions with standard methods of decision analysis for analyzing them would offer a much more powerful framework  than those presently available. Finally, he considers the issue of whether we should be more concerned with educating away  biases and inconsistencies, rather than building prescriptive systems around them. Using his example, presumably we should not  forego Bayesian inference systems because domain experts (e.g., physicians) cannot understand them as a consequence of their  lack of (mathematical) training, but rather we should give more adequate training in the relevant skills to future cohorts. In  the final paper of the collection, von Winterfeldt defends various qualitative imperatives, normative rules, and prescriptive  guidelines that he believes should be obeyed by all decision analysts and clients. The imperatives include "rules" such as  "consider the information that bears on the uncertainties" and "use judgment and make tradeoffs." The normative rules include  the laws of probability, independence of irrelevant alternatives, dominance, and transitivity. The prescriptive guidelines  include satisfying substitutability, solvability, the sure-thing principle, and relative risk neutrality. Of course, if  individuals adhere to all these conditions they essentially become expected utility (money?) maximizers, but this seems to be  exactly what von Winterfeldt thinks we should prescriptively aim for.  DISCUSSON  The major strength of Choice under Uncertainty is its coverage of recent mathematical work on nonlinear preference theory; the  book contains excellent contributions from many of the leading researchers in this field. The theoretical focus is rather  unusual for a collection of papers based on a symposium; rarely do theoreticians in this area present detailed new results in  such volumes. There are a few researchers and areas of enquiry conspicuously absent: for example, Epstein and Farmer and their  colleagues on recursive utility (Chew & Epstein, 1990; Epstein & Zin, 1989; Farmer, 1990); Luce and Fishburn on rank-and-sign  dependent linear utility (Luce, 1988, 1990; Luce & Fishburn, 1990); Machina (1985) on stochastic choice from deterministic  (nonlinear) preferences; and Loewenstein and Prelec  144 BOOK REVIEW  (1989, 1990) on intertemporal choice. But of course it is not always possible to invite everyone one might like or for  everyone invited to participate.  The absence of results on recursive utility points to a larger area that is underrepresented, namely temporal  choice-stituations where the agent is faced with a choice between various temporal streams (i.e., sequences of outcomes that  span more than one time interval), and depending on the situation must either commit to a particular stream now, or  alternatively make a series of choices as time unfolds. This omission is perhaps due to the fact that much of this work to  date has been based on classical expected utility theory (at a given point in time), although more general utility theories  are involved as time unfolds (e.g., Kreps & Porteus, 1978; Cook, 1989). There is great potential for further theoretical and  empirical work in this area extending the recent (static or one-period) nonlinear theories to the multiperiod situation,  although it is known that various conceptual difficulties arise in such extensions when one does not want the theory to reduce  back to classical subjective expected utility theory (LaValle, 1989; Sarin, 1989).  The empirical papers in Choice under Uncertainty are excellent, but limited in number as the nonlinear theories are, in  general, of such recent origin as not to have received extensive empirical testing (but see Camerer, 1989; Hey & Strazzera,  1989). Of course, these theories have been motivated by, and applied to, the available data that contradict the predictions of  subjective expected utility theory (Camerer, 1990; Luce, 1989).  There are three additional relevant research areas which, although not completely absent, are certainly not given detailed  coverage: artificial intelligence, decision support, and cognitive science. (Of course, I must observe here that the symposium  required four conference sessions with its focus on just mathematical theories of choice under uncertainty). These omissions,  nonetheless, are less a failing of the book and more a reflection of the state of the world--choice under uncertainty is  generally ignored by workers in artificial intelligence and cognitive science. There are some major exceptions to this  generalization, of course. For instance, prior to each of the recent annual meetings of the American Association for  Artificial Intelligence, there has been a workshop on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, with a new society recently  formed with that name. (Lehmann, 1990, reviews the published volumes from these workshops.) However, these workshops focus on  uncertainty-that is, probability-with little or no attention paid to utility or value issues. Also, there are the developments  in the area of decision support, where both uncertainty and value issues are considered (e.g., Henrion & Morgan, 1985; Keeney,  1988; Holtzmann, 1989). There is some "early" work (e.g., Feldman & Sproull, 1977), and some more recent work (e.g., Kuipers,  Moskowitz, & Kassirer, 1988) on decision theory within cognitive science, but to a major extent the topic is ignored. Various  recent work on strategy selection in decision tasks (e.g., Busemeyer & Myung, 1989; Bordley, 1985; Johnson & Payne, 1985;  Klayman, 1983; Payne, Bettman & Johnson, 1988), although firmly within the tradition of experimental psuchology, could also be  claimed by cognitive science. Other areas that are related to choice under uncertainty, and that bridge artificial intelligence  BOOK REVIEW 145  and cognitive science, are planning and scheduling; although the classic work in these areas was based on mathematical  algorithms and numerical representations, recent work emphasizes heuristics and symbolic representations (Fox, 1989, is an  excellent example of recent scheduling work, and Miller, 1990, reviews several recent planning books.) Again, however, both  uncertainty and value issues are inadequately convered in this recent work.  Thus, as in other areas where artificial intelligence techniques have been developed, there is a need to integrate the  numerical approach of the decision theorists with the more qualitative or symbolic approach of researchers in artificial  intelligence and cognitive science. It is clear that in the real world, much planning and decision is based on qualitative  knowledge and heuristic procedures; however, it is also clear (from the work described in this book) that numerical (or, at  least, cardinal) aspects of probability and utility influence decisions. Given that these diverse approaches to choice under  uncertainty are all represented at the national meetings of ORSA/TIMS perhaps we will soon see another volume in the present  series presenting an integration of these various perspective.  My criticisms of Choice under Uncertainty must not obscure the fact that I am very enthusiastic about this book. The editors  (and the contributors) are to be complemented on a job well done. I believe that Choice under Uncertainty is one of those rare  books that everyone seriously interested in the field of decision theory should own. It is an excellent reference book on  recent theoretical and empirical work on generalizations of expected utility theory that could also serve as the text for a  graduate-level seminar on choice under uncertainty. (A minor defect of the book is that, as in often the case with edited  volumes, there is no cumulative reference list and no author or subject index.) Only mathematically sophisticated researchers  and students will be able to master all of the material, but certainly having done so they will have a firm basis from which  to continue study and research in this currently very active area.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  This work was supported in part by the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada. I have benefited greatly  from the comments of Carol Nickerson.  REFERENCES  Table of Contents  P. C. FISHBURN AND I. H. LAVALLE (Eds.), Choice under uncerlainty Preface PETER C. FISHBURN AND IRVING H. LAVALLE  PART I. SURVEY (pp. 1-28) FISHBURN, P. C. Generalizations of expected utility theories: Survey of recent proposals. 1-28.  146 BOOK REVIEW  PART II. BEHAVIORAL MODELS AND EMPIRICAL FINDINGS (pp. 29-139)  HOGARTH, R. M. Ambiguity and competitive decision making: Some implications and tests. 31-50. GOLDSTEIN, W. M., & EINHORN, H.  J. Expression theory and the measurent of apparently labile values. 51-78.  STARMER, C., & SUGDEN, R. Violations of the independence axiom in common ratio problems: An experimental test of some  competing hypotheses. 79-102.  LoomEs, G. Predicted violations of the invariance principle in choice under uncertainty. 103-114. WEHRUNG, D. A. Risk taking  over gains and losses: A study of oil executives. 115-139.  PART Ill. RISK ATTITUDES AND PREFERENCE INTENSITIES (pp.141-228)  HARVEY, C. M. Prescriptive models of psychological effects on risk attitudes. 143-170.  BORDLEY, R. F. An intertemporal utility function concave in gains and convex in losses. 171-180. KRZYSZTOFOWIcz, R., & KOCH,  J. B. Estimation of cardinal utility based on a nonlinear theory. 181-204.  FARQUHAR, P. H., & KELLER, L. R. Preference intensity measurement. 205-218. WAKKER, P. P. Subjective expected utility with  nonincreasing risk aversion. 219-228.  PART IV. NEW RESULTS IN NONLINEAR PREFERENCE THEORY (pp.229-463)  BLUME, L., BRANDENBURGER, A., & DEKEL, E. An overview of lexicographic choice under uncertainty. 231-246.  LAVALLE, I. H., & FISHBURN, P. C. Transitivity in the small and in the large for states-additive SSB utilities. 247-272.  CHEW, S. H. Axiomatic utility theories with the betweenness property. 273-298. CHEW, S. H., & EPSTEIN, L. G. Axiomatic  rank-dependent means. 299-310. NAKAMURA, Y. Risk attitudes for nonlinear measurable utility. 311-334.  QUIGGIN, J. Sure things-dominance and independence rules for choice under uncertainty. 335-358. SEGAL, U. Anticipated utility:  A measure representation approach. 359-374.  NAU, R. F. Decision analysis with indeterminate or incoherent probabilities. 375-404. GILBOA, I. Duality in non-additive  expected utility theory. 405-414.  HAZEN, G. B. Ambiguity aversion and ambiguity content in decision making under uncertainty. 415-434. KARNI, E., & SAFRA, Z.  Ascending bid auctions with behaviorally consistent bidders. 435-446. LAVALLE, I. H. On neutrality of preferences on acts with  respect to use of proxy outcomes. 447-463.  PART V. HELPING PEOPLE TO MAKE GOOD DECISIONS (pp. 465-502)  BROWN, R. V. Toward a prescriptive science and technology of decision aiding. 467-484.  KELLER, L. R. Decision research with descriptive, normative, and prescriptive purposes-some comments. 485-488.  FISCHER, G. W. Prescriptive decision science: Problems and opportunities. 489-498.  VON WINTERFELDT, D. A re-examination of the normative-descriptive distinction in decision analysis. 499-502.  Author Index, 503.  Additional References  BARRETT, C. R., & PATTANAIK, P. K. (1987). Aggregation of probability judgements. Econometrica, 55, 1237-1241.  BELL, D. (1982). Regret in decision making under uncertainty. Operations Research, 30, 961-981.  BOOK REVIEW  147  BORDLEY, R. F. (1985). Comparing different decision rules: A simulation. Behavioral Science, 30, 230-239.  BUSEMEYER, J. R., & MYUNG, J. (1989). An adaptive approach to human decision making: Learning theory, decision theory, and  human performance. Manuscript, Department of Psychological Sciences, Purdue University.  CAMERER, C. F. (1989). An experimental test of several generalized utility theories. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 2,  61-104.  CAMERER, C. F. (1990). Recent tests of generalizations of expected utility theory. In W. Edwards (Ed.), Utility: Theories,  Measurements, and Applications, to appear.  CHEw, S. H., & EPSTEtN, L. G. (1989). Axiomatic rank-dependent means. Annals of Operations Research, 19, 299-309.  CHEw, S. H., & EPSTEtN, L. G. (1990). Recursive utility under uncertainty. In A. Khan and N. C. Yannelis (Eds.), Economic  Analysis with an Infinite Number of Commodities. New York: SpringerVerlag, to appear.  CHEw, S H., & MACCRIMMON, K. R. (1979). Alpha-nu choice theory: A generalization of expected utility theory. Working Paper  669, University of British Columbia, Vancouver.  CLARK, S. A. (1990). A concept of stochastic transitivity for the random utility model. Journal of Mathematical Psychology,  34, 95-108.  COOK, V. T. (1989). The effects of temporal uncertainty, resolution on the overall utility and suspense of' risky monetary and  survival gambles. Ph. D. Thesis, McGill University.  EPSTEtN, L. G., & ZIN, S. E. (1989). Substitution, risk aversion and the temporal behavior of consumption and asset returns: A  theoretical framework. Econometrica, 57.  FARMER, R. E. A. (1990). RINCE preferences. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 150, 43-60.  FELDMAN, E. A. & SPROULL, R. F. (1977). Decision theory and articial intelligence. II. The hungry monkey. Cognitive Science,  1, 158-192.  FiSHBURN, P. C. (1988). Nonlinear preference and utility theory. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.  FISHBURN, P. C., & LAVALLE, I. H. (1988). Context-dependent choice with nonlinear and nontransitive preferences. Econometrica,  56, 1221-1239.  Fox, M. (1989). Constraint directed search. San Mateo: Morgan Kaufmann. GITTINS, J. C. (1989). Multi-armed bandit allocation  indices. Chichester: Wiley. GOLDSTEIN, W. M., & EINHORN, H. J. (1987). Expression theory and the preference reversal  phenomena. Psychological Review, 94, 236-254.  HAUSNER, M. (1954). Multidimensional utilities. In R. M. Thrall, C. H Coombs and R. L. Davis (Eds.), Decision processses, (pp.  167-180) New York: Wiley.  HENRION, M., & MORGAN, M. G. (1985). A computer aid for risk and other policy analysis. Risk Analysis, 5, 195-208.  HEY, J. D., & STRAZZERA, A. (1989). Estimation of indifference curves in the Marschak-Machina triangle: A direct test of the  "fanning out" hypothesis. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 2, 239-260.  HOLTZMANN, S. (1989). Intelligent decision systems. Reading: Addison-Wesley.  JOHNSON, E. J., & PAYNE, J. W. (1985). Effort and accuracy in choice. Management Science, 31, 395-414. KAHNEMAN, D., &  TVERSKY, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47, 263-291.  KEENEY, R. L. (1988)- Value-driven expert systems for decision support. Decision Support Systems, 4, 405-412.  KLAYMAN, J. (1983). Analysis of predecisional information search patterns. In P. Humphreys, O. Svenson, and A. Vari (Eds.),  Anal vfing and aiding decision processes. Amsterdam: North-Holland.  KRANTz, D. H. (1972). A theory of magnitude estimation and cross-modality matching. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 9,  168-199.  KREPs, D. M., & PORTEUS, E. L. (1978). Temporal resolution of uncertainty and dynamic choice theory. Econometrica, 46, 185-200.  148  BOOK REVIEW  KUIPERS, B., MOSKOWITZ, A. J., & KASSIRER, J. P. (1988). Critical decisions under uncertainty: Representation and structure.  Cognitive Science, 12, 177-210.  LAVALLE, I. H. (1989). Small worlds and sure things: Consequentialism by the back door. To appear in W. Edwards (Ed.),  Utility: Theories, Measurements, and Applications.  LEHMANN, D. (1900). Uncertainty in artificial intelligence: A review in the context of recent workshops. A review of three  volumes of Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. (New York: North-Holland/ Elsevier). Journal of Mathematical Psychology,  34, 336-363.  LOEWENSTEIN, G., & PRELEC, D. (1989). Anomalies in intertemporal choice: Evidence and an interpretation. Manuscript, Russell  Sage Foundation, New York.  LOEWENSTEIN, G., & PRELEC, D. (1990). Decision making over time and under uncertainty: A common approach. Management Science,  in press.  LooMES, G., & SUDDEN, R. (1982). Regret theory: An alternative theory of rational choice under uncertainty. Economic Journal,  92, 805-824.  LoomEs, G., & SUDDEN, R. (1986). Disappointment and dynamic consistency in choice under uncertainty. Review of Economic  Studies, 53, 271-282.  LUCE, R. D. (1988). Rank-dependent, subjective expected-utility representations. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 1, 305-332.  LUCE, R. D. (1989). Where does subjective expected utility fail descriptively? Journal or Risk and Uncertainty, in press.  LUCE, R. D. (1900). Rank- and sign-dependent linear utility models for binary gambles. Journal of Economic Theory, in press.  LUCE, R. D., & FISHBURN, P. C. (1990). Rank- and sign-dependent linear utility models for finite firstorder gambles. Journal  of Risk and Uncertainty, in press.  LUCE, R. D., & NARENS, L. (1985). Classification of concatenation measurement structures according to scale type. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 29, 1-62.  MACHINA, M. (1982), "Expected utility" theory without the independence axiom. Econometrica, 50, 277-323.  MACHINA, M. J. (1985). Stochastic choice functions generated from deterministic preferences over lotteries. Economic Journal,  95, 575-594.  MARLEY, A. A. J. (1972). Internal state models for magnitude estimation and related experiments. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 9, 306-319.  MARLEY, A. A. J. (1990). Stochastic choice as nonlinear (sub) optimization. Manuscript, Department of Psychology, McGill  University.  MILLER, D. (1990). Toward a believable theory of planning. A Review of Wilkins, Practical Planning (Kaufmann, 1988); Friedman,  Scholnick and Cocking, Blueprints for Thinking (Cambridge, 1987); and Hammond, Case-Based Planning (Academic Press, 1989).  Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 34, 489-498.  PAYNE, J. W., BETTMAN, J. R., & JOHNSON, E. J. (1988). Adaptive strategy selection in decision making. Journal of Experimental  Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14, 534-552.  QUIGGtN, J. (1982). A theory of anticipated utility. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 3, 323-343.  SARIN, R. K. (1989). What now for generalized utility theory. To appear in W. Edwards (Ed.), Utility: Theories, Measurements,  and Applications.  SAVAGE, L. J. (1954). The foundations of statistics. New York: Wiley.  SCHMIIDLER, D. (1984). Subjective probability and expected utility without additivity. Preprint 84, Institute for Mathematics  and Its Applications, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis.  SHEPARD, R. N. (1981). Psychological relations and psychological scales: On the status of "direct" psychophysical measurement.  Journal of Mathematial Psychology, 24, 21-57.  TVERSKY, A., SATTATH, S., & SLOVIC, P. (1988). Contingent weighting in judgment and choice. Psychological Review, 95, 371-384.  YAARI, M. (1987). The dual theory of choice under risk. Econometrica, 55, 95-115.