10.1016/0022-2496(91)90029-s
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 35, 267-273 (1991)  Book Review  Getting Wise about Minimum Distance Measures*  TIMOTHY R. C. READ AND NOEL A. C. CRESSIE. Goodness-of-fit Statistics for Discrete Multivariate Data. New York:  Springer-Verlag, 1988. Pp. xi + 211. $44.00.  Revieived by WILLIAM H. BATCHELDER  Timothy R. C. Read is a Senior Consulting Statistician with E. I. Dupont in Newark, Delaware. He received his Ph. D. in  statistics at the Flinders University of South Australia in 1982, and he was an Assistant Professor of Statistics at the  University of Wisconsin and a statistician at Hewlett-Packard before assuming his current position. His primary research  interests are goodness-of-fit and industrial statistics, and he has published papers on goodness-of-fit in the statistics  literature. Noel A. C. Cressie is a Professor in the Department of Statistics at Iowa State University. He received his Ph. D.  in statistics from Princeton University in 1975, and he has been a Senior Lecturer at the Flinders University of South  Australia. His research interests include statistics for spatial data, goodness-of-fit, and empirical Bayes methods. He is a  Fellow of the American Statistical Association and the Institute of Mathematical Statistics, and he has contributed a number  of articles to the statistics literature.  The reviewer, William H. Batchelder, is a Professor in the Cognitive Sciences Department and a member of the Irvine Research  Unit in Mathematical Behavioral Sciences at the University of California, Irvine. He received his Ph. D. in psychology from  Stanford University in 1966, and he was an Assistant Professor at the University of Illinois before joining the University of  California in 1970. He was Editor of the Journal of Mathematical Psychology from 1975-1979, and he has published numerous  papers in the mathematical social and behavioral sciences. His current research interests are ethnographic methodology,  measurement, and substantive multinomial modeling. ?- 1991 Academic Press, Inc.  This book, hereafter Read and Cressie, is about statistics for measuring the goodness-of-fit of models for discrete data.  Discrete data take the form of category counts, and a goodness-of-fit statistic is a measure of departure of observed counts  from estimators of theoretical, expected counts. Mathematical psychologists deal with this sort of data in many substantive  settings; for example, test theory, probabilistic choice, and various trial-ordered performance sequences in learning and  memory paradigms. Certain restrictive traditions, involving the so-called minimum chi-square method, have arisen within  substantive mathematical psychology for dealing with models for discrete data, and my main purpose for writing this  Requests for reprints should be sent to Dr. William H. Batchelder, School of Social Sciences, University of California,  Irvine, CA 92717.  * Work on this paper was supported by NSF Grant BNS-8910552 to the author and David M. Riefer (co PIs). Also, the support of  the Irvine Research Unit in Mathematical Behavioral Sciences is acknowledged.  267  0022-2496/91 $3.00  Copyright K 1991 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  26)8 BOOK REVIEW  review is to urge mathematical modelers to expand their knowledge to include other, perhaps better, methods. For this reason,  the review will focus mostly on those aspects of Read and Cressic that bear on the inferential problems of estimating  parameters, testing hypotheses, and assessing the goodness-of-fit of a substantive, parametric model of discrete data. In the  area of psychometrics, researchers have exhibited much more eclectic approaches to discrete data; however, there is much in  Read and Cressie that will inform both mathematical psychologists and psychometricians.  Before discussing Read and Cressie in detail, it is useful to describe in technical terms the usual inferential approach to  discrete data in mathematical psychology. Suppose C,, C,, ..., CJ constitute the J categories of some category system (for  example, four-tuples of errors and successes) and X = (X,, ..., X.,) is a vector of observed category counts thought to arise  from the sampling and classification of N independent and identically distributed observations of that system. Then from  sampling assumptions alone, there exists a probability distribution a = (n, , ..., n,) over the categories such that the  probability of the observation vector is given by the multinomial distribution  where  Pr(X; n) = N! H 7r V//X;!, ;_  O<_n;51,1 RJ=1,YX;=N.  Although the setup in Eq. (1) is rarely mentioned explicitly by modelers, it underlies most applications of discrete models to  psychological data. Actually Eq. (1) represents only one category system, whereas the usual case involves several independent  category systems; for example, yes-no signal detection involves two binary systems corresponding to "old" and "new" items, and  paired-comparison probabilistic choice data are made up of M(M- 1)/2 binary systems corresponding to the possible pairings of  M objects. Riefer and Batchelder (1988) refer to models for the multiple category case as joint multinomial models, where the  appropriate probabilities are given by taking the product over each category system of expressions in the form of Eq. (1). In  this review we will stick to models of a single category system for simplicity; however, the approach of Read and Cressie can  handle the more general case as well.  Psychological models of discrete data postulate parameters that are supposed to underly the 7rj in Eq. (1). These parameters  are usually functionally independent, psychologically interpretable, and each 7c; is a function of the parameters, say 7rj  =7T;(0), where 0= (8..., 8S) and S is typically no larger than J- 1, the degreesof-freedom in the data. Examples of  parameters are learning rates, detection rates, similarity coefficients, item storage probabilities, discrimination rates,  mean utilities, guessing rates, and the like.  When an experiment provides a category count vector X for a parametric model, the researcher inevitably wants to solve two  problems in statistical inference;  BOOK REVIEW 269  namely: 1. to estimate the values of the parameters, and 2. to assess the goodnessof-fit of the model. In the early 1960s  (c.f., Atkinson, Bower, Crothers, 1965), mathematical learning theorists discovered the so-called minimum chi-square approach  to these two problems that was already in use in other areas of applied statistics. This approach involves defining a function  known to statisticians as Pearson's Xz function,  X2(0)= [X;-Nn;(0)]2, NBC; (0)  where the parameter vector 0 is constrained to lie in the parameter space of the model, say, S2. Under certain regularity  conditions, described in detail, among other places, in Bishop, Fienberg, and Holland (1975, Chap. 14) as well as in Read and  Cressie, Eq. (2) has a unique global maximum, 8, called the minimum chi-square point estimator of 0. Further, the statistic  X'(6) has an asymptotic chi-square distribution with J-1-S degrees-of-freedom, and this fact permits one to assess the  goodness-of-fit of the model.  The inferential framework obtained by working with Eq. (2) not only provides a solution to the parameter estimation and  goodness-of-fit problems, but it also permits the testing of nested hypotheses concerning dimension reducing restrictions on  the parameter vector 0, leading to nested parameter spaces, say, S2, c 0,. Such hypotheses are tested by minimizing Eq. (2)  over both the restricted (S2,) and unrestricted (Q2) models. Then the difference in these statistics, under suitable  regularity conditions, is asymptotically chi-square distributed with degrees-offreedom equal to the loss in dimensionality  entailed by the reduced model.  With few exceptions, mathematical psychologists have adopted the minimum chisquare framework for doing inferential statistics  on their models, and they have paid little attention in writing to other approaches or even to the basic issues of the  validity of the regularity conditions or the adequacy of their sample size. The one main exception to the practices based on  Eq. (2) has been methods based on the log-likelihood ratio function given by  Although most mathematical modelers know about maximum likelihood methods for parameter estimation, fewer write as though they  realize that an entire inferential framework, exactly analogous to the one based on XZ(0), can be developed from GZ(0). A  notable exception is Wickens (1982), who discusses in detail both approaches for Markov learning models.  By 1950, statisticians had shown that both Pearson's X- statistic based on Eq. (2) and the log-likelihood statistic based on  Eq. (3) provide frameworks for doing statistical inference for discrete models that have absolutely equivalent asymptotic  properties under identical regularity conditions (c.f. Bishop et al., 1975, Chap. 14). In fact, the considerations that would  dictate a choice among them for  270 BOOK REVIEW  a particular model are important practical ones like ease of computation or relative small sample and large sample  preasymptotic behavior. Read and Cressie (pp. 133-153), provide a very informative historical review of the statistical  literature comparing these two approaches, and this section alone should contribute to the collective wisdom of mathematical  psychologists.  So far, a reader may wonder what this technical description of mathematical psychology practice has to do with the book under  review. The simplest way to put it is that our tradition comprises but the tiniest fraction of the available statistical  methods for analyzing models of discrete data. Read and Cressie is all about a much larger set of approaches to such data that  come from the same classical, asymptotic approach to statistical inference that motivates the minimum chi-square approach.  More specifically, Read and Cressie is about a family of goodness-of-fit statistics called the power divergence family. In  terms of our notation, the power divergence family consists of measures defined for each real number :., except i =0 and ~ =  -1, by the statistic  ( )j=1 J  X, [ ( , ), - 1 1,  where A is the family parameter, and fr is an efficient (asymptotic minimum variance, unbiased) estimator of the parameter  vector n in Eq. (1). The special cases of :t = 0 and ti = -1 are defined, respectively, by taking limits of Eq. (4) as ;.  approaches 0 and -1. In the case of parametric models, n = n(A ), where 9 is some efficient point estimator of 0.  It is easy to see that Eq. (4) provides an entire continuum of separate statistics, each of which measures the departure of  expected and observed cell frequencies for the set-up leading to Eq. (1). The power divergence family was proposed in the  literature by Cressie and Read (1984), and it includes all the traditional BAN (best asymptotic normal) statistics used for  categorical data, including XZ and GZ discussed earlier. A partial list includes the Pearson's X2 of Eq. (2) (.l = 1), GZ of  Eq. (3) () =0), the Neyman-modified XZ statistic, sometimes called the modified minimum chi-square statistic, (A = - 2), the  Freeman-Tukey statistic (;= -1/2), and the minimum discrimination information statistic -1), which is sometimes called the  modified log-likelihood ratio statistic.  The most interesting thing about the power divergence family for our purposes is that all of its members have asymptotic  properties that are identical with those of the minimum chi-square framework described earlier; so, in principle, any of them  can be used to do inference for discrete mathematical models in psychology. With such a wide set of choices, it does not seem  wise to follow a narrow tradition based on Pearson's Xz, as many mathematical psychologists have done. With this in mind, we  can now return to a discussion of the book, itself.  Read and Cressie is composed of 8 chapters, a 20 page historical perspective comparing XZ and GZ (mentioned earlier), and 14  mathematical appendices that  BOOK REVIEW 271  give detailed proofs of important results. A reader versed in introductory mathematical statistics, say at the level of Hogg  and Craig (1978), can get a great deal from Read and Cressie; however, to penetrate all the nuances requires more advanced  statistics and a good working capacity with advanced calculus. Nevertheless, most of the empirical examples in the book fit  into the area of applied psychology and are of the sorts that arise in an undergraduate psychological statistics course, so  informal intuition can help an intermediate level reader to get quite a long way toward understanding what the basic theory  involves.  Chapters 1 and 2 provide a general framework for discussing discrete data models, and they define the power divergence family  of measures and show that it includes a number of special cases such as those discussed earlier. Then Chapter 3 takes up  log-linear models for cross-classified data, and describes three sampling schemes relevant to such data: 1. the Poisson model,  where each category count is a realization of an independent Poisson variable; 2. the multinomial model of Eq. (1 ), where  category counts must add to a prespecified total; and 3. the product-multinomial model (a special case of joint multinomial  models), where category counts must obey prespecified row marginals. Of particular interest is the section on minimum distance  parameter estimation which provides the basis for the generalization of the minimum chi-square approach discussed earlier.  Chapters 4-6 compare the members of the power divergence family on various inferential criteria. All members provide  asymptotically equivalent fit measures under regularity conditions such as Birch (1964) that, in turn, are clearly described  in appendices in Read and Cressie. Of course, any data application involves preasymptotic approximation, so this fact sets the  stage for pragmatic comparison among the measures on such issues as statistical power, rate of convergence to asymptote, and  sensitivity to error.  Chapter 4 looks at the large sample case and considers rates of convergence of the various measures as well as their power  against close alternatives. Several real examples are worked in detail. The most interesting thing that emerges in Chapter 4,  and elsewhere, is that the case of ;. = 2/3, which is not among the traditional measures, seems to outperform the other  members of the power divergency family in a variety of specific situations in the sense of providing higher power over a wide  range of underlying alternative models. In fact, throughout the book there are a number of arguments that might lead one to  select the new distance measure based on putting A. = 2/3 in Eq. (4) in place of X2 or G=.  Chapter 5 looks at the small sample case and provides correction terms in i, N, J, and t = Y 7z' ', that are designed to  improve the fit of the chi-square distribution to 2NI' in Eq. (4). Results of many simulation studies are summarized; however,  for substantive mathematical modelers, it is unfortunate that the cases involving estimating parameters were confined pretty  much to the independence model for a two-way contingency table. Chapter 6 considers the issue of power, and in particular, it  takes a look at the particular sensitivity of the power divergence statistics to directional departures of individual cell  frequencies from their hypothesized values. The results are too numerous to summarize here; however, together they  272 BOOK REVIEW  provide a start on understanding how robust the statistics are to violations of the model assumptions.  Chapter 7 looks at data grouping schemes for evaluating the fit of continuoustype families of distributions. It includes an  interesting section comparing diversity and divergence measures between discrete distributions based on information theoretic  methods. Chapter 8 discusses directions for further research. It includes sections generalizing Akaike's (1973) information  criterion (AIC) and Schwartz's (1978) Bayesian statistic (BIC) for model selection with estimated parameters. Model selection  schemes provide criteria for choosing among models even when they are nonnested, and I think mathematical psychology would  profit from paying more attention to this literature.  The section entitled "Historical Perspective: Pearson's XZ and the Loglikelihood Ratio Statistic Gz" mentioned earlier covers  early developments in classical statistics for model evaluation that go back to the work of such luminaries as Pearson,  Fisher, Wilks, Neyman, and Cramer in the first half of the 20th century. Finally, the 14 appendices provide detailed proofs of  standard as well as new results mostly dealing with asymptotic properties of the power divergence family. When they overlap  with material in Bishop, et. al. (1975), I found Read and Cressie the more instructive; however, they had the benefit of  hindsight. More generally, the appendices are a strong feature of the book.  I am not a professional statistician, so I cannot really justify providing detailed negative commentary; however, two matters  can be mentioned in this context. First, in Chapter 2, Section 2.5, the authors try to motivate the power divergence family  from a visual perception perspective. The arguments are based on applying Steven's power law to the perception of the relative  differences in area between regions on a map. Though Read and Cressie come up with a formula like the one in Eq. (4), they  provide no convincing arguments about why goodness-of-fit measures should have anything to do with visual perception. I can  say confidently to the psychological reader that nothing later in the book depends on this speculative excursion into  psychophysics.  Unfortunately for readers outside of statistics, the book does not take up a major fact about statistical modeling that all  users discover at one time or another. This fact is that all statistical models are wrong in some details when applied to  worldly settings. Of course, some models are more accurate than others, and many models are sufficiently accurate for the  purposes they were intended. Nevertheless, it has come as a shock to many of us when we first discovered that goodness-of-fit  statistics generally grow rapidly with increasing sample size N in real data applications. For example, suppose p; are the  true probabilities and 7rj are the hypothesized probabilities. Then the expected frequency counts are off in expectation by  N(n, -pi), which grows linearly with N. The impact of this in Eqs. (2), (3), and (4) is that even if the 7rj and p; are very  close, all the minimum distance measures diverge as the sample size increases. Thus, ironically, goodness-of-fit measures  based on asymptotic results are not good for evaluating the adequacy of a model for either very small or very large samples  when interpreted literally. Statisticians  BOOK REVIEW 273  are well aware of this phenomenon; however, I would have gotten more out of the book if it had included sections dealing with  these issues explicitly rather than indirectly through considering power against various alternatives.  My conclusion about the book is simple. Read and Cressie is a very readable and very well written statistics book that is sure  to enlighten mathematical psychologists who model discrete data. It has the potential to influence greatly practice in  mathematical modeling in psychology.  REFERENCES  AKAIKE, H. (1973). Information theory and an extension of the maximum likelihood principle. In B. N. Petrov and F. CsAki  (Eds.), "2nd international symposium on information theory" (pp. 267-281). Budapest: Akademiai Kiad6.  ATKINSON, R. C., BOWER, G. H., & Crothers, E. (1965). Introduction to mathematical learning theory. New York: Wiley.  BIRCH, M. W. (1964). A new proof of the Pearson-Fisher theorem. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 35, 817-824.  BIsHop, Y. M. M., FIENBERG, S. E., & HOLLAND, P. W. (1975). Discrete multivariate analysis: Theory and practice. Cambridge,  MA: MIT Press.  CRESSIE, N., & READ, T. R. C. (1984). Multinomial goodness-of-fit tests. Journal or the Royal Statistics Society Series B, 46,  440-464.  HOGG, R. V.,&CRAIG, A. T. (1978). Introduction to mathematical statistics (4th ed.). New York: Macmillan Co.  RIEFER, D. M., & BATCHELDER, W. H. (1988). Multinomial modeling and the measurement of cognitive processes. Psychological  Review, 95, 318-339.  SCHWARTZ, G. (1978). Estimating the dimension of a model. Annals of Statistics, 6, 461-464. WICKENS, T. D. (1982). Models for  behavior: Stochastic processes in psychology. San Francisco: Freeman.