10.1016/0022-2496(91)90037-t
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 35, 100-108 (1991)  Book Review  Autonomy and Modularity of Grammar: The New Rosetta Stone?  FREDERICK I. NEWMEYER (Ed.). Linguistics: The Cambridge Survey: Volume I. Linguistic Theory: Foundations. Pp. x + 498; Volume  II. Linguistic Theory: Extensions and Implications. Pp. viii + 317; Volume III. Language: Psychological and Biological  Aspects. Pp. ix + 348; Volume IV. Language: The Socio-Cultural Context. Pp. x + 292. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,  1988. Each volume 0.  Reviewed by STEF DECOENE  Newmeyer received his Ph. D. in Linguistics at the University of Washington in 1969, where he is now a Professor in the  Department of Linguistics. He has had visiting appointments at various universities, including University College, London, and  University of California, Los Angeles. He has been Associate Editor of Language and of the Journal of Pragmatics, and has  published numerous books, including The politics of linguistics (University of Chicago Press, 1986).  Decoene is a Research Assistant at the Centrum voor Matematische Psychologie of the Departement Psychologie, Katholieke  Universiteit Leuven, Belgium, where he is completing a Ph.D. thesis on speech segmentation. 1( 1991 Academic Press, Inc.  The purpose of Linguistics: The Cambridge Survey (LCS) is to offer "a comprehensive introduction to research results and  current work in all branches of the field of linguistics, from syntactic theory to ethnography of speaking, from signed  language to the mental lexicon... balancing depth of coverage with ease of reference and affordability" (I. vii). The four  volumes aim to give both beginning students of linguistics and established specialists "a wealth of information, insight, and  challenging ideas" (I. ix). In order to achieve this the editor of the four volume set has applied two strategies. First, the  structure of LCS mirrors that of linguistics itself-the first two volumes presenting the foundations, extensions, and  implications of linguistic theory; the third and fourth volume discussing the socio-cultural, psychological, and biological  aspects of language. Second, he has provided the  Requests for reprints should be sent to Stef Decoene, Departement Psychologie, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Tiensestraat  102, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.  0022-2496/91 $3.00  Copyright a': 1991 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  100  BOOK REVIEW 101  reader with an important message: formal grammar is an autonomous part of a modularly organized cognitive system.  1. Linguistic Theory: Foundations  Following the traditional linguistic division of labor, the first volume includes chapters discussing individual modules  within grammar: syntax, the lexicon, semantics, pragmatics, morphology, phonology, and phonetics. Syntactic theory (McCloskey)  presents Wh-movements and the cyclic NP-movements as case-studies showing how the transition from language-specific rules to  the interaction of very general principles and constraints as the basis of explanation in linguistics has lead to a growing  consensus in syntactic theory. Unfortunately, the discussion of these topics presupposes working knowledge of X-bar theory,  and of government and binding, lexical functional grammar, generalized phrase structure grammar, and relational grammar. This  presupposition is bound to be falsified among students and non-linguists-and probably even among linguists not specialized in  syntax. Lexical structure (Andrews) focusses on how various linguistic theories-such as government and binding, lexical  functional grammar, generalized phrase structure grammar-deal with the way lexical entries (of verbs) constrain their  syntactic environments and the semantic interpretation of the surrounding NPs. Semantic theory (Ladusaw) examines various  semantic theories, model-theoretic truthconditional semantics occupying the largest part of a short chapter. Pragmatic theory  (Horn) presents a clear picture of recent issues in pragmatics, and conversational pragmatics in particular; the difficult  relationship with semantics and syntax is highlighted. Morphological theory (Anderson) dominates the first volume-both in  length and in excellence. It contains a thought-provoking account of the interfaces between morphology and syntax, the  lexicon, and phonology. With inflection taken as that part of morphology manipulated by syntactic rules, a theory of  inflection is presented which involves several subtheories: the subtheories of morphosyntactic representations,  configurational assignment, agreement, phrasal properties, and the phonological realisation of morphological properties.  Derivational rules are defined as a sort of redundancy rules, and compounding as a process of word-internal syntax.  Phonological theory (Basbmll) reviews various linguistically relevant segments, which range from features and gestures, over  phonemes, to syllables and metre. Lexical and natural phonology are briefly discussed. Phonetic theory (Beckman) presents  phonetics as an interdisciplinary field of research heavily relying on experiments and quantitative models.  Besides these, the first volume contains three quite unique chapters on the interfaces between syntax and semantics, syntax  and phonology, and phonology and phonetics. These chapters are unique, not only in the issues they address, but because their  presence formally acknowledges and elaborates upon the essentiality of these topics for current linguistic theory. In The  syntax-semantics interface (End) the predicate-argument relation and variable binding are discussed. The synta.rphonology  interface (Pullum & Zwicky) defends the principles of superficial constraints in phonology and phonology-free syntax. The  102 BOOK REVIEW  interface (Keating) excellently discusses recent attempts of phonologists and phoneticians at treating phonetics as an  integral part of grammar, capable of providing evidence about formal representations and rules.  There are also three chapters on linguistic change. Syntactic change (Lightfoot) discusses the shift in meaning of verbs such  as "like," and a corresponding change in their syntax, of English modals, and of creoles-all this within a parameter-setting  framework. The excellent Morphological change (Anderson) discusses allomorphy and morphotactics as arising from a historical  process of morphologization of phonological rules and syntactic structures, respectively. Analogy is presented as an example  of change within the morphological component itself. Phonological change (Kiparsky) rejects the exceptionlessness hypothesis  which states that sound changes are subject only to phonetic conditioning and have no exceptions, presents various attempts  towards a theory of sound change, and discusses phonological aspects of analogy and lexical diffusion.  The volume concludes with chapters on the mathematical properties of grammars, the philosophy of language, linguistic  typology, and the history of linguistics. Mathematical properties of grammars (Weinberg) is well written, but too simple to do  justice to the complexity of the field. It offers a methodological caveat against too rash an application of complexity  results by pointing at (a) the difference between recognition and parsing performance, and (b) the importance of taking into  account the size of the grammar when adressing the computational complexity of grammar types. However, since few actual  results are presented this methodological moral remains rather abstract. Linguistics and the philosophy of language (ter  Meulen) addresses current trends in philosophical and linguistic theories of meaning. The interesting Linguistic typology  (Comrie) contrasts typological parameters that have been advanced as possible bases for linguistic typologies. Finally,  Appendix. History of linguistics (Robins) provides a short but fine historical setting of various linguistic concerns; it  should not have been deferred to an appendix.  11. Linguistic Theory: Implications and Extensions  Since Chomsky, linguists have increasingly described their research as part of theoretical psychology. The implications of  this position for linguistic theory are introduced in the short but clear chapter Extensions and implications of linguistic  theory: an overview (Newmeyer), and spelled out in the first part of the second volume, with six chapters focusing on the  modularity and autonomy of universal grammar issue in language processing, and on parameter setting as a way of explaining  language acquisition. Grammar and language processing (Frazier) proposes a modular language processing model in which  principles of grammar directly participate in language comprehension, and in which the processing subsystems operate  concurrently. Grammatical principles of first language acquisition: theory and evidence (Roeper) demonstrates how the idea of  parameter setting can clarify first language acquisition. Second language acquisition and grammatical theory (Flynn) provides  a model of second language acquisition based  BOOK REVIEW 103  on a modular and parameterized view of grammar. Brain structures and linguistic capacity (Kean) reviews evidence about  aphasia, lateralisation, and variation in cortical structures involved in linguistic ability, defending the position that  linguistic capacity changes as a consequence of neural development, that it varies in function of qualitative variations in  the neural substrate, but that universal grammar is not so much a theory of the functional acquisition device as a theory of  an emergent property of the system. Abnormal language acquisition and the modularity, of language (Curtiss) presents evidence  for at least three distinct components of linguistic structure: a referential, a social-communicative, and a grammatical  component. Grammatical aspects of speech errors (Fromkin) argues that many grammatical rules are used as production processing  rules.  Three chapters elaborate upon the relation between grammar and pragmatics. Grammar and conversational principles (Kempson)  applies relevance theory (Sperber & Wilson, 1986) to anaphora, quantifier binding, presupposition projection, and the relation  between pragmatic principles and truth conditions. It argues that relevance theory can clarify the boundary between grammar  and general cognition because it is detailed and embedded in an overall theory of cognition. Discourse analysis: a part of the  study of linguistic competence (Prince) claims that knowledge of how linguistic forms are used in discourse is part of  linguistic competence, mentioning, e.g., topicalization, VP-preposing, and gapping as evidence. Finally, Speech act  distinctions in grammar (Sadock) deals with the performative hypothesis, which states that illocutionary force should be  described in terms of a performative clause, whether one is overt in the uttered sentence or not.  The practical use of linguistic theory is shown in Computer applications of linguistic theory (Halvorsen) and Metrics and  phonological theory (Haves). The former gives an informal overview of parsing and natural language understanding, and mentions  speech recognition, synthesis, and machine translation; the latter provides an interesting discussion of metrical rules and  hierarchical structure in phonology. The evidence presented in Grammatical theory and signed languages (Padden) demonstrates  that there are principles of language independent of modality. Finally, the second volume justly includes a discussion of  Ceole languages. Less clear is why there should have been two chapters (Creole languages and the bioprogram (Bickerton) and  Are creoles a special type of language? (Muysken)) presenting diverging viewpoints concerning the bioprogram hypothesis, and a  dialogue between the two authors containing little but polite acknowledgment of each other's differing points of view.  III. Language: Psychological and Biological Aspects  The third volume adresses the more psychological side of research domains such as language production, language perception,  language acquisition, neurolinguistics, language evolution and animal communication.  Psycholinguistics: an overview (Tanenhaus) presents a clear historical and thematic analysis of psycholinguistics and its  methodology. There is a clear preference for the autonomy hypothesis without neglect of its problems, one of  104 BOOK REVIEW  which is the problem of coordinating all the modules and submodules. Also, the connectionist's challenge of fundamental  psycholinguistic assumptions (e.g., the importance of linguistic rules) is acknowledged. Language and cognition (Carston) is a  penetrating analysis of language as an innate module. A case is made for the cognitive impenetrability of language perception  and lexical access in particular. Most important, however, is the use made of Sperber and Wilson's (1986) relevance theory,  showing that (at least some) central processes, while unencapsulated in theory, may be highly constrained in practice. An  excellent and thought-provoking chapter?  Three chapters focus on normal language performance. Processes in language production (Garrett) combines the available  empirical data of sentence production (speech errors, hesitation pauses, self-corrections, the experimental analysis of  production), and uses these in discussing a sentence production model in which the successive assignment of lexical content to  phrasal structures is explicitated. Language perception (Flores d'Arcais) discusses speech segmentation, word recognition,  morphological decomposition, the clausal hypothesis in sentence perception, perceptual strategies in language segmentation,  parsing models, context effects, autonomy versus interaction in language perception, and automatic processes in cross-language  differences, but is too loosely structured to captivate the attention. In The mental lexicon (Emmorey & Fromkin) a picture is  offered of the mental lexicon as a module consisting of separate but interconnected submodules, including at least a  phonological, an orthographic, and a semantic component. Particular attention is given to implications of processing for the  nature of lexical representation.  Where language begins: Initial representations for language learning (Gleitman, Gleitman, & Wanner) is the first of two  chapters on language acquisition, and studies one aspect of parameter setting: What processes enable a child (a) to segment  the sound stream and the available extralinguistic evidence into language relevant units, and (b) to represent these units  appropriately? It is argued that "learners are sensitive to physical properties of the speech stream sufficient to provide a  rudimentary phrase structure description of heard utterances" (p. 154). Second language acquisition (Broselow) is a short,  historically oriented chapter presenting the parameterized approach to linguistic description as a powerful explanatory  perspective on second language acquisition.  Neurolinguistics is presented in three contributions. Focussing on Broca's and Wernicke's aphasia, Neurolinguistics: An  overview of language-brain relations in aphasia (Blumstein) reviews the nature of language deficits with respect to the  phonetic, phonological, lexical, and syntactic components. It is concluded that (a) language is independent of cognition, but  its components are not neurologically localised, and that (b) language pathology seems to reflect impairments of processes  affecting access to and communication between components, not structural deficits. The biological basis for language (Caplan),  on the other hand, argues that the core language functions are localised, and that there is a genetically determined  variability of the localisation of subcomponents within the dominant perisylvian association cortex, defending in this way a  modified "connectionist model" of  BOOK REVIEW 105  language processing and its relationship to brain areas. Linguistics and speech-language pathology (Jackson) is an uneven  contribution. The section on problems in clinical methodology is quite important. However, the other sections are either of  little relevance (e.g., information about academic requirements for speech-language pathologists in the U.S.), or overlap with  the two previous chapters.  The excellent Evolution of human communicative behavior (Dingwall) defends the thesis that human linguistic behavior is the  culmination of mosaic evolution within the primate order, and not a de novo creation. Linguistics and animal communication  (Demers) cursorily reviews similarities between structural, biological, and pragmatic properties of human and animal  communication, stressing the openness and productivity of the human communication system-a property totally out of the  animal's reach.  IV. Language: The Socio-Cultural Context  The fourth volume of LCS puts forward various contributions which study language in its socio-cultural aspects. The  introduction to this volume, The study of language in its socio-cultural context (Lavandera), offers a (too) personal  reflection of the author on the main topics as presented in the various chapters. Language, culture, and world-view (Hill)  gives a negative verdict on linguistic determinism, and a critical but positive account of linguistic relativity, pleading for  a sustained effort in making comparisons between languages as a powerful method in linguistics. Three chapters analyze ways in  which social variables affect language use. Language and social class (Guy) discusses how social class influences language  use, language change, and linguistic theory. Language and race: Some implications for linguistic science (Baugh) makes an  engaging political statement concerning linguistics as a weapon directed against racism, but does not survey the research  domain. Language and gender (McConnell-Ginet) looks at the interaction between gender on the one hand, and linguistic  production and meaning on the other. Bilingualism (Spolsky) briefly discusses the spread of bilingualism in a given community  and bilingual education, and then propounds an interesting analogy between style shift and bilingual language choice which  results in a preference model of language choice. Dialectology (Walters) presents dialect geography and urban dialectology as  two approaches to the study of dialect, highlighting that the theory of language underlying the domain is clearly at odds with  Chomsky's view. Sociolinguistics and syntactic variation (Sankoff) provides an interesting analysis of linguistic methodology  with particular stress on descriptive-evaluative research, making clear that the analysis of syntactic variation defined as  the neutralisation of distinctions in discourse fits uneasily with the theory of autonomous syntax. Language birth (Foley)  discusses the processes of pidginization and creolisation. In Language death (Dressler) various lexical, grammatical, and  sociolinguistic indicators of language decay are presented. Language planning: The view from linguistics (Christian) develops  an empirical framework for language planning, stressing the role linguistics can play in the succesful influencing of language  use and usage.  t06 BOOK REVIEW  Ethnography of speaking: Toward a linguistics of the praxis (Duranti) provides an engaging discussion of communicative  competence, its differences with grammatical competence, and analyzes the concepts of speech community, speech event, and  speech act as three ways of defining speech in context. The organisation of discourse (Blakemore) criticizes the coherence  approach to discourse interpretation, and contrasts it with relevance theory. Conversation analysis (Schiffrin), the final  chapter of Volume 4, highlights methodological and theoretical difficulties involved in the linguistic study of conversation.  Conclusion: The Autonomy and Modularity of Grammar Issue  Reading the general introduction to LCS, my expectations were set high. After reading the four volumes, not all of these  expectations have been satisfied. My reservations have little to do with the individual contributions. Most are clearly  written, and introduce general topics studied in the respective subdomains. The advantage of such an approach is clear:  students and non-specialists get a flavor of ongoing research but do not drown in research details. Moreover, the introductory  nature of the chapters should not give one the impression that LCS is interesting only for the beginning student. Taking  together related chapters often gives the professional reader an exciting, cogent overview of the domain and of recent  developments. The five chapters on phonology and phonetics in the first volume are a particularly good example. However, the  disadvantage is equally straightforward: recent or controversial topics can be mentioned only in passing, while in-depth  coverage of a topic is difficult to obtain. E.g., linking theory, which discusses the interplay between semantic roles and  grammatical relations is only pointed at in Lexical structure, although this topic is important in evaluating the autonomy and  modularity issue; and Semantic theory is too short given its central importance in linguistics-and certainly when compared  with other chapters.  But on the whole, there are only two important drawbacks to the four-volume set. One is the fact that it does not contain an  overview of the basics of (at least some of) the available linguistic theories (such as government and binding, and  generalized phrase structure grammar). Given that several chapters assume knowledge of one or more of these approaches, at  least one chapter of the first volume should have provided this information. The other drawback is the lack of a chapter  dealing exclusively with methodology. The study of language as presented in LCS encompasses such a great amount of diverse  phenomena and research domains, and its theories (linguistic theory in particular) have such far-reaching implications, that  an explicit presentation of the methodology involved is a necessity.  However, in my view a detailed evaluation of the individual contributions does not determine whether LCS fulfills its most  important goal; nor does the question of whether LCS includes all the relevant research domains (the acknowledged absence of  the intended chapters on linguistics and artificial intelligence, linguistics and semiotics, education, and literary analysis  is indeed to be regretted). Whether LCS is an important and a unique achievement is to be determined by the useful-  BOOK REVIEW 107  ness and strength of the theoretical vision defended. This aim of LCS is to elaborate on the view of grammar as an autonomous  and modularly organized system. The autonomy hypothesis assumes that the grammar of a language is a formal system different  from the system encompassing general cognition. The modularity thesis holds that this grammar consists of interacting but  independent modules, each having specific representations and processes. As such the modularity thesis can be seen as a more  elaborate form of the autonomy hypothesis: not only is grammar an autonomous system, but the different domains of formal  grammar (phonology, syntax, logical form) and the other linguistic domains, such as phonetics and conversational principles,  are also modularly implemented. The appropriate test, then, is to ask whether the autonomy and modularity theses are able to  provide meaningful organisational principles for LCS.  In my view, they do not. The failure of the modularity and autonomy hypotheses to resolve in some way the tension between  defining language as knowledge versus defining language as essentially communicative, is the clearest symptom in this context.  The chapters devoted to topics in pragmatics show that the division of linguistic labor implied by the modularity hypothesis  does not find unanimous support. Also, in volume four, which discusses the sociocultural context of language, little  willingness can be found to take the modularity hypothesis and the implied language as innate knowledge view seriously. In  this context it is interesting to see how Sperber and Wilsons's (1986) relevance theory, which provides a theory of the  central cognitive system, is seen as a viable alternative to (some of) the implications of the modularity thesis.  Equally revealing is the dissonance among contributions about topics which should be expected to support the modularity and  autonomy hypotheses. Neurolinguistics is a case in point. Neurolinguistics is an extremely important element in the  discussion, since the existence of independent modules localised in the brain is the primary evidence in favor of the  modularity of mind. Both the autonomy and modularity hypotheses are defended in The biological basis for language and in  Abnormal language acquisition and the modularity of language, while Neurolinguistics: An overview of language-brain relations  in aphasia defends only the autonomy hypothesis. And Brain structures and linguistic capacity elaborates only upon a weak  version of the autonomy hypothesis: linguistic capacity is biologically specified, but universal grammar is a theory of an  emergent property, not a functional biological model. Since the neural instantiation of the language modules is a direct  implication of the autonomy and modularity theses, the lack of consensus makes one doubt the strength of current evidence,  especially where the modularity thesis is concerned.  While a diagnosis of this failure is difficult to make, I suggest two possible reasons. The first is the error of gradually  transforming the methodological practice of defining one's research domain into the reification of this domain. It is sound  methodological practice to determine which part of reality one wants to study in order to make research more manageable. E.g.,  one can separate syntactic issues from semantic ones for the sake of (initial) clarity and progress. But this division  480,35-1-8  108 BOOK REVIEW  of labor does not necessarily warrant the reification of syntactic and semantic modules into the brain. Maybe more caution on  the part of linguistics, where the instantiation of research domains into brain loci is concerned, would prove helpful. A  second difficulty lies in accepting too easily appealing ideas, such as the modularity of mind view, without examining their  original motivation. While the definition of mind as modular may seem timely for linguists and psychologists, one should keep  in mind that, e.g., Fodor's The modularity of mind (1983), which has greatly contributed to the recent popularity of the  modularity hypothesis, must be understood in the first place as a strategic move in a battle between rival philosophies of  mind. It consisted in devising a picture of the mind and a psychology as its science, which fitted physicalism. Physicalism is  a philosophical theory of mind which aims to provide non-intentional and non-semantic sufficient conditions for psychological  states, but which is being criticized more and more in recent years (see, e.g., Baker (1987), Margolis (1987), and Putnam  (1988), for particularly strong criticisms of physicalism, and the modularity thesis in particular). Given the current  difficult position of physicalism, somewhat more caution in importing the modularity thesis into psychology and linguistics  should be welcomed.  In summary, Linguistics: The Cambridge Survey is a good, but unexceptional review book, special only in its scope of coverage.  The editor has done an excellent job: LCS indeed contains a wealth of information; moreover, each included contribution  critical of the autonomy and modularity thesis is a tribute to his openmindedness. Beginning students will find a lot of  information in the four volumes but little theoretical coherence and advanced readers will find the set useful when combining  the different contributions related to their research domain. In general, for potential readers it can be said that the word  "survey" adequately indicates how the four-volume set should be used. LCS offers a touristic guide of linguistics, providing  more or less detailed information about the places of interest. But it does not meaningfully explain why these places are  included in the guide, or how to get from one place to another. Indeed, while most of the individual chapters are good  introductions to their respective research domains, the autonomy and modularity hypotheses currently prove to be too weak to  provide language studies with an integrated and stable basis for research.  REFERENCES  BAKER, L. R. (1987). Saving belief: a critique of physicalism. Princeton: Princeton University Press. FODOR, J. (1983). The  modularity of mind. Cambridge: MIT press.  MARGOLIS, J. (1987). Science without unity: reconciling the human and natural sciences. Oxford: Blackwell.  PUTNAM, H. (1988). Representation and reality. Cambridge: MIT Press,  SPERBER, D., & WILSON, D. (1986). Relevance: Communication and cognition. Oxford: Blackwell.