10.1016/0022-2496(91)90028-r
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 35, 260-266 (1991)  Theoretical Note Additive Representation for Equally Spaced Structures  PETER WAKKER Duke University  It is shown that additive conjoint measurement theory can be considerably generalized and simplified in the equally spaced  case. ~0 1991 Academic Press, Inc.  1. INTRODUCTION  The major step forward in additive conjoint measurement may have been Debreu's (1960) contribution. Debreu showed how for  three or more essential coordinates mainly an independence condition, abbreviated "CI" in this paper, is necessary and  sufficient for additive representability of preferences. For the case of two essential coordinates, Debreu showed that a  condition, the "hexagon condition," had to be added, and he showed that this condition is weaker than both the Thomsen  condition and triple cancellation (see his Fig. 1). Debreu used restrictive nonnecessary conditions that were of a topological  nature; i.e., he required continuity with respect to a connected separable topology. A next step forward was obtained in the  psychological literature; the results have been gathered mainly in Chapter 6 of Krantz, Luce, Suppes, & Tversky (1971),  hereafter abbreviated KLST. They used an alternative nonnecessary condition of an algebraic nature, "restricted solvability."  It was shown that this condition is less restrictive than Debreu's topological condition. Wakker (1988) argued that the  algebraic conditions are not only mathematically, but also intuitively preferable to the topological conditions. Necessary and  sufficient conditions for additive representability in full generality have been provided by Jaffray (1974b) for two  dimensions, and by Jaffray (1974a) in full generality. These conditions are very complicated, and because of that the simpler  results which use nonnecessary conditions remain of interest.  The approach of KLST allows one to deal not only with spaces isomorphic to a continuum, but also with discrete spaces.  Discrete spaces may be "densely spaced" as are the spaces isomorphic to a continuum, but they do not have to be. If they  Requests for reprints should be sent to Peter Wakker, University of Nijmegen (NICI), Psychological Laboratory, P.O. Box 9104,  6500 HE Nijmegen, The Netherlands. The research has been made possible by a fellowship of the Royal Netherlands Academy of  Arts and Sciences, and a fellowship of the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research.  260  0022-2496/91 53.00  Copyright !c`_", 1991 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  EQUALLY SPACED STRUCTURES 261  are not, then they turn out to be "equally spaced," as will be shown. KLST gave proofs that apply simultaneously to the  densely spaced and to the equally spaced cases, building upon a generalization of a lemma of Holder that applies to each of  these cases. In subsequent contributions in the literature, authors have usually avoided the equaly spaced case by simply  adding an assumption of dense spacedness. The equally spaced case may have been considered complicated because it is of a  combinatorial nature.  This paper demonstrates that the equally spaced case in fact is much simpler, and allows much stronger theorems, than has  usually been thought. We shall strengthen the results of KLST by showing that only the weakest implication of CI, called "weak  separability" in this paper, is necessary and sufficient for additive representability, in the presence of the other  conditions. In particular for the two-dimensional case no additional condition (such as the Thomsen condition) is needed.  Under a more restrictive definition of equal spacedness, such an observation was made for two dimensions in KLST, Theorem 2.1.  For the case of difference measurement (i.e., the two-dimensional case where the second additive value function is minus the  first) on finite subsets of Cartesian products a related observation was made in Doignon and Falmagne (1974, Theorem 1 and the  last sentence of Section II ). Also the proofs for the equally spaced case are fairly simple. It turns out that the conditions  of equal spacedness, restricted solvability, and weak separability combine nicely. The crucial idea is described in Remark 6  and the last sentence above Formula (8).  A first impression may be obtained from Corollary 4, and the fact that strict increasingness there implies weak separability.  The latter illustrates the generality of weak separability.  2. THE MAIN RESULT  We concisely repeat the standard definitions of conjoint measurement. Let X"=, I'; be a finite Cartesian product, with  elements x= (x,, ..., x called alternatives. Let } be a binary relation on X^- I I'r, with >-, ::~, ~, - as usual. Let n >  2. We write x _ i v; for x with x; replaced by v;, and, for i :Aj, x _ O v,, w; for x with x; replaced by v; and x; replaced  by w]. >= is a weak order if it is complete (dx, y C- X"= I hr : x >: y or y >,= x) and transitive. } satisfies restricted  solvability if for each x _;a; > y >-x ;c; there exists b; such that x ;b; -y. For the definition of the technical Archimedean  axiom the reader is referred to Definition 6.7 and Sec tion 6.11 of KLST. Coordinate i is inessential if always x_;v;-x ;w;;  otherwise it is essential. A function V: X"= I hr -~ % represents >,t if [x >~ y p V(x) >. V(y) ]. The function V is additive  if V: xr--.Y,% I V,(xj) for some functions V;. If V is additive and representing, then the involved functions Vj are called  additive value functions. V is an interval scale if it can be replaced by another function if and only if the other function  is obtained from V by adding a real number, and multiplying with a positive number.  262 PETER WAKKER  The main condition used by KLST to characterize additive representability is "independence." Since the term independence  occurs in many different contexts with many different meanings, we prefer to rename the condition as follows. We say  is independent of common coordinates, or coordinate independent (Cl) for short, if for all i, x, y, vi, wi  lvi?-:J'-ivi qx-iwi3,`j?__i14'i. (1)  Cl says that in a preference any common coordinate may be replaced by another common coordinate. Obviously by repetition this  implies that any set of common coordinates can be replaced by any other set of common coordinates. The latter is the  formulation of KLST, and is equivalent to ours.  The discrete case which deviates most from the continuum is the equally spaced case, the topic of this paper. The terminology  in the definition below does not seem to reflect an idea of equal spacedness, and may not be perfectly suited for general  cases. For additive representations as considerd in this paper, it will nevertheless be equivalent to equal spacedness as in  KLST, as the last sentence in Theorem 3 will show. This explains our choice of term. Also Theorem 3 will show that there are  not many equally spaced models that are not additive, i.e., for which the terminology below is not suited.  DEFINITION 1. We say X"-, I'i, } satisfies the equally spaced condition if there exist i, x, ai, ci such that  Obi:x_iai>-x_ibi>-x_ici.  As we shall show, the cancellation axioms and independence can be weakened to the following condition. We are not aware of an  explicit term for the condition in psychological literature, though it did occur as condition 3' in KLST (Theorem 7.1) and  condition A2 in Fishburn and Roberts (1988). "Weak independence" might be a good term. We shall however not introduce a new  term, but instead use the term customary in economic literature.  DEFINITION 2. The binary relation } satisfies weak separability if for all i, x, y, Ui, wi  -1Ui}x_ iwipy-illi}.y-ih'i.  Whereas Cl implies that every subset of common coordinates in a preference can be replaced by other common coordinates, weak  separability implies this only for subsets of size n - 1. This makes it much weaker. For instance, if Vi : I', = 91, then the  usual strict increasingness of ~ (the higher a coordinate the better) already implies weak separability, whereas it does not  at all imply Cl.  EQUALLY SPACED STRUCTURES 26)3  THEOREM 3. Let >: be a binary relation on a finite Cartesian product X"=, Let at least two coordinates be essential, and let  restricted solvability and the equally spaced condition hold. Then the following two statements are equivalent:  (i) There exists an additive representation for }.  (ii) The binary relation } is a weak order satisfying the Archimedean axiom and weak separability.  Further, the additive representation in (i) is an interval scale. The range of every additive value function can be taken as  an interval within the set of integers.  A proof will be given in the next section. The claim about the range of the additive value functions could have been taken as  a characterization of the case of equal spacedness and restricted solvability: one can include these conditions in statement  (ii), rather than as structural presupposition, if one includes the claim about the range in statement (i). Obviously, if X"-,  I'; contains finitely many elements, then the Archimedean axiom in statement (ii) may be omitted. A direct consequence of the  above theorem is that the conditions in statement (ii) imply all the cancellation axioms, including CI and the Thomsen  condition. The following corollary illustrates the little restrictiveness of weak separability. An accumulation point of a set  is a point that is a limit of points of the set different from the point itself. Given that strict increasingness implies weak  separability, the corollary follows straightforwardly from the above theorem.  COROLLARY 4. Let Vi : I'; c 91. Suppose the weak order ~= on X;-, I', (n ~ 2) is strictly increasing in each coordinate, and  satisfies restricted solvability, the Archimedean axiom, and the equally spaced condition. Then there exists an additive  representation for }, strictly increasing in each coordinate. The F;'s are discrete and have no accumulation points.  3. PROOF OF THEOREM 3  Necessity of the conditions in statement (ii) is elementary and well-known. So we turn to sufficiency. Suppose the conditions  in statement (ii) hold. Say that the i in the definition of equal spacedness is 1. So there exist aand a; such that, for  some x, x _ , a; } x _, abut x _, a i } x , b, } x _ , a' for no b, . By weak separability we can in the usual way define >=  ; for each coordinate i, i.e., v; }; w; if and only if there exists x so that x_;v;}x_,w;, which by weak separability holds if  and only if y _; v; 1>=y _; w; for all y. Also from weak separability it follows that } ; is a weak order, that the relations  >-;, =< ;, -<;, " ; can be derived from ~; in the usual way, and that we have the following monotonicities:  [vi : x; /; yJ - [x >y1, (3)  if further besides (3) also [3i : x; }; y,] then x >- y, (4)  264 PETER WAKKER  We call b; strictly between a; and c; if ai y; b; }; c; or c; >-; b; >-; ai. Equal spacedness says there does not exist b,  strictly between aand a,. The following lemma straightforwardly follows from application of restricted solvability to the  implied w_i,;a;, qi> w_;.;ci,pi>-w_r.;ci, ql.  LEMMA 5. Let ai>-i ci, pi>-; qj. Let W_r.lai, qi}w_;,jc;, pj. Then there exists b; strictly between a; and ci so that w._,,  ;b;, q;--W-;,;c;, p;.  We have  ~Pt}i q.i : w-,.ia,, qi>- A, _,jai, Pi (6)  because that would imply, by Lemma 5, existence of b, strictly between aand a, Next we construct standard sequences on each  coordinate. First this is done for all j :A l. We fix any arbitrary a.E Tj, j = 2, ..., n. Say, for any l i4- 1, there is  b.. >-J a By (6) w _,.;a bi >t w _,.;a,, a by Lemma 5 there must exist a' to give  w_,,~a a~ ^w_,.laI a There can be no b; strictly between aand it would by Lemma 5 imply existence of a b, strictly  between aand a,. Analogously, if there exists b; >-j a1, we can construct al so that w _ ,,; a a~ - w _ I,;a i , a~ and  that there exists no bj strictly between a' and a2. We continue inductively by construct  ing ak+' so that w_,,;a a~ +' ti w_,,;ai, ak as long as there exists b; > a~ . Either this gives an infinite sequence, or  the sequence stops at a maximal a, . If the sequence is infinite, then by the Archimedean axiom there can be no upper bound  for the standard sequence. Further there is no bj strictly between any a' and a"'.  Again analogously, if there exists b,-<,a, , we can construct an ai' so that w _,,;a a- w_ t.;a; , a; 1, and so that there  is no b; strictly between a,and a; ' . We can again continue and define inductively a.- k with w_,.;a,,a~ k+t,~  is i , al -k. Either this gives an infinite sequence, or the sequence stops at a minimal aj k . Again there is no bj strictly  between any ai i` }' and a,-'. From the above one sees  Each b; E T; is ( -j) equivalent to a for some z. (7)  To construct the standard sequence on the first coordinate, note that there are at least two coordinates essential, so that  there must be a j :A 1 for which there exists not only a but also al or a,"'. Say a' exists. Then we can use the "measure  stick" ai', aon coordinate j to construct the standard sequence a a,, ... and a al', ... on coordinate 1, exactly as we  used the "measure stick" al, aon coordinate 1 to construct the standard sequences a a,', ... and a a-', ... for all i *  1.  The construction of the standard sequences is not unique. Any ai' could be replaced by any b,`` -; a~. It should be noted  that, by weak separability and its implication (5), nothing in our reasonings, constructions, or definitions would have  altered if we had carried out a replacement as just mentioned.  Remark 6. The important property of the standard sequences constructed above, showing independence of the particular way they  have been constructed, and  EQUALLY SPACED STRUCTURES 265  facilitating additive representation, is that there are no coordinates strictly between them, so, loosely speaking, a;" is the  direct follower in preference of a,~.  For the case of difference measurement (n = 2, T, =T,, V, = - V2) on a finite subset of a Cartesian product, a result related  to Remark 6 was obtained in Lemma 1 in Doignon and Falmagne (1974).  We define the additive value functions as follows, in accordance with the claim about the range in the theorem: For any j and  b, E T;, VJ (b) _ with : so that a;-, bi. By (5) and (7) it suffices to show that these functions are additive value functions  on the grid alternatives, i.e., the alternatives with all coordinates of the form a'. We first show that the "trade-offs of  size one" are alright. The following equivalence in the present setup simply follows from Lemma 5 and Remark 6.  ;a-+  for all grid alternatives xv;,;a , a"+', w_;jai+', a.z . In general additive conjoint measurement the derivation of the above  equation is the only step where more implications of the cancellation axioms are needed than weak separability. This is  explicated in Wakker (1989, Section 111.5, comment at Stage 3); there only the derivation of Fomula (111.5.3),the analogue of  the present Formula (8), requires CI in full strength and besides that also the Thomsen condition (or the weaker hexagon  condition) if no more than two coordinates are essential. It is remarkable that Formula (8) follows, in the presence of  restricted solvability and the equally spaced condition, from merely weak separability, and does not need anything else from  CI and/or other cancellation axioms.  Completion of the demonstration that the Vj's are additive value functions is done as in Wakker (1989, Section 111.5, Step  3.3). In short, the above trade-offs of size one can be repeated, showing that any two alternatives with the same sum of  additive value functions must be equivalent. Increasing the sum of the additive value functions leads obviously to a higher  equivalence class.  That the additive representation is an interval scale is standard. For example, one can see that any pair of values y > v  instead of 1, 0 would have been possible for V,(a;), V,(a, and that after those choices the additive representation is  uniquely determined. For the case of finitely many equivalence classes this uniqueness result is a special case of Corollary 1  in Fishburn and Roberts (1988), which gives necessary and sufficient conditions for additive represenations on finite  structures to be interval scales.  4. CONCLUSION  We have shown that additive conjoint measurement for the equally spaced case is simpler, and that stronger results can be  obtained, than has usually been thought. Only weak separability, a very weak version of cancellation, is needed.  480/35!2-9  266 PETER WAKKER  REFERENCES  DEBREU, G. (1960). Topological methods in cardinal utility theory. In K.J. Arrow, S. Karlin, & P. Suppes (1959, Eds.),  Mathematical methods in the social sciences (pp. 16-26). Stanford: Stanford Univ. Press.  Do[GNON, J. P., & FALMAGNE, J. C. (1974). Difference measurement and simple solvability with restricted solvability. Journal  of Mathematical Psychology, 11, 473-499.  F[SHBURN, P. C., & RGBERTS, F. S. (1988). Unique finite conjoint measurement. Mathematical Social Sciences, 16, 107-143.  JAFFRAY, J. Y. (1974a). Existence, propri&t6s de continuit&, additivit6 de fonctions d'utilit& sur un espace partiellement ou  totalement ordonn6. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Paris VI, Paris.  JAFFRAY, J. Y. (1974b). On the extension of additive utilities to infinite sets. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 11,  431-452.  KRANTZ, D. H., LUCE, R. D., SUPFES, P., & TVERSKY, A. (1971) (=KLST). Foundations of measurement, Vol I, Additive and  polynomial representations. New York: Academic Press.  WAKKER, P. P. (1988). The algebraic versus the topological approach to additive representations. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 32, 421-435.  WAKKER, P. P. (1989). Additive representations of preferences, a new foundation of decision analysis. Dordrecht: Kluwer  Academic Publishers (was Reidel).  RECEIVED: January 30, 1990