10.1016/0022-2496(91)90038-u
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 35, 109-121 (1991)  Book Review  Exploring Chaos in Psychophysical Systems  ROBERT GREGSON. Nonlinear Psychophysical Dynamics. Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc. 1988. Pp. 217 + v.  Reviewed by RICHARD A. HEATH  The author, Robert Gregson, is Professor of Psychology at the University of New England, New South Wales, Australia. He is the  author of at least two other books in mathematical psychology, Psvchometrics of similarity (1975) published by Academic Press  and Time series in psychology (1983), published by Erlbaum. His research interests have been wide-ranging from quantitive  system-theoretic models in multiple-input sensory systems to applied studies in olfaction and taste. He has also maintained a  continuing interest in applications of innovative quantitative techniques to the analysis of clinical problems. He has  published widely in these areas including several papers in the quantitative journals, British Journal of Mathematical and  Statistical Psychology and Biological Cybernetics. Professor Gregson obtained his PhD degree from the University of London in  1961. He was Professor of Psychology at the University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand from 1967 until 1980 and has  held his present position since then. Professor Gregson has played an active professional role in mathematical psychology,  being a Fellow of the Australian, British, and New Zealand Psychological Societies, as well as the Royal Statistical Society.  Recently, his contributions to Australian science have been recognized by his election to a Fellowship in the Australian  Academy of Social Sciences.  The reviewer, Richard Heath, is Associate Professor of Psychology in the University of Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia.  His research interests are mathematical models for decision making and human memory and the application of control theoretic  techniques, such as system identification and adaptive Kalman filtering, to the analysis of human information processing. He  has also applied these techniques to the prevention of fatigue in human operators and the development of computer-controlled  procedures for the assessment of individual differences in human information processing ability. ( _ 1991 Academic Press, Inc.  This monograph represents an initial expose of a new approach to the modelling of human psychophysical processes in terms of a  dynamic nonlinear system. Some of the material was derived from a series of lecture notes presented at universities in the  Federal Republic of Germany and elsewhere. Gregson demonstrates that such systems can mimic the predictions of conventional  approaches to psychophysical modelling as well as account for unexpected variations in experimental data that require major  refinement in classical psychophysical models. In so doing, he intimates that the use of dynamic nonlinear models can release  the theorist from the grip of static mathematical models and provide a mathematical and conceptual  109  0022-2496/91 $3.00  Copyright ;ci 1991 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  110 BOOK REVIEW  reason for exploring the exciting world of deterministic chaos, strange attractors, limit cycles, etc., in a psychophysical  context.  In his pursuit of this goal, Gregson examines the applicability of a mathematically simple third-order difference equation,  with complex variables, to the analysis of psychophysical data. These applications include the psychophysical function  relating the subject's response to physical stimulus magnitude, the subjective Weber function, intermittent response burst and  response quantization phenomena, analogues of signal detection theory, stimulus range effects, and finally, the effect of  compound stimuli. All this is achieved by simulating the time course of the nonlinear model on a computer and manipulating the  mapping of task-independent variables onto model parameters. Since there are no analytic developments of the model and no  theorems proved, the reader can be impressed by the model's predictions but feel impoverished by a lack of knowledge of both  its structural regularities and its deeper theoretical implications (a notoriously difficult task for nonlinear systems, but  see the extensive mathematical developments and psychological applications of nonlinear systems theory in the papers cited by  Grossberg (1988) ).  The nonlinear model and its mathematical implications. The mathematical model used in this book was selected as "the simplest  dynamic structure which might support a diversity of observable input-output relationships, whose parameters are potentially  interpretable," (p. 14). At least conceptually, it is based on 19 propositions some of which rely on well-known psychophysical  facts, e.g., the psychophysical function is "monotonic increasing within a bounded range," whereas others are not so familiar,  e.g., gain functions (here identified with the traditional psychometric function) can exhibit local breaks. These propositions  anticipate some of the more surprising predictions of a nonlinear model, such as the derivation of the subjective Weber  function from local random perturbations of the model's parameters and of the spontaneous generation of stimulus range  effects. Perhaps of even greater significance for applied psychologists is Gregson's proposal that the nonlinear model should  also account for qualitative changes in psychophysical performance due to clinical syndromes such as epilepsy and even  schizophrenia.  Before describing the more complete system-theoretic model which maps environmental stimuli on to observable responses,  Gregson uses computer simulation to investigate the properties of the following nonlinear model. If Y; is the value of the  complex internal state variable on the jth iteration, then its value at the (j+ 1)th iteration is given by  Y;+,=a(1-Y;)(Y;+ie)(Y;-ie),  0< Y;< 1  where a and e are real constants and i = 1. The dynamic evolution of this process depends on the values of the starting state  variable, Yo.  At this point the author justifies the introduction of a cubic recursive equation in complex variables by reference to results  from his earlier work on system identification (Gregson, 1983), which indicate that this type of equation is needed to  BOOK REVIEW Ill  accommodate a variety of psychophysical data. He then uses computer simulation to study the properties of the equation as the  parameters, a and e, are varied. Gregson considered it important to include both real and imaginary components for the  internal state variable since it is then possible to decompose the psychophysical system into a signal component given by the  real part of the internal state variable and an internal neural noise component represented by the imaginary part of this  variable.  One can dispense with the use of complex variables by deriving separate recursive equations for the real and imaginary  components of Eq. (1) as  xk+i=a[(e-+xk)(I _xk)+Yk(3xk-I)] (2a)  Yk+I =aykIyk-e`+xk(2-3xk)1- (2b)  Campbell and Gregson (1990) have used these relationships to investigate the geometric properties of this nonlinear recursion.  Equations (2a) and (2b) can be programmed easily and the reader is encouraged to examine the locus of the point (xk, yk), as k  varies for different values of a and e, in order to gain some insight into the interesting dynamic properties of the model  which are discussed later in this review. These two components of the internal state variable can exhibit quite different  dynamic behavior in time. For example, provided that the imaginary component, yk, is very small initially, then the real  component, xk, can attain a stable limit point while the imaginary component can become cyclic or intermittent, a  characteristic pattern in the physiological responses of sensory systems (Skarda and Freeman, 1987). In terms of the  two-dimensional plot, this effect is represented by the locus attaining an equilibrium state involving cyclic oscillation  between two values of y x in the vertical direction, i.e., for a fixed value of x,,,,.  Although not explained in detail at this stage by the author, the a parameter is related to an internal state variable which  is modified during each iteration of the process. Provided a is kept sufficiently small, the changes in the internal variable  remain within finite bounds. However, as a is increased, the internal state variable begins to make wider excursions from its  initial value and for sufficiently large values its real component may generate increasingly large excursions in both the  positive and negative directions. This leads to unstable asymptotic performance of the nonlinear system. The e parameter  measures the amplitude of the imaginary component and in most of the simulations reported in this book it is kept at very  small values. Since it measures the amount of internal noise in the system it serves to modulate the signal-noise ratio of the  nonlinear information processing system. In this case, however, the noise generated by the imaginary component of the internal  state variable is internal system noise not the external noise often implied in signal detection tasks in which weak signals  are imbedded in white stimulus noise. It might be analogous to the effect of physiological noise generated, for example, by  spontaneous neural activity, a possibility mentioned on several occasions by the author.  Gregson selected this cubic function for several good reasons. It is the simplest  112 BOOK REVIEW  extension of the second order logistic equation presented by May (1974) which contained a unidimensional real variable and  only a quadratic nonlinear term. In the reals, its third-order polynomial form allows the equation to emulate the sigmoid  nonlinear functions frequently used in other models (Grossberg, 1988). Gregson (1984) reported data in which the transfer  function, estimated from judgments of multidimensional olfactory stimuli, required an imaginary component to account for the  stimulus-response mappings. As a consequence, he considered it important to include imaginary components in any realistic  nonlinear psychophysical model. Since the model contains two parameters, plus an arbitrarily selected number of iterations of  the recursive Eq. (1 ), it can be simulated quite easily and there is a good chance that such a small parameter set may be  estimated using psychophysical data.  The model's dynamic properties were examined by simulating the process for up to 50 iterations using different values of a and  e, and a fixed starting point. When e = 0, the process attains a stable asymptote as the time variable, k, increases for a <  3, but for larger values of a, the asymptotic value of the internal state variable progresses through periodic doubling  behavior in which the asymptote shifts abruptly to a different value as a increases. As a approaches 4, the asymptote of the  real component of the internal state variable oscillates in a stable and predictable way, just like a pendulum driven clock.  This phenomenon, which is characteristic of nonlinear systems, is an example of a limit cycle. As e increases, the process  exhibits a similar sequence of varied dynamic behavior but at smaller values of a. For sufficiently large a and e the process  explodes and the asymptotic value of the internal state variable is no longer defined. Computer simulations performed by  Gregson indicated that the limit for stable asymptotic performance required values of a and e such that their product ae was  less than or equal to about 1.7.  Using an analysis based on ensuring that the Schwarzian derivative (Schuster, 1988, p. 227) of the real version of Eq. (1) is  negative, Gregson demonstrated that system stability should occur for the complex version of Eq. (1) when 0 < e < .5774.  Further computer simulations showed that stability occurs when 2.958 <, a < 6.54. This rectangular subspace of the a, e  parameter space was then used in the remaining simulations, since the process was stable for a < 2.958 and e < 0.5774. In this  case the maximum of the product of a and e is 1.707, a value close to the stability constraint mentioned earlier. It was  interesting to note that at the point where the complex component exerts a major influence on the process dynamics as  indicated by the computer simulation (at a = 4.0, e=0.5), the process's asymptotic output changes suddenly to different values  which become stable temporarily for fixed values of a and e. This phenomenon, known as bifurcation in nonlinear system  terminology, demonstrates how a continuously evolving process can be transformed into discrete state-dependent behavior to  yield a viable model for quantized perceptual and cognitive systems.  The different response modes of the nonlinear system can be determined more generally by computing the Lyapunov index, ti,  which measures the system's average rate of gain in Shannon information, or entropy, per unit time. Negative  BOOK REVIEW 113  values of .i indicate convergence of the system to a stable asymptotic equilibrium point known as an attractor, or to a  repeated range of values as exhibited by a limit cycle. On the other hand, positive values of ti indicate persistent  instability in the nonlinear system dynamics. Hence the stability region for the nonlinear system can be represented by a  three-dimensional plot of the Lyapunov index as a function of a and e.  The transition of the process into deterministic chaos for ~ > 0, in which the asymptotic value of the internal state variable  varies unpredictably for small changes in a, can be examined in more detail by plotting the phase space diagram, Y;+, against  Y;, separately for both the real and imaginary components. In this case the trajectory generated by successive values of the  internal state variable moves in large jumps in random directions occasionally passing through a finite number of points in  the phase space diagram. These "fixed" points exhibited by the chaotic behavior of the nonlinear dynamic system are called  "strange attractors" and they represent a characteristic signature of the system's unpredictable but nevertheless  deterministic behavior. In human psychophysics Gregson suggests that such an unstable region of the parameter space may  indicate degenerative behavior due to system overload, which is characteristic of certain psychopathological conditions.  Following this investigation of the stability conditions of the system, Gregson incorporates the nonlinear model represented  by Eq. (1) as a recursive component within a more complex but realistic model of psychophysical dynamics called system F. In  version 7 of this model, F V7, the input stimulus is a uniformly distributed bounded random variable similar to that  recommended for the identification of nonlinear systems using Volterra expansions (Marmarelis and Marmarelis, 1977; Heath and  Fulham, 1985). This ensures that there is maximum entropy over the input stimulus space. The input is mapped onto the a  parameter so that stimulus intensity, for example, affects the nonlinearity, or "biotic potential" of the system (see Gleick,  1987, p. 63). This parameter represents the relationship between the stimulus input and the response generated by this  stimulus, and so is responsible for the shape of the psychophysical function. The nonlinear dynamic model may also be  sensitive to the rate of change of the stimulus input and, in some versions of model I', the output of an input differentiator  mechanism is mapped onto the e parameter to allow the system to be sensitive to the input's rate of change. This is an  alternative, but novel, interpretation of the imaginary parameter of the model and suggests that its role may be considerably  more important than as a representation of internal noise processes.  In a series of computer simulations, Gregson shows that the nonlinear model generates sigmoid psychophysical functions which  are commonly observed in psychophysical data and which form the basis of nonlinear transformations in contemporary  connectionist models of human information processing (Grossberg, 1988). By inserting noise into the input and timing  components of the system, the model generates cyclic activity in its output which is revealed by fitting an autoregressive  moving-average (ARMA) time series model to the predicted output of the  114 BOOK REVIEW  nonlinear system FV7. Such cyclic behavior has been discovered in the physiological transduction of olfactory stimuli (Skarda  and Freeman, 1987).  In a series of simulations it was shown that the response variance for the real component of the system's output increases as  soon as the mean of the imaginary component of the output becomes unstable, but subsequently decreases in a parabolic fashion  for large response outputs. These findings permitted an evaluation of the subjective Weber function which states that response  uncertainty is proportional to the response magnitude (Eisler, Holm and Montgomery, 1979). Although such a relationship holds  for large sample durations, it fails in an empirically verifiable way for smaller durations. This analysis indicated the  important role played by the imaginary component in generating deterministic internal noise, which imposes limitations on  psychophysical performance. As succinctly expressed by Gregson, this application of the model indicated how the output of a  nonlinear system can be split into three components, a deterministic gain function (relating response output to stimulus  input), observable macrouncertainty in the real component (possibly of psychological significance) and internal  microuncertainty in the imaginary component (possibly of psychological significance as a source of internal noise).  In the ensuing chapters, Gregson becomes even more creative in his application of the model. For example, when the rate of  input change is mapped onto the imaginary parameter, e, an increase in the maximum value of e yields two-state responding with  a second ogival psychometric function emerging for sufficiently large a. Such response dissociation may occur when the system  fails to track rapid fluctuations in the input accurately leading to channelization phenomena, such as is occasionally  observed in sensory systems. In this situation, temporal information is lost and the system attains a relatively stable  configuration defined by spatial aspects of the input.  The predictions of eight additional versions of model I' were examined by placing various constraints on the mapping between  system variables and model parameters. In model I'V2 a is fixed and e is coupled to the rate of change of stimulus input  leading to bimodal response curves. A similar, but apparently more physiologically realistic model I'V3 also assumes that the  starting state on each iteration depends on the terminal state on the previous iteration. When there is an environmental  limitation on the maximum rate of stimulus change (model FV4), the psychometric function is linear and the response output is  autoregressive, provided that the input amplitude is not too large.  A possible deterministic nonlinear model for response time (RT) (model FV5) is obtained by fixing a and e and mapping the  input magnitude onto the information sampling rate. Although this would appear to be an important theoretical development so  that the model's predictions can be reconciled with RT and response proportion data, no clearcut interpretation of the  predictions of this version of the model was entertained, since "the observed reaction time is not strictly to be equated with  processing time inside a single recursive loop embedded within a total psychophysical system" (p. 90). In model I'V6, e is  fixed and there are no bounds  BOOK REVIEW 115  on the possible stimulus related changes in a. In this case the psychometric function is linear for low e, but nonmonotonic  for larger e. Unfortunately, visual verification of this result was compromised by the paucity of data in Figs. 6.9 and 6.10.  Model FV7, which dominates the earlier chapters of the book, generates low signal suppression in the psychometric function,  especially for larger values of e. Model FV8, in which the product of a and e is constant, generates results which are  difficult to interpret. However, model FV9, in which a is uniformly distributed and input changes are mapped onto e, generates  an interesting coarse bimodal response for which the resting state activity is slightly larger than that generated by weak  inputs. Such behavior is observed in the motor activity of Parkinson patients in which task-related, but clumsy, activity  temporarily reduces the degree of chronic tremor characteristic of the disorder. Such an insightful observation by the author  suggests that this nonlinear model may be used in the analysis of complex motor skills, a topic far removed from the  psychophysical domain.  Gregson also examined the effects of joining the nonlinear recursive loops in a cascaded fashion with both the real and  imaginary outputs of one stage serving as inputs to corresponding components of the next stage (see McClelland, 1979, for a  similar cascaded system in the reals ). When simulated, such a system generates intermittent burst behavior in both the real  and imaginary components. It also generates random jumps between energy levels, or states, which may be represented by a  semi-Markov model. In this more complicated nonlinear model, we observe a possible lower-level deterministic mechanism for  generating behavior that might be approximated by the Markov models, which still play an important analytic role in  mathematical psychology. The advantage of Gregson's model is that it provides  50  45  40  35  Z/7 30  w Z  25  20  15  10  5  01 I I I I I I I I I I I 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 STIMULI  FIG. 1. Psychometric function predictions for several versions of Gregson's model I  116 BOOK REVIEW  detailed temporal information on the processing mechanisms which determine the interstate transitions.  Figure 1 indicates the general types of stimulus-response mappings predicted by the several versions of model F discussed by  Gregson. These curves were redrawn from Fig. 6.3 (V4), Fig. 6.7 (V5), Fig. 6.15 (V7), and Fig. 6.29 (V8) in Chapter 6 of the  book and are presented on the same diagram so that the variety of predictions provided by the model can be appreciated. Both  STIMULI and RESPONSES scales are measured in arbitrary units based on the simulations reported in the book. These psychometric  functions are linear (V4), sigmoidal (V7), quantal (V5), and nonmonotonic (V8). The latter curve is interesting since it  implies that the sensory transduction system can be overloaded for stimulus intensity exceeding about 13 units leading to a  decrease in stimulus discriminability. Heath (1976) observed a similar nonmonotonic psychometric function in a visual temporal  order judgment task.  Empirical evaluation of the nonlinear model. In Chapters 9 through 13, Gregson pursues the difficult technical problem of  matching theory to data in several psychophysical tasks using illustrative experimental data from olfaction. This is a crucial  section of the book for anyone concerned about the psychological validity of the nonlinear model. Although replete with the  scholarship and technical sophistication which characterize this volume, these chapters contain immense difficulties for the  reader. Not only is the subject matter unfamiliar and therefore deserving of a less terse explication, there is an element of  ad hoc theoretical development and an annoying number of typographical errors (slips of the printer's ink occur on pages 121,  122, 124, 131, 149, 157, 175, 180, 184, 186, and 203). However, in the very preface of the book Gregson hints that there are  few precendents for a thorough analysis of nonlinear systems in psychophysics so some of the techniques employed have had to  be created de novo. This requires greater ingenuity on the part of the author and a greater demand on the reader's  interpretative skills.  This section of the book begins with a short chapter on model identification when there is the possibility of  response-stimulus overlap when, for example, a response is initiated before the previous stimulus has ended. In this case a  rather complex mechanism is proposed which is based on a small number of cascaded nonlinear recursive loops. It is difficult  for the reader to discern a meaningful pattern in the simulations of this system which are summarized in Table 8.1.  Consequently, Gregson explores the application of k-means cluster analysis and canonical correlation analysis to determine  relationships between model parameters and sequential properties of magnitude estimation judgments using olfactory stimuli.  Evidence for coherence between theory and data is provided, as well as information on individual differences in psychophysical  performance as revealed by the nonlinear model.  Here we encounter some interpretive difficulties due to a lack of clarity in both the description of the data analysis and the  interpretation of the results. For  BOOK REVIEW 117  example, in the description of the clustering algorithm on pp. 130 and 131, assumption 3 constrains an f constant to lie  within the closed interval [0.3, 0.4], whereas assumption 9 claims that ` f = 4 usually works!" On p. 133, the AIC decision  criterion is not defined and it is some time later that we learn that this is the Akaike Information Criterion needed to  correct for differences in the number of free parameters when several models are fit to the same data set. A curious result  occurs in Table 9.3 in which, despite clear evidence that model I'V7 fits better using a normalized deviation criterion (for  14 out of 15 cases where JZJ < 1.96), a leastsquares proximity criterion reveals that model FV 1 provides a better fit for  seven subjects whose performance exhibited near limit cycling characteristics. It is evident, therefore, that further research  is needed to streamline the statistical analysis of the data so that model identifiability can be clarified.  Next, Gregson examines measurement properties of the nonlinear system as revealed by subjective bisection judgments in which  the subject is required to judge the location of the arithmetic mean of the subjective effects of two stimuli located on the  same unidimensional psychological scale. By translating Pfanzagl's criterion for measurement using bisymmetric structures  (Krantz, Luce, Suppes, and Tversky, 1971, p. 295) into a corresponding process for the simulated nonlinear model, Gregson  suggests that I'V7 can generate an interval scale provided that the uncertainty interval used to induce some bisection  uncertainty in the model is not too small. This proposal represents a stochastic extension of Theorem 10 in Krantz et al.  (1971, p. 295), which shows that Pfanzagl's criterion generates an interval scale of measurement for arithmetic mean bisection  judgments. It may overcome some of practical difficulties in verifying the measurement properties of psychological scales when  there is response uncertainty in experimental data. Since memory may play a role in such bisection judgments, some local  storage process may need to be included in the nonlinear model, possibly by varying the loop delay parameter, q, as indicated  in Fig. 3.0 on p. 48.  After having shown that model I'V 1 does not generate an interval scale of measurement, Gregson used this very model to  examine analogues of the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) of Signal Detection Theory (SDT) -and the corresponding  isocriterion plots. The stimulus characteristics of SDT were simulated by selecting two closely spaced values on the input  dimension and mapping these variables onto the a parameter of the nonlinear model. The joint effects of varying a and e, the  magnitude of the imaginary component, were examined by plotting ROC curves. The ROC plots revealed a relative absence of  points in the vicinity of the (0, 1)-(l, 0) diagonal and they were quite noisy. For lower stimulus intensities, the ROC  resembled that predicted by low-threshold theory, since the curves in Fig. 11.1 and 11.2 could be fit by two intersecting  nonlinear segments. At higher intensities, when the a parameter enters the unstable zone, the ROC curves looked rather bizarre  with a decrease in the average distance from the chance diagonal (suggesting decreased sensitivity) and paradoxical negative  sensitivity for high false alarm rates. It would have been interesting to show the reader how such plots could fit a sample of  the wealth of published ROC curves in the literature, otherwise this  118 BOOK REVIEW  analysis does not enhance one's confidence that the nonlinear model actually fits empirical ROC data. One of the difficulties  noted by Gregson is the lack of a precise one-one mapping between the parameters of the nonlinear model and the  discriminability parameter, d', and response bias parameter, (3, of SDT.  A similar criticism applies to Gregson's analysis of isocriterion curves since insufficient empirical support for paradoxical  points corresponding to negative sensitivity was presented. Indeed, the bias criterion defined in Eq. (11.3) is the reciprocal  of the proportion of misses, whereas the more familiar definition depends on the proportion of false alarms. This mystery  unfolds even further when we are confronted with the definition of a bias ratio, Rb, which equals n(ai)/n(a (this ratio was  not explained adequately) given the starting value, Yo. Although I interpret n to mean "number of," there was no definition of  this symbol in the text surrounding Eq. (11.3) on page 162. Since a maps onto stimulus magnitude, then perhaps R,, should  depend on stimulus detectability, rather than response bias in the conventional sense.  Stimulus range effects occur in psychophysical tasks when there is an interaction between the types of stimulus intensities  used and the sensitivity of the observer. For example, the psychophysical response by a hypersensitive observer to relatively  weak stimuli is different than in the case for a hyposensitive observer judging the same stimulus sequence. In such cases high  absolute thresholds are generally associated with high-difference thresholds in the case of the hyposensitive observer and low  absolute thresholds are usually associated with low-difference thresholds for hypersensitive individuals. This result can be  summarized by the Crozier quotient stability criterion which requires that the absolute and difference thresholds be  proportional. Gregson showed that by varying the mapping of inputs onto the a parameter, the Crozier quotient is invariant for  fixed e, whereas varying e permits transposition effects, which result from changes in the locations of the stimuli on the  physical continuum. This is a nonintuitive finding since it suggests that the change in environmental inputs is somehow  mediated by some corresponding change in the level of internal noise, as represented by the e parameter.  The aims of the reported empirical study were to perform a dynamic nonlinear analysis of a subject's responses to  two-component olfactory stimuli and to compare the results of an analysis of the data using linear transfer function analyses  with those predicted by model FV7. In this experiment Butanol was presented at two different intensities for two disjoint  ranges of another chemical, Bergamot, a fragrant oil. In the ensuing data analyses, only the low concentrations of Butanol  exhibited orderly discrimination, so that two clearly separated clusters could be discerned, one corresponding to stable  system properties and the other exhibiting cyclic behavior probably resulting from sensory overload generated by high  intensity stimuli. The fluctuations in performance over successive trials were characteristic of limit cycling in nonlinear  systems. It was interesting to note that Gregson's nonlinear model could accommodate both types of qualitatively different  behaviors within the same theoretical framework.  Despite this interesting finding, there are some problems with the analysis. For  BOOK REVIEW  example, there is reference to a b9 autoregression coefficient which, since it follows b4 in the autoregression equation  without ellipsis, may be a misprint for b5. It is not stated whether the errors in the ARMA parameter estimation are standard  errors or 95% confidence intervals. This makes interpretation of the tables more difficult than should be necessary,  especially since it is evident that only 2 of the 22 subjects provide reliable discriminant coefficients in Table 12.5.  Gregson concludes the theoretical investigation of the nonlinear model with a brief account of hypoadditivity in the  perception of multicomponent olfactory stimuli. This phenomenon occurs when the perceived intensity of a component of a  mixture is less than its perceived intensity when presented alone. Computer simulation reveals that such negative masking  occurs when the low-intensity stimulus input is overwhelmed by the effects of internal noise. This effect is most prominent  when the response variance is heavily weighted relative to the ratio of the magnitudes of the imaginary and real outputs. Of  additional interest is the discrete state-dependent responding illustrated in Fig. 13.4 when a cascade model is employed.  Conclusion. According to Gregson (p. 209), there are at least four options when a simple model breaks down at the extremes of  its usual range of applicability; the model can be enhanced with additional assumptions, it can be rejected, another novel  theory can be devised which accomodates these aberrant findings, or the discrepant data can be ignored as theoretically  irrelevant. In this monograph, Gregson invites us to accompany him in exploring the consequences of accepting the third of  these options. We are led into the relatively unfamiliar world of nonlinear dynamic systems as it is applied to sensory  psychophysics. In this new world we can no longer resort to simple tricks such as assuming that inconsistent stimulusresponse  mappings can be handled by stochastic models such as random walks and diffusion processes. Instead, we need to examine how a  deterministic system in a complex space can generate a huge variety of qualitatively different behavioral outputs in response  to random stimuli by simply manipulating the model's parameter space. In this monograph, Gregson has provided some valuable  guidelines for a careful investigation of the applicability of such an original nonlinear model.  Despite a paucity of empirical data, difficulties in identifying psychologically relevant aspects of the model and some  frustrating stylistic and expositional habits, the author has delivered an intellectually challenging exposition of how the  basic concepts of nonlinear systems, e.g., chaos and deterministic "noise," can be of crucial theoretical importance in the  understanding of complex phenomena in psychophysics. This book is not designed for the mathematically "faint-hearted" as the  serious reader will need to approach the volume armed with a good knowledge of systems theory, time series analysis, and  multivariate statistical analysis. It would also be advantageous to review an elementary text on nonlinear differential  equations, such as Jordan-and Smith (1987), since many of the theoretical developments in this area derive from mathematical  treatments of classical nonlinear systems in continuous time, such as the pendulum problem. Since the main ideas of nonlinear  120 BOOK REVIEW  system analysis are treated rather briefly in the first two chapters of the book, readers unfamiliar with nonlinear systems  might wish to peruse an introductory book on chaotic systems such as Nicolis and Prigogine (1989) or the very readable  exposition for the layperson by Gleick (1987). There are good bibliographies at the end of each chapter of Gregson's book,  although evidence of a less than perfect editorial job is revealed by the omission of a few important text references from  these lists.  Gregson has shown how a single, well-formulated model can provide both an insight into the role of background neural activity  as a referent internal noise source, and sufficient flexibility to generate cyclic behavior typical of many sensory systems.  The devastating effects of information overload leading to chaotic behavior may serve as a useful model for perceptual  dysfunction in psychopathological conditions. There are also sufficient conceptual similarities between Gregson's model and  contemporary nonlinear neural network models of cognitive processes, e.g., Grossberg (1988), Zak (1989), to ensure a continued  interest in this innovative theoretical development in mathematical psychology and cognitive science.  Gregson's exposition of nonlinear system theoretic models has not been limited to psychophysics, and recently he has shown how  the model can be extended in higher dimensional information processing systems (Gregson, 1989a). For example, Gregson and  Britton (1990) have applied the model to the size-weight illusion and Gregson and Britton (1989) have investigated  hypoadditivity in binary odour mixtures. Returning to psychophysics, Gregson (1989b) has shown that a twodimensional form of  the nonlinear model can account for brightness interaction effects in vision. Hence, this book is not the definitive  exposition of psychological applications of nonlinear systems theory. There is much more work to be done in this field and the  interested reader should refer to Gregson's more recent work for some innovative ideas.  Although this book requires considerable mathematical expertise to comprehend its finer points, its message deserves the  attention of experimental psychologists as well. No longer should we be content to average data over trials and eliminate  those trials on which "unexpected" results occur. In order to understand the complexities of human information processing  better, a careful fine-grained temporal analysis of sequential aspects of behavior is required. In so doing, those aspects of  behavioral transitions that have been intractable to conventional quantitative analysis, but which are commonly occuring  behavioral indicators for clinicians, and even the layperson, can now be quantified adequately. We can be thankful to  Professor Gregson for revealing to us how ecologically viable mathematical psychology can really be.  REFERENCES  CAMPBELL, E. A., & GREGSON, R. A. M. (1990). Julia sets for the Gamma recursion in nonlinear psychophysics. Acta Applicandae  Mathematicae, 20, 177-188.  EiSLER, H., HOLM, S., & MONTGOMERY, H. (1979). The general psychophysical differential equation: A comparison of three  specifications. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 20, 16-34.  BOOK REVIEW  GLEICK, J. (1987). Chaos. London: Sphere Books.  GREGSON, R. A. M. (1983). Time series in psychology. Hillsdale, N.J.: L. Erlbaum Associates. GREGSON, R. A. M. (1984).  Invariance in time series representations of 2-input 2-output experiments. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical  Psychology, 37, 100-121.  GREGSON, R. A. M. (1989a). Nonlinear psychophysics in higher dimensionalities. Paper presented at the 22nd Annual Mathematical  Psychology Meeting, University of California at Irvine.  GREGSON, R. A. M. (1989b). A nonlinear systems approach to Fechner's Paradox. Biological Cvbernetic.s, 61, 129-138.  GREGSON, R. A. M., & BRITTON, L. A. (1989). Isointensity and hypoaddition in odour binary mixtures. Unpublished manuscript.  GREGSON, R. A. M., & BRITTON, L. A. (1990). The size-weight illusion in 2-d nonlinear psychophysics. Perception & Ps  ychophysics, 48, 143-156.  GROSSBERG, S. (1988). Nonlinear neural networks: Principles, mechanisms, and architectures. Neural Networks, 1, 17-61.  HEATH, R. A. (1976). Response time models for temporal order discrimination. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, McMaster  University, Ontario, Canada.  HEATH, R. A., & FULHAM, R. (1985). Applications of system identification and adaptive filter techniques in human information  processing. In G. d'Ydewalle (Ed.), Cognition, information processing, and motivation (pp. 117-147). Amsterdam: Elsevier  JORDAN, D. W., & SMITH, P. (1987). Nonlinear ordinary differential equations. Oxford: Clarendon Press. KRANTZ, D. H., LUCE, R.  D., SUPPES, P., & TVERSKY, A. (1971). Foundations of measurement. Volume I, Additive and polvnomial representations. New York:  Academic Press.  MARMARELIS, P. Z., & MARMARELIS, V. Z. (1977). Analysis of physiological .systems: The white-noise approach. New York: Plenum  Press.  MAY, R. M. (1974). Simple mathematical models with very complicated dynamics. Nature, 261, 459-467. MCCLELLAND, J. L. (1979).  On the time relations of mental processes: An examination of systems of processes in cascade. Psychological Review, 86,  NICOLIS, G., & PRIGOGINE, I. (1989). Exploring complexity: An introduction. New York: W. H. Freeman and Co.  SCHUSTER, H. G. (1988). Deterministic chaos: An introduction (2nd revised ed.). Weinheim, FRG: VCH Verlagsgesellsehaft.  SKARDA, C. A., & FREEMAN, W. J. (1987). How brains make chaos in order to make sense of the world. Behavioral and Brain  Sciences, 10, 161-195.  ZAK, M. (1989). Terminal attractors in neural networks. Neural Networks, 2, 259-274.  Work on this review was carried out whilst I was a visiting research associate at the Universities of Edinburgh and Toronto. I  wish to acknowledge the assistance of Computing Consultants at these universities and the free use of the computing facilities  in the Centre For Cognitive Science at Edinburgh University and in the Psychology Department at the University of Toronto.  Professor A. Marley of McGill University provided invaluable comments on an earlier version of this review and Professor  Gregson was kind enough to send me copies of his recent papers on further applications of the nonlinear model.