10.1016/0022-2496(91)90054-w
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 35, 394-402 (1991)  Book Review  Mine Eyes Have Seen the Glory of the Reverend Thomas Bayes*  PETER GARDENFORS AND NILS-ERIC SAHLIN (Eds.). Decision, Probability, and Utility: Selected Readings. Cambridge, England:  Cambridge Univ. Press, 1988. Pp. x+449. $49.50 (hardcover), $15.95 (paper).  Reviewed by CAROL A. NICKERSON  Peter Gdrdenfors (editor) completed his Ph.D. in philosophy at Lund University, Sweden, in 1974. He has been a Visiting Fellow  at Princeton, Stanford, Auckland University, and the Australian National University. He has been on the faculty of Umed  University and is currently Professor of Cognitive Science in the Department of Philosophy at Lund University. His research  interests include the philosophy of science, decision theory, social choice, probability theory, belief systems, logic, and  linguistics. He is co-editor (with Bengt Hansson and Nils-Eric Sahlin) of Evidentiary Value: Philosophical, Judicial, and  Psychological Aspects of a Theory (Gleerups, 1983) and author of Knowledge in Flux: Modeling the Dynamics of Epistemic States  (MIT Press, 1988). He is also past editor of the Swedish journal of philosophy, Theoria. Nils-Eric Sahlin (editor) earned his  Ph.D. in philosophy at Lund University in 1984. He has been a Visiting Fellow at Princeton and at Decision Research in Eugene,  Oregon, and is currently Assistant Professor of Philosophy at Lund University. His research interests focus on the theoretical  foundations of decision, probability, risk, causality, and evidence. He is author of The Philosophy of F. P. Ramsey (Cambridge  University Press, 1990) and review editor of Theoria.  Carol A. Nickerson (reviewer) completed her Ph.D. in quantitative psychology at the University of Colorado at Boulder and is  affiliated with the Center for Research on Judgment and Policy there. Her research interests include judgment and decision  making, statistics, social cognition, measurement and scaling, and medical ethics. <'- 1991 Academic Press, Inc.  Decision, Probability, and Utility: Selected Readings is a collection of eighteen papers-many of them classics-on the  theoretical foundations of Bayesian decision theory (expected utility theory). Most of the papers were written by  philosophers, but there are also contributions from statisticians, economists, and psychologists.  Requests for reprints should be sent to the Publications Librarian, Center for Research on Judgment and Policy, University of  Colorado, Boulder CO 80309-0344.  " The title of this review was borrowed from a Bayesian paean sung to the tune of "The Battle Hymn of the Republic"; its  composer is unknown to me. Appreciation is due the Statistical Computing Facility of the University of California at Berkeley.  0022-2496/91 $3.00  Copyright 1991 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  394  BOOK REVIEW 395  The collection is divided into five parts, each of which reflects one of the major themes underlying the vast and varied  literature of decision theory. Decision, Probability, and Utility is intended primarily as a textbook and to this end the  editors have prefaced the volume with a detailed and very nearly self-contained introduction to Bayesian decision theory. The  introduction first describes the decision situation, explains the basic terms and concepts of decision theory (e.g., "decision  matrix," "probabilities," "utilities," "alternatives," "outcomes," "states of the world," etc. ), outlines the assumptions  underlying the theory, and presents the fundamental decision rule of maximizing subjective expected utility. It also briefly  contrasts and compares the axiomatizations of Bayesian decision theory developed by Ramsey, Savage, von Neumann and  Morgenstern, and Jeffrey, and presents some of the criticisms that have been directed against the theory as a normative model  of rational decision making and as a descriptive model of individuals' actual decision-making behavior. The introduction is  structured in such a way that it serves both as an outline of the volume as a whole and as an overview of Part I. Each of the  other four parts is preceded by its own overview.  The four papers in Part I focus on the theoretical foundations of Bayesian decision theory. Ramsey's classic essay on "Truth  and Probability" introduces the notion of (subjective) probabilities as representing degrees of belief rather than frequencies  or proportions and develops a method of measuring such probabilities based on "value distances" and the construction of a  utility scale. In developing this measure, Ramsey simultaneously provides an axiomatization of Bayesian decision theory. The  second paper, consisting of a section of Luce and Raiffa's book Games and Decisions, outlines various alternative axiom  systems for decision theory, including that of Savage. Luce and Raiffa's paper is followed by Savage's statement of the  "sure-thing principle." This principle appears, albeit in different guises (e.g., "the strong independence axiom," "the  dominance principle," "the column linearity postulate") in all axiomatizations of traditional Bayesian decision theory and is  its cornerstone. In general form, the sure-thing principle states that the choice between two alternatives must be unaffected  by the value of outcomes corresponding to states for which both alternatives have the same payoff. The final paper is  Jeffrey's presentation of his (early) version of Bayesian decision theory. Jeffrey differs from Ramsey and Savage in that he  considers preferences to reflect relations between logical propositions rather than between decision outcomes. Jeffrey also  rejects the Ramsey-Savage assumption that for all states and all alternatives, the probability of the state is independent of  the alternative chosen. He believes that in some situations states might be causally dependent on alternatives or actions and  that therefore (subjective) probabilities must be replaced by (subjective) conditional probabilities in decision theory.  Part II presents some of the criticisms that have been launched against the Bayesian conceptualization of probability and  utility. In his paper, Kyburg objects to the subjectivistic interpretation of probability as degree of belief, as this implies  (a) that it is possible to evaluate a degree of belief to any desired degree of accuracy, (b) that it is possible to  characterize degree of belief as a single number,  396 BOOK REVIEW  thus disregarding such considerations as the weight of the evidence, and (c) that a priori probabilities carry information  about the long-term frequencies of events. He suggests that replacing point estimates of subjective probabilities with  interval estimates might resolve these difficulties. Hacking also objects to the requirement that a decision maker be able to  evaluate a degree of belief to any desired degree of accuracy and proposes "slightly more realistic personal probabilities."  Hansson examines two different interpretations of utility, the "realistic" interpretation, in which utility is considered to  be a subjective measure of usefulness, dependent on values and standards external or prior to the decision situation, and the  traditional "formalistic" interpretation, in which preferences among alternatives in a set form a self-contained whole that  does not derive its legitimacy from anything outside but is subject only to internal rules of coherence and consistency.  Hansson also tackles the question of whether a decision maker's attitude toward risk (e.g., risk aversion) is necessarily  reflected by the shape of his or her utility curve, as traditional Bayesians have maintained, and discusses other possible  influences on the shape of the curve.  In Part III, the axioms of Bayesian decision theory-particularly the sure-thing principle-are examined from both the normative  and the descriptive perspective. The first paper in this part is Savage's presentation of the famous Allais Paradox. Savage  admits that most individuals' preferences for the alternatives in the paradox (including his own) violate the sure-thing  principle but argues for the normative validity of that principle. McClennen then reviews four arguments commonly used to  defend the normative validity of the strong independence version of the surething principle and finds them unconvincing.  McClennen's review is followed by Kahneman and Tversky's well known Econometrica paper, in which Bayesian theory is criticized  as a descriptive model of decision making. Kahneman and Tversky discuss several classes of choice problems in which  individuals' preferences systematically violate the axioms of decision theory and propose an alternative theory, called  "prospect theory," that can account for these violations. In prospect theory probabilities are replaced by "decision weights"  and values relate not to final assets but to gains and losses. Machina surveys several types of empirical violations of the  independence axiom, including the Allais Paradox and the violations discussed by Kahneman and Tversky, and demonstrates that  they all can be explained as violations of the Bayesian assumption that individuals' preference functions are "linear in the  probabilities." He proposes a generalization of Bayesian decision theory in which the assumption of linearity is replaced by  an assumption of "smoothness" (differentiability).  Part IV on "Unreliable Probabilities" begins with Ellsberg's description of the paradox that now bears his name. Imagine two  urns, one filled with 100 red and black balls, the number of each unknown, the other filled with 50 red and 50 black balls.  Most individuals (a) are indifferent between betting on a red ball from urn 1 and betting on a black ball from urn 1, (b) are  indifferent between betting on a red ball from urn 2 and betting on a black ball from urn 2, (c) prefer betting on a red ball  from urn 2 to betting on a red ball from urn 1, and (d) prefer betting  BOOK REVIEW 397  on a black ball from urn 2 to betting on a black ball from urn 1. This pattern of preferences violates axioms of Bayesian  decision theory, including the sure-thing principle. Ellsberg suggests that these violations stem from the fact that Bayesian  decision theory does not incorporate an important dimension of many choice problems: the quality or reliability of one's  information concerning the relative likelihood of states of the world. The central problem is that Bayesian decision theory  requires that a decision maker's beliefs about states of the world in a given decision situation be represented by a unique  probability distribution defined over the states; however, differences in information quality cannot be captured by a unique  (single) probability distribution. As a solution to this problem, Ellsberg proposes a decision rule based on a probability  distribution that is a composite of all "reasonable" distributions and on a measure of the decision maker's confidence in this  distribution. Schick's solution is to replace point estimates of subjective probabilities with bounded probability ranges,  similar to the probability intervals suggested by Kyburg in Part II. This solution is somewhat problematical, as it is unclear  how probability intervals or ranges should be updated in the light of new evidence. Levi suggests that beliefs should be  represented by a set or class of probability distributions, rather than by a single distribution. The updating problem can  then be handled by revision of each distribution in the set. Gardenfors and Sahlin argue that representing beliefs by a set of  probability distributions does not go quite far enough, as some probability distributions may be supported by more information  than others. They therefore propose augmenting each probability distribution with a measure of its "epistemic reliability."  Gardenfors and Sahlin also contrast and compare their solution with several others, including those of Ellsberg, Kyburg, and  Levi.  It has long been known among statisticians and philosophers that causal independence and probabilistic independence are not  synonymous. Part V is motivated by an intriguing class of decision situations known as "Newcomb Problems" that are  characterized by probabilistic dependence but causal independence between alternatives (or acts) and states of the world.  Bayesian theories based on conditional probabilities (e.g., Jeffrey's theory in Part I) advise choosing the wrong alternative  in these situations. Therefore it has been suggested that "causal" decision theories should be based on probabilistic  evaluations of the causal influences of alternatives on states rather than on conditional probabilities. Gibbard and Harper's  paper describes a causal decision theory based on counterfactual propositions and compares it with decision theory based on  conditional probabilities. Lewis follows with a comparison of his own version of causal decision theory with several other  versions (including that of Gibbard and Harper) and suggests that they are more alike than it would appear. Jeffrey's solution  to Newcomb Problems was to replace his original decision rule of maximizing (subjective) conditional expected utility with a  new principle of choice called the "maxim of ratifiability." An act or alternative is said to be ratifiable if it has maximal  expected utility on the assumption that the decision maker has already decided to perform the act or choose the alternative;  that is, a decision should be made in terms of the probabilities that the  398 BOOK REVIEW  decision maker would assign to states of the world after the decision had been made. In cases where there is causal  independence, this strategy should make the probability of each state independent of the action or alternative chosen. In the  final paper of this collection, Rabinowicz examines the maxim of ratifiability and the closely related "maxim of stability"  and concludes that they are unacceptable.  Decision, Probability, and Utility is a wonderful book. Gardenfors and Sahlin have clearly devoted a great deal of thought and  care to the selection of papers to be included, all of which are of high quality. The earlier papers have had an enormous  impact on decision theory, many of the more recent papers promise to be influential in the future, and all are  thought-provoking. Although the papers encompass a variety of themes and represent a diversity of perspectives on Bayesian  decision theory, the collection nevertheless comes across as a cohesive whole because of the well-structured introductory  chapter and overviews that highlight the interconnections between the papers. In addition, the contributors of the papers  frequently refer to one another's work. As a result, the book often gives one the beguiling impression of listening in on the  dinner-table conversation of a group of interesting and friendly-but opinionated-persons who have had enough wine to become  voluble but not enough to become fractious.  I have only a few minor criticisms to make. First, the introductory chapter might have begun with a short history of expected  utility theory, perhaps something similar to the summary by Coombs, Dawes, and Tversky in Mathematical Psychology (1970, pp.  117-122) or the summary by Abelson and Levi in the Handbook of Special Psychology (1985, pp. 243-246). Without this  background, various unexplained references to Daniel Bernoulli, the St. Petersburg Paradox, and to utility being equal to  dollar amounts for small sums of money will not be meaningful. Also, it is quite curious that despite numerous references to  "Bayesian decision theory," there is never any mention of Bayes himself or of why this theory of decision making bears his  name, except for one brief oblique reference to Bayes' Theorem in Hacking's paper (p. 123).  Second, it would have been useful to have included two appendices, one a review of basic probability concepts and the other an  explanation of the meanings of the various symbols for sentential connectives, quantifiers, relational operators, and so on.  Many persons interested in decision making will not have had much (if any) exposure to probability theory or symbolic logic. A  glossary of logical terms (e.g., "modus ponens") and decision-making references (e.g., "Bergen Paradox") would also have been  appreciated; in reading the text I often needed to consult a variety of other works to ascertain the meaning of unknown (or  once known but forgotten) terms and references. These addenda might not be necessary for students in philosophy; however, they  would enhance the book's readability and appeal for persons in other disciplines.  Finally, the introductory chapter and the overviews of the book's parts are generally quite good, but perhaps a little uneven  in their coverage of the papers included in the collection. In particular, a few of the paper precis are insufficiently  detailed. For example, the precis of Machina's very technical paper on generalized  BOOK REVIEW 399  expected utility theory is quite brief compared with the precis of Kahneman and Tversky's prospect theory. Lewis's comparison  of his own version of causal decision theory with several other versions is difficult to follow if one does not know much  about these other theories and deserves more than the one-sentence summary it receives in the overview to Part V. Levi's  influential paper on indeterminate probabilities is rather strenuous reading for the non-philosopher and also deserves a  longer summary. However, honesty compels me to confess that the precis of those papers or topics that I do not know well are  also those that I think need more detail; perhaps there is something of import here.  Would Decision, Probability, and Utility be suitable as a textbook for a general psychology course on decision making? I  regret very much to say that I think not, for several reasons. First, the scope of the book is quite narrow. Given the variety  of approaches that psychologists have taken to the study of judgment and decision making (e.g., psychological decision theory,  information integration theory, social judgment theory, etc., Hammond, McClelland, & Mumpower, 1980), I doubt that many  instructors would want to devote a whole semester to Bayesian decision theory alone. In addition, it is my impression that  relatively few psychology departments even offer semester-long courses in decision making; more often decision making is just  one of the topics covered in a survey course on mathematical or cognitive or social psychology, if offered at all. The  material in this textbook both needs and deserves an entire semester.  Second, although descriptive concerns are interwoven with theoretical/normative concerns throughout the book, the emphasis is  most definitely on the latter, and many instructors and students will undoubtedly object that these concerns are not  particularly relevant to empirical work in psychology. I personally disagree with such objections and believe that the quality  of much empirical work would be vastly improved if researchers-fledgling and otherwise-had more knowledge of theory. For  example, many organizational, social, consumer, and health psychologists use expectancy-value models in their research.  Expectancy-value models are, of course, just simplified variants of Bayesian decision theory's subjective expected utility  model (Fischhoff, Goitein, & Shapira, 1982). All such models (e.g., Vroom's model of work motivation, the Fishbein-Ajzen model  of behavioral intentions, the Health Belief Model, Rosenberg's affective-cognitive consistency model, and many others)  theorize that an individual decision maker will choose from an array of behavioral alternatives that behavior with the most  favorable combination of expectancies and values; such models quite clearly require within-persons tests of their predictive  (descriptive) abilities. However, in virtually all applications of these models, the methodology used is a between-persons  one; expectancies and values are assessed not for a set of behavioral alternatives but for a single behavior, and prediction  as to whether or not an individual will perform that behavior then depends upon a comparison of his or her expectancies and  values regarding that behavior with the expectancies and values of other individuals regarding that behavior. This strategy is  incorrect and does not provide a valid test of expectancyvalue models (Davidson & Morrison, 1982; Jaccard, 1981; Mitchell,  1974;  480/35/3-9  400 BOOK REVIEW  Nickerson & McClelland, 1989; Wolf & Connolly, 1981). What is astonishing is that most researchers using these models seem  utterly unaware of the existence of this model/methodology discrepancy. Surely if more of these researchers were to have  exposure to formal Bayesian decision theory, this problem would not be so prevalent and so unrecognized. It is worth noting  that although researchers doing empirical tests of decision models that are closer to the original Bayesian formulation (e.g.,  prospect theory, generalized expected utility theory) certainly use between-persons analyses on occasion, they generally do  recognize that such analyses are strictly not appropriate and often provide some justification for using them (e.g., Camerer,  1989; Keren & Raaijmakers, 1988).  I will admit, however, that to be appropriate for psychology students the papers in this collection would need to be  supplemented with some additional papers relating the underlying themes specifically to psychology. For example, one would  surely want to consider Ward Edwards's (1954) landmark article introducing Bayesian decision theory to psychologists and the  several Annual Review of Psychology chapters (or specific papers chosen from those cited in these chapters) on "behavioral  decision theory" (Becker & McClintock, 1967; Edwards, 1961; Einhorn & Hogarth, 1981; Pitz & Sachs, 1984; Rapoport & Wallsten,  1972; Slovic, Fischho ff & Lichtenstein, 1977). One might also include Edwards's (1968) work on conservatism in the revision  of subjective probabilities, empirical tests of the theories proposed in the papers by Machina and by Kahneman and Tversky  (e.g., Budescu & Weiss, 1987; Camerer, 1989; Hershey & Schoemaker, 1980; Hey & Strazzera, 1989; Keren & Raaijmakers, 1988),  the empirical studies of unreliability by Einhorn and Hogarth (1985) and Yates and his colleagues (Curley & Yates, 1985;  Curley, Yates, & Abrams, 19806; Yates & Zukowski, 1976), Lopes's thoughts on risk (1987), and so on-there is a great deal of  pertinent work from which one might choose and every instructor will have his or her own favorites.  Third, the book will be too difficult for many students in psychology. This is, of course, more a criticism of the educational  backgrounds of those students than it is of the book. Gardenfors and Sahlin have clearly assumed that their readers have some  familiarity with probability and philosophy, particularly symbolic logic. A few of the papers also require a fairly high level  of mathematical sophistication; for example, complete understanding of Machina's paper requires knowledge of calculus.  Students in philosophy, economics, and statistics generally have this background; most psychology students do not. Even with  the appendices suggested above, the book would still be rough sledding for many, although psychology students seriously  interested in decision making, those at first-rate universities, and those with a theoretical or quantitative bent should  enjoy it very much. In fact, if supplemented as suggested above, Decision, Probability, and Utility could be the basis for a  very nice advanced graduate seminar on decision theory for students who have, or are willing to acquire, the necessary  background.  Gardenfors and Sahlin hope that their book will be used by researchers interested in decision theory as well as by students. I  hope so, too. The papers in their collection are those that one sees referenced again and again in the psychological  BOOK REVIEW 401  literature on judgment and decision making; how delightful to have them all available in one neatly bound volume instead of as  separate papers scattered hither and yon about one's various working places. Better get your copy now before someone decides  that the book's astonishingly low price of $15.95 is a mistake.  REFERENCES  ABELSON, R. P., & LEVI, A. (1985). Decision making and decision theory. In G. Lindzey and E. Aronson (Eds.), Handbook of  social psychology (3rd ed., Vol. 1, pp. 231-309). New York: Random House.  BECKER, G. M., & MCCLINTOCK, C. G. (1967). Value: Behavioral decision theory. Annual Review of Psychology, 18, 239-286.  BUDESCU, D. V., & WEISS, W. (1987). Reflection of transitive and intransitive preferences: A test of prospect theory.  Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 39, 184-202.  CAMERER, C. F. (1989). An experimental test of several generalized utility theories. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 2,  61-104.  COOMBS, C. H., DAWES, R. M., & TVERSKY, A. (1970). Mathematical psychology: An elementary introduction. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:  Prentice-Hall.  CURLEY, S. P., & YATES, J. F. (1985). The center and range of the probability interval as factors affecting ambiguity  preferences. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 36, 273-287.  CURLEY, S. P., YATES, J. F., & ABRAMS, R. A. (1986). Psychological sources of ambiguity avoidance. Organizational Behavior and  Human Decision Processes, 38, 230-256.  DAVIDSON, A. R., & MORRISON, D. M. (1982). Social psychological models of decision making. Research in Marketing, Supplement  1, 91-112.  EDWARDS, W. (1954). The theory of decision making. Psychological Bulletin, 51, 380-417. EDWARDS, W. (1961). Behavioral  decision theory. Annual Review of Psychology, 12, 473-498. EDWARDS, W. (1968). Conservatism in human information processing.  In B. Kleinmuntz (Ed.), Formal representation of human judgment (pp. 17-52). New York: Wiley.  EINHORN, H. J., & HOGARTH, R. M. (1981). Behavioral decision theory: Processes of judgment and choice. Annual Review of  Psychology, 32, 53-88.  EINHORN, H. J., & HOGARTH, R. M. (1985). Ambiguity and uncertainty in probabilistic inference. Psychological Review, 92,  433-461.  FISCHHOFF, B., GoITEIN, B., & SHAPIRA, Z. (1982). The experienced utility of expected utility approaches. In N. T. Feather  (Ed.), Expectations and actions: Expectancy-value models in psychology (pp. 315-339). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  HAMMOND, K. R., MCCLELLAND, G. H., & MUMPOWER, J. (1980). Human judgment and decision processes: Theories, methods, and  procedures. New York: Praeger.  HERSHEY, J. C., & SCHOEMAKER, P. J. H. (1980). Prospect theory's reflection hypothesis: A critical examination. Organizational  Behavior and Human Performance, 25, 395-418.  HEY, J. D., & STRAZZERA, E. (1989). Estimation of indifference curves in the Marshak-Machina triangle: A direct test of the  "fanning out" hypothesis. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 2, 239-260. JACCARD, J. (1981). Attitudes and behavior:  Implications of attitudes toward behavioral alternatives. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 17, 286-307.  KEREN, G. B., & RAAIJMAKERS, J. G. W. (1988). On between-subjects versus within-subjects comparisons in testing utility  theory. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 41, 233-247.  LOPES, L. L. (1987). Between hope and fear: The psychology of risk. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 20, 255-295.  MITCHELL, T. R. (1974). Expectancy models of job satisfaction, occupational preference, and effort: A theoretical,  methodological, and empirical appraisal. Psychological Bulletin, 81, 1053-1077. NICKERSON, C. A., & MCCLELLAND, G. H. (1989).  Across-persons versus within-persons tests of expectancy-value models: A methodological note. Journal of Behavioral Decision  Making, 2, 261-270.  402  BOOK REVIEW  PITZ, G. F., & SACHS, N. J. (1984). Judgment and decision: Theory and application. Annual Review of Psychology, 35, 139-163.  RAPOPORT, A., & WALLSTEN, T. S. (1972). Individual decision behavior. Annual Review of Psychology, 23, 131-176.  SLovtc, P., FISCHHOFF, B., & LiCHTENSTEIN, S. (1977). Behavioral decision theory. Annual Review of Psychology, 28, 1-39.  WOLF, G., & CONNOLLY, T. (1981). Between-subject designs in testing expectancy models: A methodological note. Decision  Sciences, 12, 39-45.  YATES, J. F., & ZUKOWSKI, L. G. (1976). Characterization of ambiguity in decision making. Behavioral Science, 21, 19-25.