10.1016/0022-2496(91)90051-t
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 35, 319-344 (1991)  Analysis of the Hockley and Murdock Decision Model  SCOTT D. GRONLUND AND ROGER RATCLIFF  Northwestern University  Hockley and Murdock (1987) proposed a decision model to predict accuracy and response latency in recognition memory across a  range of experimental paradigms. A decision is made when the evidence from a memory comparison process plus extraneous noise  exceeds a lower or upper criterion. If neither criterion is exceeded, the distance between the criteria is reduced and a new  sample of noise is added to the original memory comparison value. This is repeated until a criterion is exceeded. The model is  shown to have two shortcomings: First, it produces a reaction time distribution that is multimodal; empirical distributions  are generally unimodal. Second, application of the model to various speed-accuracy trade-off phenomena is found to be  inadequate: Either the assumptions made to account for speed-accuracy data are post hoc or they are unable to mimic the data.  An experiment that manipulates speed-accuracy tradeoffs demonstrates that the model cannot produce a trade-off of sufficient  range. Alternative conceptions of the model (the addition of a guessing process and a zero-drift random walk) are  unsuccessful. The diffusion model of Ratcliff (Psychological Review 85, 59-108 (1978); 88, 552-572 (1981)) provides an  adequate account of these data and a more parsimonious account of other speed-accuracy phenomena.  1991 Academic Press, Inc.  Hockley and Murdock (1987) proposed a decision model to predict accuracy and response latency in recognition memory. The model  was applied to four item recognition paradigms, and mimicked results for accuracy, mean reaction time, reaction time  distributions, and various speed-accuracy trade-off phenomena. However, upon closer examination, we discovered two problems:  (a) a multimodal reaction time distribution, and (b) an inadequate account of speed-accuracy tradeoff phenomena. We view the  latter problem as especially significant because the trade-off of speed for accuracy is a central phenomenon in all of the  experimental paradigms examined.  The Hockley-Murdock decision model begins with the output of a memory comparison process that represents the match between a  test probe and memory. This value of match is used in an iterative decision process. On each cycle of the decision process,  some amount of noise is added to the match value. If the sum is above an upper criterion b, a positive response is made; if  the sum is below a lower criterion a, a negative response is made. This constitutes one decision cycle. If the sum is between  the two criteria, the distance between the two criteria (a and b) is reduced  Requests for reprints should be sent to Dr. Scott Gronlund, Department of Psychology, University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma  73019.  319  0022-2496/91 $3.00  Copyright (0 1991 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  320 GRONLUND AND RATCLIFF  by a constant fraction CCR. Then the sum of a new sample of noise and the original match value is compared to these criteria.  This process continues on successive cycles until one of the criteria is exceeded and a decision is made. A precursor of the  model was proposed by Cartwright and Festinger (1943). That model also had an area of no decision. The larger this area of no  decision (analogous to the distance between the criteria in the Hockley-Murdock model), the longer the decision time.  The match (from the memory comparison process) of a test probe to information in memory varies over test probes due to  different degrees of match to memory. These are summarized by two distributions that reflect the match values for positive and  negative items. In Hockley and Murdock's (1987) applications, the parameters of these distributions are estimated from the  data. In a complete description of this match process, the distributions would be derived from a memory model linked to the  decision model. In fitting data, the negative distribution is assumed to have a mean of 0.0 and a standard deviation of 1.0.  The positive distribution has a mean of yo and a standard deviation of Fro.  To derive estimates of decision latency, the number of cycles until the match plus noise exceeds a criterion must be converted  to real-time. Hockley and Murdock (1987) assume that the duration of each successive decision cycle increases according to Eq.  (1). This assumption produces decision latency distributions that are positively skewed. By Eq. (1),  DecisionLatency = (k- + k + 2) BCT (1)  where k denotes the number of cycles until a criterion is exceeded, and BCT is the base cycle time (set to 17.5 ms by Hockley  & Murdock, 1987). Overall response latency is the decision latency plus the time required for other processes such as encoding  and response execution. Hockley and Murdock represent this time for other processes by a single normal distribution. They  refer to it as the TOS distribution (time for other stages) with mean YTOS+ for positive responses, JUTOS_ for negative  responses, and standard deviation QTOS set equal to 50 ms. Decision latency is convolved with the appropriate TOS distribution  to produce response latency. Without the quadratic mapping of Eq. (1), the model produces strictly symmetric reaction time  distributions (unless the criteria convergence rate is close to zero, then the model predicts geometric decision time  distributions).  The purpose of this article is to demonstrate two fundamental problems with the Hockley-Murdock model. The first problem  involves the assumption of increasing cycle durations (Eq. (1)). This assumption results in multimodal reaction time  distributions. The second problem concerns the model's account of speed-accuracy phenomena. Note that the model does not  accumulate evidence as does a random walk. As a consequence, it has trouble in accounting for the growth of partial  information over time (e.g., Meyer, Irwin, Osman, & Kounios, 1988; Ratcliff, 1988b; Reed, 1973, 1976), and in trading speed  for accuracy.  HOCKLEY AND MURDOCK DECISION MODEL 321  PREDICTIONS FOR REACTION TIME DISTRIBUTIONS  In Eq. (1), the assumption of increasing cycle durations predicts increasing step sizes between comparisons that finish on  successive cycles. For example, the step size between comparisons that finish on cycle k = 1 and k = 2 is only 70 ms (140 - 70  ms, see Eq. 1), but the step size between cycles k = 4 and k = 5 is 175 ms (560-385ms). At longer reaction times (greater  numbers of cycles), the variance due to the standard deviation in the TOS distribution (50 ms) is insufficient to produce a  smooth function over the intervals between these steps. A distribution produced by the model is multimodal; an example is  given in the left-hand panel of Fig. 1. This particular distribution results from the parameter values Hockley and Murdock  (1987) used to fit data from the Sternberg paradigm, set size 3 (but the multimodality is parameter-independent). A multimodal  distribution is contrary to empirical reaction time distributions which are generally unimodal (Ratcliff & Murdock, 1976).  One solution to this problem is to make the base cycle time (BCT) variable rather than constant. The right-hand panel of Fig.  1 shows the distribution for the Sternberg paradigm, set size 3, with BCT drawn from a normal distribution with mean 17.5 (as  before) and a standard deviation of 2. Note that the variability is added, then the quadratic mapping of Eq. (1) takes place.  The multimodal appearance is eliminated because the variance for the comparisons that finish on a given cycle increases as the  number of cycles increases; rather than all k = 1 comparisons taking 70 ms, they would vary around a mean of 70 ms. Making BCT  N N  O O  O O  a   fN   C   W   U   O   O O  O O  O   O   0 500 1500 0 500 1500  milliseconds milliseconds  FIG. 1. Hit reaction time distribution for the Sternberg paradigm, set size 3, with constant and variable BCT. In the  left-hand panel, parameter values were exactly those used by Hockley and Murdock (1987): CCR = 0.1, a = -2, b = 6.7, po =  4.69, ao = 1, pros, = 399, and BCT = 17.5. For the right-hand panel, the same parameter values were used except that BCT was  drawn from a normal distribution with mean 17.5 and standard deviation 2.  322  GRONLUND AND RATCLIFF  variable does not significantly change other predictions of the model. For the distribution with BCT = 17.5 ms, accuracy was  96.7 %, mean latency for hits was 624 ms, mean latency for misses was 1008 ms; with BCT = x(17.5, 2.0), accuracy was 96.7 %,  mean latency for hits was 624 ms, and mean latency for misses was 1012 ms.  The overall shape of the reaction time distribution is also largely unchanged by making BCT = n(17.5, 2.0). To examine the  shape of the reaction time distribution, a method described by Ratcliff and Murdock (1976) was used (see also Hohle, 1965).  Reaction time distributions can be summarized by a distribution that is the convolution of a normal and an exponential  distribution. The convolution distribution is described by three parameters: u and a of the normal, and r of the exponential.  The p parameter is an estimate of the leading edge of the distribution; T provides an estimate of the spread of the tail (see  Ratcliff, 1979, for relevant discussion). For BCT = 17.5, y, a, and T from the convolution model were 422, 50, and 202 ms,  respectively. With BCT = x(17.5, 2.0), It, a, and T, were 415, 40, and 212 ms, respectively.  Hazard Functions  Another way of viewing the reaction time distribution is the hazard function (Luce, 1986). A hazard function gives the  probability of an event occurring at time t given that the event failed to occur prior to time t. Figure 2 gives the hazard  functions for the distributions in Fig. 1. With BCT = 17.5, the hazard function has large  T N C N V  0 500 1500 0 1000 2000 3000  milliseconds milliseconds  FIG. 2. Hazard functions from the Hockley-Murdock model. In the left-hand panel is the hazard function for the Sternberg  paradigm, set size 3, with constant BCT. The corresponding hazard function with BCT=n (17.5, 2.0) is Function 1 in the  right-hand panel. Also in the right-hand panel are hazard functions for CCR=.05 (Function 2), y0=3.5 (Function 3), and uo=5.5  (Function 4). (The other parameters were unchanged from those Hockley and Murdock used to fit the Sternberg data, except BCT=n  (17.5, 2.0)).  HOCKLEY AND MURDOCK DECISION MODEL 323  fluctuations (left-hand panel), and these fluctuations are not occurring only in the extreme tail of the distribution (1120 ms  is the point by which 95 % of the responses have terminated). However, making BCT=q(17.5, 2.0) smooths the hazard function  (right-hand panel, Function 1). The hazard function with variable BCT decreases gradually once an early peak is reached.  Luce (1986) reported that the shapes of hazard functions vary with the intensity of the stimulus (in psychophysical  experiments). For stimuli very near threshold, the hazard function rises to an asymptote. For above-threshold stimuli, the  hazard function rises to a peak and declines to an above-zero asymptote. At high intensities, Luce (1986) reported that the  hazard function rises rapidly to a peak, and falls off sharply.  Hazard functions from memory tasks are similar to the latter two shapes. For the Sternberg paradigm, Ratcliff (1988a) found  that the hazard functions rose rapidly to a peak and then declined to an above-zero level in the tail. In addition, some  hazard functions were estimated from Ratcliff and Murdock (1976). In the left-hand panel of Fig. 3 are the hazard functions  for hits and correct rejections from a studytest paradigm (their Fig. 9, input positions 9-16, output positions 9-16, p. 200).  In the right-hand panel of Fig. 3 are the hazard functions from a study-test paradigm with words studied once or twice. The  functions are for hits for the once-presented words and correct rejections (Fig. 13 from Ratcliff & Murdock, 1976; output  positions 1-8, p. 204). In these two examples, as in Ratcliff (1988a), the hazard function rises to a peak, and remains above  zero in the tail of the distribution. (These hazard functions include about 90% of the responses; beyond that, these hazard  functions became unstable.)  The Hockley-Murdock model can produce a variety of hazard function shapes.  C N U N  O  O O 400 800 1200 0 200 600 1000  CR  HIT  milliseconds milliseconds  FIG. 3. Hazard functions for hits and correct rejections from Ratcliff and Murdock (1976). The lefthand panel is for a  study-test paradigm; the right-hand panel is for the once-presented items in a studytest paradigm with once- and  480/35/3-4  324 GRONLUND AND RATCLIFF  We varied the match strength (j,, and CCR). (Changing the criteria starting positions (b and a) produced hazard functions that  were shaped like those produced by changing Eco and CCR.) The match strength would likely vary as a function of the intensity  of the stimulus (perhaps achieved by varying study-time in a memory task). By a decrease in the match strength relative to  Fig. 2 Function 1 (representing stimuli near-threshold), the hazard function (Function 3, Fig. 2) rises to an above-zero  asymptote (95 % of the processes have terminated by 1400 ms). By increasing the match strength (representing increased  intensity of the stimulus), the hazard function (Function 4) rises to a peak and falls off sharply (the 95 % point is at 870  ms). These are consistent with what Luce (1986) reported from the psychophysical literature. If the criteria convergence rate  (CCR) is decreased (relative to Function 1), the hazard function (Function 2) rises to an early peak and falls to an  above-zero asymptote (the 95% point is 1980 ms).  It appears that the Hockley-Murdock model can predict a range of hazard functions similar to those observed in the  psychophysical literature (and the few examples found in the memory literature). However, it remains to be seen if the shape  of the reaction time distribution that corresponds to the hazard function for a given set of parameters, is consistent with  observed reaction time distributions. For Functions 2 and 3 in the right-hand panel of Fig. 2, decreasing it, and CCR each  produce a slowing of reaction time and a skewing of the reaction time distribution. The convolution model fits to the reaction  time distributions generated from these parameters give r equal to 420 and 330 ms for Functions 2 and 3, respectively. In the  recognition memory experiments of Ratcliff and Murdock (1976), i exceeded 300 ms just 8 times in 92 convolution fits (6 of  these for error reaction time distributions).  In sum, the result of making BCT variable is to add another parameter and another source of noise to the model, with no gain  other than the elimination of the multimodality in the reaction time distribution and the fluctuations in the hazard function.  Although the model can account for distribution shape as summarized by the convolution model, it does so only because of the  quadratic mapping in Eq. (1). The model can produce a variety of hazard function shapes, but perhaps not when reaction time  distribution shape is simultaneously considered.  SPEED-ACCURACY PREDICTIONS  Speed-accuracy trade-off phenomena can be grouped into two classes of dependent measures. Procedures in which subjects are  required to respond according to experimenter-controlled deadlines or response signals (time-controlled processing, Ratcliff,  1978) produce a measure of the growth of accuracy as a function of time. In contrast, procedures in which subjects are allowed  to respond in their own time allow manipulation of trade-offs in the amount of information required for a response through  payoffs or instructions (information-controlled processing, Ratcliff, 1978). These two classes of procedures are examined  below and  HOCKLEY AND MURDOCK DECISION MODEL 325  an experiment is presented that manipulates speed-accuracy trade-off by way of instructions. The Hockley-Murdock model is  unable to produce a trade-off between speed and accuracy of sufficient range to fit data from this experiment. This is because  the decision model begins with a match value of maximum accuracy (to which noise is added). For this reason, the modifications  to the model that Hockley and Murdock (1987) claim affect speed and accuracy (starting positions of the criteria and  convergence rate) change latency and accuracy independently of one another.  Time-Controlled Processing  Two of the techniques that have been used to investigate the accuracy of responses as a function of time are the  speed-accuracy decomposition technique of Meyer et al. (1988) and the response signal method of Reed (1973, 1976). The  speedaccuracy decomposition technique mixes regular trials in which subjects respond normally in their own time, with signal  trials in which subjects must respond at or before a signal presented at one of several experimenter-determined lags. In  analyzing data from this procedure, Meyer et al. (1988) assumed that signal trials are a probability mixture of fast-finishing  regular responses and guesses. They then used a decomposition technique based on a mixture model (e.g., Ollman & Billington,  1972) that allows the estimation of guessing accuracy (partial information) by factoring out the contribution of the  fast-finishing regular responses on the signal trials. In general, results showed that the accuracy of guesses initially rises  quickly, then either rises slowly or asymptotes. Kounios, Osman, and Meyer (1987) found this in a sentence verification task,  Meyer et al. (1988) in a double-word lexical decision task, and Ratcliff (1988b) in a study-test recognition task.  Hockley and Murdock (1987) account for this result in the following way: At any given time, the model is in one of three  possible states: the input (match value plus noise) to the decision system is above the upper criterion, below the lower  criterion, or between the two criteria (a nonterminated process). A regular response can be made if one of the criteria has  been surpassed before the signal is presented. For the case where the value is between the criteria, Hockley and Murdock  (1987) examined two possible mechanisms for making decisions for nonterminated processes. One was random guessing. This was  not tenable because the data of Kounios et al. (1987), Meyer et al. (1988), and Ratcliff (1988b) all indicate that the  accuracy of guesses increases as a function of retrieval time. A second mechanism was that a response was made based on a  single criterion (placed somewhere between the two criteria when the signal is presented). However, Hockley and Murdock (1987)  found that this assumption produced estimates of guessing accuracy that were far superior to those obtained by Kounios et al.  (1987), Meyer et al. (1988), and Ratcliff (1988b).  Because neither of these mechanisms was tenable, Hockley and Murdock (1987) proposed that decisions for nonterminated  processes are based on a probability mixture of random guesses and decisions based on a single criterion, with the probability  of a random guess decreasing and the probability of a single criterion  326 GRONLUND AND RATCLIFF  response increasing as the criteria converge (as retrieval time increases). This assumption produces accuracy for partial  information that increases as a function of retrieval time. However, the problem with this assumption is that it allows the  model to fit any pattern of accuracy of partial information (even patterns not seen in the data) by mixing varying amounts of  relatively high-accuracy responses, based on a single criterion, with low-accuracy random guesses. Thus, Hockley and Murdock's  (1987) proposed account of the speed-accuracy decomposition data cannot be falsified by any pattern of data, so long as  guessing accuracy is between zero and the accuracy of regular processes.  Another time-controlled processing paradigm is the response signal procedure (Reed, 1976). In this procedure, every trial is a  signal trial and the subject can respond only at the signal (not before the signal as in the speed-accuracy decomposition  task). Hockley and Murdock (1987) use the same assumptions to account for performance in this task as in the speed-accuracy  decomposition task. That is, decisions are based on fast-finishing regular responses and a probability mixture of random  guesses and single criterion responses (for nonterminated processes). Table 1 gives d' accuracy as a function of cycle time  for a response signal function generated from parameter values used by Hockley and Murdock (1987) (parameter values given in  the table). Accuracy increases as a function of increasing decision time for two reasons: (a) more and more of the decision  processes terminate normally by exceeding a criterion; (b) according to the probability mixture assumption, more and more of  the decisions involving nonterminated processes are based on a single criterion rather than a random guess. The probability  mixture assumption provides a reasonable approximation to data.  For comparison, Table 1 also gives (for the same parameter values) the response signal function that results if decisions for  all nonterminated processes are based on (a) a single criterion, or on (b) random guesses, rather than a probability mixture  TABLE 1  Three Assumptions about How Response Signal Functions Can Be Generated by the Hockley-Murdock Model  Decision cycles (lag in ms)  35 70 140 245 385 560 770 1015  Non-terminated responses are a probability mixture of a single criterion and guesses 0.35 1.02 1.57 1.99 2.30 2.52 2.68 2.80  Non-terminated responses are based on a single criterion 1.98 2.09 2.29 2.44 2.56 2.73 2.68 2.73  Non-terminated responses are based on random guesses 0.28 0.69 1.20 1.73 2.14 2.49 2.60 2.73  Note. Entries in the table are d'. The same parameter values were used as in Hockley and Murdock (1987, Fig. 7, p. 347); they  were CCR = 0.1, a = -2.0, b = 6.0, k= 3.5.  HOCKLEY AND MURDOCK DECISION MODEL 327  of the two. If decisions for nonterminated processes are based only on a guessing mechanism, a reasonable approximation to  response signal data also results. Of course, in the speed-accuracy decomposition task, this results in chance accuracy for  partial information, contrary to the data.  On the other hand, if decisions for nonterminated processes are based only on a single criterion, accuracy for the first three  lags is far superior to data. This illustrates the problem with the Hockley-Murdock model highlighted by time-controlled  tasks; the model has nothing analogous to partial information. The initial memory signal represents complete information about  the probe and is unchanged during the decision process (noise is added to the original signal). In contrast to a random walk  model, the Hockley-Murdock model does not accumulate information over time. The probability mixture assumption produces the  appropriate pattern of data, but in an ad hoc manner.  Information-Controlled Processing  In a second method used to study the trade-off of speed and accuracy, termed information-controlled processing, accuracy and  reaction time are manipulated by payoffs or instructions. In the Hockley-Murdock model, speed and accuracy are governed by the  initial positions of the criteria, and their rate of convergence. The model assumes that the initial positions and the  convergence rate can both be manipulated by differential payoffs or instructions to subjects. Hockley and Murdock (1987) claim  that the greater the distance between the starting positions and the slower their convergence, the slower but more accurate  will be the response. The closer together the criteria start and the faster their convergence, the faster but less accurate  the response. These two factors affect the ordering of the conditional mean reaction times.  The ordering of conditional mean reaction times has been used to test among various choice reaction time models (see Townsend  & Ashby, 1983, for a review). The Hockley-Murdock model, with differential placement of the criteria, together with YTOS+ and  YTOS_ being unconstrained, can predict any ordering. However, reaction time ordering is not diagnostic for recognition as it  is for choice reaction time. Ratcliff and Murdock (1976) found that in recognition, the order of conditional mean reaction  times changes as a function of the output position of the test stimulus, the list length, etc. The pattern of variation is  sufficiently complex that none of the candidate models can provide a reasonable account for it. However, this is a limitation  not so much of theory as of the current state of empirical knowledge. The number of potentially relevant factors is large, and  their effects are not well understood.  The factors of the placement of the criteria and their convergence rate have similar effects; they affect latency more so than  accuracy. The reason is that accuracy is primarily a function of the distance between the positive and negative item match  distributions (which is unchanged by instructions to subjects or payoffs), while the number of cycles until a criterion is  exceeded (the latency) is based on the initial criteria placements and their convergence rate.  328 GRONLUND AND RATCLIFF  The model's account of information-controlled processing has two problems. First, the model predicts that hit rate and correct  rejection rate are often inversely related. This is not sensible if the point of increasing the distance between the criterion  starting positions is to increase overall accuracy. Second, the model trades off speed for accuracy over too narrow a range  and too severely within that range. These problems will be dealt with in turn.  In the Hockley-Murdock model, the distance between the initial positions of the criteria is increased to reflect increasing  emphasis on accuracy. This distance between the initial positions of the criteria can be changed in one of two ways. Either  each criterion starting position is incremented by the same amount, or one criterion is incremented more than the other. The  hit rate and correct rejection rate covary if the criterion starting positions are changed symmetrically (i.e., if the  starting positions of a and b change in equal steps or by steps that differ by no more than about 15 %); but hit and correct  rejection rate are inversely related when the criterion starting positions change asymmetrically (for example, if the initial  position of a is changed from - 2 to - 2.5, but the initial position of b is changed from 4 to 5.5).  The reason the model produces inversely related hit and correct rejection rates with asymmetric changes has to do with the  point toward which the two criteria would converge if neither criterion were exceeded (call this z). If the initial positions  negative positive  ZS ZA match strength  FIG. 4. Illustration of the shift of the convergence point as a function of the initial positions of the criteria. The  left-hand distribution represents the match of negative items; the right-hand distribution represents the match of positive  items. The point toward which the two criteria would converge if no response is made is z, where zs is the convergence point  for as and bs (initial criterion positions for speed instructions), and zA is the convergence point for aA and bA (initial  criterion positions for accuracy instructions).  HOCKLEY AND MURDOCK DECISION MODEL 329  of the criteria are changed symmetrically (i.e., incremented or decremented equally), the point to which the two criteria  converge is unchanged. However, if the initial positions are changed asymmetrically, the point to which the two criteria would  converge is shifted in the direction of the criterion whose initial position was changed more. Figure 4 illustrates the shift  in the convergence point (z) for criteria starting positions that reflect speed and accuracy instructions.  This shift in z is toward the positive criterion (from zs to zA as a result of a larger change in the initial position of b  when going from speed to accuracy instructions). The positive criterion is farther away from a given match value than the  negative criterion at every cycle (relative to the criterion placements at as and bs). If the test probe is one for which a  positive response is correct, bA is less likely to be exceeded and the probability of a hit is decreased. If the test probe is  one for which a negative response is correct, the probability of a correct rejection is increased because a,, is relatively  more likely to be exceeded. The opposite is true if the point that the two criteria would converge to shifts in the direction  of the negative criterion.  In contrast to accuracy, the latencies for hits and correct rejections are never inversely related as a function of criterion  starting position. As the distance between the initial positions of the criteria is increased, latency is slowed because it  takes more cycles to exceed a criterion. If the criterion starting positions are changed asymmetrically, so that the positive  criterion is increased more than the negative is decreased (as illustrated in Fig. 4), the hit latency is slowed (more than  the correct rejection latency) because the positive criterion is further away at every cycle and less likely to be exceeded.  However, even though the hit latency is slowed, the hit rate decreases. Similarly, if the point the two criteria would  converge to shifts toward the negative criterion, the correct rejection latency is slowed (more than the hit latency), but the  correct rejection rate decreases.  An example follows that illustrates what happens to the hit and correct rejection rates and latencies as a function of  asymmetric and symmetric changes in the initial criterion positions. This information will be summarized by a speed-accuracy  tradeoff function (d' as a function of latency). Its shape demonstrates that the HockleyMurdock model trades off speed and  accuracy independently of each other. When the model produces the largest increase in accuracy, latency changes only slightly;  when the model produces the largest slowing of latency, accuracy changes only slightly.  In the Hockley and Murdock model (1987, Fig. 3, p. 345), the initial positions of a and b were varied from a = -1.5, b = 2.5,  to a = -2.0, b = 4.0, to a = -2.5, b = 5.5, to model speed-accuracy trade-off (asymmetric changes). Figure 5 gives the  proportion correct (top panel) and the latency (bottom panel) for hits and correct rejections, for the parameter values used  by Hockley and Murdock (1987). Though correct rejection rate does increase when the criteria start farther apart (as indicated  by Hockley & Murdock, 1987), hit rate decreases. This is because the b criterion was changed in greater steps and shifted the  point of convergence out with it. Also, because the distance to the positive criterion is greater when b's initial position is  330 GRONLUND AND RATCLIFF  O L O L Q  0.85  0,8  0.75  0.7  0.65  n. 6  800  750  O  700  U  650  0 hit  1 correct rejection  550  500  X  450  I I criterion starting position  -1.5/2.5 -2.0/4.0 -2.5/5.5  FIG. 5. Hit and correct rejection proportion (top panel) and latencies (bottom panel) for parameter values used by Hockley and  Murdock (1987, Fig. 3, p. 345). If initial positions of a and b are changed asymmetrically, hit and correct rejection rate are  inversely related.  increased in greater steps, the hit latency is slowed more than the correct rejection latency.  Hit rate and correct rejection rate covary when speed-accuracy instructions are modeled with symmetric criteria change. Figure  6 gives the same information as Fig. 5, with the same parameter values, except that the initial positions of the criteria are  changed symmetrically (from a = b = 0.5 to a = -2.5, b = 3.5 in steps of size 1.0). Hit and correct rejection rates both  increase as the initial distance between the criteria is increased. However, it is important to note that the largest increase  in accuracy is accompanied by little slowing of latency. Conversely, accuracy changes little over the range that latency  changes significantly. Thus, speed and accuracy are relatively independent of one another over most of the range.  HOCKLEY AND MURDOCK DECISION MODEL 331  0.5s  O G./5 CL  O L.0_  0. J  0.61  0.6  750  700 0 650 U  600  S00  450  0 hit  1 correct rejection  400  I I I I I I criterion starting position 5/.5 -.5/1.5 -1.5/2.5 -2.5/3.5  FIG. 6. Hit and correct rejection proportion (top panel) and latencies (bottom panel) for parameter values used by Hockley and  Murdock (1987, Fig. 3, p. 345). Initial positions of a and b are changed symmetrically.  Information of the kind shown in Fig. 6 can be summarized to produce a speedaccuracy trade-off function. In Fig. 7, d'  accuracy is plotted as a function of hit reaction time for various criterion starting positions. The leftmost point of the  speed-accuracy function is obtained from the upper and lower criteria starting already converged to a common point. Successive  points on a function are the result of increasing the distance between the initial positions of the criteria (an increased  stress on accuracy). The initial rapid rise in d' is accompanied by almost no increase in latency (see Function 4). When even  more caution is exercised by further increasing the distance between the criterion starting positions, the resulting slowing  of latency is accompanied by little increase in accuracy. In the model, speed  332 GRONLUND AND RATCLIFF  FIG. 7. Speed-accuracy trade-off function modeled by changing the initial positions of the criteria. Accuracy in terms of d'  is plotted as a function of hit reaction time (ms). The shape of the speedaccuracy function was explored by manipulating CCR  and a.: CCR = 0.0 or 0.05, u,=0.01 or 0.5 (denotes). Also included is the speed-accuracy trade-off function for the data from  Fig. 6.  and accuracy do not really trade-off so much as they change independently over separate ranges.  Other combinations of parameter values were tried to determine if the model could be made to produce a more gradual trade-off  of speed for accuracy. Figure 7 summarizes the effects of CCR and a., on the slope of the speed-accuracy trade-off function.  The initial positions of the criteria were changed in equal amounts from a and b = 0.5, to a = -1.5, b = 2.5. The noise  variance was set to 1.0, ao to 1.0, PTOS+ to 420, QTOS to 50, and BCT to 17.5.  The most gradual trade-off was found when the criteria were stationary (CCR = 0.0) and the variability of the memory signal  was essentially zero (Qo = 0.01) (Function 0). Neither of these conditions could be applied to data. Stationary criteria  produce very slow latencies and reaction time distributions that are too skewed. No variability in the match of test items to  memory is unrealistic because it implies that all items have equivalent strength and are equally memorable. When CCR was 0.5  (Function 1), the speed-accuracy function asymptotes more rapidly, and if a. is increased (to 0.5, Function 2), the range of  accuracy changes is much reduced. (Increased variability in the memory signal reflects an increased probability that noise  variance could push the memory signal beyond the wrong criterion, thereby lowering accuracy.)  These two parameters (CCR and a.) are responsible for the shape of the trade-off of speed and accuracy. Other parameters of  the model can only shift the whole speed-accuracy function horizontally (PTOS) or vertically (uo). Fits to data require  non-zero values of both CCR and a, (for example, Functions 3 and 4). Therefore,  HOCKLEY AND MURDOCK DECISION MODEL 333  the model must produce these sharply bending speed-accuracy trade-off functions for sets of parameter values that produce fits  to data for a single speed-accuracy condition.  A more gradually sloped function could be produced if responses were instead a probability mixture of random guesses and  regularly-terminated responses. However, this alternative model has problems accounting for time-controlled data (as was  described above). It also predicts that the minimum reaction time remains constant as accuracy is emphasized (because the  guessing component is responsible for the minimum). We shall see that data from the speed-accuracy experiment show that the  minimum reaction time increases as accuracy is emphasized, contrary to this alternative.  To evaluate the ability of the model to fit data from speed-accuracy manipulations, an experiment was conducted. In the  experiment, three levels of speedaccuracy trade-off were manipulated using differential instructions in a regular reaction  time procedure. Subjects studied 16 words and were tested on those 16 words plus 16 unstudied words. They made a positive  response to a word from the study phase and a negative response to an unstudied word. There were three instruction conditions:  conditions that stressed speed, accuracy, or a balance between the two.  METHOD  Subjects  Twenty-six Northwestern University undergraduates participated in exchange for course credit. Subjects were run in groups of  size 1 to 4.  Design and Procedure  Presentation of stimuli, timing, and response collection were under microcomputer control. Words were presented on a terminal  screen, and keypress responses were made on the keyboard.  The experiment used a study-test recognition memory procedure. On each study trial, 16 words were presented for study at a 1-s  rate. The recognition test phase followed immediately and consisted of 16 studied words plus 16 unstudied words tested in  random order. Subjects were required to press "/" to indicate that the test word.was from the study phase, and "Z" to indicate  that the test word was not previously studied.  The trade-off of speed for accuracy was manipulated through instructions. There were 27 trials in the experiment, nine of each  instruction type. These were blocked and tested in one of six possible counterbalanced orders. For speed instructions,  subjects were told to keep their response time under 500 ms and were given reaction time feedback on their terminal for 1 s.  For normal instructions, they were told to keep their response times between 500 to 700 ms. They received reaction time  feedback for 1 s on every trial and "ERROR" for 1 s after each error. For accuracy instructions, subjects were told to be as  accurate as possible. For each error, "ERROR" appeared on the screen for 2 s; no reaction time feedback was given.  334 GRONLUND AND RATCLIFF  The experiment began with a practice phase. Subjects were told to keep their response times between 500 to 700 ms on the first  practice trial. The next two blocks of practice trials were accuracy trials, then two blocks of speed trials, and finally two  blocks of normal trials. Then the experiment proper commenced.  For each subject, the words were drawn at random without replacement from a pool of 1650 words selected from the Kucera and  Francis (1967) word norms. The words were all two syllables, four to eight letters in length, and varied in frequency from a  count of 6 per million to 472 per million.  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  Six subjects were eliminated for responding at or below chance in the speed condition. Figure 8 gives hit and correct  rejection rates as a function of latency. Hit rate and correct rejection rate both increased as accuracy was stressed. The  convolution model was fitted to the grouped reaction time distributions (Ratcliff, 1979) for each of the instruction  conditions. (Ratcliff (1979) showed that this ensured that the grouped distribution retained the shape of the individual  subjects' reaction time distributions for such recognition memory procedures.) Table 2 gives the convolution parameter summary  for hits and correct rejections. The tail (i) and the leading edge (,u) of the hit (and the correct rejection) reaction time  distributions increased as accuracy was emphasized. In other words, as accuracy is emphasized, the fastest (minimum) responses  get slower (,u increases) and the slower processes get slower (i increases).  Application of the Hockley-Murdock Model  The Hockley-Murdock model was fitted to the hit and correct rejection rates and their latencies. (Distribution shape was not  fit explicitly because it was of secondary interest.) Parameters yo, YTOS+, and NTOS- were estimated to fit the normal  instruction data and were held constant across the other instruction conditions (Qo was set equal to 1.0 as it was in many of  the fits of Hockley & Murdock, 1987). Only b, a, and CCR were allowed to vary as a function of the instructions. The following  parameter values were estimated using the SIMPLEX parameter search algorithm (Nelder & Mead, 1965): yo = 2.02, YTOS+ = 433 ms,  and YTOS- = 463 ms. (The SIMPLEX algorithm minimizes the sum of squared differences until the differences among the sums of  squared differences, for all the parameter sets that define the simplex, are less than some criterion, which we set to  .00000001.) For the normal instruction condition, b = 3.29, a = -1.46, and CCR = 0.094. The top panel of Fig. 8 gives the fits  to the data.  The values of b, a, and CCR for the speed and accuracy conditions should be evaluated relative to those for the normal  instruction condition. According to the model, when accuracy is stressed the value of CCR should decrease and/or the initial  distance between b and a should increase. An adequate fit was found for either of these. When speed is stressed, the model  should decrease the distance  HOCKLEY AND MURDOCK DECISION MODEL 335  0.85  0.8  0.75  0.7  0.65  Multiple-diffusion  1 hit data 2 cr data  3 hit predictions 4 cr predictions  0.6  400 4S0 500 S50 600 6S0 701  0.85  Single-Diffusion  0.75  0.65 F_  0.6i I I I I A 407 4SU 5011 SSO 600 6S0 100 60 800  milliseconds  FIG. 8. Hit and correct rejection rate as a function of hit and correct rejection latency (ms) for the speed-accuracy  experiment. Fits are given for the Hockley and Murdock (1987) model (top panel), the multiple-diffusion model (middle panel),  and the single-diffusion model (bottom panel).  336 GRONLUND AND RATCLIFF  TABLE 2  Predictions from the Hockley and Murdock Model and the Diffusion Model (Ratcliff, 1978, 1981)  Instructions P a r p a t  Data  Speed 408 47 109 430 55 117  Normal 465 34 129 500 48 134  Accuracy 500 25 166 541 33 182   Hockley-Murdock     Speed 464 50 0 497 51 0  Normal 429 39 157 460 40 160  Accuracy' 407 32 244 437 30 254  Accuracyb 439 43 216 469 43 228   Multiple-Diffusion     Speed 435 10 70 476 26 70  Normal 451 20 108 525 37 120  Accuracy 467 26 143 556 44 160   Single-Diffusion     Speed 440 15 94 411 6 63  Normal 456 21 149 432 12 124  Accuracy 474 26 196 450 18 171  =3.12, a=-1.19, CCR=0.028. b b = 3.96, a = -2.02, CCR = 0.094.  between a and b and/or increase CCR. However, the model was unable to change accuracy sufficiently in this way and was unable  to provide an adequate fit to the data.  For the accuracy instructions, the parameter values that best approximated the data were b = 3.12, a = -1.19, and CCR = 0.028.  When only b and a were allowed to vary (with CCR = 0.094 as for the normal instruction data), an almost equivalent fit was  found for b = 3.96 and a = -2.02. For the former fit, the smaller CCR slowed reaction time; for the latter fit this was  accomplished by starting the criteria further apart (relative to the normal condition). Increasing the distance between the  initial positions of the criteria is preferable to reducing the value of CCR because the resulting reaction time distribution  is not as highly skewed (see Table 2, i = 244 vs. 216).  For the speed instructions, the data were best approximated if b = a (both= 0.81); CCR is irrelevant since the criteria start  converged. To try to get accuracy to change over the range required by this experiment, the initial positions of the criteria  must be brought together. This property of the model is illustrated  HOCKLEY AND MURDOCK DECISION MODEL 337  in Fig. 7 where it was shown that the majority of the increase in accuracy occurs when the initial positions of the criteria  go from starting already converged (all processes finish on cycle 1) to where the criteria start slightly separated. The 0.06  increase in hit rate and 0.1 increase in correct rejection rate are the maximum that the model can produce given the value of  yo estimated to fit these data (the amount of increase would be little different no matter what the value of u,). The model  does not cover the range of the data, and the range that is achieved requires reducing the Hockley-Murdock model to a  single-criterion model.  The model with a single criterion (the initial positions of the two criteria are equal) is arguably not an allowable member of  the family of possible Hockley and Murdock (1987) models; there is only one criterion and no convergence. When the initial  positions of the criteria are close together or equal, almost all processes finish on the first cycle. The resulting reaction  time distribution is normal (see Table 2, i = 0.0, Q = QTOS = 50.0) because Eq. (1) does not come into play. This is contrary  to the data. Furthermore, if equal criterion starting positions are allowed, a response with high accuracy results when  primarily non-decision aspects (i.e., only YTOS) contribute to the latency (this is evident in Table 1, for the 35-ms accuracy  level for responses based on a single criterion).  The Hockley and Murdock (1987) model does an unsatisfactory job accounting for the data of the speed-accuracy experiment..It  cannot change accuracy over the range required by the experiment. To even come close to changing the accuracy this much, the  dual-criteria model must revert to a single-criterion model. Of secondary interest, the model does predict r to increase as  accuracy is emphasized, but the increase is more extreme than the data (from Table 2, hit i = 0, 157, 216). Contrary to the  data, the model does not predict j to increase as accuracy is emphasized (hit ,u = 464, 429, 439). However, distribution shape  was not fit explicitly, only accuracy and latency.  Because of the difficulties in accounting for the speed-accuracy experiment, the problems of the multimodal reaction time  distributions and hazard functions, and the ad hoc probability mixture assumption used in time-controlled processing tasks,  alternative formulations of the Hockley-Murdock model will be considered. These include the addition of a guessing process to  the regular Hockley-Murdock model, and modification of the model to a zero-drift random walk decision process. Because neither  of these attempts is successful, an alternative framework will also be considered in an attempt to fit the data of the  speed-accuracy experiment, the diffusion model of Ratcliff (1978, 1981).  ALTERNATIVE MODELS  Hockley-Murdock Plus Guessing. A version of the Hockley-Murdock model was tried in which guessing is incorporated under speed  instructions (akin to the fast-guess models of Ollman, 1966, and Yellott, 1967, 1971). This was done because the decision  model was unable to account for the range of the speed-accuracy  338 GRONLUND AND RATCLIFF  trade-off through criterion positioning and changes in the convergence rate alone. The same parameter values were used as in  the fit to the normal instruction data; however, if the match of the test probe plus noise did not exceed either criterion on  cycle 1, there was a 20 % chance that a guess would be made. On cycle 2, there was a 40 % chance of a guess if the match plus  new noise sample did not exceed either converging criterion. If a criterion had not been exceeded by cycle 5, a guess would be  made 100% of the time. This modification of the model provides a good approximation to the mean latency and accuracy data. It  does so without requiring that the criteria start already converged, thereby avoiding the problems inherent in that fit to the  However, there is a problem with this guessing model. Responding on the basis of exceeding a criterion would always be  preferable to making a guess because it would result in much higher accuracy. Because subjects are free to change the initial  positions of the criteria, subjects should start the criteria close together to optimize performance. This would make the  frequency of a guess rare and would not produce a sufficient decline in accuracy for the speed condition. This restates a  fundamental problem with the decision model; the model begins processing at essentially full accuracy and uses criterion  positioning and convergence rate primarily to change latency, not accuracy. Therefore, a modification of the model was sought  which would (a) accumulate accuracy over time and (b) involve a more direct linking of latency to accuracy. As this is a  property of sequential sampling models, a zero-drift random walk version of the Hockley-Murdock model was examined.  Zero-Drift Random Walk. In this model, the criteria are stationary, and the noise (added on each cycle to the match strength)  is accumulated. The starting point of the walk is determined by the match of the test probe. A strong match of a test item to  memory will bias the process to begin close to the upper criterion and to terminate at the upper criterion. A weak match will  bias the process to begin close to the lower criterion and terminate at that criterion. The problem with this model is that as  the distance between the criteria is increased (reflecting increased stress on accuracy), latency slows but accuracy drops  toward chance. If the criteria are far apart, the bias in the starting point of the walk is outweighed by the great distance  to either criteria. The decision outcome is entirely determined by the noise in the walk and not the biased starting point.  Consequently, the probability of termination at each criterion approaches 50%. This model predicts the opposite of the  speed-accuracy trade-off effect obtained in data.  Because of the problems with the original version of the Hockley and Murdock (1987) decision model, and the lack of success  with two variations, we now contrast this model with sequential sampling models. Potential candidates among sequential  sampling models include the runs model of Audley (1960) and Laming (1968), the relative judgement theory of Link and Heath  (1975), the counter model of Pike (1973), the simple random walk model of Stone (1960), and the accumulator model  HOCKLEY AND MURDOCK DECISION MODEL 339  of Vickers (1970). We will consider only one member of this class, the diffusion model of Ratcliff (1978, 1981) (it is  representative, and it is the only one that has been applied to recognition memory procedures).  THE DIFFUSION MODEL  In the diffusion model, items are stored separately. At retrieval, a test probe is compared with each item in memory and  evidence is accumulated in parallel for each comparison. The comparison process is modeled by the continuous version of a  random walk called the diffusion process. Goodness-of-match determines the drift rate in the diffusion process, i.e., the rate  of accumulation of evidence. This drift rate has variance s'. The goodness-of-match of a test probe to a memory item is  assumed to vary over items; it can be summarized by a normal distribution with variance 6' (set equal to 0.18'), with mean u  for old items, and mean v for new items. Evidence accumulates continuously beginning from a starting point z toward a decision  at one of two decision boundaries (at a and 0). The more extreme the goodness-of-match, the more rapid the drift to a  boundary. A positive decision is made if the diffusion process for one comparison reaches the positive boundary, while a  negative decision is made when all the diffusion processes have reached the negative boundary. Response latency is based on  the resulting decision latency plus a factor TER that represents the time for non-decision aspects of the task (similar to TOS  in Hockley & Murdock, 1987).  Because the diffusion model accumulates evidence over time, it can more naturally deal with partial information in  time-controlled processing than can the Hockley-Murdock model. To model the Meyer et al. (1988) paradigm, Ratcliff (1988b)  assumed that responses on signal trials were based on fast-finishing regular responses that had exceeded one of the decision  boundaries, or guesses based on a single criterion if a boundary had not been exceeded. For the response signal paradigm,  Ratcliff (1978) assumed that the decision boundaries were moved far from the starting point and all responses were based on a  single criterion. However, Ratcliff (1988b) showed that response signal data could also be predicted from a mixture of  regularly terminated responses using decision boundaries plus guesses initiated by the signal based on a single criterion.  To account for speed-accuracy trade-off data, the diffusion model assumes that there are three criteria that can be adjusted  by the subject. The first two are the distance from the upper boundary to the starting point (a - z) and the distance from the  starting point to the lower boundary (z - 0). If accuracy is stressed, these distances are increased. The third criterion is  the zero point between the match (u) and nonmatch (v) distributions (Ratcliff, 1985). If subjects are penalized for false  positives over false negatives (for example), they could shift the zero point so that there exists a bias to interpret  evidence as being negative. However, as long as the difference between u and v is held constant, d' remains constant.  Speed-accuracy manipulations are assumed to vary primarily the distances from the starting point to the decision boundaries.  480/35/3-5  340 GRONLUND AND RATCLIFF  The diffusion model was fitted to the hit and correct rejection rates and latencies from the speed-accuracy experiment. The  parameters u, v, s, and TER, were estimated, but were fixed across conditions; a (the positive boundary) and z (the starting  point) were allowed to vary with instructions. It was not necessary to vary the zero point between u and v for the fits  achieved. (This contrasts with Ratcliff, 1985, where the relative probability of a yes or no response varied and was modelled  by changes in the zero point.) The SIMPLEX (Nelder & Mead, 1965) algorithm was used to find a set of parameters that closely  approximated the hit and correct rejection rates and mean latencies. The resulting parameter values were u = 0.276, v =  -0.493, s = 0.112, and TER = 400 ms. The value of z gradually increased as accuracy was emphasized, reflecting increasing  caution through movement away from the negative boundary (speed z = 0.020, normal z = 0.033, accuracy  =0.042). In addition, the distance from z to a gradually increased as accuracy was emphasized (speed a - z = 0.052, normal a -  z = 0.067, accuracy a - z = 0.079). The middle panel of Fig. 8 gives the fit to the data.  The model is able to predict the increase in hit rate and the increase in correct rejection rate as accuracy is emphasized,  with only a and z changing. It should be noted that the diffusion model is capable of changing accuracy over an even wider  range than indicated here. This might be necessary if speed versus accuracy was manipulated through explicit payoffs. Of  secondary interest, the shapes of the reaction time distributions produced by the diffusion model are more in line with the  data than those of the Hockley-Murdock model (see Table 2). In contrast to the Hockley-Murdock model, the diffusion model does  predict p to increase as accuracy is stressed, as well as predicting an increase in r (see Table 2).  One aim of the Hockley-Murdock model was to provide a decision process that would be consistent with a number of memory models  whose output for recognition is a single value of match between the test item and memory. The memory models include those with  distributed representations such as the linear association model of Anderson (Anderson, Silverstein, Ritz, & Jones, 1977),  CHARM (Eich, 1982), Murdock's (1982, 1983) TODAM model, and Pike's (1984) matrix model, and models with a localized  representation such as the SAM model of Gillund and Shiffrin (1984) and the MINERVA 2 model of Hintzman (1984, 1986).  The diffusion model of Ratcliff (1978) cannot be linked to a distributed memory model (such as TODAM, Murdock, 1982). The  diffusion model requires the separate representation of each item in memory; the test probe contacts each memory item in  parallel and a diffusion comparison process is executed for each. Distributed memory models do not possess separate  representations of each item in memory. However, Ratcliff (1981) presented a single-diffusion model that could be linked to a  distributed memory model. Other sequential sampling models could also serve this purpose.  Single-Diffusion Model  In the multiple-diffusion model, a test probe is compared with each item in memory and evidence is accumulated in parallel for  each comparison. The decision  HOCKLEY AND MURDOCK DECISION MODEL 341  process is exhaustive for a negative response and terminating for a positive one. In the single-diffusion model, the  comparison process is driven by the matching strength of a test probe to memory (e.g., the initial value used by the  HockleyMurdock model). The more extreme the goodness-of-match (positive or negative), the more rapid the drift to the  appropriate boundary. The single diffusion process begins at z and terminates when the process exceeds one of the boundaries.  A positive response is made if the upper boundary is exceeded, a negative response is made if the lower boundary is exceeded.  The single comparison diffusion model was fit to the data of the speed-accuracy experiment. The parameters u, v, and TER were  estimated, but did not vary across conditions; a and z did vary with instructions. In this version of the model, u and v  correspond to the means of the positive and negative strength distributions, with variance q' = 0.18' (from Ratcliff, 1981).  The variance of the drift was given by S'=0.08' (from Ratcliff, 1981). The parameter values (estimated using SIMPLEX, Nelder &  Mead, 1965) were u = 0.184, v = -.164, and TER = 400 ms. The value of z gradually increased as accuracy was emphasized (speed  z = 0.022, normal z = 0.038, accuracy z = 0.050). In addition, the distance from z to a gradually increased as accuracy was  emphasized (speed a - z = 0.042, normal a - z = 0.053, accuracy a - z = 0.064). The bottom panel of Fig. 8 gives the fit to  the data. This version of the diffusion model also predicts that both ,u and r increase as accuracy is emphasized (see Table  2).  Either version of the diffusion model provides a superior fit to the data of the speed-accuracy experiment, with parameter  values that change in systematic ways (i.e., the distance from the starting point to the boundaries increases). Application of  the Hockley-Murdock model to time-controlled processing tasks revealed a model that was too flexible. The probability mixture  assumption for time-controlled processing is able to fit almost any pattern of data, even some that do not occur. In contrast,  the diffusion model is tightly constrained. For example, Ratcliff (1988b) fit the diffusion model to regular trial data in the  speed-accuracy decomposition task of Meyer et al. (1988), and was able to produce a close approximation to the observed  guessing accuracy with only one free parameter, the time of onset of guessing in response to the signal. The level of accuracy  and shape of the guessing accuracy function were fixed by the regular trial fits.  GENERAL DISCUSSION  We have reviewed several problems that raise questions about the utility of the Hockley and Murdock (1987) decision model.  First of all, reaction time distributions are multimodal and hazard functions show extreme fluctuations. This is the result of  the duration of each decision cycle becoming increasingly longer according to Eq. (1) (and the variance of TOS not increasing  as the number of cycles increase), an assumption necessary to produce skewed decision latency  342 GRONLUND AND RATCLIFF  distributions. These problems can be remedied by making the base cycle time (BCT) variable rather than constant, though this  is an ad hoc fix.  The more important problems stem from the model's application to timecontrolled and information-controlled processing tasks.  The model begins with full information and uses noise to drive the decision process; consequently, partial information in  time-controlled processing must be derived from a probability mixture of random guesses and single criterion responses. The  model can produce any pattern of data from chance to regular accuracy by varying the amount of each of these processes in the  mixture. Not only is this assumption too powerful, it is not sensible. Subjects should not make random guesses when they could  be more accurate by (a) basing all nonterminated process decisions on a single criterion, or (b) making a higher proportion of  relatively high-accuracy regular responses by starting with the criteria closer together.  Serious problems with the decision model also arise for applications to information-controlled processing tasks. These  problems are the most serious because they result in mispredictions. First, the model is limited to modeling trade-offs  through symmetric changes in the initial positions of the criteria; otherwise hit and correct rejection rate are  inversely-related (contrary to data). Second, the model trades speed and accuracy largely independently of one another. The  range of the primary change in accuracy is accompanied by little change in latency; the largest change in latency is  accompanied by little change in accuracy. Finally, the model was unable to vary accuracy over a range sufficient to account  for data, even if the initial positions of the criteria were allowed to be equal (as was demonstrated by the fit to the speed  condition in the experiment). It was argued that a singlecriterion version of the model was not an allowable member of the  class of possible models of the Hockley and Murdock (1987) framework.  Two alternative versions of the model were examined: (a) adding guessing to the original model; (b) modifying the decision  process to be a zero-drift random walk. Neither of these alternatives was successful. On the other hand, two versions of the  diffusion model (Ratcliff, 1978, 1981) provided reasonable accounts of the speedaccuracy experiment and parsimonious  explanations of time-controlled processing tasks. Together, the single- and multiple-diffusion models offer a common framework  for the linking of a decision model to a memory model with a localized or a distributed memory representation. Based on the  problems with the original version of the Hockley and Murdock (1987) decision model, and the lack of success of its two  variations, it seems that a major revision of the Hockley and Murdock (1987) model is required if the model is to compete with  other candidate models.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  This research was supported by NSF Grant BNS 8510361 to Roger Ratcliff and NSF Grant BNS 8516350 to Gail McKoon. Scott  Gronlund was also supported by National Research Service Award Grant 5-T32-MH15786 to Northwestern University. We thank Gail  McKoon for conducting the experiment, and for her comments on this manuscript.  HOCKLEY AND MURDOCK DECISION MODEL 343  REFERENCES  ANDERSON, J. A., SILVERSTEIN, J. W., RITZ, S. R., & JONES, R. S. (1977). Distinctive features, categorical perception, and  probability learning: Some applications of a neural model. Psychological Review, 84, 413-451.  AUDLEY, R. J. (1960). A stochastic model for individual choice behavior. Psychological Review, 89, 1-15. CARTWRIGHT, D., &  FESTINGER, L. (1943). A quantitative theory of decision. Psychological Review, 50, 595-621.  ETCH, J. M. (1982). A composite holographic associative recall model. Psychological Review, 89, 627-661.  GILLUND, G., & SHIFFRIN, R. M. (1984). A retrieval model for both recognition and recall. Psychological Review, 91, 1-67.  HINTZMAN, D. L. (1984). MINERVA 2: A simulation model of human memory. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers,  16, 96-101.  HINTZMAN, D. L. (1986). "Schema Abstraction" in a multiple-trace memory model. Psychological Review, 93, 411-428.  HOCKLEY, W. E., & MURDOCK, B. B., JR. (1987). A decision model for accuracy and response latency in recognition memory.  Psychological Review, 94, 341-358.  HOHLE, R. H. (1965). Inferred components of reaction times as functions of foreperiod duration. Journal of Experimental  Psychology, 69, 382-386.  KOUNIOS, J., OSMAN, A. M., & MEYER, D. E. (1987). Structure and process in semantic memory: New evidence based on  speed-accuracy decomposition. Journal of Experimental Psychology. General, 116, 3-25.  KUCERA, H., & FRANCIS, W. N. (1967). Computational analysis of present-day American English. Providence, RI: Brown University.  LAMING, D. R. J. (1968). Information theory of choice-reaction tunes. New York: Wiley.  LINK, S. W., & HEATH, R. A. (1975). A sequential theory of psychological discrimination. Psychometrika, 40, 77-105.  LUCE, R. D. (1986). Response times. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.  MEYER, D. E., IRWIN, D. E., OSMAN, A. M., & KOUNIOS, J. (1988). The dynamics of cognition and action: Mental processes  inferred from speed-accuracy decomposition. Psychological Review, 95, 183-237.  MURDOCK, B. B., JR. (1982). A theory for the storage and retrieval of item and associative information. Psychological Review,  89, 609-626.  MURDOCK, B. B., JR. (1983). A distributed memory model for serial-order information. Psychological Review, 90, 316-338.  NELDER, J. A., & MEAD, R. (1965). A SIMPLEX method for function minimization. Computer Journal, 7, 308-313.  OLLMAN, R. T. (1966). Fast guesses in choice-reaction time. Psychonomic Science, 6, 155-156. OLLMAN, R. T., & BILLINGTON, M.  J. (1972). The deadline model for simple reaction times. Cognitive Psychology, 3, 311-336.  PIKE, R. (1973). Response latency models for signal detection. Psychological Review, 80, 53-68.  PIKE, R. (1984). Comparison of convolution and matrix distributed memory systems for associative recall and recognition.  Psychological Review, 91, 281-294.  RATCLIFF, R. (1978). A theory of memory retrieval. Psychological Review, 85, 59-108.  RATCLIFF, R. (1979). Group reaction time distributions and an analysis of distribution statistics. Psychological Bulletin, 86,  446-461.  RATCLIFF, R. (1981). A theory of order relations in perceptual matching. Psychological Review, 88, 552-572.  RATCLIFF, R. (1985). Theoretical interpretations of the speed and accuracy of positive and negative responses. Psychological  Review, 92, 212-225.  RATCLIFF, R. (1988a). A note on mimicking additive reaction time models. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 32, 192-204.  344 GRONLUND AND RATCLIFF  RATCLIFF, R. (1988b). Continuous versus discrete information processing: Modeling accumulation of partial information.  Psychological Review, 95, 238-255.  RATCLIFF, R., & MURDOCK, B. B., JR. (1976). Retrieval processes in recognition memory. Psychological Review, 83, 190-214.  REED, A. V. (1973). Speed-accuracy trade-off in recognition memory. Science, 181, 574-576.  REED, A. V. (1976). List length and the time course of recognition in immediate memory. Memory and Cognition, 4, 16-30.  STONE, M. (1960). Models for choice-reaction times. Psychometrika, 25, 251-260.  TOWNSEND, J. T., & ASHBY, F. G. (1983). Stochastic modeling of elementary psychological processes. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge  Univ. Press.  VICKERS, D. (1970). Evidence for an accumulator model of psychophysical discrimination. In A. T. Welford and L. Houssiadas  (Eds.), Current problems in perception, Ergonomics, 13, 37-58. YELLOTT, J. I., JR. (1967). Correction for guessing in choice  reaction time. Psychonomic Science, 8, 321-322.  YELLOTT, J. I., JR. (1971). Correction for guessing and the speed-accuracy trade-off in choice reaction time. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 8, 159-199.  RECEIVED: October 27, 1988