10.1016/0022-2496(91)90025-o
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 35, 151-213 (1991)  Accessibility: A Criterion for Regularity and Hierarchy in Visual Pattern Codes  P. A. VAN DER HELM AND E. L. J. LEEUWENBERG  Nijmegen Institute for Cognition Research and Information Technology (NICI)  In research on visual shape perception, various models have been designed for the encoding of visual patterns, in order to  predict the human interpretation of such patterns. Each of these encoding models provides a few coding rules to obtain codes  of a pattern, each code describing regularity and hierarchy in that pattern. Some of these models employ the minimum principle  which states that the human interpretation of a pattern is reflected by the simplest code of that pattern. Despite empirical  support, these encoding models suffer from three fundamental problems. First, although many coding rules can be proposed, no  encoding model provides a psychological basis for those few coding rules that have been chosen (cf. Simon, 1972). Second, the  minimum principle seems to require an unrealistic search for simplest pattern codes since, for any pattern, the number of  possible codes is combinatorially explosive (cf. Hatfield & Epstein, 1985). Third, the quantification of simplicity is  controversial and is suspected to depend too much on artifacts of the employed encoding model (cf. Hatfield & Epstein, 1985).  The present study provides a coherent solution to these problems, based on the concept of accessibility. The concept of  accessibility simply implies that regularity and hierarchy in the code of a pattern corresponds directly to regularity and  hierarchy in the pattern itself. This correspondence is specified by the notions of holographic regularity and transparent  hierarchy. These two notions are based on a strictly formal analysis of regularity and hierarchy, and lead to just a few  coding rules which, essentially, describe only three classes of regularities: iterations, symmetries, and so-called  alternations. Furthermore, the concept of accessibility enables an efficient and largely parallel encoding process, in which  the simplest code of a pattern can be obtained without generating the explosive number of all possible codes (see also van der  Helm & Leeuwenberg, 1986; van der Helm, 1988). Finally, the concept of accessibility gives rise to an improved and promising  quantification of simplicity (see also van der Helm & Van Lier, 1991). ( 1991 Academic Press. Inc.  INTRODUCTION  In principle, patterns can be interpreted in many ways. Usually, however, only one interpretation is preferred. Even for the  rather simple line drawing in Fig. 1, several different interpretations are possible, but the preferred interpretation will  generally be two squares. In order to predict such preferences, scientists in shape perception have searched for the  underlying principles that govern the human interpretation of patterns. The present study contributes to this research by  discussing  Request for reprints should be sent to P. A. van der Helm, Department of Perception, Nijmegen Institute for Cognition Research  and Information Technology (NICI), University of Nijmegen, P.O. Box 9104, 6500 HE Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Part of this  research has been supported financially by the Netherlands Organization for the Advancement of Research (NWO).  0022-2496/91 $3.00  Copyright ((,~. 1991 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  152  VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  pattern  9  interpretations  0  u  FIG. 1. In visual shape perception, a major problem is how to predict the preferred interpretation of a pattern which, in  principle, can be interpreted in many ways. Here, two possible interpretations of a line drawing are given. Generally,  interpretation B is preferred to interpretation A.  the concept of accessibility which, in our view, reflects psychological constraints in human pattern perception. This concept  is elaborated in a strictly formal way within the conceptual framework as given by the structural information model  (Leeuwenberg, 1969, 1971). That model is summarized in the next section but first, in this section, its position in the field  of perception research is indicated by considering several alternative approaches (see Fig. 2).  In order to predict the human interpretation of patterns, some scientists (e.g., Von Helmholtz, 1867; Gregory, 1973) advocate  the so-called likelihood principle which states that the preferred interpretation of a pattern is the one that reflects the  most probable situation. Indeed, in Fig. 1, interpretation B seems more probable than interpretation A, since it seems rather  coincidental that both subpatterns in interpretation A happen to be in the relative position given in the pattern. However,  the probability of a situation is said to depend on the number of occurrences of that situation in the real world. So, the  question arises: How does  human interpretation of patterns  likelihood principle minimum principle  most probable situation simplest description  procedural simplicity phenomenal simplicity descriptive simplicity efficiency regularity compactness  FIG. 2. Several views on the underlying principle of human pattern perception. Procedural simplicity is based on internal  properties of the perceptual process, while phenomenal and descriptive simplicity are based on properties of the possible  outcomes of the process. In Leeuwenberg's coding system, the notion of structural information relates descriptive simplicity  to phenomenal simplicity.  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 153  a human subject know these probabilities? One option could be that such knowledge is acquired during life. However, how are  little children able to perceive? Besides, many studies have shown that acquired knowledge hardly affects visual perception  (e.g., Rock, 1983). Another option is that knowledge about the probability of situations is already present at birth,  programmed into our nervous system by natural selection. This option may seem attractive but, in fact, says nothing more than  "we perceive in the way we perceive," which is not falsifiable. Furthermore, it is assumed that, for each possible  interpretation of any possible pattern, the probability is specified one way or another in the nervous system. Even so, the  question remains how the perceptual system represents patterns and obtains interpretations. Leeuwenberg & Boselie (1988)  provide several more reasons why the likelihood principle is not a satisfactory explanation for human perception.  An alternative to the likelihood principle is the so-called minimum principle (Hochberg & McAlister, 1953; Leeuwenberg, 1969,  1971). The minimum principle is adopted in the present study fits in with the tradition of Gestalt psychology. Gestalt  psychologists (e.g., Wertheimer, 1912; Kohler, 1920) formulated several Gestalt laws such as the laws of proximity and of  closure. For instance, the dots in the pattern in Fig. 3-A are generally grouped by human subjects according to proximity;  i.e., two dots that are close to one another are seen as one group. The parentheses in the pattern in Fig. 3-B, however, are  generally grouped according to closure, since a convex pair "( )" looks more like a closed figure than a concave pair ") (."  So, in Fig. 3-B, the law of closure is stronger than the law of proximity. However, it appeared impossible to find a  consistent priority order for the Gestalt laws; i.e., sometimes one law is stronger, sometimes another law. Therefore, in an  attempt to integrate the diversity of Gestalt laws, Koffka (1935) formulated the socalled law of PragnanZ which states that a  more basic concept guides human pattern perception, namely simplicity. The law of Pragnani can be seen as the ancestor of the  minimum principle which states that the preferred interpretation of a pattern is reflected by the simplest description of that  pattern. A pattern description can be seen as the formal counterpart of the way in which a pattern is represented by the  perceptual system. But then, immediately, the question arises: What kind of pattern descriptions should be used, and how to  define simplicity? Next, we discuss several possible answers (see also Hatfield & Epstein, 1985), including the answer that is  adopted in the present study.  Some scientists (e.g., Simon & Feigenbaum, 1964; Attneave, 1982; Biederman, 1987) regard simplicity as an internal aspect of  the perceptual process. This starting point of procedural simplicity implies that the preferred interpretation of a pattern  A: . .. .. . B: ( )( )( )  FIG. 3. Gestalt laws: the dots in pattern A are generally grouped according to the law of proximity, but the parentheses in  pattern B are grouped according to the law of closure. The law of Pr,ignanz is meant to integrate such Gestalt laws and  states, just like the minimum principle, that simplicity guides human perception.  154 VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  is thought to be reflected by the pattern description (in terms of some formal "language") that results from the most  efficient procedure within some process model. Of course, any perception model should be realistic in the sense that predicted  interpretations can be obtained within an acceptable amount of time or procedural steps (this is a topic in the present  study). In that sense, process models are valuable and may even suggest how interpretations are obtained, i.e., suggest a  realistic division of the entire process into subprocesses. However, above all, a process model must simulate correctly the  input-output relation of the human perceptual process. So, the criterion according to which the simulation is to be shaped  lies outside the simulation. This does not imply that a criterion in terms of some process model cannot lead to correct  outputs but that, in our view, it is psychologically more meaningful to start with a criterion in terms of possible outputs,  before focussing on the process.  Better in line with the Gestalt tradition, other scientists (e.g., Hochberg & McAlister, 1953) regard simplicity as being  based on properties of a pattern itself. This starting point of phenomenal simplicity implies that the preferred  interpretation of a pattern is thought to be reflected by the pattern description (again, in terms of some formal language)  that expresses the largest amount of regularity in the pattern. But then: How to specify regularity? As an illustration, we  briefly discuss the transformational approach which is fairly comparable to the encoding approach that is adopted in the  present study.  The transformational approach suggests, in different ways, that the perceptual system reveals regularity in patterns by means  of a fixed set of pattern transformations such as translation, rotation, and reflection. For instance, the fact that a square  remains the same under reflection with respect to one of its diagonals is said to reveal regularity. That is, regularity is  specified as being constituted by certain arrangements of identical pattern parts. Garner (1970) takes the number of such  invariant transformations, as allowed by a pattern, as a measure for the figural goodness of that pattern. Garner, by the way,  does not specify how the perceptual system represents patterns in order to test transformations, nor does he specify pattern  descriptions that reflect interpretations. Palmer (1983), on the other hand, describes patterns by means of a network in which  pattern parts and their properties (revealed by invariant transformations) are stored and related to one another. Palmer  suggests that the preferred interpretation is reflected by the "best" reference frame: each frame allows specific  transformations, and the "best" frame is the one that reveals a maximum of symmetries in the pattern. Leyton (1986a, b) does  not give a preference criterion, but proposes a criterion (stability) for the internal structure of pattern descriptions which  are formulated directly in terms of reference frames and invariant transformations. This criterion enables an explicit  specification of perceptual differences between possible interpretations of a pattern. Leyton, by the way, defines a  description as a mapping from a set of transformations onto a pattern; i.e., the pattern is not converted into some  description but just must be reconstructible from that set of transformations. Contrary to Leyton's suggestion (Leyton, 1986a,  p. 133), a similar aspect does hold for Lceuwenberg's coding system  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 155  (Leeuwenberg, 1969, 1971) which constitutes the framework of the present study (see also next section). That coding system  aims at phenomenal simplicity too, in a way which is indicated after the following brief discussion of the encoding approach  in general.  In the encoding approach, descriptions of a pattern are obtained on the basis of a symbolic representation of the pattern, in  which identical symbols represent identical pattern parts. By means of coding rules, the symbolic representation is reduced  into a code, i.e., into a pattern description in terms of the coding language that is defined by those coding rules (see next  section for some details). The encoding approach starts with Hochberg & McAlister (1953) who proposed a simple method to  measure the complexity of 2- and 3-dimensional patterns. Later, more intricate coding systems have been proposed. These  systems apply to the encoding of serial patterns (e.g., Simon & Kotovsky, 1963; Vitz & Todd, 1969; Restle, 1970; Jones &  Zamostny, 1975), of musical scores (e.g., Deutsch & Feroe, 1981), and of visual patterns (e.g., Vitz, 1966; Leeuwenberg, 1969,  1971; Restle, 1979). Leeuwenberg's coding system shares with the transformational approach that pattern descriptions are meant  to express regularity, where regularity is specified as being constituted by certain arrangements of identical pattern parts  (see next section for more details). The difference lies in the way regularity is thought to be revealed by the perceptual  system. The transformational approach, on the one hand, starts with invariant transformations which generally reveal, at once,  combinations of identities in the pattern. For instance, the fact that a rotation over 90 degrees is an invariant  transformation for a square is due to the fact that all four sides, respectively all four angles, are identical. But only  after such an invariant transformation is found is the human system thought to extract, eventually, information about single  identities, i.e., about the identity of just two pattern parts. Leeuwenberg's coding system, on the other hand, starts with  coding rules which prescibe the combining of single identities, and codes express the allowed combinations. On the basis of  such combinations, the human system is thought to extract, eventually, information about, e.g., invariant transformations. In  our view, the latter approach is more appropriate, since it reflects a bottom-up extraction of gradually more structured  information.  As argued by Boselie and Leeuwenberg (1986), a coding system is indeed appropriate to test the validity of the minimum  principle, since it allows an objective specification and quantification of simplicity in terms of the coding language that is  employed. Yet, one should be careful, as we see next. Among all codes into which a given symbolic representation can be  reduced, the "lost compact code could be seen as the simplest description and, therefore, as reflecting the preferred  interpretation of the related pattern. This starting point of descriptive simplicity seems rather attractive, since it could  correspond to an efficient storage of visual representations in the human memory. However, note that this option is primarily  based on the syntactical structure of the language that has been chosen to describe patterns. For instance, in Fig. 1, the  description two squares could be judged on the basis of the number of characters in the English words two and  156 VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  squares; i.e., the simplicity of the description could be valued as 3 + 7 = 10 characters. Obviously, such a judgement  concerns the English language rather than the interpretation of patterns. However, in our view, descriptive simplicity still  could make sense, but only if it is related directly to phenomenal simplicity, that is, if the compactness of a code is so  defined that it corresponds to the amount of regularity that is expressed by the code. This implies that, in measuring the  compactness of a code, only specific descriptive components are to be taken into account (see next section and Discussion for  more details). This is what happens in Leeuwenberg's coding system, in which those specific descriptive components are said to  constitute the structural information that is required by the code to describe the pattern (cf. Gabor, 1946; McKay, 1950).  This view on simplicity is the starting point in the present study. With this view on simplicity, the minimum principle more  or less encloses the earlier mentioned likelihood principle, in the sense that subjective probability can be seen as just one  consequence of simplicity (Leeuwenberg & Boselie, 1988). Furthermore, Restle (1982) and Pomerantz & Kubovy (1986) argued that  this view on simplicity indeed implies an integration of at least several of the Gestalt laws.  In this section, we have specified Leeuwenberg's structural information model as a coding system for which the following  holds. First, in line with the Gestalt tradition, the minimum principle is adopted, stating that the preferred interpretation  of a pattern is reflected by the simplest description of that pattern. Second, just as in the transformational approach,  simplicity is specified in terms of regularity, where regularity is specified as being constituted by certain arrangements of  identical pattern parts.  Now note that, just like Gestalt laws and invariant transformations, coding rules can be seen as merely sophisticated "tricks"  to predict the human interpretation of patterns. These tricks may have gained empirical support, and may be plausible for all  kinds of considerations (see also third section). For instance, in their sophisticated coding model for pitch sequences,  Deutsch and Feroe chose several of the coding rules because these rules "are frequently used as compositional devices"  (Deutsch & Feroe, 1981, p.508). Such considerations are valuable, but do not provide a psychological basis, i.e., a more  fundamental criterion according to which the "tricks" are indeed the proper ones among the many possible in principle (cf.  Simon, 1972). This problem holds not only for coding rules but also for Gestalt laws and for invariant transformations. In the  present study, however, we focus only on coding rules, especially in the visual domain. In the next section, we go into more  detail on the structural information model as the framework within which this problem is attacked. Then, we introduce and  formally elaborate the concept of accessibility as the basis for solving not only this problem but also two further problems  (cf. Hatfield & Epstein, 1985): First, the problem that the minimum principle seems to require an unrealistic search for the  simplest description of a pattern out of a combinatorially explosive number of possible descriptions, and second, the problem  of the controversial quantification of simplicity which is suspected to depend too much on artifacts of the employed encoding  model.  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 157  THE STRUCTURAL INFORMATION MODEL  The structural information model (Leeuwenberg, 1969, 1971) provides the conceptual framework for discussing the concept of  accessibility. This concept, which is introduced in the next section, constitutes the basis for a coherent solution to the  earlier mentioned problems, i.e., the choice of appropriate coding rules, the unrealistic search for simplest pattern codes,  and the controversial quantification of simplicity. First, in this section, we go into more detail on the structural  information model as such. We discuss the actual encoding, the meaning of codes, the specification of simplicity in terms of  regularity, and the empirical support.  The encoding of visual patterns, as performed in the structural information model, proceeds as follows. In order to describe  regularity in a pattern, the pattern is first represented by a svrnbol series. For instance, in Fig. 4, the contour of the  pattern consists of subsequent angles and line segments, each of which is labelled with a symbol. Angles or line segments of  equal size are labelled with an identical symbol. These symbols are called pattern svrnbols, indicating that a symbol refers  only to a pattern part and not to its meaning in, e.g., the Roman alphabet. Now, tracing the contour in a clockwise direction  would yield the symbol series kalckalckalc, representing the pattern. Note that, in theory, a pattern is not considered to be  mapped onto a symbol series. On the contrary, the symbol series must be such that the pattern can be reconstructed by  substituting the actual sizes of angles and line segments for the pattern symbols. This substitution is called the semantic  mapping from the symbol series onto the pattern. The semantic mapping as such may already give rise to several questions, for  instance with respect to the number of possible symbol series by which a pattern can be represented. In the present study,  however, we do not deal with these questions. It may suffice to note that the structural information model, including the  semantic mapping, has gained empirical support, as we see at the end of this section.  In the present study, we start from the point that a symbol series is given as a  FIG. 4. Tracing the contour of the pattern (arrow indicates starting point and direction) yields the symbol series  kalckalckatc. This symbol series represents the subsequent angles and line segments in the contour so that, by substituting  the actual values for the symbols, the pattern can be reconstructed. According to Leeuwenberg's structural information model,  interpretations of the pattern can be obtained by encoding the symbol series.  158 VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  "raw" representation of some pattern, i.e., as merely a registration of the arrangement and the identity of pattern parts.  Now, the actual encoding consists of describing regularity in the symbol series which, due to the semantic mapping,  corresponds to regularity in the pattern. In line with the specification of regularity in a pattern, as given in the previous  section, regularity in a symbol series is specified as being constituted by certain arrangements of identical symbols. The  structural information model employs, essentially, only three coding rules, each of which describes a specific class of  regularities, namely iterations, symmetries, and so-called alternations. The question whether these three coding rules are  indeed (the only) proper ones to be used, is in fact the main issue in the present study. We address this issue in the next  section where these three coding rules play a central role. Here, we proceed by giving the definitions of these coding rules,  and the way in which they can be applied to symbol series.  First, the Iteration rule can be applied to express that a series contains successive identical symbols. This coding rule is  defined as follows:  Iteration Rule.  kkk...kk-+N* (k)  The expression at the right-hand side is called an I -form, in which N equals the number of symbols k in the series at the  left-hand side (N>, 2), while (k) is called the I-argument. For instance, according to the Iteration rule, the series aaaaa  can be encoded into 5 * (a).  Second, the Symmetry rule can be applied to express that a series contains pairs of identical symbols nested around a  so-called pivot. This coding rule is defined as follows:  Symmetry Rule.  kj k2 ... kn p kn ... h2 k, --, S[ (k i)(k2) ... (kn ), (p)]  The expression at the right-hand side is called an S -form, in which (p) is the pivot, while the series (k,)(k2) ... (kn) is  called the S-argument consisting of elements (k,), i = 1, 2, ..., n (n,>1). For instance, the series kapmpak can be encoded  into S[(k)(a)(p), (m)7.  Third, the Alternation rule can be applied to express that a series contains successive subseries which either all begin or  all end identically. Both cases are given in the following definition:  Alternation Rule.  k  x, kx2...kx, -, <(k))/<(x,)(x2)... (xn)) x, k x2 k... x,7 k--~ <(x,)(x2) ... (xn))/<(k))  Each of the expressions at the right hand side is called an A -form, in which series (x,)(x2) ... (xn) is called the  A-argument consisting of elements (xi), i = l, ..., n  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 159  (n,>2). For instance, the series arasat can be encoded into <(a))/<(r)(s)(t)>, while the reversal of that series, i.e.,  tasara, can be encoded into <(t)(s)(r)>/<(a)>.  In applying the coding rules to a symbol series, one should note the following three aspects. First, in the definition of the  coding rules, the symbols are considered to be variables standing for arbitrary subseries (identical symbols standing for  identical subseries). This implies that the coding rules can be applied not just to express identity of single symbols but, in  general, to express identity of subseries in a series. For instance:  ababab -> 3 * (ab)  badpgvwpqbad -> S[ (bad)(pq ), ((vv) ].  Note that the parentheses in an I-, S-, of A-form (briefly, in an ISA form) yield an unambiguous notation. Any subseries  between parentheses in an ISA-form is called a chunk. By the way, the pivot in an S-form is a chunk which, as a limit case and  without distorting the symmetrical structure, may be "empty." This implies that, for instance, the series abppab can be  encoded into a S-form, denoted by S[(ab)(pf.  Second, a code of a symbol series does not have to consist of just one ISA-form. In general, a code is a series consisting of  single symbols and ISA-forms obtained by applying the coding rules to just subseries of the symbol series. Clearly, the  successive parts of a code must refer to successive subseries of the symbol series. For instance:  akpkpfrstsrq-+a 2 * (kp) f S[(r)(s), (t)]q.  In this example, the code consists of five parts: the symbol a, the I-form 2 * (kp), the symbol f, the S-form S[(r)(s), (t)],  and the symbol q. The I-form and the S-form have been obtained by applying the Iteration rule, respectively the Symmetry rule,  to the subseries kpkp, respectively rstsr. As we see later on, it is important to note that a (sub-)series may be encodable  into an ISA-form, even if that ISA-form does not express all identities in the (sub-)series. For instance, the series aaba can  be encoded into the S-form S[(a), (ab)] which expresses just the identity of the first and fourth symbol.  Third, the subseries inside a chunk in an ISA-form can be encoded just like any symbol series, for instance,  bapabapa --+ 2 * (bapa) --+ 2 * (b S[(a), (p)] )  aabppaab --> S[(aab)(p)] - S[(2 * (a) b)(p)]  In such cases, the ISA-forms are said to be hierarchically nested. Similarly, but less trivial, a hierarchical nesting of  ISA-forms may result as follows. Whereas an I-argument consists of only one chunk, an S- or A-argument is, in general, a  series consisting of several chunks. Such a chunk series can be encoded the same way as a symbol series. Consider, for  instance, the following encoding:  ababbaba-+S[(a)(b)(a)(b)] ~ S[2 * ((a)(b))]  160 VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  In this example, the S-argument (a)(b)(a)(b) constitutes a chunk series xyxy with chunks x = (a) and y = (b). Just like a  symbol series, this chunk series xyxy can be encoded by applying the coding rules. This yields, e.g., the code 2 * (xy) which,  by substituting x= (a) and y= (b), yields the code 2 * ((a)(b)) as given in the example. Similarly, the argument of an A-form  can be encoded. Whereas the symbol series is said to represent the lowest hierarchical level, an I-, S-, or A-argument is said  to represent a higher hierarchical level, while the encoding of an S- or A-argument leads to still higher hierarchical levels.  Now that we have considered the way in which the coding rules can be used to encode symbol series into codes, we can go into  more detail on the meaning of the codes. First of all, by expressing identities in a series, a code provides a description of  regularity in that series. However, this is not the ultimate meaning of a code. The ultimate meaning of a code is constituted  by the fact that a code provides a means to obtain a classification and an organization of the series. This may be illustrated  as follows.  First, for the four-symbol series aaba, the code 2 * (a) ba expresses just the identity of the first and second symbol, which  corresponds to all identity in a foursymbol series like pprs. Thus, pprs can be seen as a representative of the class of  symbol series to which aaba belongs according to the code (cf. Collard & Buffart, 1983). In general, such a class  representative can be found as follows. First, replace all pattern symbols in the code by arbitrary but different symbols;  then, decode the code. For instance:  abbba --+ S[(a)(b), (b)] -' S[(z)(.x), (p)] -+ zxpxz.  Second, for the series ababab, the code 3 * (ab) expresses that ababab is similar to yyy under y = ab. So, the code can be  said to induce the organization (ab)(ab)(ab ) in the series, i.e., a partitioning of the series (on a grouping of the symbols)  into chunks. Such an organization in terms of chunks is called a chunking (cf. Geissler, Klix, & Scheidereiter, 1978). In  general, the chunking as induced by an ISA-can be found by decoding the ISA-form without removing the parentheses in the  ISA-form, for instance,  badpgvwpgbad -,. S[(bad)(pq), (vu')] --+ (bad)(pq)(vw)(pq)(bad )  hkghkpq - < (hk) >/< (g)(pq) > - (hk)(g)(hk)(pq ).  As illustrated in Fig. 5, a chunking of a symbol series reflects an organization in the pattern that is represented by the  symbol series. Note that, perceptually, abab indeed seems to be chunked into (ab)(ab), but that ababpggp seems to consist of  the parts abab and pggp which is no chunking in the above sense. In our view, the latter partitioning is indeed relevant since  each of the parts corresponds to one ISA-form in the code 2 * (ab) S[(p)(q)] but, in the present study, we only focus on  chunkings in the above sense.  The classification and organization of a symbol series, according to a code of that  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 161  FIG. 5. If the pattern at the left is represented by the symbol series kalckalckalc then, according to the structural  information model, this symbol series can be encoded into 3 s (kale). This code induces, in the symbol series, the  organization (kalc)(kale)(kalc) which, in the pattern, corresponds to the organization as shown at the right.  symbol series, are considered to reflect an interpretation of the pattern that is represented by the symbol series. However,  in general, a symbol series can be encoded into many different codes. So, the question arises: Which code reflects the  preferred interpretation of the related pattern? This is where the minimum principle starts to play a role, as follows.  According to the minimum principle, as indicated in the previous section, the preferred interpretation of a pattern is  reflected by the simplest description of that pattern. In the structural information model, pattern descriptions are given by  codes. So, in order to complete this model as a means to predict the human interpretation of patterns, a specification and  quantification of the simplicity of codes must be added. As argued in the previous section (see also Fig. 2), we reject  procedural simplicity, and we adopt the notion of structural information which relates descriptive simplicity to phenomenal  simplicity. This notion can now be specified as follows (but see also Discussion).  Suppose that the symbol series aaaaa has been encoded into 5 * (a). Notationally, this code consists of five parts: the number  "5," the operator "*," two parentheses, and the pattern symbol a. So, this code is notationally just as compact as the symbol  series which consists of five pattern symbols. Yet, this code seems to be an appropriate description of the series. This may  illustrate that notational compactness is not an adequate index for predicting human interpretations, since it is merely based  on the syntactical structure of the coding language. However, instead of counting all notational elements, let us focus on  just the number of pattern symbols in a code (cf. Collard & Buffart, 1983). Whereas the series aaaaa contains five pattern  symbols, the code 5 * (a) contains only one pattern symbol, while any other code of aaaaa contains more than one pattern  symbols. This may be illustrated by, e.g., S[2 * ((a)), (a)] and <(a)>/<(a)(2 * (a))> which contain respectively two and three  pattern symbols. Now, remember that such a code classifies aaaaa into a class of symbol series. This class can be represented  by a symbol series in which all identity of symbols corresponds to the identity of symbols in aaaaa as far as expressed by the  code. For the three codes above, these classes can be  162 VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  represented respectively by yyyyy, yyzyy, and xyxzz. So, the number of pattern symbols in a code equals the number of  different symbols in the related class representative. In other words, for codes of a given symbol series, a code which  contains few pattern symbols expresses many identities. Since, as argued before, a code describes regularity by expressing  identities, we may add a code which expresses many identities and describes much regularity. Thus, phenomenal simplicity (the  more regularity, the simpler) corresponds to a specific type of descriptive simplicity (the less pattern symbols, the  simpler). Therefore, the number of pattern symbols in a code of a series is called the amount of structural information that  is required by that code to describe the series (cf. Gabor, 1946; McKay, 1950). Summarizing, we get the following formulation  of the minimum principle within the framework of the structural information model.  Minimum Principle. The preferred interpretation of a pattern is reflected by a minimum code of a symbol series that represents  the pattern, i.e., by a code that contains a minimum amount of structural information.  The definition of structural information, as given above, has not been employed in all studies concerning the structural  information model. This issue is elaborated in the Discussion in which, on the basis of the concept of accessibility, a  redefinition is proposed which can be seen as a unification of the different definitions that have been employed. Independent  of the exact definition of structural information, however, the minimum principle has already gained substantial empirical  support, as we see next.  Empirical research has shown that the structural information model is rather successful in predicting the human interpretation  of visual patterns. This empirical research covers, among others, the following topics: judged complexity (Leeuwenberg, 1969,  1971), neon effects, embeddedness and subjective contours (Van Tuijl & Leeuwenberg, 1979, 1980, 1982), pattern completion and  ambiguity  pattem 1  FO__1  pattern 2  FiG. 6. According to the structural information model, the figure-ground interpretation (B) is the "best" interpretation for  both patterns. However, this interpretation is stronger for pattern 2 than for pattern 1, since the "second-best"  interpretation (C) for pattern 2 is more complex than the "secondbest" interpretation (A) for pattern 1.  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 163  (Buffart, Leeuwenberg, & Restle, 1981), temporal order (Collard & Leeuwenberg, 1981), assimilation and contrast (Leeuwenberg,  1982), foreground-background (Leeuwenberg & Buffart, 1984), and beauty (Boselie & Leeuwenberg, 1985). These studies show that  the coding system is appropriate for investigating visual preferences. Moreover, one can also determine the relative strength  of preferences, which may be illustrated as follows.  For each of the two patterns in Fig. 6, one can compute the simplest interpretation and the so-called complementary  interpretation (Collard & Buffart, 1983). The latter is the simplest alternative interpretation, incompatible with the overall  simplest interpretation. The simplest interpretation is the figure-ground interpretation (B), while the complementary  interpretation is the mosaic interpretation (respectively A and C). Now, the complementary interpretation of pattern 2 is  found to be less simple than the complementary interpretation of pattern 1. So, the difference (with respect to simplicity)  between "best" and "second-best" is larger for pattern 2 than for pattern 1. Therefore, the preference for the figure-ground  interpretation is predicted to be stronger for pattern 2 than for pattern 1. This prediction is empirically supported by the  results of Leeuwenberg & Buffart (1984). Empirical evidence that complementary interpretations are indeed "active" during the  human perceptual process, has been provided by Mens & Leeuwenberg (1988).  In this section, we discussed the structural information model in order to provide the conceptual framework of the present  study in which, as mentioned earlier, we discuss the following problems. First, the choice of appropriate coding rules to  describe regularity; second, the unrealistic search for a simplest code out of a combinatorially explosive number of possible  codes; and, third, the controversial quantification of simplicity. Attacking the first problem requires a formalization of the  notion of regularity, in order to differentiate between coding rules on the basis of the kinds of regularity that are  described. First, in the next section, we start with this differentiation in a non-formal way and introduce the concept of  accessibility. Then, in the sections thereafter, we proceed with this differentiation in a strictly formal way, and we show  that the concept of accessibility constitutes an adequate basis not only for the choice of appropriate coding rules but also  for a realistic search for simplest codes and for an improved quantification of simplicity.  THE CHOICE OF APPROPRIATE CODING RULES  As argued in the previous section, the structural information model employs, essentially, only three coding rules: the  Iteration rule, the Symmetry rule, and the Alternation rule (briefly, the ISA-rules). By employment of only the ISA-rules, the  description of identities in a symbol series is restricted in a specific way. That is, only specific kinds of regularity can  be described, namely only iterations, symmetries, and alternations. Theoretically, however, there seems to be no a priori  reason to exclude other kinds of regularity. For, as we see later on in this study, many other coding rules could be proposed  just as well; for instance,  164 VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG K-Rule.  k x,k k x2k ...k x-> K[(k), (x1)(x2) ... (xn)]  M-Rule.  k, x, k1 k2x2k, ... k, - M[(k,)(kz) ... (kJ, (xl)(x2) ... (X")]  The K-rule and the M-rule can be used to express that a series contains successive subseries which each begin and end  identically while, in case of the K-rule, all those subseries begin and end identically. For instance, the series araasaata  can be encoded into the K-form K[(a), (r)(s)(t)], and the series arabsbctc into the M-form M[(a)(b)(c),(r)(s)(t)].  Considering that many coding rules could be proposed, the question arises whether the ISA-rules constitute precisely the  entire set of coding rules that describe perceptually relevant kinds of regularity. Note that if so, the ISA-rules do not have  to be able to describe any perceivable combination of identities. For instance, by means of the ISA-rules, the series aaba can  be encoded into 2 * (a) ba, or into S[(a), (ab)], or into <(a)(b)>/<(a)). Each of these codes expresses the identity of just  two symbols, whereas the series contains three identical symbols. The ISArules, however, cannot describe the identity of these  three symbols simultaneously, i.e., in a single code. This seems to contradict the fact that one is able to register  immediately the identity of those three symbols. However, a code of a symbol series is not meant to simply register the  identity of symbols. As argued in the previous section, a code is meant to classify and organize the symbol series, in order  to obtain an interpretation of the pattern that is represented by the symbol series. Now, in general, the classification and  organization precisely imply that not any combination of identities should be describable by a code. For, otherwise, each  pattern would be interpreted in only one way, by means of something like templates, which is not realistic considering, e.g.,  the existence of ambiguous patterns.  In perception research, rather general agreement and empirical support appears to exist for the fact that iterations,  symmetries, and alternations are perceptually relevant. That is, these kinds of regularity are focussed on by a variety of  perception models, including the encoding models and the transformation models that are mentioned in the Introduction. So,  these kinds of regularity are not adopted by just the structural information model, nor by just encoding models, nor by just  models for visual perception, but are widely accepted and have been emphasized by many scientists (e.g., Wertheimer, 1923;  Koffka, 1935; Attneave, 1954; Klix, 1971; Garner, 1974; Palmer, 1977; Pomerantz & Kubovy, 1986). The empirical results,  reported in these studies, show that iterations, symmetries, and alternations are not only indisputably relevant in perception  but, generally, also suffice to predict the human interpretation of patterns. However, the empirical results may confirm but  do not explain the perceptual relevance and the sufficiency of these kinds of regularity. Without such an explanation, the  usage of these kinds of regularity in perception  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 165  models can simply be seen as a "trick" that happens to be suitable in predicting human interpretation, but that has been  chosen merely for intuitive or pragmatic reasons, without a more fundamental basis. This would be a very unsatisfactory  situation. Moreover, it still cannot be excluded that other kinds of regularity may be perceptually relevant too. Since, until  now, such an explanation has not been available, several encoding models have indeed employed some other coding rules, despite  doubts about the perceptual relevance of those other coding rules. An example of such a coding rule is the Distribution rule  (Leeuwenberg, 1969), also called the D-rule, which can be used to express that a series contains two intertwined series, each  of which may (but does not have to) show a repetition of a subseries. The definition of the Distribution rule can be given as  follows:  Distribution Rule.  k, x, k, x, ... kNXN ---~ D[(k,)(k,) ... (kn), (x,)(x2) ... (x_)]  for: N/n and N/m integers, ki=ki+(i= 1,...,N-n), and xj =x;+ (j= 1,...,N-m).  For instance, the series arbsatbrasbt consists of the two intertwining series ababab and rstrst, and can be encoded into the  D-form D[(a)(b), (r)(s)(t)].  Clearly, the choice of the coding rules to be employed codetermines on which codes the prediction of interpretations is based  (see also previous section). Nevertheless, the doubts about the perceptual relevance of coding rules like the Distribution  rule could not be eliminated definitely by empirical research. Therefore, in the present study, the main issue is not further  empirical research, but the problem of how to differentiate theoretically between encoding schemes, i.e., between sets of  coding rules, in order to decide which encoding scheme is the proper one. This fundamental problem has already been pointed at  by Simon, who states (Simon, 1972, p. 371):  If an index of complexity is to have significance for psychology, then the encoding scheme itself must have some kind of  psychological basis.  As a first step, Simon analyzed several encoding models, and concluded that these models share more or less the same  underlying notions: hierarchy and the relations same and next between symbols. In the present study, as may be clear from the  previous section, we focus only on the notion of hierarchy and on the same-relation. That is, we disregard the next-relation,  for the following reasons.  The next-relation plays a role when symbols can be related on the basis of knowledge about some alphabet, i.e., on the basis  of the meaning of the symbols within, e.g., the Roman alphabet or the number alphabet. Now, the next-relation may be relevant  in certain psychological domains, but visual perception is hardly affected by knowledge (Gottschaldt, 1929; Kanizsa & Gerbino,  1982; Peterson & Hochberg, 1983; Fodor, 1983; Rock, 1985; Mens, 1988). In our view, visual perception is concerned with  extracting information from a pattern, without using knowledge from higher cognitive levels. The extracted information is  passed on to higher cognitive levels, and is embedded in already present knowledge which may  480/35i2-2  166 VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  influence a conscious judgement but not the low level visual interpretation of the pattern. For instance, first, consider the  letter series acgmu. This letter series shows some regularity, since the distance (within the Roman alphabet) between the ith  and the (i + 1)th letter equals 2 * i. Second, consider the following number series:  01123581321345589.  This series shows the first 12 numbers of the so-called Fibonacci sequence f, f2fs ... which shows regularity as expressed by  the formula:  fo=o, A= 1, f,=f J +fn-2 for n > 1.  Clearly, (mathematical) knowledge is required to grasp the regularity in the letter series acgmu and in the Fibonacci  sequence. That is, such kinds of regularity cannot be extracted from the series as such and are, in our view, not relevant in  visual perception. Less clear may be the case of the number regularities in the following two encoding examples:  aaabbbccc-> 3 * (a) 3 * (b) 3 * (c)  abbabbbabbbb - a 2 * (b) a 3 * (b) a 4 * (b).  The identical numbers, in the first example, and the linear growth of the number of elements b, in the second example, seem to  have relevance is visual perception. Note, however, that the symbol series are considered to represent visual patterns under  some semantic mapping (see previous section). Now, we do not exclude that, under another semantic mapping, the pattern might  be represented by symbol series in which identical symbols refer to identical (differences between) quantities. In the present  study, however, we do not deal with the semantic mapping but we start from given symbol series. Then, it is important to note  that, in both examples, the number regularities can only be grasped once the identity of the symbols has been accounted for.  In our view, this could be a reason to consider the number regularities as being accounted for at a higher cognitive level,  i.e., not at the visual perception level. In any case, we are positive about the fact that the identity of symbols is  accounted for at the visual perception level. Therefore, in the present study, besides focussing on hierarchy, we focus only  on the same-relation, i.e., on regularity in terms of the identity of symbols in a symbol series.  The starting point, in visual perception, that only the identity of symbols is used in the description of regularity, is not  yet sufficient to choose between encoding schemes. For, as illustrated by the ISA-rules, the M-rule, the K-rule, and the  Distribution rule, an enormous number of different coding rules can still be proposed, each coding rule describing a specific  class of regularities. So, a psychological basis is still required in order to choose between encoding schemes.  Recently, Buffart (1987) proposed the criterion of hierarchical completeness as a psychological constraint in perception. This  criterion is said to lead to an encoding scheme containing the Iteration rule, the Symmetry rule, and the Distribution rule.  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 167  However, it can be shown that Buffart's formal analysis is incorrect and that hierarchical completeness may impose some  constraints but does not lead to any specific set of coding rules (van der Helm, 1988). The main reason for this is that  hierarchical completeness does not account for a differentiation between kinds of regularity. In the present study it is shown  that, to choose between coding rules, such a differentiation is essential.  In the present study, we elaborate the concept of accessibility as a psychological basis for the choice of appropriate coding  rules. This concept, which is formalized later on in this study, implies the following:  The Concept of Accessibilility. Regularity and hierarchy in a code of a pattern should correspond directly to regularity and  hierarchy in the pattern itself.  As we see, this concept is not as trivial as it may seem since, in short, the following holds. The formal specification of the  concept of accessibility enables a differentiation between coding rules, on the basis of both the regularity and the hierarchy  as described by coding rules. The coding rules that are in line with the concept of accessibility not only account for an easy  extraction of information from the pattern in order to construct a pattern code but also account for an easy extraction, at  higher cognitive levels, of pattern information from the code. Furthermore, the concept of accessibility provides a solution  to two further problems (cf. Hatfield and Epstein, 1985). First, satisfying the minimum principle (see previous section) seems  to imply that, in order to obtain a simplest code, all possible codes must be generated first. This would be rather  unrealistic since the number of all possible codes is combinatorially explosive. The coding rules that are in line with the  concept of accessibility, however, enable an efficient and largely parallel encoding process in which a simplest code can be  obtained without generating the explosive number of all possible codes. Thus, the minimum principle is supported as a  realistic criterion for preferred pattern interpretations. Second, the concept of accessibility gives rise to an improved  quantification of simplicity, in terms of not only regularity but also hierarchy, in a way which does not depend on artifacts  of the employed encoding model. This may end the controversy concerning the quantification of simplicity.  In the next sections, the concept of accessibility is formally specified by two notions: holographic regularity and  transparent hierarchy. First, the notion of holographic regularity may be illustrated metaphorically by a jigsaw puzzle that  is to represent a landscape consisting of a green lawn and a sky with clouds. Then, each green piece in the disordered set of  pieces can be classified as a lawn-piece, since such a piece shows the holographic property of having the same color as the  entire lawn. In the present study, the analogue for the jigsaw puzzle is the formalization of regularity as a chain of  identities between symbols. Such a chain is said to represent holographic regularity if, in simple words, all subchains  represent the same regularity. In our view, this holographic property corresponds quite well to an intuitive notion of  regularity. For instance, a repetition of something is a repetition no matter whether the number of times that the something  168 VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  is repeated is large or small. Second, the notion of transparent hierarchy may be illustrated metaphorically by the  hierarchical structure of an industrial organization. The manager clearly is part of that organization, but can also be  approached without interference of the other employees. Analogously, in the present study, hierarchically nested codes (see  previous section) are said to represent a transparent hierarchy if a code at a higher hierarchical level can be considered  independently of the codes at the lower hierarchical levels. This implies that the regularity, as described at a higher  hierarchical level, corresponds to the same kind of regularity in the symbol series. In our view, this transparent property is  adequate since it implies that the hierarchical nesting of codes is not a syntactical artifact of the coding language but a  psychologically meaningful aspect of the description of regularity in patterns.  In order to give an indication of the effects of the differentiation between coding rules on the basis of the notions of  holographic regularity and transparent hierarchy, consider the following. For the coding rules that have been mentioned in  this section, the following hold: the Distribution rule describes neither holographic regularity nor transparent hierarchy,  the K-rule describes transparent hierarchy but not holographic regularity, the M-rule describes holographic regularity but not  transparent hierarchy, and the ISA-rules describe both holographic regularity and transparent hierarchy. Therefore, among  these coding rules, only the ISA-rules are appropriate according to the concept of accessibility.  In the next sections, we give a strictly formal approach to the notions of regularity and hierarchy, and we determine the  entire set of coding rules that are appropriate according to the concept of accessibility. Finally, we discuss several further  implications of the concept of accessibility, especially with respect to the combinatorial explosion in the number of possible  codes and with respect to the controversial quantification of simplicity.  REGULARITY  As we have seen, the structural information model represents a visual pattern by means of a symbol series in which the symbols  refer to pattern parts (the semantic mapping). Then, an interpretation of the pattern is considered to be reflected by a  classification and an organization of the symbol series which, due to the semantic mapping, correspond to a classification and  an organization of the pattern. The symbol series is classified and organized by means of a (hierarchical) description of  regularity in the symbol series. Now, note that the symbol series only represents information about the order and the identity  of pattern parts. So, the formalization of regularity can only be based on arrangements of identical symbols in a symbol  series. In this section, we perform a first step in the formalization of regularity and complete this formalization in the  next section.  In the following, we consider, in general, a series S = s, sz - - s,, (N > 1) consisting of a finite number of elements s; (i=  1, 2, ..., N). Then, clearly, a subseries in S is a  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 169  series s;8;+, * * ' sr+ p (I,< i 5 N and 0 5 p ,< N- i) consisting of p + 1 successive elements in S. Now, an arbitrary  organization of a series is specified as follows.  DEFINITION 1. For all series consisting of N elements, a chunking is given by a partitioning of the index series 1 2 3 ... N  into M chunks, i.e., into M subseries (1 <, M < N). The application of such a chunking to some series S = s, - - - s,,, (also  called a chunking of S) means that S is partitioned, the same way as the index series, into M chunks, say c; (i = 1, 2, ...,  M), and is represented by the chunk series C= c, - - - cm. C can be denoted more explicitly by:  if c; = sk ... sk + y, then substitute (sk ... sk +.) for c; in C (i = 1, 2, ..., M).  EXAMPLE. For all series consisting of five elements, the partitioning of 1 2 3 4 5 into, e.g., 1 2 3 and 4 5 defines a  chunking, of which the application to some series S=s,s2s3S4S5 is represented by chunk series C=c,c,=(s,s2s3)(s4s5). For e.g.,  S=akbbg: C=(akb)(bg).  When a pattern has been represented by a symbol series, a chunking of the symbol series constitutes an organization of the  symbol series and, thereby, also of the pattern. The chunking is represented by a chunk series which, just like the symbol  series, consists of elements that refer to pattern parts, so that both kinds of series can be treated the same way. Now, the  identity of elements or, in general, of subseries in a symbol series or chunk series is specified as follows.  DEFINITION 2. The pairs of identical subseries in a series S = s, - - - s,, form an identity relation 91 which is an  equivalence relation on the set of all subseries in S. The elements of 91 are called identity relationships or, for short,  identities. Two identical subseries, say s; ... s;+,, and s; * ' ' s;+p, are said to be involved in the identity that is  denoted by 92(1, j, p + 1) or by (i i + 1 ... i + p) = (j j ... j + p).  EXAMPLE. For series abab, R contains the identities r, = 933(1, 3, 1), r2 = 991(2, 4, 1), and r3 = `11(1, 3,  2), which can also be denoted by (1) _ (3), (2) = (4), and (12) = (3 4), respectively.  Note that a set of identities does not characterize a series but a property of a series, namely identity of elements. Many  symbol series and chunk series have the same property. Furthermore, this property may be constituted by all but also by some  identity of elements in a series. For instance, the set of identities in the example above, also characterizes all identity of  elements in the chunk series (rs)(abc)(rs)(abc) and in the series pgpgst, and characterizes not all but some identity of  elements in the series yzy7zZy.  Regularity in a series is a property of that series, and is formalized in terms of the arrangement of identical elements in  that series. Such arrangements are specified by means of ordered sets of identities. In general, such a set contains identities  170 VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  between subseries but, first, we just consider identities 9Ji(i, j, 1) between single elements.  DEFINITION 3. A set R= {r1, r2, ..., r (n>, 1) of identities r,== 9i(ik, jk, 1) with ik <jk (k= 1, ..., n), is an elementary  identity, structure if, for each pair rp and rq in R,  j, :A ja and if p < q then ip < iy.  THEOREM 1. All identity, of elements in a series S = s, s,, can be characterized by one and only one elementary identity  structure.  Proof. Let s; with i = i2, ..., ip be all elements in S that are identical to s; with i = i, , while ik _ , < ik for k = 2,  ..., p. The identity of these elements can be denoted briefly by  (ii)=(i2)=(i3)= ... =(ip-1)=(ip).  If S contains no further identity of elements, then all identity of elements in S can be characterized (only) by the  elementary identity structure G with  G l(II)-(l2), (l2)=(13),..., (lp 1)-(Ip)1.  If S does contain further identity of elements then this further identity can be treated the same way as above, yielding  identities which can each be inserted into G at only one position as prescribed by Definition 2. Thus, finally, all identity  of elements in S is characterized by one and only one elementary identity structure.  DEFINITION 4. A realization of an elementary identity structure G is a series in which all identity of elements is  characterized by G.  EXAMPLE. For series S = ababba, the identity of the elements a can be denoted briefly by (1) = (3) = (6), and the identity of  the elements b by (2) = (4) = (5). Thus, one gets unambiguously the elementary identity structure G = { (1) = (3), (2) = (4),  (3)=(6), (4)=(5)}, characterizing all identity of elements in S so that, inversely, S is a realization of G.  In our view, the ordering of the identities in an elementary identity structure, as given in Definition 3, is the most  reasonable one. However, other orderings could also be proposed. The presently chosen ordering may be supported by the  plausibility of the final results which, by the way, would hardly be affected by the choice of another ordering. The  realizations of elementary identity structures facilitate a more detailed research into regularity.  All identity of elements in the series abab can be characterized by the elementary identity structure {(1)=(3), (2)=(4)}, but  also by the identity (12)=(34) between the two subseries ab. Intuitively, the latter characterization may even seem to be more  appropriate. Therefore, as mentioned before, we consider not only  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 171  identities between single elements but also identities between larger subseries, i.e., identities 91(i, j, q) with q 3 1.  DEFINITION 5. Let G = { g, , ..., gn } (n >_ 1) be a set of identities, and let S=s, ... s,, be some series in which G  characterizes identity of elements. Then, G is an identity structure if a chunking of S (represented by chunk series C= c, . .  . c) and an elementary identity structure H= {h,, ..., h exist such that, for p= 1, ..., n:  if g,= 93(k, l, q + 1) then, for some i and j, c; = S,; . . * s,; +y, c; = S, ... S,+N, h p = 94(i, j, l ).  If, moreover, M is minimal, the chunking is called the complete chunking of S on the basis of G, C is called C(G, S), and H is  called the hierarchical image of G.  THEOREM 2. Let G be an identity structure, and S some series in which G characterizes identity of elements. Then one and only  one chunking of S is the complete chunking of S on the basis of G, and one and only one elementary identity structure is the  hierarchical image of G.  Proof. (1) For G and S, the condition in Definition 5 may be satisfied by several chunkings and elementary identity  structures, but for each of those chunkings holds that precisely one chunk is constituted by each of the subseries in S that  are involved in the identities in G. These chunks are strictly mandatory. Given these chunks, the other chunks may be  arbitrary. Then, clearly, only one chunking of S yields a minimal number of chunks, namely the one in which each of those  other chunks is taken as large as possible. In Definition 5, this unique chunking has been called the complete chunking of S  on the basis of G, represented by chunk series C(G, S).  (2) If, in the condition in Definition 5, C=C(G, S) is taken, then the indices i and j in the condition are fixed, no matter  which of the possible S is taken. For, since the non-mandatory chunks are as large as possible, the indices of the mandatory  chunks only depend on G. So, for given G, these indices lead to only one elementary identity structure H which, in Definition  5, has been called the hierarchical image of G.  EXAMPLE. Let G = { (1 2) = (3 4), (3 4) = (7 8) } be set of identities, characterizing identity of elements in  S=SISZS3S4S5S6S7Sg. G is an identity structure, since the condition in Definition 5 holds for the chunking of S that is  represented by chunk series C=(SIS=)(53s4)(S5)(S6)(S,ss) and elementary identity structure F={ (I)=(2), (2)=(5)}. The  condition is satisfied in only one other way: by the chunking that is represented by chunk series D = (s,  Sz)(S3s4)(s5s6)(s7ss) and elementary identity structure H= { (1) = (2), (2) = (4) }. C consists of more chunks than D, so that  D represents the complete chunking of S on the basis of G, i.e., C(G, S) = D, and H is the hierarchical image of G ;  for, e.g., S = ababpgab C(G, S) = (ab)(ab)(pq)(ab).  172 VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  On the one hand, note that an elementary identity structure, say K, is an identity structure too, since the condition in  Definition 5 is obviously satisfied by K itself and the chunking that yields chunks containing only one element each. On the  other hand, note that, e.g., the set L= {(1 2)=(34), (3)=(7), (4)=(8)} is not an identity structure. Just like G in the  example above, L characterizes all identity of elements in S = ababpgab. However, according to L, the third and fourth symbols  in S are taken as one unit by the first identity but as two units by the second and third identities. These are not possible  simultaneously, which has been the reason to exclude such sets by definition.  It is clear by now that regularity is formalized in terms of identity structures. That is, regularity is considered to be a  property as described by identity structures. First, we account for the fact that a property of a subseries is also a property  of the entire series.  DEFINITION 6. The identity structures {g1, ..., gn } and {h,, ..., h,} are equivalent  if an integer shift Y exists such that, for k = 1, ..., n, if gk = 9(i, j, p) then hk=9i(i+Y, j+Y, p).  EXAMPLE. Identity structure H= { (1 2) = (4 5), (3) = (7) } characterizes all identity of elements in the series cdpcdep. This  series is a subseries of the series abcdpcdepk. With respect to the latter series, the identity of elements in that  subseries can be characterized by the identity structure G = ((3 4) = (6 7), (5) = (9) } which, under a shift Y= 2, is  equivalent to H.  DEFINITION 7. A case of regularity is constituted by an arrangement of identical elements in a series, as described by an  identity structure.  For arbitrary identity structure G, let Z(G) be the set of all identity structures each of which has a hierarchical image that  is equivalent to the hierarchical image of G. Then Z(G) constitutes a kind of regularity, and the identity structures in Z(G)  are said to describe a same kind of regularity.  Since equivalence is a transitive property, the hierarchical image of any member of Z(G) is equivalent to the hierarchical  image of any other member of Z(G). This implies, for any member K of Z(G), that I(K) = L.(G). So, for two arbitrary identity  structures F and G, the sets Z(F) and X(G) are either identical or disjoint, for if K is a member of both sets then 1(K) is  identical to both sets so that both sets are identical. In other words, F and G describe a same kind of regularity if and only  if their hierarchical images are equivalent.  Definition 7 implies, for instance, that an identity structure G and its hierarchical image H describe a same kind of  regularity. For, H clearly is the hierarchical image of itself and clearly is equivalent to itself under a shift Y= 0. So, G  and H have equivalent hierarchical images. Furthermore, obviously, equivalent identity structures describe a same kind of  regularity. But also in other cases, identity structures may describe a same kind of regularity, as illustrated in the next  example.  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 173  EXAMPLE. Identity structure G = { (1 2) = (5 6), (3) = (4) } characterizes all  identity of elements in, e.g., S = acppac, and identity structure K= { (1) = (6), (2 3) = (4 5) } in, e.g., T = apqpqa. The  hierarchical image of both G and K is H = { (1) = (4), (2) = (3) } characterizing all identity of elements in both C(G, S) =  (ac)(p)(p)(ac) and C(K, T) = (a)(pq)(pq)(a). Under a shift Y= 0, H is equivalent to itself. Therefore, G and K describe a same  kind of regularity.  According to Definition 7, any arbitrary set Z(G) constitutes some kind of regularity and contains identity structures that  all consist of the same number of identities. Although this may be counter intuitive, intuition is satisfied in the next  section. First, we show that a systematic search for (all) different kinds of regularity is possible.  DEFINITION 8. An element in a series is called unique if it is not identical to any of the other elements in the series. The  set of all series which do not contain successive unique elements and neither begin nor end with a unique element is called  the set 0. The set of all elementary identity structures which characterize all identity of elements in a member of 0 is  called the set S2.  If E is a member of 0 and member V of 0 is a realization of E, then V is called a visualization of the kind of regularity that  is constituted by Z(E).  EXAMPLE. In the series fgacbpgbak, only the elements a and b are non-unique elements. The series V = apaqa is a member of 0,  in which all identity of elements is characterized by the elementary identity structure E= { (I ) = (3), (3) = (5) } (see  Theorem 1). So, E is a member of Q and, since V is a realization of E (see Definition 4), V is a visualization of the kind of  regularity that is constituted by Z(E) (see Definition 7).  THEOREM 3. Each kind of regularity is described by one and only one member of S2.  Proof. For any kind of regularity, an identity structure G exists describing that kind of regularity. Let S be some series in  which G characterizes all identity of elements. Then, C(G, S) is a chunk series which does not contain successive unique  elements (see proof of Theorem 2). All identity of elements in C(G, S) is characterized by the hierarchical image H of G. If  C(G, S) begins and/or ends with a unique element, then remove this (these) unique element(s). The remaining series is a member  of 0, in which all identity of elements is characterized by the elementary identity structure F which is a member of S2 and  which is equivalent to H. So, F and G describe a same kind of regularity. Like any member of S2, F has itself as a  hierarchical image, and is not equivalent to any other member of 0, so that F is the only member of Sl describing that kind of  regularity.  So, in searching for (all) different kinds of regularity, one need only consider (all) elementary identity structures in the  set d. The members of S2 can be found  174 VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  systematically, as illustrated in Theorem 4 which appears to be essential in the next section.  THEOREM 4. An identity structure consisting of three identities describes one out of 648 different kinds of regularity.  Proof. In order to find all different kinds of regularity, as described by identity structures consisting of three identities,  one need only generate all elementary identity structures { (i,) = (j, ), (i2) = (j2), (is) = (j3) } in the set 0 (see Theorem  3). Now, three cases are to be distinguished:  (1) i2 = j, and i3 =j,; i.e., the identities involve a quartet of identical elements. These elementary identity structures  have realizations in 0 that can be summarized by the realization k-k-k-k in which each "-" represents either a unique element  or no element at all. So, this case yields 23 = 8 different elementary identity structures.  (2) ip and jv (p= 1, 2, 3) such that the identities involve a trio and a pair of identical elements. Since the indices for  either the trio or the pair can be chosen out of 1, ..., 5, one gets (3) _ ( 2) = 10 summarizing realizations as above, namely,  k-k-k-p-p k-k-p-k-p k-k-p-p-k k-p-k-k-p k-p-k-p-k  k-p-p-k-k p-k-k-k-p p-k-k-p-k p-k-p-k-k p-p-k-k-k.  So, this case yields 10 * 24 = 160 different elementary identity structures.  (3) i2 0j,, i3 =Aj,, and i3 0 j2; i.e., the identities involve three pairs of identical elements. The six elements of these  three pairs yield (6!)/((2!)3)=90 series without any unique element. In such a series, a permutation of those three pairs  yields the same elementary identity structure. Hence, one gets 90/(3!) = 15 summarizing realizations as above, namely,  k-k-p-pf-f k-k-p-fp f' k-k-p-ff-p k-p-k-p-ff k-p-k-f-p f  k P-k-f-f-p k-p-f-k-p f k-p-f-k-f-p k-p-f-f-k-p k-p-p-k-f-f  k-p-p-f-k f k-p-p-f-f-k k-p-f=p-k f k-p-f-p-f-k k-p-f-f-p-k.  So, this case yields 15 * 25 = 480 different elementary identity structures.  In total, the three cases yield 648 different elementary identity structures which, according to Theorem 3, implies 648  different kinds of regularity. /  In this section, we have provided a formal basis for dealing with arrangements of identical elements in a series, enabling a  systematic search for (all) different kinds of regularity. In the next two sections, we use this formal basis to specify the  notions of holographic regularity and transparent hierarchy. These notions constitute the two characteristics in terms of  which the concept of accessibility is specified as a psychological basis for the choice of appropriate coding rules.  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 175  HOLOGRAPHIC REGULARITY  The concept of accessibility is meant to provide a psychological basis for the choice of coding rules that are appropriate for  the encoding of visual patterns. As mentioned before, the concept of accessibility simply implies that regularity and  hierarchy in a code of a pattern corresponds directly to regularity and hierarchy in the pattern itself. This correspondence  is specified in detail by the notions of holographic and transparent hierarchy. The notion of transparent hierarchy is dealt  with in the next section. In this section, we elaborate the notion of holographic regularity, on the basis of the  formalization that has been given in the previous section.  In the previous section, we mentioned that the fact that any identity structure describes some kind of regularity and that all  identity structures which describe a certain kind of regularity consist of the same number of identities may contradict  intuition. For intuition seems to prescribe that something is regular if it has a property that, in a simple way can be  generalized into a property with arbitrary extent. For instance, a repetition of something is a repetition no matter how many  times the something is repeated. Such an approach may be sufficient to judge particular cases of regularity but, in order to  specify regularity as such, one must go into more detail, as follows.  First of all, note that repetition stands for a collection of similar cases, each of which is called a repetition. For these  similar cases, the following two aspects hold. First, the repeated something may be arbitrary. Second, the number of times  that the something is repeated may be arbitrary. Now, the formalization in the previous section accounts for the first aspect.  That is, a repetition (specific number of times) of an arbitrary something is an example of a kind of regularity (see  Definition 7). In this section, the second aspect is included. That is, repetition (arbitrary number of times, arbitrary  .something) appears to be an example of a case of holographic regularity.  The specification of holographic regularity is based on a set-subset relation between identity structures, which may be  introduced as follows. Suppose that a certain kind of regularity is described by identity structure H. Furthermore, suppose  that this property (i.e., the kind of regularity as described by H) can be generalized, in some way, into a property with  arbitrary extent. This generalization corresponds, in terms of identity structures, to an extrapolation of H into an identity  structure consisting of an arbitrary number of identities. This implies, independent of the way in which the extrapolation is  performed, that H corresponds to a subset of the identity structure that results from the extrapolation. The set-subset  relation between identity structures is defined as follows.  DEFINITION 9. A substructure of an identity structure G = { g, , ..., g} is a subset  gr> gi+ > > , gr+nt- , i (1 5 i n; 1 5 m < n - i + 1) of G, in which the identities are ordered as in G. Such a substructure  is denoted by G;,.  Substructures are essential in defining holographic kinds of regularity, i.e., kinds  176 VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  of regularity that bear a germ for generalization into cases of holographic regularity. But, first, we prove the following  theorem which shows its importance in a moment.  THEOREM 5. If identity structures F and G describe a same kind of regularity then, for fixed i and m, the substructures F;,  and G;, are identity structures describing a same kind of regularity too.  Proof. Clearly, a substructure is an identity structure describing some kind of regularity. Now, if F and G describe a same  kind of regularity then, according to Definition 7, F and G have equivalent hierarchical images, say K and L, respectively.  Then, Definition 5 implies that K;,,n and F,, have the same hierarchical image and, therefore, describe a same kind of  regularity. Similarly, L;, and G,, describe a same kind of regularity. Since K and L are equivalent, K,,m and L;. are  equivalent and, therefore, describe a same kind of regularity. But, then, F,, and G,, describe a same kind of regularity  too.  DEFINITION 10. An identity structure G describes a holographic kind of regularity if, for each m (1 S m < n), all  substructures G,, (i = 1, ..., n - m + 1) describe a same kind of regularity.  Note that it is the kind of regularity, as described by G, that is holographic. That is, as implied by Theorem 5, the  condition in Definition 10 is satisfied by any identity structure that describes the same kind of regularity as described by G.  Furthermore, note that, for an identity structure G with substructures G,, the substructures of each G,.m are substructures  of G. So, if G satisfies the condition in Definition 10 then each G,, satisfies that condition too, i.e., describes a  holographic kind of regularity too. This recursive aspect is the above mentioned germ for generalization, as we see later on  in this section.  EXAMPLE. On the one hand, identity structure G = { (1) = (2), (2) = (4), (3)=(5)} characterizes all identity of elements in  e.g., S=aabab. G has two substructures consisting of two identities each, namely G,, z = { (1) = (2), (2) = (4) and G,,,, = {  (2) = (4), (3) = (5) }. Each of these substructures has itself as a hierarchical image, while they are not equivalent.  Therefore, these substructures do not describe a same kind of regularity, so that G does not describe a holographic kind of  regularity.  On the other hand, identity structure E _ { (1) _ (7), (2) = (6), (3) = (5) } characterizes all identity of elements in, e.g.,  V = abcpcba. The hierarchical image of substructure E, ,,={(1)=(7), (2)=(6)} is H={(1)=(5), (2)=(4)} which charac terizes all  identity of elements in the chunk series C(E,,2, V)=(a)(b)(cpc)(b)(a). Under a shift Y= 1, H is equivalent to substructure  E2,2 = { (2) = (6), (3) = (5))f. So, E,., and E,,2 describe a same kind of regularity. Separately but similarly, the three  substructures, consisting of one identity each, also describe a same kind of regularity. So, E describes a holographic kind of  regularity.  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 177  Note that, in the example above, E is a member of Sz and V a member of 0, so that V is a visualization of the kind of  regularity that is described by E (see Definition 8). Furthermore, since substructure E,,2 characterizes the identity of the  elements a, respectively b, the kind of regularity that is described by this substructure can, suggestively, be visualized by  member ab-ba of 0, in which "-" represents a unique element. Similarly, the kind of regularity that is described by  substructure E,,Z can, suggestively, be visualized by be-cb. The fact that, in both visualizations, all identity of elements  is characterized by exactly the same member of Sl, shows that both substructures describe a same kind of regularity.  The example above illustrates the test that is mentioned in the proof of Theorem 6, while the explication just given  illustrates the way in which the results of that test are presented in Table 1-A and 1-B. Theorem 6 itself illustrates the  systematic search for (all) different holographic kinds of regularity, and appears to be sufficient in obtaining all cases of  holographic regularity.  THEOREM 6. Among the kinds of regularity, as described by identity structures consisting of three identities each, only 24  kinds of regularity are holographic.  Proof. According to Theorem 3, each kind of regularity is described by one and only one member of S2. As found in Theorem 4,  only 648 members of S2 consist of three identities each. By simply testing by means of Definition 10, one finds that only 24  of the 648 elementary identity structures describe a holographic kind of regularity.  We do not show the rather simple test for each of the 648 elementary identity structures. The exhaustive search, that leads to  the 24 holographic kinds of regularity, can be found in van der Helm (1988). Table 1-B may show that among all arbitrary  arrangements of identical elements, Definition 10 yields a formal selection of arrangements which, intuitively, might be  called regular indeed.  As mentioned before, intuition seems to prescribe that something is regular if it has a property that, in a simple way, can be  generalized into a property with arbitrary extent. This intuitive notion of regularity will now be formalized into the formal  notion of cases of holographic regularity.  DEFINITION 11. Let Stn (n >, 1) be the set of all elementary identity structures in S2 that, each, consist of n identities.  Let the set {En; Ein Qn, n = 1, 2, 3, ... } be such that, for any identity structure G in Z(En) and for any m with 1 < in <  n, substructure G,,,n (1 <, i < n - m + 1) is in E(Em ).  Then, the set iZ(En); n = 1, 2, 3, ...1 constitutes a case of holographic regularity.  EXAMPLE. For an elementary identity structure En in Stn (n fixed), the set Z(E consists of an infinite number of identity  structures (each consisting of n identities), and constitutes one kind of regularity (see Definition 7). As mentioned before,  an  178 VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  example is a repetition (specific number of times) of an arbitrary something, for which (n still fixed)  En={(1)=(2),(2)=(3),(3)=(4),...,(n)=(n+1)}.  A visualization (see Definition 8) of Eis kkk ... kk consisting of n + l elements k. Now, repetition (not only arbitrary  something, but also arbitrary number of times) comprises an infinite number of kinds of regularity and corresponds to  generalizing Eby taking n arbitrary. Then, one gets a set { E.; n=1,2,3,...} as in Definition 11. That is, the kinds of  regularity constituted by 2-'(E (n= 1, 2, 3, ...) are not only holographic (see Definition 10) but also related to one  another in a true "holographic" way, as follows. If the set 11(E.); n = 1, 2, 3, ... I is called YJ and every identity  structure in YJ is called a W-structure, then each substructure of any iP-structure is a W-structure too. So, repetition is  formally given by the set W and indeed, as mentioned before, constitutes a case of holographic regularity.  As mentioned in this example, any case of holographic regularity, say {X(En); n = 1, 2, 3, ... , consists of holographic kinds  of regularity. This implies that E3 must describe one of the 24 holographic kinds of regularity as found in Theorem 6 and  visualized in Table 1-B. Furthermore, Ez must describe the (holographic) kind of regularity that is described by the  substructures (consisting of two identities) of E3. As can be gathered from Table 1-A, those substructures describe one of  sixteen possible kinds of regularity. Analogously, E, must describe the kind of regularity that is described by the  substructures (consisting of one identity) of E,, i.e., one of two kinds of regularity, visualized by kk, respectively k-k.  The number of possible holographic kinds of regularity for n = 1, 2, 3 (2, 16, and 24, respectively) may suggest that the  number of possible holographic kinds of regularity increases dramatically for increasing n, which would result in an infinite  variety of cases of holographic regularity. However, note the following theorem.  THEOREM 7. Table 1-C represents visualizations of all holographic kinds of regularity, while Table 1-C1, C2,..., C20  represents all cases of holographic regularity.  An exhaustive proof of this theorem would take too much space. However, not only all possible holographic kinds of regularity  but also all possible cases of holographic regularity can be found in a rather simple and straightforward way. This is  illustrated in the next example, after which we summarize our findings which can rather easily be verified.  EXAMPLE. In the series kkppff (see Table 1-B5), all identity of elements is characterized by the elementary identity structure  { (1) = (2), (3) = (4), (5) = (6) } which equals the following elementary identity structure under n = 3:  E {(1)=(2), (3)=(4), ..., (2 * n- 1)=(2 * n)}.  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 179  TABLE 1 Holographic Regularity   A B  1 kkk kkk kkkk  2 k-k-k k-k-k k-k-k-k  3 kpkp pkpk kpkpk  4 k-p-k-P P-k-P-k k-p-k-p-k  5 kkpp PPff kkppff  6 k-kp-p P-Pf k-kp-P -f  7 kk-pp PP-jf kk-PP-ff  8 k-k-p-P P-P.f.f k-k-P-P-f.f  9 kp-pk Pf-fp kpf-fpk  10 k-p-pk P-ffp k-P-ffpk  11 kp-p-k pf fp kpf-f-P-k  12 k-p-p-k P-ffp k-P-f-f-P-k  13 k-pk-p P-JP-f k-Pkfp-f  14 k-pk-p P-fp-f k-Pk-fp-f  15 k-p-k-p P-fp-f k-P-kfP-f  16 k-p-k-p p-.fp-f k-P-k-f P-f  17 k-p-kp P-.fpf k-p-fkpf  18 k-p-k-p pfp-f kpf-k-P-f  19 kp-kp Pf-1?f kPf kPf  20 k-p-k-P P-f-P-f k-p-f-k-p-f  21 kp-kp pf-pf kpfk-pf  22 k-P-kp P-fpf k-p-fkpf  23 kp-k-p Pf-P-f kpjk-P-f  24 k p-k-p p-f-p-f k-p-fk-p-f  kkk ... kk  (n+ 1 elements k)  k-k-k----k-k  (n+ 1 elements k)  k,k=..k,k,k,..k,...k,k, -ki (i<r;r>2) k,-k,-. .k -k1-/t_-..k -...kl-k,-.-k, (i~r;r>2) (m subseries k, k, - -kresp. k,-k,- -  -k,; m > 2;  n = (m - 1) * r + i ; for n < r, see case 19, resp. 20)  k, k, k=k, . . . kn k,-k, k,-k,...kn-k k, k,-k,k-:-...knkk,-k, - k2-k, - . . . knkn  k, k, . . . kn - kn .. . k=k, k,-k-= . . . kn - k. . . k, k , k, k, . . . kn - kn . . . k,-k j k,-k,- . . . kn - kn- . . .  k,-k,  k,-kzk,k3k=...knkn-,-kn k,-k,k,-k.,k,-...knkn-I -kn k, - k,-k, k ;-k, . . . k,-k,, , - kn  k, - k2-k I - k3-k, - . . . knk,, -, - k k,-k=-...kn-k,k=...kn k, k= ... kn - k I -k, .. . kn k I k= . . . k- k I k, . . . kk,-k,-...kn- k,-k,-...kn (see case 3)  k,-k_-...knk,k`...kn k, k 2 ... kn k,-k,- . . . kn k,-k,-...k k1-k- - kn  C  Note. Each "-" represents a unique element. Column B shows visualizations of all holographic kinds of regularity described by  identity structures consisting of three identities each. For each of these identity structures, Column A shows visualizations  of the kinds of regularity described by the two substructures consisting of two identities each. The fact that both  substructures describe a same kind of regularity, precisely indicates that the kind of regularity in Column B is holographic.  Column B can be generalized uniquely into Column C which (under n = 1, 2, 3,...) represents visualizations of all holographic  kinds of regularity. C1, C2, ..., C20 represent all cases of holographic regularity.  E(n >,1) describes a kind of regularity visualized by k, k, k,k2 ... k(see Table 1-C5). Now, it is easily verified that,  for each Ewith n > 3, E, is the only member of S2, for which both substructures, consisting of n identities each,  describe the kind of regularity that is constituted by E(E. Thus, by induction, one finds that E3 can be generalized  uniquely into the case of holographic regularity that is constituted by fZ(E; n= 1, 2, 3, ... f.  180 VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  So, if similarly each case in Table 1-B could be generalized in a unique way, then one could obtain not only all holographic  kinds of regularity but also, simultaneously, all cases of holographic regularity. To start with, in the same way as shown in  the example above, one finds unique generalizations for Table 1-131, B2, ..., B16, and for Table 1-1321. Each of these  generalizations yields unambiguously a case of holographic regularity (see Table 1-C). Note that Table 1-133, B4 yield,  respectively, Table 1-C3, C4 under r = 2, while Table 1-1321 yields Table 1-C3 under r=3. In fact, for each r, Table 1-C3, C4  represents a case of holographic regularity, as may be clear in a moment.  First, note that, for a case of holographic regularity I Z(E, ); n = 1, 2, 3, ... }, E(n >, 3) cannot describe one of the  (holographic) kinds of regularity that are visualized in Table 1-C22, C23, C24. For, if Ewould describe one of these kinds  of regularity, then no member of S2, exists such that its substructures, consisting of n identities, describe that kind of  regularity. So, although these kinds of regularity are holographic, they are not included in a case of holographic regularity.  Yet, they can be seen as limit cases of, respectively, Table 1-C17, C18, C20, as may be clear from the following.  For Table 1-1117, B18, B19, B20, the generalization requires some more consideration. These four cases can be generalized into  the cases of holographic regularity in, respectively, Table 1-C17, C18, C19, C20. However, the induction step (see the example  above) from Eto E, (n=3, 4, 5, ...) is not unique, as we see next. Suppose that En describes the kind of regularity that  is visualized by k,-k2- - - - k, - k, k, - - - kn (see Table 1-C 17). Then, precisely two members of Stn + , exist such that  the substructures, consisting of n identities, describe that kind of regularity. These two members describe kinds of  regularity that are visualized by k,-k2- - - - kn+, - k, k2 ... kn+, , respectively k,-k2- - - - kn+, k, k, - - - kn+, . The  first of these kinds of regularity is included in the case of holographic regularity in Table 1-C17, while the alternative is  included in Table 1-C22. As argued above, Table 1-C22 does not represent a case of holographic regularity, so Table 1-1317  still leads uniquely to the case of holographic regularity in Table 1-CIT The same holds for Table 1-C18 which has one  alternative that is included in Table 1-C23 (no case of holographic regularity). Table 1-C19 has one alternative too, but now,  this alternative leads to a case of holographic regularity as given in Table 1-C3. Finally, Table 1-C20 has two alternatives:  the first alternative is included in Table 1-C24 (no case of holographic regularity); the second alternative leads to a case  of holographic regularity as given in Table 1-C4.  The summary of our findings just given may suffice to show that, as stated in Theorem 7, Table 1-C indeed represents  visualizations of all holographic kinds of regularity, while Table 1-C1, C2, ..., C20 represents all cases of holographic  regularity. With this result, we conclude the formalization of regularity. Before we discuss this result in terms of coding  rules, we first, in the next section, discuss the notion of transparent hierarchy which constitutes the second characteristic  in terms of which the concept of accessibility is specified.  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 181  TRANSPARENT HIERARCHY  In the previous sections, we have seen that the formalization of regularity in a series requires the notion of chunking (see  Definition 1). This notion is even more essential in the formalization of hierarchy. As we see in this section, a hierarchical  organization in a series is given by a combination of arbitrary chunkings of subseries in that series. If each of these  chunkings is a complete chunking, on the basis of an identity structure describing regularity in the subseries (see Definition  5), then the hierarchical organization will be called transparent. That is, whereas hierarchy as such is independent of  regularity, the notion of transparent hierarchy implies a relation between regularity and hierarchy.  The formalization of transparent hierarchy is really quite simple but, as we see in the next section, has great impact on the  selection of appropriate coding rules. First, we specify the conditions under which arbitrary chunkings may be combined.  DEFINITION 12. (A) Let chunk series C=c, ... c,,, represent a chunking of subseries Sc. in series S = s, - - - s,,, and let  chunk series D = d, - - - d, represent a chunking of subseries So in S. C and D are hierarchically compatible if one of the  following three cases holds: (1) Sc and So are disjoint; (2) S, is contained entirely in one chunk dk in D; (3) D can be  superimposed on C; i.e., D corresponds to a chunk series E = e, - e, which represents a chunking of a subseries in C such  that, for each k (k=1,..., L), if dk=s;...s;+,,, then ek=c;---c;+p and c; ... c;+r represents a chunking of .s, - - - s;+~,.  (B) A hierarchical organization (or for short, a hierarchy) in a series S is constituted by a set H = { S, C, , C2 , ..., Cp }  (p,>1) in which the C; (i=1,2 ..., p ) are chunk series which represent chunkings of subseries in S and which, if p > 1, are  pairwise hierarchically compatible. The set H is ordered only insofar as S is said to constitute the lowest hierarchical level  in the hierarchy; each of the C; is said to constitute a higher hierarchical level than S, C; is said to constitute a higher  hierarchical level than C;, if C; and C; are hierarchically compatible only since C; can be superimposed on C;.  EXAMPLE. For series S = abcdfpgrst, the three chunk series C, = (ab)(cd ), C, = (pq)(rst), and C3 = (abcdfp)(grs) each  represent a chunking of a subseries in S. According to Definition 12(B), each of the sets {S, C, 11, {S, C211-, and {S, C31  constitutes a hierarchy in which S constitutes the lowest hierarchical level and Ci (respectively i = 1, 2, 3) the higher  hierarchical level. Note that C, and G represent chunkings of disjoint subseries in S, so that they are hierarchically  compatible and IS, C, , C, } constitutes a hierarchy. Clearly, this hierarchy can be denoted by indicating both chunkings in  S, i.e., by (ab)(cd) f(pq)(rst). Furthermore, note that CZ and C3 are not hierarchically compatible. C, and C3, however, are  hierarchically compatible since C, represents a chunking of a subseries that is contained entirely in the first chunk in C3,  so that IS, C1, C3 } constitutes a hierarchy too. Again,  480'35'2-3  182 VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  this hierarchy can be denoted by indicating both chunking in S, i.e., by ((ab) (cd) fp)(grs)t.  The most interesting case is the one in which one chunk series can be superimposed on another chunk series, i.e., the case  which involves successive higher hierarchical levels. For instance for series S = abcdefpgrst, the chunk series C= c, c, c3 c4  c5 = (bc)(d)(efp)(gr)(st), and D = d, d, = (bcdefp)(gr) each represent a chunking of a subseries in S. Now, D can be  superimposed on C since D corresponds, in the sense as given in Definition 12(A), to the chunk series  E=e,e,=(c,czc3)(c4)=((bc)(d)(efp))((gr)), representing a chunking of a subseries in C. So, C and D are hierarchically  compatible and { S, C, D } constitutes a hierarchy which, again, can be denoted by indicating both chunkings in S, i.e., by  a((bc)(d)(efp))((gr))(st). In this hierarchy, S constitutes the lowest hierarchical level, C constitutes a higher hierarchical  level, and D constitutes a still higher hierarchical level.  Note that, as illustrated in the example, the third condition in Definition 12(A) reflects a dualism in the construction of a  hierarchy. First, the successive hierarchical levels can be obtained sequentially, i.e., a next higher level on the basis of  the previous one. Second, different chunkings at the lowest level, obtained in parallel, can be related hierarchically by  superimposing one chunk series on another. As we will see in a moment, this dualism gets a more specific meaning for  transparent hierarchies. First, recall that the complete chunking of a series S, on the basis of an identity structure G, is  unique and represented by the chunk series C(G, S) (see Definition 5 and Theorem 2).  DEFINITION 13. A transparent hierarchy in a series S is constituted by a hierarchical organization { S, C1, CZ, ..., Cj (p,>1)  in which, for i = 1, 2, ..., p, C;=C(G;, S;) with G; an identity structure that characterizes identity of elements in  subseries S; in S.  EXAMPLE. In series S = abyabzaby, some identity of elements is characterized by each of the following two identity structures:  G,={(12)=(45),(45)=(78)}, G,={(123)=(789)}.  The complete chunking of S on the basis of G,, respectively GZ, is represented by  C, = C(G,, S) = (ab)(y)(ab)(z)(ab)(y), C, = C(G2, S) = (aby)(abz)(aby).  Clearly, CZ can be superimposed on C1, so that the set IS, C1, C21 constitutes a transparent hierarchy in S, which can be  denoted by ((ab)(y))((ab)(z))((ab)(y)).  In the chunk series C, in this example, identity structure H = J (I 2) = (5 6) } characterizes identity of elements, such that  C(H, C,) equals the chunk series that results from superimposing Cz on C1. Moreover, H and G2 describe the same kind of  regularity (see Definition 7). This illustrates that, for transparent hierarchies, the  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 183  earlier mentioned dualism also applies to the identity structures that are involved. That is, any identity structure at a  higher hierarchical level corresponds to an identity structure at the lowest hierarchical level, describing a same kind of  regularity. This dualism illustrates the "transparency," with respect to regularity, of the hierarchical levels in a  transparent hierarchy.  In this section, we have formalized hierarchy in a quite simple way, in line with common sense. In the next section, we see  that, together with the notion of holographic regularity as discussed in the previous section, the notion of transparent  hierarchy is decisive in specifying the concept of accessibility as an adequate criterion for the choice of coding rules.  THE CRITERION OF ACCESSIBILITY  In a previous section, we have stated the concept of accessibility as implying that regularity and hierarchy in a code of a  pattern correspond directly to regularity and hierarchy in the pattern itself. In this section, we formulate this concept as a  criterion for the selection of appropriate coding rules by requiring that a coding rule describes not only holographic  regularity but also transparent hierarchy. In order to specify this criterion, one first must know more about the description  of regularity by means of coding rules in a formal sense. Considering the diversity of coding rules in actually proposed  coding models (see Introduction), however, it hardly seems possible to formulate a general definition for coding rules.  Therefore, we elaborate a formalization which may not hold for any coding rule, but suffices to obtain all coding rules that  satisfy the criterion of accessibility.  First, a remark about codes: In the second section, only the ISA-rules were employed. Then, for a series S, a code was said to  be a series in which each element is either a single element of S, or the encoding of a subseries of S into an ISA-form in  which further ISA-forms may be hierarchically nested. This definition of a code holds analogously for any set of coding rules,  but is not very relevant in this section. In this section, we are interested in each coding rule as such. That is, e.g., for  only the ISA-rules, we are interested in the encoding of an entire (sub-)series into one ISA-form. Therefore, in this section,  we consider only codes that result from applying one coding rule to an entire series.  A general characteristic of the application of a coding rule to a series is the reduction of the series into a code. The  impetus for the reduction can be nearly anything. For instance, the Fibonacci sequence (see third section) can be reduced into  a code (a formula), on the basis of mathematical relationship between the values of the elements in the sequence. In this  study, however, we consider only reductions that are based on regularity in terms of identity relationships between elements  in a series (see third section). Now, notwithstanding the diversity of coding rules in actually proposed coding models, the  following definition (based on Definition 5) seems to hold generally for the identity based reductions (cf. Simon, 1972) and,  therefore, is adopted in this section.  184 VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  DEFINITION 14. Let H = { h, , h2, ..., h} be the hierarchical image of identity structure G, and let G characterize identity  of elements in series S such that the complete chunking of S on the basis of G is represented by chunk series C(G, S) =  c,C ... CM.  Then, p(G, S) is the chunk series that remains after removing elements from C(G, S) as follows: if hp = 91(i, j, 1) then  remove c, (p = 1, 2, ..., n).  EXAMPLE. If S = ababab and G = { (12) = (3 4), (3 4) = (5 6) }, then the complete chunking of S on the basis of G is  represented by the chunk series C(G, S) = (ab)(ab)(ab) and the hierarchical image of G is H={(1)=(2), (2)=(3)}. Now, p(G, S)  can be obtained as follows. Due to the identities (1) = (2) and (2) _ (3) in H, the second and the third chunk in C(G, S) must  be removed, so that p(G, S) = (ab).  Note that p(G, S) is not (yet) a code but just the result of the reduction. As we see, a code contains, in some way, p(G, S)  as the only remnant of S. The reduction as such is relevant for several reasons. One reason is given next, then we give the  formalization of codes, after which we discuss further the meaning of the reduction.  Among other reasons, C(G, S) is reduced into p(G, S) for a pragmatic reason, as follows. On the one hand, for each identity in  the hierarchical image H of G, one chunk in C(G, S) is removed, so that the reduction reflects the amount of regularity (in  terms of identity of elements) that is described by G. On the other hand, a code only shows the result of the reduction, not  the identity that is described. So, the reduction is relevant in that the result of the reduction can be used in measuring the  simplicity of a code in terms of regularity (see also first and second section).  In actually proposed coding models, the identity based reductions may generally satisfy Definition 14 but the codes,  containing the result of those reductions, show a wide variety.  EXAMPLE. In the previous example, we saw that for series S = ababab and identity structure G = { (1 2) = (3 4), (3 4) = (5 6)  } holds that p(G, S) = (ab ). By means of the Iteration rule (sec second section), S can be encoded into the code 3 * (ab), on  the basis of the same identity as characterized by G. Note that the code contains p(G, S) as the remnant of S.  As can be verified, p(F T)=(a)(r)(b)(s)(t) for series T=arbsatbrasbt and identity structure F= {(1)=(5), (2)=(8), (3)=(7),  (4)=(10), (5)=(9), (6)=(12), (7) = (11) }. By means of the Distribution rule (see third section), T can be encoded into the  code D[(a)(b), (r)(s)(t)], on the basis of the same identity as characterized by F Note that the code contains, in some way,  the chunks in p(F, T) as the only remnant of T.  The example illustrates that codes not only contain, in various ways, p(G, S) as the only remnant of the series S, but also  contain various further notational components. However, in the second section, we argued that the actual meaning of a code  lies in the classification and organization of a series. That is, the classifica-  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 185  tion as based on the identity that is characterized by the code, and the organization (chunking) as induced by the code. The  further notational components beside p(G, S) in a code have no meaning with respect to the classification and organization  and, therefore, can be disregarded in formulating a standard definition of a code. Nevertheless, one still must deal with the  various ways in which p(G, S) is contained in a code. This point is discussed after the following definition which, here, is  taken as the standard definition of a code.  DEFINITION 15. Let H be the hierarchical image of an identity structure G that characterizes identity of elements in series S.  Then, U(G, S) is the chunk series that remains after removal from C(G, S), of all elements that are involved in the identities  in H. Furthermore, I(G, S) is the chunk series that remains after removing, from p(G, S), all U(G, S)-chunks. Then, S can be  encoded into the code [1(G, S), U(G, S) ]. The code is said to express G, to induce C(G, S), and to describe the kind of  regularity constituted by Z(G).  EXAMPLE. For S = apgabcybc and G = { (l) = (4 ), (56)=(89)1, C(G, S) = (a)(pq)(a)(bc)(y)(bc) and the hierarchical image of G  is H= {(1)=(3), (4)=(6)}, so that p(G, S) = (a)(pq)(bc)(y). Now, U(G, S) is obtained by removing the first, third, fourth, and  sixth elements from C(G, S), yielding U(G, S) = (pq)(y). Furthermore, I(G, S) is obtained by removing the U(G, S)-chunks from  p(G, S), yielding I(G, S) = (a)(bc). So, according to Definition 15, S can be encoded into the code [(a)(bc), (pq)(y)].  Observe that this code corresponds to M[(a)(bc), (pq)(y)] in terms of the M-rule (see third section).  Note that different pairs S and G may lead to the same code. This, however, is not relevant; what matters is the meaning of  the code with respect to the series, i.e., the classification and the organization. Definition 15 prescribes a standard way of  embedding p(G, S) in a code, namely by dividing p(G, S) into the two parts I(G, S) and U(G, S). The reason for this division  is connected with the reasons for reducing C(G, S) into p(G, S), as follows.  We already mentioned a rather pragmatic reason (measuring simplicity) for reducing C(G, S) into p(G, S). But the reduction is  also, and maybe even more, relevant with respect to hierarchy which also is a general characteristic of coding models (cf.  Simon, 1972). As argued in the previous section, C(G, S) constitutes a higher hierarchical level which, as stated in  Definition 15, is considered to be induced by the code [I(G, S), U(G, S)]. Now, given such a code, still higher hierarchical  levels may be reached by encoding I(G, S) and/or U(G, S).  EXAMPLE. For S = ababpbaba, identity structure G=-'(1)=(9), (2)=(8), (3)=(7), (4)=(6)} leads to the code [(a)(b)(a)(b),  (p)]. For I(G, S)= (a)(b)(a)(b), identity structure H=,((12)=(34)1 leads to the code [((a)(b))] which, nested in the first  code, yields [[((a)(b))], (p)]. This nesting corresponds to S[2 * ((a)(b)), (p)] in terms of the ISA-rules (see second  section).  18E) VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  So, the way in which p(G, S) is embedded in a code determines the possibilities to nest codes in order to reach higher  hierarchical levels. The reason to divide p(G, S) into I(G, S) and U(G, S) is to take full account of the kind of regularity  that is described by G. That is, whereas I(G, S) contains precisely those chunks that were involved in the identities in G,  U(G, S) contains precisely the remaining chunks. This way, one could say that the nestings of codes not only lead to  hierarchical relations between chunkings, but also to hierarchical relations between kinds of regularity. This could not be  said if, e.g., C(G, S) would be encoded; then, one would indeed obtain higher hierarchical levels, but this encoding would  hardly take account of G since the same chunk series could represent a complete chunking based on an other identity structure  than G. So, in summary, C(G, S) is reduced into p(G, S) not only for a rather pragmatic reason (measuring simplicity) but also  to take account of G in prescribing how codes may be nested in order to reach higher hierarchical levels. In order to take  full account of G, p(G, S) is divided into I(G, S) and U(G, S).  After the just given formalization and explication of codes as given in actually proposed coding models, the following two  remarks are relevant. First, whereas the reduction of C(G, S) into p(G, S) is a general characteristic of identity based  coding rules, the division of p(G, S) into I(G, S) and U(G, S) is not. For instance, the codes that result from applying the  Distribution rule show the reduction but not the division. This may suggest that the division, although maybe reasonable,  imposes an a priori restriction which should be made more plausible since it probably influences the set of coding rules that  satisfy the criterion of accessibility. However, at the end of this section, it may be clear that the division is not at all  restrictive with respect to that set of coding rules and, within that set, even leads to more plausible nestings of codes (the  Distribution rule would not satisfy the criterion of accessibility anyway, as becomes clear later on). Second, as mentioned  before, C(G, S) constitutes a higher hierarchical level, while still higher levels may be reached by encoding I(G, S) and/or  U(G, S). However, the latter two series generally are not even subseries of C(G, S), so that the question may arise whether  the encoding of one of those two series indeed leads to a hierarchical level on top of C(G, S). This is precisely one of the  aspects that is dealt with by the criterion of accessibility, as we see later on in this section.  Now that we have formalized codes in general, we can focus on the question of which codes are "allowed" by the perceptual  system. That is, the question of which codes describe the kinds of regularity that account for the classifications and  organizations that can be performed by the perceptual system. In each actually proposed coding model, just a few coding rules  are chosen intuitively, in order to specify the "allowed" codes. We do not give a precise definition for all these proposed  coding rules, but a suitable definition can be given on the basis of the following definition, sufficing to obtain all coding  rules that satisfy the criterion of accessibility which formally specifies the codes that, in our view, are allowed.  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 187  DEFINITION 16. Let C be a series without successive unique elements and let H be the elementary identity structure that  characterizes all identity of elements in C. Then, y(H, C) is the set of all pairs (G, S) with S a series in which identity  structure G characterizes identity of elements, such that H is the hierarchical image of G and C(G, S) consists of the same  number of elements as C. Furthermore, the encoding C-> [I(H, C), U(H, C) ] is said to represent the set of encodings  F(H, C) = {S--+ [I(G, S), U(G, S)]; all (G, S) in y(H, C)}.  I'(H, C) is said to describe the kind of regularity constituted by H).  EXAMPLE. For C=apaga and H= {(1)=(3), (3)=(5)}, the set y(H, C) contains, e.g., the pair S = rsbrsktrs and  G=f(12)=(45), (45)=(89)'. The encoding apaga-> [(a), (p)(q))] represents the set I'(H, C) in the sense that any encoding in  I'(H, C) can be obtained by substituting an arbitrary series for each of the different symbols in apaqa -> [(a), (p)(q)]. For  instance, by substituting a = rs, p=h, and q=kt, one gets the encoding of S into the code [(rs), (b)(kt)], expressing G. I'(H,  C) describes the kind of regularity constituted by f(H) which is also described by precisely three other I'-sets: first, I'(H,  D) with D=apagaz, represented by apagaz- [(a), (p)(q)(z)]; second, F(L, T) with T= yapaga and L = { (2) = (4), (4) = (6)  } (note that L is equivalent to H), and represented by yapaga- [(a), (y)(p)(q)]; third, I'(L, U) with U= yapagaz, and  represented by yapagaz -[(a), (y)(p)(q)(z)]_  DEFINITION 17. Let M be an infinite subset of the positive integers. Then, a coding rule is constituted by a collection R=  {I'(H C; Hconsisting of n identities, all n in M}. If, for some F(H C in R, the pair (G, S) is in y(H C, then G  is called an R-structure and the code [I(G, S), U(G, S)] is called an R -form.  EXAMPLE. According to Definition 17, for each integer in an infinite subset of the positive integers, a coding rule contains  only one I'-set, i.e., describes only one kind of regularity. Now, even disregarding the fact that the Distribution rule does  not satisfy Definition 15 concerning the syntax of a code, it neither satisfies Definition 17. For most of the positive  integers, it describes one kind of regularity but, for some positive integers, it describes several kinds of regularity (see  third section). This may be illustrated by the encoding of arbsatbrasbt into the D-form D[(a)(b), (r)(s)(t)], expressing seven  identities which number of identities is expressed too by the encoding of apagarasatauavaw into the D-form D[(a),  (p)(q)(r)(s)(t)(u)(v)(w)].  In the third section, the K-rule was given by the following expression in which the K-forms satisfy Definition 15 (the  character K is just an identification label):  kx,kkx,k...k xmk->K[(k), (xl)(x,)...(ti  This expression represents (see Definition 16), for each m, a I'-set F(H C as in Definition 17, with n = 2 * nI - 1. So,  the K-rule is in fact constituted by the collec-  188 VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  tion of all these F -sets, thus satisfying Definition 17 and describing, for only each odd positive integer, precisely one  kind of regularity. This may be illustrated by the encoding of abaacaada into the K-form K[(a), (b)(c)(d)], expressing five  identities.  Note that in this example, the F-sets that constitute the K-rule show a syntactical coherence; i.e., they all can be  represented together by one expression. This generally holds for any coding rule in actually proposed coding models (see,  e.g., the definitions of the ISA-rules, the M-rule, and the D-rule in the second and third sections). That is, a coding rule  is generally not given by a collection of isolated F-sets, as in Definition 17. Definition 17, however, does not impose such a  syntactical coherence between the F-sets, since that would be misleading in the sense that it suggests, without any reason,  that such a syntactical coherence is all that regularity is about. That is, regularity does not exclude such a syntactical  coherence (see, e.g., Table 1), but it should be seen merely as a consequence of the specification of regularity as such. As  argued in the previous sections, regularity as such shows a coherence, i.e., a "holographic" coherence that is inherent to the  kinds of regularity that constitute a case of holographic regularity (see Definition 11). This "holographic" coherence is, in  the following definition, the basis for specifying the first of two characteristics that a coding rule should possess in order  to satisfy the criterion of accessibility.  DEFINITION 18. Let Y'= IZ(E,); Ein Q,,, n= 1, 2, 3, ... f_ be a case of holographic regularity. Then, a coding rule R=  fF(H Ca); Hin _Y(En),  n = 1, 2, 3, ... ) is called a holographic rule and is said to describe the case of holographic regularity W.  As we have seen before, for a case of holographic regularity Y% the holographic coherence can be stated as follows: if every  identity structure in P is called a VI-structure, then each substructure of any V-structure is a P-structure too. Now, for a  holographic rule R, the R-structures (see Definition 17) show a similar holographic coherence, as follows.  THEOREM 8. For a holographic rule R, each substructure of any R-structure is equivalent to an R-structure.  Proof. Let R be as Definition 18, and let G be an R-structure. That is (see Definition 17), a series S exists such that (G, S)  is in y(H C for some positive integer n. Then, since G and Hdescribe the same kind of regularity, G is in E(En). Now, an  arbitrary substructure G;, of G is in L'(E,n) (see Definition 11). The hierarchical image of any identity structure in  L'(E.) is either H or an elementary identity structure that, under a shift Y= 1, is equivalent to H (see Definitions 5, 6,  and 7). In L'(E.) are all identity structures that are equivalent to G;.. Clearly, at least one of these equivalent identity  structures, say L, has H as hierarchical image, so that a series T exists such that (L, T) is in y(H, C). So, this L is an  R-structure, and is equivalent to G;, as required.  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 189  EXAMPLE. On the one hand, comparing the previous example with Definition 18, yields that the Distribution rule and the K-rule  are not holographic, since these two coding rules do not enable the description of precisely one kind of regularity for each  positive integer.  On the other hand, consider Table l -C6 in which a case of holographic regularity is represented by the series C= k,-k,  k,-k, - - - k,-k,,, in which each "-" represents a unique element, and in which all identity of elements is characterized by  the elementary identity structure H,,=11(1)=(3), (4) = (6 ), ..., (3 * n - 2) _ (3 * n) }. Now, the sets of encodings I'(H  C (n= 1, 2, 3, ...) are I'-sets as prescribed in Definition 18 to constitute, together, a holographic rule. Representing the  I'-sets as prescribed in Definition 16, they show a syntactical coherence, so that the holographic rule can be given by one  expression, as follows:  k, x, k, k2x,k2... k-' C(kl)(k,) ... (k, (Xl)(X2) ... (xn)]  Observe that this is in fact precisely the M-rule as given in the third section (see Fig. 7). The M-rule is not the only  holographic rule that describes the case of holographic regularity in Table 1-C6. As illustrated in the example between  Definitions 16 and 17, each kind of regularity can be described by means of precisely four different I'-sets. For fixed n,  beside I'(H C, the other three I'-sets can be obtained by, in simple words, adding a unique element at the beginning  and/or at the end of C Since this addition does not have to be the same for every n, an infinite number of variations on the  M-rule are possible, all constituting a holographic rule. Performing the same addition for every n, however, yields three  holographic rules, each consisting of syntactically coherent T'-sets, and represented by  x0 k, x,k,k,x,k,...k,,xt,k-[(kl)(k2)...(k,(x0)(xI)(x2)...(xn)]  k, x, k, k, x,k,...kr1 - L(kl)(k,)...(k, (x,)(x,)...(x(x1)]  x0 k, x, k, k,x,k, . .. kx 1 --- C(kl)(k2) ... (kn), (X0)(xl)(x2) ... (x (x 1 )]  kxk pyp tzt -~ M((k)(p)(t),(x)(y)(z)1 t(1)=(3),(4)=(6).(7)=(9))  ((1)=(3),(4)=(6)) ((4)=(6,(7)=(9)) MI(k)(p),(x)(y)l tzt kxk MI(p)(t),(y)(z)l  F- I 1 --1  ((])=(3)) ((4)=(6)) ((7)=(9))  M[(k),(x)) pyp tzt krk MI (p),W] tzt kxk pyp Ml(4,(z)l  FIG. 7. The holographic M-rule. The series S=kxkpypt--t can be encoded into the M-form at the top, expressing the M-structure  consisting of three identities. For each substructure of the M-structure, one of the other M-forms expresses (in a subseries  of S) an M-structure that is equivalent to that substructure. Precisely this indicates that the M-rule is a holographic rule.  190  VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  TABLE 2 Holographic Rules  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16  kkk...kk kxtkX2...kx  k1-krk1..k ...k,..ki k,x,'..k,x'k,x2..krx2...k,xm+  kIk1k,k,---knkn k,x,k,k2x2k2...knxnkn ktk,z,k2k2z2...kn-,kn-,zn-,knkn k,xlk,z,...kn-lxn-1kn-tin-Iknxnkn  k, k2 ... kn p kn ...k,k ,  k,x, k,x2...kn- ix, -, kn p kn kn-, ... k, k k, k2..4n pknzn_,kn-, ... z,k2 z,k1 k,x,...kn-Ixn-,kpkn-,kn-1 ...ztk1  k, x, k2k, k3k, ... knkn-, x2 kn  k, x, k,k, x2 k3k2 x; ...knkn-, xkn  k1 x, k2z1k, k3z2k2...knzn-,kn-1 x2 kn k1 x1 k,z1k1 x-.knzn-1kn-1 xnkn  - [(k1)...(kr)7  .k1-1xi~-+,tk, -L(ki)...(kr),(xi)...(.zn' 11)1  -~ L(k)7  -~ [(k), (x,) ..(xn)]  -_~ [(k1)...(kn)7  -' L(kt) ...(kn),(-XI)...(xn)] -L(k1)...(kn), (z1)...(zn-1)7 -' L(ki)...(kn), (x1)(z1)-..(xn_,)lzn-1)l-zn)7  E(k1)...(kn), (p)] L(kt)...(kn),(XI)...(xn-1)(p)l E(kl)...(kn),(p)(zn_-,)...(s,)7 L(k1)...(kn), (x1)- (xn_ 1)(p)(z,, )- .(:,)]  [(k1)...(kn),(x1)(x,)7 E(k1)...(kn),(xi)...(xn)7 [(k,)...(kn), (-z1)(z1)(=2) ...(zn-1)(x2)] E(k,)...(kn),  (.z1)(z1)(-z2)...(zn-1)(xn)1  17 18 19 20  k,x, k,x-.kn_,xn-1 kn pk1 k-..kn k, k-.knp k,z1 k2=2 ...kn-1-n-I kn k,k,...knp k1k2 ..kn k,x,...kn-1xn_1knp k,z,-kn_1zn_tkn  L(k,)...(kn),(x1)...(xn-1)(p)l E(k1)...(kn), (p)(z,)...(zn-,)7 L(k1) ... (kn), (p)7 [(k1)...(kn),(x,) (xn-1)(p)(z1)--(zn-1)7  Note. The holographic rules in this table result most directly from the cases of holographic regularity which all are given in  Table 1-C1, C2, ..., C20. For convenience, Table 2-3, -4 are each considered as one holographic rule describing, for each r  (r=2, 3, ...), a case of holographic regularity (see Table 1-C3, C4). In simple words, by adding a unique element at the  beginning and,/or at the end of the series at the lefthand side, and adjusting accordingly the code at the right-hand side,  three further holographic rules can be obtained for each of the 20 cases above. The resulting 80 holographic rules precisely  enable all encodings by which, together, all cases of holographic regularity can be described.  Note that, together with the M-rule, the three holographic rules at the end of this example enable all encodings that can be  performed by the infinite set of holographic rules describing the case of holographic regularity in Table 1-C6. Therefore, no  restriction is implied by employing just these four holographic rules. Thus, one still gets coding rules consisting of  syntactically coherent I'-sets, but merely as a convenient consequence of the holographic coherence of the kinds of regularity  that are described.  In Table 1-Cl, C2, ..., C20, all cases of holographic regularity are represented. For each case of holographic regularity, the  syntactically coherent holographic rule which, just like the M-rule in the example above, results most directly from that case  of holographic regularity, is given in Table 2. Obviously, in the same way as in the example above, four syntactically  coherent holographic rules can be obtained for each case of holographic regularity, enabling all encodings that can be  performed by the infinite set of holographic rules describing that case of  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 191  aaaa --> 4- (a) ((1)=(2),(2)=(3),(3)=(4))  ((1)=(2),(2)=(3)) ((2)=(3),(3)=(4)) 3- (a) a a 3- (a)  ((1)=(2)) t(2)=(3)I ((3)=(4)I  2- (a) a a a 2-(a) a a a 2-(u)  FIG. 8. The holographic Iteration rule. The series S=aaaa can be encoded into the I-form at the top, expressing the  I-structure consisting of three identities. For each substructure of this I-structure, one of the other 1-forms expresses (in  a subseries of S) an I-structure that is equivalent to that substructure. This precisely indicates that the Iteration rule is  holographic.  holographic regularity. Observe that, for instance, Table 2-1 represents the Iteration rule, and Table 2-9 the Symmetry rule,  while the two Alternation rules are obtained from Table 2-2 by adding a unique element at the beginning, respectively at the  end, of the series (see Figs. 8, 9, and 10, in which the notation, as given in the second section, is employed). Analogue to  Table 1-C3, C4, Table 2-3, -4 represent a holographic rule for each r (r = 2, 3, ... ). Note that Table 2-3, considered as one  holographic rule (describing many cases of holographic regularity), constitutes the so-called Continuation rule as employed in  Leeuwenberg (1971). Considering, similarly, Table 2-4 as one holographic rule, the correctness of the following theorem is  clear by now.  THEOREM 9. Only 80 holographic rules suffice to enable precisely all encodings by which, together, all cases of holographic  regularity can be described.  As mentioned before, describing holographic regularity is one of two properties a coding rule should possess in order to  satisfy the criterion of accessibility. The other property is based on the notion of transparent hierarchy (see previous  section), as follows. First, recall from Definition 1 that a chunking, say chunking X, is an operation of which the  application to some series is represented by a chunk  a b c p c b a -4 St(a)(b)(e),(p)1 ((1)=(7),(2)=(6).(3)=(5))  ((1)=(7).(2)=(6)) ((2)=(6),(3)=(5)) S((a)(b),(cpc)) u Sl(b)(c),(p)1 a  ((1)=(7)) I(2)=(6)) t(3)=(5))  SI(a),(bcpcb)1 a SI(b),(cpc)I a ab SI(c),(p)1 ba  FIG. 9. The holographic Symmetry rule. The series S = abcpcba can be encoded into the S-form at the top, expressing the  S-structure consisting of three identities. For each substructure of this S-structure, one of the other S-forms expresses (in  a subseries of S) an S-structure that is equivalent to that substructure. This precisely indicates that the Symmetry rule is  holographic.  192  VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  abacadae  <(a)>l<(b)(c)(d)(e)> ((1)=(3),(3)=(5),(5)=(7))  <(a)>I<(b)(c)(d)> ae ab <(a)>I<(c)(d)(e)>  ((t)=(3)) ((3)=(5)) ((5)=(7)) <(a)>I<(b)(c)> ad ae ab <(a)>l<(c)(d)> ae ab ac <(a)>l<(d)(e)>  Ftc. 10. The holographic Alternation rule. The series S=abacadae can be encoded into the A-form at the top, expressing the  A-structure consisting of three identities. For each substructure of this A-structure, one of the other A-forms expresses (in  a subseries of S) an A-structure that is equivalent to that substructure. This precisely indicates that the Alternation rule  is holographic.  series. That is, the same chunking X can be applied to different series consisting of the same number of elements, yielding  chunk series which all consist of the same number of chunks. Second, recall from Definition 16 that a I'-set T(H, C) is  represented by the encoding of C into the code [I(H, C), U(H, C)], in the sense that any encoding in F(H, C) can be obtained  by substituting arbitrary series for each of the different symbols in the representative encoding. That is, for each pair (G,  S) in y(H, C), the chunk series C(G, S), I(G, S), and U(G, S), consist of the same number of elements and contain at least the  same identity of elements as C, I(H, C), and U(H, C), respectively.  DEFINITION 19. Let F(H, C) = {S-* [I(G, S), U(G, S)]; all (G, S) in y(H, C)} be a T-set in some coding rule R, let 11, be the  set II(G, S); all (G, S) in y (H, C) }, and let U; be the set f U(G, S); all (G, S) in y(H, C);. Furthermore, let I(H C) and  U(H, C) consist of, respectively, m and n elements, while C= ct ... CA,.  Then, I., (and analogously Uv) is transparent in each of the next three cases: (1) m= 1; (2) m=2, and a triple (X, i, j)  exists consisting of a chunking X and integers i and j such that, for any (G, S) in y(H, C), the application of X to subseries  u; ... ut+; in C(G, S) = u, - - - u,,, is represented by a chunk series consisting of m elements and containing exactly the  same identity of elements as I(G, S); then, X is a transparency chunking for L,; 3) m > 3, and one and only one triple (Z, i,  j), as above, exists.  I'(H, C) is transparent if both I,, and U,, are transparent under, if both m >, 2 and n > 2, triples (X,, i, j), respectively  (Xu, p, q), which are such that X, and X,,, applied to subseries c; ... c;+;, respectively cp*''c,,+y, in C, are represented  by chunk series that are hierarchically compatible but not such that one can be superimposed on the other. Coding rule R is a  transparent rule if all h-sets in R are transparent.  If, as in Definition 19, m >, 3 and X is the unique transparency chunking for I., then, for any pair (G, S), I(G, S) contains  exactly the same identity of elements as the chunk series that represents the application of X to the unique subseries in C(G,  S). That is, any kind of regularity in I(G, S) corresponds unambiguously to  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 193  the same kind of regularity in C(G, S) and, therefore, also to the same kind of regularity in S. The same holds for U(G, S),  if n > 3 and U,, is transparent. Thus, in an almost visual sense, the R-form [I(G, S), U(G, S)] is transparent, i.e.,  "through" the R-form, regularity in S can be "seen." Note that this holds, despite the reduction of C(G, S) into p(G, S) and  despite the division of p(G, S) into I(G, S) and U(G, S).  If, as in Definition 19, in = 1 then I(G, S) cannot contain identical elements, and I,, is considered to be transparent by  default. The fact that, if m = 2, the triple (x, i, j) does not have to be unique, reflects a similar ambiguity as the fact  that, in Table 1, an identity structure consisting of two identities cannot be generalized uniquely, whereas one consisting of  three identities can. Both ambiguities are very analoguous to the fact that in geometry on two points many circles can be  drawn but on three points, only one circle can be drawn.  If, as in Definition 19, Iis transparent and in > 2 then, clearly, any code in 1(G, S) corresponds, via the transparency  chunking, to a code in C(G, S) and also to a code in S, describing not only the same kind of regularity but also inducing a  chunk series that can be superimposed on C(G, S) (see Definitions 12 and 15). Thus, Definition 19 defines coding rules that  describe transparent hierarchies. The requirement, in Definition 19, of the hierarchically compatible but not superimponable  chunk series, is not very relevant in this study but assures, in the general case, that the transparency of the hierarchy is  preserved when series at still higher hierarchical levels in a code are encoded.  EXAMPLE. An arbitrary I'-set in the non-holographic K-rule, say I'(H, C), is represented by the encoding of C = ax, a axe a -  - - axa (n > 1) into the K-form K[(a), (x,)(x,) ... (x]. That is, for any pair (G, S) in y(H, C), the chunk series C(G, S)  consists, just like C, of 3 * n elements and contains at least the same identity of elements. Similarly, U(G, S) consists,  just like U(H C) = (x,)(x,) ... (x,,) in the K-form above, of n elements and may contain some identity of elements. So,  instead of considering C(G, S) and U(G, S) for each pair (G, S) in y(H, C), in order to test the transparency of the set Uy,  (see Definition 19), one could consider C and U(H, C) and assume an arbitrary additional identity of elements in C and U(H,  C). Now, for n > 2, consider the chunking X which, applied to C, is represented by the chunk series T=(ax,a)(ax,a)...(ax).  Note that if one assumes that (xi)=(x;) in U(H, C), then (ax;a)=(ax;a) in T. So, any assumed identity of elements in U(H, C)  corresponds to exactly the same identity of elements in T That is, for any pair (G, S) in y(H, C), the application of x to  C(G, S) is represented by a chunk series which contains exactly the same identity of elements as U(G, S). It is easily  verified that X is the only chunking for which this holds. So U., is transparent under the unique triple (X, 1, 3 * n). The  set 1Y, is transparent by default since, for any pair (G, S) in y(H, C), I(G, S) consists of just one chunk. This holds for  all I'-sets in the K-rule, so that the K-rule is a transparent rule. This may be illustrated by the encoding of S=ataakaataaka  into the K-form K[(a), (t)(k)(t)(k)]. The second argument of this K-form can be encoded into the I-form 2 * ((t)(k)) which  clearly  194  VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  LEVEL. t: a i a a k a a r a a k a  K[(a), (r)(k)(r)(k)l  LEVEL 2: (a)(r)(a) (a)(k)(a) (a)(r)(a) (a)(k)(a)  K[ (a), 2- (W(k)) 1  LEVELS: ((a)(r)(a) (a)(k)(a)) ((a)(r)(a) (a)(k)(a))  Ftc. 11. The transparent non-holographic K-rule. The 1-form 2 * ((t)(k)) in the second argument of the K-form corresponds  unambiguously to the !-form 2 * (ata aka) in the level 1 series, inducing a chunk series that can be superimposed on the level  2 chunk series induced by the K-form, yielding a transparent hierarchy in the level 1 series.  corresponds to the I-form 2 *(ata aka) in S, inducing a chunk series that can be superimposed on the chunk series induced by  the K-form (see Fig. 11).  In order to show that the non-holographic Distribution rule is not transparent, consider the encoding of S=apbpagbpapbq into  the D-form D[(a)(b), (p)(p)(q) ]. In the second argument (p)(p)(q) of this D-form, the identity structure {(1) = (2) }  describes a kind of regularity (two successive identical subseries) that does not occur in S. This simple observation suffices  to establish that the Distribution rule is not a transparent rule.  It hardly seems possible to find all transparent rules but, as indicated before, a coding rule should not only be transparent  to satisfy the criterion of accessibility. Next, we give this criterion and discuss its formal implications while, in the next  section, we discuss its conceptual implications.  The Criterion of Accessibility. A coding rule should be both holographic and transparent in order to be appropriate for the  encoding of a symbol series that represents a visual pattern.  THEOREM 10. Of the 80 holographic rules that are represented in Table 2, only the 9 coding rules that are represented in Table  3 are transparent.  We do not prove this theorem exhaustively since that would take too much space, but we illustrate it sufficiently by, first,  showing three cases of nontransparency and, then, discussing the nine transparent holographic rules in Table 3.  First, as we saw before, Table 2-6 represents the holographic M-rule, by means of which, for instance, series S = arabsbaxabzb  can be encoded into the M-form M[(a)(b)(a)(b), (r)(s)(x)(z)]. The first argument of this M-form can be encoded into the I-form  2 * ((a)(b)), describing a kind of regularity (two successive identical subseries) which does not occur in S. Therefore, the  M-rule is not transparent.  Second, in Table 2-19, a holographic rule is represented by the encoding of C = k, k, - - - kp k, k2 ... kinto the code  [(k,) ... (ka), (p) ]. Now, the chunk series (k,) ... (k represents a chunking of a subseries in C and, since it equals the  first argument in the code, contains the same identity of elements as that first argument if any identity of elements is  assumed in that first argument (see the K-rule example  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 195  TABLE 3 Transparent Holographic Rules  1 kkk...kk - [(k)]  2 k,k,...kk..k,k, -. [(ki)-..(kn),(P)]  3 kx,kx2...kxi - [(k),(x,)...(x1)]  4 x,kx.k...x,_,k -+ [(k),(x,).._  5 xkkk...kk  6 kkk...kkz -[(k),(:)]  7 k,k,k,k2...k- [(ki) ..(k]  8 xk,k,k,k,...k-, [(k,)...(k, (x)]  9 k,k,k,k2...k -[(ki)...(k,(=)]  Note. The formal analysis of regularity and hierarchy in symbol series results into these nine transparent holographic rules  as the only coding rules that are appropriate according to the criterion of accessibility. Employing only coding rules 1, 2,  3, 4 implies no restriction since, first, the classifications and organizations obtained by means of coding rules 7, 8, 9 form  a proper subset of those obtained by means of coding rules 1, 5, 6 and, second (if the quantification of simplicity, as given  in the Discussion, is accepted), simplest codes never yield classifications or organizations that can be obtained only by  means of coding rules 5, 6. In fact, the first four coding rules are precisely the Iteration rule, the Symmetry rule, and the  two Alternation rules, as employed in Leeuwenberg's structural information model.  above). So chunking is indeed a transparency chunking. However, for n > 3, the transparency is not unambiguous, as required in  Definition 19, since C contains two subseries k, kz - - - kto which the transparency chunking can be applied. Therefore,  this holographic rule is not transparent.  Third, the holographic rule in Table 2-2 is not transparent due to an ambiguity which may be illustrated by the encoding of C  = axayaza into the code [(a), (x)(y)(7)]. Any assumed identity of elements in the second argument of this code corresponds to  the same identity of elements in both (ax)(ay)(az) and (xa)(ya)(za) which each represent a chunking of a subseries in C. For  instance, after the encoding of S=axaxaxa into [(a), (x)(x)(x)], the second argument of this code can be encoded into the  I-form 3 * ((x)) which might correspond, in S, to the 1-form 3 * (ax) but also to the I-form 3 * (xa).  In the same way as shown for the three cases above, 71 of the 80 holographic rules can be shown to be non-transparent. The  remaining nine transparent holographic rules are given in Table 3, and are discussed next.  In Table 3-l, the Iteration rule is represented by the encoding of C=kkk ... kk into a code which, as in the second section,  may be denoted by n * (k). The Iteration rule is transparent by default, since the argument of an I-form always consists of  just one element (see Definition 19). For the same reason, the coding rules in Table 3-5, -6 are transparent.  196  VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  S[(ab)(c)(ab)(c),(p)I S[ 2((ab)(c)) ,(p)1  U:VELI: ab c ab c p c ab c ab  LLVEL 2. (a b) (c) (a b) (c) (p) (c) (a b) (c) (a b)  LFVIil.3: ((,b) (c)) ((a b) (c)) (p) (c) (a b) (c) (a b)  FIG. 12. The transparent holographic Symmetry rule. The I-form 2 * ((ab)(c)) in the first argument of the S-form corresponds  unambiguously to the I-form 2 * (abc) in the level 1 series, inducing a chunk series that can be superimposed on the level 2  chunk series induced by the S-form, yielding a transparent hierarchy in the level 1 series.  In Table 3-2, the Symmetry rule is represented by the encoding of C =  k, k2 ... kp k- k2 k, into a code which, as in the second section, may be denoted by S[(k I) ... (kJ, (p)]. The second  argument of an S-form always consists of just one element while, for the first argument, transparency clearly holds under a  chunking of the first n elements in C, i.e., the chunking that is represented by (k,)(k,) ... (k) (see Fig. 12). For n > 3,  this transparency is unambiguous.  In Table 3-3, -4, the two Alternation rules are represented. The first one is given by the encoding of C=kx, kx2 ...kx, into  a code which, as in the second section, may be denoted by <(k))/<(xI)...(x,)>. The first argument of such an A-form always  consists of just one element while, for the second argument, the transparency chunking clearly is represented by the chunk  series (kx,)(kx2) ... (kx,) (see Fig. 13). The second Alternation rule is given by the encoding of C = x, k x2 k ... x+ ,  k into a code which, as in the second section, may be denoted by <(x,) ... (x,,,,)>/<(k)). Clearly, the transparency chunking  for the first argument is represented by the chunk series (x,k)(x,k)...(xIk).  Finally, Table 3-7 represents a transparent rule, which is called the T-rule, and which is represented by the encoding of  C=k,k, k,k2---kinto a code which may be denote by T[(k)) ... (k]. Any T-form contains just one argument for which,  clearly, the transparency chunking is represented by (k,k,)(k2k2) ... (k, which is unambiguous for n > 3. Similarly, the  coding rules in Table 3-8, -9 are transparent.  Taking a closer look at the nine transparent holographic rules in Table 3, one may observe that, by means of the coding rules  in Table 3-1, -5, -6, not only exactly the same identity of elements can be expressed by means of the coding rules in  t.[:vt3, l: k x k v k x  <(k)>I<(x)()')(x)>  LEVEL 2: (k) (x) (k) (v) (k) (x)  <(k)>I< S[((x)),((y))1 >  VD- 3: ((k) (x)) ((k) (y)) ((k) (x))  FIG. 13. One of the transparent holographic Alternation rules. The S-form S[((x)), ((y))] in the second argument of the A-form  corresponds unambiguously to the S-form S[(kx), (ky)] in the level 1 series, inducing a chunk series that can be superimposed  on the level 2 chunk series induced by the A-form, yielding a transparent hierarchy in the level 1 series.  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 197  LEVEL 1: p p d d p p :LEVEL I  T[(p)(d)(pl I I 2p) 2d) 2-(p LEVEL2: (p) (p) (d) (d) (p (p) :LEVE1.2  T[ S[((p)),((d))11 I I S[(2-(p)), (2-(d))1  LEVEL 3: ((p) (p)) ((d) (d)) ((p (p) :LEVEL 3  FIG. 14. The T-rule is more than covered by the Iteration rule which is able to express the same identity of elements inducing  the same chunk series. That is, the two nestings of codes may be different but the same classification and organization of the  level 1 series result.  Table 3-7, -8, -9 (inducing exactly the same chunk series), but also other identity of elements. This may be illustrated by  the T-rule and the Iteration rule: any T-form T[(kl)(k,) ... (kn)] can be replaced by 2 * (kt) 2 * (k,) ... 2 * (k (see Fig.  14). So, the coding rules in Table 3-7, -8, -9 are in fact superfluous, and no restriction would be implied by employing only  the remaining six transparent holographic rules. Furthermore, note that the coding rules in Table 3-5, -6 express exactly the  same identity of elements as the Iteration rule and induce chunk series that may be slightly different from those induced by  the Iteration rule. Now, in the next section, we propose a new quantification of simplicity, based on the concept of  accessibility. Given the new quantification, it is easily verified that those slightly different chunk series are never  induced by a simplest code. So, if that new quantification of simplicity is accepted, then the coding rules in Table 3-5, -6  can be ignored without implying a restriction, so that, according to the criterion of accessibility, a set of coding rules for  the encoding of symbol series into simplest codes only must consist of the coding rules in Table 3-1, -2, -3, -4. As we have  seen, these four coding rules are precisely the ISA-rules as employed in Leeuwenberg's structural information model (see  second section).  In this section, we have concluded the formal investigation into regularity and hierarchy in pattern codes, resulting in only  nine coding rules that, according to the concept of accessibility, are appropriate for the encoding of a symbol series that  represents a visual pattern. In the next section, we discuss several further implications.  DISCUSSION  In this study, we have seen that the notions of holographic regularity and transparent hierarchy enable an adequate  differentiation between coding rules. This differentiation leads to nine transparent holographic rules as the only coding  rules that, according to the criterion of accessibility, are appropriate for the encoding of a symbol series that represents a  visual pattern. That is, only these nine coding rules provide codes yielding classifications and organizations as, in our  view, can be performed by the perceptual system. In this section, we discuss several further implications. One may easily  verify that these implications hold for all transparent  480/35/--4  198 VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  holographic rules but, for reasons mentioned at the end of the previous section, we use only the ISA-rules to illustrate these  implications.  First, we go into more detail on the conceptual aspects of the notions of holographic regularity and transparent hierarchy.  Then, we consider the implications with respect to the encoding process which seems to involve a combinatorially explosive  search for simplest codes, which would render the minimum principle unrealistic. Finally, we propose an improved  quantification of simplicity that does not depend on artifacts of the encoding model.  The first implication of the concept of accessibility may be introduced as follows. In this study, the concept of  accessibility has been stated as implying that regularity and hierarchy in a code of a pattern should correspond directly to  regularity and hierarchy in the pattern itself. As we have seen, this concept has been specified by the notions of holographic  regularity and transparent hierarchy, which are now discussed successively.  The formal notion of holographic regularity primarily has been developed to establish what regularity (in terms of identity of  elements in a series) actually is. Intuitively, regularity corresponds to a property which can be generalized, or  extrapolated, into a property with arbitrary extent. For instance, a repetition of something is a repetition no matter whether  the number of times that the something is repeated is large or small. In this study, we have formalized this intuitive notion  by defining a case of holographic regularity as a collection of identity structures for which any substructure belongs to that  collection too, that is, in exactly the same way as any actual repetition belongs to the collection of all repetitions.  Whereas, cognitively, regularity can be thought to be present in almost any configuration (e.g., the Fibonacci sequence), the  inherent coherence of a case of holographic regularity reflects, in our view, an essential characteristic of the basic  regularities that are relevant in visual perception. This is supported by the fact, as argued in the third section, that  iterations, symmetries, and alternations (as described by the holographic ISA-rules), are generally considered to be  indisputably relevant in visual perception. Here, visual perception is considered as a primary module in the cognitive system,  not involving a matching of stored templates nor influenced by knowledge (although the output of the module may, of course,  undergo changes after having been "embedded" in stored knowledge structures). This primary module starts from a "raw"  registration of a pattern, here represented by a symbol series which contains information about the arrangement and identity  of basic pattern parts (such as line segments and angles). The output of this module is constituted by an interpretation of  the pattern, here represented by a classification and an organization of the symbol series. The module itself is concerned  with the extraction of pattern information as contained in the symbol series, and is here represented by an encoding model  using coding rules to describe regularity in the series and employing the minimum principle by stating that the simplest code  of the series reflects the output of the module. Now, if only holographic rules are to be used in extracting pattern  information from the symbol series, then the extraction is very easy; i.e., the pattern information to be extracted  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 199  is very accessible. For instance, for the holographic ISA-rules, ISA-forms can be constructed in a simple stepwise fashion,  starting with any single identity and each step adding just one identity. This may be illustrated as follows (see also Figs.  8, 9, 10):  aaaa->2*(a)aa->3*(a)a--+ 4*(a)  abcpcba -~ S[(a), (bcpcb) ] -S[(a)(b), (cpc) ] -+ S[(a)(b)(c), (p) ]  abacadae --+ <(a)>/<(b)(c)>adae-> <(a))/<(b)(c)(d)> ae, <(a)>/<(b)(c)(d)(e)>.  So, e.g., for the I-forms, the construction proceeds from one I-form towards another 1-form, each step enlarging the expressed  identity structure by one identity. Clearly, this is possible due to the holographic property that any iteration belongs to  the collection of all iterations. Thus, complex combinations of identities do not have to be matched, since the construction  involves "atomic" steps of one identity at a time.  Maybe even more than the notion of holographic regularity, the notion of transparent hierarchy provides for the accessibility  of pattern information as contained in a symbol series. As we have seen in the previous section, the transparency of coding  rules implies that regularity at a higher hierarchical level in a code of the series corresponds unambiguously to the same  kind of regularity in the series itself. Since the classification and the organization of the series is based on the described  regularity, the transparency implies that higher cognitive levels deal with (or, have access to) pattern information. That is,  the information that is considered to be passed on to higher cognitive levels is not, as an artifact of the employed model,  just based on regularity at a higher hierarchical level in a code, but on regularity in the pattern. Furthermore, we have seen  that using transparent rules implies that the encoding yields unambiguously a transparent hierarchical organization in the  symbol series (see also Figs. 12, 13, 14). Now, in the section on transparent hierarchy, we argued that a dualism exists with  respect to the construction of a transparent hierarchy. In terms of the ISA-forms, this dualism implies that a hierarchical  nesting of ISA-forms can be established either in a sequential or in a largely parallel way, which now are discussed  successively. First, consider the following two encodings of the same symbol series:  apakak -+ap2 * (ak)  a p a k a k- ((a)>/<(p)(k)(k)) - <(a))/<(p) 2 * ((k)) >.  The second encoding yields a hierarchical nesting of an A-form and an I-from, which is obtained sequentially by, first,  encoding apakak into the A-form and, second, encoding a subseries of the A-argument (p)(k)(k) into the I-form 2 * ((k)). Now  note that, according to the notion of transparency, the latter 1-form is perceptually the same as the I-form 2 * (ak) as given  in the first encoding. So, on the one hand, the hierarchical sequential encoding automatically yields hierarchically  compatible ISA-forms. On the other hand, however, it may also lead to a multiple  200 VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  search for the same ISA-forms. For, in order to satisfy a criterion like the minimum principle, all possible encodings of a  symbol series must be taken into account so that, considering both encodings above, the I-form in fact must be generated  twice: once directly in the symbol series, and once in the A-argument.  Besides the hierarchical sequential encoding method to get hierarchically compatible ISA-forms, a largely parallel way is also  possible, without a multiple search for the same ISA-forms. First, all single ISA-forms that are possible in the symbol series  can be searched for in parallel by investigating, for each subseries, whether that entire subseries can be encoded into one  ISA-form (using the holographic property as discussed earlier in this section). Then, in parallel too, each pair of ISA-forms  can be tested on hierarchical compatibility, without searching anew for ISA-forms at higher hierarchical levels in a code.  This test can be performed on the basis of the transparency chunkings (see Definition 19 and following). This may be  illustrated by the A-form and the I-form in the symbol series apakak, as given above. For the A-argument in the A-form  <(a)>/<p)(k)(k)), the transparency chunking (applied to the symbol series) is represented by the chunk series (ap)(ak)(ak).  Now, the I-form in ap 2 * (ak) induces, for subseries akak, the chunk series (ak)(ak) which can be superimposed on  (ap)(ak)(ak). This observation clearly suffices to establish that the A-form and the I-form are hierarchically compatible,  i.e., that the I-form can be hierarchically nested in the A-argument, yielding <(a)>/<(p) 2 *((k))>. Thus, in general, if an  ISA-form induces a chunk series that can be superimposed on the chunk series that represents the transparency chunking for an  A-form (or, similarly, for an S-form ), then that ISA-form can be hierarchically nested in the A-form (or the S-form).  Obviously, if two ISA-forms induce chunk series for disjoint subseries, or if one of the two chunk series is contained  entirely inside one chunk of the other chunk series, then the two ISA-forms are hierarchically compatible too (see also  Definition 12). For instance, in abbac, the I-form 2 * (b) occurs inside the chunk (bb) in the A-form <(a)>/<(bb)(c)), so that  the A-form and the I-form can be combined into <(a)>/<(2 * (b))(c)).  The above shows that, without a multiple search for the same ISA-forms, both the search for single ISA-forms and the search  for hierarchical nesting of ISA-forms can be performed largely in parallel. Furthermore, the above shows that ISA-forms that  end up at a higher hierarchical level in a code, already can be extracted from (or, are accessible in) the symbol series. That  is, on the one hand, the encoding may result in a hierarchy consisting of sequentially ordered hierarchical level but, on the  other hand, this hierarchy does not have to be established in a strictly sequential way. This illustrates that, in our view,  the notion of hierarchy should not be based on some process model as such, as in, e.g., the so-called hierarchical sequential  search model of Simon and Feigenbaum (1964), or as in other so-called top-down models that involve reasoning or unconscious  inferences (Von Helmholtz, 1876; Neisser, 1966; Gregory, 1972; Rock, 1983). Nor should hierarchy be seen, as suggested in  Buffart (1987), as a property of a single pattern representation in which several different hierarchical levels can be  distinguished by decomposing that  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 201  representation (see also van der Helm, 1988). On the contrary, hierarchy should rather be seen as a relation between several  different representations of the same pattern. That is, as argued before, several different ISA-forms, obtained in parallel,  may be related hierarchically in order to compose a hierarchy consisting of several different hierarchical levels. In the  latter sense, the notion of hierarchy agrees with a bottom-up extraction of gradually more structured information. That is,  starting from the single identities in a raw pattern registration, regularity is described first, then different kinds of  regularity are related hierarchically, resulting in a classification and an organization which can be embedded in stored  knowledge structures.  The second implication of the concept of accessibility may be introduced as follows. In the second section, we formulated the  minimum principle as stating that the preferred interpretation of a pattern is reflected by a minimum code for that pattern,  i.e., a code that contains a minimum amount of structural information. Furthermore, given a series S that represents the  pattern and employing only the ISA-rules, a code was said to be a series in which each element is either a single element of S  or the encoding of a subseries of S into an ISA-form in which further ISA-forms may be hierarchically nested. Now, even  though, as discussed above, the encoding may be performed largely in parallel, the minimum principle still seems to be  unrealistic since, for any series, a combinatorially explosive number of codes may be possible (cf. Hatfield & Epstein, 1985).  However, due to the concept of accessibility and due to a mathematical technique called the shortest path method (Dijkstra,  1959), a minimum code can be obtained without generating all possible codes. In order to simulate such a non-explosive  encoding process, we have implemented the encoding algorithm PISA. Next, we give a global idea of how this encoding algorithm  operates while, for an extensive elaboration, we refer to van der Helm and Leeuwenberg (1986) and van der Helm (1988).  First, four general remarks: First, note that the encoding algorithm can be seen as a process model for the human perceptual  system, but not necessarily so. That is, the simulation primarily shows the feasibility of obtaining a minimum code in a  non-explosive way. So, even when the simulation proceeds in another way than the human system, the simulation still supports  the minimum principle as being realistic. Second, note that the structural information in a code was defined as the number of  pattern symbols in the code. Later on in this section, we propose an improved quantification of simplicity which, however, has  no influence on the implication of the concept of accessibility discussed here. Therefore, here, we stick to the  quantification as used in the simulation, i.e. the number of pattern symbols in the code, also called the P-load of the code  (that is why the encoding algorithm has been called PISA: P-load plus ISA-rules). So, here, a minimum code is a code with  minimum P-load. Third, note that an ISA-form (in which further ISA-forms may be hierarchically nested) is said to cover a  subseries of the symbol series to be encoded, if that entire subseries can be encoded into that ISA-form. Fourth, the  explosiveness of a process is generally measured by estimating the maximum number of computational steps that is required in  order to deal with an arbitrary input. This estimation is guided by: given two functions f and g, defined on the  202 VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  positive integers, f is said to be in the order of g if a constant Q and a positive integer M exist, such that f (n) 5 Q *  g(n) for all n > M.  The basic theme in the encoding algorithm is that, for each subseries of the series to be encoded, a covering ISA-form with  minimum P-load is searched for. Then, by combining such ISA-forms, a minimum code for the entire series is determined. The  combinatorially explosive number of possible codes for a symbol series is in fact due to three distinguishable explosions, one  minor explosion and two major explosions which are next discussed successively.  Suppose that the symbol series S to be enc oded consists of N symbols. Then, the number of subseries in S is N * (N+ 1)(2  which is a polynomial, i.e., non-explosive, number in the order of N'`. Now, if a subseries consisting of, say, k symbols can  be covered by an S- or A-form, then the S- or A-argument clearly consists of maximally k/2 chunks. Furthermore, as we see  later on, the total number of ISAforms by which the subseries can be covered, can be taken to be in the order of k. Since the  encoding algorithm PISA performs a hierarchically sequential encoding (see earlier in this section), each S- or A-argument  must be encoded anew yielding, recursively, ISA-forms that cover subseries of the S- or A-argument. The maximum hierarchical  depth, i.e., the maximum number of successive hierarchical levels is 'log(k) since, for each transition to a higher level, the  maximum number of chunks in an S- or A-argument decreases by a factor two. This implies (see van der Helm, 1988) that in  searching for a minimum code for the entire series S, the total number of S- and A- arguments to be encoded is exponential,  i.e., explosive, in the order of N' +'-"d with d='-log(N). However, due to the logarithmic factor, this explosion is generally  said to be only weakly exponential, i.e., almost acceptable. But we also have further good reasons to believe that this  explosion does not have to cause problems. First, the maximum hierarchical depth can only be reached when the symbol series  contains many identities, but then the explosion is slowed down by the fact that only one subseries of each set of identical  subseries must be investigated to find covering ISA-forms. Second, as mentioned before, the encoding algorithm PISA performs a  hierarchical sequential encoding, whereas we strongly suspect (and intend to show in the near future) that implementing a  simulation of a largely parallel encoding (as discussed earlier) may eliminate this explosion. Therefore, we leave this minor  explosion as it is, and concentrate on the two major explosions.  One of the two major explosions is caused by the fact that, if a subseries can be covered by one S- or A-form, then the  subseries can generally be covered by an exponential number of S- and A-forms (the I-forms do not cause a problem). All these  S- and A-forms must be taken into account in searching for a covering ISAform with minimum P-load. The other major explosion  is caused by the fact that, even if for each subseries a covering ISA-form with minimum P-load is known (at least, if a  covering ISA-form is possible), then still an exponential number of codes for the entire series is possible. However, as is  indicated next, both explosions can be eliminated. First, we consider the later explosion.  As indicated before, for a symbol series consisting of N symbols, the number of  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 203  subseries is non-explosive, namely N * (N+ 1)/2. Yet, the series can be partitioned into subseries in an exponential number of  2'- ' different ways. This is illustrated by the directed graph in Fig. 15. In graph theory (see Harary, 1969), a graph is  defined as a set of vertices and edges, each edge connecting two vertices. In a directed graph, the edges are represented by  arrows, indicating that the connection is one-way only. The directed graph in Fig. 15 represents, for the symbol series aabab,  all partitionings of that series into subseries. Each partitioning is represented by a path from vertex 0 to vertex 5. Each  edge in the graph represents a subseries. Now, suppose that for each subseries, a covering ISA-form with minimum P-load is  known (at least, if a covering ISA-form is possible). Then, each path from vertex 0 to vertex 5 may, in principle, represent  another code for the entire series aabab. Now, as may be verified, the graph in Fig. 15 contains 24 different paths,  illustrating that the number of possible codes for an arbitrary series is indeed exponential. However, as we see next, each  path does not have to be investigated separately in order to find a minimum code.  Suppose, for a subseries of the series to be encoded, that covering ISA-forms are possible and that a covering ISA-form with  minimum P-load is known. Then, take this minimum P-load to be the length of the corresponding edge in the graph which  represents all partitionings of the series into subseries. If, for some subseries, no covering ISA-form is possible, then just  take the number of symbols in the subseries as the length of the corresponding edge in the graph. Then, a shortest path  through the graph corresponds to a series consisting of single symbols and ISA-forms, such that the total length, i.e., the  total P-load, is minimal. That is, clearly, a shortest path corresponds to a minimum code for the entire series. Thus, the  search for a minimum code is translated into the search for a shortest path. Now, by applying the so-called shortest path  method (Dijkstra, 1959), a shortest path, i.e., a minimum code, can be found without investigating all possible paths. This  has been  FIG. 15. The series aabab can be partitioned into subseries, in an exponential number of 2different ways. In the directed  graph above, each of these partitionings is represented by a path from vertex 0 to vertex 5. Each edge in the graph represents  a subseries. In principle, each subseries might be encodable into one ISA-form (in which further ISA-forms may be nested  hierarchically). So, in principle, each path form vertex 0 to vertex 5 might represent another code for the entire series, so  that an exponential number of codes might be possible. However, by applying the shortest path method, a minimum code can be  found in a non-exponential way, i.e., without investigating each of the possible codes separately.  204 VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  elaborated extensively in van der Helm and Leeuwenberg (1986). Therefore, here, we only briefly indicate this method and what  is gained by it.  Let the series S to be encoded consist of N symbols, and let G = G(V, E) be the graph that represents all partitionings of S  into subseries, where V is the set {0, 1, 2, ..., N} of all vertices and E is the set of all directed edges e(k, p) from  vertex k to vertex p. Then, define d(k, p) as the length of edge e(k, p), i.e., as the P-load of the corresponding subseries  as found after the search for covering ISA-forms. Then, the minimal P-load of a code for the entire series S corresponds to  the minimal distance dmi0, N) from vertex 0 to vertex N, which can be found by determining, successively, for k = N- 1, N-  2, ..., 0:  dmin(k, N) = MIN{d(k, p)+dmin(p, N); for all e(k, p) in E}.  For fixed k, the number of edges e(k, p) is N-k, which implies that the determination of dmin(0, N) requires a polynomial  number of computational steps, in the order of NZ. This determination can proceed such that, afterwards, an actual path with  the shortest length can be found straightforwardly. So, whereas investigating each path separately would require an  exponential number of computational steps, in the order of 2' (corresponding to the total number of possible paths), the  shortest path method only requires a polynomial number of computational steps, in the order of Nz, to compute a shortest path,  i.e., a minimum code. Thus, one major explosion in the search for a minimum code can be eliminated. Note that this elimination  is not based on the concept of accessibility. The elimination of the other major explosion, however, strongly depends on the  concept of accessibility, as we see next.  (o)(k4a)  FIG. 16. The paths from vertex 0 to vertex 10 in this directed graph (which can be constructed in a non-explosive way)  represent all A-forms <(a))/<1x,)(x2) ..(xn)) into which the series akafaaaka/' can be encoded, as follows. Each edge  represents a possible pair (a)(x,), so that, e.g., the A-form <(a)>1<(k)(f)(a)(k)(f)> is represented by the path along  vertices 0, 2A, 6, 8, 10, and the A-form < (a) >1 < (kaf)(a)(kaf)) by the path along vertices 0, 4, 6, 10. Due to the concept  of accessibitv, the A-arguments of all these A-forms do not have to be encoded separately since, e.g., for the two just  mentioned A-forms, the single identity between the two subgraphs consisting of all subpaths from vertex 0 to vertex 4,  respectively, from vertex 6 to vertex 10, represents simultaneously the identity (12) =(45) for the first A-form and the  identity (1) = (3) for the second A-form. Therefore, by considering the single identities between subgraphs (which can be  found in a non-explosive way), the exponential number of possible A-arguments can be encoded simultaneously.  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 205  As mentioned above, the second major explosion is caused by the fact that, if a subseries can be covered by one S- or A-form,  then the subseries can generally be covered by an exponential number of S- and A-forms. The elimination of this explosion has  been elaborated extensively in van der Helm (1988). Therefore, here, we only indicate the crucial aspects in this elimination,  in order to show that this elimination is possible due to the concept of accessibility. For that purpose, we use Figs. 16 and  17 as illustration for the A-forms, respectively the S-forms. We only go into more detail on the A-forms, but Fig. 17 may show  that the S-forms can be dealt with analogously.  For the symbol series T=akafaaakaf, all covering A-forms <(a)>/<(x,)(x,) ... (x > are represented in the directed graph in  Fig. 16. Each edge in that graph represents a so-called A-pair (a)(x,) which corresponds precisely to one chunk in the chunk  series that represents the transparency chunking for the A-form (see Definition 19 and following). Thus, each path from vertex  0 to vertex 10 represents another A-form. The number of possible A-pairs is always less than the number of subseries in series  T, so that the graph can be constructed in a non-explosive number of computational steps. Nevertheless, as can be verified,  the number of possible paths through the graph is explosive, in the order of 2' where m is the number of symbols a in T. So,  the encoding of an exponential number of A-arguments must be taken into account in order to find an A-form with minimum  P-load. However, all these A-arguments can be encoded simultaneously, as we see next.  Consider, in Fig. 16, the so-called subgraph consisting of all subpaths from vertex 0 to vertex 4. This subgraph consists of  two subpaths, representing the subseries  Fic. 17. The paths from vertex 0 to vertex 10 in this directed graph (which can be constructed in a non-explosive way)  represent all S-forms SC(Xl)(x2)...(x,), (P)] into which the series abahfababgbabafbaba can be encoded, as follows. Each bold  edge represents a possible chunk (x;), while the other edges (all ending in vertex 10) each represent a possible pivot (p).  E.g., the S-form S[(a)(bab)(f)(a)(bab), (g)] is represented by the path along vertices 0, 1, 4, 5. 6, 9, 10, and the S-form  S[(a)(b)(a)(b)(f)(a)(b)(a)(b), (g)] by the path along vertices 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Analogously as for the  A-forms, the exponential number of all S-arguments can be encoded simultaneously by considering the single identities between  subgraphs consisting of only bold edges (which can be found in a non-explosive way). E.g., the single identity between the two  subgraphs consisting of all subpaths from vertex 0 to vertex 4, respectively, from vertex 5 to vertex 9, represents  simultaneously the identity (1 2) = (4 5) for the first S-form above and the identity (12 3 4) = (6 7 8 9) for the second  S-form above.  206 VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  (k)(f ), respectively (kaf ), of possible A-arguments. Now note that exactly the same subseries are represented by the  subgraph consisting of all subpaths from vertex 6 to vertex 10. So, an identity can be said to exist between these two  subgraphs, indicating simultaneously the identity (12) = (4 5) in the A-argument of the A-form < (a)>/< (k)(f)(a)(k)(f)> and  the identity (1)=(3) in the A-argument of the A-form < (a)>l< (kaf)(a)(kaf)>. In general, precisely due to the fact that the  A-rule is both holographic and transparent (remember the relation between an A-pair and the transparency chunking), all  subgraph identities can be found in a non-explosive way. Clearly, any subgraph identity represents an identity in one or more  different A-arguments. But, moreover, any identity in one of the A-arguments is represented by one and only one subgraph  identity (see van der Helm, 1988). Therefore, all A-arguments can be encoded simultaneously, by considering the entire graph  as a "generalized" series in which identities exist between generalized subseries (i.e., the subgraphs). That is, the entire  graph in Fig. 16 can be seen as one series 6, Q, - - - U,o in which two subseries, say ai ... al and up ... a., are identical  if and only if an identity exists between the two subgraphs consisting of all subpaths from vertex i to vertex j, respectively  from vertex p to vertex q. Thus, instead of encoding every A-argument separately, only this generalized series can be encoded,  yielding all ISA-forms that can be nested in those A-arguments. Once this encoding has been performed, the shortest path  method is applied to the entire graph in order to find an A-argument with minimal P-load.  Note that the graph in Fig. 16 only represents A-forms <(a)>/<.....>. However, the series akafaaakaf can also be encoded into,  e.g., A-forms <..... >/<(.fak)>. For each of these cases (less than N cases for a series consisting of N elements), one graph  as in Fig. 16 must be considered. For the S-forms, only one graph must be considered (see Fig. 17). This confirms, as stated  when dealing with the minor explosion, that the number of ISA-forms, covering a subseries consisting of k elements, can be  taken to be in the order of k.  Summarizing, the encoding process gives rise to three combinatorial explosions in the search for a minimum code of a symbol  series that represents a visual pattern. Among these three explosions, one explosion is only weakly exponential, i.e., almost  acceptable, and may even be eliminated by implementing a simulation of a largely parallel encoding process. A second explosion  is rather strongly exponential, but can be eliminated by applying the shortest path method. The third explosion is rather  strongly exponential too, but can be eliminated mainly due to the fact that the employed ISA-rules are both holographic and  transparent. Thus, together with the shortest path method, the concept of accessibility supports the minimum principle as  being realistic, since a minimum code can be obtained without generating the strongly exponential number of all possible codes.  The third implication of the concept of accessibility, and the last one to be discussed in this study, concerns the  quantification of simplicity. An adequate quantification of simplicity is very relevant since, as argued in the first section,  the minimum principle states that the preferred interpretation of a pattern is reflected by the simplest description of that  pattern, where the simplest description was  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 207  considered to be a code that expresses the largest amount of regularity in the pattern. In the first section too, we specified  the complexity of a code as being the amount of structural information that is required by the code to describe the pattern.  That is, the more regularity expressed by a code, the smaller the amount of structural information in the code and the simpler  the code. However, in the same first section, we also stated that the structural information in a code is reflected by  specific descriptive components in the code. This latter statement may lead to the suspicion that the quantification of  simplicity depends on artifacts of the employed encoding model, since the encoding model determines all descriptive components  in codes (cf. Hatfield & Epstein, 1985). As we see next, on the one hand, this suspicion must be confirmed regarding many of  the studies concerning the structural information model but, on the other hand, the concept of accessibility gives rise to a  quantification of simplicity which does not depend on artifacts of the encoding model. This new quantification shows promising  improvements with respect to, and can be seen as a unification of, the earlier employed quantifications.  First of all, as stated in the first part of this section, the encoding model represents a primary perception module, for  which the input is constituted by a symbol series as raw registration of a pattern, while the output is constituted by a  classification and organization of that symbol series, reflecting an interpretation of the pattern. Clearly, if only the  (possible) outputs, i.e., the classifications and organizations, form the basis for the quantification of simplicity, then the  quantification does not depend on artifacts of the encoding model. Such a quantification has been given in the second section,  where we defined the amount of structural information in a code as the P-load of that code, i.e., the number of pattern  symbols in that code. For instance, if the series aaaaaa is encoded into the I-form 3 * (aa), with P-load P=2, then the series  is considered to be classified into the class of series that can be represented by, e.g., the series xzxzx=.This class  representative xzxzxz contains precisely the identity of elements as characterized by the I-form. Occasionally, such a class  representative has been called an abstract code (cf. Collard & Buffart, 1983). In general, the P-load of a code equals the  number of different elements in the corresponding abstract code and, therefore, implies a quantification of simplicity on the  basis of the output (the classification) of the encoding model, i.e., not depending on artifacts of the model itself.  So, if the structural information in a code is defined as the P-load of the code, then the above mentioned suspicion does not  have to be confirmed. However, the P-load only applies to the classification of the series, not to its organization which is  also part of the output. And indeed, predictions of preferred pattern interpretations, by means of the P-load, are not that  good, due to the fact, among others, that the P-load hardly differentiates between codes. This can be gathered from the many  experimental studies concerning the structural information model (see references in the second section), in which mostly  better predictions are obtained by using another definition of structural information, as follows.  In many studies concerning the structural information model, the structural information in a code has been taken to be the  number of pattern symbols in the  208 VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  code plus the number of I-forms and S-forms in the code. This definition was meant to reflect the amount of memory space to  store the code while, for some reason, the A-forms in a code did not have to be counted (see Buffart et al., 1981). This  quantification of simplicity was called the 1-load, but will here be called the Iold-load, in view of the quantification still  to be proposed. For instance, if the series abpgba is encoded into the S-form S[(a)(b), (pq)], then the Iold-load of the code  is Io,d = 5, i.e., four pattern symbols and one S-form. Although, as mentioned above, the Iold-load yields reasonably good  predictions, it gives rise to several conceptual problems. For instance, pattern symbols and I- and S-forms are valued  equally, but are in fact incomparable units, at least very different units. That is, why not count an I- or S-form as two or  more pattern symbols? Furthermore, note that there is no fundamental distinction between an A-form and an I- or S-form with  respect to the classification and organization of a series, as may be clear from the present study. For such reasons, the  above mentioned suspicion must be confirmed, namely that this quantification of simplicity indeed depends on artifacts of the  encoding model. Nevertheless, as mentioned above, the lo,,-load reasonably well predicts preferred pattern interpretations (as  least better than the P-load). In view of the present study, this might be explainable as follows.  Since the Iold-load of a code contains, besides the number of I- and S-forms in the code, the number of pattern symbols in the  code, it accounts for the classification in the same way as the P-load. Now, counting all ISA-forms (i.e., including the  A-forms) in a code would correspond to counting all hierarchical levels in the code since, as we have seen, each ISA-form  induces a transition to a higher hierarchical level. So, to some extent, the Iold-load can be said to account for the  organization too, which might explain its reasonably good predictions. However, the above mentioned conceptual problems still  remain. Therefore, we have developed a new quantification of simplicity, on the basis of the concept of accessibility, as  follows.  In the present study, we have seen that if a symbol series is encoded by means of the ISA-rules, then the resulting code  unambiguously induces a transparent hierarchy in the series, representing an organization of the series (see Figs. 12 and 13).  Now, imposing the same organization on the corresponding abstract code (as defined above) yields an organized class  representative which reflects both the classification and the organization of the series. For instance, if the symbol series  abcabcab is encoded into the S-form S[(ab)(c), (ab)], then the classification is represented by the abstract code x. tpgtx ,  while the organization is represented by the chunk series (ab)(c)(ab)(c)(ab). Imposing this same organization on the abstract  code clearly yields the expression (x)(t)(pq)(t)(x=). From now on, such an expression is said to represent an abstract  chunking. Clearly, precisely due to the fact that the ISA-rules are transparent, such an abstract chunking can be determined  for any code that has been obtained by means of the ISA-rules. Now, the new quantification of simplicity, which is called the  In,,-load, consists of counting all different elements over all hierarchical levels in such an abstract chunking. For  instance, for the S-form above, one gets Inew = 7, since the abstract chunking contains the following seven different  elements: x, z, (x--), t, p, q, and  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 209  (pq). Note that the lower level element t is not different from the higher level element (t) since, in this case, the  parentheses merely indicate a chunk that equals one symbol. That is, beside the different single symbols, only the different  actual groupings of several symbols or chunks are counted. This may be illustrated by two further examples. In Fig. 12, we saw  that the encoding of the symbol series abcabcpcabcab into the code S[2 * ((ab)(c)), (p)] yields a transparent hierarchy which  is represented by the expression ((ab)(c)) ((ab)(c)) (p) (c)(ab) (c)(ab). Since the code characterizes all identity of  elements in the symbol series, the latter expression also represents the abstract chunking. This abstract chunking contains  six different elements, namely: a, b, (ab), c, (abc), and p, so that the code has an Inew-load of Inew = 6. Furthermore, in  Fig. 13, we saw that the encoding of the symbol series kxkykx into the code ( (k) >/< S[ ((x) ), ((y)) ] > yields a  transparent hierarchy which is represented by the expression ((k)(x))((k)(y))((k)(x)). Again, the code characterizes all  identity of elements in the symbol series, so that the latter expression also represents the abstract chunking. This abstract  chunking contains five different elements, namely, k, x, (kx), y, and (kh), so that the code has an Inew-load of Inew = 5.  Now that we have introduced the I.,,-load, we first of all want to emphasize that this quantification of simplicity does not  depend on artifacts of the encoding model, since it is based solely on the output, i.e., on the classification and  organization. Therefore, it does not show the conceptual problems connected to the old-load; i.e., now, comparable units are  counted without any distinction between an A-form and an I- or S-form while, as an improvement on the Io,d-load, a better  account is given of the hierarchical structure in a code. Furthermore, in a similar way as the P-load, the In,,-load of a code  can still be said to reflect the amount of regularity expressed by the code but now, as an improvement on the P-load, the  amount of regularity is measured in terms of identity of elements at all hierarchical levels, not just at the lowest level.  Among others, this leads to a better differentiation between codes, which may be illustrated by the S-forms S[(a)(hc), (p)]  and S[(a)(b)(c), (p)]: both the P-load and the Io,d-load do not differentiate between these S-forms (P=4 and Io,d = 5). In  contrast, the Inew-load yields In,, = 5 for the first S-form, and Inew = 4 for the second S-form. This example also indicates  that the In,,-load supports the Prbgnanz of mirror-symmetrical structures, since an S-form tends to be simpler if the chunks  in the S-form are smaller.  Of course, extensive empirical research must be undertaken in order to investigate whether the Inew-load indeed yields good  predictions of preferred pattern interpretations. Yet, some pilot experiments (van der Helm & Van Lier, 1991) already show  promising results. That is, the Inew-load predictions are, in the investigated cases, much better than the Ioid-load  predictions and the P-load predictions.  In the previous sections, we saw that the concept of accessibility enables an adequate differentiation between coding rules,  leading to only nine transparent holographic rules. In this section, we saw that this concept also has plausible conceptual  implications with respect to the relevance of regularity and hierarchy in  210 VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  visual perception. Furthermore, it enables a largely parallel encoding process (i.e., instead of a hierarchical sequential  process), without a multiple search for the same codes. Moreover, it supports the minimum principle as being a realistic  criterion for preferred pattern interpretations, in that a simplest code can be obtained without generating the explosive  number of all possible codes. Finally, it gives rise to a promising quantification of simplicity which does not depend on  artifacts of the employed encoding model.  SUMMARY  A fundamental problem with respect to encoding models in pattern perception has always been the selection of coding rules that  are appropriate for the encoding of a symbol series that represents a pattern. That is, coding rules that are adequate in  predicting the human interpretation of visual patterns. This problem has been the main issue in the present study. The  conceptual framework of the present study has been Leeuwenberg's structural information model which employs the minimum  principle by stating that the preferred interpretation of a pattern is reflected by the simplest code of a symbol series that  represents the pattern. Here, simplicity is specified in terms of regularity, and regularity in terms of identity of elements  in the symbol series. Within this framework, we have elaborated the concept of accessibility as a criterion for regularity and  hierarchy in pattern codes.  The concept of accessibility simply implies that regularity and hierarchy in a code of a pattern should correspond directly to  regularity and hierarchy in the pattern itself. This concept has been specified by the formal notions of holographic  regularity and transparent hierarchy. The notion of holographic regularity has been developed as a formalization of the  intuitive notion of regularity, namely that regularity is a property which can be generalized, or extrapolated, into a  property with arbitrary extent (just like a repetition of something is a repetition, no matter the number of times that the  something is repeated). The notion of transparent hierarchy implies that regularity, described at a higher hierarchical level  in a code of a symbol series, corresponds to the same kind of regularity in the symbol series itself. This may all sound  trivial, but both notions enable an adequate differentiation between coding rules, resulting in only 80 holographic rules,  i.e., coding rules describing holographic regularity, and in only nine transparent holographic rules, i.e., holographic rules  describing transparent hierarchy.  Besides an adequate differentiation between coding rules, the concept of accessibility has also several further plausible  implications. First, if the encoding of a symbol series is performed by means of transparent holographic rules, then the  pattern information in the symbol series is very accessible. That is, pattern information can be extracted easily not only  from the symbol series (during the encoding phase) but also from the code (during higher cognitive phases). Second, employing  only transparent holographic rules enables a largely parallel encoding process, in  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 211  which a simplest code of a symbol series can be obtained without generating the strongly explosive number of all possible  codes of that symbol series. This implies that the minimum principle is supported as being realistic. Third, the concept of  accessibility gives rise to a promising quantification of simplicity which does not depend on artifacts of the encoding model.  If this new quantification of simplicity is accepted, then five of the nine transparent holographic rules do not have to be  used, since they yield simplest codes that reflect interpretations which form a proper subset of those obtainable by means of  the other four transparent holographic rules. These four coding rules are precisely the Iteration rule, the Symmetry rule, and  the two Alternation rules, as employed in Leeuwenberg's structural information model. These four coding rules are generally  considered as indisputably relevant in perception, which independently supports the plausibility of the concept of  accessibility.  ACKNOWLEDGMENT  We are very grateful to Prof. dr. Cees Hoede (University of Twente) for his stimulating support, especially in getting the  mathematics in this paper properly formulated.  REFERENCES  ATTNEAVE, F. (1954). Some information aspects of visual perception. Psychological Review, 61, 183-193. ATTNEAVE, F. (1982).  Pragnanz and soap-bubble systems: A theoretical exploration. In J. Beck (Ed.), Organization and representation in perception.  Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  BOSELIE, F., & LEEUWENBERG, E. L. J. (1985). Birkhoff revisited: Beauty as a function of effect and means. American Journal of  Psychology, 98, 1-39.  BOSELIE, F., & LEEUWENBERG, E. L. J. (1986). A test of the minimum principle requires a perceptual coding system. Perception,  15, 331-354.  BIEDERMAN, I. (1987). Recognition-by-components: A theory of human image understanding. Psychological Review, 94, 115-147.  BUFFART, H. F. J. M. (1987). Seven minus two and structural operations. In E. E. Roskam, & R. Suck (Eds.), Progress in  Mathematical Psychology 1. Amsterdam: North-Holland.  BUFFART, H. F. J. M., LEEUWENBERG, E. L. J., & RESTLE, F. (1981). Coding theory of visual pattern completion. Journal of  Esperintental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 7, 241-274. COLLARD, R. F. A., &BUFFART, H. F. J. M. (1983).  Minimization of structural information: A settheoretical approach. Pattern Recognition, 16, 231-242.  COLLARD, R. F. A., & LEEUWENBERG, E. L. J. (1981). Judged temporal order of visual patterns. Canadian Journal of Psychology,,  35, 323-329.  DEUTSCH, D., & FEROE, J. (1981). The internal representation of pitch sequences in tonal music. Psychological Review, 88,  503-522.  DLIKSTRA, E. W. (1959). A note on two problems in connexion with graphs. Numerische Mathematik, 1, 269-271.  FODOR, J. A. (1983). The modularity of mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. GABOR, D. (1946). Theory of communication. J. Inst.  Electr. Eng., 93, 429-457. GARNER, W. (1970). Good patterns have few alternatives. American Scientist, 58, 34-42. GARNER, W.  (1974). The processing of in/ormation and structure. Potomac, MD: Erlbaum. GEISSLER, H.-G., KLIX, F., & SCHNEIDEREITER, U.  (1978). Visual recognition of serial structure: Evidence of a two-stage scanning model. In E. L. J. Leeuwenberg & H. F. J. M.  Buffart (Eds.), Formal theories of visual perception. New York: Wiley.  212 VAN DER HELM AND LEEUWENBERG  GOTTSCHALDT, K. (1929). Ueber den Eintluss der Erfahrung auf die Wahrnehmung yon Figuren. Psychologischen Forschungen, 129,  1-87.  GREGORY, R. L. (1972). Cognitive contours. Nature, 238, 51-52.  GREGORY, R. L. (1973). The confounded eye. In R. Gregory, & E. Gombrich (Eds.), Illusion in nature and art. London: Duckworth.  HARARY, F. (1969). Graph theory. Reading, MA: Addison-Wessley.  HATFIELD, G. C., & EPSTEIN, W. (1985). The status of the minimum principle in the theoretical analysis of visual perception.  Psychological Bulletin, 97, 155-186.  HOCHBERG, J. E., & McALISTER, E. (1953). A quantitative approach to final "goodness." Journal of Experimental Psychology, 46,  361-364.  JONES, M., & ZAMOSTNY, K. (1975). Memory and rule structure in the prediction of serial patterns. Journal of Experimental  Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 104, 295-306.  KANIZSA, G., & GERBINO, W. (1982). Amodal completion: Seeing and thinking. In J. Beck (Ed.), Organization and representation  in perception. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  KLIX, F. (1971). Information and Verhalten. Bern: Hans Huber.  KOFFKA, K. (1935). Principles of Gestalt Ps ycholog . New York: Harcourt, Brace & World.  KOHLER, W. (1920). Die Physischen Gestalten in Ruhe and im stationdren Zustand. Braunschweig: Vieweg.  LEEUWENBERG, E. L. J. (1969). Quantitative specification of information in sequential patterns. Psychological Review, 76,  21(s-220.  LEEUWENBERG, E. L. J. (1971). A perceptual coding language for visual and auditory patterns. American Journal of Psychology,  84, 307-349.  LEEUWENBERG, E. L. J. (1982). The perception of assimilation and brightness contrast. Perception and Psychophysics, 32,  345-352.  LEEUWENBERG, E. L. J., & BOSELIE, F. (1988). Against the likelihood principle in visual form perception. Psychological Review,  95, 485-491.  LEEUWENBERG, E. L. J., & Buffart, H. F. J. M. (1984). The perception of foreground and background as derived from structural  information theory. Acta Ps vchologica, 55, 249-272.  LEPTON, M. (1986a). A theory of information structure. I. General principles. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 30, 103-160.  LEPTON, M. (1986b). A theory of information structure. II. A theory of perceptual organization. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 30, 257-305.  McKAY, D. (1950). Quanta] aspects of scientific information. Philosophical Magazine, 41, 289-301. MENs, L. (1988), Primary  perception of .stimulus .structure. Ph.D. Thesis, University of Nijmegen, MENs, L., & LEEUWENBERG, E. L. J. (1988). Hidden  Figures are ever present. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 14, 561-571.  NEISSER, U. (1966). Cognitive psychology. New York: Appleton-Centure-Crofts.  PALMER, S. (1977). Hierarchical structure in perceptual representation. Cognitive Psychology, 9, 441-474. PALMER, S. (1983).  The psychology of perceptual organization: a transformational approach. In J. Beck, B. Hope, & A. Rosenfeld (Eds.), Human and  machine vision (pp. 269-337). New York: Academic Press.  PETERSON, M. A., & Hochberg, J. (1983). Opposed-set measurements procedure: A quantitative analysis of the role of local cues  and intention in form perception. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 9, 183-193.  POMERANTZ, J., & KUBOVY, M. (1986). Theoretical approaches to perceptual organization. In K. R. Boff, L. Kaufman, & J. P.  Thomas (Eds.), Handbook of perception and human performance II (pp. 1-46). New York: Wiley.  RESTLE, F. (1970). Theory of serial pattern learning: Structural trees. Psychological Reviex-, 77, 481-495. RESTLE, F. (1979).  Coding theory of the perception of motion configurations. Psychological Review, 86, 1-24.  RESTLE, F. (1982). Coding theory as an integration of Gestalt psychology and information processing theory. In J. Beck (Ed.),  Organization and representation in perception. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  ACCESSIBILITY AND VISUAL PATTERN CODES 213  ROCK, 1. (1983). The logic of perception. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. ROCK, I. (1985). Perception and knowledge. Acta  Psychologica, 59, 3-22. SIMON, H. A. (1972). Complexity and the representation of patterned sequences of symbols.  Psychological Review, 79, 369-382.  SIMON, H. A., & FEIGENBAUM, E. A. (1964). An information processing theory of some effects of similarity, familiarization, and  meaningfulness in verbal learning. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 3, 385-396.  SIMON, H. A., & KOTOVSKY, K. (1963). Human acquisition of concepts for sequential patterns. Psychological Review, 70, 534-546.  VAN DER HELM, P. A. (1988). Accessibiliti, and simplicity of visual structures. Ph.D. Thesis, University of Nijmegen.  VAN DER HELM, P. A., & LEEUWENBERG, E. L. J. (1986). Avoiding explosive search in automatic selection of simplest pattern  codes. Pattern Recognition, 19, 181-191.  VAN DER HELM, P. A., & VAN LIER, R. J. (1991). Serial pattern complexity: Irregularity and hierarchy. Submitted for  publication.  VAN TUIJL, H. F. J. M., & LEEUWENBERG, E. L. J. (1979). Neon color spreading and structural information measures. Perception  and Ps vchophysics, 25, 269-284.  VAN TUI1L, H. F. J. M., & LEEUWENBERG, E. L. J. (1980). Perceptual interpretation of complex line patterns. Journal of  Experimental Ps vchology: Human Perception and Performance, 6, 197-221.  VAN TUIJL, H. F. J. M., & LEEUWENBERG, E. L. J. (1982). Peripheral and central determinants of subjective contour strength. In  H.-G. Geissler, H. F. J. M. Buffart, P. Petzoldt, & Y. M. Zabrodin (Eds.), Psychophysical judgement and the process  of'perception. Amsterdam: North-Holland.  VITZ, P. C. (1966). Preference for different amounts of visual complexity. Behavioral Science, 11, 105-114.  VITZ, P. C., & TODD, R. C. (1969). A coded element model of the perceptual processing of sequential stimuli. Psychological  Review, 76, 433-449.  VON HELMHOLTZ, H. (1962). Treatise on Physiological Optics, Vol. III. (Translation from the 3rd German ed.) NY: Dover  Publications. (Original work published 1867).  WERTHEIMER, M. (1912). Experimentelle Studien uber das Sehen von Bewegung. Zeitschriji fur Psychologie, 12, 161-265.  WERTHEIMER, M. (1923). Untersuchungen zur Lehre von der Gestalt. Psychologische Forschung, 4, 301-350.  RECEIVED: February 22, 1988  480/35/2-5