10.1016/0022-2496(91)90049-y
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 35, 277-293 (1991)  Modelling the Reliability of Paired Comparisons  DAVID TRITCHLER Ontario Cancer Institute, and University of Toronto  AND  GINA LOCKWOOD  Ontario Cancer Institute  This paper considers paired comparison experiments for which weights describing the reliability of the comparisons are  available. Such a weight can be represented by a belief function as defined by G. Shafer in A Mathematical Theory of Evidence  (Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press, 1976). We develop a belief function analysis for this case, and discuss the  interpretation of such an analysis and the conditions for its validity. C% 1991 Academic Press, Inc.  1. INTRODUCTION  The method of paired comparisons is important in measurement theory, and has applications in fields such as economics,  psychology, and decision theory. The method presents two objects from a set A= {a,, a2, ..., a at a time, and the judge  simply chooses the "best" of each pair. The individual choices can be processed by various methods to infer a binary relation  over the elements of A (often a ranking). Several such methods are described in David (1988).  It is often the case that some choices are clearly more difficult or confusing to the judge than others, and it is appealing  to try to use information about the difficulty of the various choices to weight the individual comparisons, giving greater  weight to the easier or more certain judgements.  There are several possible ways to obtain an evaluation of the difficulty of a given comparison. The difficulty may be clear  from the nature of the objects being compared, and the experimenter may be able to rate the difficulty of that choice task.  The subject may be able to rate his confusion in comparing that pair of objects, or the time required to choose might more  objectively measure that confusion.  However it is obtained, we suppose that each comparison has attached to it a number r, 0 ` r < 1, which has the following  interpretation: with probability r the stated choice is valid, and with probability 1 - r the choice is meaningless and gives  Reprint requests should be addressed to Dr. David Tritchler, Ontario Cancer Institute, 500 Sherbourne St., Toronto, Ontario,  Canada M4X 1K9.  277  0022-2496/91 $3.00  Copyright 0 1991 by Academic Press. Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  278 TRITCHLER AND LOCKWOOD  no information about the ordering of the two objects. The number r may be viewed as a reliability, and its interpretation will  vary with the particular application.  As an example, Tversky and Russo (1969) showed that interstimulus dissimilarity contributes to the difficulty of a comparison.  In their experiment the subjects compared the areas of geometric figures; comparisons of similarly-shaped objects proved more  accurate. In such a situation, we would treat the degree of dissimilarity as a factor which decreases the reliability of the  stated choice.  The concept of incomparability, which appears in the preference modeling literature, can also be described by reliability.  Roubens and Vincke (1985) describe the incomparability relation as the set of pairs of objects for which "the individual is  likely to be confused, being unable to compare the elements." We extend this concept by assuming that incomparability is not  all-or-nothing, but a matter of degree. The degree of incomparability will not reflect the probability that the stated choice  is wrong, rather the probability that it gives no information.  As another example, suppose that comparing each pair of objects requires that a complex argument be constructed, either  explicitly or implicitly. Some of the issues might be which attributes are relevant to that comparison, how those attributes  should be combined and compared, etc. The subject's certainty about this choice, which represents his confidence in the  argument he constructed, we would model as a reliability.  We are thus trying to describe intuitive notions such as dissimilarity, incomparability, uncertainty, and confusion in a  mathematical model. This paper uses belief functions to describe uncertainty about the comparisons, and to incorporate  assumptions defining the properties of an appropriate relation on A. The resulting methodology incorporates more information  about the comparisons by taking uncertainty into account. It should not be considered a psychological model of uncertainty,  but rather a mathematical model appropriate for data analysis when its assumptions are satisfied.  The theory of belief functions will be shown to be a useful technology for determining the implications of uncertainty in  paired comparison data. The nature of the uncertainty is clearly defined by formally representing it with a belief function.  The operations on the original uncertainty weights to obtain final uncertainties are according to a rigorous mathematical  theory, whose assumptions can be precisely stated. The result is that we are provided with degrees of belief for sets of  rankings, which are interpreted as partial orders. In addition, a measure produced by combining belief functions, the  conflict, provides a measure of the subject's inconsistency.  In the remainder of this section we present the necessary concepts from the theory of belief functions. Graph-theoretic  definitions and results are given in an Appendix. In Section 2 we state the model we will use to weight and analyze the paired  comparisons. In Section 3 we discuss the assumptions upon which the validity of the analysis depends. An example of belief  function analysis is given in Section 4. Finally, additional topics, including extensions and generalizations, are discussed  PAIRED COMPARISONS 279  Belief Functions  The theory of belief functions is a mathematical theory for the numerical assessment of uncertainty. The elements of the  theory were set forth by Dempster (1966, 1967a, 1967b, 1968a, 1968b, 1969). Shafer (1976) further developed the theory and  presented it as a general theory of evidence. The theory encompasses a rigorous formalism along with a set of concepts to  assess uncertainty when evidence is incomplete. We give here a brief introduction of the necessary concepts and notation. The  reader unfamiliar with belief functions will benefit from consulting Shafer (1982) and Shafer and Tversky (1985).  Suppose we are interested in finding the true proposition 6 contained in a set O of mutually exclusive propositions. O is  called the frame of discernment; it represents the set of possibilities we wish to consider. A belief function measures the  certainty that S is contained in some subset V of O. The basic probability number m(V), m(V),>0, is the measure of belief that  is committed exactly to V. By definition, the empty set QS has m(0)=0 and Y_,, e m(V) = 1. The total belief committed to V is  the sum of m(V) and the basic probability numbers m(W) for all proper subsets W of V,  Bel(V)= Y m(W), (1) w- v  since V is implied by any subset of V. A subset V is called a focal element of a belief function Bel over O if m(V) > 0. The  information in a belief function Bel can also be expressed in terms of the plausibility function Pl, given by  Pl(V) = 1 - Bel(V), (2)  where V is the complement of V. P1(V) is a measure of the extent to which the evidence fails to refute V.  A simple support function is a belief function defined by the basic probability assignment  m(W)=s,  m(0)= 1 -s,  0<S<1,  for some nonempty subset W of O. If s = 0 the belief function is said to be vacuous. If s = 1 the belief function is called  logical.  One very important feature of the theory of belief functions is that it allows the combination of evidence. Given several  belief functions defined on the same frame of discernment but based on independent bodies of evidence, Dempster's rule of  combination enables us to construct a new belief function based on the pooled evidence. We will discuss the concept of  independent bodies of evidence in Section 3. Suppose m; is the basic probability assignment for a belief function Bel;  280 TRITCHLER AND LOCKWOOD  over a frame O, i = 1, 2, ..., n. The probability mass exactly committed to a subset V, based on the pooled evidence, is  m(V)=K I mi(VI)mz(V2)...MJVA (4)  V1, V2...., VV1 n Vn--~,, VV  where V; is a focal element of Belt, and  K -1- I mI (Vl)mz(Vz)...ynn(Vn)- (  V1VZ,.... VVinVZn-- nV0  The belief function corresponding to (4) is called the orthogonal sum of Bell, Belz-., Beln and is denoted by Bet = Bell p  Belz Q ... Q Beln, unless K-'=0, in which case the orthogonal sum does not exist. The orthogonal sum operation is commutative  and associative. K has a useful intuitive interpretation; it is termed the conflict between the belief functions because it is  an increasing function of the support the Bel; commit to disjoint subsets of O. The conflict K ranges from one to infinity  with one representing no conflict and infinity representing complete contradiction. The weight of conflict is defined to be  log K.  If O,, Oz, ..., On are frames of discernment, we define the product space  O(S) _ H O; for S= { l, 2, ..., n} (6) iEs  to be the set of n-tuples f(01, 02, ..., 0n); 0; E Oil. We adopt Kong's (1986) notation for belief functions over product  spaces. Many of the following definitions are specializations, to the case of product spaces, of more general concepts from  Shafer (1976).  If I(--S, the product space e(I) is termed a margin of O(S), and e(S) is called a refinement of O(I). The set function given by  co(w)= W x O(S-I)  for Wc e(I) is called a refining. The sets W and co(W), although discerned in different frames, represent the same  proposition. Thus if I and J are subsets of S, propositions discerned in O(I) and O(J) are discerned in O(S); to indicate this  we say that the product space O(S) and its margins form a collection of compatible frames where O(S) is the common refinement  of all its margins. Note that if I and J are disjoint subsets of S, V c O (I), W c O (J), then  (Vx O(S-I))n (Wx e(S-J))= Vx Wx e(S-I-J)=0 (7)  iff V=0 or W=QS. Thus by Theorem 6.10 of Shafer (1976), O(I) and O(J), I n J= QS are what Shafer terms independent frames; we  will make use of this independence property.  PAIRED COMPARISONS 281  If Bel is defined on 0(I), its minimal extension to O(S), Bel T O(S), is given by  mTO(S)(Wx0(S-I))=m(W) for all Wc0(I), (8)  where m and mT O(S) denote the basic probability assignments of Bel and Bel T O(S). Clearly, the focal elements of Bel T O(S)  are of the form B x O(S-1), where e is a focal element of Bel.  For a belief function Bel on O(S) with basic probability assignment m, let Bel 10 (I), I c S, be the belief function over 0(I)  with basic probability assignment  MI0(I)(W)= Y m(V) for all Wc0(I) (9)  V c S) PJ(VJB(l))=W  where P;(VI0(I))= {B10 e 0(I), Vn ({0} x O(S-I)) :A 0} for all Vc O(S). Kong calls P;(VI0(I)) the projection of V onto 0(I),  and it is a special case of Shafer's outer reduction. Bel J, O(I) is called the marginal belief function over O(I).  2. BELIEF FUNCTION FORMULATION FOR PAIRED COMPARISONS  In this section we show how the comparison of two objects can be described in terms of a belief function. Belief functions  describing several comparisons are then combined over a product space to form Bel the belief function obtained from the  paired comparison data. Modelling assumptions specifying the type of relation we believe to hold among the objects are  introduced by combining a logical belief function Be1L with Bel We will study the nature of the focal elements and conflict  arising from this combination of evidence. Theorems 1 and 2 clarify the interpretation of the belief function analysis by  specifying the nature of the focal elements and the conflict. Lemmas 4 and 5 show how the basic operations on focal elements,  union and intersection, can be implemented. We will also see that the conflict is a useful quantity for examining the  subject's consistency. We give only the formal development here. The application and assumptions of the belief function  analysis will be discussed in the following section.  Consider comparisons of pairs from the set A = { a, , ..., a}. A comparison of a; with aj, (i, j) e S= { (i, j); 1 5 i < j n  }, has outcomes which we formally describe by the frame of discernment 0;;= {(a;, a), (a;, a;)}, where (a,, a;) represents the  ordering or dominance of a; over aj. A simple support function Bel' over O;~ is obtained when aX is chosen over ay, xe Ii, j},  ye Ii, j}, and the reliability of that choice is r;~. Then {(ax, a,,)} holds with probability ry, and with probability 1 -r;~  the ordering is undetermined. The focal elements of Bel,are {(ax, a,,)} and 0; ;. The basic probability numbers are max,  a = r;; and m;;O;;) = 1 - r;;.  Although the Bel' of our formulation are simple support functions, the development to follow will allow the Bel' to be  dichotomous belief functions. A dichotomous belief function is over a frame of cardinality 2 and has two singleton  282 TRITCHLER AND LOCKWOOD  focal elements; thus we allow MD(ai, a;) = r;;, MD(ai, a;) = s;;, and MD(;) = 1 - r;; - s;;. Allowing dichotomous belief  functions introduces little extra complexity and makes possible some generalizations of the method. We can assume that there  is at least one belief function for each ; (i, j) E S; if the comparison was not made, the corresponding belief function is  vacuous.  Define dominance data to be the directed graph D = (A, P) where P = {(a,, a,,); m,D(a,,, a,) > 0, (i, j) E S}. Thus (a;, ak) E  P iff { (j, k) } is a focal element of BelD and (ak, a;) E P iff {(k, j) } is a focal element of Bel k. That is, singleton  focal elements correspond to arcs in the dominance data. We interpret the dominance data as all choices that the subject gave  some support to.  The product space S) = H,,), S O;; consists of all complete asymmetric relations on A. To assess the evidence provided by  all the comparisons, we minimally extend the (2) belief functions to the common refinement S) and combine them by Dempster's  rule. The valid application of Dempster's rule requires that the Be1,D be based on independent bodies of evidence. This  assumption will be discussed in Section 3. The focal elements of the minimal extension BeltT S) are all subsets of e(s) of  the form j x S- {(i, j)}), where O,; is a focal element of Bel; Since the frames O;; are independent, by Lemma 7.8 of  Shafer (1976) the orthogonal sum  Be1D = Be1D T 0(S) Q+ Bel' T O(S) O+ - O+ BelD _ 1)n T 0(S)  exists and its basic probability assignment is given by  rr1D(B)=m1D2(B12) m1D3(B13) ...MD -1)n(B(n-1)n)  (10)  for B=j-lB;;=B12xB13X ... xB(n_1)n, where B,~c, BcS), and m(C)=0 otherwise. It follows that each focal element 0 of Be1D  is of the form  0=012XO13X ... X0(n-1)n,  where 0;; is a focal element of Be1,D. Also, every set of the form (11) is a focal element of Be1D, since it is non-null by  (7). Since 0 is a subset of S), each element of 0 is a complete asymmetric relation on A.  We define the canonical graph (A, G(0)) for to be the graph with vertices A and an arc corresponding to each O;ij in (11)  which is a singleton, so (A, G(O)) is an asymmetric directed graph. By the independence of the 0;; and Lemma 7.7 of Shafer  (1976), G( is uniquely defined. The arcs in G(0) correspond to the pairs (a;, aj) which are present in every element of 0.  Since O;ij is either a singleton or j, corresponds to the set of all complete asymmetric directed graphs containing the  set of arcs G(0). We will denote the graph (A, G(0)) by G(0) from now on. We will also refer to arcs by the notations (a;, a;)  and a; -i a;, interchangeably. Conversely, given a directed graph G, we define (S) I G) to be the set of all complete  asymmetric directed graphs which contain the arcs of G. Thus 0 = (S) I G(0)). Clearly (S) I G) = 0 if G is not asymmetric.  Defining G, u G2 to be the graph consisting  PAIRED COMPARISONS 283  of the union of the arcs of G, and G2, we have that (S) I G,) n (S) I G2) _ (4(S) I G, u G2)  In analyzing paired choices we often specify that a specific type of relation holds on A, e.g., to impose measurement criteria  or model preference structure. A common model specifies that the relation P must be a linear ordering-asymmetric, transitive,  and complete. We represent this model by a logical belief function Bel' whose single focal element L is the set of all  asymmetric, transitive, complete relations on A. This, in effect, restricts e(s) to the set of all n ! linear orderings of A.  Suppose that a set of comparisons is observed, giving a set of simple support functions. Bel' represents the evidence about  preference contributed by the observed data. To introduce the modelling assumptions we then combine Bel' with Bel' to obtain  Bel. Since Bel' restricts e to linear orders, Bel will assign beliefs to sets of linear orders. Theorem 1 concerns the  interpretation and implementation of the belief function analysis. Before stating it, we give the following definitions and  lemmas.  Any collection C of linear orders on A will define a partial order H as follows: (a,, a;) e H iff (a;, a;) is in every linear  order of the collection C. Thus H is the intersection of all the relations in C. We say that H is realized by C, and that C  realizes H. A linear order which contains all of the arcs of a partial order H is said to be a linear extension of H, so C  consists of linear extensions of H. Observing that {(abcd), (adcb) I and {(abcd), (adcb), (acdb) I are two collections of  linear orders which realize the same partial order H= {(a-' b), (a --, c), (a -+ d)} establishes that a partial order can have  several subsets of L which realize it. Here (abed) represents the linear order {(a-b), (a->c), (aid), (b -., c), (b -. d), (c  -d)}.  The following three lemmas are equivalent to results given by Thompson and Remage (1964). They will facilitate the proof of  Theorem 1.  LEMMA 1. A transitive digraph D has a linear extension iff D is a partial order.  Proof. By Lemma 2.31 of Dushnik and Miller (1941), every partial order has a linear extension. If D is not a partial order, it  can have no linear extension, since any digraph containing its arcs must fail to be irreflexive and/or asymmetric.  LEMMA 2. If D is a digraph, D` is a partial order iff D is acyclic.  Proof. If D contains a cycle then there is a path in D from some node X to itself, so by Theorem 5.4 of Harary et al. (1965),  (x, x)eD` so D` is not a partial order. The converse is Theorem 10.1 of Harary et al. (1965).  LEMMA 3. Let 1 be a linear order on A, L the set of all such linear orders, 0 a focal element of Bel and G(0) the canonical  graph of 0. Then 1 e L n 0 iff 1 is a linear extension of G(O)'.  Proof. Assume 1 e L n 0. By definition 1 is transitive. Every element of 0 contains the arcs of G(0), so le 0 is a transitive  relation containing G(0). Hence G(O)' c 1  284 TRITCHLER AND LOCKWOOD  and 1 is a linear extension of G(`. Conversely, let 1 be a linear extension of G(`, so G(0) c 1. Then I E 0 since  contains all complete asymmetric irreflexive directed graphs containing G(0), so 1 E L n 0.  THEOREM 1. Let KL be the conflict between Bel' and Bell' and let B be a focal element of Bel = BelQ+ BelL. Then:  1. KL = [1 -y m] -', where the summation is over every focal element 0 of Bel' whose canonical graph contains a cycle.  2. Let the partial order H be realized by B. Then 9 is the set of all linear extensions of H, so B is the largest subset of L  which realizes H-the maximal realizer of H.  3. m(B) = K' Y- m0), where the summation is over every focal element 0 of Bel' such that the transitive closure G(O)= H,  where H is realized by B.  Proof. By (5), the summation in conclusion 1 is over every focal element 0 of Bel' such that 0 n L = QS. By Lemma 3 these are  the focal elements 0 of Bel' such that G'(0) has no linear extension, hence by Lemmas 1 and 2 those 0 which contain a cycle,  proving the first conclusion of the theorem.  To prove conclusions 2 and 3, note that a focal element 9 of Bel is of the form 0 n L, so by Lemma 3, B consists of all linear  extensions of G(O). Let 9 realize H. Clearly, G(O)' c H. If there exists a; -+ a; in H but not in G(O)', then by Dushnik and  Miller (1941, Lemma 2.31) there is a linear extension 1 of G(O)' containing a; -> a;, so 9 cannot realize H. Thus G(` = H,  so 6 realizes G(O)', and consists of all linear extensions of G(`, establishing 2. The third conclusion then follows from  (4).  The first conclusion of Theorem 1 relates the conflict to traditional measures of consistency in paired comparisons. All  existing methods of evaluating the validity of paired comparison data study cycles in the dominance data (see Bezembinder  (1981) for a summary of methods). The third conclusion of the theorem shows how Bel can be constructed from Bel' by allocating  the basic probability number of each focal element 0 of Bel' with acyclic G( to B such that G(O) =G(O)`.  Any subset of L represents a disjunction of relations in L. Some subsets, however, have a simple interpretation as a single  relation. Trivially, a singleton subset represents a single linear order. In addition, certain subsets of L of cardinality  greater than one are interpreted as a single relation-a partial order. We define (L I H), the subset of L corresponding to a  partial order H, to be the set of all linear extensions of H. Then (L I H) is defined by the arcs in H and no other  restrictions on L. It represents only the constraints on L contained in H. Conclusion 2 of Theorem 1 shows that the focal  elements of Bel are of this form, so in that sense these subsets are those which are directly supported by the paired  comparison data. Other forms of subsets receive support only from partial orders which imply them.  If we let F= { (L J H): H is a partial order on A } then there is a 1-1 correspondence between the elements of F and the set  of transitive acyclic digraphs  PAIRED COMPARISONS 285  on A. We can thus conveniently represent the focal elements in a computer in terms of their graphs, so (L I H) is represented  by H.  In many applications, we might only be interested in subsets of L which can be interpreted as a single relation-a partial  order. We calculate the belief for a set by summing the basic probability numbers for focal elements it contains. The  following lemma tells us how to recognize focal elements contained in a partial order, in terms of the corresponding graphs.  LEMMA 4. Let 0, = (L I H,) and 02 = (L I H2) be subsets of L corresponding to partial orders H, and H2. Then B, c 02 iff H2 is  a subgraph of H, induced by deleting arcs from H, .  Proof. If Hz is a subgraph of H,, any linear extension of H, is a linear extension of H2, so 0, c 02. Assume 0, c 02 and Hz is  not a subgraph of H,. Then there exists an arc a -+ b of H2 not in H, . Every linear extension of H2 (and thus every element  of 02) must contain a-+ b, but by Lemma 2.31 of Dushnik and Miller (1941) there is a linear extension of H, with b --~ a,  implying 0, ~t 02. Thus Hz is a subgraph of H, .  Similarly, for computing the plausibilities of partial orders, the following lemma tells us how to recognize the focal  elements which intersect a given partial order.  LEMMA 5. Let 0, = (L I H,) and 02 = (L I H2) be subsets of L corresponding to  partial orders H, and H2. Then 0, n 02 0 iff H, u H2 is acyclic.  Proof. Note that (L I H,) n (L I H2) = (O(S) I H,) n L n ((9(S) I HZ) n L = (S) I H, u H2) n L, so 0, n 02 = (L I H,) n (L I  H2) = QS iff H, u H2 contains a cycle, completing the proof.  We have shown that the conflict is useful for examining the subject's responses. We now show that the conflict can be factored  according to a partition of S, to identify difficult subsets of comparisons. Let Z1, Z2, ..., Zk be the strong components  partitioning of the dominance data. Define I,_ {(i, j); a;, aj E Z., i < j{, m =1, ..., k, and let Io = {S - I, - 12 - - - -  - Ik }. Let KL be as in Theorem 1, let Bel be the belief function obtained when computing Bel using only those comparisons  over O (I.), m=0, 1, ..., k, let K be the conflict when computing Bel and similarly let Bel' be computed over I,. Our  proposed diagnostic is the set of numbers {K: m = 1, 2, ..., k}. By the following theorem, these numbers describe the total  THEOREM 2. KL = K, - K2 - ' ' - - Kk.  Proof. Let L; = Pj (L J I;)) be the set of linear orderings of the elements of Z;, and denote 0 to be a focal element of  Bel' and O; a focal element of Bel,  i = 0, 1, 2, ..., k. Since the I,) are independent frames, by Lemma 7.8 of  Shafer (1976) 0 is of the form 0 =  x  x Y'2 x ... x'rk and m =  286) TRITCHLER AND LOCKWOOD  mo () MD(01)  ... MD(0k). It suffices to show that 0 n L = Ql implies O; n L; = QS for some i, 1 <, i < k. For then  (K'')-1= Y MD(0) since BelL is logical,  _ mo (00) m1D(Y'1) ... MD(ok)  00.01,.-Ok OI-Lr#0 1<i_<k  =Y MO (9'0) Y MD(01) Y, MD(02) ... MD(mk) 00 01-L1#0 02-L2#0 OknLk,i`0  =(K,)-'.(K2)_' '.. (Kk)-1.  By (11) 0 = 012 x O13 x ... x 0(1)n, where Oi; is a focal element of BelD. if  O n L = O, by Theorem l, G(0) contains a cycle B. Since the arcs in G(O) correspond to singleton focal elements of Be1D, there  is an arc ai --+ a; in the dominance data for each (i, j) in B and hence a cycle in the dominance data. But a cycle can occur  only within a strong component, so B c G(oi) for some i E 11, 2, ..., k }. But then O; n L; = 0 since G() contains a cycle  and can have no linear extension in L;.  We may rephrase Theorem 2 to state that the weight of conflict is additive over the strong components. In practice, we would  use Theorem 2 by observing which strong components had large conflict and scrutinizing the comparisons within those components.  3. ASSUMPTIONS OF THE BELIEF FUNCTION MODEL  It may often be sufficient merely to view the belief function as a descriptive technique. Then the Be1D would be regarded as  the amount of weight the subject or experimenter wished to attach to a comparison, and the belief function analysis would  constitute a reasonable set of rules for constructing rankings which incorporate those weights. If, however, we wish to  interpret the Bel' as subjective probabilities, and wish to give the resulting beliefs in ranks a subjective probability  interpretation, we must carefully consider the necessary assumptions. The fundamental assumptions are that (1) the Be1;D have  the properties of a belief function and (2) Dempster's rule is appropriate for combining them. To justify these assumptions we  must carefully consider the appropriateness of a random mechanism as an analogy for the uncertainty about the comparisons in a  The first assumption of our method is that it is possible to represent the uncertainty of each comparison by a belief  function. Shafer and Tversky (1985) stress that any subjective probability assessment requires the use of canonical examples to  PAIRED COMPARISONS  287  relate evidence to a numerical scale of degree of belief. In our case this means that the confidence for each comparison can  be matched to a canonical example within the belief function framework. For simple support functions, they suggest a sometimes  reliable truth machine as a model for a canonical example. This machine has two modes of operation. In mode one it broadcasts  the truth, but in mode two it is completely unpredictable. There is a chance r that it operates in mode one, and 1 - r for  mode two. Different values for r constitute different canonical examples. The subject needs to compare the certainty of his  choice to the confidence he would have in the output of such a machine to determine the simple support function for his  comparison. Then we can reason about uncertainty using the analogy of a random mechanism.  Thus we must ensure that the comparisons can be related either explicitly or implicitly to the randomly reliable truth  machine. We are not asserting that the response is actually random, just that the confidence in a given comparison is  comparable to the confidence inspired by the output of a stochastic machine. Sophisticated probability assessors might  explicitly use the truth machine model, while skillful questioning as to the degree of "guessing" might be necessary for naive  subjects.  The second assumption is the validity of the rule of combination. To justify using Dempster's rule to combine the belief  functions for the individual comparisons, the belief functions must be based on independent bodies of evidence. Intuitively,  this is because if the evidence upon which two comparisons are based overlaps, then some uncertainty is shared and a simple  product rule will overestimate the uncertainty of the combination of the two belief functions. Extensive discussions of the  independence assumption are given in Shafer (1981) and Shafer (1987).  In our case, the assessment of the validity of the independence assumption must be based on the nature of the evidence used  for the comparisons. We will discuss the kinds of situations where independence seems intuitively justified, and contrast them  with cases where independence is unlikely. We make no distinction between the case for which the investigator applying the  paired comparisons judges the reliability for each comparison and the case when the subject performing the task states his  uncertainty about the comparison. The issues are the same in both cases.  If the specification of Bel' is based on external considerations, and not on the observation of the given subject's choices,  the independence of Bel' and Bel' seems clear. The evidence for Bel'J could be the previous experience of the investigator, or  his conviction that transitivity is essential in constructing preferences.  Let us now consider the independence assumptions made when forming Bel The judgement that two comparisons are based on  intuitively independent bodies of evidence is modelled by requiring that the analogous truth machines exhibit stochastic  independence, so that the joint reliability of the machines is the product of the individual reliabilities, which leads to  Dempster's rule. To see how to apply this prescription, let us consider a classic example for paired comparisons-the blinded  comparison of weights. A subject simultaneously picks up two objects which appear identical and specifies which one he  perceives to be heavier. The  288 TRITCHLER AND LOCKWOOD  magnitude of the uncertainty about each comparison will be partly a function of the difference in the true masses, similar  masses leading to high uncertainty. Suppose that the same objects, A and B, are compared twice. Given that the uncertainty of  each comparison is represented by a reliability r, it is intuitive to suppose that the judgements are made independently since  the comparisons are blinded. This is represented in our analogy by letting the probability of both truth machines being  reliable be given by rz.  This example reveals some principles for evaluating evidential independence in paired comparisons. First of all, what is the  evidence which must be independent? It seems to be the perception of the relative weights, which is made anew for each  comparison. We do not consider the objects themselves, or their true weights to be the relevant evidence. This is because the  difference between the weights of A and B is reflected in r, but given r the uncertainty is about the act of perception. The  situation is comparable to a balance scale. Although measurements made on such a scale are related by a common error  distribution, the measurement errors are considered independent since the scale has no memory.  If we change the above example by unblinding the comparisons, the two A vs. B comparisons would not be independent, unless the  subject had no memory. The subject would just recall his first judgement and the reliability of the pair of judgements would  equal that of the first judgement, r.  Let us disallow multiple comparisons of the same pair of objects and consider the unblinded comparisons A vs. B and B vs. C.  Object B is common to both comparisons-does this destroy independence? Although the same object B is perceived in both  comparisons, the two perceptions of B are made separately, probably not remembered, and made in different contexts-i.e.,  relative to A on one occasion and C on the other. Thus perception of the weight of B on the first occasion does not bias its  perception on the second, and the reliability of the second comparison is independent of the first. Since we are unblinded, we  must also assume that the subject is not employing any notions of transitivity to force his choices to be consistent. In  short, if the subject is making a separate perception of B (i.e., not recording and reusing the first perception of B), and  not forcing transitivity of his choices, we are in the same situation as if the comparisons are blinded. We say the evidence  used in comparing A and B (the relative perception of the weights) is separate from the evidence used for comparing B and C  (since fresh perceptions are made).  The case of comparing weights illustrates some of the issues in judging independence. This paradigm is representative of many  applications of paired comparisons, such as comparing psychophysical stimuli, when a global perception is made of the "worth"  of an object and the act of perception is performed each time an object is compared, without any retention. The analogy also  holds for comparing preferences, when the preference for an object is determined uniquely within the context of the object it  is being compared with.  Every application will demand a careful scrutiny of independence. Let us give an example where independence does not hold.  Suppose that attribute YB of an object B is measured a priori with an imprecise instrument, and that YA and Yc for  PAIRED COMPARISONS 289  objects A and C are precisely known. If we compare A vs. B by comparing YA to YB and compare B to C by comparing YB to Yc,  then YB is the same in both comparisons and uncertainty about B is shared, so the belief functions for the two comparisons are  not independent. To be able to assert that the joint probability is the product, we need to ensure that independent  measurements of YB are taken. The belief functions for the two comparisons are then independent, since the fact that the same  instrument is used for both measurements is taken into account by the respective reliabilities. This simple example relates to  more complex, structured problems where objects are compared on functions of their attribute values. If the attribute values  are a source of uncertainty and are fixed from comparison to comparison, independence will not hold.  Finally, let us consider a class of complex, unstructured comparisons. Independence is a natural assumption if the comparison  of two objects requires the construction of a complex argument and the belief function expresses uncertainty about the  validity of that argument. Here we consider the argument to be unique for each pair of objects. For example, the subject may  determine the relevant attributes for comparing those particular two objects and the relative worths of the objects on those  attributes, and somehow combine that information. This is a complex argument unique to the specific pair being compared, and  we consider uncertainty about its validity to be independent of arguments for different pairs. An example of this class of  problems is given in the next section.  4. EXAMPLE  In a study at the Ontario Cancer Institute, subjects were asked to compare for preference four scenarios describing ethical  dilemmas in health care. The preferences for all six possible scenario pairs were obtained. The choices for one respondent are  reported here:  1. Scenario B is preferred to scenario A,  2. Scenario D is preferred to scenario B,  3, Scenario D is preferred to scenario C,  4. Scenario A is preferred to scenario C,  5. Scenario A is preferred to scenario D,  6. Scenario B is preferred to scenario C.  A common way to analyze these data is to calculate the score for each scenario. The scenarios are then ranked in order of  preference by the magnitude of their scores (see, e.g., David (1988) ). The scores for scenarios A, B, C, D are 2, 2, 0, 2,  respectively. Thus A, B, and D are tied for first ranking.  The subject was asked to rate his reliability on each comparison. The reliabilities obtained were r, = 0.44, r2 = 0.74, r3 =  0.06, r4 = 0.97, r5 = 0.94, and rb = 0.93.  290 TRITCHLER AND LOCKWOOD  Comparison 1 gives support to scenario B over scenario A. This gives a simple support function with basic probability numbers:  m,(B-+A)=r,=0.44,  m,(B) = 1- r, = 0.56.  Simple support functions are yielded similarly by the other five comparisons. Let us see how the belief function analysis  compares to the analysis by scores.  For a subjective probability interpretation of the analysis we must inspect the appropriateness of the independence  assumptions. The comparisons are quite difficult, involving complex argumentation and a high degree of incomparability. The  scenarios depicted different diseases, different physical conditions and personal situations of patients, etc. Each scenario  included an ethical decision resolving the ethical dilemma described in that scenario-the comparison was of the palatability  of the ethical decisions. The difficulty of the comparisons was judged to be due to the complexity of constructing an argument  to compare the scenarios and to the high degree of incomparability. The properties of the individual scenarios are clear from  the descriptions and not a source of uncertainty. We were thus willing to make the assumption that belief functions for the  individual comparisons were independent.  Using Dempster's rule we compute the belief function based on all six comparisons. For brevity, we give the belief function  only for singleton and doubleton focal elements. The basic probability numbers, beliefs, and plausibilities are  m({ (ADBC) }) = 0.522, m({ (BADC) }) = 0.009, m ( { (DBAC) }) = 0.027, m({ (ADBC ), (ADCB) }) = 0.002, m({ (BADC ), (BACD) })  = 0.141, m({(DBAC), (DBCA)})=0.001,  Bet = 0.522, P1= 0.806  Bel = 0.009, PI = 0.374  Bel = 0.027, P1= 0.086  Bel = 0.524, P1= 0.806  Bet = 0.150, P1= 0.374  Bet=0.028, P1=0.086.  The last set, for example, realizes the partial order {(A, D), (A, B), (A, C), (D, B), (D, C)}, the intersection of the linear  orders DBAC and DBCA. The conflict is K'=(1-r,rzr3)-'=1.44.  If we compute beliefs for subsets of 0 which specify the top-ranked scenario the resulting beliefs are Bel(A) = 0.560, Bel(B)  = 0.155, Bel(C) = 0, Bel(D) = 0.028. The plausibilities are Pl(A) = 0.806, PI(B) = 0.374, PI(C) = 0.001, Pl(D) = 0.086.  Although scenarios A, B, and D form a cycle in the data, a singleton with scenario A ranked first, { (ADBC) }, is the only one  that gets a substantial amount of belief. The degrees of certainty assigned to the choices have discerned which ordering of A,  B, and D is most strongly supported; indeed, the belief for (ADBC) is greater than the plausibilities of the other singletons  with positive belief. The  PAIRED COMPARISONS 291  belief function analysis has thus provided a clear choice for a single ranking of the objects and for the choice of the most  preferred object, so modelling the uncertainty has greatly refined our analysis. Note that subject gives the singleton {  (BADC) } very low belief and {(BACD)} none at all, but gives the doubleton {(BADC), (BACD) } a moderate amount of belief. This  indicates that there is appreciable evidence that his preference ranking is one of (BADC) or (BACD), but very little evidence  as to which one.  S. DISCUSSION  The example in Section 4 demonstrates that weighting the comparisons can greatly refine the analysis. Further, results of the  analysis derived in Section 2 have natural interpretations. Focal elements represent partial orders, and the conflict is  related to cycles in the data. The theory of belief functions has yielded quite sensible results for this application.  Representing the linear ordering model by a belief function points the way to generalizations of the method. First, other  models such as weak orders and interval orders can be represented in the same way by an appropriate belief function, and the  details of the analysis worked out. Further, we need not use a logical belief function to represent the model. The logical  belief function asserts the model holds with complete certainty, which may exaggerate our confidence in the model. We can  reduce our dependence on the model by giving it a basic probability number less than one. The most general formulation would  use a belief function on a frame consisting of several possible models, which expressed our confidence in each of the models.  Further work will explore these generalizations.  Our formal use of dichotomous belief functions in Section 2 allows us to extend the method to situations where more than one  comparison of a given pair of objects, say A and B, is made. Each comparison of that pair yields a simple support function,  and the orthogonal sum of these simple support functions on OAB yields, in general, a dichotomous belief function on OAB. Thus  our method carries through directly. The use of the method is valid when, in addition to the normal independence assumptions,  the independence of the simple support functions on the same frame holds. This may be true when the comparisons are made based  on different criteria. For example, scenarios of ethical dilemmas might be compared as to the autonomy of the player, the  effect on society, etc. Shafer's method of discounting (Shafer, 1976) could be used to weight the criteria. Independent  dichotomous belief functions can also arise when the judgements of several different judges are combined. A third way of  obtaining a dichotomous belief function is by combining a' simple support function for a comparison with a dichotomous belief  function representing prior beliefs for that comparison, based on a history of such comparisons or the experimenter's  expectations. The method thus can incorporate prior information about both the structure of the preferences and the individual  choices.  480/35/3-2  292 TRITCHLER AND LOCKWOOD  The computational complexity of belief function analysis is great. Computational issues and algorithms are discussed in  Tritchler and Lockwood (1988).  APPENDIX: RELATIONS AND DIRECTED GRAPHS  Let A= {a,, az, ..., an} and let R be an irreflexive ((x, x) 0 R, for all x) binary relation on A. (a;, aj) E R represents the  preference of the judge for a; over aj, a;Ra;. We assume each ordered pair in R is unique, so the structure formed by A and R  is represented as a directed graph (or digraph) D=(A, R), where the a; are the nodes and there is a directed arc a; -> a;  connecting nodes a; and a; when (a;, aj) E R. The digraph D = (A, R) is said to be complete if either (a;, aj) or (aj, a;) is  in R for all i ;A j. We will often omit the distinction between D = (A, R) and R; e.g., we will say R is complete when D is  complete.  A path in the digraph D is a sequence of distinct nodes and their connecting arcs, e.g. (a;, a; --> a;, a;, a; -~ ak, ..., a,  - am, am). The node a; is reachable from a; if there exists a path beginning with a; and ending with a;. The length of a path  is the number of its arcs. A k-cycle is a path of length k whose first and last nodes are identical.  A directed graph is strong if every two nodes are mutually reachable. The directed graph D' is a subgraph of D if all its  nodes and arcs are contained in D, and we write D'(-- D. If D'(-- D, D' is strong, and there is no strong D" such that D' c--  D" c D, then we call D' a strong component of D. Harary et al. (1965, Theorem 3.2) show that (1) every node of D is contained  in exactly one of its strong components, yielding a partitioning Z,, Zz, ..., ZI of A; (2) an arc is in a strong component if  and only if it is in a cycle; and (3) an arc is in at most one strong component. Theorems 3.3 and 3.6 of Harary et al. show  that all the arcs of a given cycle are contained in the same strong component.  The binary relation R represented by a digraph D is transitive if for any three distinct nodes u, v, w, of D, whenever u -> v  and v - w, then u -> w. R is asymmetric if u -. v precludes v -+ u for distinct nodes u and v. If in addition to being  irreflexive R is asymmetric and transitive, it is a partial order. If R is also complete, it is a linear order.  The transitive closure D` of a digraph D is the unique minimal transitive digraph containing D. By Theorem 10.1 of Harary et  al. (1965), D` is a partial order if D is acyclic. By Theorem 5.4 of Harary et al., the arc u -> v is in D` if and only if v  is reachable from u in D.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  The authors are grateful to Arthur Dempster for helpful suggestions concerning this work, and for valuable comments on earlier  drafts of this paper. James Till's encouragement and comments are much appreciated. We have benefited from discussions with  Shelagh Emmott, Robert Morton, Hung Nguyen, Mathis Thoma, and Russell Almond. The comments of the referees have been helpful  and stimulating. The data in the example were kindly provided by James Till. This research was supported by the National  Cancer Institute of Canada.  PAIRED COMPARISONS  293  REFERENCES  BEZEMBINDER, T. G. G. (1981). Circularity and consistency in paired comparisons. British Journal of Mathematical and  Statistical Psychology, 34, 16-37.  DAVID, H. A. (1988). The method of paired comparisons (2nd ed.). London: Griffin.  DEMPSTER, A. P. (1966). New methods for reasoning towards posterior distributions based on sample data. Annals of Mathematical  Statistics, 37, 355-374.  DEMPSTER, A. P. (1967a). Upper and lower probabilities induced by a multivalued mapping. Annals of Mathematical Statistics,  38, 325-339.  DEMPSTER, A. P. (19676). Upper and lower probability inferences based on a sample from a finite univariate population.  Biometrika, 54, 515-528.  DEMPSTER, A. P. (1968a). Upper and lower probabilities generated by a random closed interval. Annals of Mathematical  Statistics, 39, 957-966.  DEMPSTER, A. P. (19686). A generalization of Bayesian inference (with discussion), Journal of the Royal Statistical Society,  Series B, 30, 205-247.  DEMPSTER, A. P. (1969). Upper and lower probability inferences for families of hypotheses with monotone density ratios. Annals  of Mathematical Statistics, 40, 953-969.  DUSHNIK, B., & MILLER, E. W. (1941). Partially ordered sets. American Journal of Mathematics, 63, 600-610.  HARARY, F., NORMAN, R. Z., & CARTWRIGHT, D. (1965). Structural models: An introduction to the theory of directed graphs. New  York: Wiley.  KONG, A. M. (1986). Multivariate belief functions and graphical models. Ph.D. Thesis, Department of Statistics, Harvard  University.  RouBENS, M., & VINCKE, P. (1985). Preference Modeling. Berlin, Springer-Verlag.  SHAFER, G. (1976). A mathematical theory of evidence. Princeton, NS: Princeton University Press. SHAFER, G. (1981).  Constructive probability. Synthese, 48, 1-60.  SHAFER, G. (1982). Belief functions and parametric models. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 44, 322-352.  SHAFER, G. (1987). Belief functions and possibility measures, in J. C. Bizdek (Ed.), The analysis of fuzzy information, Vol. 2  (pp. 51-84). Cleveland: CRC Press.  SHAFER, G. & TVERSKY, A. (1985). Languages and designs for probability judgement. Cognitive Science, 9, 309-339.  THOMPSON, W. A., & REMADE, R. (1964), Rankings from paired comparisons. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 35, 739-747.  TRITCHLER, D. & LOCKWOOD, G. (1988). Algorithms for paired comparison belief functions, Computer science and statistics: 20 th  symposium on the interface (pp. 359-364).  TVERSKY, A. & Russo, J. (1969). Substitutability and similarity in binary choices. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 6, 1-12  RECEIVED: June 12, 1989