10.1016/0022-2496(91)90039-v
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 35, 122-130 (1991)  Book Review  Founding Cognitive Science on the Arrow of Time?  MARIA NOWAKOWSKA. Cognitive Sciences. Basic Problems, New Perspectives, and Implications for Artificial Intelligence. Orlando,  FL: Academic Press, 1986. Pp. ix + 379.  Reviewed b1' HANS COLONIUS  Maria Nowakowska was, until her death in 1989 of a heart attack, a Research Associate at the Machine Intelligence Institute  and an Adjunct Professor of Psychology, both at Ohio State University. She obtained a Ph.D. in Science and Psychology from  Jagiellonian University, Cracow, Poland, in 1973, and from 1975 to 1980 was Head of the Laboratory of Psychology and Action  Theory at the Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw. Nowakowska's major research area was the formal theory of actions, in which  she published extensively. Her nine books include that under review and Quantitative psychology. Some chosen problems and new  ideas (North-Holland, 1983).  The reviewer, Hans Colonius, is an Associate Professor with the Department of Psychological Sciences at Purdue University. His  research interests include mathematical modeling of psychophysical and elementary cognitive processes, probabilistic choice,  and measurement theory. His publications include Stochastische Theorien individuellen Wahlverhallens [Stochastic Theories of  Individual Choice], (Springer-Verlag, 1984). R' 1991 Academic Press, Inc.  "This is an unusual book, full of ideas, some good and some bad." This introductory remark by Patrick Suppes (Suppes, 1986)  reviewing Nowakowska's earlier book on quantitative psychology (Nowakowska, 1983) seems fitting to this more recent work as  well. Let me hasten to add, however, that this is a much more coherent and original piece of work recommended to anyone  interested in a perspective on cognitive science off the beaten track. The basic premise of this book, as the author puts it  (p. 1), is that "...advancement of all sciences that owe their foundations to the cognitive processes depends on an extension,  a deepening, and an exactness of description within the cognitive dialogue between the perceiver and objective reality."  Accordingly, the concepts of subjective and objective time (Chapter 1), of events and their observability (Chapter 2), and the  theory of fuzzy sets pervade the book. Later chapters are on communication and language (Chapter 3), judgment formation and  knowledge theory (Chapter 4), memory and perception (Chapter 5), and expertise formation, opinion change, and learning  (Chapter 6).  Requests for reprints should be sent to Dr. Hans Colonius, Department of Psychological Sciences, Purdue University, Peirce  Hall, Room 365A, West Lafayette, IN 47907.  0022-2496/91 $3.00  Copyright :(; 1991 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  122  BOOK REVIEW 123  There are several reasons why I am not really enthusiastic about the book, however, My concerns roughly divide into two  classes, (a) its use of mathematics, and (b) its non-use of known results, in particular, empirical results. Let me expand on  these a little before substantiating my criticism while going through the chapters in more detail. The point here is not, of  course, the use of mathematics in itself, although the definition-theorem-proof style prevailing in many chapters may  discourage some potential readers. In general, the degree of mathematization, or formalization, of a theory-let us equate  those two concepts here for the sake of conciseness-is assumed to reflect the level of sophistication of the theoretical  approach. In this book, the correspondence is not that simple. Although Nowakoska makes free and easy use of heavy tools from  probability theory (e.g., Wiener and Ornstein-Uhlenbeck processes) I was almost never struck by deeper insights given by the  theorems beyond what was already stated without the formalism. One reason for this is that Nowakowska uses mathematics mainly  in a descriptive manner. While she seems to be aware of this-anticipating a later, explanatory stage of her theories-the  theorems sometimes cross the borderline to triviality. Another reason, with more serious consequences, is the arbitrariness of  many of the mathematical assumptions introduced. For example, in Section 1.4, the mechanisms of subjective comparisons of time  intervals are discussed. She suggests a model mapping temporal stimuli onto memory traces assuming that, at the time of  comparison, a judgment by the subject is based on the state of the memory traces given at that time. The modification over  time of the memory traces is postulated to constitute a Wiener process. While this model may be a viable candidate, no  particular motivation is given for the Wiener process assumption nor are possible alternatives discussed.  This example may also serve to illustrate my second point of concern, the nonuse of empirical (and alternative theoretical)  results. By now, there exists a large body of empirical data on the psychophysics of time gathered over more than a century;  see, e.g., the results of the International Workshop on Time, Mind, and Behavior reported in Michon & Jackson (1985). Even if  one chooses to disregard alternative theories, how can one afford to ignore relevant data without contributing to the  frequently deplored lack of cohesion and cumulative development in this field? This is all the more regrettable as the author  does certainly have interesting ideas which, however, often remain in a largely unfinished state.  Before embarking on the first chapter, a short comment on the author's somewhat idiosyncratic use of the term Cognitive  Science seems advisable. In fact, the term is nowhere defined in the book and is also lacking in the subject index. As the  title of the book suggests, Nowakowska is trying to circumvent the admittedly delicate problem of a precise definition (see,  however, Norman, 1981) by speaking of "the cognitive sciences". My guess is that by these she means the various subfields of  cognitive psychology since logic, philosophy, linguistics, psycholinguistics, neurobiology, artificial intelligence, and  computer science are explicitly excluded (p. 11 ).  The first chapter, "A New Theory of Time," is perhaps the most ambitious one.  480/35'1 -9  124 BOOK REVIEW  Given the shift of emphasis from structural to dynamic analysis proposed by Nowakowska, the concept of time becomes a notion  of fundamental importance for the foundation of cognitive science. Her theory of time  ...combines in one formal system the problems of objective and subjective time and memory. This is a theoretical novelty in  measurement theory, being the first analysis of its kind in the literature. One can expect that further development of the  theory of measurement will go towards construction of a new class of models that are not only descriptive but also  explanatory, thus bringing it closer to cognitive processes, and allowing us to rely less on physical models. The notion of  time is of fundamental importance not only for measurement from the theoretical, philosophical, or physical point of view, it  is also crucial for AI (simulation of cognitive processes), mathematical theory of programming (restrictions of satisfiability  and truth in time), and in studies of structure and coding of information, especially for the new generation of super fast  computers for which information is to be coded in molecular structures." (p.2).  For concreteness, let us roughly sketch her formal approach here. She starts with an ordered pair <Z, W), where Z is a set of  events (understood as "instantaneous changes of state of some fragment of reality") and W is a class of fuzzy partial  relations in Z mapping pairs of events (a, b) into the closed unit interval, where each w from W has its specific domain A  (w), a subset of Z x Z. The value w(a, b) is to be interpreted as the degree to which event a precedes event b. Thus, each  A(vv) is the set of those pairs of events that are comparable with respect to the precedence relation w. Assuming that the  only case that two events may not be comparable is if they both occur in the future, Nowakowska's general idea is to derive an  objective ordinal time scale from a (set-inclusion) order on the class of domains A (w). Specifically, the sets A (w) serve to  define a subset of events, called the future of "-counting from the (time of) comparison w-as follows:  F(w) = {a E Z : there exists b such that (a, b) is not in A(w)I  Consequently, if an event a is not in the future of w it should be possible to compare it to any other event with respect to  its degree of precedence. The author then puts an order on the set W by defining  w < w' if and only if A(w) is a subset of A(w').  Stipulating that for any w, w' from W either A (w) is a subset of A (w') or vice versa, it is easily seen that A (w) c A (w')  implies F(w') c F(w), that is, w < w' if comparison w occurs earlier than comparison w'. Postulating S to be a weak order and  adding a technical condition (existence of a countable order-dense subset) the author then invokes an ordinal representation  theorem of measurement theory (see, e.g., Roberts, 1979, p. 112) to derive the existence of an order-preserving real-valued  function t on W. The ordinal time scale t(w) then serves to define, for each event a E Z, its time of occurence by  T(a) =infIt(w) : a not an element of F(w) },  BOOK REVIEW 125  that is, "...the earliest moment at which a is not in the future of comparison relations pertaining to this moment." (p. 19).  From here, it is straightforward to define the past and present at t, respectively, as  P,= {aEZ: T(a) <tj  and  N,={aeZ:T(a)=t}  where t=t(w) for some vv. Nowakoska's next goal is to derive a subjective time (interval) scale defined on the union of P, and  N,. To this end, she adds assumptions allowing her to transform each function w into a function u', defined on all pairs (a,  b), where a, b are from the union of P, and N,. The intended interpretation of wr(a, b) is "the degree to which event a  precedes event b if a comparison is made at time t". The reason for this manipulation is that now vvt has all the formal  properties of a pair comparison probability; in particular,  w,(a, b) + w,(b, a) = 1.  Consequently, by another appeal to measurement theory (the strong utility model, see, e.g., Suppes, Krantz, Luce & Tversky,  1989; Chap. 17), she arrives at a subjective time interval scale s, defined on the union of P, and N, satisfying  s,(a) < s,(b) iff w,(a, b) > 12  and  s,(a) -s,(b) > s,(c) -s,(d) iff a'ja, b) < w,(c, d).  Later in the chapter, this construction is used to model the storage of event orders in long-term memory and the subjective  distortions of time intervals. As mentioned above, while those applications contain some interesting ideas, the developments  suffer from the author's almost completely ignoring relevant work in the area of the psychology of time.  At first sight, Nowakowska's approach of defining both subjective and objective time within one formal system may appear  unnecessarily laborious. Why should one not accept the existence of an objective scale of time measured in milliseconds as is  common practice, e.g., in psychological studies of reaction time? After all, when studying the perception of length, for  example, psychologists also rely on a physical scale of length for describing their stimuli. Nowakowska's point, however, is  that from the viewpoint of measurement theory, this naive approach is not acceptable. An axiomatic foundation of objective  time may expose exactly those properties of this concept which are instrumental in understanding time perception. That this  hope need not be totally vain is demonstrated by the case of a closely related concept, viz. space. Although it is safe to  assume that the subjects'  126) BOOK REVIEW  perception takes place in objective euclidean space (at least approximately so), a more general geometric analysis of the  concept of space has turned out to be a key to understanding binocular visual space perception (see, e.g., Suppes et al.,  1989, Chap. 13, for a recent review).  To put some perspective on Nowakowska's approach towards a foundation for time, let us digress a little bit. Time has proved  to be an exceptionally elusive concept even in physics. First, the theory of relativity made it necessary to abandon the idea  of a unique absolute time. Second, it is well known that most physical laws would allow the universe to run equally well  forward or backward. This has led theoretical physicists to search for a possible explanation for the arrow of time. In fact,  for Stephen W. Hawking (Hawking, 1988, p. 145) there are "...at least three different arrows of time. First, there is the  thermodynamic arrow of time, the direction of time in which disorder or entropy increases. Then, there is the psychological  arrow of time. This is the direction in which we feel time passes, the direction in which we remember the past but not the  future. Finally, there is the cosmological arrow of time. This is the direction of time in which the universe is expanding  rather than contracting." Hawking argues that the psychological arrow of time is determined by the thermodynamic arrow of  time: "Disorder increases with time because we measure time in the direction in which disorder increases." (ibid., p. 147).  Living things can exist and build up memories, thus gaining a sense of time, only by overcoming the ever increasing disorder  in the universe within a local region. This is no contradiction to the second law of thermodynamics, Hawking holds, because  the increase in the order of the memory itself is always less than the increase in disorder generated by the energy used up by  the memory device, human or artificial. He proposes a particular quantum-gravity model of the universe in order to explain why  the universe is ordered at one pole of time (the big bang) but disordered at the other (the big crunch).  Whether or not one accepts Hawking's speculation-some criticism has been raised lately-it seems fair to say that Nowakowska's  `ordinal objective time' scale derived from the order on the set of functions W does not provide a physical foundation of the  time concept but, rather, can be seen as an interesting elaboration of Hawking's second arrow of time warranting the existence  of a subjective time scale. In fact, since w(a, b) is to be interpreted as "the degree to which event a precedes event b",  this presupposes some kind of representational medium in which to perform this comparison. This conclusion holds even after  realizing that Nowakowska, in contrast to what her presentation suggests, does not use the functions w in her construction of  ordinal time: all that is being used in defining the order on W are the domains A(w) of the functions w in W. As time  progresses, the domains A(n,) expand increasing the number of event pairs which are comparable with respect to the precedence  relation. Thus, Hawking's suggested local decrease of entropy in memory over time is reflected in Nowakowska's construction.  The second chapter begins with an analysis of the notion of an event in terms of a theory of fuzzy sets. Although Nowakowska's  treatment of spatial and temporal fuzziness of objects and her notion of fuzziness-dependence of predicates goes  BOOK REVIEW 127  beyond standard fuzzy set theory I fail to see-here as well as in most other applications of fuzzy set theory to  psychology-the explanatory power of assuming, for example, the existence of a function specifying the degree to which an  object exists at some point in time t. Interestingly, the author herself abandons the fuzzy set framework when she sets out to  explicate the important concept of causal (in)dependence of events. Her definition of causal independence in terms of  probabilistic conditional independence is basically equivalent to that given by Suppes & Zanotti (1981) who are not  referenced, however (see also Holland & Rosenbaum, 1986, for an application to latent variable models). The remaining part of  the chapter deals with a somewhat neglected aspect of psychological data theory, namely the constraints on observability  occuring in many experimental situations. This is another example of the author's having good insights that are not born out  by substantive empirical illustration. She characterizes the situation by assuming that the complete knowledge of the laws  governing some collection of objects can be captured by the joint probability distribution of their corresponding attributes.  Observability constraints make it impossible to estimate the joint distribution completely, even though partial observations,  e.g. the values of the marginals, may be possible. A case in point which the author might have mentioned is the analysis of  reaction times in the redundant target paradigm where subjects are instructed to respond with a button press to two or more  simultaneously presented stimuli. According to a popular model (Raab, 1962), each stimulus gives rise to a response process  represented by a random variable with the response time being determined by the winner of the race. Obviously, the joint  probability distribution of the response processes is not observable, only the minimum time is (for a recent discussion of  this an similar paradigms, see Miller, 1982; Ashby & Townsend, 1986; Colonius, 1986; 1990). Later in the chapter (Section  2.8.3), the author discusses a situation where the minimum time as well as the event type are observable. From her  representation of this material, it is not clear whether the author is familiar with the vast statistical literature on this  topic, viz. the theory of competing risks (see, e.g. David & Moeschburger (1978) for the theory, and Marley & Colonius (in  press), for an application in choice theory).  The next two chapters (3 and 4) are based on Nowakowska's earlier work published in Mathematical Social Scioences (Nowakowska  1985a, 1985b) and will only be given a cursory glance here. Chapter 3 is concerned with multimedia communication. The authors  proposes an interesting analysis of how to think about the combination of verbal statements, body movements, gestures, and  facial expressions and analyzes problems of expressibility of certain meanings in situations in which some media are excluded  from use. An impressive collection of psychological, logical, and linguistic analyses of various aspects of judgment formation  is presented in Chapter 4 comprising models of answering questions, a discussion of the limitations on the precision of  description imposed by the language used, a theory of texts, and a theory of knowledge.  The last two chapters comprising some 120 pages contain about a dozen models in the areas of perception and memory (Chap. 5)  and on expertise formation,  128 BOOK REVIEW  opinion change, and learning (Chap 6). My concerns raised above concerning the author's use of mathematics and the neglect of  the relevant literature need to be reiterated for Chap. 5. Characteristically, whenever Nowakowska mentions "empirical"  results what she refers to are in fact data coming from a simulation rather than from real subjects. Still, a few of the  models are specified in enough detail to undergo empirical testing by a reader wanting to undertake it. For a reviewer,  however, the task of evaluating these models becomes very difficult. To give a general idea of her approach, let us sketch  what she calls "elements of a new theory of perception" (p. 227). The theory centers around the concept of a glance defined as  "...a change of the focus of the eye, followed by a period of fine eye movements in the domain of the new focal point." (p.  227). According to the author, glances are to be distinguished from saccadic eye movements by a conscious component: "One  knows that one glances at a particular point." (p. 227). In the process of perception, the subject makes a sequence of glances  thereby generating a dynamic system of events, due to the process of cognition: she remembers what she saw earlier and what  she saw later. Moreover, this process of conscious exploration by glances is to be distinguished from "...loose and  spontaneous passive glances over an object." The movement of these passive glances is governed by a so-called attractiveness  function representing the changes of attractiveness of various domains of the focal points. She assumes that the attraction of  the inspected domain decreases over time, while the attractions of the domains not inspected increase, with rates possibly  depending on the proximity to the inspected domain. On the other hand, the glance process can be controlled and designed to  attain some specific goal, such as recognizing an object while optimizing some criterion like recognition time.  The way the theory is stated so far, it is purely descriptive and its dynamic aspects are reminiscent of early field theories  (Lewin, 1936). Although Nowakowska does not mention this connection, she discusses the relation between her theory and Gestalt  theory (pp. 313-314). Specifically, she considers some of the formalized models stemming from her theory of perception as  quantifications of Gestalt theoretic notions. Unfortunately, due to her idiosyncratic use of mathematics, most of these models  do not make testable predictions. For example, the author suggests an intuitive explanation of the Miiller-Lyer illusion in  terms of her glance process which is no more or less plausible than many other verbally stated proposals. Subsequently, when  she sets out to formalize it, a number of specific assumptions are introduced, among others, again the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck  process to describe the behavior of the fine eye movements in the domain of a focal point. From here, one would expect her to  derive predictions concerning, for example, the strength of the illusion as a function of the angle spanned by the arms of the  arrows. Instead, she derives an expression for the average duration of the memory trace which, while supporting her general  hypothesis, does not generate any quantitative predictions as to the size of the effect.  The final chapter develops a Markov process model to describe the dynamics of knowledge acquisition. Nowakowska rightly  emphasizes the formal correspondence among the processes involved in expertise formation, opinion change, and learning.  BOOK REVIEW  129  The models on expertise formation and on optimal time allocation to topics in a learning situation are among the more concrete  ones in the book although the author seems not be aware of early work by Chant & Atkinson (1973) for the optimal allocation  problem. As to the first model in this chapter, moreover, one may wonder whether representing a knowledge state simply as a  vector of realvalued coordinates without further structure is doing justice to the complexity of the situation. For a similar  situation, an alternative approach using lattice-theoretic structures has been developed by Falmagne and coworkers (Doignon &  Falmagne, 1985; Falmagne, 1989).  This plethora of models having been gone through, a natural question arises: What, if any, will be the impact of this book on  cognitive science? My concerns raised earlier should make it plain that I do not consider this book a convincing demonstration  of how to apply mathematics to the problems of cognitive science. With her ad hoc mathematization Nowakowska makes the second  step before the first, which would have been to carefully review the accumulated empirical results and identify those abstract  functional relationships that call for a mathematical interpretation. On the other hand, Nowakowska's emphasis on the dynamic  and stochastic aspects of cognition, on minute description of the empirical situation, her appreciation of the important role  of the notions of time and observability, and her endeavour to approach diverse areas of cognition within one unifying  framework deserve the attention of everyone working in the broad area of cognitive science.  REFERENCES  ASHBY, F. G., & TOWNSEND, J. T. (1986). Varieties of perceptual independence. Psychological Review, 93, 154-179.  CHANT, V., & ATKINSON, R. C. (1973). Optimal allocation of instructional effort to interrelated learning strands. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 10, 1-25.  COLONIUS, H. (1986). Measuring channel dependence in separate activation models. Perception & Psychophysics, 40, 251-255.  COLONIUS, H. (1990). Possibly dependent probability summation of reaction time. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 34,  253-275.  DAVID, H. A., & MOESCHBURGER, M. L. (1978). The theory of competing risks. London: Griffin. DOIGNON, J.-P., & FALMAGNE, G.-C.  (1985). Spaces for the assessment of knowledge. International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 23, 175-196.  FALMAGNE, J.-C. (1989). A latent trait theory via a stochastic learning theory for a knowledge space. Psychometrika, 54,  283-303.  HAWKING, S. W. (1988). A brief history of time. New York: Bantam.  HOLLAND, P. W., & ROSENBAUM, P. R. (1986). Conditional association and unidimensionality in monotone latent variable models.  The Annals of Statistics, 14, 1523-1543.  LEWIN, K. (1936). Principles of topological psychology. New York: McGraw-Hill.  MARLEY, A. A. J., & COLONIus, H. (in press). The "horse race" random utility model and its competing risks interpretation.  Journal of Mathematical Psychology.  MICHON, J. A., & JACKSON, J. L. (1985). Time, mind, and behavior. Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag. MILLER, J. O. (1982). Divided  attention: Evidence for coactivation with redundant signals. Cognitive Psychology, 14, 247-279.  NORMAN, D. A. (1981). Perspectives on cognitive science. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  130  BOOK REVIEW  NOWAKOWSKA, M. (1983). Quantitative psychology: Some chosen problems and new ideas. Amsterdam: North-Holland.  NoWAKOWSKA, M. (1985a). Fundamentals of expert systems. 1. Judgment formation and problems of description. Mathematical Social  Sciences, 9.  NOWAKOWSKA, M. (?985b). Fundamentals of expert systems. 11. Communication. Mathematical Social Sciences, 10.  RAAB, D. (1962). Statistical facilitation of simple reaction times. Transactions of the New York Academy of Sciences, 24,  574-590.  ROBERTS, F. S. (1979). Measurement theory. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.  SUPPES, P., & ZANOTTI, M. (1981). When are probabilistic explanations possible? Synthese, 48, 191-199. SUPPES, P. (1986). Too  little about too much: Review of Maria Nowakowska, Quantitative Psychology: Some Chosen Problems and New Ideas. Contemporary  Psychology, 31, 660-661.  SUPPES, P., KRANTZ, D. M., LucE, R. D., & TVERSKY, A. (1989). Foundations of Measurement, Vol. 11. San Diego: Academic Press.