10.1016/0022-2496(91)90036-s
IOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 35, 92-99 (1991)  Theoretical Note  Measurable Value Functions for Ranking and Selection of Groups of Alternatives  BEHNAM MALAKOOTI  Case Western Reserve University  A set of axioms for the existence and assessment of measurable value functions is presented. It is shown that these measurable  value functions can express higher order relationships (more than four elements). As an application, it is shown that these  measurable functions can be used when more than one alternative, i.e., a subset of alternatives, should be selected, thereby  expanding the domain of problem solving. The cognitive burden on the decision maker in terms of both the number and the  difficulty of questions (observations) is reported based on some experiments. <1991 Academic Press, Inc.  INTRODUCTION  1.1. Examples Illustrating Selection of Groups of Alternatives  Consider the president of a small company who whishes to buy three cars for his company. His choices are specific models of  Mercedes Benz (M), Cadillac (Ca), Oldsmobile (O), Nissan (N), and Chevrolet (Ch). His selection is to be based on the three  cars as a group, rather than three independent selections. This problem involves relationships that are of a higher order than  binary or quaternary. For example, in the binary relationship, the Decision Maker (DM) is faced with the paired comparison of  alternatives, e.g., M vs. Ca, i.e., the selection of one alternative. In the quaternary relationship, the DM can compare, for  example, M and O vs. Ca and N, i.e., selection of two alternatives. The quaternary relationship can also be expressed in the  form of a preference difference, e.g., how strongly the DM prefers M to O vs. how strongly he prefers Ca to N. Although  quaternary relationships can imply binary relationships, they do not imply higher-order relationships (that is, relationships  that can be used for the selection of more than two  Many thanks are due to anonymous referees and Professor James T. Townsend for their detailed comments and constructive  suggestions. The author is indebted to Mr. Evan Tandler, who contributed immensely in the experimentations reported in this  paper. The author also thanks Professors Vira Chankong, R. K. Sarin, Robert L. Winkler, Mr. Jun Wang, and Mr. Fiedel Ikam.  Requests for reprints should be sent to B. Malakooti, Associate Professor, Department of Systems Engineering, Center for  Automation and Intelligent Systems Research, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106.  0022-2496/91 $3.00  Copyright ii > 1991 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  92  MEASURABLE VALUE FUNCTIONS 93  alternatives as subsets of alternatives, e.g., the selection of three cars as a group). In this note, a special case of  preference differences (quaternary relationships) and their underlying axioms are presented to solve the higher-order  relationships.  As another example, consider an employer who can hire 20 employees from a pool of 30 applicants. A value function based on  binary or even quaternary relationships is not necessarily valid for comparing all different possibilities. One may try to  compare all the different combinations of 20 alternatives, and then choose the best set of alternatives. In this approach,  however, each alternative (applicant) must be considered separately, and there may be so many combinations of alternatives  (all different possible groups of 20 out of 30 applicants) that the DM's job becomes extremely difficult or impossible. In the  approach proposed in this paper, however, the DM is required to think in terms of only three alternatives at a time. This  imposes a greater cognitive burden on the DM than binary relationships do, but, as discussed, it yields a more precise  assessment of the DM's measurable value function and ranking of different combinations of alternatives.  The idea of strength of preference or preference difference has been around for many years, but it has been criticized as  non-operational and being essentially a matter of direct self-interrogation. This and other limitations are discussed by  Fishburn (1970, Chap. 6). Yet recent studies by Dyer and Sarin (1979) among others suggest that there may be some advantages  in terms of applications from further developments of the strength of preference notion. Malakooti (1985) used the notion of  strength of preference for assessment of multi-attribute utility functions through the paired comparison of alternatives; also  see Malakooti and Ravindran (1985/1986), Malakooti and D'Souza (1986), and Malakooti (1988).  This note consists of three sections. Section 2 discusses the basic theory, theoretical implications, applications, and a  summary of experiments. Section 3 is the conclusions.  2. EXISTENCE OF MEASURABLE VALUE FUNCTIONS  In this note we present a special case of the difference measurement and measurable value functions. This special case  requires that one of the four elements in the quaternary relationships of the difference measurement be null. Since there are  three elements (besides the null element) involved in each relationship, this special case is called strength of preference  through trinary relations.  2.1. Notations and Definitions  There are several axiom systems for existence of measurable value functions, such as the algebraic axioms by Scott and Suppes  (1958), or the topological results of Debreu (1960). The following axioms are based on the algebraic-difference structure  axiom system of Krantz et al. (1971, Chap. 4). Let X denote the set of possible consequences of a decision situation; let K',  x, v, y', q E X; and let > + denote the preference relation on X. Let > + denote strict preference, and let ti + denote indif-  94 B. MALAKOOTI  ference. Also, define "null" or QS to be unique. A null alternative implies no action and 0 E X.  2.2. Axioms and a Theorem  Al (Transitivity): If wx > + yo and yo > + zo, then wx > + zo.  A2 (Connectivity): Either wx > + yo, or yo > + w:x.  A3 (Negativity): If uvx > + yo, then Oy > + xw.  A4 (Weak Monotonicity): If wx > + yo and xz > + QS y' and yy' - + q0, then wz > + q0.  A5 (Continuity): If wx > + yo and yo ? + wtiv, then there exist .v', y" F X such that wy' - + yo and Yo - + y" x.  A6 (Archimedean Condition): If w,, w,_ w;, ... is a strictly bounded standard sequence (w;+,wr-+ qo and qo-+ w2w, for every  w;, w;+, in the sequence; not q0 ^, + w, w,; and there exist o; , z', z" E X such that z'z" > + o; QS and o; Qf > + `" Z'  where o; Qs - + w; w, for all w; in the sequence) then it is finite.  A7 (Substitutability): If w, x E X then there exists y E X such that wx-+ yo.  Axiom 1 demonstrates strength of preference consistency. Axiom 2 expresses a completeness assumption that guarantees  comparability between any preference and any preference difference. Axiom 3 establishes the notion of negativity for  preference difference and preferences. Loosely speaking, Axiom 4 implies that the appropriate ordering of preference  difference is maintained if we compare the difference between the end points of two pairs that share a common consequence.  Axiom 5 is similar to the solvability condition that primarily implies that X is infinite. Axiom 6 implies that if wx > + yo  and yo > + ww, then there exists a positive integer n such that wx can be divided into n + 1 equal intervals where yo > +  (each interval). Axiom 7 implies that for any preference difference there exists an equivalent alternative. This implies that  one can substitute a preference for a preference difference. Axiom 7, substitutability, is in fact consistent with A5  (solvability or continuity) and A6 (Archimedean Condition), which are both used in Krantz et al. (1971) for quaternary axioms.  Although it is a strong condition, however, substitutability has been used in other sets of axioms (though for different  purposes); see, for example, Von Neumann and Morgenstern's set of axioms for expected utility functions. See (Krantz et al.,  1971) for references.  The value of null is defined to be a constant. That is, if there exists a value function V, then V(O) = C, where C is unique  only up to a positive linear transformation.  THEOREM. Given Axioms A1 to A7, there exists a real-valued function V on X such that, for all w, x, y E X wx > + yO if and  only if  V(w)-V(x)> V(Y) -C, (1)  MEASURABLE VALUE FUNCTIONS 95  where C is a constant. Furthermore, V is unique up to a positive linear transformation; that is, if V' also satisfies (1),  then there are real numbers a > 0 and b such that V'(x) = aV(x) + b for all x E X.  Outline of Proof. To prove the theorem, we show that our set of Axioms 1 to 7 implies Axioms 1 to 5 of Krantz et al. (1971, p.  151, Sect. 4.4.1). Since Krantz et al. (1971) prove that there exists a real-valued function v on X based on their Axioms 1 to  5, there exists a real-valued function based on our Axioms 1 to 7. We establish these implications as follows.  Axiom 1 of Krantz et al. (1971) is weak order which is the same as transitivity and connectivity (Krantz et al., 1971, pp. 145  and 14, Definition 1). For quaternary their axioms are defined thus:  K 1 (Transitivity): If wx Z> + mn and mn > + aq, then wx > + Qq.  K2 (Connectedness ): Either wx > + mz or mz > + RIx.  Now we state that K1 can be implied by Al and A7 and K2 can be implied by A2 and A7.  Since by A7 there exist preference differences for each y, z E X, then there exist w', x', w", x" E X such that w'x' - + yo  and w"x" - + zo. This implies that A l can be written as  If wx > + w'x' and w'x' > + w"x", then wx > + w"x",  which is the same as K1.  Similarly, A2 can be written in the above format by using A7. That is, for y E X there exist z, m E X such that yo - + mz;  therefore, A2 can be written as  Either wx > + mz or mz > + wx.  Since K1 and K2 are the same as Axiom 1 (weak order) of Krantz et al. (1971) and our Al, A2, and A7 implies Kl and K2, hence  Al, A2, and A7 imply the weak order of Krantz et al. (1971). Similarly:  Axiom 2 of Krantz et al. (1971) follows from A3 and A7. Axiom 3 of Krantz et al. (1971) follows from A4 and A7. Axiom 4 of  Krantz et al. (1971) follows from A5 and A7. Axiom 5 of Krantz et al. (1971) follows from A6 and A7.  Finally, by the proof of Theorem 2 (Section 4.4.1 of Krantz et al., the conclusions of the above theorem are true; i.e., there  exists a measurable value function based on Al to A7.  The Theorem implies that V is a cardinal function that provides an interval scale of measurement. Axioms 1-1 and 6 are  necessary for the desired representation of the theorem; Axiom 5 is only structural restriction. Axiom 7 (substitutability) is  480,/35,'1-7  96 B. MALAKOOTI  needed to derive the algebraic difference structure axioms, but this does not make it a necessary axiom, i.e., one following  from the representation.  The above set of axioms is similar to that of Krantz et al. (1971), although we use trinary relationships; i.e., we require  one of the four elements to be the null alternative. That is, our set of axioms is not more strict than that of Krantz et al.  (1971) except that we have an additional Axiom 7 that assumes the existence of a preference equivalent for any given  preference difference. Axiom 7, however, is consistent with (i.e., is not more restrictive than) A5 and A6 (or Axioms 4 and 5  of Krantz et al. (1971) ). To validate these axioms or those of Krantz et al. (1971), however, requires substantial behavioral  experimentation. Yet, intuitively, one can say that the axioms are consistent with each other and are not irrational.  2.3. Binary as an Extension of Trinary  Based on a set of axioms (for example, see (Krantz et al., 1971, Sect. 2.2.1, p. 44) for binary relations, there can exist  measurable value functions denoted by > on X. That is, x > y if and only if V(x) > V(y). In what follows, the relationship of  the binary relationship >_ to the trinary relationship > + is discussed.  Let yx - + mo. We require wx > + mo if and only if w > y for all m, w, x, y E X. Consequently, from (1) it is apparent that w  > y if and only if V(w) > V(y) - C' where C' is a constant. Note that by Axiom (A7) there always exist equivalences and hence  a complete binary relationship is possible. Alternatively, in the theorem, wx > + yo, by assuming x is a null alternative, we  have w > y if and only if V(w) > V(y) - C' where C' is a constant.  2.4. Quaternary as an Extension of Trinary  According to Krantz et al. (1971), by a set of axioms for quaternary relationships (Krantz et al., 1971, p.151) >* on X there  exists a measurable value function wx > * yz, if and only if V(w) - V(x) > V(y) - V(z). Since by Axiom 7, for each pair y, z e  X there exists an m E X such that mo ^, + yz, then we require wx > + mo if and only if wx > * y z. Consequently, from (1) it  is apparent that wx > * yz if and only if V(w) - V(x) > V(y) - V(z).  2.5. Higher-Order Relationships as Extensions of Trinary-The Effect of Substitutability  Since Axioms 5, 6, and 7 substitute preference differences for consequences, higher levels (higher than quaternary) of  preference differences can be derived with the proposed system of axioms. For example, if yo - + xz, yo > + x'z', and zO - +  x"z", then according to the theorem we have:  V(y) -C= V(X) - V(z) V(y) -C> V(x') - V(z') V(Z) -C= V(x")- V(z").  MEASURABLE VALUE FUNCTIONS 97  Rearranging the above constraints,  V(a')-C'> [V(x,)- V(Z]- [V(x)- V(x],  Now, rewriting this relationship in terms of preference substitution,  Z'Q>+ (x'Z")(xx").  This relationship is based on six components, including the null. As the number of components increases, it is more difficult  for the DM to answer questions. However, because we use the substitution axiom, the DM must respond only to trinary  alternative questions, after which the higher relationships can be derived without his/her direct responses. This property of  the developed measurable value functions can provide further flexibility and reduce cognitive burden. For example, one may  derive a relationship between 20 components, where the DM responds only to trinary questions.  2.6. Discussion and a Summary of Experiments for Assessing Measurable Value Functions  If we ask paired comparison (binary) questions for n number of alternatives, the number of questions is (n)(n - 1)/2. If we  ask preference difference (quaternary) questions, the DM must compare all n(n - 1)/2 preference differences; so for n  alternatives, we ask (n(n - 1)/2) [(n(n - 1)/2) - 1 ]/2 questions to rank all preference differences. Note that the number of  questions for quaternary relationships increases exponentially in comparison to the binary. Furthermore, the preference  difference questions (quaternary) are more difficult to answer than the paired comparison questions (binary) because they  involve four components instead of two and may require more precise assessment.  In this section, we discuss the results of experiments showing that with relatively few trinary questions, one can achieve  similar results in terms of the assessment of the measurable value function as compared to the results with quaternary  relationships. This is attributable mainly to the use of the substitution axiom (A7). This axiom, admittedly a strong  condition, implies that the DM can provide or state an alternative (either real or hypothetical) that is equivalent to the  preference difference of two other given alternatives. In the car-buying example, the DM may say that the preference  difference of Mercedes Benz to Nissan is the same as car Q to nothing. Car Q can be expressed in terms of the same criteria  that Mercedes Benz and Nissan are expressed or evaluated in. An example of extrapolation of the developed system for multiple  attribute alternatives is as follows. Assume that the DM considers only two criteria for the selection of cars, price and  comfort, where price ranges from $10,000 to $50,000 and comfort from 0 (worst) to 10 (best). Mercedes Benz (M) costs $40,000  and its comfort is rated 9, and Nissan (N) costs $15,000 and its comfort is rated 5. By the substitution axiom, it is assumed  that the DM is able to express the preference difference of M to N in terms of cost and comfort. For example, the DM may say  car Q with the price of $10,000 and comfort  98 B. MALAKOOTI  rating of 6 is the equivalent of the preference difference of M to N. In other words, the DM is indifferent between buying M  or buying N and Q. This type of question can substantially improve the assessment of the value function.  To demonstrate how effectively binary, trinary, and quaternary relationships can predict the DM's ranking of alternatives when  the measurable value function is partially assessed after some limited number of questions, we performed a set of simulated  experiments using an assumed value function. We wrote a software package in FORTRAN 77 and used an IBM XT personal computer  with 512 K to run the experiments. We generated five sets of 100 random alternatives with 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 criteria, i.e., 5  x 5 = 25 sets of 100 alternatives. We then reported the averages of five different samples for each size. In each case five  alternatives were provided to the (simulated) DM and her responses based on the five alternatives were used to rank the  remaining 95 alternatives. The result was then compared to the case in which the value function was completely known.  The results of the experiments show that, in general, as the number of criteria increases, the accuracy of ranking decreases.  The trinary relationship, in all cases, achieves tremendous superiority and accuracy in terms of ranking more alternatives  with the same number of questions. Details of experiments can be furnished upon request.  In another experiment, we gave a questionnaire to a group of undergraduate engineering students. Five alternatives were given,  and four questions were asked about them, including one paired comparison (binary) question, one quaternary relationship  question, and one trinary question. The result of experiments showed that paired comparisons were easier to understand and  more reliable than quaternary relationships, and quaternary more than trinary; details can be furnished upon request.  3. CONCLUSIONS  In this note a set of axioms for the existence of measurable value functions was presented for ranking groups of alternatives.  It was demonstrated that trinary-based measurable value functions can be assessed precisely and hence with relatively few  questions, ranking of alternatives is achieved, although from a behavioral point of view they may require more cognitive  burden than binary questions. Finally, it can be claimed that these measurable value functions are the the only available  functions for ranking and selecting the best subsets of alternatives. They can be easily applied for the selection of group  alternatives such as portfolio selection.  REFERENCES  DEBREU, G. (1960). Topological methods in cardinal utility theory. In K. J. Arrow, S. Karlin, and P. Suppes (Eds.),  Mathematical methods in the social sciences, 1959: proceedings. (pp. 16-26). Stanford, CA: Stanford Univ. Press.  MEASURABLE VALUE FUNCTIONS 99  DYER, J. S., & SARIN R. K. (1979). Measurable multiattribute value functions. Operations Research, 27, No. 4.  FISHBURN, P. (1970). Utility theory for decision making. New York: Wiley.  KEENEY, R. L., & RAIFFA, H. (1976). Decisions with multiple objectives. New York: Wiley,  KRANTZ, D. H., LUCE, R. D., SUPPES, P., & TVERSKY, A. (1971). Foundations of tneasurement (Vol. 1). New York: Academic Press.  MALAKOOTI, B. (1985). Assessment through strength of preference. Large Scale Systems: Theory and Applications, 8 169-182.  MALAKOOTI, B., & RAVINDRAN, A. (1985/1986). Computational procedures with interactive paired comparison methods for MOLP  problems. Annals of Operations Research, 5, 575-597.  MALAKOOTI, B., & D'SOUZA, G. (1986). Multiple objective programming for the quadratic assignment problem. International  Journal of Production Research, 25 285-300.  MALAKOOTI, B., (1988). A decision support system and a heuristic interactive approach for solving discrete multiple criteria  problems. IEEE Trans. Systems Man Cybernet., 18 (2), 273-285.  SCOTT, D., & SUPPES, P. (1958). Foundational aspects of theories of measurement. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 23. 113-128.  TORGERSON, W. S. (1961). Distances and ratios in psychological scaling. Acta Psvchologica 19, 210-205.  RECEIVED: January 22, 1988