10.1016/0022-2496(91)90053-v
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 35, 371-393 (1991)  A Note on Cognitive Maps: An Optimal Spatial Knowledge Representation  RYOZO YOSHINO  The Institute of Statistical Mathematics  One's cognitive system has certain limitations such as memory capacity and information processing speed. The structure of the  physical environment also makes some restrictions on one's cognition. However, one may optimize the use of cognitive resources  under the cognitive and physical constraints. This may be observed in human spatial knowledge acquisition. In this note, the  structure of a cognitive map is reconsidered from the viewpoint of the optimization of cognitive resource allocation. First,  an axiomatic system called a string geometry is introduced to formally represent spatial knowledge. Second, an optimal  structure of a cognitive map is mathematically identified under certain conditions in terms of efficient spatial knowledge  acquisition. Finally, some important features of a human cognitive map are reconsidered in comparison with this optimal  structure. 1991 Academic Press, Inc.  INTRODUCTION  The main objective of this note is to reconsider the structure of a cognitive map from the viewpoint of optimal spatial  knowledge representation. The significance of the study is as follows. Main features of life include self-organization,  self-maintenance, and self-reproduction (e.g., finding food, water, mates, and a safe place to survive and reproduce many f t  offspring and avoiding natural enemies) (Dawkins, 1976; Oparin, 1938). One finds that only mobile animals show remarkably high  intelligence in the struggle for survival, which allows them to adapt to a new situation. Therefore the study of mobility is  the key to the recapitulation of the evolution that produced human and animal intelligence (Lerner, 1985). Because the  efficacy and the versatility of the mobility depend upon one's spatial knowledge representation, the study of spatial  knowledge representations is important for the investigation of human and animal intelligence.  The modern study of spatial knowledge acquisition was originated by Tolman (1948). who coined the now familiar term "cognitive  map" to designate a spatial knowledge representation in the mind. The last two decades have witnessed a large amount of  research concerning structures of mental representations of spatial environment (e.g., Holahan, 1986; Russell & Ward, 1982,  for review). One may find  Send all reprint requests to Ryozo Yoshino, The Institute of Statistical Mathematics, 4-6-7 MinamiAzabu, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 106  Japan.  371  0022-2496/91 83.00  Copyright 0 1991 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  372 RYOZO YOSHINO  interesting results and approaches in related fields such as psychology (Baker, 1981; Hirtle & Jonides, 1985; Tversky, 1981),  geography (Beguine & Thisse, 1979), artificial intelligence (AI) (Chen, 1987), and psychobiology (O'Keefe & Nadel, 1978).  For example, some groups of AI researchers are attempting the construction of autonomous mobile robots that can perform a  variety of tasks in military, industrial, and household sectors (Chen, 1987; Lerner, 1985; Thorpe, Hebert, Kanade & Shafer,  1988). At first, once the robot can see objects in the physical surroundings and record their locations, the problem may seem  as trivial for a computer as recording a local telephone book. However, spatial knowledge acquisition for autonomous  mobilization is not a matter of tabulating objects and their locations. It involves acquiring a large number of spatial  relations, some precise and some imprecise. Learning an area involves analyzing a series of perceptual and sensory  impressions, each of which shows only a few objects, some only in part, and only a few ambiguous relations between them;  organizing these impressions by finding features common to them; synthesizing them into a coherent component; and dynamically  renewing the synthesized component by the most recent information. This process is not just a matter of memorization, but  rather it involves deep spatial reasoning (Davis, 1986).  In general, a very important objective of cognitive science is to investigate algorithms of human cognitive processes. One  lives with biological, cognitive, and physical constraints. For example, a limit of memory capacity is a biological or  cognitive constraint on human cognitive resources. The spatial and temporal structure of the physical space is a physical  constraint on human spatial cognition. (As is well known, Immanuel Kant claimed in "Kritik der reinen Vernunft" that the  possible geometry in mathematics was restricted by our senses and the structure of the physical space.) Those constraints  restrict the possibility of a cognitive process, but simultaneously one may utilize those constraints in the struggle for  survival. That is, there is an important connection between an individual biological system and the physical environment,  related to evolutionary and individual developments through which one acquires better ability of self-organization,  self-maintenance, and self-reproduction in the physical environment.  Human behavior may be considered a problem solving series, characterized by the three features of life, as described at the  beginning. Probably, in evolution, one developed and is still developing a cognitive system that may function in an optimal  way under biological and physical constraints. This optimal system may be considered from many viewpoints such as  availability, cost, efficiency, flexibility, realizability, redundancy, and safety. The author thinks that the objective of  cognitive science is accomplished by identifying how one realizes the optimal system under those biological, cognitive, and  physical constraints. This may be attempted roughly in the following steps.  Step 1. (a) Construction of a formal system to describe the biological or cognitive constraints and the physical constraints;  (b) specification of those constraints.  OPTIMAL SPATIAL REPRESENTATION 373  Step 2. Formulation of a goal and sub-goals of a certain human behavior or a cognitive process as problem solving for survival.  Step 3. Identification of mathematical solutions to a problem formulated in Step 2.  Step 4. Comparison of those solutions with a real behavior or cognitive process.  Step 5. Recursive refinement of the steps above. (Of course, these are not totally independent, but rather are mutually  related steps. Chapter 1 of Coombs (1983) is a reference for this topic.)  In this note, the author attempts to sketch the approach of Steps 1-4 for the study of spatial knowledge acquisition of a  human cognitive map, although necessarily under a limited condition. First, the components of spatial information of a  cognitive map are briefly reviewed, and the formal terminology is explained (Step 1). Second, three computational problems  concerning spatial knowledge acquisition, construction of a spatial representation, and organization of spatial knowledge  representations are presented (Step 2). The solutions of these problems lead to an optimal structure of a cognitive map under  certain conditions (Step 3). Finally, some important aspects of a human cognitive map are reconsidered in comparison with the  optimal structure (Step 4). In this note, no substantive commitment is given to the practical problem of how one acquires  spatial information such as names of locations, distances, and orientations in reality. This must be one of the most important  problems in psychology. However, this problem is avoided because extensive and intensive studies of perceptions and sensations  beyond the scope of this note must be prepared for it. Such a problem should be dealt with in the next step (Step 5).  BRIEF REVIEW OF SPATIAL KNOWLEDGE  It is known that there are roughly two kinds of spatial knowledge: (i) procedure (or navigational) knowledge and (ii) survey  knowledge (Thorndyke & Hayes-Roth, 1982). Procedure knowledge allows one to navigate from a certain place to another. For  example: "If you walk five minutes from here along this road and turn right at the next intersection, then you will see the  university a half mile ahead." On the other hand, by survey knowledge, one may know the global locational relationships of a  certain region. For instance: "On the campus, the main library is located a half mile north of the Physical Science Building,  which is about 400 yards east of the Biological Science Building."  There are at least two types of representations of spatial knowledge: a propositional representations (such as the two  examples above) and a pictorial representation. (One may remember the debate between pictorial image theorists and  propositional image theorists and propositional image theorists in the past two  374 RYOZO YOSHINO  decades. Although this issue may be interesting, it is avoided to commit to a particular standpoint for this issue at this  point of research. (For a discussion of the issue, see Anderson, 1980; Kosslyn & Pomerantz, 1977; Pylyshyn, 1973)). Therefore,  one may classify spatial knowledge representations as shown in Fig. 1.  The components of spatial information of procedure knowledge should be distinguished from those of survey knowledge. For  example, two kinds of distances should be distinguished: navigational distance and survey distance. On the one hand, as in a  picture, survey distances dy may satisfy the metric axioms: (i) d;, >' 0, and dii = 0 iff i = j; (ii) d;; = d;;; and (iii) d;,  + d j, >, d;,, where d,, denotes distance between i and j. Therefore, their spatial representation may be constructed, for  example, in a Euclidean space under certain additional conditions on a given set of data. It is important to investigate what  additional conditions provide such a spatial representation and in what sense a representation is unique (e.g., up to  Euclidean translations). This sort of problem is called the representation problem in abstract measurement theory (Narens,  1985). On the other hand, there is some evidence that navigational distances may not necessarily be symmetric, nor satisfy the  triangular inequality. For example, Sadalla, Burrough, and Staplin (1980) showed that cognitive distance from a reference  point (e.g., the center of a city) to a non-reference point (e.g., a suburb of the city) was longer than that from the  nonreference point to the reference point. Baird, Merrill, and Tannenbaum (1979), Galanter and Galanter (1983), and Kunnapas  (1960) showed that a cognitive distance was a power function of a physical distance, where the power of the exponent scattered  around one. If the power is less than one, cognitive distances cannot satisfy the triangular inequality. Therefore, generally  it may not be possible to represent a set of navigational distances in a pictorial form that satisfies the metric axioms, such  as those multidimensional scaling provides. Instead, it is possible to construct a lattice (a partial order set each of whose  subsets has a maximum and a minimum) of a set of navigational links even if some distances are missing in a given set of data.  This lattice provides a natural comparison of two path lengths by a partial order (a relation of longer than or equal to) even  if they cannot numerically be compared.  spatial knowledge  procedure type survey type  nn  propositional pictorial propositional pictorial FIG. 1. A classification of spatial knowledge representations.  OPTIMAL SPATIAL REPRESENTATION 375  TERMINOLOGY  There are some attempts to construct formal systems to represent spatial information of a cognitive map (e.g., Kuipers, 1978;  Levine, Jankovic, & Palij, 1982; Yoshino & Batchelder, 1985). The terminology of this section is based on the formalization of  Yoshino (1988), which was stated in a form of axiomatic system to represent those ideas reviewed in the previous section (Step  la). But, here, this is simplified and explained for the present purpose. The basic idea is simple: Characterize a spatial  knowledge representation by several pieces (called "strings") of spatial information. The knowledge representation is called a  string geometry.  Procedure Spatial Knowledge  The basic components of procedure spatial knowledge are: (1) a finite set of points (landmarks) P;  (2) (i) a set of simple strings S, where each string (A, B) represents a directed link between a pair of points A and B; and  (ii) a distance function d, where d(A, B) represents procedure (navigational) distance from points A to B for an element (A,  B) in S; and  (3) (i) a set of turning angle strings, where each string (A, B, C) corresponds to a corner; and (ii) a turning angle function  a, where a(A, B, C) represents a turning angle at Point B in navigation from A, B, to C.  See Fig. 2 for an illustration of these components.  In practice, there may be several alternative interpretations for these components. For example, "procedure distance" may be  time distance, energy consumption distance, or navigational distance as a function of several variables such as  comfortableness, familiarity, and safety. A "turning angle" is intended to mean an angle which one turns at a given  intersection. The scalas of these components should be appropriately chosen in practice.  The formal definition of a procedure type of string geometry is as follows.  (1) a simple string  (2) a distance string  A  d(A,B)  (3) a turning angle string  C a(A,B,C)  A B  FIG. 2. Basic components of procedure spatial knowledge: (1) a simple string to represent a directed link of two points; (2) a  distance string to represent a procedure (navigational) distance; and, (3) a turning angle string to represent a turning angle  at a corner.  376 RYOZO YOSHINO  DEFINITION 1. S~ _ <P, S, D, d, A, a> is a procedure type of string geometry iff  (i) P is a finite set of points (landmarks),  (ii) S is a subset of P x P: An element of S is called a (simple) string,  (iii) D is a subset of P x P: An element of D is called a distance string,  (iv) A is a subset of P x P x P: An element of A is called a (turning) angle string,  (v) d: D -> Re': d is called the (procedure or navigational) distance function; by definition, di;=d(i, j) is called the  (procedure or navigational) distance between i and j for (i, j) in D,  (vi) a: A-> (-7r, 7r]: a is called the (turning) angle function; by definition, ayk = a < i, j, k > is called the turning  angle for < i, j, k ) in A,  and the following axioms are satisfied.  Axiom 1. S is irreflexive: For any point i in P, (i, i) is not in S. Axiom 2. D is a subset of S.  Axiom 3. If <p, q, r> is in A, then (p, q) and (q, r) are in S.  Axiom 4. For all < p, q, r> in A,  (i) if <q, r, p> is in A, then sign(apgr)=sign(agrp), and  (ii) if <r, q, p> is in A, then sign(ap9r)= -sign (argp).  An interesting type of path called a Hamiltonian path is later used. This is defined as follows.  DEFINITION 2. A procedure type of string geometry S- = <P, S, D, d, A, a> is said to be a Hamiltonian path iff S consists of a  sequence of connected distinctive strings that covers all points of P as  for  S- Kill i2), (i2l i3)~ ...I Um-1I im)I P= lil, i2, i3, ..., im_1~ imI.  Survey Spatial Knowledge  The basic components of survey spatial knowledge are:  (1) (i) a finite set of points P; (ii) a set of undirected simple strings S, where each string (A, B) represents a straight  line between a pair of points A and B;  (2) (i) a set of distance strings D; (ii) a distance function d, where d(A, B) represents crow-flight distance between Points  A and B; and  (3) (i) a set of orientation strings Os; (ii) an orientation function o, where o(A, B) represents a compass angle from Points  A to B with respect to the North.  OPTIMAL SPATIAL REPRESENTATION 377  See Fig. 3 for an illustration of these components. It is easy to see that a pair of d(A, B) and o(A, B) corresponds to a  vector whose start is fixed at Point A. The formal definition of a survey type of string geometry is as follows.  DEFINITION 3. S- = <P, S, D, d, Os, o> is a survey type of string geometry iff  (i) P is a finite set of points (landmarks),  (ii) S is a subset of P x P: An element of S is called a (simple) string,  (iii) D is a subset of S: An element of D is called a (survey) distance string,  (iv) OS is a subset of S: An element of OS is called an orientation string,  (v) d: D -. Re +: d is called the (survey) distance function; by definition,  d,;=d(i, j) is called the (survey) distance between i and j for (i, j) in D,  (vi) o: Os -+ (0, 2n]: o is called the orientation function; by definition, o,ij=o(i, j) is called the orientation angle for  (i, j) in Os,  and the following axioms are satisfied.  Axiom 1. S is irreflexive.  Axiom 2. D is symmetric: (i, j) is in D iff (j, i) is in D.  Axiom 3: Conditional Metric Axioms. For all (i, j), (j, k), and (i, k) in D,  a. 0<d,;. b. d;; = d;,. c. d,,r d,; + d k.  A  (1) a simple string  A d(A,B) B  (2) a distance string  B  A  (3) an orientation string  B  A /{d(A,B), o(A,B))  (4) a vector  Fla. 3. Basic components of survey spatial knowledge: (1) a simple string to represent a pair of points; (2) a distance string  to represent a crow-flight distance; (3) an orientation string to represent a compass angle; and (4) a vector as a pair of a  distance string and an orientation string.  378 RYOZO YOSHINO  Axiom 4. OS is symmetric.  Axiom 5. a. For every (i, j) in Os,  Iou -o,rl _7r.  b. Every triple of (i, j), (j, k), and (k, i) in OS with corresponding angles o,;, o k, and oki can be consistently  represented on a two dimensional Euclidean plane.  There may still be some arbitrary points in the choice of those components of spatial information. But most researchers on  this subject focus on those components, and some empirical data support this choice. For example, even preschool children can  acquire Euclidean knowledge (orientation and distance) through selfexploration (Conning & Byrne, 1984); directions are more  accurately represented than distances (Garling, Book, Lindberg, & Nilsson, 1981). Further analysis on substantial empirical  data should lead to a more appropriate choice of those spatial components.  A procedure or survey string geometry is said to be Ez representable iff it is consistently represented on a plane. Such a  representation is said to be an EZ representation. Note that Axiom 3 (respectively, Axiom 5) of survey string geometry  guarantees that every triple of distance (respectively, orientation) strings is Ez representable. This, however, does not  guarantee that all distance and orientation strings are simultaneously Ez representable. This distinction between a local EZ  representation and a global EZ representation is important to characterize a string geometry as a cognitive map representation.  Manifold  "Manifold" is an extended concept of an EZ representation of procedure or survey spatial knowledge. This concept plays an  important role in investigating the more complicated structure of a cognitive map. An underlying idea is as follows. In the  course of dynamical development of a cognitive map, the map may show systematic changes from separate pieces of spatial  information, to a partially or locally organized representation, and finally to a more organized representation. That is, at  earlier stages of the development a cognitive map may be represented as a set of EZ representations, each of which covers a  part of the cognitive map even if the map is not uniquely EZ representable as a whole. Here each cover is called a local  chart, and the set of local charts (a sort of patch work) is called a manifold. As the development continues, the number of  local charts of a manifold that represents the cognitive map may decrease, and finally, the whole map may be represented by a  single chart, or an Ez representation. Some empirical evidence justifies this idea (Garling, Saisa, Book, & Lindberg, 1986;  Hirtle & Jonides, 1985; Tversky, 1981). The formal definition of a manifold is as follows.  DEFINITION 4 (Manifold). Let S` = <P, S, D, d, Os, o> be a survey string geometry. Let {S; }, be a set of string geometries  and { f }, be a set of maps, where  OPTIMAL SPATIAL REPRESENTATION 379  I is an index set. Then M= < {S; }, { f } >, is said to be a manifold iff the following conditions are satisfied.  (i) P, S, D, and OS are the unions of, respectively Pi's, Si's, Di's and O;'s, where the is are in the index set I.  (ii) For each i in the index set I, S; is a survey string geometry: S,` = <P;, S;, D;, d;, O;, o;>, where di=d on D; and o; =  o on O;.  (iii) For each i in I, Si- is EZ representable by a map f : P; -> E2.  Here, {S,7 }, is said to be a covering of S-, and each pair of S," and f for i in the set I is said to be a local chart of S-.  Furthermore, a manifold M is said to be an EZ manifold on S- iff the following conditions are satisfied.  (iv) For each i in I, S;7 is EZ representable uniquely up to parallel translation (i.e., choice of the origin) by a map f : P;  , E'.  (v) If the intersection of P; and P; is non-null for i and j in the set I, then f = h f; on the intersection of P; and P;,  where h is a parallel translation.  See Fig. 4 for an illustration of a manifold.  Hierarchy  Think of an atlas such as one can buy at a gas station. It may consist of a global map and several charts such as a state map,  county maps, and city maps, among which one can use the appropriate one according to one's purpose. For example, if one plans  to go from Los Angeles to San Francisco by car, one may first use the state map to make a rough plan of what locations to go  through between these two  Southern California  some local charts A hierarchical tree in a global chart  FIG. 4. (a) A manifold and (b) its hierarchy. F is a reference point of a chart of (A, B, C), G is a reference point of {E,  D}, and H is a reference point of a global chart including F and G. Some of the local charts may be overlapping each other.  All these charts can be considered a set of manifolds, each of which consists of a single chart. X; is the ratio between the  number of branches at the (i-I)th and ith level.  380 RYOZO YOSHINO  cities. Then, one may use more local but detailed charts to figure out a more precise navigation plan. Thus, in the planning  of navigation, this sort of hierarchical structure of a map is important. Hirtle and Jonides (1985) showed that a human  cognitive map also has a similar sort of hierarchical structure. This point is worth further investigation. The formal  definition of a hierarchy on a string geometry is given as follows.  DEFINITION 5. Let S- = <P, S, D, d, Os, o) be a survey string geometry and < {S; },, { f },> be a manifold on S-, where the  index set I and the point set P; of S; for each i in I satisfy the following conditions.  (i) I= {0, 1, 2, ..., L}.  (ii) P is the union of disjoint sets {P;},:  P=POUP,VP2U ... UP,.  (iii) There exists a set of maps {h;},, where h; is a map from P; onto for each i in I,= {0, 1, 2,...,L-11.  (iv) For each i in I, there exists a manifold < {S;; }.,., {fi,},,) on S,-, where J; is an index set for j's.  Pi+1  (v) For every point p in P;+,, there exist a local chart Si- and f;; of S; such that hi-'(p) is a subset of the point set of  S;- . Then, by definition, the pair of the set of manifolds and the set of maps, [<{{S,- },; },, { f;},},>, {hi},,], is said  to be a hierarchy (or hierarchical tree) on S-; the manifold {S; },; is said to be at the i th (abstraction) level for i = 0,  1, 2, ..., L; every p in P; +, is said to be a node of h; '(p); and a pair of (p, q) is said to be a branch at node p for  every q in h; '(p).  Note that a branch of a hierarchy and a string of a string geometry should not be confused: The former (see Fig. 4b) is a link  between local charts, each in a distinctive level, and the latter is a link within a chart. The set of manifolds < { { St;  }.j; } r, { { fr; } r; } ,) can itself sometimes be regarded as a single manifold (see Fig. 4a).  Although Definitions 4 and 5 were stated for survey string geometries, analogous definitions can be made for procedure string  geometries also.  SOME MATHEMATICAL WORK  The development of a cognitive map includes three main processes: gradual spatial knowledge acquisition, gradual construction  of spatial knowledge representations, and organization of spatial knowledge representations for utilization. Now, three  computational problems which capture some important aspects of these processes are presented in a thought experiment. These  problems are considered to be formulation of a goal of cognitive mapping for survival, particularly from a viewpoint of  efficient spatial knowledge acquisition, among others (Steps lb and 2).  OPTIMAL SPATIAL REPRESENTATION 381  Although these problems have been separately investigated by some researchers (e.g., Garling et al., 1986; Kanal & Kumar,  1988), here these are considered to be mutually related problems. An analysis of these problems leads to an optimal structure  of a spatial knowledge representation under certain conditions (Step 3). A main objective of this analysis is to later use the  optimal structure as a reference frame to investigate the structure of a human cognitive map: One needs a simple standard in  comparison with which one investigates something unknown (Step 4).  Three Problems  Suppose that you walk on straight paths among several landmarks on plane with a compass and a tape measure. Each time you go  from one landmark to another landmark, you can make an accurate note of the path distance and/or the path orientation, if you  like. And you can also make an accurate note of the path orientation between two landmarks if you are at one of the two  landmarks. Your task is to draw a complete two dimensional map as soon as you have sufficient information to do it. A question  is: When can you draw the map? You do not necessarily need complete information, but do need necessary and sufficient  information to draw a complete map. Namely, a point of this problem is to identify the necessary and sufficient conditions  that one needs to recover a survey type of spatial knowledge from knowledge acquired through navigation. This problem may seem  to deal with highly artificial conditions, but it still captures some important aspects of spatial knowledge acquisition in  real life, although usually you use your senses of distance and orientation instead of a compass and a tape measure. (Some  studies of experimental psychology utilize this type of experimental paradigm. For example, Levine et al. (1982) made a  blindfolded subject learn locational relationships by walking between several locations on the floor with the experimenter's  guide. Then the subject, still blindfolded, was asked to walk straight from a certain location to another location. His  movement was expected to reveal his cognitive map.)  There are many possible answers to the question above. One possible answer is: Suppose that you have taken a path that travels  each landmark once and only once (i.e., a Hamiltonian path); then the vector addition can construct a complete map. There may  be more problems concerning this problem. Tentatively let us focus on the next three problems as examples to consider some  important aspects of spatial information processing. The three questions are sequentially stated in the ordering of spatial  information processing:  (1) Spatial knowledge acquisition: There are several sets of necessary and sufficient information to recover piece by piece a  survey map of those landmarks. What is an efficient input ordering of pieces of distance and/or orientation information to  recover the survey map of those landmarks?  (2) Construction of a spatial knowledge representation: In gradual assimilation of spatial knowledge, what is an efficient way  to locate a new point in the survey map under construction, in terms of minimization of cost of spatial knowledge acquisition?  382 RYOZO YOSHINO  (3) Organization of a set of spatial knowledge representations: Suppose that a set of spatial knowledge representations, each  of which corresponds to a certain region, has been constructed. Some spatial representations may be global but less precise,  others may be local but more precise, and some are related to others. How should these representations be organized in order  to be utilized for efficient navigation planning, in particular, for location search in those representations? (The search  under discussion is a search through memory to find information about a particular landmark. This location search is the first  step for searching for a path or shortcut in navigation planning.)  Despite this simplified situation, it is necessary to consider many variables in order to obtain general solutions to these  problems. Here more mathematically specified problems are considered under certain heuristic assumptions in order to later use  this analysis for the understanding of a human cognitive map.  In order to further specify and formalize the three problems, these are restated in terms of string geometry as follows.  Let P be the fixed set of those landmarks, where the number of landmarks is n (i.e., I PA = n). Let S- = <P, S, D, d, Os, o >  be a survey string geometry which is considered a complete set of spatial information to represent the locations of P, where  10, 1 = IDI =n(n-1)/2. Note that each element of the set of permutations on P can correspond to a navigation ordering among  all landmarks of P and also to a set of ordered simple strings to represent the navigation. The following is a tentative  definition of the cost of spatial knowledge acquisition which is focused on here.  DEFINITION 6 (Cost of Survey Knowledge Acquisition through Navigation). Let C, be the average cost of acquisition of a  distance string (i.e., distance measurement), C2 be that of an orientation string (i.e., orientation measurement), and C,, be  the average cost of navigation of a straight path between two landmarks of P. (These costs may be those of energy consumption,  time, risk, etc.) Let S; = <P, S1, D,, d, Os,, o) be a survey string geometry that corresponds to a navigation among the  landmarks. By definition, the costs of survey knowledge acquisition through navigation of S-, D,, and OS, are, respectively,  C(S-) = Cd(D,) + CO(O1) + mC,, Cd(DI)=k1C1,  Co(O1)=k2C2,  where k, = ID,1, k2 = 10, l, and m is the number of simple strings: m = I S,1. (In this section, a "straight path" of the  problem is identified with a simple string.)  Then the three problems are restated as:  Problem 1. What type of navigation path gives a minimum set of distance and/or orientation strings which are necessary and  sufficient to recover an E2  OPTIMAL SPATIAL REPRESENTATION 383  representation of S- unique up to parallel translation, with all possible acquisition ordering of distance and orientation  strings along navigations considered?  Problem 2. What is the set of distance or orientation strings needed to uniquely locate a new point in the E2 representation  under construction on a plane, with a minimum average cost of acquisition of strings?  Problem 3. Suppose that a set of spatial representations (i.e., a manifold) has been constructed. What type of organization  (e.g., a hierarchy) is best for efficient search through memory for information about a particular location in those  representations ?  First, Problem 2 is investigated, because it is found that a solution of Problem 2 under some assumptions reduces Problem 1 to  a simpler one. Then, Problem 1 is solved, on the basis of the solution of Problem 2, and finally Problem 3 is considered under  a certain assumption.  Spatial Knowledge Representation  A major utility of a cognitive map is the use in navigation planning to find out a shortcut which minimizes traveling cost  such as energy consumption and risk. Therefore, it is desirable to minimize navigation even when it is necessary to explore a  region in order to obtain more spatial information, if one should avoid getting lost. This observation motivates us to  introduce the next assumption.  Assumption 1. Let C1, C2, and C,, be as in Definition 6. Then, by assumption, CN > C1, C2.  Problem 2 is considered under this assumption. For the sake of simplicity, it is assumed that a component (denoted M)  including P,, P2, and P3 is already located in a spatial representation under construction. These three points are considered  a set of reference points that specify an orientation and a unit of scale of the representation. The problem is to calculate  the costs needed to uniquely locate a new point P4 with respect to the component M in all cases and then to find a case of a  minimum cost. It is reasonable to assume that one uses the basic knowledge given next concerning the physical space.  Assumption 2 (A Physical Constraint). The physical space is a two dimensional Euclidean plane. (If the elevation is also  considered, it is three dimensional.)  The solution of Problem 1 is given as:  PROPOSITION 1. Under Assumptions 1 and 2, the solution of Problem 1 is to use a vector v(Pi, P4) to locate a new point P4,  where P; is a certain point in an E2 representation already constructed.  Proof. There are four cases to investigate. (See Fig. 5 for some examples to consider in each case.)  480,135/3-8  384 RYOZO YOSHINO  P4  Case 1  Navigation: 1-->4 distance measure: d 14 orientation measure: o14  P4  Case 2  Navigation: 1-->4-->2-->3-->4 distance measure: d14 , d42 , d34  Case 3 Navigation: 1-->4 orientation measure: 014, 042  P4  Case 4  Navigation: 1-->4-->2-->3 distance measure: d14 , d 42 orientation measure: 034  FIG. 5. Some examples for Proposition 1. Generally (except singular cases), Case 1 (vectorial measurement) is the most  efficient spatial acquisition in terms of costs of navigation and measurement of distance and/or orientation needed to  uniquely locate P4 with respect to a spatial representation M already constructed.  Case 1. Suppose that a vector is used to locate a new point P4 in the representation. A single vector from any point in M to  P4 uniquely determines a location of P4 as the endpoint of the vector. Each vector consists of a distance string and an  orientation string, and these strings are simultaneously obtained by the navigation of a straight path. Therefore, the average  cost is C1 + C2 + Cl  Case 2. Suppose that only distance strings are used to locate P,. Two distance strings, each from two distinct points in M to  P4, determine at most two possible locations of P4. Generally (i.e., except singular cases), at least three dis tance strings,  each from three distinct points in M to P4, are needed to uniquely locate P,. As is easily seen, it is necessary to navigate  at least four connected straight paths to obtain those three distance strings. Therefore, the average cost is more than or  equal to 3C1 + 4CN.  Case 3. Suppose that only orientation strings are used to locate P4. Generally, two orientation strings, from two distinct  points in M to P4, uniquely determine a location of P4. In order to obtain those two orientation strings, it is necessary to  navigate at least one straight path. In this case, the average cost is  OPTIMAL SPATIAL REPRESENTATION 385  more than or equal to 2Cz + C,. If three points connected by those two orientation strings happen to be collinear, it is  necessary to navigate at least another straight path and get another orientation string to uniquely locate P,. In this case,  the average cost is more than or equal to 3C, + 2C,. Therefore, the average cost of Case 3 is more than 2Cz + Cs,.  Case 4. Suppose that a distance string and an orientation string are used to locate P4, where the pair is not a vector.  Generically, a pair of a distance string and an orientation string, from two distinct points of M to P4, determines at most  two possible locations of P4. Therefore, an additional distance or orientation string from any point in M to P4 is needed to  uniquely determine the location of P4. After all, it is needed to navigate at least two paths. Accordingly, the average cost  is more than 2C,.  To summarize, the strategy of Case 1 gives a minimum average cost under Assumptions 1 and 2. Q.E.D.  Spatial Knowledge Acquisition  The solution of Problem 2 substantially decreases the difficulty of Problem 1, and a solution is as follows.  PROPOSITION 2. Under the condition that a spatial representation is constructed by vector addition as shown in Proposition 1,  the solution of Problem 1 is to navigate a Hamiltonian path and acquire a corresponding vector path as spatial knowledge.  Proof. It is easy to see that, by Proposition l, a minimum set of strings to be acquired corresponds to any series of straight  paths which consists of (N-1) vectors that covers all the N landmarks, as shown in Fig. 6. It is obvious that only  FiG. 6. Examples of connected vector components: Each component covers N=4 landmarks by (N-1) vectors. (c) and (d) are  examples of Hamiltonian paths.  386 RYOZO YOSHINO  Hamiltonian paths are possible if these figures are corresponded to navigational paths without repetitions of a same path.  (Obviously, one cannot jump in time and space because of the physical constraint.) Q.E.D.  Location Searching  It is well known that an abstraction hierarchy of a search network realizes efficient search in many types of problem solving  (e.g., Korf (Kanal & Kumar, Chap. 7, 1988)]. Therefore, this is a motivation to introduce the next assumption in order to  consider Problem 3. (This assumption is justified by an empirical observation later described: Observation 4 of the next  section.)  Assumption 3. The location-search network of a cognitive map is a hierarchical tree (e.g., Fig. 4b). In the search through  memory for information about a particular landmark, under what node(s) that landmark is located is assumed to be known.  Two types of well-known search strategies are considered: exhaustive search and self-terminating search. The solution of  Problem 3 is obtained as an application of Korf s (Kanal & Kumar, Chap. 7, 1988) work, as follows.  PROPOSITION 3. Under Assumption 3, searching cost is minimized iff the hierarchy is a tree where the average number of  branches of each node is:  (a) 2.71828... (=e, where e is the base of the natural logarithm) for exhaustive search, and  (b) 3.59328... for self-terminating search.  Furthermore, if the number of branches is constrained to be the same for all nodes (e.g., by a certain constraint such as  minimization of organizational cost), searching cost is minimized iff the average number of branches of each node is:  (c) 3 for exhaustive search, and  (d) 4 for self-terminating search.  Proof. Let X, be the ratio between the number of landmarks of the base of the hierarchy and the first level, XZ be the ratio  between the number of landmarks of the first level and the second level, etc. (see Fig. 4b). Let the number of landmarks be N  at the base. In order to make the formula for the search cost at the highest level the same as in the lower levels, let the  highest level consist of a single landmark. Then, Problem 3 is reduced to the following problem: What ratios give the network  the minimum cost of search? If X, is N, then the cognitive map is a trivial hierarchy of one superordinate point and N  subordinate points at the next lower level. If X; = 1 for every i, then the representation is a linear ordering. (If either of  these is the case, a non-trivial hierarchical structure of a cognitive map is against efficiency of searching. On the  contrary, if neither of these is the case, a certain hierarchical structure of a cognitive map is a necessary component to make  OPTIMAL SPATIAL REPRESENTATION 387  an efficient system of searching.) The task of the top level is to find a sequence of branches, which consists of one branch  per each abstraction level in the hierarchy, from the top node to the bottom. For the sake of convenience of analysis, let us  assume that a location under search is at the lowest level of a hierarchy.  (a) If the search is exhaustive at each node, the search cost of a location is X; at each node of the ith level. Therefore,  the average cost C to find a location is  C=(XI+X2+ ''' +XL),  where L is the number of levels of the hierarchy. Note: N= XI XZ XL. By a relationship between arithmetic mean and geometric  mean,  (a+b+ ... +c)/m>,(ab...c)I/"',  where m is the number of terms (a, b,..., and c) and the equality holds iff a = b = ... = c. By this inequality,  C>, L(XL)I1L =LX=X logx N,  where X = XI =X2= ... = XL and N= XL, or equivalently L = logx N are used. By d(X logx N)/dX = ln(N)(ln(X) -1)/(ln(X))2=0 iff  X = e (=2.71828 ... ), the average cost Cm;. is minimized iff X= e.  (b) If the search is self-terminating at each node, the minimum average cost is calculated as follows. The cost at each node  is (X; + 1)/2. Therefore, the average cost C to find a location is  C={(XI+1)/2+(X2+1)/2+'..+(XL+1)/2},  where L is the same as in (a). By the relationship between arithmetic mean and geometric mean,  C>, L{ [(X+ 1)/2]Ll 11L=L(X+ 1)/2 = {(X+ 1) logx N}/2,  where X= X, =X2= ... =XL and L=logx N are used. Because d{ (X+ 1) logx N}/dX =ln(N){Xln(X)-(X+1)}/1X(ln(X) )2}=0 iff  X=3.59328..., the average cost Cm;n is minimized iff X= 3.59328....  (c) and (d) Note that Cm;= X logx N for exhaustive search and Cmin = { (X + 1)/21 logx N for self-terminating search. If the  number of branches is constrained to be same for all nodes, the number of branches is 3 for the most efficient exhaustive  search because of 21092 N >, 3 1093 N, and 4 for the most efficient selfterminating search because of 21093 N >, 5/21094  N. Q.E.D.  The use of the hierarchies of Proposition 3 reduces the expected search cost from O(N) to O(log [N]). (McGregor's (1987)  analysis on short term memory [STM] capacity is related to this section's argument.)  388 RYOZO YOSHINO  Now all the analysis concerning Problems 1 to 3 is summarized as follows. Under Assumptions 1, 2, and 3, the optimal  development of a cognitive map from the viewpoint of efficient spatial knowledge acquisition is: (1) to navigate and acquire  spatial information which corresponds to a set of vectors that makes a Hamiltonian path, in each region, (2) to construct  spatial representations by vector addition, and (3) to organize these representations in a hierarchy whose average number of  branches is 2.71828... for exhaustive search and 3.59328... for selfterminating search.  A HUMAN COGNITIVE MAP  In order to reconsider a human cognitive map, some empirical observations are now sequentially reviewed. This review goes  roughly along the three processes as described in the previous section. The current knowledge on a quantitative structure of a  cognitive map is limited, so this review is necessarily qualitative. But one will recognize some cues to find certain still  missing constraints under which a human cognitive map may be considered optimal, in the comparison of a human cognitive map  with the optimal structure of a cognitive map identified by Propositions 1 to 3 (Step 4).  The next observation is a brief summary of the types of spatial knowledge representations, which Definitions 1 and 3  characterize.  Observation 1. There are several types of spatial knowledge and spatial knowledge representations:  (1) Two types of spatial knowledge: a procedure type and a survey type.  (2) Two types of spatial representations: a propositional representation and a pictorial representation.  (3) Two classes of spatial knowledge: global spatial knowledge and local spatial knowledge. Global spatial knowledge may be  represented by a piece of a global map, whereas local spatial knowledge may be represented by a local chart of a manifold.  (Global and local are relative terms, so a global map in one case can be a local map in another case) (cf. Definitions 1, 3,  and 4).  Therefore, theoretically there are eight types of spatial knowledge representations based on the combinations of types in (1),  (2), and (3). However, the next two observations suggest some restrictions on the combinations.  Observation 2. (Spatial Knowledge Acquisition). One may steadily acquire procedure knowledge that is necessary for daily life,  although one cannot immediately establish a precise survey knowledge representation (Allen, Siegel, & Rosinski, 1978;  Kozlowski & Bryant, 1977; Thorndyke & Hayse-Roth, 1982) (cf. Problems 1 and 2).  This is obvious. One navigates, actually, has to navigate, one's environment for survival, but it is infrequent that one can  access survey knowledge and some effort  OPTIMAL SPATIAL REPRESENTATION 389  is needed to construct a survey knowledge representation from procedure knowledge. One, however, gradually establishes survey  knowledge by accumulating procedure knowledge (Thorndyke & Hayes-Roth, 1982), which helps make more efficient navigation  (Allen et al., 1978; Kozlowski & Bryant, 1977). The next observation is well known for spatial problem solving in general.  Observation 3. The construction of a pictorial representation of a problem state facilitates spatial problem solving (Allen et  al., 1978; Garling et al., 1986; Shaw & Bellmore, 1982) (cf. Problem 2).  Therefore, it is desirable that one construct a mental representation of spatial environment as long as it is possible and  convenient. Observations 2 and 3 suggest that such a representation is constructed in a trade-off between the cost of  construction of a mental map and its utility. More explicitly, for example, the route-finding problem is a well-known example  of the NP (non-polynomial) problem, so search cost exponentially increases as the number of locations increases. But if a  survey map is available, search cost can be substantially reduced. (Overlook the map, find a start and a goal, draw a straight  line between them, and find a route that approximates the line. Now this is no longer an NP problem.) In daily activities, it  is rare that one can obtain all distance or orientation information on a region. Under certain limited cognitive resources, a  mental representation may be constructed only when it is uniquely determined by sufficient input information. (As another  possibility, one may use a default representation until additional information becomes available.) Obviously, this trade-off  is mainly due to a well-known cognitive constraint on short term memory (STM):  A Cognitive Constraint. One's short term memory has a capacity limitation (McGregor, 1987; Miller, 1956; Peterson & Peterson,  1959).  Therefore, one has to make good use of the limited resource of STM. This may lead to a particular organization of a cognitive  map, as the following observation shows.  Observation 4 (Organization of Spatial Representations). A human cognitive map is organized as a hierarchical manifold: It  consists of a set of local charts, each of which corresponds to a certain level of a hierarchy (Hirtle & Jonides, 1985) (cf.  Problem 3).  Acquisition of only partial information allows the partial construction of a global representation, namely, a set of local  charts of a manifold. Furthermore, as discussed in Problem 3, a certain hierarchical organization of the manifold makes an  efficient search of location. Such a hierarchy may correspond to administrative districts, a geographical categories, or a  certain functional hierarchy. There is a reference point of each local chart which corresponds to a node of a certain level of  a hierarchy and in which other points of the chart are related to the reference point, as shown in Fig. 4 (Hirtle & Jonides,  1985; Sadalla et al., 1980). Local charts of the manifold may be loosely linked to neighboring local charts. Therefore the  390 RYOZO YOSHINO  manifold as a global map sometimes may show some distortions such as rotation and alignment (Tversky, 1981), if compared with  a corresponding physical geography. However, more quantitative empirical data are needed to investigate a more precise  structure of the hierarchy, such as Proposition 3.  Finally, the next important observation is concerned with the utility and the organization of a cognitive map.  Observation 5 (Path Search). In route finding to visit a number of locations as in daily life, one first chooses the order  between locations that locally minimize survey (or crow-flight) distances and then chooses the shortest navigational (or  travel) paths between consecutive pairs of locations in the constrained order (Garling et al., 1986) (cf. Problem 3).  More precisely, at the first step to determine the order of traveling, one uses the strategy called "local minimization of  distance (LMD)." That is, one chooses the nearest location from a starting point, then the nearest location from that point,  etc. until the order is specified. The minimization probably occurs on a survey local chart with a higher abstraction level.  The higher abstraction level has the more global but the less precise spatial information (cf. a city map, a county map, a  state map, etc. ). But is is easier to make a rough plan of navigation on a map of higher level abstraction, because one has  to deal with only a small number of points which represent crude locational relationships. At the second step, one retrieves  the shortest navigational paths between consecutive pairs of locations within each chart, whose order is constrained at the  previous step. Note that the LMD heuristic does not necessarily lead to global minimization of distance (GMD). However, it can  be a semi-optimal strategy when a global map is not available.  To summarize all these observations, an important cue for the future empirical studies is as follows.  In the course of the dynamic development of a cognitive map, the map may show systematic changes from separate pieces of  information, to partial organization as a set of local charts, and finally to a global map connecting local charts. Some  cognitive resources are consumed in establishing a global map, whereas it may be easier to find a shortcut on a global map  (GMD) than on a set of local charts. This is a sort of trade-off between mental calculation cost and construction cost of a  knowledge representation. In this trade-off, one may suspect the transition of strategies from LMD to GMD, corresponding to  the development of a cognitive map from a manifold to a global map. This dynamical transition of strategies as well as the  structure of a cognitive map is worth investigating.  CONCLUDING REMARKS  Although under a simplified condition, this note has sketched those steps (except Step 5) of the approach to investigate a  human cognitive process described in the introduction. For the future development of this research, some additional remarks  are presented as follows.  OPTIMAL SPATIAL REPRESENTATION 391  First, some modifications are needed to make string geometry (Definitions 1 and 3) a better system for representing a human  cognitive map. For example, there are other types of orientation such as egocentric orientation or orientation with respect to  a certain object. Knowledge of a turning angle at a crossing is more informative in navigation than that of a serpentine road  without crossings where there is no other choice of a path. But these points are not covered by Definitions 1 and 3. However,  once the formal system of string geometry has been presented, it must be easier to rigorously argue about what is missing,  what is wrong, and what should be modified in the system in order to develop more precise formal machinery.  Second, one needs more precise quantitative empirical data concerning, for example, the hierarchical structure of a cognitive  map. In the previous section, the hierarchy of a human cognitive map was compared with an optimal structure from the viewpoint  of spatial knowledge acquisition. This was a qualitative, not quantitative, comparison. The hierarchical structure of a human  cognitive map probably is more complicated and more fuzzy than that of Definition 5. In order to modify the definition, one  needs more precise quantitative data about connections between local charts of a cognitive map.  Third, although an "optimal" system is considered only in terms of spatial knowledge acquisition in this note, this concept  should be considered from many other points of view such as comfortableness, egocentricity, familiarity, food supply, and  safety. One's cognitive system needs to be flexible for survival because one lives in a dynamically changing environment, and  so a criterion to be an optimal system is not unique. Various viewpoints on the optimal system may reveal some hidden or  unknown constraints on human spatial cognition and facilitate the understanding of a human cognitive map as an optimal system  under certain constraints.  Finally, it is desirable to quantitatively analyze spatial cognition under the biological and physical constraints in a more  precise dynamic model such as PERT network (Schweickert & Townsend, 1989; Townsend & Schweickert, 1989) or a neural network  (Uhr, 1987). PERT network is a representation of a cognitive process and is used to describe a reaction time and a probability  of correct response in a certain cognitive process. For example, it may be possible to develop such an analysis by replacing  the concept of reaction time in PERT network with that of "cost," although an important problem then is how to define and  measure the cost.  It is hoped that this note will encourage mathematical psychologists to become interested in the subject and to develop a more  precise theory on the optimal mechanism of a cognitive process.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  The author is indebted to Donald Bamber, action editor; James T. Townsend, editor; and anonymous referees for their  extraordinarily painstaking readings of my early manuscript and for their many valuable comments on and insightful suggestions  for its improvement. The author is, however, fully responsible for the particular approach taken here and for any errors  contained therein.  392  RYOZO YOSHINO  REFERENCES  ALLEN, G. W., SIEGEL, A. W., & ROSINSKI, R. R. (1978). The role of perceptual context in structuring spatial knowledge.  Journal of Experimental Psychology, 4, 617-630.  ANDERSON, J. R. (1980). Cognitive psychology and its implications. San Francisco: Freeman.  BAIRD, J. C., MERRILL, A. A., & TANNENBAUM, J. (1979). Studies of the cognitive representation of spatial relations. II. A  familiar environment. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 108(1), 92-98. BAKER, R. R. (1981). Human navigation and the sixth  sense. London Toronto: Hodder and Stoughton. BEGUINE, H., & THISSE, J-F. (1979). Axiomatic approach to geographical space.  Geographical Analysis, 11(4), 325-341.  CHEN, S-S. (1987). Editorial comments: Robotics planning and navigation. International Journal of Intelligent Systems, 2(2),  71-72.  CONNING, A. M., & BYRNE, R. W. (1984). Pointing to preschool children's spatial competence: A Study in natural setting.  Journal of Environmental Psychology, 4, 165-175.  COOMBS, C. H. (1983). Psychology and mathematics: An essay on Theory. Ann Arbor: Univ. of Michigan Press.  DAVIS, E. (1986). Representing and acquiring geographic knowledge. Los Altos, CA: Morgan Kaufmann. DAWKINS, R. (1976). The  selfish gene. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.  GALANTER, E., & GALANTER, P. (1983). Range estimates of distant visual stimuli. Perception and Psychophysics, 14, 301-306.  DARLING, T., BOOK, A., LINDBERG, E., & NILSSON, T. (1981). Memory for the spatial layout of the everyday physical experiment:  Factors affecting rate of acquisition. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 17, 263-277.  DARLING, T., SALSA, J., BOOK, A., & LINDBERG, E. (1986). The spatiotemporal sequencing of everyday activities in the  large-scale environment. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 6, 261-280.  HIRTLE, S. C., & JONIDES, J. (1985). Evidence of hierarchies in cognitive maps. Memory and Cognition, 1(3), 208-217.  HOLAHAN, C. J. (1986). Environmental psychology. Annual Review of Psychology, 37, 381-407. KANAL, L., & KUMAR, V. (Eds.).  (1988). Search in artificial intelligence. New York: Springer-Verlag. KOSSLYN, S. M., & POMERANTZ, J. R. (1977). Imagery,  propositions, and the form of internal representations. Cognitive Psychology, 9, 52-76.  KOZLOWSKI, L., & BRYANT, K. (1977). Sense of direction, spatial orientation, and cognitive maps. Journal of Experimental  Psychology, 3, 590-598.  KUIPERS, B. (1978). Modeling spatial knowledge. Cognitive Science, 2, 129-153.  KUNNAPAS, T. (1960). Scales for subjective distance. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 1, 187-192. LERNER, B. J. (1985).  Robotics: The birth of vision. Science Digest, 93, 29-77.  LEVINE, M., JANKOVIC, I. N., & PALIJ, M. (1982). Principles of spatial problem solving. Journal of Experimental Psychology:  General, 111(2), 157-175.  McGREGOR, J. N. (1987). Short-term memory capacity: Limitation or optimization. Psychological Review, 94(1), 107-108.  MILLER, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our capacity for processing information.  Psychological Review, 63, 81-97.  NARENS, L. (1985). Abstract measurement theory. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  O'KEEFE, J., & NADEL, L. (1978). The hippocampus as a cognitive map. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. OPARIN, A. (1938). Origin  of life. (S. Morgulis, Trans.) New York: Dover.  PETERSON, L. R., & PETERSON, M. (1959). Short-term retention of individual items. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 58,  193-198.  PYLYSHYN, Z. (1973). What the mind's eye tells the mind's brain: A critique of mental imagery. Psychological Bulletin, 80,  1-24.  RUSSELL, J. A., & WARD, L. M. (1982). Environmental psychology. Annual Review of Psychology, 33, 651-688.  SADALLA, E. K., BURROUGH, W. J., & STAPLIN, L. J. (1980). Reference points in spatial cognition. Journal of Experimental  Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 6, 516-528.  OPTIMAL SPATIAL REPRESENTATION 393  SCHWEICKERT, R., & TOWNSEND, J. T. (1989). A trichotomy: Interactions of factors prolonging sequential & concurrent mental  processes in stochastic distance mental (PERT) networks. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 33, 328-347.  SHAW, G. A., & BELLMORE, S. (1982). The relationship between imagery and creativity. Imagination, Cognition & Personality,  2(2), 115-123.  THORNDYKE, P. W., & HAYSE-ROTH, B. (1982). Differences in spatial knowledge acquired from maps and navigation. Cognitive  Psychology, 14, 560-589.  THORPE, C., HEBERT, M. H., KANADE, T., & SHAFER, S. A. (1988). Vision and navigation for the Carnegie-Mellon Navlab. IEEE  Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 10, 3. TOLMAN, E. C. (1948). Cognitive maps in rats and men.  Psychological Review, 55(4), 189-208. TOWNSEND, J. T., & SCHWEICKERT, R. (1989). Towards the trichotomy to methods of reaction  times: Laying the foundation of stochastic mental networks. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 33, 309-327.  TVERSKY, B. (1981). Distortion in memory for maps. Cognitive Psychology, 13(3), 407-433. UHR, L. (1987). Multi-computer  architectures for artificial intelligence. New York: Wiley. YOSHINO, R. (1988). Formal representations of spatial knowledge  (Doctoral dissertation, University of California, Irvine).  YOSHINO, R., & BATCHELDER, W. H. (1985). A computational geometry for cognitive map information in an ideal learner. Reported  at the 18th annual mathematical psychology meeting, University of California, San Diego.  RECEIVED: July 2, 1987