10.1016/0022-2496(91)90026-p
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 35, 214-241 (1991)  Stochastic Networks as Models of Cognition: Derivation of Response Time Distributions Using the Order-of-Processing Method  WILLIAM M. GOLDSTEIN  The University o/ Chicago  AND  DONALD L. FISHER  University of Massachusetts  Researchers in cognitive psychology have devoted a great deal of attention to the temporal nature of cognitive processes.  Hypotheses are tested by comparing obtained and theoretical response time distributions for various experimental conditions.  This paper extends and refines a method for deriving theoretically expected response time distributions, so that it can be  applied under weaker assumptions and to a wider class of mental architectures. Specifically, the Order-of-Processing (OP)  method, originally developed to analyze stochastic PERT networks, is extended to apply to much more general structures. The  method is also extended to handle more general distributions of cognitive process durations than previously considered. As an  example of the OP method, OP diagrams are constructed for models which are not representable as stochastic PERT  networks-limited-capacity and self-terminating models of visual search. r, 1991 Academic Press, Inc.  Researchers in cognitive psychology have devoted a great deal of attention to the time-dependent nature of the covert  cognitive processes that underlie overt task performance (e.g., Luce, 1986; Posner, 1978; Taylor, 1976; Townsend & Ashby,  1983). Some historical perspective is given in the introductory section of a recent paper by Townsend and Schweickert (1989).  As they indicate, the transition from Donders' (1868) "method of subtraction" to Sternberg's (1969) "additive factors method"  marked not only a methodological shift, but also a change in the nature of the questions that investigators emphasized.  Although the methods of Donders and Sternberg both assumed that the mental processes underlying task performance were executed  sequentially, the aims of the two investigators were dif  Correspondence and requests for reprints should be sent to William M. Goldstein, Department of Psychology, The University of  Chicago, 5848 South University Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637. This research was supported in part by a Research Initiation Grant  from the National Science Foundation (IST 83-09431) and a grant from the National Institute of Mental Health (MH 39960), both  to Donald L. Fisher.  0022-2496/91 $3.00  Copyright 'c; 1991 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  214  STOCHASTIC NETWORKS 215  ferent. Donders had concentrated on measuring the duration of the mental processes, while Sternberg asked questions about the  particulars of the mental architecture and its susceptibility to experimental manipulation. That is, Sternberg was concerned  with hypotheses about the identity of the constituent mental processes and their independent manipulability by distinct  experimental factors.  With the emphasis of investigation on the architecture, dynamics, and manipulability of cognitive processes, more recent  research has been guided by a succession of broader views about what the mental structures might be like, and how the  constituent mental processes might interact with each other and with experimental manipulations. Assumptions about sequential  processes gave over to questions about serial versus parallel arrangements. Other assumptions about mental processing were  also relaxed, leading investigators to question whether processing might be self-terminating or exhaustive, of limited or  unlimited capacity, whether the durations of mental processes are stochastically independent or dependent, etc. With a broader  range of possibilities under consideration, distinguishing between architectures was seen to be a subtle issue. For example,  observations that were once believed to indicate a serial structure (e.g., mean reaction times that increase linearly with the  "size" of the task) were seen to be implied by other architectures as well (e.g., parallel structures with particular capacity  limitations). Nevertheless, investigators have been able to determine conditions under which the structures can be  distinguished using mean reaction times, reaction time distributions, distributions of errors, and so on. (Townsend & Ashby,  1983, provide detailed discussions of such distinctions as serial vs parallel, exhaustive vs self-terminating, limited vs  unlimited capacity, etc., with particular emphasis on the conditions under which these distinctions can be drawn empirically.  More recent results are given by Townsend, 1984, and by Townsend & Van Zandt, 1988. Because of continuing confusion in the  literature regarding the serial-parallel distinction, Townsend, 1989, has recently compiled a summary of methods that can be  used, under specified circumstances, to draw this distinction.)  Continuing the trend to consider an ever widening set of possible mental architectures, Schweickert (1978, 1980) introduced  PERT networks to psychology. PERT (Program Evaluation and Review Technique) networks were developed by operations researchers  as an aid in the management of projects which involve many subtasks, such as the building of a submarine. The networks enable  the managers to represent constraints on the ordering of the subtasks (e.g., blueprints must be drawn before steel can be  welded, but interior work and exterior painting can proceed simultaneously). Because PERT networks can show some subtasks as  sequential and other subtasks as concurrent, they can represent architectures that are neither strictly serial nor strictly  parallel. Capitalizing on this flexibility, Schweickert used PERT networks as models of cognition, thereby enlarging the set  of mental architectures considered by cognitive psychologists. Of course, there is a fundamental difference between the  problems facing operations researchers and psychologists. The manager of a project knows the identity and arrangement of the  subtasks and wants to estimate the time required to complete the project. The  216 GOLDSTEIN AND FISHER  psychologist knows how long the "project" took, i.e., the response time for the performance of a task, and wants to draw  inferences about the identity and arrangement of the "subtasks," i.e., the constituent mental processes. Thus, the  psychologist needs to know the set of structures that can be rejected on the basis of observed response times.  Theory for drawing inferences about deterministic PERT networks has been developed and applied by Schweickert (1978, 1980,  1983a, 1983b), and work on stochastic PERT networks has also been progressing (Fisher & Goldstein, 1983; Fisher, Saisi, &  Goldstein, 1985; Schweickert, 1982; Townsend & Schweickert, 1985). Two recent papers (Schweickert & Townsend, 1989; Townsend &  Schweickert, t989) show that if the cognitive structure can be described by some PERT network, if two experimental factors  each selectively prolong a different mental process, and if certain additional assumptions are met (including a regularity  condition that is weaker than stochastic independence of the process durations ), important deductions about the network  structure can be drawn according to the subadditivity, superadditivity, or additivity of the experimental factors' effects on  response time. Specifically, albeit stated somewhat loosely: (1) subadditivity of the experimental factors implies that the  prolonged mental processes are either concurrent with one another or sequentially arranged in a configuration called a  Wheatstone bridge, (2) superadditivity implies that the prolonged mental processes are executed sequentially and that there  are other mental processes whose execution is concurrent with both of the prolonged processes, and (3) additivity implies that  the prolonged mental processes are executed sequentially, that the complete network of mental processes is not itself a  Wheatstone bridge, and that no mental process concurrent with both of the prolonged processes has positive probability of  being on a most-time-consuming (i.e., "longest," or "critical") path through the network. (A one-sentence summary cannot do  justice to the results. For details, see Schweickert & Townsend, 1989; Townsend & Schweickert, 1989.)  The present paper seeks to extend and refine a method for deriving testable implications of stochastic PERT networks, so that  it can be applied under weaker assumptions and to a wider class of mental architectures. By enabling researchers to derive  predictions for more complicated structures (e.g., non-PERT networks), the set of hypotheses which can be subjected to  empirical test is enlarged. In this way, we hope to contribute to the trend of expanding the set of architectures available to  psychologists as possible models of cognition. Specifically, this paper extends earlier work of Fisher and Goldstein (1983),  who provided a method for deriving the response time distributions predicted by psychological process theories which meet two  conditions. First, the constituent mental processes must be constrained in a way that makes them representable by a PERT  network. (This is discussed in more detail below.) Second, there must be probability zero of two or more mental processes  finishing their execution simultaneously. Fisher and Goldstein (1983) used their method to derive a closed-form expression for  the response time distribution when the individual mental processes have durations  STOCHASTIC NETWORKS 217  that are independently and exponentially distributed, and they sketched how to proceed when process durations were given by  independent probability mixtures of general-gamma distributions. In the present paper, rather than pursuing the closedform  expressions that result from other distributions of process durations, we generalize the overall method by relaxing the  constraints concerning both the structure (i.e., PERT networks) and the distributions of process durations (i.e., no  simultaneous completions).  To motivate the generalizations, we will briefly review the approach taken to derive the response time distribution for  stochastic PERT networks. In Section 1, PERT networks are described and an example is given which illustrates their usefulness  in representing psychological theories. The example also illustrates the difficulties in deriving response time distributions  directly from PERT networks. In Section 2, we discuss the Order-of-Processing method and summarize Fisher and Goldstein's  (1983) main result. Fisher and Goldstein (1983) constructed Order-ofProcessing (OP) diagrams as an alternative, and more  tractable, representation of the information in PERT networks. OP diagrams are more tractable because of a theorem that Fisher  and Goldstein (1983) proved relating events in the OP diagram to linear combinations of mental process durations.  Unfortunately, the theorem relied on the OP diagram having particular properties that were either (a) transferred from the  corresponding PERT network or (b) a result of assumptions about the distributions of processing durations. Consequently,  Fisher and Goldstein's (1983) theorem does not exploit the full flexibility and generality of OP diagrams. In Section 3, we  discuss the behavior of more general OP diagrams, including OP diagrams that could not have arisen from any PERT network. It  turns out that a generalization of Fisher and Goldstein's (1983) theorem can be proved with fewer assumptions. Thus, the  tractability of OP diagrams does not depend on their being PERT representable. This is fortunate, because PERT networks have  some limitations that make them unsatisfactory models of particular kinds of cognitive processing. This is illustrated in  Section 4, where we discuss the generality of the OP method. Examples will be given of limited-capacity and self-terminating  visual search which cannot be represented by PERT networks, but which yield to the OP method.  1. STOCHASTIC PERT NETWORKS AS MODELS OF COGNITION  The directed, acyclic graph shown in Fig. 1 provides an example of a PERT network, and illustrates how these networks can  provide models of cognitive tasks such as visual search. In a typical visual search experiment, subjects must indicate as  quickly as possible whether a prespecified target character (e.g., a specific letter or digit) appears in a displayed array of  characters. To do this, the subject must execute a set of cognitive processes which result in display characters being (1)  encoded, and (2) compared with an encoded representation of the target character. (The target character itself is encoded  before the trial begins.)  480/35;2-6  218 GOLDSTEIN AND FISHER e3  e,  e2  FIG. 1. PERT network representation of a hybrid serial-parallel model of visual search among three display characters.  Figure 1 represents a model similar to one considered by Fisher (1983) in a study of visual search. The network shown in Fig.  1 represents a hybrid serial-parallel model of visual search among three display characters. In this model, display characters  are encoded sequentially but comparisons with the target are executed simultaneously. Each hypothesized process is represented  by a directed arc in the PERT network. Process e; refers to the encoding of the ith character in the display set to which  attention is directed. Process c; refers to the comparison between the target and the character encoded by e;. Process r  refers to the response process.  PERT network models can be shown in the graphical form of Fig. 1 because it is assumed that processes are constrained by a  fixed partial order such that no process can begin until all processes which precede it (in the partial order) have finished.  This enables hypotheses about order constraints on the processes to be represented in the PERT network by precedence relations  on the corresponding arcs. For example, the hypothesized sequential nature of encoding is represented by the fact that arcs  el, e2, and e3 are on a directed path, with e, preceding e2, and e2 preceding e3. The hypothesized concurrent nature of  comparison is represented by the lack of a precedence relation among arcs c,, c2, and c3. Since no two of these arcs lie on a  directed path, the processes are permitted to execute simultaneously. It should be noted that the response process r cannot  begin until all stimuli have been encoded and compared with the target.  For a theory which is represented by a PERT network, the predicted response time is equal to the duration of the PERT network.  PERT network models make three assumptions about the dynamics of processing that permit the duration of the network to be  computed. First, all processes that can begin do begin. Put differently, it is assumed that as soon as the processes (arcs)  which precede a vertex have completed their execution, all the processes (arcs) which immediately succeed the vertex begin  executing. For example, process c3 must begin as soon as process e3 is finished. Second, it is assumed that once a process has  begun, it continues uninterrupted until it has finished executing. Third, the task is not regarded as finished until all arcs  of the PERT network have been traversed. Thus, for example, c3 must be allowed to finish, even if process c, finishes first  and has identified the target, i.e., search is exhaustive.  It follows from these assumptions that the duration T of the entire PERT network is equal to the duration of the most time  consuming path, where the "duration of a path" is defined as the sum of the durations of the processes on the  STOCHASTIC NETWORKS 219  path. For example, the PERT network shown in Fig. 1 has three paths. One path contains arcs e,, e,, e3, c3, and r. Another  path contains arcs e,, ez, c2, and r. The remaining path contains arcs e,, c,, and r. Let E; denote the duration of process  e;, with other process durations defined analogously. Then the duration of this PERT network is given by  T=max{E,+E,+E3+C3+R, E,+EZ+C,+R, E,+C,+R}. (1)  If the individual process duration are known constants, there is no difficulty, in principle, in computing the duration of the  PERT network.  This paper addresses the situation when the process durations are random variables. In this stochastic case, it is  considerably more difficult to evaluate the network duration. Although the duration T is still equal to the duration of the  most time consuming path, the particular path which provides the maximum, and the value of that maximum, vary from trial to  trial. The main difficulty in deriving the distribution of T stems from the fact that even if the individual process durations  are mutually independent, the sums of which T is the maximum are generally dependent. For example, for the PERT network in  Fig. 1, we see from Eq. (1) that there are shared terms between any pair of the sums of which T is the maximum.  2. ORDER-OF-PROCESSING (OP) DIAGRAMS DERIVED FROM PERT NETWORKS  The methods of Fisher and Goldstein (1983) yield the distribution of T for a stochastic PERT network, provided that the  process durations are independently distributed as probability mixtures of general-gamma distributions. The approach turns on  the use of Order-of-Processing or OP diagrams. Deriving the OP diagram associated with a PERT network is based on the  following observation. At any moment, the processes in a PERT network can be partitioned into three sets: (1) a completed set  of processes whose execution is finished, (2) a current set of processes which are undergoing execution, and (3) a pre-active  set of processes which have not yet begun. A state of the system is identified with each partition that is consistent with the  PERT network.  The OP diagram is formed by letting vertices represent possible states of the system. For example, Fig. 2 shows the OP diagram  which corresponds to the PERT network in Fig. 1. When the trial begins, no processes have been completed, process e, is  executing, and the remaining processes have not yet begun. This state of the system is shown at the bottom of the OP diagram,  in the node that has been labeled "s," for "state 1." In the top half of the node, we indicate the processes which are  currently executing, in this case just e, . In the bottom half of the node, we indicate the processes which have completed  execution. At the start of the trial, no processes have been completed, and so we write "start" in the bottom half of the  node. Implicitly, any processes which are not specifically indicated have not yet begun execution.  220 GOLDSTEIN AND FISHER  FiG. 2. Order-of-processing (OP) diagram corresponding to the serial-parallel model of visual search shown in Fig. 1.  Figure 1 shows that when process e, completes its execution, processes e2 and c, begin. Thus, the state of the system moves to  s2 in the OP diagram (Fig. 2). In this state, processes e, and c, are both executing, as indicated in the top half of the  vertex, and process e, has been completed, as indicated in the bottom half of the vertex. Suppose that process e2 completes  execution before process c, . Then according to the PERT network, processes e3 and c, begin execution and process c, continues  execution. Thus, processes e3, cl, and c2 are "currently executing," processes e, and e, have been completed, and the  remaining processes are pre-active. This state of the system is shown in the node labeled s3. The other nodes in the OP  diagram are interpreted similarly. (See Fisher, Saisi, and Goldstein, 1985, for an algorithm that constructs OP diagrams from  PERT networks.)  The state labeled s,e has no current processes, and so we write "finish" in the top half of the node. The finish state itself  has no duration; the task is finished as soon as the system enters state s,6. We indicate that s,6 contributes nothing to the  over-  STOCHASTIC NETWORKS 221  all task duration by drawing the corresponding node as rectangular rather than elliptical.  Two observations about paths through the OP diagram lead to a strategy for computing the completion time distribution of the  entire task. First, although completion of the task entails that all paths through a PERT network must be followed, one and  only one path through the OP diagram is followed on any particular trial. The particular path that is followed through the OP  diagram will vary, because the processes will be completed in different orders from occasion to occasion. The name  "Order-of-Processing Diagram" derives from the fact that each path through the OP diagram corresponds to a particular order of  completion of the processes. The second observation is the following. Suppose some particular path through the OP diagram is  followed, say path a. Then the duration of the task is equal to the sum of the durations of the states contained in path a;  these and only these states have positive duration.  To put this more formally, let the sequence of processes {x;}, 0C 1*, a*, ..., aN, be a possible order of completion of the N  processes that appear in a PERT network. Let the sequence of states {s,;}, j= )C,, a,, ..., aN+,, be the corresponding path  through the OP diagram from the start state with empty completed set to the finish state with empty current set. We will also  somewhat loosely refer to the index sequence a= {a,, a,, ..., aN+,} as a path. Let I'= {a, f, ...,} denote the set of paths  through the OP diagram, and let W be a random variable whose value indicates the path followed on a particular trial, i.e.,  P(W =a) is the probability that path a is followed through the OP diagram. Let Tx denote the vector (T,,,..., TxJ, where Tx.  denotes the duration of state s,,. As just observed, if path a is followed through the OP diagram, then the duration of the  N  T= Y T. (2)  The distribution of T can be computed as follows. Consider some particular path a through the OP diagram. First, compute the  probability P(W=a) that path a will be followed. Then, conditional on path a being followed, compute the joint density (or  mass) function of the durations of the states along path a, denoted .f,, (VI W= a). With this conditional joint density  function, it is straightforward, in principle, to compute the conditional density function f, (t I W=a) of the task duration,  given that path a is followed. Finally, the unconditional density function for T can be computed as  fT(t)= I fT(tI W= a) P(W .Er  The difficulty in following this strategy is that the terms of Eq. (3) all concern events that take place in the OP diagram,  whereas information is likely to be available only for events that take place in the PERT network. Specifically, it is assumed  that the joint density function of the process durations (i.e., in the PERT  222 GOLDSTEIN AND FISHER  network) is known, and this information must be used to compute the joint density function of the state durations (i.e., in  the OP network).  Using only the structure of the PERT network giving rise to the OP diagram, and the assumption that no two processes ever  finish execution simultaneously, Fisher and Goldstein (1983) showed how the relevant OP events can be stated in terms of  linear combinations of process durations. To state the result, let  a(x;, s;) = 1 if process x; is in the current set  of state s;, and  a(x;, si)=0 otherwise.  Define a square N by N matrix Ax as consisting of components a;;, where a; = a(x,., s,). That is, a;ij = 1 if the ith process  completed when W= a is contained in the current set of the j th state of path a, and a;; = 0 otherwise. Let Xx be the  N-dimensional random vector of process durations, (Xxi , ..., XxN)'. Fisher and Goldstein (1983) proved that W = a if and only  if each component of An ' X, is positive. Moreover, if W= a, then Tx = Ax A.. Thus, knowledge about the process durations can  be used to derive needed information about state durations.  3. GENERAL OP DIAGRAMS  OP Diagrams without PERT Networks  Fisher and Goldstein (1983) assumed: (1) that the OP diagram arose from a PERT network, and (2) that no two processes could  finish execution simultaneously. These assumptions constrain the OP diagram in several ways. However, Fisher and Goldstein  (1983) were not entirely clear about which of the resulting properties of OP diagrams are crucial to their results. In fact, a  similar result can be obtained with OP diagrams that could not have arisen from any PERT network. In this section, we consider  general OP diagrams that may or may not also be representable as PERT networks. It will be seen that OP diagrams are more  flexible than the PERT networks that inspired them, and that Fisher and Goldstein's (1983) results apply more widely than they  realized. Also, we will state a theorem that generalizes the earlier results.  To extend the earlier notation, let 17 be a set of processes, and for each x E 17, let X denote the corresponding process  duration. Let S be a set of states, where each s E S is a partition of 17. It should be noted that although each state is a  partition, not all possible partitions need appear as states in S. For each s; E S, let T; denote the corresponding state  duration. Let {s; }, i = a, , a, ..., be a sequence of states, called a path. As noted earlier, we also refer to the index  sequence a= ((X,, a,, ...) as a path. Let T= {a, f, ... } be the set of paths through the OP diagram. Our goal is to determine  the least restrictive constraints on the sets 17, S, and T that allow us to retain both the spirit of the OP diagrams that  arose from PERT networks, and the following results about their behavior: (1) on any particular trial, one and  STOCHASTIC NETWORKS 223  only one path through the OP diagram is followed; (2) the duration of the task is equal to the sum of the durations of the  states along the path that is followed through the OP diagram, all other state durations being equal to zero; and (3) both the  path followed and the durations of the states can be determined from knowledge of the process durations.  Partitions. First, consider the partitions of the processes. PERT networks require processes to have one of only three  "statuses": current, completed, or preactive. However, one can imagine that processes might have other statuses as well. For  example, a process might be "on hold," i.e., awaiting resumption after being interrupted by a higher priority process in a  limited capacity system. In order to avoid prejudging the set of statuses that investigators might find useful, for now we  will distinguish only the status of "other" in addition to "current" and "completed." The "other" processes might be  subdivided into pre-active (i.e., never begun), on hold, canceled processes, etc., but for the moment, finer partitions would  only complicate the notation without adding any generality. Thus, we define each state s of the OP diagram to be identified  with a partition of the processes into a (finite) current set C(s), a completed set K(s), and a set O(s) of "other" processes.  Start States. Second, consider the way that the system begins. In a PERT network, the task must begin with the execution of a  particular set of processes. Consequently, the corresponding OP diagram can have only one start state with an empty completed  set. We allow the set S of OP states to have a subset S, of potential start states, all of which have empty completed sets and  nonempty curent sets. On any trial the system begins in only one start state, but the particular start state can vary from  trial to trial.  State Transitions. Third, consider the transitions from one state to another. We interpret the processes in Qs;) to be in a  "race," so that a transition from state s; to state s, is made at the moment when one or more current processes become  completed. Thus, the duration T; of .s; is equal to the duration of the first process(es) in Qs;) to complete execution, minus  the duration of any partial execution received in previously reached states. (It was in order to ensure that some process(es)  would finish first that we assumed the current set C(s) to be finite.) It should be noted that this implicitly prohibits the  system from moving out of a state with an empty current set, i.e., if C(si) = 0 then there is no current process to become  completed. We assume that the task continues until the moment when the system enters a state with no current processes.  By this definition, a transition from state s; to state si is necessarily accompanied by some members of Qs,) becoming members  of K(s;). Moreover, we assume that completed processes remain completed, i.e., K(.sj) must be the union of K(s;) and whatever  members of C(sJ that completed their execution. In addition to some processes becoming completed, OP diagrams constructed from  PERT networks permit each state transition to be accompanied (only) by some pre-active processes becoming current. We permit  (1) any "other" process to become current, and (2)  224 GOLDSTEIN AND FISHER  any current process to become "other." Thus, unlike PERT networks, we permit current processes to be interrupted before their  processing is completed.  Another departure from the earlier work is that we allow multiple processes to finish simultaneously. This permits more  general distributions of process duration than previously considered, including discrete distributions (e.g., number of  "attempts" required to complete a process). To accommodate simultaneous completions, we assume that for each nonempty subset M  of C(s), there is at least one state in S to which the system could move if the processes in M were to win the "race,"  finishing their execution simultaneously and before any of the processes in C(s) - M. There may be probability zero of such an  event taking place (e.g., if process durations were independently distributed according to continuous density functions), but  the set of states S and the set of paths h must be complete enough to allow it.  Because we are allowing simultaneous completion of processes, we need to clarify what is meant by saying that a path is  "followed." We say that path a is followed on some particular trial if the system reaches all the states and only the states  that are contained in path a. If there is some other path /l whose states form a subsequence of the states in path a, then all  the states of path /3 are reached when path a is followed. However, because states other than those in path /3 are also  reached, we do not say that path /3 is followed when path a is followed.  Transition Rules. Fourth, consider the rule for deciding which of the eligible states will be reached from s. We assume that  the state reached from s is determined in part by the particular set of processes that win the "race" among the processes in  C(s), and in part by the sequence of states that have already been reached to bring the system to state s. However, there must  be no other determining factor. To illustrate, suppose that the system is in state s = sx, = sQ = s, = - - -, and let M be  some nonempty subset of C(s). Suppose that only paths a and #contain states to which the system could move if the processes in  M win the "race." That is, states sx;+, and s,,+, both have completed set K(s) v M (although they may have different current  and other sets). If the processes in M finish their execution simultaneously and before any of the processes in C(s) - M, then  the system will move to state s,,,, or to state sff _,, respectively, depending on whether the system had arrived in state s  via the sequence s,,, sx..., sx, or the sequence sl;l , s0..., stj. OP diagrams that are derived from PERT networks have  state transitions that do not depend on the sequence of states previously reached, although their state durations might depend  on the prior sequence.  If the sets I7, S, and I' meet all of the above assumptions, we refer to the structure <II, S, I'> as an Order-of-Processing  or OP diagram. If, in addition to the above assumptions, each path a E I' is a finite sequence of states, we say that the OP  diagram is finite. Finally, an OP diagram is said to be a Total Order-ofProcessing or TOP diagram if, in addition, it  satisfies the following condition:  For all a E I , x E C(sx,) implies x E K(sx) for some j > i.  STOCHASTIC NETWORKS 225  That is, in a TOP diagram, any process which ever becomes current must eventually be completed, although it may be interrupted  and resumed before completion. This is not to say that every process must eventually become current and then completed. There  may be processes which are engaged on some trials of the task but not others.  To summarize, is contrast with OP diagrams that are derived from PERT networks, we permit finite TOP diagrams to have: (1)  finer partitions of the processes, (2) multiple start states, (3) multiple finish states, (4) interruptions of uncompleted  processes, (5) state transitions that depend on the sequence of states previously reached, (6) processes that may not be  engaged on every trial, and (7) paths of differing lengths. Moreover, although PERT networks allow processes to finish  simultaneously, they were not permitted in earlier work on OP diagrams.  We turn next to finite TOP diagrams. Conceptually, TOP diagrams with infinite paths provide no particular difficulty, but the  notational bookkeeping would be much more involved. Totality also is an assumption that we make mainly for mathematical  convenience. We will show later how our methods can be used to model tasks in which there are processes which are interrupted  and never resumed, e.g., in self-terminating visual search. In particular, we will show how OP diagrams can be associated with  and analyzed as TOP diagrams, so there is no loss of generality in restricting the focus to TOP diagrams.  The Duration of Finite TOP Diagrams  We assume that the only available information is (a) the structure of the OP diagram, (b) the probability that the system will  begin in any specified start state seS,, and (c) the conditional joint density (or mass) function of the process durations  (not the state durations), given that the system does begin in state s. Therefore, the terms of Eq. (3), concerning paths in  the OP diagram and state durations, must be related to events concerning process durations. This is the problem addressed in  this section. As shown in the theorem below, it will turn out that everything we need to know about OP diagrams can be  expressed in terms of linear transformations of process durations. The theorem states a necessary and sufficient condition for  path a to be followed, stated in terms of process durations. Furthermore, the theorem shows how to express the state durations  in terms of the process durations, given that path x is followed. In order to state the theorem, we must first introduce some  additional notation.  If Qs,) is nonempty, then s,,+, exists, and Mx; = K(sa,+l) - K(sx) is the subset of C(sx,) whose processing is completed when  the system moves from sx, to s,;+,. Write M,,= {x}, where 1 2 n Also it will be convenient to let n_ _ "ai n where N(a)  denotes the number of states along path a, excluding the finish state with empty current set.  Let Xa,, i= 1, 2, ..., N(a), be an n,,-dimensional vector whose components are the durations of the processes in Mx;. That is,  X a; = (X, 1 , X,2 , ..., X,,) .  226 GOLDSTEIN AND FISHER  Let X, be the partitioned vector (X;,, X~'z, ..., which has a component vector X,; corresponding to each state along path a  with a nonempty current set.  Define the na by N(a) partioned matrix A, as follows. The kth column of A, is associated with state s,k. The rows of A, are  blocked, with the first nay rows associated with s,,, the next nx, rows associated with s etc. Specifically, the ith group  of rows is associated with the set of processes M,,. Let a,[(i, j), k] denote the entry in the kth column and the jth row of  the ith group of rows, and let a,[(i, j), k] =a(x,;s,k). It isn't hard to show that the columns of A, are linearly  independent, and therefore (e.g., Strang, 1980, p. 109) AA, is a square, symmetric, and invertible matrix.  THEOREM. Let <II, S, I'> be a finite TOP diagram. Then path a is followed if and only if the following three statements are  true.  (1) s,, is reached.  (2) A,(A'A,)-` A;X,=X,.  (3) Each component of (A'A,)--' A'X, is positive.  Moreover, if path a is followed, then  (4) T,=(AxA,)-` A'X,.  The proof of the theorem is given in the Appendix. The significance of the theorem is that we can now carry out the strategy  discussed in Section 2 for computing the completion-time distribution of the entire task [cf. Eq. (3)]. We require (a) the  probability that a specified path a is followed, and (b) the conditional joint density function of the durations of the states  along path a, given that path a is followed. We address these problems in turn below.  Let Y = [I - A, (AxA,) -' A x ] X., where I is the n, by n x identity matrix, and let Z=(AxA,)-' A'X,=CXwhere C=(AxA,)-' Az.  In view of the theorem, the probability that path a is followed can be written as  P(W = a) = P(Y = 0 and Z > 0 J s,, reached) x P(s, reached), (4)  where Z > 0 indicates that each component of Z is positive. Because the vectors Y and Z are linear transformations of the  vector X, of process durations, the probability expressed by Eq. (4) can be computed from the known conditional density (or  mass) function of X, given that .s,, is reached. To do this, in effect we append Z to Y to form one long vector (which is  still a linear transformation of X,). Then we delete redundant information from the long vector to produce a new vector that  contains all the relevant information and is an invertible linear transformation of X.. Then an appeal to standard results on  invertible linear transformations of random variables will produce the desired result.  The nx by n, matrix [I-A,(AxA,)-' A;] projects a vector onto the orthogonal complement of the column space of A, (Strang,  1980, p. 116). Thus, it is of rank n, - N(a ). Let B be a matrix formed by selecting any n, - N(a) linearly independent rows  of [I-A,(A,A,)-' AJ Note that Y= [I-A,(A,A,)-' Ax] X,=0 if and  STOCHASTIC NETWORKS 227  only if BX,, = 0. For our purposes, it can be said that BX, contains a nonredundant set of elements of Y.  The N(a) by nx matrix C=(A;A,)-' A, has the same number of columns and the same nullspace as Ax, and therefore has the same  rank, namely N(a). Further, it isn't hard to show that the rows of C are orthogonal to the rows of [I-A,(A'A,)-' Aa], and  therefore to the rows of B. Let Q be the nby nmatrix formed by appending the N(a) rows of C to the nx-N(a) rows of B. By  construction, the row space of Q is of dimension nx, and therefore Q is invertible. Let R be the n. -dimensional vector given  by R = QX,. The vector R is the result of having appended Z to Y and having deleted redundant elements of Y. The first n, -  N(a) elements of R contain the non-redundant information in Y, and the last N(a) elements of R are equal to the elements of Z.  Moreover, R is an invertible linear transformation of X,. Thus,  P(W=ac)=P(R;=0 for i= 1, ..., na-N(a), R;>0 for i=n,-N(a)+ 1, ..., n, I  sreached) x P(s,, reached). (5)  Using well-known results bearing on the transformation of random variables (e.g., Lindgren, 1968, p. 465), the unknown  conditional density (or mass) function for R can be rewritten in terms of the known conditional density (or mass) function for  X.:  fR(r' l sreached) = 1 fxz[(Q -'r)' I sreached]. (6) 1 det Q I  The first term on the right hand side of Eq. (5) can be found by integrating (or summing) Eq. (6) over the appropriate region.  Next, we need to find fT, (t' l W = a), the conditional joint density (or mass) function of the durations of the states along  path a, given that path a is followed. According to the Theorem, if path a is followed, then the elements of T, are equal to  the elements of Z, which are equal to the last N(a) elements of R. Using this fact, an expression for fr, (t' l W = a) in  terms of known quantities can be derived. Such an expression is given in the following corollary, which is proven in the  Appendix.  COROLLARY. The conditional density of' T x given that path a is followed, can be written  f,,(t'l W= a)= [P(W=a)]-',f,(r'lsx, reached) P(sreached)  _ [P(W=a)]-' 1 fx,[(Q-1r)'Isx, reached] P(sreached), IdetQI  where r; = 0 for i = 1, ..., n, - N(a), and r, - N(x ) +, = ti > O for i = 1, ..., N(a ); and =0 otherwise.  228 GOLDSTEIN AND FISHER  The unconditional density function for the completion time of the task is written in Eq. (3) as a probability mixture of  conditional densities. The conditional density function f,. (t I W= a) can be obtained from the Corollary, and standard  statistical techniques (e.g., Lindgren, 1968) for finding the distribution of a sum of random variables whose joint  distribution is known. The quantity P(W=oc) can be obtained from Eqs. (5) and (6). (Because the inverse of P( W = a) appears  in the expression for fT, (t' l W = a), and because Eq. (3) indicates that f,. (t I W = a) is to be multiplied by P(W = a), it  may seem that P(W = a) will cancel out and need not be computed. However, depending on the specific density functions  involved, the situation may not be this simple. Moreover, it may still be more convenient to allow the inverse of P( W = a) to  be absorbed into the expression for fT, (t' l W = v).)  4. THE GENERALITY OF THE OP METHOD  This section will deal with the generality and limitations of the OP method. In particular, one goal of this section is to  show how a TOP diagram can be associated with any OP diagram, demonstrating that the totality assumption of Section 3 causes  no loss of generality. To provide a concrete focus for this section, we will return to the example of models for visual  search. Recall that in a visual search experiment, the subject is to indicate as quickly as possible whether a prespecified  target character appears in a displayed array of characters. On some trials, the target character will in fact be among the  display characters; on other trials only distractor characters will be displayed.  We will begin where the discussion of PERT networks left off. Consider again the PERT network shown in Fig. 1, of a hybrid  serial-parallel model of visual search among three display characters. Recall that in this model, display characters are  encoded sequentially and comparisons with the target are executed simultaneously_ The reader should also be reminded that the  subscripts indicate the unknown order in which display characters receive attention, not known positions in the physical  display. We will now show that the OP method can handle modifications of this model that render it unrepresentable by any PERT  network. Specifically, the model shown in Fig. 1 entails the assumptions: (1) that capacity to execute comparisons with the  target is large enough to permit three simultaneous comparisons, and (2) that search is exhaustive, i.e., the search  continues, and delays initiation of the response process, even after the target has been found. By contrast, the OP method can  be used to model a limited-capacity self-terminating search process in which: (1) no more than two display characters can be  compared simultaneously with the target, and (2) the response process is initiated as soon as the target is identified or all  characters have been examined. As discussed below, these modifications violate all three PERT network assumptions about the  dynamics of processing. Although there is no conceptual difficulty in handling capacity limitation and selftermination  simultaneously, discussing these properties separately will enable us to present simpler and more readable OP diagrams.  STOCHASTIC NETWORKS  229  Consider capacity limitation first, and suppose that no more than two display characters can be compared simultaneously with  the target. This implies that when process e3 completes execution, process C3 is unable to begin if processes ct and c, are  both still undergoing execution. This violates the PERT assumption that a process begins as soon as the processes that precede  it in the partial order have completed execution. The difficulty presented by the limited-capacity model is that neither ct  nor cZ can definitely be said to precede c3. Rather it is the disjunction (c, or c,) which is required to precede c3, but PERT  networks don't have the facility to represent this.  Figure 3 shows the OP diagram which corresponds to the hybrid serial-parallel limited-capacity (exhaustive search) model for  three display characters. (Although they are not drawn in Fig. 3, we allow transitions from one state to another such that two  or more processes finish simultaneously. Drawing these additional arcs would complicate the OP diagram in an obvious way.) The  effect of the capacity  FIG. 3. Total Order-of-Processing (TOP) diagram corresponding to a limited-capacity serial-parallel model of visual search  among three display characters.  230 GOLDSTEIN AND FISHER  limitation on the OP diagram can be seen by comparing Fig. 3 with Fig. 2. In both figures, the transition from state S3 to  state ss is made when e3 completes execution before the other current processes c, and c2. Without a capacity limitation (Fig.  2), process c3 begins upon the completion of e3. In the limited-capacity model (Fig. 3), the processes c, and c, remain  current, thereby preventing c3 from beginning. Figure 3 shows that c3 begins as soon as some transition out of state ss is  made. This modification does not affect any of the properties of OP diagrams that were used to derive the results of Section  3, and the methods discussed there can be used to find the response time distribution.  The property of self-termination violates the remaining two PERT assumptions about the dynamics of processing. It clearly  violates the assumption that all processes must be executed before the task is completed, for the whole point of  selftermination is that some processes can be bypassed. Also, it violates the assumption that once a process has begun, it  continues uninterrupted until it has finished executing. To see this, suppose that process c, completes its execution before  c, does, and that c2 has in fact identified the target. Self-termination requires that the response process begin immediately  and that the process c, be interrupted and canceled. Thus, although PERT networks are remarkably flexible models, they cannot  incorporate properties such as capacity limitation and self-termination. OP diagrams seem to us to be a natural device for  handling these properties of visual search models.  As the preceding paragraph indicates, self-termination can be illustrated with two display characters rather than three, and  to simplify the presentation we do so. As before, display characters are encoded sequentially and compared with the target  simultaneously, but the response process is initiated as soon as either (1) a comparison process identifies the target, or (2)  both comparison processes complete execution without having found the target. For this example, we assume that the target  character is absent from the display on a random half of the trials, and that for the remaining trials the target is equally  likely to be the first or second character to which the subject directs attention. (This assumption seems reasonable,  especially if the experimenter has randomly allocated the target character to a physical position in the display.) Thus, there  is probability 1/2 that the target will be absent from the display, probability 1/4 that the target will be identified by  comparison process c,, and probability 1/4 that the target will be identified by comparison process c2. We assume in addition  that the duration of a comparison process is independent of whether or not it results in identification of the target. It  should be noted that this last assumption is not required by the OP method. We adopt it only to simplify the presentation. As  we will discuss later, the ability of the OP method to accommodate dependencies between process durations and aspects of  process performance (e.g., whether the process identifies a target or not, whether the process completes "correctly" or not,  etc.) represents an important advantage of the method.  The use of dummy processes in the OP diagram, i.e., those which do not correspond to any mental activities, facilitates  modeling of the self-termination  STOCHASTIC NETWORKS 231  property. Let p and a (for "presence" and "absence" of the target, respectively) denote dummy processes that begin upon the  first completion of a comparison process and interrupt any other current processing. We can think of the completion of process  p before a as indicating that the comparison process has found the target to be present, while the completion of process a  prior to p indicates that the comparison process found the target to be absent. Any density functions for the durations of  processes p and a will suffice, provided that the probability of process p having a smaller duration than process a is 1/4,  and that these durations are independent of the remaining process durations (e.g., P and A distributed exponentially with rate  parameters equal to ~ and 3A, respectively, with P and A independent of each other and everything else will do).  Figure 4 shows the OP diagram that models (unlimited-capacity) self-terminating search among two display characters. States  s,, s2, and s3 require nothing more than the notational conventions already introduced. We show the completed processes in the  lower half of the state, the processes shown in the upper half are  FIG. 4. OP diagram corresponding to a self-terminating serial-parallel model of visual search among two display characters.  "Dummy processes" are used to represent whether comparison processes result in the identification of the target character.  232 GOLDSTEIN AND FISHER  currently executing, and the remaining unnamed processes are pre-active. In the remaining states, we need to partition the  processes more finely than permitted by the usual three statuses-current, completed, and "other"; we need to subdivide the  "other" processes into those that are pre-active and those that are interrupted. In these states, the completed processes are  shown in the lower half of the state, but the upper half represents both the current and the interrupted processes. The  current processes are shown on the left and the interrupted processes are shown on the right. Any unnamed processes are to be  understood as pre-active.  Consider Fig. 4, and suppose that the system has moved from state s, to state s,, where encoding process ez and comparison  process c, are current. Suppose that c, finishes its execution before ez. Then the first comparison process has been completed  and the system moves to state s4. In state s4, the dummy processes p and a are current, and the encoding process e, has been  interrupted. If dummy process p finishes before a, then we interpret comparison process c, to have resulted in discovery of  the target character. In this case, the system moves to states,, in which the response process r is initiated without ever  resuming encoding process e2 and without ever initiating the comparison process c_ In fact, the only way for both comparison  processes to finish execution is if process a finishes before process p in state 4, 5, or 6.  It should be noted that state s4 is drawn as rectangular, indicating that the duration T4 of this state does not contribute to  the overall duration T of the task. This is the first instance in which a state other than a finish state has failed to  contribute to the task duration T. Thus, if the system were to follow path s,, .s,, .s4, S's, s,3 through Fig. 4, the task  duration would be computed as T= T, + T, + T,, not as T = T, + T, + T4 + T,. As a result, some care must be taken in computing  fT (t I W = a) from f,, (t' I W = a), so that only the appropriate Ta, contribute to T. However, this modification creates no  difficulties for the overall strategy discussed in Section 2. It is still the case that  Mt)=Y-.fr(tI W= a)P(W=a1,  a  so we still want to use the methods of Section 3 to compute P(W = a) and f , (tx I W= a), and then use the conditional joint  density function f,, (t' I W = a) as a means to compute fT(t I W=a). The caution applies only to the last step. That is, in  usingfT,(t'I W= a) to compute fT(tI W= a), T should be defined not as the sum of all the Ta,, but only the sum of those Ta  whose corresponding states are represented by elliptical, not rectangular, nodes in the OP diagram.  What does create some difficulty is that the OP diagram shown in Fig. 4, although finite, violates totality. This is because  there exist paths containing processes which are interrupted and never resumed. Thus, the methods of Section 3 cannot be used  directly. Instead, we show how to associate a TOP diagram with this OP diagram. At that point we can apply the results of  Section 3. Figure 5 shows the TOP diagram associated with Fig. 4. By contrast with Fig. 4, in which execution of processes can  be interrupted and never resumed, Fig. 5 shows pro-  STOCHASTIC NETWORKS 233  FIG. 5. TOP diagram corresponding to the OP diagram shown in Fig. 4.  cesses resuming execution after completion of the response process r. However, all vertices which succeed completion of the  response process are drawn as rectangular, indicating that the durations of these states do not contribute to the overall  duration T of the task. A TOP diagram can be associated with any finite OP diagram in this fashion.  It should be emphasized that our depiction in Fig. 5 of encoding and comparison processes resuming execution after the  completion of the response is only for technical, and not substantive purposes. We are not proposing some sort of Zeigarnik  effect in which uncompleted activities must find resolution. This is just another use of dummy processes that don't correspond  to any mental activity at all. Its purpose here is to enable us to use the results of Section 3, concerning finite TOP  diagrams, to compute the response time distribution for a self-terminating process.  The inclusion of dummy processes in the OP diagram can be used to achieve an  480/35,!2-7  234 GOLDSTEIN AND FISHER  even greater degree of generality for the OP method. Above, we used dummy processes p and a to model an aspect of the  comparison process other than its duration, specifically whether or not the comparison process resulted in the discovery of  the target character. In a similar fashion, dummy processes can be used to model other nontemporal aspects of performance,  such as the commission of an error, the accomplishment of a subgoal, or other measures of the quality of performance.  Moreover, because the present development allows process durations to be dependent, OP diagrams can be used to model the  well-known relationships which exist between the speed of a process and other aspects of performance. Two such relationships  will be mentioned here. First, we needn't adopt the assumption that the duration of a comparison process is independent of  whether or not it results in identification of the target, or put more generally, we needn't assume that the duration of a  comparison process is independent of the stimuli being compared. Moreover, research suggests that such an independence  assumption may be too simple in many circumstances. In the matching paradigm (e.g., Bamber, 1969; Krueger, 1978), subjects  typically take less time to indicate that two stimulus arrays match than to indicate a mismatch. In the memory search paradigm  (e.g., Townsend & Roos, 1973), subjects typically take less time to decide that a target is present than to decide that a  target is absent. In the visual search paradigm (e.g., Fisher, Duffy, Young, & Pollatsek, 1988; Townsend & Roos, 1973),  subjects typically respond more slowly when the target resembles the distractors than when the target does not resemble the  distractors, and subjects are faster when there are multiple targets present in the display. Although various alternative  mechanisms have been proposed to account for each of these findings (e.g., see Bamber, 1969, for a dual-process explanation of  the differences in matching times), in most cases the more parsimonious explanations appear to be ones which assume that the  comparison times do depend on whether the stimuli being compared are the same or different. This sort of relation can be  modeled by dependencies in the joint density function of C, P, and A, i.e., the durations of the comparison process and the  presence/absence dummy processes. As a second example of the sort of relation between speed and performance which OP diagrams  can be used to model, note that the "correct" or "error" performance of a mental process can be captured by dummy processes.  Dependencies in the joint density function of these particular processes can be used to capture well-known speed-accuracy  tradeoffs (cf. Schweickert, 1985).  5. SUMMARY  PERT networks were introduced to psychology (Schweickert, 1978, 1980) as a class of models that could describe mental  architectures other than strictly serial or strictly parallel arrangements of cognitive processes. In Fisher and Goldstein's  (1983) approach to computing the response time distributions that are predicted by stochastic PERT networks, they employed OP  diagrams solely as an  STOCHASTIC NETWORKS 235  alternative representation of the information contained in PERT networks, i.e., as a mathematical convenience in the  derivation of their algorithm. The present paper emphasizes that OP diagrams are more general than PERT networks, and that OP  diagrams can provide models of plausible mental architectures that cannot be represented as PERT networks. It should be  emphasized, however, that PERT networks can also be generalized in other ways, and that a good deal of recent research has  been devoted to mental architectures which feature the continuous flow of information rather than the discrete starting and  stopping of processes in an OP diagram (e.g., McClelland & Rumelhart, 1986; Rumelhart & McClelland, 1986; Schweickert, 1989).  Nevertheless, the analysis of task performance in terms of discrete stages of processing or the execution of functionally  distinct subtasks has a long history in psychology and continues to be favored for particular levels of analysis. Our results  on OP diagrams offer some additional flexibility to researchers whose purposes are suited by considering the arrangement of  discrete mental processes.  For OP diagrams to be useful as models of cognition, researchers need to know how to derive falsifiable predictions from them.  The bulk of this paper has concerned the development of a procedure for computing the response time distributions predicted by  OP diagrams. The earlier work of Fisher and Goldstein (1983) assumed that the OP diagrams arose from PERT networks, and that  the mental process durations were independently distributed as probability mixtures of generalgamma distributions. Both  assumptions are relaxed in this paper. In contrast with OP diagrams that correspond to PERT networks, we have derived results  for finite TOP diagrams, which are permitted to have: (1) Corer partitions of the processes, (2) multiple start states, (3)  multiple finish states, (4) interruptions of uncompleted processes, (5) state transitions that depend on the sequence of  states previously reached, (6) processes that may not be engaged on every trial, and (7) paths of differing lengths. As  examples of the OP method applied to models that are not representable as stochastic PERT networks, we discussed limited  capacity and selfterminating models of visual search. The modeling of capacity limitations is a reflection of the OP diagram's  ability to handle more complicated conditions for the onset of a mental process than can be represented in a PERT network. The  modeling of self-termination reflects the OP diagram's flexibility in handling process "status." While PERT networks require  that mental processes be either current, completed, or not yet begun, OP diagrams allow mental processes to have other  statuses as well-interrupted, on hold, cancelled, etc.  In addition, because no assumptions were made about the distributions of the process durations (other than assuming that the  joint density or mass function was known), the OP method allows investigators to study complicated process dynamics. In  particular, no difficulty is presented by the possibility that several processes may simultaneously finish execution. Thus,  even discrete process durations can be modeled. Moreover, since process durations need not be independent, OP diagrams can be  used to model various sorts of tradeoffs, e.g., between the time spent in different activities. By using dummy processes that  don't correspond  236 GOLDSTEIN AND FISHER  directly to mental processes, OP diagrams can be used to model aspects of processing other than duration, such as whether a  process completes correctly or results in an error. Thus, tradeoffs between speed and accuracy can also be modeled.  In conclusion, we hope that by showing how predicted response time distributions can be derived for a general class of OP  diagrams, the results reported here will enable researchers to enlarge the set of hypothesized mental architectures that they  can subject to empirical test.  APPENDIX  THEOREM. Let <17, S, T> be a finite TOP diagram. Then path a is followed if and only if the following three statements are  true.  (1) sx, is reached.  (2) A,(A',A,)-' A',X,=X,.  (3) Each component of (A' A,) -' A' X, is positive.  Moreover, if path a is followed, then  (4) T, = (Ax)-' A'X,.  Proof of Necessity. Suppose that path a is followed. Then statement (1) is obvious. Because of the totality assumption, any  process x which becomes current somewhere along path a must eventually be allowed to finish. Thus, the duration of x is equal  to the sum of the durations of the states in which x is current. That is, X, = A,T,. It follows that X, is in the column space  of Ax, and so the orthogonal projection of X, into the column space of Anamely A,(A'A,)-' A'Xis equal to X, itself. This  establishes statement (2). Statement (4) is established by noting that A, has the left-inverse (A'A,)-' Ax, so T, = (Ax A,) -'  A, X, follows from X, = A, T, . Finally, statement (3) follows from statement (4) upon observing that every state along path a  must have positive duration.  Proof of Sufficiency. Suppose that statements (1)-(3) are satisfied. Statement (2) implies that X, is in the column space of  Aand therefore the equation A,Z=X, can be solved for Z. Because A, has the left-inverse (A'A,)-' Ax, the unique solution of  A, Z = X, is given by Z = (A, A,) -' Ax X, . By statement (3), each Z; is positive.  Define the n, by N(or) partitioned matrix Dx as follows. The kth column of D, is associated with state s,,. Like Athe rows  of D, are blocked, with the first n,, rows associated with s,,, the next n,Z rows associated with s,2, etc. Specifically, the  STOCHASTIC NETWORKS 237  ith group of rows is associated with the set of processes M,,. Let d,[(i, j), k] denote the entry in the kth column and the  jth row of the ith group of rows, and let  d,[(i, j), k] = 1 if x,;jC M,k, and  d,[(i, j), k] =0 otherwise.  Now, we can write X, = A, Z = D, Z + (A, - D,) Z, and therefore,  D,Z=Xx-(Aa-D,)Z. That is,  1-1  Zi=Xa;i- I, a(xa;l,S.)Zk, (A1) k=1  for j = 1, 2, ..., n,;.  By hypothesis s,, is reached. It will now be shown that the processes in Mx, finish simultaneously and before any other  processes in C(s,). It then follows that the system moves from s, to s,,, and that T,, is equal to the duration of the  processes in M  By Eq. (A1), Z1 = X, for j = I, ..., n,,, and it follows that x E Mimplies X = X,,,. Now let x e C(s - M,,. Then by  totality, there exists i > 1 such that x E M,;. Therefore, x = x,,j, for some j. By hypothesis, we have 0 < Zi, or by using  Eq. (A 1),  i- 1  0 < X,,, - 11 a(x,,j, s,k) Z k=l  Xx;i - a(x,,,, Sa) Z1  =X,1-a(x,;j, s,,) Xa11  = X,,j - X,,, .  The last step is made by observing that a(x,,j, s= 1, since by hypothesis, x,;j = x e C(s). Rearranging terms, we have  X,,, < X,;i = X, as required. Moreover, we have  T,,= min {X}=X,,1=Z1. x E C(s,1)  The proof now proceeds by induction. Suppose that for i = 1, ..., m - 1, we have C(s,;) :?,- 0, T,,. = Zi, and the system  moves from sto s , . It will be shown that if C(s,m) zA 0, then the processes in M, finish simultaneously and before any  of the other processes in C(sj. Thus, the system moves from sx,, to s,,,,, and we also have T, = Z_.  We need to show that the minimum value of  m-1  X - Y a(x, s,,) Zi i=1  238 GOLDSTEIN AND FISHER  is attained by exactly those processes in M,,n. By Eq. (Al), we have  Zm ~ X7- Y, a(xxmi, S,) Zip i=1  for j = t, ..., n,m, that is, for all processes in M,n,. Thus, all processes x E M.. attain the same value of  774 - - I  X- Y a(x, s,) Zi, i=1  namely  n7 -  Zm = X,I - Y a(xan,I, .4,) Zi. i=  If it can now be shown that x E C(s,m) - M,m implies  m-1  Zm < X - ~, a(x, s,,) Zi, i=1  then it will have been shown that  ( m - t l  Zm = min X - Y a(x, s,;) Zi }  X E C(S,'{ ~ l ) 7=I  Moreover, it will have been shown that this minimum vailue is attained for exactly those processes in M,,n, and thus the  system moves from sxn to s,.,,. Thus, it suffices to show that x E C(s,m) - M,m implies  m- I  Zp< X- Y a(x, S,,) Zi. i=1  Let x E C(s,m) - M... Then by totality there exists k > m such that x E M,k. Therefore, x = x,,,, for some u. By hypothesis,  we have 0 < Zk, or by Eq. (A 1),  k  0<X,,,- Y a(X,k" S, ) Zj j=1  m  - Y- a(Xak" S.) Zi j=1  - Xak,. - Y- a(x,k_ Sal) Zj - a(xxk" Sam) Zm i=1  m-I  - X~kc - a(Xak" Szi) Zj - Zm. /=1  STOCHASTIC NETWORKS  239  The last step is made by observing that a(xxk,., sxm) = 1, since by hypothesis, vxk,. = x E C(S",, ). Rearranging terms, we  have  nt - 1  Z < Xak' - Y- a(xxk Sai) Zi /=1  as required. Q.E.D.  COROLLARY. The conditional density of T,, given that path a is followed, can be written  fT,(t'j W= a)= [P(W=a)]-'fR(r'jsa1 reached) P(sa1 reached)  _ [P(W=a)]-1 I detQI fx(Q-Ir)'lsx, reached] P(s, reached),  where r; = 0 for i = 1, ..., n, - N(a ), and 1'-N(a)+i=ti>0for i= 1_., N(oc); and  = 0 otherwise.  Proof. It will be shown that the event  E1 = [(T, 5 t;, for i= 1, ..., N(a)), and (W= a)] is equivalent to the event  E, = [(R; = 0, for i = 1, ..., na - N(a) ), and  (0 < R, N(a)+; - t;, for i = 1, ..., N(oc)), and (s, reached)].  It will therefore follow that  P[T, 5 t;, for i = 1, ..., N(a)j W= a] P[ W= x] = P [ (R; = 0, for i = 1, ..., n a - N(a) ), and  (0 < R__ N,x)+;,< ti, for i= 1, ..., N(a))I(sz, reached)] x P[s, reached].  Thus, the relevant cumulative distribution functions behave as specified in the Corollary, and by taking derivatives, the  density functions will also.  240 GOLDSTEIN AND FISHER  By the theorem, and the discussion following it in the text, path a being followed is equivalent to the event  E = [ (R i = 0, for i = 1, ..., n, - N(a) ), and  (0 < R-N(x) +i, for i = 1, ..., N(a)), and  (s reached)].  Moreover, if path a is followed, then R-N(x)+i=T, for i= 1, ..., N(a). Therefore, letting F denote the event  F= [Tx; < ti, for i = 1, ..., N(a) ],  it is easy to see that Et = (E and F) = E,. Q.E.D.  REFERENCES  BAMBER, D. (1969). Reaction times and error rates for "same"-"different" judgments of multidimensional stimuli. Perception and  Psychophysics, 6, 169-174.  DONDERS, F. C. (1868). Die Schnelligkeit Psychischer Processe. Archiv.fur Anatomie and Physiologie, 657-681. [On the speed of  mental processes. In W. G. Koster (Ed. and Trans.), Attention and performance 11 (pp. 412-431). Amsterdam: North-Holland.  Reprinted from Acta Psyehologica, 1969, 30]. FISHER, D. L. (1983). Stochastic models of visual search: Queues, PERT networks,  and OP diagrams. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.  FISHER, D. L., DUFFY, S. A., YOUNG, C., & POLLATSEK, A. (1988). Automatic detection in visual search: Masking, decision noise,  and load effects. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 14, 253-266.  FISHER, D. L., & GOLDSTEIN, W. M. (1983). Stochastic PERT networks as models of cognition: Derivation of the mean, variance,  and distribution of reaction time using order-of-processing (OP) diagrams. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 27, 121-151.  FISHER, D. L., SAISI, D., & GOLDSTEIN, W. M. (1985). Stochastic PERT networks: OP diagrams, critical paths, and the project  completion time. Computers and Operations Research, 12, 471-482. KRUEGER, L. E. (1978). A theory of perceptual matching.  Psychological Review, 85, 278-304. LINDGREN, B. W. (1968). Statistical theory (3rd ed.). New York: Macmillan.  LUCE, R. D. (1986). Response times: Their role in inferring elementary mental organization. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.  MCCLELLAND, J. L., & RUMELHART, D. E. (1986). Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition  (Vol. 2). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  POSNER, M. I. (1978). Chronometric explorations of mind. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. RuMELHART, D. E., & MCCLELLAND, J.  L. (1986). Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition (Vol. 1). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  SCHWEICKERT, R. (1978). A critical path generalization of the additive factor method: Analysis of a Stroop task. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 18, 105-139.  SCHWEICKERT, R. (1980). Critical-path scheduling of mental processes in a dual task. Science, 209, 704-706.  SCHWEICKERT, R. (1982). The bias of an estimate of coupled slack in stochastic PERT networks. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 26, 1-12.  SCHWEICKERT, R. (1983a). Latent network theory: Scheduling of processes in sentence verification and the Stroop effect.  Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 9, 353-383.  STOCHASTIC NETWORKS  241  SCHWEICKERT, R. (1983b). Synthesizing partial orders given comparability information: Partitive sets and slack in critical  path networks. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 27, 261-276. SCHWEICKERT, R. (1985). Separable effects of factors on speed  and accuracy: Memory scanning, lexical decision, and choice tasks. Psychological Bulletin, 97, 530-546.  SCHWEICKERT, R. (1989). Separable effects of factors on activation functions in discrete and continuous models: d' and evoked  potentials. Psychological Bulletin, 106, 318-328.  SCHWEICKERT, R., & TOWNSEND, J. T. (1989). A trichotomy: Interactions of factors prolonging sequential and concurrent mental  processes in stochastic discrete mental (PERT) networks. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 33, 328-347.  STERNBERG, S. (1969). The discovery of processing stages: Extensions of Donders' method. In W. G. Koster (Ed.), Attention and  performance II (pp. 176-315). Amsterdam: Elsevier/North-Holland. STRANG, G. (1980). Linear algebra and its applications (2nd  ed.). New York: Academic Press. TAYLOR, D. A. (1976). Stage analysis of reaction time. Psychological Bulletin, 83, 161-191.  TOWNSEND, J. T. (1984). Uncovering mental processes with factorial experiments. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 28,  363-400.  TOWNSEND, J. T. (1989). It was twenty years ago today: Increasing reaction times or errors still do not a serial processor  make (Tech. Rep. No. 89-t). Purdue Mathematical Psychology Program. TOWNSEND, J. T., & ASHBY, F. G. (1983). The stochastic  modeling of elementary psychological processes. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.  TOWNSEND, J. T., & Roos, R. N. (1973). Search reaction time for single targets in multiletter stimuli with brief visual  displays. Memory and Cognition, 1, 319-332.  TOWNSEND, J. T., & SCHWEICKERT, R. (1985). Interactive effects of factors affecting processes in stochastic PERT networks. In  G. d'Ydewalle (Ed.), Cognition, information processing, and motivation. Amsterdam: North-Holland.  TOWNSEND, J. T., & SCHWEICKERT, R. (1989). Toward the trichotomy method of reaction times: Laying the foundation of stochastic  mental networks. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 33, 309-327. TOWNSEND, J. T., & VAN ZANDT, T. (1988). New theoretical  results on testing self-terminating vs. exhaustive processing. In H. G. Geissler and H. Schroeder (Eds.), Proceedings of the  International Fechner Symposium. Amsterdam: North-Holland.  RECEIVED: April 20, 1988