10.1016/0022-2496(92)90055-c
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 36, 129-145 (1992)  Theoretical Note  Stochastic Networks as Models of Cognition: Deriving Predictions for Resource-Constrained Mental Processing  WILLIAM M. GOLDSTEIN  The University of Chicago  AND  DONALD L. FISHER  University of Massachusetts  One approach to the analysis of task performance is to focus on the identity and arrangement of subtasks. For our purposes, we  consider a theory of task performance to consist of: (1) a decomposition of the task into a set of hypothesized subtasks or  mental processes; (2) hypothesized structural constraints concerning the order of execution of mental processes (i.e., which  of the mental processes must occur sequentially and which can occur concurrently), whether subtasks can be interrupted and  resumed, whether potentially concurrent subtasks are prioritized, etc.; and (3) temporal hypotheses concerning the time  required to complete each of the subtasks. A large class of such theories can be represented by Order-of-Processing (OP)  diagrams. Previous research has indicated how to compute the theoretically expected response-time distribution for  OP-representable tasks, provided that processing resources are allocated in such a manner that each subtask undergoing  execution progresses at a constant, unit rate. Here, we present results for OP-representable tasks in which processing  resources (e.g., attention) can be differentially and dynamically allocated to the execution of mental processes, the exact  allocation of resources determining the rate at which each subtask is executed at any given moment. C 1992 Academic Press, Inc.  One approach to the analysis of task performance is to focus on the identity and arrangement of subtasks. To illustrate,  consider the decision-making task in which subjects must indicate which of two multi-attribute alternatives A and B they  prefer. In order to perform this task, subjects must execute psychological processes that result in stimulus information being  encoded, encoded information being evaluated, and subjective evaluations being expressed as an overt choice (Goldstein &  Einhorn, 1987, 1989). A finer-grained consideration of these subtasks reveals a  Correspondence and requests for reprints should be addressed to William M. Goldstein, Department of Psychology, The University  of Chicago, 5848 South University Avenue, IL 60637.  129  0022-2496/92 $3.00  Copyright 1992 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  130 GOLDSTEIN AND FISHER  variety of theoretically interesting possibilities. For example, subjects employing "holistic" decision strategies would  consider the two alternatives separately. For each alternative, the subject would perform operations to encode and evaluate  the attributes, and to combine the attribute information into an overall evaluation of that alternative. Then, subjects would  compare the overall evaluations of the two alternatives with each other, compare the resulting comparison with a decision  threshold, and report a response. By contrast, subjects employing "dimensional" decision strategies would not consider the two  alternatives separately. Instead, subjects would encode the attribute information for both alternatives, evaluate the  difference between the alternatives on each attribute, combine the set of withinattribute comparisons into an overall  comparative evaluation, compare this overall comparative evaluation with a decision threshold, and report a response. Thus,  the two strategies posit somewhat different sets of psychological subtasks. (For more detail on holistic and dimensional  decision strategies, see Russo & Dosher, 1983. For a discussion of models that incorporate decision thresholds, see Goldstein,  1991.) In addition to differing sets of psychological subtasks, numerous variations can be generated by imposing different  assumptions about the temporal relations among the subtasks. For example, it might be assumed that the psychological processes  must be executed sequentially, or that they can all be executed concurrently, or a hybrid arrangement might be assumed in  which some processes must be executed sequentially while others can be executed concurrently (e.g., information is encoded  sequentially, but evaluation of previously encoded information can occur concurrently with the encoding of additional  information).  For our present purposes, we consider a theory of task performance to consist of: (1) a decomposition of the task into a set  of hypothesized subtasks or mental processes; (2) hypothesized structural constraints concerning the order of execution of  mental processes (i.e., which of the mental processes must occur sequentially and which can occur concurrently), whether  subtasks can be interrupted and resumed, whether potentially concurrent subtasks are prioritized, etc.; and because we will  focus exclusively on response time as the measure of task performance, we also require (3) temporal hypotheses concerning the  time required to complete each of the subtasks. Ever since the introduction of Sternberg's (1969) additive factors method,  theories of this sort have been probed by manipulating experimental factors that are assumed to affect the duration of  particular subtasks, and then observing whether the effect on response time is as predicted by the theory (cf. Schweickert,  1978; Schweickert & Townsend, 1989; Townsend & Ashby, 1983; Townsend & Schweickert, 1989). However, a recurring problem is  that when the mental processes are assumed to have probabilistic durations, the derivation of the predicted response time  distribution can be very difficult. Elsewhere, we have addressed the computation of predicted response time distributions when  the structural constraints can be represented by PERT networks (Fisher & Goldstein, 1983; Fisher, Saisi, & Goldstein, 1985),  and for weaker constraints that make processing representable by Order-of-Processing (OP) diagrams (Goldstein & Fisher, 1991).  Here, we present results for OP-representable tasks in which  processing resources (e.g., attention) can be differentially and dynamically allocated to the execution of mental processes.  By extending the earlier results in this way, we aim to enlarge the scope of these models, and permit the associated methods  to be brought to bear on phenomena of attention, both between modalities and within any given modality. (See Schweickert and  Boggs (1984) for a review of many of these issues.)  For example, consider the utility of such methods for the analysis of the division of attention across modalities. Current  theories of cross-modality divided attention, including both single-resource theories (e.g., Kahneman, 1973; Moray, 1967) and  multiple-resource theories (e.g., Kantowitz & Knight, 1976; Navon & Gopher, 1979; Wickens, 1984), generally ignore the  specific form of the relation between response time and the allocation of resources. An understanding of this relation was  unnecessary as long as it was possible to design adequate tests of the various divided attention theories by studying only  qualitative properties of response time and accuracy of performance. However, it no longer appears that the current tests will  suffice (Navon, 1984). The use of the methods described below may afford a way around the current dilemma.  In contrast with cross-modality studies, quantitative properties of response time have figured prominently in single-modality  studies of divided attention. In the study of visual search performance, for example, Townsend (1974) has suggested that a  constant pool of resources is divided evenly among the various processes that are executing at any given moment. As soon as  one of the processes is completed, the resources are redistributed homogeneously across the remaining processes. Such a  redistribution at the completion of each process continues until all processes have been executed. Rumelhart (1970) has  proposed a similar model. However, unlike the above, the resources assigned to any particular process remain unchanged as the  system unfolds. Finally, Shaw and Shaw (1977) have developed a model where the initial allocation of resources is assumed to  be optimal. Interestingly, they can use their model to estimate the total capacity across various conditions. They find that  this capacity remains constant. Each of the above models has assumed particular distributions of the process durations and  particular resource allocation rules. The methods that we describe below can be used to derive predictions for a broader class  of distributions of process durations and resource allocation rules.  OP DIAGRAMS  Structure  Let 11 be the set of subtasks or mental processes hypothesized to underlie task performance. To represent task performance by  an Order-of-Processing (OP) diagram, we consider the state of the psychological system to be characterized at any moment by a  partition s of the mental processes in 17 into: (1) a finite set C(s) of processes that are currently undergoing execution,  (2) a set K(s) of processes whose execution has been completed, and (3) a set O(s) of processes whose status  is anything other than current or completed (e.g., not yet begun, awaiting resumption after being interrupted by a higher  priority process in a limited capacity system, interrupted and canceled). Let S be the set of such states, and let S, be the  subset of S which consists of the potential start states of the system, each of which has an empty completed set and a  nonempty current set.  A pictorial representation of an OP diagram can be formed by constructing a graph whose vertices correspond to the possible  states of the system. For concreteness, we will interweave our definitions with illustrations referring to the task depicted  in Fig. 1. Figure 1 shows the OP diagram for a task with subtasks, x, y, z, w, r, i.e., 17= {x, y, z, w, r}. This task has  only one possible start state, shown at the bottom of the OP diagram in the node that has been labeled "s," for "state 1."  Thus, S, = {s, }. When the trial begins and the system enters s,, no processes have been completed [i.e., the completed set of  s,, K(s,), is empty], processes x and y are both executing [i.e., the current set of s, is Qs,) = { x, y I], and the remaining  processes have not yet begun [i.e., the "other" set of s, is O(s,) = {z, w, r} ]. This partition of the subtasks is shown in  Fig. 1 by lists written inside the node s, . In the top half of the node, we indicate the processes which are currently  executing, in this case x and y. In the bottom half of the node, we indicate the processes which have completed execution. At  the start of the trial, no processes have been completed, and so we write "start" in the bottom half of the node. Implicitly,  any processes which are not specifically indicated have not yet begun execution.  x, y, z, r  x, y,z,w  FIG.  1. Order-of-processing (OP) diagram corresponding to a hypothetical task with subtasks  By definition of "state," transitions from one state to another are accompanied by a change in the partitioning of 17. In  particular, we consider the processes in Qs;) to be in a "race" (Marley & Colonius, 1990), so that a transition from state s;  to state s; is made at the moment when one or more current processes become completed. Thus, a transition from state s; to  state s; is necessarily accompanied by some members of Qs;) becoming members of K(s;). Moreover, we assume that completed  processes remain completed, so K(s;) must be the union of K(s;) and the members of Qs,) that completed their execution. A  state transition requires at least one current process to become complete. In addition, a state transition may be accompanied  by: (1) any "other" process becoming current, and (2) any current process becoming "other." We assume that the task continues  until the moment when the system enters a state with no current processes.  To illustrate, note that in Fig. 1 the system can exit from the start state s, in any of three ways, depending on how the  "race" between the current processes of s,, x and y, is resolved. First, if x completes before y does, then the system moves  to the state labeled "s2," which shows x in the bottom half of the node (indicating that x has been completed), and y in the  top half of the node (indicating that y continues to execute in state s2). As shown in Fig. 1, if the system does enter s2, it  will necessarily move to state s4 next, when process y completes execution.  The second way for the system to exit s, is for processes x and y to complete simultaneously. In this case, the system moves  directly to state s4, which shows x and y in the bottom half of the node (i.e., completed). The appearance of process z in the  top half of state s4 indicates that subtask z undergoes execution when the system enters s4. That is, the transition to s4  from s, (or from s2) is accompanied by an "other" process, in this case the not-yet-begun process z, becoming current.  Third, the system can exit s, by process y completing before x. In this case, the system moves to state s3, which shows y in  the bottom half of the node (i.e., completed). The top half of state s3 has been divided into two parts. In the upper left  portion, we list the current processes of s3. Thus, the not-yet-begun process z becomes current in the transition from s, to  s3. The upper right portion shows the processes which have changed status from current to "other," i.e., the processes whose  execution has been interrupted. In this instance, the completion of process y prompts the interruption of x and the execution  of z. Such an interruption might occur, for example, it process y produces a result that must be acted on by process z before  it decays from short-term memory, and processes x and z require the same processing resource. By listing interrupted processes  in the upper right portion of a state, we are implicitly distinguishing two different kinds of "other" processes: interrupted  processes (upper right) and processes not yet begun (all those not explicitly listed). It is mainly because of an assumption  introduced below (called "totality") that is convenient to employ a notation that makes this distinction.  Let M(s;, s;) be the subset of current processes Qs;) whose completion marks the transition from state s; to state sj. [For  example, in Fig. 1, M(s,, s2)= {x}.] It should be emphasized that there may be many states in S whose completed sets are equal  to the union of K(s;) and M(s;, s;), but which differ in their current and  "other" sets. If the system is in state s,, and the processes in M(s;, s;) complete their execution simultaneously and before  any of the processes in Qs;) - M(s,, s;), then all of the states s with K(s) = K(s;) u M(s;, sj) are candidates to succeed s;.  We assume in this case that the particular state to succeed s; is determined by the sequence of states by which the system has  arrived in state s;. Thus, the state transitions of an OP diagram are determined in part by the subset of current processes  that win the "race," and in part by the history of the system, but we assume that no other considerations are relevant.  To illustrate this last point, note that in Fig. 1, state s4 can be succeeded by either s6 or s7. That is, both s6 and s, have  completed sets that are equal to the union of K(s,) and z, the only process current in s,. The particular state to succeed s4,  then, must be determined by the sequence of states by which the system came to s4. We have written "1, 4" on the arc leading  from s4 to s6, and "1, 2, 4" on the arc leading from s4 to s,, to indicate, respectively, that the transition will be made to  state s6 if the system went directly from s, to s4, and the transition will be made to state s, if the system arrived in s, by  way of s2.  The states labeled s8 and s, in Fig. 1 have no current processes, and so we write "finish" in the top half of these nodes.  Finish states themselves have no duration; the task is finished as soon as the system enters a finish state. We indicate that  finish states contribute nothing to the overall task duration by drawing the corresponding node as rectangular rather than  elliptical.  The above considerations characterize OP diagrams. However, we make two additional assumptions, mainly for mathematical  convenience. To state these conditions, let {s;}, i=aI, a2, ..., be a sequence of states, called a path, which describes a  possible evolution of the task. We also refer to the index sequence a= ((X,, a2, ...) as a path. Let T = tot, Q, ...I be the  set of paths through the OP diagram. If each path a e T is a finite sequence of states, we say that the OP diagram is finite.  Also, we say that an OP diagram is a Total Order-of-Processing or TOP diagram if it satisfies the following condition:  For all a e T, x e C(s,) implies x e K(s.) for some j > i.  That is, in a TOP diagram, any process which ever becomes current during the evolution of the system must eventually be  completed, although it may be interrupted and resumed before completion. It should be emphasized that totality does not  require each process in 17 to become current and then completed. There may be processes which are engaged on some trials of  the task but not others. (For example, in Fig. 1, only one of the processes w and r is ever engaged on any particular trial.)  In the results that follow, we assume that the task has the structure of a finite TOP diagram. The totality assumption does  not cause any loss of generality, as any finite OP diagram can be associated with a finite TOP diagram (Goldstein & Fisher,  1991). Finally, it is important to observe that on any particular trial of the task, one and only one path through the OP  diagram will be  followed. (For further discussion of the structure of OP diagrams, including the ways that OP diagrams generalize PERT  networks, see Goldstein & Fisher, 1991.)  Dynamic Resource Allocation  In previous treatments (Fisher & Goldstein, 1983; Fisher et al., 1985; Goldstein & Fisher, 1991), we assumed the process  durations to be random variables with a known joint density (or mass) function, and addressed the problem of determining the  density (or mass) function of the duration of the entire task (i.e., the response time). Here, we include the possibility that  process durations might be affected by processing resources whose allocation might itself depend on the evolution of the  system. In this case, it does not seem reasonable to assume that the process durations have a known joint density function  that is not conditioned on the system evolution. Instead, we adopt the framework employed by Kulkarni and Adlakha (1986) to  consider resource constraints in PERT networks. (Also, see Townsend and Ashby (1978) for related developments.)  We assume that the duration X of process x is a decreasing function of the amount of resources allocated to its execution. To  model the dependence of X on the allocated resources, we associate two quantities with each x E 17: (1) the positive quantity  W,,, which we interpret as the amount of work required to complete process x, and (2) the nonnegative quantity vx(t), which we  interpret as the speed at which work on process x is progressing at time t, a rate which depends on the processing resources  devoted to the execution of process x. We assume that if process x begins executing at time 0, and continues executing with  speed vx(t) at time t, then the duration X of process x is related to Wx and vx(t) via the equation  WY= f0 Xv,(t)dt. (1)  Thus, the work requirement Wx of process x can be regarded as the duration of x when its execution takes place with constant,  unit speed. We assume that the speed at which process x is executed is a monotonically increasing function of the amount of  resources allocated to its execution. However, we will not pursue here the possibility of positing the form of this function  and drawing inferences about resource allocations that are distinguished from inferences about processing speed. Rather, in  the following discussion we will consider the concepts of processing speed and allocated resources to be interchangeable.  Clearly, the duration of process x will depend on the resources allocated to its execution, which may change as the system  evolves. On the other hand, it seems reasonable to suppose that the work requirement Wx is independent of resource  allocations. We assume that the work requirements of the processes in II are random variables with a known joint density (or  mass) function, and we will show how the density (or mass) function of the duration of the entire task can be derived. It  might be noted that because the work requirement of a process is equal to its duration when executed at constant unit speed,  our assumption that the distribution of work requirements is known is nothing more than the assumption made in  previous work that the distribution of processing durations (without dynamic resource allocation) was known.'  Some additional assumptions are required concerning the speed of processing. First, we assume that the speed of execution of  process x, vx(t), is positive when and only when process x is current, with vx(t) equal to zero at all other times. Second, we  assume that vx(t) is constant during the time that the psychological system is in state s, although the speed can change when  the system makes a state transition. Because of this assumption, it is convenient to employ the following notation. For each  path ac-F, and for each state s, E S in which x is currently executing, let v(x, s,,,) denote the speed of process x while the  system is in state s, provided that the system has arrived in state s,,, via path a. The intention of the last clause is to  permit v(x, s,,,) :A v(x, s,6,.) even though sa, = s, 6j. That is, the speed of process x is permitted to depend on both the  state of the system and the sequence of states by which that state has been reached.  The assumptions about processing speed are broad enough to encompass many intuitively plausible resource-allocation rules, as  well as some rather exotic ones. One allocation rule divides a constant pool of resources into equal shares among all the  processes in the current set of each state (Rumelhart, 1970; Townsend, 1974). This would be modeled v(x, sx), for x E C(s.),  equal to some constant divided by the number of processes in C(s.). Note that for any particular process x, this allocation  scheme can change the resources available to x if x undergoes execution in more than one state. An alternative allocation rule  would assign x some quantity of resources that would remain dedicated to x across states, with the amount assigned depending  on the history of the system up to the moment when x begins execution. The only limitation we have placed on the possible  allocation rules is that resource allocations change only at those moments when state transitions are made.  Response Time  It was mentioned above that we consider the processes in Qs;) to be in a "race," so that a transition is made out of state s;  at the moment when one or more current processes become completed. It follows that the duration T; of state s; is equal to  ' Given that Eq. (1) specifies the relations among process duration X, work requirement Wx, and processing speed vx(t), and  given our desire to consider X as a random variable, it follows that one or both of the remaining two variables, Wx and vs(t),  must also be random. This is true even in the special case that v.,(t) is independent of t, for which Eq. (1) becomes Wx=v,X.  We have chosen to consider the work requirement as a random variable, and to consider processing speed to be a deterministic  function of allocated resources. It was pointed out by James Townsend in a review of this paper that the resulting models may  not be identifiably different from models in which processing speed is a random function of allocated resources (e.g., a  deterministic function plus a random component) and the work requirement Wx is a constant. We agree with this observation, but  we have nothing useful to say at this point about the way that models of one class might mimic models of the other class. We  have chosen our particular assumptions not for any deep theoretical reasons, but because these assumptions permit a smoother  generalization of previous mathematical work.  the duration of the first process(es) in Qs;) to complete execution, minus the duration of any partial execution of those  process(es) performed in previously reached states. Considering the assumptions we have made about work requirements and  processing speed, an alternative expression for T; can be given. Specifically, the duration T; of state s; is equal to the  work that remains to be done on the first process(es) to complete execution (i.e., work requirement minus the amount of work  already accomplished in previous states) divided by the speed at which work progresses on this process in state s;.  To see this, suppose that on a particular trial of the task, path a is the path followed through the finite TOP diagram. Then,  given out assumptions, Eq. (1) becomes  Wr- Y_ V(X, Sa) T, (2)  where i * is the last state along path a to have process x in its current set; i.e., x is one of the processes whose  completion marks the transition from state s,,, to state sa,,+l. Solving Eq. (2) for Ta, yields  1'-1 1 l  Ta', = [ WY - V(X, s T, J i=1  V(X, S,'  The expression in square brackets is the amount of work that remains to be done on process x at the moment when the system  enters state sa;and the speed at which x is executed in state s,,,., the system having arrived via path a, is the term in  the denominator. The amount of work that remains to be done on a process, divided by the speed at which work is progressing,  gives the length of time required to complete that process if work were to continue at that speed. Because the state duration  is determined by a "race" among all the current processes in the state, it is the process(es) with the smallest remaining time  to completion (at the speeds operating in the state) that provide the state duration. Moreover, because state transitions are  determined in part by the sequence of states previously reached, and in part by the identity of the processes that win the  "race," it is important to observe exactly which processes actually attain the minimum value of work remaining divided by  speed. By the supposition made at the beginning of this paragraph, that path a is being followed, this quantity (work  remaining divided by speed) is minimized, among all processes in C(s,,,), by exactly those processes whose completion marks  the transition from s, to s,,._,,, and the value of this minimum is equal to T.;,.  A useful observation is that it does no harm to extend the summation in Eq. (2) to the end of path a, because by assumption  v(x, s) = 0 for i > i *. Let N(a) be the number of states contained in path a, excluding the finish state with empty current  set. Then we can rewrite Eq. (2) as  N(a)  W.Y = Y_ V(X, S.) T, (4) =,  In view of Eq. (4), we can pursue the following strategy. Several steps are conditional on path a being followed through the  TOP diagram. First, we will write Eq. (4) in matrix form, with a vector of work requirements equal to a matrix of processing  speeds multiplied by a vector of state durations. Second, because the matrix can be shown to have a left-inverse, we can  express the vector of state durations as the product of the left-inverse matrix and the vector of work requirements. This will  show that the vector of state durations can be expressed as a linear transformation of the work requirements. Third, because  the work requirements were assumed to have a known joint density (or mass) function, standard statistical results can be used  to find the conditional joint density (or mass) function of the linearly transformed work requirements, i.e., the vector of  state durations. Fourth, because the duration of the entire task is equal to the sum of the durations of the states reached  along the path followed, standard statistical results can be used to find the conditional density (or mass) function of the  sum, given that path a is followed. At this point, it will remain to show how to find the probability of path a being  followed, so that the unconditional density (or mass) function of the task duration can be expressed as the  probability-weighted average of conditional densities, where the average is taken over all possible paths through the TOP  diagram.  For the sake of brevity , we will not elaborate all these steps in detail. Below, we state a theorem which provides a  necessary and sufficient condition for path a to be followed, stated in terms of work requirements. The theorem also states  the linear combinations of work requirements which equal the state durations when path a is followed. We assume that the only  available information is: (1) the structure of the finite TOP diagram, (2) the probability that the system will begin in any  specified start state s E S,, and (3) the conditional joint density (or mass) function of the work requirements, given that  the system does begin in state s.  In order to state the theorem, we must first introduce some addtional notation. If C(sa;) is nonempty, then sa,+, exists, and  M,,, = K(sa,+1) - K(sa;) is the subset of C(sa) whose processing is completed when the system moves from sa, to sa,+,. Write  Ma, = lxa,l}, where j= 1, 2,..., na,. Also, it will be convenient to let na=~Nc ~> na,, where as before N(a) denotes the  number of states along path a, excluding the finish state with empty current set.  Let Wa;, i= 1, 2, ..., N(a), be an n,,, -dimensional column vector whose components are the work requirements of the processes  in Ma;. That is,  W ai = (WXail' WYy,2"", WXa nx) .  Let Wa be the partitioned column vector (W, W, ..., WaN,a))', which has a component vector Wa, corresponding to each state  along path a with a nonempty current set, and let Ta be the column vector of state durations (T.,, Tae, ..., T",(a))'.  Define the na by N(a) partitioned matrix Va as follows. The kth column of Va is associated with state suk. The rows of Vu are  blocked, with the first na, rows associated with s,, the next nag rows associated with sat, etc. Specifically, the ith  group of rows is associated with the set of processes Ma,. Let vx[(i, j), k] denote the entry in the kth column and the jth  row of the ith group of rows, and let va[(i, j), k] = v(xa;;, Sat). It is not hard to show that the columns of Va are linearly  independent, and therefore (e.g. , Strang, 1980, p. 109) V',V, is a square, symmetric, and invertible matrix.  THEOREM. Suppose a task can be decribed by a finite TOP diagram with a set of processes I7, a set of states S, and a set of  paths I'. Then path a e I' is followed if and only if the following three statements are true:  (1) sx, is reached.  (2) V.(VaV.)-'V.Wa-Wa.  (3) Each component of (V.V.)-'V'W. is positive.  Moreover, if path a is followed, then  Ta = (V'V,)-'V'W,.  This theorem generalizes a result of Goldstein and Fisher (1991), who showed how to compute the response-time distribution of  a task that could be described by a finite TOP diagram without dynamic resource allocation. In the present context, Goldstein  and Fisher's previous assumptions amount to having assumed that all constituent processes are executed at constant, unit  speed. Thus, their theorem has the form of the above theorem, with a vector of process durations substituted for our vector of  work requirements, and a matrix replacing Va which has a 1 in every location for which Va has a positive entry, and zeros  elsewhere. The proof of the above theorem proceeds along similar lines to the proof given by Goldstein and Fisher (1991), and  is given in the Appendix.  The significance of the theorem is that we can carry out the strategy outlined above for computing the response-time density  (or mass) function of the entire task. To reiterate, this response-time density (or mass) function can be expressed as a  weighted average (summed over all paths through the TOP diagram), where each term in the sum consists of a conditional  response-time density (or mass) function given that a particular path is followed, weighted by the probability that that path  is followed. According to the theorem, the event that a particular path ac-I' is followed, given that sa, is reached, is  equivalent to the event that Y= [I-Va(V'Va)-'Va] Wa=0, where I is the na by na identity matrix, and that Z = (V,V,,)-'V'W, >  0, where Z > 0 indicates that each component of Z is positive. Thus,  P(path = a) = P(Y = 0 and Z > 01 sal reached) x P(sa, reached). (5)  Because the vectors Y and Z are linear transformations of the vector Wa of work requirements, the probability expressed by Eq.  (5) can be computed from the known conditional density (or mass) of Wa given that say is reached. (For some elaboration of how  to do this, see Goldstein & Fisher, 1991.)  Next, we need to find fT.(t' l path = a), the conditional joint density (or mass) function of the durations of the states  along path a, given that path a is followed. According to the theorem, if path a is followed, then the elements of Ta are  equal to the elements of Z. Again, because Z is a linear transformation of W., whose joint density (or mass) function is  assumed to be known, standard statistical results concerning transformations of random variables (e.g., Lindgren, 1968, pp.  453-465) can be used to find f,,(t' l path = a). With the conditional joint density (or mass) function f,a(t' l path = a) in  hand, it is a familiar problem to find the conditional density (or mass) function of the sum T of the elements of T., that is  to find fT(t l path = a) (e.g., Lindgren, 1968, pp. 453-165 ). Finally, the unconditional density (or mass) function for the  response time of the task is given by  fT(t)= Y fT(tIpath =a)P(path=a). (6) xcF  SUMMARY  In the above discussion, we have provided a brief review of OP diagrams, and generalized a theorem of Goldstein and Fisher  (1991). The theorem permitted us to sketch how to compute the theoretically expected distribution of response times when: (1)  a task can be represented by a finite TOP diagram, and (2) processing resources (e.g., attention) are allocated differentially  and dynamically to subtasks. Our aim in providing these results is to enable researchers to derive testable consequences of  their theories about the arrangement of subtasks and the constraints on processing resources.  APPENDIX  THEOREM. Let <I7, S, I'> be a finite TOP diagram. Then path a is followed if and only if the following three statements are  true:  (1) s, is reached.  (2) V.(V'V.)-'V'W.=W..  (3) Each component of (V,V,)-'V'W, is positive.  Moreover, if path a is followed, then  (4) T(V'V.)-'V'W,.  Proof of Necessity. Suppose that path a is followed. Then statement (1) is obvious. Because of the totality assumption, any  process x which becomes current somewhere along path a must eventually be allowed to finish. Thus, the work requirement of x  is equal to the speed-weighted sum of the durations of the states  in which x is current. That is, Wa=Va. It follows that Wis in the column space of Va, and so the orthogonal projection Wa  into the column space of Va, namely Va(V'V,)-'V'W,, is equal to W,, itself. This establishes statement (2). Statement (4) is  established by noting that Va has the left-inverse (VaV,,)-'V', so Ta = (VxVa)-'V'W, follows from Wa = VaTa. Finally,  statement (3) follows from statement (4) upon observing that every state along path a must have positive duration.  Proof of Sufficiency. Suppose that statements (1)-(3) are satisfied. Statement (2) implies that Wa is in the column space of  Va, and therefore the equation VaZ=Wa can be solved for Z. Because Va has the left-inverse (V,,)-'V', the unique solution of  V,Z=Wa is given by Z=(V'Va)-'Va. By statement (3), each Z; is positive.  First, we will derive an expression for Zi. Define the na by N(a) partitioned matrix Da as follows. The kth column of Da is  associated with state sak. Like Va, the rows of Da are blocked, with the first na, rows associated with sa,, the next nag rows  associated with sae, etc. Specifically, the ith group of rows is associated with the set of processes M. Let da[(i, j), k]  denote the entry in the kth column and the jth row of the ith group of rows, and let  da[(I, i), k] =V(xati' Sak) If xaii E MakI  and  da[(i, j), k] =0 otherwise.  Now, we can write W a = V, Z = D a Z + (V a - D,) Z, and therefore, D, Z = Wa-(Va-Da)Z. That is,  V(xatj) Sat) Z1 = W~~,j, (Al)  or  for j = 1, ..., n,,, that is, for all x E  [Wx,;]w(xa,j, S.,), (A2)  Ma,, and   i-1 (A3)  i WX~ii- E V(xaij, Sak) Zk,   k=1   I-1 (A4)  V(xa'', sak) Z'J V(xaij, sa),   k=1   V(x,j, Sa)   or  By hypothesis sa, is reached. It will now be shown that the processes in Ma, finish simultaneously and before any other  processes in C(s,,, ). It then follows that the system moves from sa, to Sae, and that T, is equal to the duration of the  processes in Ma,, which can also be expressed as  Ta, = min { [ Wx]/v(x, sa,)}, Y E c(sa,  which we will show is also equal to Z1.  By Eq. (A2), Z1= [ W,, j~]/v(xa, j, sa,), for j = 1, ..., na,, that is, for all x e Ma,. Thus, all the processes in )'~ a,  attain the same value of work remaining divided by speed of execution. If this value can be shown to be a minimum for all x E  C(sa, ), then it follows that T = Z1 and that the system moves from sa, to sat.  Let x E C(sa,) - Ma, . Then by totality, there exists i > 1 such that x e Mai. Therefore, x = xa,j,~for some j. By hypothesis,  we have 0 < Z;, or by Eq. (A4),  0 < Zi = [ WXj - Y v(x,j, Sak ) k=1  ad, Sa),  which implies  0 < [ WXa' . - v(x,j' Sat) Z' ]IV(Xaij' S,),  since by hypothesis Zk > 0 for all k, and v(, ) is nonnegative by definition. Therefore,  v(Xaij' Sa,) Z1/v(X,j' Sx) < [ Ws,j]w(Xa; j, Sa;),  which upon cross-multiplying yields  Z1 < [Wxnij]w(Xaij'S.') = [W~]w(X, sa),  as required.  The proof now proceeds by induction. Suppose that for i = 1, ..., m - 1, we have C(sa):A 0, Tai = Zi, and the system moves  from sa, to sai+, . It will be show that if C(sa,) :A 0, then among all the processes in C(sa.), the processes in Mam minimize  the quantity  Wx- v X, Sak) TakJ k=1  v(X' s,).  Thus, the system moves from sam to sam+,, and we also have Tam=Zm. We need to show that the minimum value of  C m-1  Wr - v(X, Sak) Tak] k=1  v(X, Sam)  STOCHASTIC NETWORKS AS MODELS OF COGNITION 143  is attained by exactly those processes in Mam. By Eq. (A4), we have  mi1  Zm-CWx~mj- V Xamj' Sa) Z,llV(Xamj' Sam)' i=1  for j = 1, ..., nam, that is, for all processes in Mam. Since by hypothesis we have Tat = Zi, for i = 1, ..., m -1, we can  write  m-1  Zm - ~ Wxamj ILr V(Xamj, Sa) Tai = 1  V(Xamj, Sam)1  for j = 1, ..., nam. Thus, all processes x e Mam attain the same value of work remaining divided by speed of execution, namely  Zm. If it can now be shown that x e QS J - Mam implies  m-1  Zm < I WX- V(X, Sa) Tai i=1  V(x, Sam),  then it will have been shown that  m-1  Zm = Tam = min Wx - v(x, sa) Tai XEQS~m) {[ (=1  Moreover, having shown that this minimum value is attained for exactly those processes in Mam, it will follow that the system  moves from sam to sam+,. Thus, it- suffices to show that x e C(sam) - Mam implies  m-1  Zm < I WX- V(X, Sa) Tai i=1  V(x, Sam).  Let x e C(sam) - Mam. Then by totality there exists k > m such that x e Mak. Therefore, x = xaku, for some u. By hypothesis,  we have 0 < Zk, or by Eq. (A4),  k-1  0 < Zk = C Wx~ku - V(Xaku' Saj) Zi j=1  V(Xaku' Sak)'  which implies  m ,'  0 < I Wxaku- V(Xaku+ Saj) ZiJ j=1  V(Xakul Sak)  m-1  - C Wxu - I V(Xaku' Saj) ZiJIV(Xaku9 Sak) j=1  - CV(xaku' Sam) Zm11V(Xaku+ Sak).  144 GOLDSTEIN AND FISHER It follows that  lv(xaku, Sam ZA/ll(xaku, Szk)  which implies that  m-1 ,  < [ Wxaku - Y, v(xaku' Saj) ZJ '  j=1 J  vlxaku' Sake  m-1 l  Zm < C wxaku- , vlxaW Saj) ZiJ j=1  vlxnku' Same  or, since Zj = Taj, for j = 1, ... IM-11  m-1  u Ulxaku' SO Tajl j=1  V(xaku' same  as required Q.E.D.  REFERENCES  FISHER, D. L., & GOLDSTEIN, W. M. (1983). Stochastic PERT networks as models of cognition: Derivation of the mean, variance,  and distribution of reaction time using order-of-processing (OP) diagrams. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 27, 121-151.  FISHER, D. L., SAISI, D., & GOLDSTEIN, W. M. (1985). Stochastic PERT networks: OP diagrams, critical paths, and the project  completion time. Computers and Operations Research, 12, 471-482. GOLDSTEIN, W. M. (1991). Decomposable threshold models.  Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 35, 64-79.  GOLDSTEIN, W. M., & EINHORN, H. J. (1987). Expression theory and the preference reversal phenomena. Psychological Review, 94,  236-254.  GOLDSTEIN, W. M., & EINHORN, H. J. (1989). Expression theory and the measurement of apparently labile values. Annals of  Operations Research, 19, 51-78.  GOLDSTEIN, W. M., & FISHER, D. L. (1991). Stochastic networks as models of cognition: Derivation of response time  distributions using the order-of-processing method. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 35, 214-241.  KAHNEMAN, D. (1973). Attention and effort. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.  KANTI)WITZ, B. H., & KNIGHT, J. L. (1976). Testing tapping time-sharing. 11. Auditory secondary task. Acta Psychologica, 40,  343-362.  KULKARNI, V. G., & ADLAKHA, V. G. (1986). Markov and Markov-regenerative PERT networks. Operations Research, 34, 769-781.  LINDGREN, B. W. (1968). Statistical theory (3rd ed.). New York: Macmillan Co.  MARLEY, A. A. J., & COLONIVs, H. (1990). The "horse race" random utility model for choice probabilities and reaction times,  and its competing risks interpretation. Unpublished manuscript. MORAY, N. (1967). Where is attention limited? A survery and a  model. Acia Psychologica, 27, 84-92. NAVON, D. (1984). Resources-A theoretical soup stone? Psychological Review, 91, 216-234.  NAVON, D., & GOPHER, D. (1979). On the economy of the human processing system. Psychological Review, 86, 214-255.  RUIvIELHART, D. E. (1970). A multicomponent theory of the perception of briefly exposed visual displays. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 7, 191-218.  Russo, J. E., & DOSHER, B. A. (1983). Strategies for multiattribute binary choice. Journal of Experimental Psychology:  Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 9, 676-696.  STOCHASTIC NETWORKS AS MODELS OF COGNITION 145  SCHWEICKERT, R. (1978). A critical path generalization of the additive factor method: Analysis of a Stroop task. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 18, 105-139.  SCHWEICKERT, R., & BOGGS, G. J. (1984). Models of central capacity and concurrency. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 28,  223-281.  SCHWEICKERT, R., & Townsend, J. T. (1989). A trichotomy: Interactions of factors prolonging sequential and concurrent mental  processes in stochastic discrete mental (PERT) networks. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 33, 328-347.  SHAW, M. L., & SHAW, P. (1977). Optimal allocation of cognitive resources to spatial locations. Journal of Experimental  Psychology: Human Performance and Perception, 3, 201-211.  STERNBERG, S. (1969). The discovery of processing stages: Extensions of Donders' method. In W. G. Koster (Ed.), Attention and  performance II (pp. 176-315). Amsterdam: Elsevier/North-Holland. STRANG, G. (1980). Linear algebra and its applications (2nd  ed.). New York: Academic Press. TowNSEND, J. T. (1974). Issues and models concerning the processing of a finite number of  inputs. In B. H. Kantowitz (Ed.), Human information processing: Tutorials in performance and cognition (pp. 133-168).  Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  TowNSEND, J. T., & ASHBY, F. G. (1978). Methods of modeling capacity in simple processing systems. In N. J. Castellan, Jr., &  F. Restle (Eds.), Cognitive theory (Vol. 3, pp. 200-239). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  TowNSEND, J. T., & ASHBY, F. G. (1983). The stochastic modeling of elementary psychological processes. Cambridge: Cambridge  Univ. Press.  TowNSEND, J. T., & SCHWEICKERT, R. (1989). Toward the trichotomy method of reaction times: Laying the foundation of stochastic  mental networks. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 33, 309-327. WicKENS, C. D. (1984). Engineering psychology and human  performance (pp. 301-305). Columbus: Merrill.