10.1016/0022-2496(92)90057-e
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 36, 154-158 (1992)  Book Review  Not Everything That Is Possible Is Probable  DIDIER DUBOIS AND HENRI PRADE. Possibility Theory:  An Approach to Computerized Processing of Uncertainty. New York: Plenum Press, 1988. Pp. 263. Translated, with some revision,  from Theorie des Possibilites: Applications d la Repr6sentation des Connaissances en Informatique. Paris: Masson, 1985.  Reviewed by RAMI ZWICK  The authors, Didier Dubois and Henri Prade, are researchers at the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique I.R.I.T.,  University Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France. Their research interests include uncertainty modeling, approximate reasoning, and  decision analysis and operations research, and they authored Fuzzy Sets and Systems: Theory and Application (Academic Press,  1980).  The reviewer, Rami Zwick, is an Assistant Professor of Marketing at the Pennsylvania State University. His major research  interests are group and individual decision making. 1992 Academic Press, Inc.  INTRODUCTION  There is an ancient paradox, attributed to Eubulides, called sorites (the heap) or falakros (the bold man). The original form  can be paraphrased as follows: If you add one grain to a small heap, it remains small. A heap containing one grain is small.  Therefore (by induction) every heap is small. Most of us would agree that there exist an integer n such that a collection of n  grains would not be described as a small heap. How does one reconcile the two statements? The paradox arises because we think  about "small" as an exact concept, i.e., each collection of grains must be either small or not small. One way out is to think  of each collection as being a small heap to a certain degree. Not only would this help us out of Eubulides' paradox but it is  probably closer to our conception of a heap's size than the all or none approach taken by classical set theory. Given that a  large number of naturally occurring categories (e.g., the set of all birds, the set of all bright red objects) are  characterized by hazy boundaries, the motivation for a theory of fuzzy sets is obvious.  Requests for reprints should be sent to Dr. Rami Zwick, Department of Marketing, 701N Business Administration, Pennsylvania  State University, University Park, PA 16802-9976.  0022-2496/92 $3.00  Copyright CQ 1992 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  154  Possibility theory emerged from the notion of fuzzy sets (Zadeh, 1965), and was developed by Zadeh in 1978. Essentially,  fuzziness is a type of imprecision that stems from a grouping of elements into classes that do not have sharply defined  boundaries.  The theory of fuzzy sets has as one of its aims the development of a methodology for the formulation and solution of problems  that are too complex or too ill-defined to be susceptible of analysis by conventional techniques.  FUZZY SETS AND POSSIBILITY THEORY  A fuzzy set is a generalization of the usual notion of a set. Let U be a universal (non fuzzy) set. A fuzzy subset A of U is  then described by its characteristic function NA: U-> [0, 1]. For all xE U, PA (x) is interpreted as the extend to which x  belongs to A. If a fuzzy subset A is such that PA(U) E {0, 1 } then A is an ordinary subset of U.  Let Y be a variable taking values in X; then a possibility distribution, 17,,, associated with Y may be viewed as a fuzzy  constraint on the values that may be assigned to Y. Such a distribution is characterized by a possibility distribution  function n,.: X -> [0, 1 ] which associates with each x E X the "degree of ease" or the possibility that Y may take x as a  value. Possibility theory is interested especially in the cases where the possibility distribution associated with a variable  is epistemic in nature, that is, it is induced by propositions expressed in a natural language. More precisely, if A is a  fuzzy subset of U characterized by its membership function FIA, then the proposition "Y is A" induces a possibility  distribution 17A that is equal to PA.  For example, let p be the proposition "Kathie is young," in which "young" is represented by a fuzzy subset of U= [0, 100]  characterized by the membership function NYoangConsider a numerical age, say u = 28, whose grade of membership in the fuzzy  set "young" is 0.7. Then, 0.7 can also be interpreted as the possibility that Kathie is 28 given that she is "young."  Possibility Theory is a very comprehensive presentation of that topic and I would strongly recommend it to anyone who is  interested in the new approaches to uncertainty management that it presents.  CONTENTS  The book has six chapters. Basic concepts are presented and discussed in Chapter 1, and Chapters 2-6 illustrate the use of  possibility theory in various domains such as operations research, artificial intelligence, and database management; for a  broader if less up-to-date review of the application of possibility theory the reader is referred to an earlier book by the  authors (Dubois and Prade, 1980). Hard copies of source codes to computer programs in LISP and BASIC are attached to  Chapters 2-6. These programs demonstrate the feasibility of the techniques presented in these chapters.  Chapter 1 provides motivation and context, defines measures of possibility, and presents basic notions necessary for  understanding the later chapters. It considers imprecision and uncertainty as two complementary aspects of a single reality,  that of imperfect information. Imprecision relates to the vague content of an item of information, such as the linguistic  description of age (e.g., old, young, etc. ), whereas uncertainty relates to the truth value of a statement. The chapter  starts by discussing the traditional models of imprecision and uncertainty and their limitations. Probability theory, the  traditional tool to deal with uncertainty, is considered "too normative a framework to take all the aspects of uncertain  judgement into account." Interval analysis, the traditional tool to deal with imprecision, "... merely serves to throw the  inaccuracies of measurements, in the form of intervals, back onto the magnitudes estimated by the measurements," and is  criticized for having sharp boundaries to each interval: "... while one does not know the exact value of a parameter, one does  not know the exact limits of its domain of variation." Chapter 1 suggests alternative measures such as possibility and  necessity (an event is necessary when its contrary is impossible) which are based on the notion of fuzzy sets. The chapter  briefly reviews the basic concepts of fuzzy sets and elementary fuzzy set operations. It concludes by presenting practical  methods for determining membership functions.  Chapter 2 presents methods of calculating expressions containing imprecise quantities, represented by possibility  distributions on the real numbers. The authors show that these methods are, in effect, a generalization of interval analysis  to the case of weighted intervals. The chapter concludes by presenting three examples (estimation of resources in a budget,  calculation of a PERT analysis with fuzzy duration estimation, and a problem in the control of a machine tool) of the  usefulness of the techniques.  Chapter 3 surveys the use of fuzzy sets for the evaluation and ranking of objects. This is especially important if we adopt  the Bellman and Zadeh (1970) approach to choice with multiple criteria. In their approach, objectives and constraints are  represented by fuzzy sets which subsume elements of subjective preference. In this framework, the aggregation criterion can be  viewed as a problem of combining fuzzy sets by mean of fuzzy set-theoretic operations.  Chapter 4 presents a synthetic view of several non probabilistic approaches to approximate reasoning in expert systems'  deductive processes. The chapter opens by presenting various models of imprecision and uncertainty which generalize the  concepts of probability and possibility. Next follows a treatment of the two principal inference mechanisms needed in expert  systems, namely, deductive inference and the combination of data derived from different sources, in the context of uncertain  or imprecise premises.  Chapter 5 deals with heuristic search in an imprecise environment, and fuzzy programming. Heuristic search is illustrated by a  generalized case of the traveling salesman problem in which the costs are imprecise, that is, the lengths of the  journey' connecting the towns are only imperfectly known. The fuzzy programming techniques are illustrated by an environment  in which a robot is instructed to execute a sequence of moves described in fuzzy terms.  Chapter 6 presents a general model to handle incomplete or uncertain data and vague gueries in database applications.  DISCUSSION  The book was written by the two most authoritative scholars in this area today. It is pleasure to read the complicated  materials presented in a clear manner. The attached examples allow the reader to appreciate the wide applicability of the  proposed theory.  The book's major contribution is its proposal of a canonical generalization of interval analysis that admits of appropriate  gradations. That is, the book shows that the methods of calculation for expressions containing imprecise quantities, presented  by possibility distributions on the real line, constitute an extension to what is commonly called interval analysis.  While most of the work on fuzzy computing is still in the developmental stage, there are already some commercial applications.  It is interesting to note that it is the Japanese who have become its most avid proponents. On July, 1988, the city of Sendai  in Japan threw the switch of an automated subway that uses a fuzzy-logic control system to brake to swift, smooth stops. In  late 1988 the Japanese Minister of International Trade and Industry requested funds for a 6-year fuzzy-logic program that  would enlist 50 Japanese companies (Business Week, February 20, 1989; May 21, 1990.) In addition NASA recently sponsored a  national symposium on fuzzy computing and neural networks. The hope of this writer is that more American scholars will get  acquainted with this theory. Translating Possibility Theory to English is a very good first step.  Unfortunately, the book is now somewhat out of date and I would recommend that the interested reader supplement his or her  reading by looking at more recent work on related topics such as Dubois (1988) on the normative foundation of possibility  theory, Zwick and Wallsten (1989) on experimental work devoted to testing fuzzy-set theoretical models, and several other  books that present alternative approaches (e.g., Pearl, 1988, and its review by Dubois & Prade, 1990; and Smithson, 1989).  My only disappointed in reading the book was the brief and causal treatment of empirical issues. Giles (1983) has described  the character of research in fuzzy reasoning as follows:  A prominent feature of most of the work in fuzzy reasoning is its ad hoc nature.... If fuzzy reasoning were simply a  mathematical theory there would be no harm in adopting this approach;.... However, fuzzy reasoning is essentially a practical  subject. Its function is to assist the decision-maker in a real world situation, and for this purpose the practical meaning of  the concepts involved is of vital importance. [Giles, 1983, p. 263],  Fuzzy set and possibility theories would benefit from adopting a behavioral approach, having its assumption validated, and  having its models verified by empirical findings. Zadeh (1978) in his original paper introducing possibility theory realized  that our intuition concerning possibility theory is not very reliable, and a great deal of empirical work would have to be  done to provide us with a better understanding of the ways in which possibility distributions are manipulated by humans.  Finally, I did not find the hard copy of the computer programs included in the book to be useful. In some of them the print  quality is poor, making it impossible to use them. I would hope that for later editions the publisher will include a diskette  and a manual on how to use the programs.  REFERENCES  BELLMAN, R. E., & ZADEH, L. A. (1970). Decision-making in a fuzzy environment. Management Science, 17(4), 141-164.  DUBOIS, D. (1988). Possibility theory: Searching for normative foundations. In B. R. Munier (Ed.), Risk, decision and  rationality. Amsterdam: Reidel.  DuBois, D., & Prade, H. (1980). Fuzzy sets and systems: Theory and applications, Mathematics in Sciences and Engineering  Series (Vol. 144). New York: Academic Press.  Dusots, D., & PRADE, H. (1990). Probability theory in artificial intelligence. A review of J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning  in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference (Kaufmann, 1988). Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 34, 472-482.  GILES, R. (1983). The practical interpretation of fuzzy concepts. Human Systems Management, 3, 263-264.  PEARL, J. (1988). Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: Networks of plausible inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan  Kaufman.  SMITHSON, M. (1989). Ignorance and uncertainty. New York: Springer-Verlag. ZADEH, L. A. (1965). Fuzzy sets. Information and  Control, 8, 338-353.  ZADEH, L. A. (1978). Fuzzy sets as a basis for a theory of possibility. Fuzzy Sets and Systems, 1, 3-28. ZWICK R., & WALLSTEN,  T. S. (1989). Combining stochastic uncertainty and linguistic inexactness: Theory and experimental evaluation of four fuzzy  probability models. International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 30, 69-111.