10.1016/0022-2496(92)90030-b
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 31, 426-449 (1992)  Numerical Representations of Imperfectly Ordered Preferences (A Unified Geometric Exposition)  AVRAHAM BEJA  Tel Aviv University  AND  ITZHAK GILBOA  Northwestern University  This paper uses "generalized numerical representations" to extend some of the result of utility theory regarding imperfectly  ordered preferences in general and semiordered preferences in particular. It offers a unified geometric approach, which helps  visualize how the increasingly stringent conditions of suborders, interval orders, semiorders, and weak orders give rise to  increasingly intuitive representations. The differences between the proposed framework and the more traditional utility  representations are especially significant in the context of uncountable sets. The main new results are axiomatizations for  fixed threshold representations of the "just noticeable difference" (jnd) when the set of alternatives is infinite. It is also  noted that all fixedynd representations give rise to an "almost cardinal" utility function, since permissible transformations  must be linear "in the large." CT? 1992 Academic Press, Inc.  1. INTRODUCTION  Numerical representations of preference relations assign "utility numbers" to the elements of choice so as to reflect as  coherently as possible a given collection of pairwise preference statements. The classical representation of fully transitive  relations by utility numbers that are perfectly monotonic with the stated preferences may be considered an ideal of clarity,  precision, and intuitive appeal. But human and social behavior abound with imperfectly ordered preference statements that do  not admit a classical representation. The methods used to deal with such preferences (e.g., partial representations and  interval representations) have typically been somewhat fragmented.' In an attempt to enhance and unify the theory, we use  We are grateful to Peter C. Fishburn, David Schmeidler, Amos Tversky, and two anonymous referees for helpful comments and  references. Address reprint requests to Professor Itzhak Gilboa at MEDS, Kellogg Graduate School of Management, Northwestern  University, Leverone Hall, Evanston, ILL 60208.  ' For surveys with extensive references see, e.g., Suppes, Krantz, Luce, and Tversky (1989) (particularly chapter 16), Roberts  (1970), or Fishburn (1970b, 1985).  426  0022-2496/92 $5.00  Copyright Q 1992 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  IMPERFECTLY ORDERED PREFERENCES 427  in this paper a formal structure that we call "generalized numerical representation" (GNR), offering the following  contributions:  A unified framework that puts the individual results in proper perspective. The geometric interpretation makes the results,  and especially the relationships between them, more intuitive.  * A separation of the issues associated with "consistency" of the stated preferences and those associated with high  cardinality and with topological considerations.  The new results of this paper apply primarily to infinite sets. In particular, we give straightforward extensions of the  celebrated Scott-Suppes theorem on fixedthreshold representations of semiorders on finite sets to denumerable and  nondenumerable sets, using a new method of proof that offers some independently interesting insights. The GNR framework also  permits a slight strengthening of the earlier statements for some of the previously known results.  The intuitive appeal of the classical representation of preferences by a utility function comprises a number of distinct  features. Suppose that an alternative x is (strictly) preferred to another alternative y. A classical utility function u(-)  satisfies all of the following properties:  1. U(X) > u(y).  2. If z is not preferred to y, then u(z) < u(x).  3. If x is not preferred to z, then u(z) > u(y).  4. u(z) > u(w) if and only if there is some alternative t such that t is preferred to w but not to z, or z is preferred to t  while w is not.  5. If z is not preferred to w, then u(z) - u(w) < u(x) - u(y).  6. There is a positive number E such that if z is not preferred to w then IU(z)-u(x)I +IU(w)-u(y)I >s.  Various combinations of these features can be attained also for preferences that do not admit a classical utility function.  The use of GNRs helps highlight the connection between properties of the preference relation and the attainability of  different combinations of these features.  The six conditions stated above do not imply one of the key features of classical utility, namely that u(z)>u(w) only if z is  (strictly) preferred to w. In the generalized representations u(z) > u(w) may reflect an advantage of z over w which is said  to be below the "just noticeable difference (jnd)," being implicit in the stated preferences but not explicitly stated. Our  discussions below include both variablejnd and fixed-jnd representations.  The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives some preliminaries on notation. Section 3 gives a first overview of our  approach in the limited context of countable sets. Increasingly stringent conditions on the preference relation give rise to  representations that exhibit increasingly intuitive monotonicity between the stated  480136%3-8  428 BEJA AND GILBOA  preferences and the numerical values assigned to alternatives, as indicated by properties 1-5 above. This is based to a large  extent on previously published results, but the unified framework makes these results more intuitive and they are also often  stated in slightly stronger versions than before. Section 4 extends the analysis with new results relating to uncountable  sets, where the differences between our GNRs and the earlier representations have a greater effect. It also deals with  property 6 above, which is in essence non-restrictive in the context of denumerable sets. The last section, 5, offers a few  concluding remarks on "uniqueness," more specifically on the range of permissible transformations of generalized numerical  representations. In fixed jnd representations, permissible transformations must be linear "in the large," giving rise to an  "almost cardinal" utility function. The formal proofs of our results are presented separately in the Appendix.  2. BINARY RELATIONS ASSOCIATED WITH PREFERENCES  The notational framework for this study is as follows. Let A be a non-empty set of alternatives. Preferences are stated as  pairwise comparisons and formalized by a binary relation, a subset B of the set A2 = A x A of all ordered pairs of  alternatives. xBy is synonymous with (x, y) E B. For any two binary relations B, and B2 (on a common set A) B, B, denotes a  binary relation on A by  B, B2 = { (x, y) E A2 : xB, z and zB2 y for some z e A }.  This concatenation can be extended recursively.  Our primitive binary relation, to be denoted by P, will be strict preference, which is asymmetric (xPy implies [not yPx] ).  Absence of preference in both directions is denoted by I, viz.  I = { (x, y) E A' : not xPy and not yPx }.  The relation I is commonly referred to as indifference (the choice of strict preference as the primitive relation shuns the  distinction between pairs from which choice seems impossible and pairs from which it is considered a matter of indifference).  As defined, indifference is necessarily reflexive (xIx for all x E A) and symmetric (xIy implies yIx), but not necessarily  transitive (xIy and yIz need not imply xIz).  The pairwise preference statements are often taken to reflect to one degree or another some underlying well ordered  "standings" of all alternatives. This is clearly the case when P is a weak order (PP implies P and II implies I). But even  when P is not itself a weak order, there are inferences that can be drawn from the stated preferences about the presumed  underlying standings of the alternatives. This is formalized by the relation Q, defined as follows:  xQy if xPz and not yPz, or zPy and not zPx, for some z E A.  IMPERFECTLY ORDERED PREFERENCES 429  We interpret Q as "revealed preference." We also note that P implies Q, i.e., Q augments the stated preferences P whenever an  implicit preference is detectable. As defined, Q is irreflexive but not necessarily asymmetric: one alternative may appear to  be better than another in some contexts while the other alternative seems better in other contexts (implicit preferences may  also contradict stated preferences, as xPy does not preclude yQx). Such contradictions do not appear in the asymmetric part of  Q and in the symmetric complement of Q, defined by  xP*y if xQy and not yQx  xEy if [not xQy] and [not yQx].  When xEy the two alternatives are said to be "equivalent": there is no evidence of any advantage of one over the other.  Indeed, E is an equivalence relation, being reflexive, symmetric, and transitive.  We note that (i) Q need not be transitive even when P is (consider A = {x, y, a, b, c } with P = { (a, b), (b, c), (a, c) },  where xQb and bQy but not xQy), (ii) the complement of Q is always transitive, even if P is not (observe that [not yQx]  applies if and only if yPz => xPz and zPx => zPy), and hence (iii) P* is always transitive: suppose xP*y and yP*z, then [not  zQy] and [not yQx] imply [not zQx], and either xPw(PuI)y, implying [not zPw] and subsequently xQz, or x(P v I) wPy, implying  wPz and again xQz. Thus P* gives a (possibly partial) ordering of the underlying standings of all alternatives on the basis of  uncontradicted evidence, either direct (in P) or implied (in Q). Semiorders, which play an important role in our subsequent  discussions, are exactly those (asymmetric) relations for which Q = P*, and weak orders are those for which Q = P.  Remark. It is possible to extend the inferences about the relative standings of the alternative to the transitive closure of Q  (rather than limit them to the oneintermediate-step comparisons used for Q). This can only generate contradicting inferences,  and only for pairs in E, not for pairs in P* (i.e., if the transitive closure of Q is denoted by Q, and its asymmetric part  and its symmetric complement are denoted by P* and E, respectively, then P* = P* and E ~:- E). We shall not follow this line,  but only note that the subsequent results on the numerical representation of Q also apply to the extended interpretation of  revealed preference.  3. NUMERICAL REPRESENTATIONS OF PREFERENCES OVER COUNTABLE SETS  The essence of numerical representation for preference relations is the assignment of numbers ("utilities") to  decision-relevant alternatives so that the assigned 'utilities  'The concept of implicitly revealed preferences appears in the literature in various forms and under a variety of different  names. Luce (1956) suggested PIuIP, calling it "the relation induced by P," and Fishburn (1985) termed the asymmetric part of  this relation "the sequel of P." Suppes et al. (1989) call the dual of the complement of Q "the two-sided quasiorder induced  430 BEJA AND GILBOA   1234    5638    1. Benko - 0 0 0 1 0 00   2. Fischer 1 - .5.5  1  090   3. Gli oric 1 .5 - 0 .5.5  M 0  4. Keres 1 .5 1 - 1 0  1  5. Olafson   0.0-.5,01-   1 .010   6. Petrosian 1 1 .5 1 0 - 0 .5  7. Sm slov 1 5 0 .5 Oil 1 1 - 0  8. Tat 1 1 1   .5 1 -  V(Y)  FIG. 1. (a) Conventional statement of pairwise comparisons in a chess tournament. (b) A GNR of the chess tournament data.  represent the given preferences as intuitively as possible on the basis of the familiar ordering of the real numbers. We  choose to separate the issues that are associated with the level of consistency in preference from the more technical  difficulties that can arise if the set of alternatives has very high cardinality. Accordingly, we start by limiting the  discussion in this section to preferences over countable sets. The presentation is based on previously published results, some  of which are given here in slightly stronger versions.' The proofs for the strengthened versions are indicated in the Appendix.  The following basic notion is the cornerstone of our analysis.  DEFINITION G1. A generalized numerical representation (GNR) of a binary relation B g: A' is a pair (v, S), where v: A -+ 91 is  a mapping from A to the real line 91 and S is a subset of 91', such that (x, y) e B if and only if (v(x), v(y)) e S.  EXAMPLE. Figure 1 gives a binary relation comprising pairwise comparisons based on the encounters in a chess tournament.' The  left side gives the conventional representation used in the chess world (1 means a win for the row player and 0.5 means a  draw), and the right side a GNR where each player is simply assigned his serial number of the list.  Observation 3.1. Every binary relation on a countable set has a GNR.  Classical utility theory deals with numerical representations where S takes the special form H, defined by  H=I(a,tl)e'A':a>l}  ' In referring to cited results, "version" will usually relate to a restatement of a given theorem in the terminology of this  paper, and "stronger version" to a mathematically stronger statement. The absence of reference will mean that in our view the  statement is either trivial, (non-trivial) "folklore," or a new result of this paper (avoiding any attempt to distinguish  between the three categories).  ' This is the "candidates" (for world championship) tournament held in Bled, Yugoslavia, 1954.  IMPERFECTLY ORDERED PREFERENCES 431  and thus xPy p (v(x), v(y)) E H- v(x) > v(y). When it is possible, such a representation is very attractive because it  directly associates "higher" (utility) with "better" (alternatives). When this is not possible, it would still be desirable to  maintain at least some of the intuitive monotonicity between the underlying preferences and the numbers that represent them.  Without it, a numerical representation would be merely a labeling of the alternatives, devoid of any connotation of "utility."  In any GNR (v, S) the asymmetry of P implies that (v(x), v(x)) 0 S for all x E A, hence xPy => v(x) :A v(y). Therefore, the  condition xPy => v(x) > v(y) suggests itself as a minimal monotonicity requirement. This condition means that the relevant  part of S, i.e., Sn (range v)2, should be included in H, and (since the irrelevant part of S can be chosen at will) this  suggests the condition S S=- H. The preferences that admit such representations constitute a familiar class.  DEFINITION P1. A suborder is an asymmetric binary relation P satisfying the acyclicity condition x;Px;+, for i= 1, ..., n  implies [not x,Px,].  The results on the representation of suborders will be stated in two versions. The distinction between them highlights an  important difference between our generalized utility representations by pairs (v, S) and the weaker representations by a  numerical function v alone.  THEOREM 3.2 (Adams, 1965). Let P be a binary relation on a countable set A. Then there is a function v: A -91 such that v(x)  > v(y) whenever xPy if and only if P is a suborder.  THEOREM 3.2(a). A relation P on a countable set has a GNR(v, S) such that S g H if and only if P is a suborder.  The function v in Theorem 3.2 is only a partial representation of the binary relation P, because it is not guaranteed that one  can fully recover P from the numerical representation. For example, suppose that a suborder P on the set A = {a, b, c } is  represented by a function v, where v(a) = I and v(b) = v(c) = 0. If this function is only known to be a partial representation  as in 3.2 then it is consistent both with P= {(a, b), (a, c)} and with P= {(a, b)}. But if v is known to be part of a GNR as  in 3.2(a) then it is consistent only with P= {(a, b), (a, c)}, not with P= {(a, b)}. To qualify for a GNR, a function v must  satisfy the preliminary condition that v(x) :A v(y) whenever (x, y) ~ E. As we shall see in the next section, the distinction  is crucial when A is not a countable set.  Note that the acyclicity and asymmetry of a suborder are obviously necessary for S g H. The more substantive contribution of  Theorems 3.2-3.2(a) is the observation that this is also sufficient. A similar relationship between necessity and sufficiency  seems to apply also in the other characterizations that follow.  The next definition uses additional aspects of monotonicity. s  s Related notions are discussed in Doignon, Monjardet, Roubens, and Vincke (1986).  432 BEJA AND GILBOA  DEFINITION G2. (i) A GNR(v, S) satisfies upward monotonicity if (0c, fl) C- S implies (a', #) e S for all a'> a.  (ii) A GNR(v, S) satisfies downward monotonicity if (a, /3) e S implies (a, #') e S for all #'< /l.  (iii) A GNR(v, S) satisfies bilateral monotonicity, or in short is monotonic, if it satisfies both upward monotonicity and  downward monotonicity (Fig. 2).  By the asymmetry of P, either part of definition G2 implies the minimal monotonicity condition S n (range v)z -_ H. To have  representations that satisfy these stronger conditions, it is not sufficient that preferences be acyclical. The next two  theorems specify precisely when such representations are possible. Each of these is preceded by a definition that summarizes  the corresponding conditions.  DEFINITION P2. An asymmetric binary relation P is an interval order if PIP implies P (i.e., xPy, y1z, and zPw imply xPw).  Remark. Fishburn motivated his suggestion of the term "interval order" by an example, dating back to Norbert Wiener, where  each element x e A is an event in time marked by a beginning b(x) e 91 and an end e(x) c- 91, and where xPy (meaning "x  precedes y") applies if e(x) < b(y). Relations satisfying the "interval order condition" are precisely those for which real  intervals can be assigned to alternatives so that "interval precedence" as above exactly reflects the given relation (see  Fishburn, 1970c).  THEOREM 3.3. (Version of Fishburn, 1970c). For an asymmetric relation P on a countable set, the following three statements are  equivalent.  (i) P is an interval order.  (ii) P has a GNR that satisfies upward monotonicity.  (iii) P has a GNR that satisfies downward monotonicity.  e v(X) b v(X) c v (X)  FIG. 2. (Left) Upward monotonicity. (Middle) Downward monotonicity. (Right) Bilateral monotonicity.  IMPERFECTLY ORDERED PREFERENCES 433  Z  w  a b  Fig. 3. (a) Violation of [PPI implies P]. (b) Violation of [PIP implies P].  DEFINITION P3. An asymmetric binary relation P is a semiorder if PQ implies P, equivalently [PIP or PPI] implies P.  Figure 3 illustrates the difference between the semiorder condition and the interval order condition for four distinct  alternatives (preference is indicated by an arrow).  Remark. Luce (1956) motivated his introduction of semiorders by observing that the definition is a necessary condition for the  possibility of assigning numbers to alternatives in such a way that the interval spanned by two alternatives for which  preference applies is never a subinterval of the interval corresponding to two alternatives for which indifference applies.  This is equivalent to bilateral monotonicity, a property which is the focus of the next theorem.  THEOREM 3.4 (A Stronger Version of Luce, 1956).6 An asymmetric relation on a countable set has a monotonic GNR if and only if  it is a semiorder.  Every inference that can be drawn from a preference relation P can of course also be recovered from its GNR, and in this sense  a GNR for P also gives a full representation of the revealed preferences Q. It would clearly be desirable to make these  inferences more "direct" by applying a certain degree of monotonicity also to the representation of Q. In general, however, it  would not be possible to let v(x)>v(y) whenever xQy, because xQy does not preclude yQx. The next two extensions to Theorems  3.2(a) and 3.3 state the maximal monotonicity that can be guaranteed for suborders and for interval orders.  THEOREM 3.2(a)*. A suborder P on a countable set has a GNR(v, S) such that [v(x) > v(y) whenever xPy or xP*y] and [v(x) = v(y)  whenever xEy].  THEOREM 3.3* (Version of Fishburn, 1970c). An interval order P on a countable set has a GNR(v, S) satisfying upward  monotonicity (alternatively downward  'Theorem 3.4 is clearly more straightforward than theorems 2 and 3 in Luce (1956). As stated, it is technically stronger than  the corresponding statements in Luce because it is not restricted to representations where S is open in 922 (which is  particularly important for the potential extension to uncountable sets). The same applies to the subsequent theorem 3.5.  434 BEJA AND GILBOA  monotonicity) such that [v(x) > v(y) whenever xP*y] and [v(x) = v(y) whenever xEy].  When the stated preferences P are semiordered the revealed preferences exhibit no contradictions, i.e., the symmetric part of  Q is empty and Q = P* (for a semiorder, x(I u P) zPyQx implies zPx, y(I u P) zPxQy implies zPy, and xPzIyPwIx implies yPz,  three contradictions that exhaustively preclude xQyQx). In this case Q is a weak order, being an asymmetric relation whose  complement is transitive. A GNR for P can then be made to reflect Q as intuitively as classical utility representations do for  weak orders. This merits a special definition.  DEFINITION G3. A generalized utility representation (GUR) of an asymmetric binary relation P is a monotonic GNR(u, S) of P  which satisfies xQy p u(x) > u(y). (The notational substitution of u for v is used to emphasize the fact that the GNR under  consideration is indeed a GUR).  THEOREM 3.5 (A Stronger Version of Luce, 1956). An asymmetric binary relation on a countable set has a GUR if and only if it  is a semiorder.  Remark. While P has a GUR if and only if it has a monotonic GNR, P may also have monotonic GNRs which are not GURs. In a  monotonic GNR for a semiorder P, v(x) > v(y) is mandatory whenever xQy (because if v(x) 5 v(y) then xPz implies yPz and zPy  implies zPx, hence [not xQy] ), but there may be pairs x, y such that v(x) > v(y) while xEy (rather than xQy).  For monotonic GNRs and GURs the boundary of S in 9912 plays a prominent role, because it visibly separates S from its  complement. In the special case of weak orders with S=H, the boundary of S is the "diagonal" in 99;', defined by  We seek representations with similarly simple boundaries for preferences that are not weak orders.  DEFINITION G4. A 6-threshold GNR(GUR) is a monotonic GNR(GUR) (v, S) such that  {(a, fl) e9t2 1 LX >l+61 sSs {(a, fl) E912 1 a>#+61  (i.e., these are the monotonic representations for which boundary(S) _ {(a,/1)E9z:a=P+61).  The 0-threshold GNRs are precisely the (u, H) classical utility representations of weak orders. 6-Threshold GNRs with  (strictly) positive 6, or in short positivethreshold GNRs, also exist for some, but not all, weak orders, as well as for some  preferences which are not weak orders. The following characterization of positivethreshold GNRs is a famous old result.  IMPERFECTLY ORDERED PREFERENCES 435  THEOREM 3.6 (Scott and Suppes, 1958). A binary relation on a finite set has a positive-threshold GNR if and only if it is a  semiorder.  That the Scott-Suppes theorem does not apply for infinite sets is apparent from the observation that the following axiom,  which is trivially satisfied for finite sets but not so for infinite sets, is a necessary condition for P to have a positive  threshold GNR.'  Axiom A1. For every w e A and every infinite sequence x t, xz, ... E A, if xipxi+ t for i = 1, 2, ... then for some n WPX  and if x;+, Pxi for i = 1, 2, ... then for some n xPw.  The Scott-Suppes theorem was first extended to denumerable sets by Manders (1981). Theorem 3.7 below gives an alternative  which we find to be simpler, as its builds on Axiom A1 instead of his less transparent connectedness condition. Our proof of  Theorem 3.7 is totally different from that of Manders, and in the next section it will also be seen to be generalizable to  uncountable sets.' As before, the obvious necessary conditions are found to be also sufficient.  THEOREM 3.7 (A Simpler Version of Manders, 1981). For a binary relation P on a countable set, the following statements are  equivalent.  (i) P is a semiorder which satisfies Axiom A1.  (ii) P has a positive-threshold GNR.  (iii) P has a positive-threshold GUR.  Remark. If (v, S) is a GNR for an asymmetric binary relation, then clearly S must not intersect the diagonal D in 93' (as  defined above). It is interesting to note as a corollary to 3.7 that if a binary relation has a monotonic GNR(v, S) such that  S is bounded away from D then it also has a positive-threshold GUR.  When (v, S) is a 0-threshold GNR (i.e., a classical utility representation) then S=H is open in W. In GNRs or GURs which have  a positive threshold, or ones which are just bilaterally or unilaterally monotonic, S may be open, closed, or neither open nor  closed (a representation where S is an open set is sometimes termed strong, one where S is a closed set is termed strong*, and  the term weak then refers to representations where S is neither open nor closed). In conformity with the classical utility  representations, there has been a traditional tendency to use, whenever possible, representations where S is open. In  particular, the traditional statement of the Scott-Suppes theorem (using strict inequality to represent preference)  corresponds to a positive-threshold representation with S  'An example of a semiorder that does not satisfy axiom 1 was already used by Fishburn (1985) to demonstrate the limited domain  of the Scott-Suppes theorem, but to the best of our knowledge the present study is the first time that the axiom is given an  explicit statement.  'Doignon (1987) used a similar approach, based on the so-called potential technique on valued digraphs, for the finite case.  We are grateful to a referee for drawing our attention to this reference.  436 BEJA AND GILBOA  open. Our last result for this section states that for countable sets this distinction is immaterial. Modifications are  necessary for uncountable sets, and we will get to these in due course.  THEOREM 3.8. For a binary relation P on a countable set A, the following statements are equivalent.  (i) P has a positive-threshold GUR.  (ii) There is a real valued function a on A such that xPy p u(x) > u(y) + 1.  (iii) There is a real valued function u on A such that xPy p u(x) >, u(y) + 1. Furthermore, in parts (ii) and (iii) one can  add or omit the stipulation xQy p u(x) >  U( y  An analogous result can be shown to apply for interval orders.  For completeness, we recall the classical result of utility theory (traceable to Cantor, 1915) which, restated, says that an  asymmetric relation on a countable set has a 0-threshold GNR if and only if it is a weak order. We note that every 0-threshold  GNR is necessarily a GUR.  4. NON-DENUMERABLE SETS  We now turn to the more technical issues that must be addressed when the set of alternatives is not necessarily countable. A  binary relation on an uncountable set may fail to admit any GNR, let alone one satisfying monotonicity of one kind or another.  For example, suppose that A is the collection of all subsets of the real line 91, and let xPy if x g; y. Here if (v, S) is a  GNR for P then v must be a one-to-one mapping of A into 91-an impossibility which is summarized by the statement that the  cardinality of A is higher than the cardinality 1!i (Aleph) of 91. But high cardinality of A does not per se inhibit a  numerical representation: if there are very many alternatives that are equivalent to each other then it is always possible,  indeed desirable, to assign to all of them the same numerical value. To concentrate on the more relevant aspects, we shall in  what follows deal with the "reduced" sets of equivalence classes, where xEy implies x = y. A related set, i.e., pair (A, P),  satisfying this condition will be termed irreducible. Every related set has a unique irreducible form. [Formally, the  irreducible form, say (A, P), of an arbitrary related set (A, P) is defined as follows. A is the collection of E-equivalent  classes in A, defined by A = {x - A : x 0 0, and x E x implies [ y E x if and only if yEx] }, and then P is defined on A by P  = { (x, y) E AZ : xPy for some x E x, y E y } ].  Observation 4.1. (a) A related set (A, P) has a GNR if and only if its irreducible form has a GNR. Every GNR(v, S) for the  reduced form can be trivially extended to apply for (A, P), with v(x) = v(y) whenever xEy.  (b) An irreducible related set (A, P) has a GNR if and only if the cardinality of A does not exceed R.  IMPERFECTLY ORDERED PREFERENCES 437  If the irreducible form of a related set (A, P) has sufficiently low cardinality, then it has some GNR(v, S). When the  irreducible form is countable then all the results of Section 3 apply, and the degree of monotonicity that the GNR can be made  to have depends only on the degree of "consistency" in the stated preferences (from suborders up to weak orders). On the other  hand, when the irreducible form is uncountable then the existence of a GNR and the consistency of the preferences are not  sufficient to guarantee that the GNR can be made to have any of the desirable monotonicity properties. A famous counterexample  from classical utility theory, due to Debreu (1954), is the lexicographic ordering of the real plane W, viz. (x ,, x2) P(y,,  y2) if xI > yI or [x I = y, and x2 > y2], which is a weak order on a set of cardinality Aleph that does not have a classical  utility representation (nor indeed any representation with S s; H). The key property for all representations of preferences on  uncountable sets is "separability," defined as follows.  DEFINITION P4. A binary relation P on a set A is separable if A contains a countable subset C such that whenever y and z are  two (distinct) elements in A but not in C and yPz there is some x e C satisfying yPx and xPz (the set C is said to be "P-dense  in A").  The classical condition for the representability of non-denumerable weak orders is again traceable to Cantor (1915): A weak  order has a 0-threshold GNR and equivalently has a GUR, if and only if its irreducible form is separable.  In contrast to the above, separability of the stated preferences is neither necessary nor sufficient for the representation of  an imperfectly ordered set by a GNR with a lower degree of monotonicity. Here there is a crucial difference between complete  representation by a GNR(v, S) and partial representation by a numerical function v alone. Separability is sufficient for a  partial representation, as stated in the next theorem.  THEOREM 4.2 (Richter, 1966). If the irreducible form of a suborder P on a set A is separable, then there is a real valued  function v : A -+ 91 such that v(x) > v(y) whenever xPy.  But separability is not sufficient for a complete representation by a GNR(v, S) satisfying S s~ H, as demonstrated by the  following example. Suppose that A = 91 x f O, 1 } and (x, i) P(y, j) if x > y and [ i = j or x - y O 1]. This irreducible  suborder is clearly separable, and indeed v(x, i) = x satisfies the partial representation condition of theorem 4.2. But a  GNR(v, S) must also satisfy v(x, 0) 0 v(x, 1) for all x e 91 (because the two are not equivalent), and if S s H then also  v(x,i)>v(y,j) whenever x>y, hence the intervals [min {v(x,0),v(x,1)}, max { v(x, 0), v(x, 1) } ], x c- 9?, would have to be an  uncountable collection of disjoint intervals of positive length, which is impossible.  On the other hand, separability of the stated preferences is clearly not necessary, not even for a complete representation by  a GNR. This is evident from the semiorder where xPy applies whenever x - y > 1, which is not separable but  438 BEJA AND GILBOA  has a trivial numerical representation with S g H. The following counterpart to Theorem 4.2 gives a necessary condition for  representations that exhibit any degree of monotonicity.  DEFINITION P5. An asymmetric binary relation P on a set A is weakly separable if A contains a countable subset C such that  whenever y and z are two (distinct) elements in A but not in C and yPz there is some x e C satisfying [ yPx or yIx] and [xPz  or xIz].  THEOREM 4.3. If there is a function v: A --+ 91 such that v(x) > v(y) whenever xPy then P is weakly separable.  Since the weak separability in theorem 4.3 is a necessary condition, it is also, a fortiori, a necessary condition for the  existence of a GNR with S ~ H.  For the representation of semiorders, there is a separability condition that is both necessary and sufficient. Unlike the  previous results, this involves not the separability of the stated preferences P, but rather the separability of the revealed  preferences Q.  THEOREM 4.4. ' (a) (Version of Fishburn, 1985) An irreducible semiorder P has a monotonic GNR (alternatively GUR) if and only  if Q is separable.  (b) An irreducible semiorder P satisfying Axiom Al has a positive-threshold representation if and only if Q is separable.  Separability of the revealed preferences Q does not, however, resolve the representability of less well structured  preferences. The example following Theorem 4.2 shows a suborder that does not have a GNR (v, S) with S g; H, even though Q (as  well as P) is separable. For unilaterally monotonic representation of interval orders, it is necessary and sufficient that  both the relation PI and the relation IP (rather than just their union Q) be separable (Fishburn, 1985).  When the set of alternatives has high cardinality, other topological considerations also come into play.9 We conclude this  section with a discussion of conditions for P to have a GNR(v, S) where S is open in 912, or such that S is closed, or  possibly representations of both kinds, as in Theorem 3.8 above. This depends on appropriately defined notions of continuity  of the preference relation. A number of equally plausible formulations will do, and we elect to use the following.  DEFINITION P6. (a) An alternative x e A is a P-gap-edge-point if there is y e A such that yPx and not yPQx.  (b) An alternative x E A is an I-upper-edge-point if there is y e A such that yIx and not yIQx.  9 See, e.g., Bridges (1983), Chateauneuf (1987), and Gensemer (1987) for axiomatizations of representations of preferences  over large sets using additional structure that involves a topology on the set of alternatives.  IMPERFECTLY ORDERED PREFERENCES 439  THEOREM 4.5. (a) An irreducible semiorder P satisfying Al has a GNR(v, S) where S is open if and only if Q is separable and  the set of P-gap-edge-points is countable.  (b) An irreducible semiorder P satisfying Al has a GNR(v, S) where S is closed if and only if Q is separable and the set of  I-upper-edge points is countable.  We note that in both parts of Theorem 4.5 "GNR" may be replaced by "GUR."  5. SOME COMMENTS ON UNIQUENESS  One of the natural questions that arise once the existence of numerical representations is established is their uniqueness. It  is interesting to investigate the extent to which one can change a given representation and identify the features shared by  all representations of a given preference relation.  We start with the following question: supposing that a preference relation P has a GUR(u, S where S= { (a, l) : a - /3 >  11, to what extent is the generalized utility function u unique? To identify the permissible transformations of u, consider  any strictly increasing function f. [0, 1) -+ [0, 1), and let Tf: 91-+ 91 be defined by  Tf(a)=LaI+f(a-La]),  where Lad denotes the largest integer not exceeding a. Then clearly (Tfu, S is also a GUR for P. It is not difficult to see  that when (range u) = 91 the class of transformations Tf described above, in conjunction with arbitrary choices of origin,  exhausts all the transformations that can be applied to the utility representation u while maintaining S Defining similarly  S` = { (a, /3): a - fl > 11, the same analysis applies to closed fixed threshold representations (u, S.  We also wish to investigate to what extent S(alt. S`) is unique (beyond the obviously permissible changes of scale). By the  previous analysis one might tend to expect that some properties must be shared by all equivalent representations. In  particular, if (v, S) is equivalent to (u, S as a GUR for P then we might expect S to be monotonic, bounded away from the  diagonal D in 912, and open (or closed for S. But in fact none of these properties is strictly necessary: S need only be  monotonic in its intersection with (range v)2, it does not have to be bounded away from the diagonal for P to satisfy Al, and  rather than being open (alt. closed) it may include (alt. exclude) a countable set of points from the intersection of its  boundary with (range v)2 and any subset of the boundary not in (range v)2. Given that these properties are not necessary, we  may still wonder whether in some sense they are sufficient. The answer is a qualified yes, depending on the precise sense in  which the equivalence is sought, as follows.  THEOREM 5.1. (a) Let (v, S) be a GUR for a preference relation P. If S is monotonic, bounded away from the diagonal D in 912,  and open (alt. closed), then  440 BEJA AND GILBOA  there is some strictly increasing transformation T: 91 -91 such that (Tv, S (alt. (Tv, S) is a GUR for P.  (b) Let (u, S (alt. (u, S) be a GUR for a preference relation P, and let S 9; 91' be monotonic, bounded away from the  diagonal D in 91', and open (alt. closed). If the boundary of S is the graph of a strictly increasing, unbounded and  continuous function on 9I then there is a strictly increasing transformation T: 91 -+ 91 such that (Tu, S) is a GUR for P.  To see that the additional qualification in part (b) of Theorem 5.1 is indeed necessary, let A = 91 with xPy whenever x - y >  1, and consider S = { (a, /l): a > 1 and # < 0 }, which is monotonic, bounded away from the diagonal, and open. But if (v, S)  is a GNR for P then xP(x - 2) implies v(x) > 1 and (x + 2) Px implies v(x) < 0, a contradiction which proves our point.  Another counterexample with a different slant involves the same related set (A, P) as above and S' = { (a, /l)  a - /3 > 1 and [a > 3 or /3 < 1 ] }. If (v, S') is a GUR for P then v must be strictly increasing and (since P satisfies Al)  unbounded both from below and from above. Hence there are a, b e 91 such that  a = sup {x : v(x) < 1 } = inf{x : v(x) > 1  and  b = sup {x : v(x) < 3 } = inf{x : v(x) > 3 }.  Furthermore, b = a + 1, since x > b and y < a imply xPy and x - y > 1, while x < b and y > a imply v(x) < 3 and v(y) > 1,  hence (v(x), v(y)) 0 S and x- y < 1. Then (b+0.1)-(a+0.5)=0.6< 1 implies v(a+0.5)>v(b+0.1)-1 >2 while (a+0.5)(a - 0.1) = 0.6 <  1 implies v(a + 0.5) < v(a - 0.1) + 1 < 2, once again a contradiction.  Beyond the sheer interest in uniqueness, part (a) of Theorem 5.1 is clearly motivated by the intuitive appeal of Sand S`.  But the motivation underlying part (b) may perhaps seem somewhat dubious: if the preference P is already known to be  representable by the highly attractive S(or S'), why search for other representations with apparently less attractive S? The  answer is that the intuitive appeal of alternative representations depends very much on the specific context. An obvious  example is Weber's law, where the proportional-threshold representation in terms of the stimuli is by no means less attractive  than the constant-threshold representation in terms of the logarithms.  Much has been said and written in classical utility theory about the distinction between the "ordinal" utility representations  that are amenable to any strictly increasing transformation and the "cardinal" utility representations of preferences over  lotteries, where in order to maintain the mathematical expectations structure only positive linear transformations are  permissible. As we have noted here, the fixed jnd representations exhibit some intermediate degree of "cardinality": they do  not admit all strictly increasing transformations, but are not restricted to linear transformations alone. One can perhaps say  that positive-threshold representations admit arbitrary monotonically increasing transformations "in the small," but only  IMPERFECTLY ORDERED PREFERENCES 441  linear positive transformations "in the large." Indeed, we may think of the utility functions in fixed-threshold  representations as being "almost cardinal," especially for preferences that exhibit relatively strong (but bounded) "powers of  discrimination" (comparing two binary relations P, and PZ on a common set of alternatives A, P, can be said to exhibit  "stronger powers of discrimination" than PZ if PZ g P, and also Qz = Q, ). It is remarkable that for semiorders  near-cardinality stems from the discrimination threshold alone, without any reference to the highly structured space of  lotteries over the given alternatives, let alone to operationally dubious statements comparing "the intensity of preferences"  between different pairs.  The range of admissible transformations "in the large" is reduced further to the choice of origin alone if one wishes to  maintain the discrimination threshold as the unit of measurement for the "utility scale." In contrast to the classical utility  representations, where the choice of scale is totally arbitrary, the discrimination threshold of limited discrimination  preference orders offers a natural choice of a unit of measurement which is indicated by the preference pattern itself.  Indeed, our constructive proof of existence of positive-threshold utility representations for semiorders satisfying Axiom Al  makes direct use of this unit of measurement.  Of course, the whole idea of numerical representation, and especially the numerical representations that exhibit a degree of  monotonicity, is primarily an appeal to intuition: from a strictly logical viewpoint any definition of the preference relation  will do. The research on attractive numerical representations and on the extent that they are interchangeable can be  interpreted as an effort to bring the formal analysis and its intuitive interpretation closer together.  APPENDIX: PROOFS OF THE THEOREMS  Theorem 3.2(a). The "only if" part is immediate. For the "if" part, note that the transitive closure, P of a suborder P is a  strict partial order (i.e., asymmetric and transitive), set {v(x), x E A } sequentially so that v(x) > v(y) whenever xP and  v(x)=v(y) if and only if xEy, and then set S= I(v(x), v(y))Cqj2: (x, y)CP}.  Theorem 3.3. It is easy to see that either (ii) or (iii) implies that P is an interval order. To show the converse  implication, assume P is an interval order and use Theorems 6 and 8 in Fishburn (1985, pp. 28-29) to conclude that there are  b, e: A -+ 9? such that (1) b(x) 5 e(x) and (2) xPy iff b(x) > e(y).  To prove that (ii) holds, set {v(x), x E A } sequentially to satisfy v(x) > v(y) if and only if [b(x)>h(y) or (b(x) = b(y) and  e(x) > e(y))]. Then define S= { (a, v(y)) I a >, v(x) for some x E A such that xPy }.  The proof for (iii) is symmetric.  Theorem 3.4. The "only if" part is straightforward. For the "if" part use Theorems 7 and 8 in Fishburn (1985, p. 29) and  construct v and S as in (either part of) the proof of Theorem 3.3 above.  442 BEJA AND GILBOA  Theorem 3.2(a)*. First note that xP*yPz implies xPz (for otherwise yQx) and xPyP*z also implies xPz (for otherwise zQy), i.e.,  P*P u PP* c P. With the transitivity of P* (established in Section 2) it follows that when P is a suborder then PuP* is also a  suborder, and we continue as in the proof of 3.2.(a).  Theorem 3.3*. We will show that the construction of Theorem 3.3 satisfies the additional requirements. First, note that if xEy  one may, w.l.o.g., assign the same b and e values to x and y, whence v(x) = v(y). Next, to show that v(x) > v(y) when xP*y,  consider first the upward monotonicity construction. Knowing that xQy, there is a z such that xPz and not yPz, or such that  zPy and not zPx. In the first case b(x) > b(y) and v(x) > v(y). In the second case we obtain e(x) > e(y) and we still have to  prove that b(x) >, b(y). However, a close look at the construction of the function b (see Theorem 3 on pp. 23-24 of Fishburn  (1985)) shows that b(x)<b(y) would have implied the existence of an alternative z with b(x) < e(z) < b(y), which would have  meant yQx. But this conclusion is contradictory to xP*y, whence we conclude that b(x) >, b(y) and (with e(x) > e(y)) we obtain  The proof for the downward monotonicity construction is symmetric.  Theorem 3.5. Using the same theorems in Fishburn as in 3.4, we only note that his proof (via Theorems 3 and 4 on pp. 23-25)  guarantees that the GNR is also a GUR.  Theorem 3.7. The issue of substance here is to show that (i) implies (ii) and (iii). The main idea of the proof is the  following: a given x E A provides a "stratification" of A by the longest P-chains from x to each other alternative (or vice  versa), denoted NJ.). Thus, if we set u(x) = 0 and the jnd S = 1, N_r(y) will be a minimal possible value for u(y). Then we  show that when a different "base point" is chosen, differences of the type NX(y)-N,(z) cannot change drastically. Finally, we  define the utility u(.) as some average of N,(.) (over all x) and prove that if satisfies the required condition.  It was pointed out to us by an anonymous referee that a restriction of this technique to a finite set of alternatives is  similar to the "potential technique" as in Doignon (1987).  In what follows, the more self-evident statements will be given without detailed proof.  We first define Q= Q u E and note that if P is a semiorder, then P =) PQ' and P:::) Q. For x, y E A we define a set  M.C(y)={neNI3zl,zz,...,z,EAsuch that YPZ,Pz2P...PZ,QX}.  Define also  0 if MV (y) = 0,  max M.Y (y) if MY (y) is nonempty and finite,  00 if M+(y)is (y) is infinite.  NY (y) =  We observe that, for all x, y E A, N.Y (y) > 0 iff yQx.  IMPERFECTLY ORDERED PREFERENCES 443  LEMMA 1. Assume that x, y, z e A satisfy N.Y (z) = n, > 0 and N y) = n2 > U. Then  n,+n2-I <NX (y)<n,+n2.  Proof. The left side inequality is implied by P:::) QP. As for the right side, if NX ( y ) = k > n, + n,  , there are W11--Wk-1 such that YPw I P ... Pwk _ I Qx. Consider w.Z and z. If wn2QZ, then NZ (y) ,> n2 + 1, which is false.  Hence zQ,, and ZPwnz+, follows which, in turn, implies that NY (z) ~k - n2 > n, , a contradiction.  LEMMA 2. For all x,y e X, NX (y) is finite.  Proof. Assume the contrary, and let x, y e A satisfy NX (y) = oo. Let z e A satisfy yPzPx (of course, such exists). By Lemma  1, either Nx (z)=oo or N(y) = oc (or both). In the first case, denote y, =z and consider x and y,. In the second, let x, = z  and continue with x, and y. Arguing inductively, one obtains either a monotonically P-decreasing sequence (y;) which is  bounded from below (by x) or an increasing one (x;) which is bounded from above (by y), or both. At any rate, this is a  contradiction of Axiom Al.  LEMMA 3. If x, y, z e A satisfy NY (y) > 0 and zPy, then N.' (z) > Nr (y) + 1.  LEMMA 4. Suppose that NC ( y ) = n > 0 and that yPz, Pz2 P Pzn _ , Qx. Then NY (z;)=n-i for 1 n- 1.  LEMMA 5. Suppose that xly. Then for all z e A, I N+ (x) -N+ (y) 15 1.  Proof. Assume the contrary, e.g., xly and Nx)>Ny)+2. Suppose xPw, Pw2P...Pw. IQz where n=Nx). Then N+(w2)=n-2, and (w2Py  or w2iy) follows, whence xPy, a contradiction.  We now proceed to define a new set of functions, to be denoted by INX IxsAFirst define, for x, y e A, MX (y) = {n e N 13zt,  z2, ..., zn_, e A such that YPZIPz2P...Pzn_IPx} and  NX(y)=~ max MX (y)  if MX (y)=175,  if MX (y) is nonempty and finite,  if MX (y) is infinite.  Obviously, NX (y) > 0 ilf yPx for all x, y e A.  LEMMA 6. For all x, y e A  NX(y)< NX (y)~NX (y) + 1.  The functions { NX ) r E A have similar properties to those of { NX } _r E A.  480,136/3-9  444 BEJA AND GILBOA  LEMMA 7. Assume that x, y, z E A satisfy NX (z) = n, > 0 and N- (y) = n2 > 0. Then  n,+n2<NX (y)<,n,+n2+1.  Proof. Similar to Lemma 5.  LEMMA 8. For all x, y E A, NY (y) is finite.  Proof. Like Lemma 2 or using Lemma 6.  LEMMA 9. Assume N.Y (y) > 0. Then for z such that zPy one has Nr (z) N.X (y) + 1 and for z such that xPz, we get N~ (y) > Nx  (y) + 1.  LEMMA 10. Suppose that Nr (y) = n > 0 and that YPz, Pz2 ... Pz_ , Qx. Then N.Y (z;)=n-i for i<i<n-1.  LEMMA 11. If xly, then IN-(x)-N-(y)~ 1, dzeA.  by  We can finally define the functions we are really after. For x e A define Nc: A -+ Z  N+(y) if YQX,  Nx(y) = 0 if yEx,  -NV (x) if xQy.  The following lemmata are quite straightforward. The somewhat tedious proofs  (based on a case-by-case study) are omitted.  LEMMA 12. If xPy, then N_(x) > N_(y) + 1, Vz E A.  LEMMA 13. If x1y, then I N_ (x) - N,(y) I 5 1, Vz E A.  LEMMA 14. For all x, y e A, 0 <, Nx(y) + N,,(x) < 1.  LEMMA 15. For all x, y, z E A  INz(y)-Njx)-N.r(y)I <3.  We will now define a real-valued function on A as an average of all functions { Nx(-) } x E a . We need a measurable structure  which will be provided by the real line. We note here that Q is separable. (According to definition P4 in Section 4 above.)  (This is, of course, trivial since A is countable, but for later adaptations of the proof it is worthy of note that the  countability of A is used here for the first time and that the separability of Q is all we need.) We may therefore assume that  there exists v: A -9? such that xQy iff v(x) > v(y).  IMPERFECTLY ORDERED PREFERENCES 445  Let C=conv(range(v)) (i.e., C is a (not necessarily finite) interval in 91). For a E C define N": A -+ Z by  N2(y) =min{NX(y) I v(x)<a}.  Note that N"(-) is well defined, finite and monotonically nondecreasing. Moreover, for each y E A, N'(y) is a nonincreasing  function of a-hence, measurable. Let p be a probability measure on C withg the following properties:  (i) p(I) > 0 for every positive-length interval L,  (ii) For some yo E A, the integral  c  N'(yo) dy  is well-defined and finite.  Note that such measures do exist. LEMMA 16. For every y E A,  U(y) = fc N'(y) dy  is well-defined and finite.  Proof. By Lemma 15, u(y) and u(yo) converge or diverge together for every yo, yeA.  LEMMA 17. For all x, y E A,  XPy- u(x) '> u(y) + 1 XIy - I U(x) - U(Y) I 1.  LEMMA 18. For all x, y E A,  xQy p u(x) > u(y).  Proof. Assume xQy, whence v(x) > v(y). For all a E (v(y), v(x)), N'(x)  1 > 0 ,> N"(y) whence u(x) > u(y). On the other hand, xEy surely implies U(x)=u(y).  Lemmata 17 and 18 complete the proof of Theorem 3.7.  Theorem 3.8. (ii) and (iii) surely imply (i). We avoid proving the converse implications at this point because (in conjunction  with Theorem 3.7) they follow immediately from Theorem 4.5 below.  446  BEJA AND GILBOA  Theorem 4.3. Suppose v: A -> 91 satisfies v(x) > v(y) for all x, y E A such that xPy. It is sufficient to show that there  exists a countable C g A such that v(x) > v(y) implies the existence of z E C with v(x) > v(z) > v(y). For every pair of  rational numbers, a < b, if range (v) n (a, b) :A 0, choose x E A with v(x) e (a, b) and denote the set of alternatives thus  chosen by Co. Next define a "hole" to be a positive-length interval which does not intersect the range of v. Note that every  hole is contained in a maximal hole and that distinct maximal holes are disjoint, hence there are only countably many maximal  holes. Let {H, }; be an enumeration of those maximal holes which are finite open intervals. For each H;, there are x;, y;EA  such that Hi =(v(x;), v(yi)). Define C=CouU;,, {x;, y;} and note that it satisfies the requirement of weak separability.  Theorem 4.4. (a) For the "if" part, assume Q is separable and let v: A -> 91 represent it (i.e., v(x) > v(y) p xQy). Then  define S= { (a, /3) I a > v(x), /3 < v(y) for some x, y E A such that xPy } and note that (v, S) is a monotonic GUR of P. For  the "only if" part, we recall the remark following Theorem 3.5 and conclude that if (v, S) is a monotonic GNR of an  irreducible preference P, then it is also a monotonic GUR and v represents Q, whence Q is separable.  (b) The "only if" part follows from part (a). The "if" part is proved similarly to Theorem 3.7.  Theorem 4.5. (a) First assume that P has a positive-threshold GNR where S is open. This means that there exists a function u:  A -,. 91 satisfying xPy e_> u(x) > u(y) + 1 for all x, y E A. It is easily seen that this implies that P is a semiorder  satisfying Al, that u represents Q, and that Q is separable. To see that there are only countably many P-gap-edge-points, let  x be one and let y satisfy yPx where there is no z for which yPzQx holds. Hence, range (u) n (u(x), u(y) - 1) = QS. This means  that the u-value of every P-gap-edge-point alternative is the left endpoint of a positive-length interval not intersecting  range (u). Since P is irreducible, there are only countably many P-gap-edge-points.  We will now prove the converse. The general idea of the proof is as follows: the function u constructed in the proof of  Theorem 3.7 may fail to satisfy u(x) > u(y) + 1 for xPy if y is a P-gap-edge-point, although the weak inequality has to hold.  The "problem" is that there does not exist a Q-interval (u, z) such that xPzQwQy. If there were such z and w, we would have  N"(x) - Ny) >, 2 for v(w) < a < v(z) and u(x) - u(y) > 1 would follow. The solution is, therefore, very simple: add  artificial z and w as required for every P-gap-edge-point y. Since there are only countably many P-gap-edge-points, the  resulting Q is still separable and the above reasoning basically completes the proof.  Assume, then, that P is an irreducible semiorder satisfying Al, with countably many P-gap-edge-points, and that Q is  separable. For x E A we say that x is P-regular if it is not a P-gap-edge-point and that it is P-regular of order 2 if for  every y E A satisfying yPx there are z, w E A such that yPzQwQx. Let C; be the set of all alternatives which are not P-regular  of order i (i= 1, 2).  IMPERFECTLY ORDERED PREFERENCES 447  LEMMA 1. C2 is countable.  Proof. It suffices to show that there are only countably many alternatives x which are P-regular but not P-regular of order 2.  Let x be such an alternative. Then there is y e A such that yPx, but yPzQwQx does not hold for any (z, w) E A2. By  P-regularity, there is t e A such that yPtQx. The alternative, t, itself has to be P-gap-edge-point. Furthermore, there is no  w e A satisfying tQwQx. This means that there exists a 1-1 function from CZ \ C, to C, , and the conclusion follows.  (Note that by the same method one can inductively define C; (i,> 1) and show that C; is countable for all i>, 1, hence also U  i > , C; is countable.)  We will now extend the set of alternatives and the relations defined on it as follows. For every x E C2 let us introduce two  new alternatives, denoted x and z. Let A = A u { x j x e CZ } v { x 1 x C- C2 }. We define P and Q on A as follows  (i) For all x, y e A, let xpy <> xPy and xQy p xQy.  (ii) For x E C2 and y E A, y y-1 x, let  xpy a .Uy - xPy; yPx e> YPx p YPx .XQY p xQy <' XQY; YQx r> yQx e> yQx. (iii) For x, Y e C2, X :A Y, let  xPy p xPy p xPy p zpy <a xPy xQy r> xQy r> .kQy <> XQy ca xQy.  And finally,  (iv) For x E C2, let zQzQx.  For x, y E A, let xIy if neither xPy nor yPx. The following needs no proof:  LEMMA 2. (a) P is an irreducible semiorder satisfying Al;  (b) Q is a separable weak order;  (c) Q=)PIUIP; P::DQPUPQ.  (Note that Q is not necessarily the indirect preference relation corresponding to P. In other words, Q may be strictly larger  than PI v 1F.)  Next we note that for binary relations P and Q which satisfy conditions (a)-(c) of Lemma 2, all the lemmata in the proof of  Theorem 3.7 hold. Consider the function u: A -91 constructed in the proof. For all x, y e A we have (Lemma 17)  xPy-u(x)'>u(y)+1  and  XIy-IU(x)-u(Y)I '< 1.  448 BEJA AND GILBOA  We now have to show that for x, y e A, xPy implies u(x) > u(y) + 1. However, for such x, y e A there are z, w E A such that  xPzQwQy. Consider a E (v(y), v(w)) (where v represents Q as in the proof). For such a value a, N"(x) > 2 where N"(y) < 0. As  v(y) < v(w), u(x) > u(y) + 1. Hence P has a positive-threshold GUR with an open set S, and the proof is complete.  (b) Both parts of the statement are proved similarly to their counterparts in (a) above.  Theorem 5.1. (a) Theorem 4.5 implies that P has a GUR (u, S (alt., (u, S`)). Because both u and v represent Q, there exist a  strictly increasing T: 91 --* 91 with u = Tv.  (b) By the provision of the theorem, there exists u: A --> 91 such that xPy iff u(x) > u(y) + 1 (u(x) > u(y) + 1) and xQy iff  u(x) > u(y). Assume without loss of generality that range (u) = 9t (otherwise, extend A, P, and u). Therefore, the func tion v  we are looking for is a monotone transformation of u. Choose an arbitrary xo E A and let v(xo) = u(xo). Let xi satisfy u(xi) -  u(xo) = i for i E Z. The value v(xi) is determined by the boundary of S. (Le., v(x,)=inf{a I (a, v(xo))ES}, and so forth).  Define v(x) for {x I u(xo) < u(x) < u(x,) I so that v is some (strictly) monotonic continuous function of u on [u(xo), u(x,)],  and extend v to all A according to S as above. Since bd(S) is the graph of a strictly increasing, unbounded and continuous  function (defined on all the reals), this procedure generates a well-defined v (which is continuous in u) such that (v, S) is  a GUR of P.  REFERENCES  ADAMS, E. W. (1985). Elements of a theory of inexact measurement. Philosophy of Science, 32, 205-228. BRIDGES, D. S. (1983). A  numerical representation of preferences with intransitive indifference. Journal of Mathematical Economics, 11, 25-42.  CANTOR, G. (1915). Contributions to the founding of the theory of transfinite numbers. New York: Dover. CHATEAUNEUF, A.  (1987). Continuous representation of a preference relation on a connected topological space. Journal of Mathematical  Economics, 16, 139-146.  DEBREu, G. (1954). Representation of a preference ordering by a numerical function. In R. Thrall, C. Coombs, & R. Davis  (Eds.), Decision processes (Chap. XI, pp. 159-165). New York: Wiley. DOIGNON, J. P. (1987). Threshold representations of  multiple semiorders. SIAM Journal of Algebraic and Discrete Methods, 8, 77-84.  DOIGNON, J. P., MONJARDET, B., ROUBENS, M., AND VINCKE, P. (1986). Biorder families, valued relations, and preference  modelling. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 30, 435-480.  FISHBURN, P. C. (I 970a). Utility theory for decision making. New York: Wiley. (Reprinted by Krieger, Huntington, N6ew York,  1979.)  FISHBURN, P. C. (1970b). Intransitive indifference in preference theory: A survey. Operations Research, 18, 207-228.  FISHBURN, P. C. (1970c). Intrasitive indifference with unequal indifference intervals. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 7,  144-149.  FISHBURN, P. C. (1985). Interval orders and interval graphs. New York: Wiley.  GENSEMER, S. (1987). Continuous semiorder representation. Journal of Mathematical Economics, 16, 275-290.  IMPERFECTLY ORDERED PREFERENCES 449  LUCE, R. D. (1956). Semiorders and a theory of utility discrimination. Econometrica, 24, 178-191. MANDERS, K. L. (1981). On  JND representations of semiorders. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 24 224-248.  RICHTER, M. K. (1966). Revealed preference theory. Econometrica, 34, 635-645.  ROBERTS, F. S. (1970). On nontransitive indifference. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 7, 243-258. SCOTT, D., AND SUPPES,  P. (1958). Foundational aspects of theories of measurement. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 23, 113-128.  SUPPES, P., KRANTZ, D., LUCE, R. D., AND TVERSKY, A. (1989). Foundations of Measurement (Vol. 2). San Diego: Academic Press.  RECEIVED: June 7, 1989