10.1016/0022-2496(92)90029-7
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 36, 396425 (1992)  Constrained Supervised Learning  MICHAEL 1. JORDAN  Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology  When distinct outputs of an adaptive system have equivalent effects on the environment, the problem of finding appropriate  actions given desired results is ill-posed. For supervised learning algorithms, the ill-posedness of such "inverse learning  problems" implies a certain flexibility-during training, there are in general many possible target vectors corresponding to  each input vector. To allow supervised learning algorithms to make use of this flexibility, the current paper considers how to  specify targets by sets of constraints, rather than as particular vectors. Two classes of constraints are  distinguished-configurational constraints, which define regions of output space in which an output vector must lie, and  temporal constraints, which define relationships between outputs produced at different points in time. Learning algorithms  minimize a cost function that contains terms for both kinds of constraints. n 1992 Academic Press, Inc.  In many domains, it is the case that targets, goals, or other criteria do not uniquely specify the actions which must be  produced to meet the criteria. That is, many systems are redundant, and large or even infinite numbers of combinations of  values for the system's degrees of freedom lead to the same results. A classical example of such a system is the  musculoskeletal system (Bernstein, 1967), for which the instantaneous configuration is generally underdetermined by the task  to be performed. Such indeterminacies or "degrees-of-freedom problems" arise throughout the study of action (Kelso, 1986;  Turvey, 1977), and also arise in perception, often under the rubric of "context-sensitivity" or "parallelism" (Perkell &  Klatt, 1986).  Of the learning problems that a system interacting with an environment must solve, many can be characterized as either  "forward" problems or "inverse" problems. A paradigmatic case of a forward problem is concept formation. Given an environment  that is characterized by a many-to-one classification function, the system observes a set of input-output pairs taken from  this function and attempts to choose correct outputs for novel inputs. In an inverse problem, such as goal reduction or motor  planning, input-output pairs are again assumed to be available, after which it is desired to find the correct inputs  corresponding to a given set of  Preparation of the paper was supported by Grant AFOSR-87-03 to Andrew Barto from the Air Force Office of Scientific Research,  Bolling, AFB, and by a grant to Michael I. Jordan from the Human Frontier Science Program Research Grant Foundation. I thank  Andrew Barto for his support and for helpful commentary on the paper.  0022-2496/92 $5.00  Copyright CQ 1992 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  396  CONSTRAINED SUPERVISED LEARNING 397  outputs. For systems with excess degrees of freedom, this latter problem is one-tomany, or ill-posed.  Research on connectionist learning algorithms has made progress on the general problem of converting a set of input-output  observations into predictions for novel data (Ackley, Hinton, & Sejnowsky, 1985; Grossberg, 1982; Hinton, 1987; Rumelhart,  Hinton, & Williams, 1986; Sutton, 1987; Werbos, 1987). However, these algorithms have tended to emphasize the role of the  environment as a source of stimuli, rather than as a recipient of actions; that is, the algorithms have generally been  developed in the context of forward problems. Although it is possible to adapt these algorithms to inverse problems by simply  reversing the role of the input and output units of the network with respect to the environment, this approach ignores the  one-to-many nature of inverse problems.'  This paper discusses how to allow a network to choose an action from among a set of possibilities. To this end, I first  consider generalizations of the supervised learning paradigm that allow flexibility in the specification of target values for  a network. The approach includes the use of don't-care conditions, inequalities and ranges defined on individual output  variables, and constraints between the output variables. In the latter case, the constraints may be linear or nonlinear. These  representational devices, used singly or in combination, make it possible to specify regions of the output space from which  the network must select an output vector.  Constraints generally arise from knowledge of the structural or dynamical properties of the environment. Such knowledge is  often stated in the form of parameterized relationships among variables. For example, Newton's second law is a relationship  between the force acting on an object and its acceleration, parameterized by the mass of the object. The relationship between  the joint angles of the arm and the spatial location of the wrist is a trigonometric equation, parameterized by the lengths of  the limbs. Parameterized knowledge of this kind can be internalized in a learning algorithm by utilizing a parameterized  family of constraints. For example, a vector x may be required to satisfy a constraint of the form aTx = 0, where a is a  vector of parameters. Such constraints can also be generalized to include an additional "target" variable y*, yielding the  equation of constraint aTx=y*. Constraints with target variables are a natural generalization of the classical supervised  learning paradigm-rather than assuming that the environment provides a target value x* for each of the ouput variables x;, it  is assumed that the environment provides target values for certain combinations of the output variables.  ` This approach is called "direct inverse modeling" and has been studied by Kuperstein (1987), Miller, (1987), and Widrow and  Stearns (1985), among others. When there are excess degrees of freedom, a network using direct inverse modeling will generally  not find an inverse mapping, even though there are infinite numbers of possible inverse mappings which solve the problem. For  example, let y=f(x,) and y=f(x2), for a particular vector y, so that x, and xz are possible solutions when y is the input  vector to the network. After repeated presentation of the stimulus pairs (y, x,) and (y, XZ), the network will output a vector  x which minimizes the sum of squared differences y;-, (x-x;)2, but is not in general a solution (i.e., in general, y0f(x)).  398 MICHAEL I. JORDAN  Two additional issues arise when one considers parameterized constraints. First there is the issue of representational  power-the internal parameterization must generate a rich enough class of functions to include the assumed functional form of  the constraint or the internal parameterization must be universal in the sense of being able to approximate the assumed  functional form. This issue is not pursued in this paper, although it is noted in passing that the network parameterizations  utilized in the paper can be shown to be universal approximators for a large class of functions (Hornik, Stinchcombe, & White,  1989). Second, in many situations the parameters characterizirig a constraint are not known a priori. That is, the learner may  have knowledge of the form of the constraints imposed by the environment but may not know the values of the parameters. This  is a natural model for many situations; indeed, even if values for the parameters are known initially they may change over  time. Thus we have a further distinction within the class of parameterized constraints: those for which the parameters are  known a priori and those for which the parameters are unknown a priori. The paper deals with both classes of constraint, with  particular emphasis on the case of unknown parameters.  When the constraints on solutions to a problem do not specify a unique solution, it is commonly the case that additional  optimality principles are invoked: The solution is required to optimize some function defined over the set of vectors that  meet the constraints (Wilde & Beighter, 1967). For example, for underconstrained systems of linear equations Ax = b, there  exist an infinite number of solutions vectors. If it is further specified that the solution vector have the minimum norm among  all possible solution vectors, then the unique solution is given by x = A' b, where A+ is the pseudoinverse of A. Such a  result is convenient mathematically; however, the minimum norm principle may or may not have meaning in the context of the  problem being addressed. In general, it is desirable that an optimality principle have some grounding in a theoretical  understanding of the problem being solved, rather than being used merely to obtain uniqueness.  In the current paper, constraints on solutions are treated by converting them to a function E(x) to be minimized; thus the  optimization of an additional quantity simply adds another term to E. I also wish to consider a broader approach to resolving  excess degrees of freedom for situations in which actions are chosen not in isolation, but rather in the context of the  choices of other actions. That is, I consider inverse problems in which sequences of actions must be learned, where each  action is defined by a set of configurational constraints, and where it is assumed that the sequential context provides  additional implicit temporal constraints on the form actions may take. Configurational constraints define regions of output  space in which an output vector must lie, whereas temporal constraints define relationships between outputs produced at  different points in time. Although temporal constraints can arise in many ways, it is assumed here that they can be captured  by an appropriately defined smoothness criterion. Smoothness captures sequential dependencies by requiring that actions nearby  in time be implemented in non-conflicting ways or, relatedly, that actions spread in time and blend with one another, in ways  that still respect the configurational constraints. The learning  CONSTRAINED SUPERVISED LEARNING 399  problem that is treated here includes both configurational constraints and temporal constraints, and the functional to be  optimized takes the general form  m  J= Ji(Xi, Xz, ..., Xn ), (1 ) j  j=1  where  J'(  nj nj  i, ..., xnj)= E (x;)+T L h(x;, x;-J  r=1 r=z  The subscripts in these equations index time steps within sequences. The functional Jj is defined on the jth sequence in the  set of sequences being learned. Each such functional is composed of terms E (x) that encode the configurational constraints on  individual actions and terms h(x , x _ 1) that enforce smoothness. The parameter T is a regularization parameter that weighs  the relative importance of meeting the configurational constraints and obtaining smoothness.  Connectionist learning algorithms generally involve not only an optimization principle but also a specific network  architecture. In the current paper, the optimization problem includes the storage of the solution sequences in a recurrent  network from which they can be recalled. This enriches the optimization framework by making it possible to discuss  generalization between and within sequences and the dynamics of the process of generating solution sequences.  The paper is organized as follows. After a brief review of supervised learning I discuss don't-care conditions, inequalities,  and parameterized constraints with known parameters. I then discuss the case of parameterized constraints with unknown  parameters and consider the problem of parameter estimation. The following section treats temporal constraints and embeds the  optimization problem in a sequential network architecture. The final section of the paper presents an application of the  approach to a simulated kinematic learning problem. The simulations focus on temporal constraints and parameterized  configurational constraints with unknown parameters.  REVIEW OF BACKPROPAGATION LEARNING  Although the ideas developed in this paper can be used in conjunction with any supervised learning algorithm in which an error  vector is computed, the focus here is on the backpropagation algorithm as presented by Rumelhart et al. (1986). Consider a  feedforward network of computational units, each of which computes its activation z; according to  Z; = 0 (Y-Wijzj ),  400 MICHAEL I. JORDAN  where 0 is a differentiable function and w;; is the weight from unit j to unit i. The network has a set of input units, whose  activations are fixed by the environment, and a set of output units. The network can be described globally as computing a  differentiable, parameterized function of its input q,  x=g(q, w),  where q denotes the activation of the input units, x denotes the activation of the output units, and w is the vector of  weights. The form of g is determined by the activation function 0 and the network connectivity pattern.  The backpropagation learning rule assumes the existence of a target vector x corresponding to each input vector q;. An error  measure E; is formed, based on the sum of squares of the differences between components of x* and x;=g(q;, w):  E;= i(x* _ xr)T (x* _ Xi).  Backpropagation is an algorithm that changes the weights w according to the gradient of the error measure E;, that is, it  computes  aXT  E;- - aw (X*-xi), (3)  where (Ox,/Ow) is the matrix of partial derivatives of g(q, w) taken with respect to w, evaluated at q = q; and the current  value of w. The vector of weight changes is proportional to the total gradient  n  dW = -ocV,Y Y Er (4) i=1  n  n aXT  _Y aw (X,!,-X,.), (6)  where a is a step size and the summation is taken over the n input-output pairs in the training set. In the remainder of the  paper, the learning rule shown in Eq. (6) is assumed, and our only concern will be the computation of gradients.  One simple modification of standard backpropagation that will prove useful is to allow a symmetric, positive definite matrix Q  to appear in the error functional:  Er=z(x*-xYQ(x*-xi).  The gradient of this error term is  T  pwE;_ -W Q(X'*-XA (7)  CONSTRAINED SUPERVISED LEARNING 401  The matrix Q is required to be positive definite so that the error E; is zero only when x;* = x;. Such a matrix will be useful  in a noisy environment when there are correlations between the components of the error vector. Also, the diagonal elements of  Q can be thought of as individual gains associated with the components of the error.  Finally, it is worth noting that the backpropagation algorithm also computes V,E;, the vector of partial derivatives of the  error with respect to the units' activations (the partial derivative (aE;/azj) corresponding to the jth unit is used by the  algorithm in computing the partials for the incoming weights wok). In particular, the algorithm computes the partial  derivatives of the error with respect to the activations of the input units:  OgEi=L!  (x*-x;) .. (8)  The matrix (ax;/0q) is the Jacobian matrix of the input-output mapping performed by the network (that is, the matrix of  partial derivatives of the components of x; with respect to the components of q). Thus, for a fixed set of weights, the  backpropagation algorithm transforms the error vector by multiplying it by the transpose of a Jacobian matrix. The algorithm  computes this product by implementing a particular factorization of the transpose Jacobian matrix. The structure of the  algorithm can be seen by writing this factorization explicity as  pqE_= W())TA")W(2)TA(2)... W(N)TA(N)(xl*-xi),  where N is the number of layers in the network, W(k) is the weight matrix linking the (k -1)th layer of units to the kth  layer, and A (k) is a diagonal matrix whose entries are the derivatives of the activation functions of the units in the kth  layer. (Here and elsewhere in the paper, expressions for gradients should be read from right to left to correspond to the  order in which backpropagation computes the matrix products.) Given that multiplication by a transpose matrix corresponds to  propagating a vector backward through a network (Oppenheim & Schafer, 1975), this expression succinctly describes the  propagation of the error vector backward through the layered network. Note finally that vectors other than the error vector  can be propagated backward through the network. Indeed, as is discussed in a following section, it is useful to consider the  case in which the propagated vector does not depend on the output x;. In such cases, even though the output vector is not  needed, it is still necessary for activation to flow forward in the network. This is due to the fact that the Jacobian matrix  varies as a function of the input q, and the forward activation pass is needed in order to instantiate a particular Jacobian  matrix. In particular, as shown in Eq. (9), the Jacobian matrix depends on the activations of the units in the network through  the intermediary of the diagonal matrices A (".  402 MICHAEL I. JORDAN  CONFIGURATIONAL CONSTRAINTS  A broad class of configurational constraints can be obtained by generalizing the form of the error vector. The discussion here  proceeds in several steps, after which I discuss temporal constraints.  Don't-care conditions, inequalities, and ranges. This section describes some simple techniques for constraining the activation  of a unit to lie in a specified interval. A don't-care condition imposes no constraint at all-the interval specified is the  entire real axis. Clearly, the learning procedure for a don't-care condition should be to make no change to the unit's weight  and to propagate no error from the unit. A more restrictive condition is an inequality constraint. For example, the activation  x; might be required to be less than 0.4. In such a case, the learning rule should generate no error if x; < 0.4, otherwise,  an error 0.4 - x; is generated as if 0.4 were a target value. Ranges can be treated by summing the errors produced by the  corresponding pair of inequalities. For multiple, disjoint intervals, there are several possibilities; for example, (1) the  errors generated by each pair of inequalities can be summed, or (2) the target value is set to be the nearest interval  boundary, for activations not already in some target interval.  These ideas can be easily translated into an error functional form. Let S, be the set of indices i such that the i th  component of x * has a don't-care condition .2 Furthermore, let SZ be the set of indices corresponding to the "less-than"  inequalities and S3 be the set of indices corresponding to the "greater-than" inequalities. Then the error functional E is  given by  E= 1(x* -x)T QH(x* -x),  where H is a diagonal matrix defined as a function of x in the following way. Let  h;i =  if ieS,  if i E SZ and x; <, x  if i e S, and xi >, x,!' otherwise,  where St, S2, and S3 are nonoverlapping. Differentiation of E with respect to w yields  T  v"E= -aw QH(x*-x),  where H effectively zeroes the components of x* - x where constraints are already met. It should be noted that H is a  discontinuous function of w. This might appear  z In the following, we drop the subscript i denoting the stimulus number, in the interest of clarity. The symbol x; represents  the ith component of x.  CONSTRAINED SUPERVISED LEARNING 403  to pose difficulties for the computation of the gradient; however, the set on which the derivative of H is undefined is  precisely the set where the corresponding components of x are equal to x*. For this set, we have E=0. In the neighborhood of  this set, E is quadratic or identically zero; in either case, the left and right derivatives are zero. Thus, E is pointwise  continuous and differentiable, even if H is not.  For range constraints, we simply include a second target vector in the error functional, with components given by the second  member of the corresponding inequality pairs. Don't-care conditions are used to fill out the vector for components where there  is no range constraint.  Linear constraints. The previous section shows how to adapt supervised learning to cases in which targets are rectangular  regions in the output space with sides parallel to the standard basis vectors. More complex regions can be represented by  linear constraints defined among the output variables.  Consider a network with three output units having activations x1, x2, and x3. Suppose that there are a given pair of  constraints of the form x, + x2 = y 1* and x2 + x3 = y2*, for particular values y,* and yz*. As shown in Fig. 1, we can think  of these constraints as being implemented by an auxiliary pair of linear units adjoined to the output units. These auxiliary  units have activations y1= x, + x2 and y2 = x2 + X3, by virtue of the fixed connections of unity from the output units. Target  values are applied to these units rather than directly to the output units. For example, if y, is different from y I*, then an  error y1* -y, is generated. It is natural to apportion this error equally to the units x, and x2, whence it is propagated  backward as usual. All else being equal, this process will work to find a solution to Y1* = x1 + x2 in which x, and x2 are  equal. However, the constraint y2 = x2 + x3 imposes further conditions on x2, so that the value actually chosen will be a  compromise.  In general, we consider a collection of k constraint functions f; such that  Output Units  FIG. 1. Implementing linear constraints with auxiliary units. The weights from the output units to the auxiliary units are  fixed.  404 MICHAEL I. JORDAN  y; =f; (x, c; ) = c T x, i = 1, 2, ..., k for some set of parameter vectors {c;}. Letting C denote the matrix whose rows are  the vectors CT, we have y = Cx. Now suppose that a target vector y* is given.' Form the error functional  E= i (Y* - Cx)T Q(Y* - Cx).  This functional can be differentiated with respect to the weights w, giving  VwE -( aw Cx)T Q(Y*-Cx)  T  - aw CT Q(Y* - Cx).  The gradient descent learning rule is therefore a simple modification of backpropagation, in which the output vector is  multiplied by a constraint matrix C before being compared to the target, and the weighted error vector is first multiplied by  CT before being propagated backward (compare to Eq. (7)). Alternatively, we may think of this rule being implemented as a  special case of backpropagation, in which the last layer of weights is fixed according to the matrix C, and the next-to-last  layer of units is actually the output units.  Parameterized nonlinear constraints. Consider differentiable functions y; =f;(x, c;), which are the components of a vector  constraint function y=f(x, ct, c2, ..., c. Assuming that target values for the constraints are given, we form an error term  E=i(Y*-Y)TQ(Y*-Y). Differentiating with respect to w yields  T  VWE= -aw Q(Y*-Y)  OXT ayT  - -aw ax Q(Y -Y). (10)  This equation differs from the linear case in that x is transformed nonlinearly before comparison with the target, and the  weighted error vector is first multiplied by the transpose of a matrix that is no longer constant, but depends on the value of  x. This matrix, (ay/ax), is the Jacobian matrix of the contraint function f.  If the values of the parameters are known a priori, then a variety of techniques are applicable to the computation described  by Eq. (10). For example, a fixed network containing the appropriate nonlinear activation functions can be constructed to  implement the transformation y=f(x, ct, cz, ..., c. The Jacobian  s Inequalities are discussed below. Note also that a constraint such as x;=x; is rewritten as x;-xj =0, a linear constraint  with a target value of zero.  CONSTRAINED SUPERVISED LEARNING 405  matrix of the network can be obtained through backpropagation. Alternatively the constraint functions can be differentiated  analytically, treating the parameters as constants, and the Jacobian matrix can then be computed directly. The  parameterization may provide hints as to the most efficient implementation of the computation.  Unknown parameters. If the values of the parameters are unknown, then the Jacobian matrix (8y/8x) cannot be evaluated and the  gradient in Eq. (10) cannot be determined directly. In this section I discuss two approaches to obtaining estimates of the  gradient when the parameters are unknown.  The case of unknown parameters is a realistic model in many situations. Consider for example the constraints imposed on  pursuit eye movements by parameters such as the focal length of the lens and the distance between the eyes. Maturational  factors change the values of these parameters, as do environmental factors such as the presence of eyeglasses, therefore a  fixed internal parameterization is inadequate. Similar comments apply to the constraints imposed on reaching movements by the  linked structure of the arm. Such kinematic constraints can be defined in terms of parameterized relationships between joint  angles and spatial coordinates. As the organism matures these parameters change and the internal estimates of the parameters  must change accordingly. Furthermore, when external objects are grasped and manipulated additional unknown parameters are  introduced.  One approach to obtaining estimates of the gradient is to first obtain estimates of the unknown parameters. The problem of  obtaining estimates of the parameters of a function of a known form is a classical problem in statistics and a variety of  techniques from nonlinear regression are applicable. In the context of the current paper it is convenient to utilize a layered  network to perform the regression. Nonlinear regression is a standard application of supervised learning algorithms in which  the training set is a collection of pairs (x, y) sampled from the function f. The network model has the form 9 = f(x, c,, cz,  ..., c, where the weights c; are internal estimates of the parameters. The weights are adjusted by gradient descent in the  error measure  L= .~ - (yi-Yi)T (yi-M,  which is the sum of squared residuals taken across the n samples in the training set. An alternative approach to obtaining an  estimate of the requisite Jacobian matrix is to utilize an auxiliary network to approximate f. The internal structure of such  a network need have no special relationship to the parameterization of the constraint function as long as the input-output  behavior of the network approximates f sufficiently well. In particular, if the input-output behavior of the network is  sufficiently accurate then the Jacobian matrix that is obtained by backpropagation will be a reasonable approximation of the  true Jacobian matrix, regardless of the network parameterization. The network model in this case has the general form  406 MICHAEL I. JORDAN  y = f(x, v), where f is a family of functions, parameterized by the weight vector v, that serve to approximate the true  constraint function. The weight vector v is adjusted by gradient descent in L as before.  As shown in Fig. 2, the model of the constraint function is an auxiliary network that is adjoined to the output units of the  primary learning network. This figure is the generalization of Fig. 1 to the case of a nonlinear constraint function with  unknown parameters. Once the weights of the auxiliary network converge to acceptable values (as determined by the magnitude of  the error measure L), they are fixed and the learning of the weights of the primary network can proceed. The latter learning  procedure is conceptually identical to that described in conjunction with Fig. 1: Errors are generated at the output units of  the auxiliary network and are propagated backward to the output units of the primary network. Using Eq. (8), we can describe  this process by the transformation  aXT Q(Y*-y), (11)  where (ay/ax) is the Jacobian matrix of the auxiliary network. The transformed error vector is then propagated backward into  the primary network where the weights are changed. Using Eq. (7), with the error term Q(x*-x;) replaced by the generalized  error term (ay/ax)T Q(y* -y) from Eq. (11), we obtain  axT ay T  0E= - aW ax Q(y -y).  Comparing this equation with Eq. (10), it is seen that the use of the auxiliary network involves replacing the Jacobian matrix  (ay/ax) with an estimated Jacobian matrix (ay/ax). The other terms in the gradient computation remain the same.  To summarize, the case of constraints with unknown parameters involves a two-phase learning process. In the first phase the  weights of an auxiliary network are adjusted so as to estimate the unknown parameters (or more generally to approximate the  unknown constraint function). In the second phase the weights of  Primary network Auxiliary network  Output Units  FIG. 2. An auxiliary network that serves as a model of the constraint function. The auxiliary network  is adjoined to the output units of the primary learning network.  CONSTRAINED SUPERVISED LEARNING 407  the auxiliary network are held fixed and errors are transformed by propagating them backward through the auxiliary network and  down into the primary network where the weights are changed. This two-phase process can be used to implement a large class of  nonlinear constraints.  The technique of using an auxiliary network as a model of an unknown constraint function can be extended in a number of  directions. Jordan and Rumelhart (in press) provide a general discussion of the role of learned internal models in supervised  learning problems and show how to utilize such models in the control of an unknown dynamical system. Jordan and Jacobs (1990)  address the problem of time delays and discuss the problem of simultaneous estimation and control. Jordan (1990) describes an  application of these ideas to a theory of motor learning.  Linear and nonlinear inequalities. It is possible to combine the ideas of the previous sections by allowing don't-care  conditions and inequalities to refer to the elements of the y* vector. Thus, a general form of the error functional for  configurational constraints is given by  E = z (y* - y)T QH(y* - y),  (12)  where H is a diagonal matrix given by  if i e Sl  if i e Sz and y; 5 y* if i e S3 and y; >,y* otherwise,  and where S,, S2, and S3 are sets containing the indices for the don't-care conditions, the "less-than" inequalities, and the  "greater-than" inequalities, respectively. Note that this formulation includes cases of don't-care conditions and inequalities  defined directly on the output x; certain of the functions f may simply pick out particular elements from x.  Other optimality criteria on x. As noted in the Introduction, it is straightforward to introduce further optimality criteria  given as functions of x. Such functions simply appear among the functions f . For example, a minimum norm criterion would  appear as f (x) = x'x, where the target value for this constraint would be zero. This type of constraint differs from those  considered earlier, however, in that the error is not normally assumed to go to zero, and thus a gradient will always be  generated. To prevent a local minimum in which this gradient is matched (in the opposite direction) by a gradient from those  error components that should go to zero, the system should decrease the gain of the optimality constraint (the ith column of  the matrix Q) to zero over iterations.  Discussion. The approach described in this section generalizes the form of the error vector in supervised learning algorithms.  Rather than forming an error vector  408 MICHAEL I. JORDAN  by direct comparison of the output x with some target x*, the proposal is to compute a term QH(y*-y) that measures how far the  current output is from meeting a set of constraints, and then to convert this term into an error vector by multiplying by an  estimate of the transpose of the Jacobian matrix of the constraint function. It is worth pointing out that the same algorithm  applies whether or not there are excess degrees of freedom (excess degrees of freedom arise from a manyto-one constraint  function, or zero diagonal entries in H).  When there are excess degrees of freedom, the configurational constraints associated with a particular input vector implicitly  specify a region in which the image of the vector must lie. The excess degrees of freedom are resolved in a choice of a  particular output vector by factors that influence the path taken toward the region on learning trials for that input. The  major such factor is generalization from the constraints associated with other input vectors. That is, for input vectors that  are nearby in the input space, the paths taken toward the corresponding regions in the output space are interdependent, via  the shared weights of the network. This is an expanded role for generalization, beyond its normal role as an interpolative  mechanism.  It is also worth nothing that the class of interpolative effects that can be obtained in a network are broadened when  configurational constraints are used. For example, a pail of input vectors that are orthogonal can still influence one  another's output, through the intermediary of a third vector whose desired output is specified with configurational  constraints. To see this, consider input vectors q,, q2, and qs, such that q, and q3 are orthogonal, and q2 lies between q,  and q, Let q, be required to map to a target vector x *, let q2 be required to map into a region R2 defined by a set of  configurational constraints, and let q3 be a test vector. Suppose that when q, is not in the stimulus ensemble, the q2 -+ RZ  mapping is resolved in the choice of an output vector x2 distant from x * (that is, on the far side of Rz ). When q3 is  presented as a test vector, the output x3 will tend also to be distant from x,, because of generalization from q2 to q3. On  the other hand, if q, is added to the stimulus ensemble, then the solution x2 will be displaced within the region RZ , closer  to x *. By generalization, if q3 is now presented as a test vector, the output x3 will also be closer to x,. Thus, the  presence of q, in the stimulus ensemble has an effect on the output evoked by q3, even though q, and q3 are orthogonal.  Another approach to resolving excess degrees of freedom is to include other classes of explicit constraints in the  optimization functional, by expanding the scope of the optimization problem. The temporal constraints discussed in the next  section are illustrative of this approach.  TEMPORAL CONSTRAINTS  Terminology. The following terminology will be adopted for the remainder of the paper.  The outputs x are members of a vector space referred to as output space. Output  CONSTRAINED SUPERVISED LEARNING 409  space is mapped into target space by a many-to-one constraint function f(x).The vectors y, y, and y* are all members of  target space.  To solve a sequential imitation problem, a system must take as input target sequences y;', yi*, ..., yn~, for each j,  including specifications as to which vector components are to be treated as inequalities or don't-care conditions, and produce  output sequences x;, x2, ..., x1., such that x E R j*, for all i and for all j, where R;' denotes the region in output space  where the quadratic form (y'-f(x ))TQHi(y;`-f(x;)) is minimized.  Characterization of temporal constraints. Temporal constraints appear as functions on a sequence xt, xz, ..., X5 For  example, it might be required that (x; - x; _ J )T (x; - x, _ ,) < d, for all i, and some scalar d. One approach to  implementing constraints of this form is to treat them as configurational constraints and apply the techniques of previous  sections. This can be done by juxtaposing the actions x; in an output vector [x; I x2 ( xn]T, which represents the entire  sequence, with each action being stored in a spatially distinct buffer indexed by sequential position. However, there are  characteristic differences between configurational constraints and temporal constraints that this approach ignores. First, for  configurational constraints it is natural for there to be a fixed number of components in the domain of the constraints.  However, for temporal constraints and sequences, it is more natural to allow the number of actions n to be arbitrary. Second,  any arbitrary subset of components {x;} may participate in a configurational constraint, whereas temporal constraints tend to  involve actions that are nearby in time. As will be seen, this allows a different implementation strategy for temporal  constraints. Third, configurational constraints typically arise from fixed structural relations in the effector system and/or  environment. Temporal constraints ordinarily do not have such an interpretation; rather, they arise from dynamical properties  of systems. Furthermore, treating temporal constraints structurally by storing actions in spatial buffers makes the  implementation of configurational constraints more difficult. The (learned) constraint function f(x) must be copied across  buffer locations, and learning at any one position must generalize to other positions. Finally, it is quite possible to have  configurational constraints apply across time without using spatial buffers. This is achieved when some of the output  variables x; are actually the time derivatives G; of underlying variables v,. Indeed, it may often be sensible to have units  for both v and v (Jordan, 1990).  Sequential networks. The preceding discussion suggests that in order to implement configurational constraints with efficiency  and generality, it is preferable to have a single output position at which actions appear dynamically in time. Configurational  constraints can then be handled with a single auxiliary network that is connected to this output position. This architectural  constraint also implies  To simplify the notation, explicit reference to the parameterization of the constraint function is dropped in the remainder of  the paper.  s In what follows, the sequence superscript j is dropped for readability.  410 MICHAEL I. JORDAN  that temporal constraints are to be treated by comparing values produced at different moments in time but at the same physical  location.  An example of a network with the required architecture is the "sequential network" depicted in Fig. 3 (Jordan, 1980b). This  network is able to produce sequences of actions as dynamically changing patterns of activation across the output units, due to  the recurrent connections arriving at the state units. These connections cause the activations of the state units to change,  thereby providing a time-varying input to the layered network which learns the action sequences. The computation of the state  vector is different during the learning phase and the performance phase. During learning, the desired activations of the  output units are fed back through the recurrent connections to the state units. During performance, the actual activations of  the output units are fed back. The total input vector also contains the activation pattern on the plan units, which are fed by  the external input to the network. The plan stays constant within a sequence, but varies between sequences to allow different  sequences to be learned by the same network. The network is a dynamical system in which both the output function and the  next-state function change as the weights in the forward path of the network are modified through learning.  A particular interconnection scheme for the state units is shown in Fig. 4. (This is the scheme used for the simulations  reported later in the paper in which all but one of the simulations use networks with only two state units.) These state units  are linear, with fixed cross-connections of ~ and -~, and fixed auto-connections of it. It is easy to show that this linear  system is a second-order filter with eigenvalues p i~. It therefore oscillates with a frequency determined by the phase  angle tan-'(/p) of the eigenvalues. The state units are also driven by the recurrent connections (with fixed weights of fl)  from the output units.  FIG. 3. A sequential network. During learning, the desired activations of the output units are fed  back to the state units. During performance, the actual activations are fed back.  CONSTRAINED SUPERVISED LEARNING 411  FIG. 4. State units and their interconnections.  In previous study of this type of network (Jordan, 1986a), there were no crossconnections between the state units (the state  units constituted a first-order filter). Such a network could also have been used for the simulations reported here; however,  these simulations all involve repetitive sequences, which are more easily learned if the state itself has internal oscillatory  behavior.  A temporal smoothness constraint. Suppose that the configurational constraints on a sequential network having three output  units are of the following form at times i and i + 1:  (x, x32 * 1.6~, j x2 + x3 * 0.4}.  We also require 0 S xk <1 1, for all k. Of the infinite number of solution sequences, the following solution is "best," if it  is desired to perform the sequence smoothly and quickly:  1.0 1.0 0.6 , 0.4 . 0.0 0.0  For this solution, x2 is required to change by only 0.2 units between time steps. The choices of x2 = 0.6 and x2 = 0.4 force  x, = 1.0 at time step i, and x3 = 0.0 at i + 1. The don't-care condition on x3 at i allows the value 0.0 to be anticipated, so  that no change need occur for x3 between time steps. Similarly, the don't-care condition on x, at i + 1 allows the value 1.0  to spread forward in time.  One approach to obtaining solutions of this kind is to enforce a smoothness constraint at the output units, such that the  values of the components of x;  480/36/3-7  412 MICHAEL I. JORDAN  change as little as possible over time. A simple smoothness constraint is achieved by minimizing a functional of the form  _1 n  I 2 .Y (xr-xr-1)T f=2  where each term is one-half the squared Euclidean distance between successive output vectors. Differentiating these terms with  respect to the weights w yields  n ax; ax;_ 1 T  OWI= Y (xr-x7-1)  = 2 (aw aw )  - - axT a x'' l aW 1 (xr-xr-1)+ aW (X'_.-xi)t, i=2  (13)  where (ax;/Ow) depends both on the current input vector q; and on the current value of w. Since w does not change until an  entire pass through the set of sequences has been made, the matrices (ax;/Ow) and (0x;_1/0w) are evaluated at a common value  of w, and a simple implementation of Eq. (13) is therefore possible. We assume that each unit in the sequential network stores  the value of its activation at the previous time step. The second term in the equation is then computed by backpropagating the  error vector x;-1-xi (compare Eq. (3)). The vector x;-1 can be thought of as a "target" for x;. To compute the first term in  the equation, each unit temporarily restores the previous value of its activation, and the error vector x; - x; - t is  propagated backward.'  The smoothness constraint is similar to the temporal difference methods presented by Sutton (1987) as a model of classical  conditioning. In fact, Eq. (13) is essentially the same as Sutton's TD(0) algorithm, but proceeding backward and forward in  time simultaneously. Also, in Sutton's algorithm, there is an ultimate value to be predicted forward in time; this grounds the  algorithm. In the current case, there is no ultimate value to be predicted in either direction. The algorithm is grounded by  the configurational constraints, which prevent the network from minimizing I trivially by choosing x 1 = x2 = ... = xn.  Other temporal constraints. By adapting the techniques discussed previously for configurational constraints, it is possible to  minimize functionals of the form  n  I 2 iY (g(xr)-g(xr-1))T RG(g(xi)-g(xi-1)), =2  where the function g allows successive vectors to be compared in a domain other than the output domain, and the matrices R and  G allow don't-care conditions, inequalities, and gain parameters.  6 It is actually the derivative of 0 that must be restored, but for a logistic function, the derivative is a function of the  activation: 0' = z(1 - z).  CONSTRAINED SUPERVISED LEARNING 413  Another class of temporal constraints allows comparisons between vectors at three or more time steps. Although this  generalization is conceptually straightforward, the implementation becomes more complex. A better approach to using  higher-order temporal constraints may be to make first-order comparisons in networks whose activations have an interpretation  as the velocities or accelerations of some underlying system.  Combining configurational and temporal constraints. The smoothness constraint is of interest only when it is combined with  configurational constraints that specify different regions of output space at different times. We therefore consider the  functional J of Eq. (1) which is the sum of functionals J' that combine configurational and temporal constraints. For the jth  sequence, J' is given by  where  of n: J'=1 Y (Yi*  -Y; )rQH;(Yi* -Yi)+~ (xi-xi_i)TR(x;  2  r=2  Y; = f(x; )  Upon differentiating with respect to w, it is found that terms from the first and second summations combine, yielding  Ji = - ax' T aYiT QHj(Y i `" Ow ax; '  n, ax'T ay  - Y ' (-QHj(Y -Yi)+A.R(x ,=z aw ax  of ax iT =z  aw t R(xi-x;-,). (15)  This expression has the following interpretation. For i = 1, only the constraints outside of the summation are computed. For i  > 1, terms in the first summation are computed by a single backpropagation pass, in which QH (y ' - y) is computed at the  target units and propagated through the auxiliary network, yielding a transformed error to which AR(x _ , - x;) is added at  the output units, with the resulting sum being propagated into the sequential network. Terms in the second summation are  computed within the sequential network alone, using restored activation values as discussed in the previous section.  The smoothness term does not normally reach zero (zero smoothness implies that all actions in the sequence are the same), thus  the parameter .1 must go to zero over iterations, so that a positive smoothness term does not prevent the configurational  constraints from being achieved. In the simulations reported in the next section, this was done by defining A to be  proportional to the total error in the configurational constraint term. Another possibility, not pursued here, is to let ~.  vary in proportion to (OP/OA), thereby treating A as a Lagrange multiplier.  414 MICHAEL I. JORDAN  Geometrically, the optimization problem posed in Eq. (14) is depicted in Fig. 5. The regions R ' are defined implicitly as  minima of the configurational constraint terms. These regions may overlap if there are don't-care conditions or inequalities.  The system must find a trajectory that passes through the regions in the correct order. There are many such candidate  trajectories; the smoothness constraint defines particular candidate trajectories with minimal variation. To find such  trajectories, I have proposed using gradient descent based on Eq. (15). It is worth noting that this approach modifies  candidate trajectories indirectly, by changing the parameters of an underlying dynamical system (the sequential network). That  is, it is more accurate to say that the learning rule modifies the vector field of a dynamical system, rather than modifying  particular stored trajectories. As suggested by Fig. 5, this has implications for the region of output space in the  neighborhood of a learned trajectory, due to the continuity of the vector field.  Gradient descent in J is susceptible to problems with local minima as are all gradient descent procedures. With respect to the  sequential imitation problem, that is, the problem of finding sequences that meet the configurational constraints, local  minima have been found to be less of a problem in practice than is the case with standard backpropagation. The smoothness  constraint links the steps taken for each x; with respect to the error in the configurational constraints; thus, for the  system to be in a local minimum, it must simultaneously be in local minima for each of these searches conceived separately.  Also, excess degrees of freedom in the mapping f(x) decrease the chances of reaching local minima. This is because excess  degrees of freedom increase the number of rows in the transpose Jacobian matrix, thereby generally decreasing the size of its  null-space. On the other hand, excess degrees of freedom greatly increase the size of solution set, so that there are a large  FIG. 5. A geometrical representation of the sequential imitation problem. The vector field defines the dynamics of the  sequential network that generates candidate trajectories.  CONSTRAINED SUPERVISED LEARNING 415  number of local minima with respect to the smoothness constraint. In simulations with the planar manipulators to be discussed  in the next section, it has often been found that solutions in distant parts of output space have similar smoothness values.  This may be a problem or a virtue depending on the phenomena being modeled (cf. Jordan, 1990). Further constraints can be  added if certain canonical solutions are to be preferred. For example, a term TE"j I (x; -x()' (x; - x(')) can be added to J  where x( is a canonical "low-energy" position. When large initial values of ~ and y are used, the system will be biased to  finding solutions such that all output vectors are close to x(.  SIMULATIONS  In this section, I present the results of a series of simulation experiments that demonstrate the computational viability of  the approach and serve to illustrate several of its properties.  Architectures, Environments, Tasks, and Procedures  The domain chosen for the simulation experiments is that of planar kinematic manipulators, the task being to make specified  sequences of "button presses" in the plane. As shown in Fig. 6, the manipulator has two translational degrees of freedom (its  base can be moved up and down, and left and right) and four revolute joints, for a total of six degrees of freedom. Output  space is therefore a six-dimensional space of translational and joint angle displacements. Given that the manipulator has a  single endpoint, target space is two-dimensional Cartesian space. There are four excess degrees of freedom. Thus, as shown in  Fig. 7, there are a wide variety of postures corresponding to each Cartesian position.  The constraint function f(x) linking output space and target space is the forward kinematic function of the manipulator, and  the Jacobian matrix of f(x) is the "Jacobian" of the manipulator (Paul, 1981). The task to be solved is the inverse  44 X1 0  FIG. 6. A six degree-of-freedom planar manipulator. The variables x, and xZ are translational degrees of freedom. The  remaining four variables are revolute degrees of freedom.  416 MICHAEL 1. JORDAN  FIG. 7. Various inverse kinematic solutions. Each of the configurations shown maps into the same endpoint position in  Cartesian space.  kinematics problem: Given target points in Cartesian space, find corresponding values for the output variables. The system  must find sequences of inverse kinematic solutions along a trajectory, and do so in such a way that the solutions for points  nearby in time differ minimally. To do this, the system must take advantage of the excess degrees of freedom of the  manipulator.  The network used to control the manipulator is of the form shown in Fig. 8. The network is composed of two subnetworks-a  sequential subnetwork and an auxiliary model subnetwork. In the experiments reported below the sequential subnetwork has six  plan units, four hidden units, and six output units. These output units constitute the output from the network as a whole and  represent the degrees of freedom of the manipulator. The auxiliary model network has four hidden units and two target units.  The activations of the target units are fed back to a pair of state units, which are interconnected as shown in Fig. 4. In  general the state units also receive feedback from the output units, as shown in Fig. 8; however, in the experiments reported  below this feedback path is absent.  Each of the output units computes its activation by passing the weighted sum of its input through a logistic function with  asymptotes at -1 and 1,  where  Si -Y_ wtlxl.  The activations of the first two output units are interpreted as translational  Target Output Hidden Units Units Units  417  FIG. 8. The sequential network conjoined with an auxiliary model network. See text for a full  description.  displacements. The remaining four output units represent the sines of the angles of the four joints. Since these activations  are real numbers between -1 and 1, the angles are restricted to displacements between -(n/2) and +(rt/2) radians. The target  units are also logistic units with activations ranging between -1 and 1, where each unit represents one dimension of the  Cartesian workspace.' The hidden units in both subnetworks are also logistic units, with asymptotes of 0 and 1.  For the network shown in Fig. 8 to be able to learn sequences on the basis of Cartesian errors, it must first learn a model of  the forward kinematics. This was done by repeatedly choosing random activation patterns x for the output units (chosen from a  uniform distribution) and learning the mapping from the output units to the target units by comparing the output of the target  units y to the actual Cartesian position y of the manipulator endpoint and using the backpropagation learning rule to change  the weights in the auxiliary network to reduce the discrepancy between y and y. After approximately 2000 trials, the average  discrepancy was judged to be sufficiently small, and the auxiliary network learning phase was ended. From this point on, the  weights in the path from the output units to the  ' There are many other possible network representations of output space and target space than the relatively direct variable  encodings used here. For example, values in both spaces can be coarse-coded (Hinton, McClelland, & Rumelhart, 1986;  Kuperstein, 1987), yielding increased generalization, decreased learning time, and better resistance to noise and damage. For  the purpose of ;demonstrating the current approach, however, the direct representational scheme is sufficient.  418 MICHAEL I. JORDAN  target units were fixed, and the remaining weights in the network were learned as the network attempted to perform sequences.  For the sequence learning experiments, a learning trial involved the following procedure. First, the plan vector for the  sequence being learned was clamped on the plan units. For these experiments, plan vectors were simply particular random  vectors, one for each sequence. Next, the state units were initialized with the pattern <0,1>. This started the oscillatory  behavior on these units. At each time step, activation passed forward to the output units, determining a posture for the  manipulator. Activation also passed forward to the target units, thereby instantiating a particular Jacobian transpose in the  auxiliary network. Incremental changes to the weights were then computed by backpropagation in accordance with Eq. (15). Units  then saved their current activations in a temporary location, to allow the smoothness constraint to be implemented at the next  time step. Finally, the target values were fed back through the recurrent links to the state units. It is important to  emphasize that external target values, rather than the outputs of the target units, are fed back through the recurrent  connections during learning. This allows the learning process to proceed independently at each successive time step and it  allows the system to converge faster than would otherwise be the case (Jordan, 1986a). Of course, when the network performance  is tested, no external target values are available, and actual target unit output values are fed back. This procedure was  followed on each successive time step, with the target position changing to follow the target sequence.  Results  Sequence learning. In the first simulation, the network learned the cyclic sequence shown in Fig. 9. The manipulator was  required to touch the buttons in  IN  i  Fla. 9. A sequence to be learned. The task for the manipulator is to learn to move its endpoint around the square, starting  and Finishing at y=.  CONSTRAINED SUPERVISED LEARNING 419  counterclockwise order. Figure 10 shows the results on selected trials during the learning process. In this figure, each panel  displays an overlay of the position of the manipulator at four successive time steps during a particular learning trial. As  can be seen in the last panel, by trial 77 the system has found a solution for the sequential imitation problem. Note that the  solution that the system has found is a smooth one; despite the infinite number of postures that are possible for each target  position, the postures chosen at each time step are related to the postures chosen at nearby time steps. Thus, the values for  the output degrees of freedom need not change greatly between time steps and the trajectory appears to be reasonably  coordinated.  During the learning process the network stores the solution it is developing, and after learning it can perform the learned  sequence if it is given the corresponding plan vector as input. The same network can learn many different sequences.  Trial 0  Trial 10  0 0  0 0  0  Trial 20  Trial 30  0 0  0 0  Trial 50 Trial 77  FIG. 10. Selected epochs during the learning of the sequence. Each panel shows an overlay of four successive time steps.  420 MICHAEL I. JORDAN  Generalization and interference. In a further simulation, the network learned a second sequence that was a shifted version of  the previously learned sequence. That is, each button position was shifted downward with respect to its position in the  original sequence. It was expected that the previous learning should generalize, so that learning time for the second sequence  should decrease. As shown in Fig. 11, this was in fact the case. After only five learning trials on the second sequence, the  system has nearly found a solution.  Generalization can hinder learning as well, when previous learning starts the system with weights that are far from a solution  for a particular sequence. Also, solutions that are suboptimal with respect to the smoothness constraint are likely to be  found if they are too close to the initial weights. In general, the ability of the system to find good solutions for each of  several different sequences depends on the relationships between the sequences. The patterns of interference or generalization  that are obtained are not absolute, but depend on the particular representation used for the output degrees of freedom and the  target degrees of freedom. Particular symmetries in these representations lead to particular kinds of generalizations.  Using excess degrees of freedom. Figures 12 and 13 show the results of the network learning a pair of sequences that are  straight lines in Cartesian space. In these figures, the button at the medial position is at the same position in Cartesian  space. However, because of the smoothness constraint, the inverse kinematic solutions found by the network are different in  the two figures. This is an example of motor equivalence (Hebb, 1949): The forms chosen for an action depend on the temporal  context in which the action is embedded, even though the target point is the same. The system is able to take advantage of its  excess degrees of freedom to blend actions, while still respecting nonlinear constraints that require the endpoints to be at  particular positions at successive time steps.  The system appears to have access to a wide variety of possible inverse kinematic  Trial 5  FIG. 11. Learning a shifted sequence. All of the targets have been shifted downward with respect to the targets in Fig. 9.  CONSTRAINED SUPERVISED LEARNING 421  FIG. 12. The solution found by the network when presented with a linear sequence in Cartesian space.  solutions and can find different solutions that are appropriate for different temporal contexts. This is demonstrated by the  postures shown earlier in Fig. 7; they are in fact solutions found by the network for the same target point embedded in  different sequences.  Interpolation. An effect of the continuity of the mappings in the network is that it is possible to scale the speed at which  the system performs a sequence by reparameterizing the state trajectories. This can be done by changing the weights ~ and p  between the state units so that the phase angle tan-I(~/h) becomes smaller or larger. To demonstrate this scaling property, a  network first learned the cyclic sequence of Fig. 9. Then the weights y and ~ were modulated so as to change the  FIG. 13. The solution found by the network when presented with a second linear sequence in Cartesian space. This sequence  shares a target with the previous sequence.  422 MICHAEL I. JORDAN  phase angle by one-fourth. Also, the state units were updated four times more frequently than the remainder of the network.  The resulting trajectory is shown in Fig. 14, where it can be seen that the manipulator automatically interpolates between the  learned positions.  Nonlinear dynamics. A network with feedback connections from the target units to the state units can exhibit interesting  nonlinear dynamical phenomena (Jordan, 1986b). After learning the cyclic sequence shown in Fig. 9, the network was initialized  with random values for the state units. When activation from these units was passed through to the output units, the  manipulator moved to the position shown at the top of Fig. 15. This position was one which the manipulator had never visited.  However, due to dynamics of the network, the manipulator endpoint tends to be drawn in to the learned trajectory. Starting the  system in a variety of other positions, including inside the learned trajectory, led to similar results, suggesting that the  learned trajectory is a periodic attractor in target space. In a further experiment, the network learned to perform the same  sequence in a clockwise order, in the context of a different plan. When the system was started in random positions, the  manipulator endpoint was drawn in to one of the two learned cycles, depending on which plan was present on the plan units.  Inaccuracies ih the model. A final simulation considered the question of inaccuracies in the auxiliary network's model of the  forward kinematics. This issue is of relevance for several reasons. First, it may be difficult in complex environments to  obtain a complete model, and questions arise concerning the efficacy of a model which is only qualitatively good. Second, it  may be desirable to explore the forward kinematics and learn sequences at the same time, and thus the sequence learning  FIG. 14. Performance when the state trajectory is reparameterized. The figure shows an overlay of the manipulator position at  16 successive time steps.  CONSTRAINED SUPERVISED LEARNING 423  FIG. 15. The network is initialized with random values on the state units. The resulting manipulator position is the topmost  position in the figure. The figure shows the manipulator position at three succeeding time steps.  must make do with a partial model. Finally, the robustness of the learning system as a whole depends on its robustness to  damage to the model or change in the physical system being modeled.  To address these issues, an experiment was conducted in which random noise was added to the weights in the auxiliary network  after the model was learned. The noise was rather large-the power in the noise was one-half the power in the original weights.  After the weights were distorted in this manner, the network attempted to learn the cyclic sequence shown in Fig. 9, with the  distorted weights held fixed. The results are shown in Fig. 16. As can be seen, it was still possible for  Trial 102  FIG. 16. The sequence of configurations that the network finds when the forward kinematic model is inaccurate.  424 MICHAEL I. JORDAN  the system to find an exact solution to the problem, even with a distorted model. The distortion had two effects on the  solution: first, it took longer to learn the sequence than before, and second, the solution was fairly awkward; that is, the  trajectory in output space was less smooth than before. Both of the effects are due to the fact that the system has an  incorrect version of the Jacobian transpose; thus, the direction that the system moves in output space is no longer down the  true gradient. However, because the error vectors y* - y; can still be computed correctly, sequences for which the output  vectors x; are in the correct regions R* are still stable points of the algorithm. These stable points can be reached if the  biased steps in output space have a positive inner product with the true gradient.  CONCLUSIONS  This paper has discussed aspects of the general problem of constrained supervised learning. I have presented methods whereby a  general class of constraints can be imposed on the forms of the actions a system must learn. This approach extends the  applicability of the supervised learning paradigm to inverse learning problems, in which there are in general many possible  target vectors corresponding to each input vector. By using configurational constraints to specify target regions, such  indeterminacy need not be resolved a priori in the choice of training set. That is, it is not necessary for the "teacher" to  choose a unique target vector corresponding to each input vector. Rather, the resolution of the indeterminacy becomes part of  the learning algorithm. Such resolution may occur in several ways. First, implicit constraints on the solutions found by the  learning algorithm are provided by the network architecture and the topology of the set of input vectors seen during training.  Ordinarily, these constraints are said to provide for generalization from the training data to novel inputs; they can play a  related role in the choice of appropriate output vectors for indeterminate training inputs. Second, if such implicit  constraints yield unsatisfactory results, then additional explicit configurational constraints may be added to the quantity  being optimized. Finally, the form of an output vector can be made to be sensitive to a larger context than that defining the  configurational constraints. This can be done by enlarging the scope of the optimization problem to include other classes of  constraints, such as the temporal constraints discussed here.  REFERENCES  ACKLEY, D. H., HINTON, G. E., & SEJNOWSKI, T. J. (1985). A learning algorithm for Boltzmann machines. Cognitive Science, 9,  147-169.  BARTO, A. G., & ANANDAN, P. (1985). Pattern recognizing stochastic learning automata. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and  Cybernetics, 15, 360-375.  BERNSTEIN, N. (1967). The coordination and regulation of movements. London: Pergamon. EYKHOFF, P. (1974). System  identification. New York: Wiley.  CONSTRAINED SUPERVISED LEARNING 425  GROSSBERG, S. (1982). Studies of mind and brain. Dordrecht, Holland: Reidel. HEBB, D. O. (1949). The organization of behavior.  New York: Wiley.  HINTON, G. E. (1987). Connectionist learning procedures (Tech. Rep. CMU-CS-87-115). Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie-Mellon  University, Department of Computer Science.  HORNIK, K., STINCHCOMBE, M., & WHITE, H. (1989). Multilayer feedforward networks are universal approximators. Neural Networks,  2, 359-366.  JORDAN, M. I. (1986a). Serial order: A parallel, distributed processing approach (Tech. Rep. ICS-8604). La Jolla, CA:  University of California, Institute for Cognitive Science.  JORDAN, M. 1. (1986b). Attractor dynamics and parallelism in a connectionist sequential machine. In Proceedings of the eighth  annual conference of the cognitive science society. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. JORDAN, M. I. (1990). Motor learning and the  degrees of freedom problem. In M. Jeannerod (Ed.), Attention and performance, XIII. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  JORDAN, M. L, & JACOBS, R. A. (1990). Learning to control an unstable system with forward modeling. In D. Touretzky (Ed.),  Advances in neural information processing. Systems 2. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.  JORDAN, M. I., & RUMELHART, D. E. (in press). Forward models: Supervised learning with a distal teacher, Cognitive Science.  KELSO, J. A. S. (1986). Pattern formation in speech and limb movements involving many degrees of freedom. Experimental Brain  Research, 15, 105-126.  KUPERSTEIN, M. (1987). Adaptive visual-motor coordination in multijoint robots using parallel architecture. IEEE Conference on  Robotics and Automation, pp 1595-1602.  MILLER, W. T. (1987). Sensor-based control of robotic manipulators using a general learning algorithm. IEEE Journal of  Robotics and Automation, 3, 157-165.  OPPENHEIM, A. V., & SCHAFER, R. W. (1975). Digital signal processing. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.  PAUL, R. P. C. (1981). Robot manipulators. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  PERKELL, J. S., & KLATT, D. H. (EDS.) (1986). Variability and invariance in speech processes. Hillsdale NJ: Erlbaum.  RUMELHART, D. E., HINTON, G. E., & WILLIAMS, R. J. (1986). Learning internal representations by error propagation. In D. E.  Rumelhart & J. L. McClelland (Eds.), Parallel distributed processing: Volume 1. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  SUTTON, R. S. (1987). Learning to predict by the methods of temporal differences (Tech. Rep. TR87509.1). Waltham, MA: GTE  Laboratories.  TURVEY, M. T. (1977). Preliminaries to a theory of action with reference to vision. In R. Shaw & J. Bransford (Eds.),  Perceiving, acting, and knowing: Toward an ecological psychology. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  WERBOS, P. (1987). Building and understanding adaptive systems: A statistical/numerical approach to factory automation and  brain research. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 17, 7-20.  WIDROW, B., & STEARNS, S. D. (1985). Adaptive signal processing. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.  RECEIVED: September 14, 1989