10.1016/0022-2496(92)90038-9
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 36, 235-268 (1992)  The Structure of Simple Reaction Time to Step-Function Signals  EHTIBAR N. DZHAFAROV  University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and The Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology  Simple reaction time to a step-function signal of amplitude A can be additively decomposed into a signal-dependent component,  T(A) (converging to zero as A increases), and a signalindependent component, R. The two components, however, are not mutually  independent, they both are increasing deterministic functions of a single random variable; T(A) =T(A,C) and R = R(C). C is  interpreted as a "criterion" or "inhibition factor" controlling simultaneously "readiness to detect" and "readiness to  respond." The model is not based on a priori distributional assumptions. RT percentiles of a given rank P computed across RT  distributions for different values of A, have a deterministic structure, RTp(A)=T(A,Cp)+R(Cp), where Cp is the Pth percentile  of C. Subtracting RTp(A*) for a very large A* from RTp(A), one gets an estimate of T(A, Cp), the Pth percentile of T(A).  Applying this to different values of P, one can a posteriori reconstruct the joint distribution of the two RT components. The  asymptotic consequences of this model (for sufficiently large A) are corroborated by data on the RT to instantaneous  displacements of a visual target. 1992 Academic Press, Inc.  1. INTRODUCTION  1.1. Brief Overview  Simple reaction time (RT) to a step-function signal tends to decrease as a function of signal amplitude. Assumptions  underlying this statement are that (a) step changes in a stimulus parameter occur from a fixed base level; (b) response is  required as soon as a change is detected (simple RT paradigm); and (c) the step changes (signals) form a unidimensional  "strength" continuum, i.e., their perceptual salience (detectability and/or subjective magnitude) increases with amplitude.  The RT decrease is best documented for step increases in physical intensity (Pieron, 1920; Chocholle, 1940; Kohfeld, Santee, &  Wallace, 1981a, b; Luce, 1986), but it has also been shown for non-intensity "strength" signals, such as velocity of a light  Correspondence and requests for reprints should be sent to Ehtibar N. Dzhafarov, Department of Psychology, University of  Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 603 East Daniel Street, Champaign, Illinois 61820.  235  0022-2496/92 35.00  Copyright Cc~ 1992 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  236 EHTIBAR N. DZHAFAROV  OAS  a  N E  s s  300  zoo  100  0  0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5  R-2/3 (deg/sl-xis  FIG. 1. Mean and standard deviation of the RT to visual motion onset (step-function signal with respect to motion speed; from  an unpublished experiment by Dzhafarov, Sekuler, Allik, and Williams). The two statistics (computed over the RTs falling  between 100 and 1000 ms) are arithmetically averaged over two subjects, which is justifiable because the expected dependence  is linear with respect to theoretical parameters.  source (Ball & Sekuler, 1980; Tynan & Sekuler, 1982; Allik & Dzhafarov, 1984; Troscienko & Fahle, 1987; see Fig. 1).' The RT  decrease is typically presented in terms of the mean and variance of (censored) RT distributions, but a more general fact can  be stated: for a given percentile rank, RT percentile is a decreasing function of signal amplitude, except for the  close-to-margins percentiles, which show weak or no ordinal dependence on amplitude.  A theoretical framework for this dependence is provided by the idea of a process evoked by signal onset, developing in time  through successive stages, and terminating in an external response. Some stages notably (but not exclusively) motor ones, are  not influenced by signal amplitude: their total duration can be termed the signal-independent component of RT. The  complementary, signal-dependent, RT component decreases (stochastically) as a function of amplitude. There seems to be  `The linearizing transformation of velocity, A -213, in Fig. 1, as well as the linearizing transformation of displacement,  A-2, in Figs. 5, 7, 9, and 14 have been derived from an elaborated version of a motion detection model proposed by Dzhafarov  and Allik (Dzhafarov, 1982; Dzhafarov & Allik, 1984). The model is not discussed in this paper.  THE STRUCTURE OF SIMPLE REACTION TIME 237  a concensus that these two RT components are mutually independent random variables. In the best available survey of the  subject, Luce (1986, p. 97) expresses doubts that the independence hypothesis can be tested by psychophysical data. The  independence, therefore, is assumed primarily because of its mathematical simplicity. However, unless distributional  assumptions are made concerning the two RT components, the independence does not translate into simple algorithms for RT  decomposition.  To illustrate some difficulties, consider a model in which a signal of amplitude A initiates a deterministic process, 0(t, A),  developing in time, t. Detection occurs when this process reaches a random criterion level, C. Then detection time is a random  variable D =D(A, C), obtained by solving 0(t, A) =C for t:z D is identified as the signal-dependent RT component, and RT is  D(A, C) + F, where F denotes the total duration of signal-independent processes preceding and following the detection process.  According to the independence assumption, we have x; [RT(A)] = x; [D(A, C)] + k,(F] for cumulants Ki of any order i.  For a typical psychophysical model, once it predicts the value of D(A, C) for any given A and C, distributional assumptions  about C and F are not essential. However, rc;[D(A,C)] cannot be found without such assumptions, and to make the model testable  by RT data, the distribution of C will have to be derived from external considerations (such as the frequently misused  invocation of the central limit theorem), or else it will have to be estimated from data. In the former case, a failure of the  conjunction of the two hypotheses, about the function D(A, C) and the distribution of C, cannot be uniquely attributed to one  of them-an undesirable situation if the distributional assumptions are not essential for the model. When the distribution is  estimated from data, the model acquires too much freedom to be falsifiable by the observed x;[RT(A)], at least in a limited  range of i. The situation improves only if D(A, C) can be factorized into f(C) D,(A), in which case to fit the values of x;  [RT(A)] all one has to do is to find coefficients x; [ f(C)] and x; [F].  Even in this case, however, the empirical applicability is limited to low-order cumulants only, typically the mean and the  variance. High-order cumulants are difficult to estimate reliably, and they are sensitive to distribution tails and censoring  procedures (Ashby & Townsend, 1980; Luce, 1986; Ratcliff, 1979). There are compelling reasons to believe that the lower tails  of RT distributions contain false alarms mixed with signal-initiated responses, and the upper tails contain omission/  distraction responses (see Section 1.5). As a result, RT distributions should be censored before their cumulants are computed.  No censoring procedure, however, under the assumption of independence would separate "true" responses from signalunrelated  responses. In addition, any censoring procedure transforms the distribu  2 Here and throughout the text: (1) a symbol in boldface type, like H, indicates a random variable; (2) the same symbol in  regular type, like H, stands for a particular or arbitrary value of this variable; (3) the Pth percentile of a random variable  H is denoted by Hp. RT, when in mathematical expressions, should always be read as a single symbol: RT, RTp, etc. Note that  H(X) is a random variable depending on a parameter X, whereas H(X) is a deterministic function of a random variable X. All  random variables are assumed to vary between but not within trials.  238 EHTIBAR N. DZHAFAROV  tions of D and F in an unknown way and introduces both an unknown dependence of F on A and an unknown interdependence between  D and F. Consequently, the results of an analysis based on high-order RT cumulants (in fact beginning with the variance) will  depend critically on the exact values, or percentile ranks, below and above which the RT distributions are trimmed. The same  problems arise if the analysis is based on integral transforms of empirical RT distributions, rather than cumulants (see  Section 1.3).  These difficulties would have to be taken as inherent limitations of the RT analysis of sensory processing if there were no  reasonable and empirically testable alternatives to the assumption of independence. I show in this paper that this is not the  case: an alternative is proposed and empirically justified that greatly simplifies algorithms of RT decomposition and  considerably advances the analytical power of the RT paradigm. It is important to realize that mutual stochastic independence  of the two RT components can in no way be inferred from the fact that only one of them, by definition, depends on signal  amplitude: it is quite possible that both components depend on a common set of (signal-independent) random variables. In the  decomposition D(A, C) + F, the variable C is A-independent, and it is logically possible that F and C are interdependent,  inducing an interdependence between F and D.  In the simplest case, F might be a deterministic function of C, F = F(C ), inducing a deterministic relation between F and D,  for any given A. This possibility constitutes the essence of the RT decomposition model arrived at in this paper: the two RT  components are deterministic (monotonic) functions of a single signalindependent random variable. In a sense, this is a  conceptual opposite of the independence hypothesis. The decomposition model proposed is not based on parametric assumptions  about underlying distributions, but it allows one to reconstruct these distributions a posteriori. The model also provides  theoretical grounds for separating signal-initiated RTs from signal-unrelated responses.  Most of the theoretical predictions derived in this paper are related to the asymptotic behavior of RTs, as signal amplitude  tends to its upper limit. Their empirical corroboration, therefore, requires sufficiently large amplitudes. At the same time,  the model's applicability is only moderately limited: it is shown that at least for one class of signals all perfectly  detectable amplitudes are "sufficiently large." The major advantage of the asymptotic analysis is that it does not require  specific assumptions about sensory processes evoked by a given class of signals.  1.2. Basic Assumptions  Here I present two basic assumptions underlying all RT decomposition models considered in this paper. The discussion is  confined to "true" reactions, evoked by signal onset (signal-unrelated RTs are discussed in Section 1.5).  1. AdditiveDecomposition Assumption. RT to a signal of amplitude A can be decomposed as (see footnote 2 for notation)  RT(A)=D(A,2)+F, (1)  THE STRUCTURE OF SIMPLE REACTION TIME 239  where  (a) F > 0;  (b) Z is a set of random variables (not necessarily countable) such that the joint distribution of (F, 2) is independent of A;  (c) D(A, Z) > 0 is a strictly decreasing function of A for any value Z of the random set V  D(A) =D(A, 2) is a signal-dependent component of RT. It is a random variable because it (deterministically) depends on the  random set 2. It is "stochastically decreasing" as A increases because it is strictly decreasing for any given Z and the  distribution of 2 does not change with A. F is a signal-independent component of RT. The concept of "signal-independence"  should not be taken as meaning "stimulus-independence," which is a much stronger term. It is only assumed that the  distribution of (F, Z) does not vary as a function of amplitude of a specific stimulation parameter.  To appreciate the generality of Assumption 1, note that any random variable D(A) can be presented as a deterministic function  D of A and of some random variables that are A-independent themselves (see Lemma 1.2.1 and Corollary 1.2.1 below). The  assumption, therefore, does not impose any restrictions on the marginal distribution of D(A)=D(A, 2). Assumption 1 is only  violated if for any choice of 2 in Eq. (1), either the distribution of (F, 2) depends on A, or D(A, Z) does not decrease in A.  The following lemma shows that this cannot happen in intuitively a very important case, when for a given value of F all  percentiles of the conditional distribution of D(A) decrease with increasing A.  LEMMA 1.2.1.4 Let RT(A) = D(A) + F, where (1) F > 0 does not depend on A; and (2) D ,(A I F), the Pth percentile of D(A I F =  F) > 0, is a strictly decreasing function of A for any P. Then Assumption 1 is satisfied.  COROLLARY 1.2.1. Let RT(A) = D(A) + F, where (1) F > 0 does not depend on A; (2) Dp(A), the Pth percentile of D(A) > 0, is a  strictly decreasing function of A for any P; and (3) D(A) and F are mutually independent. Then Assumption 1 is satisfied.  This corollary shows that Assumption 1 is a direct generalization of the commonly accepted assumption of independence (see  Section 1.1), provided that D(A) decreases in all percentiles with increasing A.  ' Two technical comments: (a) the "value T' means, of course, the set of values for all components of the random set 2; (b)  here and throughout the paper the terms "any," "always," and "all," when referring to values of random variables, should be  taken with the usual possible exception of zeroprobability sets.  All proofs are presented in the Appendix.  240 EHTIBAR N. DZHAFAROV  2. Asymptotic Differentiability Assumption.' For any Z (see footnote 3b), as A -+ oo, there asymptotically exists a nonzero  finite derivative of D(A, Z) with respect to some positive function s(A ).  This means that D(A, Z) can be written as  D(A, Z)=D(oo, Z)+C(Z) s(A) +o{s(A)}, (2)  where  (a) s(A) > 0;  (b) C(Z) 0 0 is the finite asymptotic derivative 8D/as, A --> oo;  (c) D(oc, Z) is a non-negative limit function whose existence follows from the  fact that D(A, Z) decreases while remaining nonnegative.  The difference  T(A, Z)=D(A, Z)-D(oo, Z)=C(Z) s(A) +o{s(A)}  is a strictly decreasing function of A converging to zero. The random variable T(A, Z) plays an important role in making the  term "signal-dependence" unambiguous. As pointed out by Luce (1986, pp. 98-99), in general the decomposition of RT into  signal-dependent and signal-independent components is not unique: if D + F is such a decomposition, then so is (D + X) + (- X  + F), provided X is signal-independent and the redefined components remain non-negative. T(A, 2) is a "minimal" form of the  signal-dependent RT component: it cannot be further additively decomposed. Correspondingly,  R=D(oc, 2)+F  is a "maximal" form of the signal-independent RT component.  Assumption 2 is rather unrestrictive. Its major purpose is to ensure asymptotic co-measurability of the central tendency of  T(A, 2) (median, mean) and the timedimensioned variability of T(A, 7,) (interquartile range, standard deviation): as A -). oo,  the ratio of the two tends to a positive finite constant.'  The following simple results provide a detailed asymptotic characterization of the function T(A, 2), which will be used for  theoretical analysis of RT distributions in Section 3.  s Without loss of generality, let A assume all values in [0, oc): for any other As one can replace A by (A-`-A-P)-'.  Asymptotic statements in the following text are formulated as equations including o{s(A)}, which denotes a function of A such  that o(s(A)Jls(A) ~ 0 as A-. oo. If s(A) converges to zero, then o(s(A)} converges to zero infinitely faster. In practice this  means that o{s(A)) can be neglected when s is sufficiently small (i.e., A is sufficiently large). o(1} denotes any variable  converging to zero.  ' I am grateful to R. D. Luce (1991, personal communication) for subjecting Assumption 2 to a thorough analysis. He  constructed a simple counter-example by putting 7,=Z>0, a single random variable, and T(A, Z) = kA-z. This yields RT(A) = R +  kA -z, for which, as proved by Luce, Assumption 2 is not satisfied. It is easy to show that as A ~ oc, the mean and median of  T(A, Z) are vanishing infinitely faster than its standard deviation and interquartile range. Intuitively, this is an  "anomalous" behavior for a positive random variable, and Assumption 2 prevents this from happening.  THE STRUCTURE OF SIMPLE REACTION TIME 241  LEMMA 1.2.2. T(A, Z) is asymptotically factorizable into a product of a positive function C(Z) and a strictly decreasing  positive function s(A) vanishing at A-. oo,  T(A, Z)=C(Z) s(A) +o{s(A)},  where C(Z) is unique, and s(A) is asymptotically unique, except for positive scaling coefficients having reciprocal values for  the two functions.  It immediately follows that  COROLLARY 1.2.2. T(A, Z) asymptotically increases with C(Z), i.e., (a) if C(Z,) >1 C(ZZ) then beginning with some value of A,  T(A, Z,) > T(A, 22); and (b) if C(Z,)=C(ZZ) then T(A,Z,)-T(A,ZZ)=ofs(A)}.  The RT decomposition assumptions can now be summarized in the form RT(A)=T(A, 2)+R, (3a) R=D(oc, 2)+F, (3b)  T(A, Z) = C(Z) s(A) + o f s(A) }, (3c)  where all terms and their relations are as above; obviously, (R, 2) is A-independent. Equation (3) will be referred to as the  basic RT decomposition model (for signalinitiated responses). All models considered in this paper are particular cases or  simple modifications of this model.  1.3. RT Decomposition Models Based on the Assumption of Independence  As mentioned in Section 1.1, there seems to be a consensus that the RT components D(A, 2) and F in Eq. (1) are mutually  independent random variables. In general this does not translate into mutual independence of T(A, 2) and R, the "minimal"  signal-dependent component and the "maximal" signal-independent component, respectively. Indeed, R in Eq. (3) contains the  component D(oo, 2) depending on 2. If, however, the variability of D(oo, 2) happens to be much smaller than that of F, then an  approximate independence exists between T(A, 2) and R.  This suggests a strong version of the assumption of independence, in which D(oo, 2) = const, and the principal components of  the basic RT decomposition, T(A, 2) and R, are mutually independent (Luce & Green, 1972; Kohfeld et al., 1981a, b). Reflecting  the two major properties of the model, the mutual independence of the RT components and the convergence to zero of the  signaldependent component, it will be referred to as the "asymptotic zero plus independence" (AZ +I) model.  The model is of special importance because it is the only independence-based model leading to distribution-free algorithms for  RT decomposition. Indeed, as A  242 EHTIBAR N. DZHAFAROV  increases, the distribution function FRT(A)(t) tends to FR(t).' Then F,(t) can be estimated by FRT(A(t) for a sufficiently  large A*, and the detection time distribution can be recovered from any RT(A) by deconvolving the estimated $a(t) from  fRT(A)(t). In terms of the moment generating functions (mgf),  mgf[T(A, Z)] zmgf[RT(A)]/mgf[RT(A*)]. (4)  The AZ+I model will be shown to disagree with the observed asymptotic behavior of the RT distributions (Section 3.1). Due to  its theoretical importance, however, it is worthwhile to see whether the predictions of the model can be improved by simple  modifications while retaining the model's essential features. I consider two such modifications employing two schemata of  mixing true RTs with signal-unrelated responses. One such schema is a 2-state mixture,  ( ) H with probability 1 - a;  RT A =~ (5)  T(A, 2) + R with probability a;  where H does not depend on A. Another schema assumes a race between signalinitiated and signal-unrelated processes. Denoting  by N duration of the latter, the model states  RT(A)=min {N, T(A, 2)}+R. (6)  N and 2 are not necessarily mutually independent. As an example, consider again the model in which detection occurs if a  deterministic process 0(t, A) reaches a variable criterion C (Section 1.1). In this model 2 = C. Let an independent "noise  process" X(t-to) randomly launched at moments to race with 0(t, A) for the current criterion level, C. In this case N and C  must positively covary. Note that both N in the race model and H in the 2-state model, being signal-unrelated, may attain  non-positive values, counting from the signal onset.  It is shown (Section 3.3) that both modifications considered (which turn out to be asymptotically equivalent) can indeed  improve the predictive power of the AZ + I model, but only at the cost of assuming an unrealistically large proportion of  signal-unrelated responses in RT distributions (50% or more for the RT data reported below).  1.4. Overview of the Single- Variate RT Model  A conventional approach, once the AZ + I model is shown to fail, would be to seek the next simplest model as that in which  D(oo, Z) :A const. i.e., its variability is not negligible, but 2 and F in Eq. (3b) are still independent. The independence  assumption then would be formally preserved, but not between the RT components  7 Notation conventions: distribution and density functions of a random variable H at a value H will always be denoted by FH)  and #H), respectively: the subscript indicates the name of the random variable. I will assume that FH(H) for all  time-dimensioned H are strictly increasing and differentiable on (inf H, oo ).  THE STRUCTURE OF SIMPLE REACTION TIME 243  taken in the "minimal-maximal" form, T+R (Eq. (3a)). It is shown, however, that such a model would be theoretically redundant  in so far as the asymptotic RT distributions are concerned (Section 3.2). If R is comprised of elements depending on 2 and  elements independent of 2, then the latter elements can be dropped from the model with no consequences for asymptotic  predictions. Moreover, experimental data strongly suggest that the interdependence of R and 2 has a particularly simple form:  R is a deterministic increasing function of T(A, 2) for any given A.  The simplest model incorporating this relationship is constructed by assuming that T(A, :Z) can be presented as T(A, C(Z)) for  all A, not only asymptotically, as it follows from Eq. (3). Related to Corollary 1.2.2, this means that T(A, C(z)) is a  strictly increasing function of a single random variable, C = C(Z). The RT decomposition (Eq. (3)) then assumes the form  RT(A) = T(A, C) + R, (7a)  R=L(C)+m, (7b)  T(A, C)=Cs(A)+o{s(A)}, (7c)  where both T(A, C) and L(C) are increasing functions of C, and m is a positive constant (about 130 ms in the experiments  reported). The constant m=inf{R(C)I is isolated because of its traditional interpretation as the "irreducible minimum": no  signal-initiated RT can fall below this value.  Equation (7) will be referred to as the single-variate RT (SVRT) model: RT(A) in this model is a monotonic transformation of a  single random variable, C, rather than a combined effect of independent random variables selectively associated with A.$ The  function L(C) is found to be a simple scale transformation, L(C) = BC, where B is a positive constant. This finding simplifies  RT analysis, but is not critical for the SVRT model.  The most important consequence of the SVRT model is that all RT percentiles of a given rank P, RT p(A), correspond to a single  value of the criterion C, namely, to the Pth percentile of C, Cp. As a result, Eqs. (7a, b) can be rewritten as  RTp(A)=T(A, Cp)+L(Cp)+m. (8)  Remarkable consequences of this equation are discussed in Section 1.6.  One interpretation of the random variable C in Eq. (7) is that it represents a preset "criterion" that has to be crossed by a  signal-initiated deterministic process, 0(t, A), in order for detection to occur. This hypothetical process can always be  constructed in such a way that solving the equation 0(t, A)= C for t one gets t = T(A, C) + L(C) = RT(A) - m. One can  recognize here the variable criterion model proposed by Grice (1968, 1972; Grice, Nullmeyer, & Spiker, 1982) for simple RT. In  a modified version, the process 0(t, A) can be constructed to yield  s Observe that if the SVRT model holds, then the only way to decompose RT(A) into a sum of mutually independent components,  D(A) and F, is to put D(A) =L(C)+T(A,C), and F=m: a constant is simultaneously stochastically independent of and functionally  related to any random variable.  244 EHTIBAR N. DZHAFAROV  t = T(A, C) as a solution of 0(t, A) = C, so that R = L(C) + m has to be added to this solution to get RT(A ). Due to these  and similar interpretations I refer to the random variable C as the "criterion." This term, however, should only be taken as a  technical label. This paper does not address the question of what experimental manipulations may affect the distribution of C,  and in what way: in particular, the "criterion" is not necessarily a "high-order" decision variable. To give an obvious  example of another interpretation, consider C-t0(t, A) to be a stochastic process which has to reach a fixed (unity) level for  detection to occur: C-t0(t, A)= 1 (McGill, 1963). Since this equation is equivalent to 0(t, A) = C, the "criterion" may be a  conceptual means to describe "sensory" variability of a particular kind, rather than a decision variable.9  1.5. "True," "Too Fast," and "Too Slow" Reactions  Equation (8) will be shown to hold in a wide percentile range, but not for very low and very high percentile ranks: as P  approaches 0 or 100%, the dependence of RT p(A) on A loses even ordinal regularity.  The problem with the upper-tail RT percentiles is to a large extent statistical: they cannot be reliably estimated from  moderate-size samples due to their extreme positive skewness. Another factor is that with some probability the observer can be  distracted and miss the signal onset. This would result in very long RTs (up to several seconds). Irrespective of A, these RTs  will have percentile ranks exceeeding some relatively high value, say P*. In the SVRT model the "distraction state" can be  formally associated with an extremely high (or infinite) value of the criterion C, occurring with probability 1- P*. As a  result, Eq. (8) will not be affected at P < P*.  The fact that the lower-tail RT percentiles can be close to zero, or even negative, indicates that the "true,"  signal-initiated responses are mixed here with signalunrelated "false alarms." At the same time, the SVRT model for "true"  reactions (Eqs. (7) and (8)) seems to account for all RT percentiles whose rank exceeds a relatively low value, P* (unless P >  P*, as discussed above). A simple schema in which effectively all false alarms are concentrated below a certain RT percentile  can be constructed as follows. Consider a "race" between ~(t, A) and X(t-to) as discussed in Section 1.3 for the AZ +I model  (Eq. (6)). Assume that after either of the two processes reaches the current criterion level, C, the reaction continues as  postulated in the SVRT model (Eq.7(b)): the remaining time, L(C)+m, is an increasing function of C. It follows that the false  alarm times are always shorter than the true RT for any given C. Assume now that the "noise process" is effectively bounded  from above, i.e., Prob{X(t-to)>C*} is negligibly small for some level C*. Then Eq. (8) will hold for all P exceeding the  percentile rank P* of C*.  1.6. Operational Consequences of the SVRT Model  The SVRT model greatly enhances one's ability to test models of sensory processing (with no a priori distributional  assumptions) by means of the RT  v The present form of this paragraph is due to a most helpful discussion with R. D. Luce.  THE STRUCTURE OF SIMPLE REACTION TIME 245  paradigm. Consider the model discussed in Section 1.1, predicting the detection time of a signal as a function of amplitude  and criterion position, D(A, C). To test these predictions, RT distributions are obtained for a number of amplitude values,  {A,, A2, ..., A. Let the percentiles RT p(A,) be computed across all these distributions, for values of P between some  limits P* and P*. According to the SVRT model (Eq. (8)),  RTp(Ai)-RTp(A;)=T(A;, Cp)-T(A;, Cp)=D(A;, Cp)-D(Ap CA  Fixing the value of P (say, at 50%) one can see that Cp is fixed across all values of A, so it can be estimated by means of a  regression analysis (the form of the function D is specified by the model tested). Moving to another percentile level (say, 40  or 60%) one gets another test for the hypothetical function D(A, C), and, as a by-product, an estimate of the 40th or 60th  percentile of C. Continuing in this way, one gets as many tests of the model (within a single set of data) as there are  percentile levels that can be reliably estimated from the RT distributions. Provided the model is corroborated between the  percentile ranks P* and P*, as a by-product one reconstructs a posteriori the distribution of C between P* and P*. The  situation is completely deterministic and, if the model is correct, the regression error is associated only with empirical  estimation of the RT percentiles.  Moving downward from P* and upward from P* one can reach the percentile levels at which the fit deteriorates considerably.  These levels would provide estimates of the percentile range containing only true RTs, separated from false alarms and  omissions/distractions (Section 1.5). Note that ignoring marginal percentiles does not constitute a censoring (truncation) of  the RT distributions: all the percentiles analyzed are determined from the entire distributions. At the same time, the  relatively central percentiles are not affected by the values of the marginal ones-one of the well-known advantages of dealing  with percentiles rather than moments or integral transforms (see Townsend & Ashby, 1983, pp. 95-98; Ratcliff, 1979).  If D(A, C) is of interest in its "minimal" form only, T(A, C), the analysis can be simplified further. From Eq. (7) we have  lim RT,(A)=Rp. The limit can be estimated by RT,(A*), where A* is sufficiently large (the latter can be verified by observing  that further increase in A leads to only negligible changes in RT p(A )-an "empirical form" of Cauchy's convergence  criterion). Then  RT,(A)-RT,(A*) T(A, C,), (9)  which is a surprisingly simple analogue of the deconvolution discussed in Section 1.3 (Eq. (4)) and also more reliable as a  numerical procedure.  2. EXPERIMENTAL DATA  The theory presented in this paper is related to the results of two experiments on detection of instantaneous changes in  spatial position of a small light source. The  246 EHTIBAR N. DZHAFAROV  main experiment is a simple RT one in which the observers had to respond to a spatial shift as soon as it was noticed. To  assess detectability of different spatial shifts, a Yes-No detection experiment was conducted in which the observers indicated  whether they noticed or did not notice a shift. The experimental procedures were as follows.  2.1. Method  In both experiments the light source was a bright (>99% contrast) squareshaped spot (1.1' x 1.1 ') on a dark background,  binocularly viewed from 220 cm (chin-rest, forehead support). A Macintosh Plus computer (60 Hz vertical refresh rate)  presented the stimuli and recorded the subjects' responses. To prevent autokinetic motion, the room was illuminated dimly,  allowing the display's borders (4.8 x 3.2) to be just discriminable.  A trial started when the subject pushed a designated "readiness" key on the computer keyboard with the left hand. This caused  the spot to appear in the center of the display. The spot remained in this position for a random time interval (uniformly  distributed between 1 and 2 s), adter which it disappeared and instantaneously reappeared in another position along the same  horizontal line. The amplitude and direction of the displacement varied from trial to trial. The spot remained in the  displayed position until the subject pushed a designated response key (one of two keys in the Yes-No experiment) on the  keyboard with the right hand. Then the spot disappeared, ending the trial (response-terminated presentation mode).  Both experiments were carried out as a sequence of short blocks of trials, one or two blocks per subject per day. Within a  block each amplitude value was presented 26 times, 13 times to the left and 13 times to the right. Except for this constraint,  the presentation order was random.  Two right-handed subjects with corrected acuity participated in the simple RT experiment. The observers had to push the  response key as quickly as possible as soon as a displacement was noticed, regardless of its direction. The displacement  amplitudes in this experiment were 1.1', 1.7', 2.2', 2.8', 3.3', 4.4', 7.2', and 19.9'. Observer SW participated in 9 blocks  and observer RWS in 8 blocks (208 and 182 trials per amplitude, respectively).  Five different observers with normal or corrected acuity participated in the Yes-No detection experiment. The displacement  amplitudes presented were 0.6', 1.1', and 1.7', and, for two observers, 0' (no displacement). The observers were asked to push  the "Yes" key, if they noticed a displacement, "quickly enough" to indicate an "immediate impression." If no displacement was  noticed within a sufficiently long time, counting from the trial start, the "No" key was pushed: all observers had been  trained to wait at least 4-5 s to make sure. No feedback was given. Only type of response, "Yes" or "No," was recorded. Each  observer participated in 4 blocks, 104 trials per amplitude per observer in total.  THE STRUCTURE OF SIMPLE REACTION TIME 247  n o0  O   L   a   e   40   d   d r  9 N  20   Q.  0   O ED HL O cl Gs DD  t  R, arc min  Fic. 2. Detection probability of instantaneous displacements (step-function signal with respect to spatial shift) of  amplitudes 0, 0.55, 1.1, and 1.7 (arc min) for 5 observers; 104 responses per amplitude per observer; 0' amplitude was  presented to 2 observers only. The curve is drawn through across-subject means.  2.2. Results  (1) Distributions of the RTs to leftward and rightward displacements of the same amplitude were combined, as they were found  sufficiently similar: the Smirnov-Kolmogorov two-sample statistics, (n/2)'/ZDn,n, computed for 16 pairs of distributions (2  subjects by 8 amplitudes) range from 0.91 (p>0.2) to 1.19 (0.1 < p < 0.15 ), with the median of 1.08 (0.15 < p < 0.2). The  same similarity was found for the response frequencies in the Yes-No experiment (the x2 value pooled over all subjects and all  amplitudes is 41.13, df = 34, p > 0.1). All data, therefore, are presented and analyzed as functions of amplitude only. The  psychometric functions obtained in the Yes-No experiment are presented in Fig. 2. The empirical distribution functions  obtained in the RT experiment are shown in Fig. 3.  (2) Figure 2 shows virtually perfect detectability of the 1.7' displacements. Thus, of the amplitudes used in the RT  experiment, all but the lowest, 1.1', are virtually perfectly detectable. This "virtually" can be dropped for the next (after  1.7') amplitude, 2.2'; the reason it was not included in the Yes-No experiment is that its perfect detectability was  phenomenologically obvious. The delectability of the 1.1' amplitude is imperfect and varies between 60 and 90%. Note in Fig.  3, RWS, an increase in the RT(1.1') density at about the 70th percentile, indicating a bimodality. This bimodality is what can  be expected if the upper percentiles of the distribution reflect trials when the displacement was not detected by this  subject."  'A more detailed analysis, not included in this paper, confirms that the detectability of the 1.1' displacement by RWS was  almost precisely 65%. The same amplitude was detected by subject SW about 90% of the time, and the ceiling effect prevents one  from seeing a bimodality in this case.  480/36/2-7  248 EHTIBAR N. DZHAFAROV  (3) Figure 2 shows also about a 10% false alarm rate. Assuming the two experiments are roughly comparable, it might be  expected then that signalunrelated false alarms make up about 10% of RT trials (if the SVRT model holds, then the false alarm  reactions should all be concentrated at the lower tails).  (4) In accordance with the general rule mentioned in Section 1.1, all percentiles of the RT distributions, RT,(A), are  decreasing functions of A, provided P is  0 E 0  100  I ............"............. _ -............ ..... . 41  W V C d Q d V ti. d qr A 7 E 0  100 1000 10000  reaction time (ms, log-scale)  FIG. 3. Cumulative frequency distributions of the RT to instantaneous displacements of amplitudes 1.1, 1.7, 2.2, 2.8, 3.3,  4.4, 7.2, and 19.4 (arc min) for 2 observers; 208 RTs per amplitude for subject SW, 182 RTs per amplitude for subject RWS. The  medians (open symbols) and two lateral quartiles (filled symbols) are indicated in each curve. For better discriminability the  curves corresponding to different amplitudes are shifted by 20% steps with respect to each other. The amplitudes are shown  above corresponding vertical axes. 100 and 0% levels for every curve are shown by dotted lines. The interrupted line in the  panel for RWS, I.1', points out a density increase at about the 70% level, resulting in a second mode at about the 80-85%  level.  0  !!-JO 100 1000 10000 reaction time (ms, log-scale)  THE STRUCTURE OF SIMPLE REACTION TIME 249  not close to 0 or 100% (in our case, 10-15% < P < 85-90%). This is demonstrated in Fig. 4. Note that the lower limit (10-15%)  roughly agrees with the false alarm rate mentioned in paragraph (3).  (5) One can determine from Fig. 3 that the differences between corresponding percentiles of the RT distributions for A =  19.9', the largest amplitude used, and 7.2', the next largest amplitude, are very small, on the order of 1 ms. This means that  as A exceeds 7.2' RT(A) approaches its theoretical minimum, lint RT(A) = R (Eq. (3)).  2.3. Asymptotically Linearizing Transformations  Figure 5 shows that beginning with A = 1.7', the three RT quartiles are well approximated by linear functions of A -2. The  linearity grossly deteriorates (especially for the third quartile) if the 1.1' amplitude is included, and it improves, though  very slightly, if the 1.7' amplitude is excluded. This suggests that the transformation A-2 is asymptotically linearizing.  Figure 6 shows that amplitude squaring is essential for the obtained linearity: the quality of fit for all three curves  sharply deteriorates as the exponent shifts from - 2 in either direction. The same results as in Figs. 5 and 6 have been  obtained for other percentiles between the 15th and 85th (occasional small deviations from -2, as in the third quartile curve  of Fig. 6, do not exhibit any systematic pattern). These percentiles are not shown here to avoid obscuring the graphs, but all  are included in a more comprehensive analysis presented in Section 3.4.  It is a simple mathematical fact (see Theorem 3.1.2 below) that the mean RT, computed for the values of A and over the region  of P where RT p(A) is a linear function of A-2, is itself a linear function of A-2. Figure 7 demonstrates this fact  percentile rank ,  N v e aI Y  FIG. 4. Kendall's rank-order correlation between the amplitudes A and the percentiles RT p(A) as a function of P (taken with  2.5% steps). Due to the extreme positive skewness of the distributions, the percentiles above the 90th could not be estimated  reliably. The values of r between -0.5 and 0.5 are not significantly different from 0 at 0.05 significance level.  250 EHTIBAR N. DZHAFAROV R, arc min  N E  s m  00 3.2 2.2 1.8 1.6 1 .4  H-2, Min-2  FIG. 5. RT quartiles and the semi-interquartile interval as functions of amplitude A (A >_ 1.7, i.e., A = 1.1' is excluded).  The statistics are arithmetically averaged over two subjects (RWS and SW), which is justified as in the legend of Fig. l. The  functions are linear with respect to A-Z (approximation error values can be read from Fig. 6, at /1= -2).  for the RT distributions censored (truncated) below the 10th and above the 90th percentiles. The same is true for the RT  standard deviation (not variance): it is linear in the same plots for the same censoring procedure. The linearity of the mean  and standard deviation also holds for any other pair of cut-off percentile ranks taken between 10 and 90% (not necessarily  symmetrically with respect to the median).  N E v 0 w d C O r 4 E  .F e a a 0  a  3  2  -3.0 -2.5 -2.0 -1.5 -1.0  eHponent  FIG. 6. Standard error of approximation of the three RT quartiles from Fig. 5 by linear functions of Afl, as a function of /3.  300  200  100  0  THE STRUCTURE OF SIMPLE REACTION TIME 251  R, arc min  r s  300  too  0  0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5  R-2, min -2  FIG. 7. Mean and standard deviation of the RT to instantaneous displacments (A _> 1.7'), computed over the RTs falling between  the 10th and 90th empirical percentiles, and arithmetically averaged over two subjects (RWS and SW; see legends of Figs. 1 and  5).  3. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS  3.1. Dependence of the RT Percentiles on Signal Amplitude  Figure 5 presents RT data in the format focal for this section: RTs of a given percentile rank P plotted against a  transformation of A that linearizes the plots. It is shown in this section that such a linearizing transformation should exist  for sufficiently large values of A if the basic RT model holds (Eq. (3)). Moreover, this transformation (asymptotically)  equals the function s(A) in the asymptotic factorization of T(A, Z) (Eq. (3c)).  The intercepts of the linearized RT p(A) plots are theoretically equal to the corresponding percentiles R, of the  signal-independent RT component R = RT(A) - T(A, 2). A theoretical meaning of the RT p(A) slopes within the framework of the  basic RT model is less obvious. The following theorem shows that  252 EHTIBAR N. DZHAFAROV  these slopes equal E[C I R = R,]," so the degree the slopes change with P reflects the degree of interdependence between R and  the cirterion C.  THEOREM 3.1.1. In the basic RT decomposition model (Eq. (3))  RT p(A)=Rp+ E[C I R =R,] s(A)+o{s(A)}. (10)  Three conclusions follow from this theorem when related to the RTp vs s(A) data. First, the function s in Eq. (3) can be  empirically identified by finding the "best" linearizing transformation for sufficiently large values of A. In our case (Figs.  5 and 6), s asymptotically equals A-2. Second, the range of "sufficiently large values of A" in the experiments reported  coincides with the range of perfectly detectable signals. Finally, the data in Fig. 5 suggest that R and C have a considerable  degree of positive covariation. Indeed, it immediately follows from Eq. 10 that  COROLLARY 3.1.1. If R and C are mutually independent (AZ + I model), then  RTp=Rp+E[C] s(A) +o{s(A)}. (11)  In other words, if R and C are mutually independent, the slopes of the linearized percentile curves have to be virtually  identical for all P. This is obviously not the case: as P increases, both the intercepts and the slopes of the percentile  curves increase (Fig. 5). Figure 8 demonstrates this for all analyzed percentiles; in fact, the slope of the linearized curves  increases about 4-6 times faster than the intercept. The inset shows that this relationship is not critically determined by  inclusion of the lower amplitudes, but is indeed an asymptotic property.  It is clear, therefore, that the AZ + I model should be dismissed, even as a first approximation. At the same time the data  are in conformity with the SVRT model. In this model only one value of C corresponds to R = RP, and this value is C, (Eq.  (8)). In terms of Eq. (10), E[C I R = Rp] = Cp, which is obviously an increasing function of P (or of Rp).  A more traditional way to establish interdependence between C and R would be to linearize the mean and standard deviation of  the RTs, rather than the percentiles. The following simple theorem shows that the asymptotically linearizing transformation s  of A is the same in both cases.  THEOREM 3.1.2. If the basic RT decomposition model holds for the RT distributions in a percentile rank region (P*, P*), then  (see footnote 11 for notation)  E[RT(A)IPA]=E[RIP]+E[4~ IP]s+o{s},  D[RT(A)IPA]=D[RIP]+a[C,RIP] D[CIP]s+o{s},  "Notation conventions: expected value and standard deviation (not variance) of a random variable H will be denoted by E(H) and  D(H), respectively; correlation between H and X will be denoted by r(H, X). If the distribution of H is conditioned on a  certain statement P, the notation is E(HI P) and D(H I P). Symbols E(H I X) and D(H I X) can be used if the statement P is of  the type X = X. Finally, E(H I X) is a random variable with values E(H I X).  THE STRUCTURE OF SIMPLE REACTION TIME 253  N C  E h E d a 0  a  intercept (ms)  FIG. 8. Slopes and intercepts of the linear functions bo+b,A-Z approximating RT,(A), A>_1.7; symbols from left to right  correspond to P= 15, 20,..., 80, 85% (the linear functions for 25, 50, and 75% are shown in Fig. 5). The inset shows the  slopes and intercepts of the quartile functions computed for three highest amplitudes only, 4.4', 7.2', and 19.9' (averaged  over two subjects).  where P,, stands for RT,.(A) < RT(A) <, RT,.(A); P stands for Rp. < R < R,.; and (; =E[CSR].  As a result, if C and R are mutually independent, i.e., r [ f , R JP ] = r[C, R I P] = r[C, R] = 0, then (omitting the  conditions for simplicity)  { [RT(A ) ] - [R] } = o{ E[RT(A ) ] - E[R] },  i.e., asymptotically RT(A )] should be infinitely closer to a constant than E[RT(A)]. Figure 7 shows that this is not the  case: RT(A)]-R] is nearly proportional to E[RT(A)]-E[R] (E[R] and R] are the intercepts of the straight lines)."  An analogous result is shown in Fig. 1 for the RT to uniform motion onset (the linearizing transformation here is s = A -213,  where A is velocity). Note, however, that it follows from the analysis just presented, that the cut-off points should be  placed at fixed percentiles (as in Fig. 7) rather than at fixed RT values (as in Fig. 1). The similarity of the patterns  displayed by the two figures should be attributed to the fact that the cut-off points in Fig. 1, 100 ms and 1000 ms, have  roughly constant percentile ranks across the velocity values (at the same time, 100 ms is high enough to exclude most of the  false alarms).  Summarizing, the experimental data are incompatible with the AZ + I model, and strongly support the basic RT decomposition  model with positive covariation  'Z All linear equations in this paper are explicitly formulated as asymptotic statements, hence in addition to sampling error  the residuals in Figs. 5 and 7 (and later in Figs. 10-14) constain a systematic component induced by dropping the unknown o f  s}-terms. Consequently, a formal goodness-of-fit analysis (when applicable), or tests of linearity against higher-order  trends, are uninformative, aside from characterizing the statistical power of the tests.  254 EHTIBAR N. DZHAFAROV  of T(A) and R. They are also in agreement with the SVRT model in which T(A) and R are deterministic increasing functions of  each other for any given A. Although I am not aware of other experimental analyses where RT percentiles were asymptotically  linearized, the approximately linear relationship between D [RT(A) ] and E[RT(A)] for sufficiently large A seems to be a  common finding (Cocholle, 1940; Green & Luce, 1971). Due to Theorem 3.1.2, this is an indication that the RT percentiles for  other signal types also follow the SVRT model pattern.  3.2. SVRT Model versus Basic RT Model  Two models making identical predictions concerning RT p(A) are operationally equivalent, whatever their formal differences.  The following very simple theorem shows that this is the case with the basic RT model (Eq. (3)) and the SVRT model (Eq. (7))  in so far as the asymptotic RT distributions are concerned.  THEOREM 3.2.1. If the basic RT decomposition model with E[C I Rp] being an increasing function of P accounts for the  asymptotic RT distributions in a percentile rank region (P*, P*), then in the same region the asymptotic RT distributions can  be accounted for by the SVRT model with CSVRT= E[C I R]bas, .  The situation can now be viewed in the following way. The SVRT model and the AZ + I model are two opposite and extreme cases  of the basic RT model. The latter is corroborated by finding an asymptotically linearizing transformation s of A for the RT  percentiles (a somewhat different approach is described in Section 3.4 below). Now, if the asymptotic slopes of the percentile  curves do not change with their intercepts (equivalently, percentile ranks), then the basic RT model reduces to the AZ +I  model. If the slopes increase with percentile rank (which is the case for the experiments reported), then the basic RT model  reduces to the SVRT model. Only if neither of the two situations took place (a decreasing or non-monotonic dependence), there  would be a reason for keeping the basic RT model in its general form. This statement does not exclude the possibility that the  SVRT model can be tested against the basic RT model using RT distributions for weak signals (see Section 4).  3.3. Two-State Mixture And Race Models  In this section I consider whether the compatibility of the independence hypothesis with the RT percentile data can be  improved by the two modifications introduced in Section 1.3: the 2-state mixture model and the race model.  THEOREM 3.3.1. Let the 2-state mixture model hold (Eq. 5), and let A(x) be the likelihood ratio function fx)lf,e(x). Then  RT,(A)=Rp+C(P) E[C]s+o{s}, (12)  where C(P) = [1 +A(Rp)(1 -a)/a]  THE STRUCTURE OF SIMPLE REACTION TIME 255  COROLLARY 3.3.1. The asymptotic slope of the RTP vs s(A) curves increases with P if and only if the likelihood ratio A(x) is a  monotonically decreasing function.  One can see from this corollary that, unlike the AZ + I model, its 2-state mixture modification can account for the fact that  the slope of the linearized RT percentile curves increases with their intercept. One has to assume only that f ,(x)/ff,(x) is  a decreasing function. To understand why mixing signal-unrelated reactions with those generated according to the AZ+I model  makes such a change, note that Eq. (5) can be presented as  RT(A)=bT(A)+ {bR+(1-b)H},  where b attains values 1 and 0 with probabilities a and 1- a, respectively. It is clear now that the signal-dependent  component of RT is bT(A ), rather than T(A) alone. Analogously, bR +(I - b) H is the signal-independent component. The  covariance of the two components equals  E[b2TR] - E[bT] E[bR + (1- b)H] = a(l - a) E[T] {E[R] - E[H] }.  This value is positive, because, since A(x) is monotonically decreasing, E[R] > E[H]. In other words, the 2-state mixture  improves the AZ +I model's predictive power by de facto introducing a positive correlation between the signal-dependent and  signal-independent RT components. In a sense, this defeats the original purpose: to retain the assumption of independence.  Nevertheless, the model might still be considered a viable alternative to the SVRT model, if one could show that the estimated  values of a and A(x) are reasonable. The parameter a can be roughly estimated by comparing the slopes of the linearized RT  percentile curves to that of the linearized E[RT]-curve.  LEMMA 3.3.1. If the 2-state mixture model holds, then for any P,  asymptotic slope of E[RT] vs s(A)  (13)  a asymptotic slope of RTP vs s(A)  Since A(RP) is a decreasing function, the greater the P chosen, the closer the denominator of Eq. (13) approaches E[C] and the  more precise the estimate of a. However, one cannot use a percentile rank too close to 100%: for the considered data the  85th-90th percentile is about the highest for which the asymptotic linearization is still acceptable (Fig. 9, upper curve).  The lower curves in Fig. 9 represent E[RT].ts The ratio of the slopes (Eq. (13)) shows that a<0.55 for both observers. Even  assuming that at P=85-90% A(RP) is practically zero, so that  's It is not clear from the model how the RT distributions should be censored to compute E[RT]. Fortunately, E[RT] is robust  with respect to different types of censoring: as one can see from Fig. 9, the values of E[RT] computed over data uncensored  except for the exclusion of obvious upper-tail outliers are very close to E[RT] computed as in Fig. 7.  256 EHTIBAR N. DZHAFAROV  f1-2, min-2 H-2, min -2  FIG. 9. Mean RT compared with a high-rank RT percentile plotted against A-Z (A >_ 1.7). The means computed from distributions  censored as for Fig. 7 (open squares) coincide with the means computed, from uncensored distributions (filled squares). The  rank of the percentiles was chosen as the highest (in the series taken with 5% steps) for which the linear approximation is  still acceptable. The ratio of the slopes is about 0.55 for both observers.  a Pz 0.55, this means that almost half of all reactions are signal-unrelated. This clearly contradicts introspection and is an  unrealistic possibility.  The situation with the second modification of the AZ + I model introduced in Section 1.3, the race model, is exactly the same:  the model can formally account for the positive slope-intercept covariation in the linearized RT percentile curves, but then  half or more of all reactions should be signal-unrelated. The reason for this similarity is that the two models, 2-state and  race, are asymptotically equivalent, as shown in the following theorem.  THEOREM 3.3.2. The race model (Eq. (6)) is asymptotically equivalent to the 2-state mixture model (Eq. (5)) with  a 2-state = Prob {N 1 0 } race  F H (t) 2-state = Prob { N + R < t I N 5 0 } rape  The asymptotic equivalence here means that for any X  Prob { RT < X }race = Prob { RT < X12-,tale + OW.  In summary, unless one is ready to accept the possibility that half or more of all reactions in a simple RT experiment are  signal-unrelated, one cannot accept the 2-state mixture and race models. In addition, these models do not account for the lack  of a regular relationship between A and very low RT percentiles. It is formally possible, of course, to complement these  models by the "fast false alarms" hypothesis presented in Section 1.5 for the SVRT model. This would amount, however, to  adding still another type of signal-unrelated reaction to the already unreasonably large proportion.  THE STRUCTURE OF SIMPLE REACTION TIME 257  3.4. Percentile-versus-Percentile Curves  In this section I describe a test for the SVRT model that does not require that one find the linearizing transformation s(A)  beforehand. I also show how to establish the form of the function L(C) in Eq. (7), and how to estimate the constant m.  As a first step, recall that RT,(A) - Rp = Cps(A) + o(s) (see Theorem 3.2.1). Then for any two values A,, A2,  RT p(A,) - R p = (s, /s2)[RTp(A2) - Rp] + o {s, {.  Recall also that Rp can be estimated by RT p(A*), where A* is a "very large amplitude," whose further increase does not lead  to a non-negligible decrease in RT p(A*) (Eq. 9). If the SVRT model holds in a percentile range (P*, P*), then within this  range one should expect that for sufficiently large A,, A2,  RTp(A,)-RTp(A*)~z-(s,/s2)[RTp(A2)-RTp(A*)]. (14)  Plotted against each other, RT p(A)-RT p(A*) curves should form a fan of zerointercept straight lines. Consider a class of  amplitude values {A,, A2, ..., A,{, in ascending order, with Ataken for A*. An economic way to show that Eq. (14) holds is  to plot RT p(Ai)-RT p(A* ), against their normalized mean,  u(P) = [RTp(.) - RTp(A *)]/[RT.(.) - RT.(A *) ],  where the dot replacing a parameter indicates arithmetic averaging across all values of this parameter. If (and only if) Eq.  (14) holds, then  RTp(A;)-RTp(A*) b;p(P), (15)  where b; does not depend on P and decreases with A. Figure 10 shows that Eq. (15) is satisfied with a reasonable precision for  all perfectly detectable amplitudes between P* =15% and P* = 85%, with A* =19.9' (Section 2.2(5)).  Note that j(P) is an estimate of CpIC., hence the slopes b; of the curves are estimates of s; C. measured in time units.  Figure 11 confirms that the pattern in Fig. 10 is indeed only asymptotic: for the 1.1' amplitude, whose detection probability  is measurably less than 1, the approximation is very poor, even if one excludes the upper percentiles reflecting signal  omission trials (Sections 1.5; 2.2(2)). Figure 11 shows also that zero-intercept straight lines are not a priori fittable to  data in this format due to their ordinal-scale properties (see footnote 12).  The next problem to consider is the dependence of Rp on Cp. Since Cp (in units of C.) is estimated by u(P), and Rp is  estimated by RTp(A*), the simplest way to deal with the problem is to plot RTp(A*) against M(P). To make the analysis more  convincing, one can look at the dependence on y(P) of RTp(Ai) for all values of A shown in Fig. 10, in addition to A* (Fig.  12).  258 EHTIBAR N. DZHAFAROV  H E  s i r s d  EP / C. EP/E. 120  100 e0 60 40 20  0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 0.0 0.e 1.0 1.5 2.0  ARTPW/ART.( ARTP(/ART.(-)  FIG. 10. Empirical estimates of ARTp(A)=RTp(A)-limRTp(A), A->1.7, plotted against the means of these estimates across A, ART  p(. ), normalized by their grand mean, ART.(.); lim RT p(A) is estimated by RT p(A = 19.9'); P = 15, 20,..., 80, 85%.  Theoretically, the graphs represent estimates of sC p plotted against estimates of Cp/C..  Surprisingly, the RT p(A) vs y(P) functions turn out to be linear with a common intercept, indicating that Rp is a linear  function of Cp:  Rp=(BC.)(Cp/C.)+m=BCp+m. (16)  The "irreducible minimum" m in Fig. 12 is obtained by linear extrapolation, even though the percentiles close to sero have  been excluded from the analysis. There is no contradiction here, because the low-tail percentiles reflect a mixture of true  reactions and false alarms, as discussed in Section 1.5. The constancy of the intercept across different curves can be  considered a validation of this hypothesis.  Figure 13 presents a different way to establish that R p is a linear function of Cp, and to estimate m. Since RT p(A) - R p =  Cs + o(s), it follows from Eq. (16) that  RTp(A)=(s+B)C,+m+o{s}. (17)  Then for any two sufficiently large values from {AI, A2, ..., A,  RTp(A;),t b,jRTp(Aj)+m(1-br,),  where b,; stands for (s; + B)/(s; + B). If one computes all pairwise regression lines RT,(Ai) vs RT,(A;), and plots intercept  values against the values of (1-slope), the relation should be described by a zero-intercept linear function. The slope of this  THE STRUCTURE OF SIMPLE REACTION TIME 259  300  SW   SE =28.4 Ins   R2= .82   D  200  9  100  3  N  -1- 0 2.0  ARTP (-) /ART.(-) ARTP (-) / eRT. (  FIG. 11. Same as in the Fig. 10, but A = 1.1'. The graph for RWS does not include the four higher percentiles (70th through  85th), because of their very large values (all percentiles are shown in the inset).  linear function is an estimator of m. Figure 13 shows that this prediction is correct, and the estimates of m practically  coincide with those obtained from Fig 12.  Still another estimate for m can be derived from Fig. 7, by plotting E[RT(A)] against RT(A)] (omitting for simplicity the  censoring condition PA). Indeed, it follows from Eq. (17), that E[RT(A)] must be a linear function of RT(A)], with  N E d r ac  (A l'7 7  ao n 3  ARTP(-) /ART.(-) ARTP(-) /ART,(  FIG. 12. RTp(A), A >, 1.7, plotted against the same horizontal axis as in Figs. 10 and 11); P= (15, 20,..., 80, 85%.  Theoretically, the vertical axis represents estimates of sC,+BCp+m.  260 EHTIBAR N. DZHAFAROV  N E a d v d c  -0.s  I -slope (dimensionless) I -slope (dimensionless)  FIG. 13. The values of ho and 1-b, of the linear functions RTr(A;)=bo+b, RT p(A;), computed for all amplitude pairs (A;, Aj)  chosen from the set A _> 1.7'; P= 15, 20,..., 80, 85%. The dotted lines separate the regression coefficients for Aj > A;  (upper right quadrant) from those for Aj < A; (lower left quadrant). The slope of the straight line fitted to the [bo, 1- b, ]  pairs is an estimate of parameter m.  the intercept estimating m. (The computations yield 127 ms for SW and 146 ms for RWS, in agreement with Figs. 12 and 13).  1 return now to the linearizing transformation s(A). Its identification was not necessary so far in this section, and the SVRT  model was corroborated without regard to the form of this transformation. Once established, however, the model allows one to  solve the identification problem as a separate issue. The procedure is analogous to that used in Section 2.3, Figs. 5 and 6,  but this time it includes all RT percentiles considered, and does so in a more economic way.  The slopes of the linear functions in Figs. 10 and 12 are estimators of the theoretical values sC. and sC. + BC.,  respectively. Plotted against any function of A, these slope values would form two parallel curves, with the vertical  separation equal to BC.. To find the transformation s(A) means to linearize these two parallel curves.  In agreement with the previous analysis, Fig. 14 shows that putting s=A-2 yields an almost perfect linear fit. Figure 15  confirms that if the transformation is sought in the form A fl, # < 0, the best linear fit is indeed obtained at fl about -2.  4. CONCLUSION  I have shown in this paper that the problem of interdependence between the signal-dependent and signal-independent RT  components can be meaningfully addressed by psychophysical means, based on plausible initial assumptions. The two RT  components have been shown to positively covary, which disagrees with the commonly accepted independence hypothesis. The SVRT  model proposed is the simplest conceptual opposite of the independence hypothesis and the simplest variant of the basic RT  decomposition model that agrees with data. In this model  THE STRUCTURE OF SIMPLE REACTION TIME 261  0 E ai C. 0 0  120  100  so  0  60 R  3 N  40  20  0  0.4 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4  S= 8-2, min-2 s= il-2, min-2  Fig. 14. The slopes of the linear functions from Fig. 10 (filled symbols) and Fig. 12 (open symbols), plotted against s = A  -2. Theoretically, the two functions are, respectively, sC. and sC. + BC., i.e., they are linear with the same slope, C.  (approximation error and determination coefficient values can be read from Fig. 15, at P= -2).  the additive RT components are monotonic functions of each other for any given signal amplitude, and their variability is  accounted for by a single random variable, termed the "criterion."  One way to describe the SVRT model is to say that the "criterion" C is a "double-readiness" factor: readiness to detect and  readiness to respond. The higher the criterion the lower the readiness both to detect and to respond; hence, the components  T(A) = T(A, C) and R = L(C) + m increase or decrease together for any given A. This interpretation is especially plausible if  one accepts Grice's modelling schema (see Section 1.4, last paragraph). As shown in the same paragraph, C can also be  interpreted as a factor controlling sensory accumulation rate, a multiplicative perturbation of a deterministic accumulation  process, 0(t, A), by a signalindependent noise. The fact that C is signal-independent suggests that the source of this noise  is relatively central: a transient "inhibition" (attenuation) state is imposed  0 E 0 CU c 0 E  s 0  L o. a0  exponent exponent  FiG. 15. Standard error of approximation and determination coefficient obtained when A-2 in Fig. 14 is replaced by other  powers of A.  262 EHTIBAR N. DZHAFAROV  on an entire network of signal-specific sensory encoders (e.g., Reichardt-type bilocal correlators in the case of  motion/displacement detection; Reichardt, 1961; see Nakayama, 1985, for a review). The SVRT model then can be viewed as  suggesting that this transient inhibition affects activation transmission through all processing subcomponents,  signal-dependent or not, possibly including the activation transmission from sensory encoders to motor units.  It remains to be seen whether the SVRT model applies to weak signals, those whose detection probability is measurably less  than 1. If Assumption 1 (Section 1.2) holds, the distribution of R extracted from asymptotic RT distributions should remain  the same for all signal amplitudes, however small; otherwise, the joint distribution of (2, R) would be signal-dependent. In  particular , the approximation of R by L(C[7,))+m should apply to all amplitudes. However, the approximation of T(A, 2) by  T(A, C(Z)), an increasing function of C(Z), may not apply to small amplitudes. It is possible, therefore, that even though R  is the same, its extraction from weak-signal RTs requires different decomposition algorithms. It is also possible, of course,  that the Assumption 1 itself holds only asymptotically. Thus, it is not certain that by subtracting an asymptotic estimate of  Rp from RT,(A) for small A, one would obtain an estimate of T,(A). This prediction, however, can be empirically tested in  conjunction with a specific model of sensory processing (see Section 1.6).  It is possible that further analyses will demonstrate limitations of the SVRT model as a general model of simple reaction  time, either for small signal values or even as an asymptotic approximation. However, due to its remarkable simplicity and  openness to empirical falsification, the model can be viewed as a new normative schema, in addition to the traditional schema  based on the independence hypothesis.  APPENDIX: PROOFS  Proof of Lemma 1.2.1. D(A) can always be presented as D(A, F, P), a deterministic function of A, F, and a random variable P  uniformly distributed between 0 and 100. Indeed, put D(A, F, P) = D,(A I F), the Pth percentile of the conditional  distribution of D(A I F = F), 0 < P S 100. P and F are mutually independent and independent of A. Hence the joint distribution  of (F, P) does not depend on A, and neither does the joint distribution of (F, P, F). The proof is completed by putting Z=(F,  P), and observing that (a), (b), and (c) in Assumption 1 are satisfied.  In particular, if D (A) and F are mutually independent, then D(A, F, P)= D(A, P) = D,(A), the Pth percentile of D(A) = D(A,  P). Putting = P, we get a proof of Corollary 1.2.1.  Proof of Lemma 1.2.2 (omitting arguments of functions C and s for short). That C is positive and s is vanishing at A --), oo  follows trivially from Eq. (2). The unique ness properties are proved by equating C, s, + o {s,) and C2S2 + o(S2 }, and  observing that then S1/S2-+C2/C1. Since the limit of s, /s2 does not depend on Z,  THE STRUCTURE OF SIMPLE REACTION TIME 263  and C2/C, does not change with A, this asymptotic equality can only be satisfied if A = CZ/C, is a constant, and s, /s2 -> A.  Then C, = C3/A, and s, = As2 + o {s2 }. Finally, to prove that s(A) can be chosen to be strictly decreasing, put s(A) = T(A,  20) for a fixed value Zo of the random set 2.  Proof of Theorem 3.1.1.`4 The percentiles RTp and Rp are defined from  Prob{R+T<RTP}=P; (*1)  Prob{R < Rp} = P. (*2)  Prob{R + T < RTP} =Prob{R < RT p-T } can be presented in terms of the  conditional distribution functions FRIT(RI T) as  RTp 0  F, I ARTp- TI T) dFT(T)=P. (*3)  In the region RTp - T > 0 FR I ART p - T I T) can be expanded as  FR IT(RTpI T)-fRIT(RTpI T)T+o{T}.  Observing that both o { T } and foTp o { T } dFT (T) are o { s }, one can rewrite (*3) as  foT,FRIT(RTplT)dFT(T)- foTpTfRIT(RTpIT)dFT(T)+o{s}=P. (*4)  In the second integral $R I T(RT p I T) can be replaced with f R I T (R p l T) because  f RTpT[f,IT(RTpI T)-fRIT(RpI T) ] dFT(T)=ofsI. 0  Indeed, the expression in the brackets is o { 11, so the integrated function is o { T }. After this substitution the second  integral in (*4) can be rewritten as  f0TpTfRIT(RplT)&T(T)=$R(Rp) f,TpTdFTIR(TIRp), (*5)  because  fRIT(RpI T)dFT(T)=ffR(Rp)dfTj R(TI Rp)=fR,T(Rp, T) dT.  Next, the upper integration limits for both integrals in (*4) can be replaced with oo. Indeed, for the first integral 15  RTp FRIT(RTplT)dFT(T)< fRTp ~ dFT(T)<E[TZ]/RTp,  '4 Notation conventions: (1) in this and following theorems, to make mathematical expressions less cumbersome, I will omit the  argument A when referring to random variables or functions depending on A: thus, s, RT, RT., T, etc., will stand for s(A),  RT(A), RTp(A), T(A), etc.; (2) conditional distribution and density functions of a random variable H given a certain value of  a variable G will be denoted by FejG(HIG) and ffeIG(HIG), respectively.  '5I use here Chebyshev's inequality for non-negative variables: 1 - F.. (x) < E[Xz]/xz.  480/36/2-8  264 EHTIBAR N. DZHAFAROV  and since E [T2 ] = o { s { whereas RT p -+ R P, their ratio is o { s {. For the second integral, taken in the form (*5),'6  fR(Rp) f T dFTI R(T I Rp) <fR(Rp) E[T2 I Rp]/RTp, RTv  and, again, E[T2I Rp] =o{s}. Now (*4) can be presented as  f0 0  ,' FRI T(RT,IT)dFT(T)-$R(R,)f ~ TdFTIR(TIRp)+o{s}=P. (*6)  At the same time, due to (*2),  f0'~ FRIT(Rpl T)dFT(T)=P. (*7)  Subtracting (*7) from (*6), and observing that  FRIT(RTpjT)-FRIT(RpjT)=fRIT(Rpl T)(RTp-Rp)+o{RTp-Rpl, one gets the following equation:  (RTp-Rp) fo f1l T(RpI T)dFT(T)+o{RTp-Rp}  =fR(Rp) f0,'w, T dFTIR(TI Rp)+o{s}. (*8)  The expression o { RTp - R p } can be dropped, because it is o { s }, as one can see by dividing both sides of the equation by  s. Using the same transformation as in (*5), the left-hand integral in (*8) can be presented as  f0'~ f1jT(R,I T)dFT(T)=fR(Rp) f0, dFTj R(TI Rp)-$R(Rp).  Since the right-hand integral in (*8) represents E [T I Rp], the equation assumes the  form  fR(Rp)(RTp- Rp) ='R(Rp) E[T I Rp] + o{s}.  Dividing both sides by fR(Rp), and observing that  E[TIRp]=E[CI Rp]s+o{s},  one comes to the statement of the theorem.  'e Here I use an inequality for non-negative variables closely related to Chebyshev's: E[X I X > x] x (I - Ex(x)) < E[XZ]/x.  Its proof is analogous to that of Chebyshev's inequality.  THE STRUCTURE OF SIMPLE REACTION TIME 265  Proof of Theorem 3.1.2. Considering 1~ as a function QR), Rp. <, R < Rp., the first statement of the theorem is immediately  obtained from Eq. (10). To prove the second statement expand ( [R + f(R) s + o { s } ] )'iz up to the first power of s.  Proof of Theorem 3.2.1. If Eq. (10) holds, then by renaming E [C I Rp] as (~(P) one gets  RT,(A)=Rp+f(P)s+o{s},  where both Rp and QP) are positive increasing functions of P. Therefore QP) can be considered to be the Pth percentile of a  random variable 1~. Its percentiles below P* and above P* can be added by an arbitrary continuous extrapolation. Since R is an  increasing function of 1~, one can denote inf{R} by m (a nonnegative value), and present R as L(4~) + m, where L is an  increasing function vanishing at the lower boundary inf{(7) of f. Renaming ('s as (A, (7), one gets  RTp(A)=(A, (7p)+L(Cp)+m+o{s},  which is asymptotically equivalent to Eq. (8).  Proof of Theorem 3.3.1. The percentiles RTp and Rp are defined from  Prob{R+T<RTp}a+Prob{H< RTp}(1-a)=P; (*1)  Prob{R<Rp}a+Prob{H<Rp}(1-a)=P. (*2)  First, we subject Prob { R + T < RTp } to transformations analogous to those used in Theorem 3.1.1:  Prob{R + T < RT p(A) }  = f0Rrp  FR(RTP T) dFT(T)  = f o rP FR(RTp) dFr(T)- f o rP T$R(RTp) dF,(T)+o{s}.  Observing, as in Theorem 3.1.1, that f, (RTp) can be replaced by ff, (R,), and the  upper integration limits can be replaced by oo, the transformations continue as  FR (RT,) f0, dFT(T)-ffR(Rp) f TdFT(T)+o{s{ 0  = FR(RTp)-ffR(Rp) E[T] +o{ s}. (*3)  Substituting (*3) for Prob { R + T < RTp } in (*I), we come to the following expression:  FR(RTp)a-ffR(Rp)E[T]a+F,(RTp)(1-a)+o{s}=P. (*4)  266 EHTIBAR N. DZHAFAROV  Due to (*2), we have also  FR(Rp)a+ FRp)(1 -a)=P. (*5)  Subtracting (*5) from (*4), presenting FR(RT,)-FR(Rp) as $R(Rp)(RTp-Rp)+ o{RTp-Rp}, presenting FRTp)-F,(Rp) as  $,(Rp)(RTp-Rp)+o(RTp-Rp}, and observing that o { RTp - R p) is o {s ), one gets  {a$R(Rp)+(1-a) $fr(Rp)j(RTp-Rp)=a$R(R,) E[T] +o{s).  Since E [T] = E [C ] s + o {s }, the statement of the theorem is obtained from here by algebraic transformations.  Proof of Lemma 3.3.1.  E[RT]={aff[R]+(1-a)E[H]}+aE[C]s+o{s},  hence asymptotically the E [RT ] vs s slope equals off[C] ]. From Eq. (12), the asymptotic RT p vs s slope equals E [C ] [ 1 +  .l(R p)(1 - a)/a] -'. This value cannot exceed E[C] because [1+.1(Rp)(1-a)/a]_' 1. Hence the ratio of the two asymptotic  slopes cannot be less than ocE[C]/E[C] = a. /  Proof of Theorem 3.3.2. The theorem states that the race model is asymptoti  cally equivalent to the 2-state mixture model  RT(A) _ N + R with probability 1- a  - fT+R with probability a,  where a is Prob{N > 0}. Prob{RT < X} in this model can be presented in the  following form:  " o   Prob{RT<XI2_state= f0 f FR(X-N)dF,IT(NI T)dFT(T)   - 00   0C " (*1)  + f f FR(X-T)dF,jT(NI T)dFT(T).   0 0   The analogous expression for the race model is   Prob{RT<X}race= fo f -00 FR(X-N)dFrvjT(NI T)dFT(T)   T   + f0, f0 FR(X-N) dF,jT(NI T) dFT(T)   +f ~   f T (*2)  FR(X-T) dFNIT(NI T) dFT(T).   o r   THE STRUCTURE OF SIMPLE REACTION TIME 267  The difference between (*2) and (*l) is  f T  o FR(X-N) dFNIT(NI T) dFT(T)  fo  00 T  - fo fo FR(X-T)dFNIT(NI T)dFT(T). (*3)  Expanding both FR (X-T) and FR (X-N) up to the first power of T and N respectively, and observing that o { T} = o {s } and,  since N < T within the integration limits, o {NJ = o {s }, the difference (*3) can be rewritten as  $R(X)f0 o f0 T(T-N)dFNIT(NIT)dFT(T)+o{s}  =fR(X) f0, T f0 T(1-NIT) dFN1T(NI T)dFT(T)+o{s}.  The inner integral is obviously o { 11, and since T is of the order of s, the entire expression is of s}. This proves the  statement of the theorem.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  I am indebted to R. Duncan Luce for many thought-provoking comments and constructive criticism. I am equally indebted to  Robert Sekuler for his cooperation in the RT experiments, supported by a grant to Robert Sekuler from the U. S. Air Force  Office of Scientific Research, AFOSR 85-0370. 1 am grateful to James Townsend, Richard Schweickert, Jan P. H. van Santen,  Lawrence Hubert, and Joseph Malpeli for many helpful suggestions.  REFERENCES  ALLIK, J., & DZHAFAROV, E. N. (1984). Reaction time to motion onset: Local dispersion model analysis. Vision Research, 24,  99-101.  ASHBY, F. G., & TowNSEND, J. T. (1980). Decomposing the reaction time distribution: Pure insertion and selective influence  revisited. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 21, 93-123.  BALL, K., & SEKULER, R. (1980). Models of stimulus uncertainty in motion perception. Psychological Review, 87, 435-169.  CHOCHOLLE, R. (1940). Variations des temps de reaction auditifs en fonction de 1'intensit6 a diverse frequences. L'Anne  Psychologique, 41, 65-124.  DZHAFAROV, E. N. (1982). General model for visual motion detection. Studia Psychologica, 24, 193-198. DzAFARov, E. N., &  ALLIK, J. (1984). A general theory of motion detection. In M. Rank (Ed.), Computational Models in Hearing and Vision, pp.  77-84. Tallin: Estonian Academy of Sciences. GREEN D. M., & LUCE, R. D. (1971). Detection of auditory signals presented at  random times, III. Perception and Psychophysics, 9, 257-268.  GRICE, G. R. (1968). Stimulus intensity and response evocation. Psychological Review, 75, 359-373. GRICE, G. R. (1972).  Application of a variable criterion model to auditory reaction time as, a function of the type of catch trial. Perception and  Psychophysics, 12, 103-107.  268  EHTIBAR N. DZHAFAROV  GRICE, G. R., NULLMEYER, R., & SPIKER, V. A. (1982). Human reaction time: Toward a general theory. Journal of Experimental  Psychology: General, 111, 135-153.  KOHFELD, D. L., SANTEE, J. L., & WALLACE, N. D. (1981a). Loudness and reaction time, I. Perception and Psychophysics, 29,  535-549.  KOHFELD, D. L., SANTEE, J. L., & WALLACE, N. D. (1981b). Loudness and reaction time, II. Identification of detection  components at different intensities and frequencies. Perception and Psychophysics, 29, 550-562.  LUCE, R. D. (1986). Response times. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. LUCE, R. D. (1991). Personal communication.  LUCE, R. D., & GREEN, D. M. (1972). A neutral timing theory for response times and the psychophysics of intensity.  Psychological Review, 79, 14-57.  McGILL, W. (1963). Stochastic latency mechanisms. In R. D. Luce & E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of mathematical psychology,  Vol. 1, pp. 309-360. New York: Wiley.  NAKAYAMA, K. (1985). Biological image motion processing: A review. Vision Research, 25, 625-660. PIERON, H. (1920). Nouvelles  recherches sur 1'analyse du temps de latency sensorielle et sur la loi qui relie le temps A l'intensite d'excitation. L'Anne  Psychologique, 22, 58-142.  RATCLIFF, R. (1979). Group reaction time distributions and an analysis of distribution statistics. Psychological Bulletin, 86,  446-461.  REICHARDT, W. (1961). Autocorrelation, a principle for the evaluation of sensory information by the central nervous system. In  W. A. Rosenblith (Ed.), Sensory communications, pp. 303-317. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.  TOWNSEND, J. T., & ASHBY, F. G. (1983). The stochastic modeling of elementary psychological processes. Cambridge: Cabridge  Univ. Press.  TROSCIANKO, T., & FAHLE, M. (1988). Why do isoluminant stimuli appear slower? Journal of the Optical Society of America, A5,  871-879.  RECEIVED: May 16, 1990