10.1016/0022-2496(92)90035-6
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 36, 165-184 (1992)  Norbert Wiener on the Theory of Measurement (1914, 1915, 1921)  PETER FISHBURN AT & T Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, New Jersey 07974 AND BERNARD MONJARDET Universal Paris V et Centre  d'Analyse et de Math~matigue Sociales  In conclusion, let us consider what bearing all this work of ours can have on experimental psychology. (Wiener, 1921, p.204)  These words, written by Norbert Wiener in 1919 when he was 24 years old, appear near the end of the third of three  extraordinary papers on the theory of relations and measurement that he began before his twentieth birthday. The papers use  the notation of Principia Mathematica, which is fairly inaccessible to modern readers. However, Wiener's contributions to  measurement theory deserve to be remembered because they include important concepts that were rediscovered by others and now  have a central place in the representational theory of measurement and in graph theory. Our purpose is to recount in modern  terms Wiener's work in these areas. 1992 Academic Press, Inc.  1. INTRODUCTION  Norbert Wiener (1894-1964), the child prodigy who received his Ph.D. from Harvard in 1913 at age 18, is remembered as a  brilliant mathematician who made profound and lasting contributions to mathematics in the areas of function spaces, stochastic  processes, harmonic analysis, Fourier transforms, ergodic theory, and communication theory. His work recounted here (1914,  1915, 1921) went largely unnoticed until recently, but it too deserves lasting recognition for its contributions to what is  now called the representational theory of measurement (Falmagne, 1985; Fishburn, 1986; Krantz, Luce, Suppes, & Tversky, 1971;  Narens, 1985; Roberts, 1979; Scott & Suppes, 1958). In the intervening years, several of Wiener's seminal concepts in  measurement theory were discovered by others who had no inkling of his priority, and the concepts were given names that would  have been unfamiliar to their originator.  Reprint requests should be addressed to P. C. Fishburn, Room 2C-354, AT&T Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, NJ 07974.  165  0022-2496/92 $5.00  Copyright T1 1992 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  166 FISHBURN AND MONJARDET  By his own admission, Wiener's understanding of modern mathematics began in 1918, the year before he assumed a career-long  position in mathematics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Before that he spent much of 1913-1915 in Cambridge,  England, under the mentorship of Bertrand Russell, co-author with Alfred North Whitehead of the monumental Principia  Mathematica. The first two of Wiener's papers reviewed below were written at that time, and both were completed while he was  still in his teens! The third was written at about the time he took his position at MIT. Because of his association with  Russell, his study of the Principia, and his then-current interest in the relationship between philosophy and mathematics,  Wiener used the Principia notation in all three papers.  Never easy to assimilate, this notation is all but indecipherable today except to a few scholars. For example, the very first  proposition in Wiener's first paper (1914, p. 441) says that  RcJ,R2cR,RuAvIrC'R=C'RTC'R,  and this is by no means the most awesome formula in the three papers. Fortunately, Wiener interprets some of these in ordinary  words, and others can be reconstructed from the symbols. The particular proposition at hand says that R is a linear order on a  set X or, in more detail, that R is irreflexive, transitive, and complete (or connected) in the sense that if x and y are in X  then either xRy or yRx or x = y.  This is the last Principia-type formula that we shall offer since our purpose is to explain the concepts and results of  Wiener's papers in modern terms. Proofs are omitted. Our descriptions aim at brevity and clarity without sacrificing essential  content, but they do not try to convey the flavor of his own style or arguments. However, the Appendix of the paper gives an  excerpt from each of his papers so that readers can appreciate the sense of his writing.  Although the books on measurement theory cited in the opening paragraph do not mention Wiener's contributions to the subject,  those contributions have not been ignored completely. The 1914 paper has been mentioned (Kamp, 1979) in a debate between  logicians and linguists on the logical analysis of time and tense, and the 1914 and 1921 papers are mentioned in Suppes,  Krantz, Luce, and Tversky (1989). Kyburg (1977) provides abstracts of the 1914 and 1915 papers, but says only of the 1921  paper that it "provides a detailed analysis of the way in which one could proceed from apparent relations of greater or less  to quantitative measures" (p. 86). And the recent biography of Wiener by Masani (1990) comments briefly on all three papers  (pp. 56-64). Other notices of the 1921 paper are mentioned in Section 9.  The sections that follow alternate between summaries of Wiener's papers and our comments on later developments. We use modern  terminology and notation in the Wiener sections but recall some of his own terms in brackets, as in linear order [series]. Our  own notes within the Wiener sections (2, 4, 6, 8) are headed by Authors' Note.  WIENER ON THE THEORY OF MEASUREMENT 167  Sections 2 and 3 are on the 1914 paper, which generalizes linear orders to interval orders and other relations. Sections 4 and  5 take up the second half of the 1915 paper since it is closely related to the 1914 paper. (An important footnote on this part  of the 1915 paper that appears in the 1921 paper is discussed in Section 5.) Sections 6 and 7 discuss the first half of the  1915 paper, which generalizes transitivity and completeness to n-ary relations. Sections 8 and 9 focus on the 1921 paper and  its program of measuring psychophysical magnitudes that are subject to thresholds of discriminability. Our final section  contains concluding remarks.  To forestall misunderstandings, we define some of our own terms and notation at this time. A relational set is a pair (X, R)  in which X is a nonempty set and R is an n-ary relation on X, i.e., R s~ X". When R is binary, we write xRy as equivalent to  (x, y) e R, and refer to (X, R) as a related set.  Let (X, R) be a related set. The converse R* of R is the binary relation on X defined by xR*y if yRx. The complement R` and  dual Rd of R are defined by (x, y) e R` if (x, y) 0 R, and Rd = (R *) `, so (x, y) e Rd if (y, x) 0 R. The symmetric  complement of R, often denoted by I, is R` o Rd, so xIy if neither xRy nor yRx.  The composition R, RZ of binary relations R, and R2 on X is defined by  R, RZ = { (x, y) E X 2 : xR, z and zR2 y for some z e X).  For m >, 3, the composition R, - - - R of binary relations R; on X is defined as the composition of R, - - - R _ , and R.  Let A = { (x, x) : x e X }, the identity relation on X. A binary relation R on X is reflexive if A c R, irreflexive if A n R =  0, symmetric if R* = R, asymmetric if R* n R = QS, transitive if RR g R, dense if R - RR, and complete if R u R* u A = X x X.  In addition, R is an equivalence relation if it is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive.  Other terms will be defined as needed.  2. SUMMARY OF THE 1914 PAPER  Let (X, P) be a related set. The relation P on X is a linear order [series] if it is irreflexive [diverse], transitive, and  complete [connected]. Linearly ordered sets have been studied by many people. Authors' Note. See the Appendix Part (A) for  Wiener's own description.  The relationship between intervals on a line or between events over time suggests an interesting generalization of linear  order. Define P as an interval order [relation of complete sequence] if it is irreflexive and satisfies  PIP g; P,  where I is the symmetric complement or similarity relation [simultaneity relation] of P. This says, for example, that if event  x ends before y begins, if events y and z overlap, and if z ends before w begins, then x ends before w begins. An interval  168 FISHBURN AND MONJARDET  order is transitive, but not complete unless I= d. Moreover, every linearly ordered set is an interval ordered set, so the  notion of interval order truly generalizes that of linear order.  Most authors treat P [precedence] and I [simultaneity] as joint primitives. If this is done and one assumes that {I=I*, I n P  = QS, P u P* u I = X x X }, then I = P` n Pd, the symmetric complement of P. Conversely, if P is irreflexive and I is defined  as P' r) Pd, then I=I*, I n P = 0, and P u P* u 1= X x X It is assumed henceforth that I is defined as P` n Pd.  To be more precise about relationships beteen events, we make the following definitions. The incomparability graph of (X, P)  is (X, I). A maximal clique [instant] of (X, I) is a nonempty subset a of X that satisfies  (i) x, y e a => x1y,  (ii) yIx for all x e a =:> y e a.  Let C be the set of all maximal cliques of (X, I). Define <, on C by, for all a, /3 e C, a<,# if xPy for some x e a and some y  e /l.  The following result assumes nothing about P apart from what is stated in its hypotheses.  THEOREM 2.1. If PIP g P and C 0 0, then (C, < r) is a linearly ordered set.  Note that irreflexivity of P is not needed to obtain the ordering properties for <p. A corollary follows easily when  irreflexivity is added.  COROLLARY 2.2. If P is an interval order then the maximal cliques of its incomparability graph are linearly ordered by <,.  Suppose X is the family of closed unit intervals on the line with xPy if max x < min y. Then (X, P) is an interval order, but  P is not dense since [0, 1 ] P[3/2, 5/2] and no z has [0, 1] PzP[3/2, 5/2]. However, <p is dense in C since C is tantamount to  R with a < r /l if a < P.  This example satisfies P 9 PIP but not P ~ PP. In general, when P is irreflexive, P c PP => P c PIP but not conversely.  It is interesting to consider conditions for which <p is dense [compact] in C regardless of whether P is dense in X. Define P  as a pre-dense interval order [csd] if it is an interval order that satisfies  (1) PSPIP,  (2) if xP*Iy then { t e X : xP*tIy } has a P-minimal element z, i.e., no such t has tPz.  Condition (2) was first formulated by Mr. Russell. It helps to ensure that for every x e X there is a <,-minimal maximal  clique in C that contains x.  WIENER ON THE THEORY OF MEASUREMENT 169  LEMMA 2.3. If P is an interval order that satisfies (2) then for every x E X there is an a e C such that x e a and, for all #  e C with l3 < p a, x 0 l.  This lemma is used to prove  THEOREM 2.4. If P is a pre-dense interval order then < p is dense in C.  The example that follows Corollary 2.2 provides a specific instance of the theorem.  3. COMMENTS ON THE 1914 PAPER  Wiener (1914, p. 441) credits Russell for suggesting the subject of the paper, which "is the result of an attempt to simplify  and generalize certain notions used by him in his treatment of the relation between the series of events and the series of  instances." Later, in the first volume of his autobiography, Wiener (1953, p. 201) acknowledges the influence of Whitehead's  axiomatic approach to his 1914 paper's "treatment of systems of measurement in the presence of thresholds between observations  whose differences were barely noticeable."  The name interval order first appeared in print in Fishburn (1970a, 1970b), where it is defined by irreflexivity and, for all  x, y, a, b e X,  (xPa, yPb) => (xPb or yPa).  This is easily seen to be equivalent to Wiener's definition, which was not then known to Fishburn. Fishburn (1985a) gives many  results about interval orders and related notions, including representability by real intervals. Monjardet (1988) provides a  summary and extensive references to work that generalizes the notion of interval order and other concepts.  The maximal cliques of the incomparability graph (X, I) of an interval ordered set (X P) are the maximal antichains or maximal  independent sets of (X P), and the incomparability graph itself is better known as an interval graph. The latter term was  introduced in Gilmore and Hoffman (1962) following earlier work on the concept by Hajos (1957) and Benzer (1959). We define an  interval graph as a related set (X E) for which there is a mapping F from X into the closed intervals of some linearly ordered  set such that, for all x, y e X  xEy-F(x)nF(y)A0.  Subgraph characterizations of interval graphs were developed by Lekkerkerker and Boland (1962) and Gilmore and Hoffman (1962,  1964), and relationships between interval graphs and interval orders are discussed in Fishburn (1985a, 1985b).  An interval graph (X, E) can also be characterized (Golumbic, 1980) by the property that the maximal cliques of (X, E) can be  linearly ordered such that, for every x c- X the maximal cliques containing x occur consecutively. This characterization  arises in the subgraph characterization proof in Gilmore and Hoffman  170 FISHBURN AND MONJARDET  (1964) and appears as the consecutive-1's-property in Fulkerson and Gross (1965) which has roots in Flinders Petrie's work on  seriation in archaeology around the turn of the century (Shuchat, 1984). Similarly, an interval order (X, P) can be  characterized by either of the following two properties:  (1) The set of maximal antichains of (X, P) is linearly ordered by <p;  (2) The set of maximal antichains of (X, P) is linearly ordered by <p and, for every x e X, the set of maximal antichains  containing x is an interval of < r.  The fact that an interval order satisfies (1) is Wiener's Corollary 2.2. Since it is easily shown that an interval order also  satisfies (2), and since the converse implications are obvious, Wiener's approach leads to a proof of the preceding  characterization of interval graphs. (See also the approach taken in Section 3.3 of Fishburn, 1985a. )  Wiener's unit interval example after Corollary 2.2 is an instance of a semiorder, which is an interval order having the  additional property that, for all x, y, z, a e X,  xPyPz => xPa or aPz.  An alternative to this condition is (PP) c (77) = QS. The term semiorder is due to Luce (1956) although the concept was used  earlier in consumer preference theory by Armstrong (1939, 1948) and, as we have seen, was not unfamiliar to Wiener. Neither  Armstrong nor Luce mentions Wiener. Luce (1956) derived basic properties for semiorders similar to Theorem 4.1 in the next  section. Scott and Suppes (1958) recognized that if (X, P) is a finite semiorder then there exists an f: X-> R such that, for  all x, y e X,  xpy- f(X) + 1 < fly).  The incomparability graph of a semiorder is a unit interval graph or an indifference graph (Roberts, 1969). In general, an  indifference graph is an interval graph with the additional property for F: (X, E) - (Y, <4) of inf F(x) <0 inf F(y) c:> sup  F(x) <4 sup fly). Roberts (1969, 1970) proved that a graph (X, E) is an indifference graph if and only if it has no 4-point  subgraph with aEx, aEy, aEz and not (xEy or xEz or yEz). Further information about semiorders and indifference graphs is  available in Fishburn (1985a) and the references of Monjardet (1988).  Wiener's conditions in Theorem 2.4 are sufficient but not necessary for the denseness of <, in C. Indeed, (1) is necessary but  (2) is not. Theorem 3.4 in Fishburn (1985a) provides access to conditions that are necessary and sufficient, but the matter is  rather tehnical and we shall not pursue it here.  4. SUMMARY OF THE 1915 PAPER, PART 2  Let (X, P) be a related set with similarity relation I = P` n Pd. Recall from Theorem 2.1 that (C, < p) is a linearly ordered  set when C ~A 0 and PIP g P. Also note that similarity need not be transitive, as when xIy, yIz, and xPz.  WIENER ON THE THEORY OF MEASUREMENT 171  To illustrate the present discussion, let X be a set of objects that have different degrees of luminosity, and interpret xPy  as x is noticeably brighter than y. Two objections to the preceding approach arise in this setting if C is interpreted as a  set of levels of brightness ordered in the natural way. First, brightness similarity can be intransitive. Second, since it is  natural to presume that an object's brightness is uniquely determined, if x is in more than one member of C then one faces the  possibility of concluding that x is brighter than itself.  Both objections are overcome by another approach. Define the strong similarity relation ;z~ [Ps] on X by  x y if {zC-X:ZIX}={zC-X:zly},  so x and y are strongly similar if every object similar to x is similar to y, and vice versa. It follows immediately that is  an equivalence relation. Hence z (unlike I) is transitive and, with D equal to the set X/ of equivalence classes of X under ,  each object is in exactly one class in D. It is therefore reasonable to view elements in D as levels of brightness. And there  is a natural way to order these levels.  Authors' Note. We proceed here as in the 1915 paper although Wiener amended what follows by a footnote on p. 191 of his 1921  paper. His footnote is discussed in the next section.  Let > o be defined on D by, for all a, # E D,  a >o P if xIPy for some x e a and some y e fl.  Then class a is brighter than # if something in a is as bright as something noticeably brighter than something in R.  Regardless of the nature of P, >o is irreflexive. Moreover, >o is transitive if IP is transitive, and >o will be complete if  PI - IP. Thus:  THEOREM 4.1. If IPIP S IP and PI s: IP then (D, >0) is a linearly ordered set.  Transitivity of IP says that if x is indistinguishable from something noticeably brighter than y, and y is indistinguishable  from something noticeably brighter than z, then x will be indistinguishable from something noticeably brighter than z. This  seems intuitively obvious. Also, since PIP g P in Wiener (1914) implies that IP is transitive, >o is transitive when P is an  interval order.  The truth of PI g IP is not so transparent. It says that if x is noticeably brighter than something indistinguishable from y,  then x is indistinguishable from something noticeably brighter than y. This is probably true, but in any case analogous  propositions for sensory stimuli are implied by the Weber-Fechner law. For example, suppose (t) x and y are just noticeably  brighter than z and (2) u is just noticeably brighter than x but uly. Weber's law says for (1) that the strengths of the  stimuli produced by z, x, and y will be a, all + c), and all + c), respectively (a, c > 0). But it also gives for the strength  of u, all + c)2 by the first part of (2), and less than all + c)2 by uly, so Weber's law is contradicted.  172 FISHBURN AND MONJARDET  Observe also that PI g IP can fail when P is an interval order. In particular, >o need not be a linear order when P is an  interval order. However, for events over time, if X is restricted to all events that last exactly five minutes, then PI g IP  and > o is a linear order.  To assure the denseness of >o in D it suffices to assume that IP is dense in X. But denseness of IP might not be necessary for  denseness of >o.  Psychologists often naively assume that a set such as (D, >o) is a datum of experience and not a construction. This leads them  into grotesque interpretations of Weber's law and other quantitative formulas. Without an approach that constructs an ordering  of levels of brightness from sensory data, no scientific psychophysics is possible. Authors' Note. See the Appendix Part (B)  for Wiener's own conclusion. ,  5. COMMENTS ON THE 1915 PAPER, PART 2  Strong similarity has been used by many authors to identify "equivalent" elements. Examples are Goodman (1951; see also  Galanter, 1956) and Halphen (1955; see also Guilbaud, 1978) in works on the measurement of psychological magnitudes that  include more or less formalized notions of semiorders and indifference graphs. However, it appears that few later authors were  aware of Wiener's use of strong similarity.  A peculiarity of his general treatment that Wiener might not have been aware of is that, while x z x, it need not be true that  xlx. The simplest example is X = { x } with xPx, in which case I= 0, D={X}, >o is empty, and the hypotheses of Theorem 4.1  hold trivially. If P is assumed to be irreflexive, then xIx for all x, and it is easily proved that the hypotheses of Theorem  4.1 imply that P is an interval order.  Wiener notes that PIP g P implies that IP is transitive. It implies also that PI is transitive. On the other hand, neither his  condition PI g IP nor its companion IP 9 PI generally holds when P is a semiorder. Although Wiener never formally defines a  concept that is tantamount to a semiorder, his discussion of Weber's law and the reference to events that last exactly five  minutes suggests that he would have found Luce's (1956) definition a familiar concept.  The general approach to Weber's law suggested by Wiener has in fact become the norm in the measurement-theoretic treatment of  psychophysics. A very nice discussion of Weber's law in this mode appears in Narens (1985, pp. 88-94).  The example in the second paragraph after Theorem 4.1 is more to the point of IP g PI than to the condition PI s IP used by  Wiener. His own condition makes sense in the context of brightness if one presumes an infinitely increasing sequence of ever  brighter objects, while IP !:-: PI would be tenable only if there were an infinitely decreasing sequence of ever darker  objects.  The resulting asymmetry of Wiener's approach in Part 2 of his 1915 paper was later rectified by a footnote on page 191 of his  1921 paper where he retracts the  WIENER ON THE THEORY OF MEASUREMENT 173  earlier approach and notes that its conceptual difficulties "arose from the author's not considering the fact that all ranges  of sensory qualities or intensities have, roughly speaking, a maximum." He goes on to suggest that >o on the set D of strong  similarity classes be replaced by a relation we denote as >2, defined by  a > 2 fl if x(IP u PI) y for some x e a and some y e J3.  He then recommends that the assumption of transitivity of IP, or of PIP s P, be replaced by the hypothesis that IP u PI is  transitive, and that everything he said about PI g IP be deleted as unnecessary. The new relation > 2 is complete, and Theorem  4.1 remains valid if its hypotheses are replaced by the transitivity of IP u PI, and (D, >0) in its conclusion is replaced by  (D, >2).  Although Wiener's 1921 amendment clarifies his original intention and yields a symmetric treatment of D, the mathematics of  the 1915 presentation are correct. In this connection we note that Theorem 4.1 as stated earlier has a natural companion based  on the relation > 1 on D defined by  a > 1 /3 if xPIy for some x e a and some y e l.  The companion says that if PI is transitive (PIPI s PI) and IP g PI, then (D, >,) is a linearly ordered set. Wiener's 1921  amendment combines > o and > 1 by taking > 2 as the union of the two.  The relationships between the relations IP (basis for >o) and PI (basis for >1) on X are discussed further in Fishburn (1985a,  Chap. 7, pp. 21-28), when P is an interval order. In this case the strong similarity relation is the intersection of the  symmetric complements of IP and PI.  6. SUMMARY OF THE 1915 PAPER, PART 1  Let (X R) be a relational set with R an n-ary relation on X so that R 9: Xn. If R is binary, transitivity says that {(x, y) e  R, (y, z) e R} => (x, z) e R, and completeness says that {x 0 y} => {(x, y) e R or (y, x) e R}. Generalizations of these  notions to n-ary relations will be considered here.  Given R g Xn, a property of R is said to be an n-transitivity of R if it can be written as follows. For all x1, x2, ..., xn e  X if there exist al, ..., ak e X such that at least one of the following expressions holds for specified C e {x1, ..., xn, al,  ..., ak},  (1) (C111C21e...,Cnl),...I(C1P1,C2P1,...,Cnp1)ER;  (2) (C 11, C21 ..., Cnl )e ..., (CI P2, C2P2~ ..., Cnp2) e Re  (h) (C11 C21, ..., Cnl)e ..., (C1Ph, C2Ph' ..., CnPh)ER,  then (x1, x2, ..., xn) e R. What distinguishes a particular form of n-transitivity is the way that the x; and aj are  positioned in (1)-(h).  174 FISHBURN AND MONJARDET  Ordinary transitivity, a 2-transitivity, has k = 1, h =1, and p, = 2: for all x, y e X, if there is an a, e X such that (1)  (x, a,), (a,, y) e R, then (x, y) e R. An example of a 3-transitivity for the ternary relation of betweenness, where abc is  shorthand for (a, b, c) e R and signifies that b is "between" a and c, has k = 1 and h = 6 as follows: for all a, b, c e X, if  there is a d e X such that  { abd, bdc } or { abd, bed) or { adc, dbc } or  { abd, acd, bac } or { dab, dac, bac } or {cba },  then abc. A 4-transitivity is the property of Vailati's separation relation, where xy 11 zw denotes (x, y, z, w) e R, which  says that if there is an e e X such that  {ab 11 dc} or {cd 11 ab{ or {ab 11 ec, ae 11 cd},  then ab 11 cd.  One property shared by various forms of n-transitivity is that if R is any n-ary relation and if P is any particular form of  n-transitivity, then there is a minimal n-ary relation R` that includes R and has property P. For ordinary binary  transitivity, R` is the transitive closure of R defined by  xR'y if there exist x, = x, x2, ..., x = y, m _ 2,  such that x;Rx;+, for all i < m.  Clearly R'R' g R', R s R`, and if S is any other transitive binary relation on X that includes R, then R's; S.  More generally, if P has the form of n-transitivity in the second paragraph above, and R g X", R' is formed iteratively as  follows. Take (x ,, ..., xn) e R, when any one of (1)-(h) holds for R; take (XI ,-,xn)eR2 when any one of (1)-(h) holds with R  u R, in place of R; continue in the natural way, and finally define R' as R u R, u R2 u - - .. Then R s R', R' satisfies P,  and it is the minimal n-ary relation on X with these properties.  To consider n-completeness [n-connexity] define X(R) = {x : xe {x,, ..., x,,{ for some (x, , ..., xn) e R }, the effective  domain for R 9 X n. A property of R is said to be an n-completeness of R if it can be written as follows. There is a nonempty  set E of permutations a on { 1, ..., n} such that, for all distinct x,, ..., xn e X(R),  (xo(,), xa(2), ..., xa(n)) e R for some a e X.  With X(R) defined in context, 3-completeness for betweenness says that, for all distinct a, b, c e X(R), either abc or bca or  cab, and 4-completeness for the separation relation says that, for all distinct a, b, c, d e X(R), ab 11 cd or ac 11 bd or ad  11 be.  Given R s Xn, one can construct in a definite way another n-ary relation that has the form of n-completeness defined by (* ).  Define R' s X n by (x, , ..., xn) e R' if all x; e X(R) and (*) is false, i.e., (x,(,), ..., xa(n)) 0 R for all a e E. Then  let A be the class of all nonempty subsets a of X(R) that satisfy  WIENER ON THE THEORY OF MEASUREMENT 175  (i) if x, y e a and a,,..., az e X(R) then (b,,..., bn) e R' for all permutations b1, ..., bn of x, y, a,, ..., an-25  (ii) if for all x e a it is true that (x, c, , ..., cn _ 1) e R' or (C1, x, C3, ..., Cn _,) e R' or ... (Cl, ..., Cn _ , , x)  e R', then c,_., Cn _ 1 e a.  Finally, define RA 9 An by, for all a1, ..., an e A,  (a1,...,an)C_RA if (a,,...,an)c-R for some a;ea;, i<n.  It is not hard to show that RA has the form of n-completeness defined at (* ), i.e., for all distinct a1, ..., an e A,  (ao(,), ..., ao(n)) e RA for some a e E.  Moreover, the a; are distinct whenever (a,, ..., an) e RA.  Further constructions can ensure that RA has a prescribed form of n-transitivity, and that, given any R s Xn, one can obtain  an n-ary relation based on R that has prescribed forms of n-transitivity and n-completeness and is such that the y; are  distinct whenever (y1, ..., yn) is in the new relation. (Authors' Note. Wiener's description of the first construction, for  RA, is obscure and is not discussed by us.) For the latter construction, form RA for the prescribed n-completeness, take the  transitive closure RA of RA with respect to the prescribed n-transitivity, then repeat for RA on A the same process for the  given n-completeness that was used to obtain RA from R on X. This yields an n-ary relation, say (R;1)a within a set Bn, that  has the prescribed forms of transitivity and completeness as well as distinct y; whenever (y1, ..., yn) e (RA)B  The construction for (RA), bears a passing resemblance to the method in a footnote of Wiener (1914) for constructing a  linearly ordered set from any related set (X, P). In that case one first obtains <p on the maximal clique set C, then takes  the transitive closure <P' of <p, defines <' on C as the asymmetric part of < P, then concludes by replicating the clique  procedure on (C, <') in place of (X, P). The binary relation obtained from the final step is a linear order on the maximal  cliques based on (C, <').  In our present setting the natural betweenness relation of a linearly ordered set is characterized by the 3-transitivity and  3-completeness conditions specified earlier, plus a third irreflexivity type condition: if abc then a, b, and c are all  different. Similarly, the quaternary separation relation in the same setting is characterized by 4-transitivity and  4-completeness for separation cited earlier, plus, ab 11 cd => I {a, b, c, d } I = 4. The preceding discussion shows that,  given any ternary or quaternary relation, a betweenness or separation relation can be constructed to have the characterizing  properties just mentioned. These important applications of the present approach indicate its relevance to other contexts.  Other properties of relations like betweenness may be of interest. For example, a natural denseness property for betweenness  says that, for all distinct a, c e X(R),  176 FISHBURN AND MONJARDET  there is a b for which abc. Under one further structural assumption, the analogous denseness property for any ternary relation  R will imply a similar denseness property for RA, and indeed for R`, and (RA )B as formulated earlier.  7. COMMENTS ON THE 1915 PAPER, PART 1  The transitive closure operation for binary relations is widely used, but we are not aware of later applications of Wiener's  general procedures for satisfying forms of n-transitivity and n-completeness. In his autobiography, Wiener (1953, p. 211)  refers to his development of these forms as his "first experience of the concentrated passionate work that is necessary for  new research." He then describes the intensity of his efforts and says that this part of the 1915 paper was one of his best  early pieces of research.  Various notions of betweenness have been widely studied, both before and after 1915. The first rigorous axiomatization of  betweenness that we know about dates to Pasch (1882), and Huntington and Kline (1917) note 11 sets of independent axioms for  strict betweenness that are necessary and sufficient for X to be linearly ordered in natural agreement with betweenness.  Fishburn (1971) summarizes the history of developments related to betweenness and gives theorems that connect it to  semiorders, interval orders, interval graphs, and indifference graphs: see also Fishburn (1985a, Chap. 4). Quaternary  relations have been used frequently in connection with difference measurement or distance measurement, where they are often  replaced by binary relations on X x X. See, for example, Fishburn (1970a, Chap. 6), Krantz et al. (1971, Chap. 4), and Roberts  (1979, Chap. 3).  Wiener's development for n-completeness, as we have interpreted it, has one difficulty that he seems not to have addressed. It  is that R' can be empty. For example, if R = X x X then R' = 0, A = QS unless its members are allowed to be empty, in which  case A = {Q1 } (which itself causes problems), and R,, = QJ.  We deferred discussion of Wiener's 1914 footnote to near the end of the preceding section since it has a natural place there.  In graph theoretic terms, the procedure that obtains (C, <') goes as follows. Begin with an arbitrary directed graph, loops  allowed. Discard all points with loops. Form a new directed graph whose points are the maximal independent sets of what  remains, with an arc from a to /t if there was an arc from some x e a to some y e /3 in the original directed graph. Take the  transitive closure of the new graph, with an arc from a to /I if the new graph has a directed path from a to fl. Delete all  arc pairs of the form {a -+ /3, /I -+ a }, and call the resulting directed graph D. Form a new directed graph whose points are  the maximal independent sets of D, with an arc from a' to fl' if some a e a' has an arc to some /3 e l' in D. The result will  be a chain, or linearly ordered set, provided that some original points are loopless.  WIENER ON THE THEORY OF MEASUREMENT 177  g. SUMMARY OF THE 1921 PAPER  The third volume of the Principia Mathematica develops a beautiful theory of measurement which, unfortunately, is inapplicable  to situations in which magnitudes are bounded above. Since some psychophysical intensities are not always susceptible to  arbitrarily large ratio increases, a program is developed here that facilitates measurement when there are natural bounds on  the magnitudes of the objects or stimuli of measurement.  The program begins with comparisons between pairs of ordered pairs of objects. The ordered pair xy = (x, y) is viewed as the  difference between x and y, or as an interval from x to y. We focus on intervals that are noticeably greater than the interval  between an object and itself. This eventually leads to the measurement of sensation intensity of the individual objects. Later  remarks pertain to cases without maxima or upper limits and to the relationship between the program described here and the  theory of measurement in the Principia.  Let (X x X, P) be a related set, and interpret xy P uv as "the difference between x and y is noticeably algebraically less  than [seems algebraically less than] the difference between a and v." Define xy E X x X as noticeably positive [positive  supraliminal] if  zz P xy for some z E X.  Let Af be the set of all noticeably positive intervals, and define similarity [seeming equality] I and strong similarity  [genuine equality] .; on -* as in the 1915 paper: I = P` n Pd and, for xy, uv e I,  xy uv if {zw E,* : zw Ixy} = {zw E -V,: zw Iuv}.  Then on *' is an equivalence relation.  Let M= the set of equivalence classes of f under . We refer to a E M as a noticeably positive class [positive supraliminal  vector], or np class for short. Although each of the noticeably positive intervals xy and uv might begin and end at very  different points on some hypothetical sensory continuum, they can be strongly similar and, if so, are in the same np class.  It is natural to regard one interval in -~Y as less than another (but not necessarily noticeably less than) if the first is  noticeably less than a third interval that is similar to the second, or the first is similar to a third interval that is  noticeably less than the second. We therefore define <2 on Af by  xy <, UV if xy(PI U IP) uv.  This is extended to M by defining, for np classes a and /1,  a < 2 /l if xy < 2 uv for some xy e a and uv e P.  Next, to each pair a, # e M with a < 2 # we associate a binary relation on X, i.e., a set d(a, #) of pairs in X x X. A loose  interpretation of xy e d(a, #) is that either we  178 FISHBURN AND MONJARDET  can begin at x, move down by fl, and then back up by a to arrive at y, or begin at y, move up by /3, and then back down by a  to arrive at x. Formally, with a, /3 E M and a < 2 P, for all xy E X x X define  xy E d(a, f3) if there is a z E X such that  either { xz e fl, yz E a } or { zy E P, zx E al.  We denote by D the set of all such d(a, /3), and refer to each member of D as a positive difference set [intensity vector]. It  should be noted that xy E d(a, fl) need not be in Ae. That is, xy need not be a noticeably positive interval to be the  "difference" of a /3 and an a for which a <2 Q.  One refinement can be made to D before we consider measurement as such. This results from the possibility that d(a, P) and  d(a', l3') have a nonempty intersection but are not identical, as could happen when a' and J3' are greater than a and fl,  respectively, by the same increment. Then, when the range of intensities is bounded, we might have xy E d(a, (3) along with xy  0 d(a', l3'). To account for this possibility we form the graph (D, E) with d(a, fl) E d(a', /3') if d(a, /3) n d(a', fl') :o  QS, and then take the union of the positive difference sets d(a, fl) with each connected component (by the transitive closure  of E) of the graph. We let Ddenote the resultant set of unions and refer to each dc-D, as a disjoint difference class  [separated vector]. If d, d' E D" and d :A d', then d n d'= QS.  We now consider measurement itself. Let )r denote a class of binary relations R, S, T,... on a ground set that we continue to  denote by X. In the psychophysically motivated discussion above, D and Dare examples of .*'. For each positive integer p let  T" be the p-fold composition of T with itself (see Section 1). For each pair (p, v) of positive integers let F(p, v) be the  family of ordered pairs from , '- that have ratio p/v according to the following definition:  F(p, v) = { (R, S) E Y x ./6 : there is a T E .Y and x, y, z, w E X such that xy E T" r) R  and zw E T" n S}.  Each F(p, v) is a binary relation on .'. Informally speaking, if (R, S) E F(p,, v) then, for some T, p copies of T  end-to-end equal 1 copy of R, and v copies of T end-toend equal 1 copy of S. As a consequence, the ratio of two relations is  defined in terms of a common submultiple instead of in terms of a common multiple as in the Principia. This allows us to  proceed with measurement in the absence of arbitrarily large multiples.  With bounded intensities in mind, and with the understanding that AF is fixed throughout, we next define the index p (R) for  each R E .%'' by  p(R) =inf{p/v : (R, S)EF(p, v) for some SEA''}.  If -'' contains a maximum relation then p(R) is the ratio of R to the maximum. In the unbounded case of the Principia, we  would have p(R) = 0 for all R.  WIENER ON THE THEORY OF MEASUREMENT 179  In the case of bounded intensities, as intended for D or D p provides a measurement of each d(a, J3) or d. For d e D, we  assign the value p(d) to each interval xy e d and regard this value as a measurement of the difference of sensation intensity  between its end points.  The final step in our basic program is to define a measure m(x) for each x e X. Intuitively, we would like this measure to  reflect the index of the difference between x and a sensation of zero intensity. However, since the latter has not been  defined, and there may be a natural bound away from zero, we take  m(x) =sup{p(R):ReAA' and xyeR for some yeX}.  This guarantees that each x e X has a unique measure with respect to A'. It does not imply that m(x) :A m(y) when x :A y, but  m can be made injective if an additional condition is imposed. The present definition can be used with any class A', but when  p = 0, as in the Principia context, we would also have m = 0.  The preceding constructions do not necessarily imply that the index of the composition of two members of .R is the sum of  their indices, i.e., that p(RS) = p(R) + p(S), when RS e .Y. However, by working backwards from m, we can form a new class of  binary relations on X that satisfy additivity. For each real p let  fly) = {xyeXXX:m(x)-m(y)=p}  and let _*-'= { f(p) : f(p) :A QS }. For each R c-A" define T(R) = p when R =f(y) as the measure of the new R. Clearly, T(R*)  = -T(R), and T(RR*)=T(R)+T(R*)=0. More generally, if R, S, and RS are in A', then  T(RS) =T(R)+T(S),  and if SR is also in . *` then RS =SR. Additivity for m itself can also be secured in the obvious way with respect to the  subsets of X which have the same measure. This shows that the popular opinion that only extensive magnitudes like length and  mass have a commutative, associative operation of addition is erroneous.  The preceding developments can be illustrated for the disjoint difference class set Din the context of color saturation  where the natural unit of measurement is complete saturation, say, a red for which nothing can be redder. It leads to m(x) as  the degree of saturation of object x. Such degrees might be commensurate with saturations arrived at by the theory in Section  4 (amended as in Section 5) when P there is taken to be "is noticeably more saturated than," but the two approaches are not  equivalent except under complicated assumptions.  The previous program uses the maximum or upper limit of members of .7f. as the measurement standard. When this seems  artificial, as perhaps with brightness or loudness, one might use a just noticeably different interval as the standard.  However, since we avoid the assumption that all intervals from a stimulus to other just noticeably greater stimuli are equal,  we adopt the class of all intervals that are less than noticeable as our real standard of measurement. Let V be this class. For  480/36/2-2  180 FISHBURN AND MONJARDET  example, when f = D,V is the union of members of D, whose xy pairs are not in -V'. We then apply our previous program to V  in place of .*' to give an index p on the members of Gh or on the intervals in those members. This index on 9l is unique. We  then extend it to noticeable intervals R E ~,Y by defining p' on d E .~f \ by  p'(d) = f Ap(e) : there are e E V with S E e and R E d such that Sz = R (A. copies of an interval in S equal 1 in R)}.  Since there is no assurance that .lp(e) = A'p(e') when both (A, e) and (A', e') satisfy the conditions, p' is a  correspondence. For R E d we take p'(R) = p'(d). Then, for m on X we proceed as before with the sup operation to obtain a  unique measure m(x) for each X EX. Moreover, the procedure described earlier for f(p) and i can be invoked to secure  additivity.  Since our earlier program for bounded measurement does not follow the methodology of the Principia, only the approach of the  preceding paragraph can be compared to the approach of Whitehead and Russell. Under suitable assumptions it is shown that the  latter two approaches give substantially the same results.  In conclusion, we can say that the methods of measurement in this paper provide unambiguous ways of integrating a large number  of interval comparisons based on the notion of "is noticeably greater than" into a coherent quantitative law such as that  proposed by Weber. Authors' Note. See the Appendix Part (C) for Wiener's own concluding words.  9. COMMENTS ON THE 1921 PAPER  Three differences between Wiener's 1921 paper and his two earlier papers seem noteworthy. First, unlike the earlier work that  generalizes linear orders to interval orders, semiorders, and similar related sets, the 1921 paper focuses on comparisons of  pairs of differences and the role of nontransitivity of the similarity relation for such comparisons. Second, the 1921 paper  does not axiomatize Wiener's measurement program. And third, there is no explicit mention of the paper in his autobiography.  There are several plausible explanations for the omission of axioms to support his theory. For example, in what is already a  long paper, a clear statement of axioms might be thought less important than a thorough description of his measurement  program, both informally (pp. 181-189) and formally (p. 189-199). Moreover, he refers to the 1915 paper in ways which could  suggest that its axioms might be adapted and extended to the more intricate comparison-of-differences context. Since the 1921  paper presents an alternative to the measurement theory of the Principia but invokes results from that work in its proofs (pp.  194-196, 200-204), Wiener  WIENER ON THE THEORY OF MEASUREMENT 181  may have presupposed a substantial part of the Principia's foundations in his own theory. In this respect it is perhaps not  beside the point to note that Russell refereed the 1921 paper for the London Mathematical Society. His report, reprinted in  Wiener (1977, p. 86), says in part that the chief importance of Wiener's principles "is in respect of such things as  intensities, which cannot be increased indefinitely... . So far as I am aware, Dr. Wiener is the first to consider, with the  necessary apparatus of mathematical logic, the possibility of obtaining numerical measures of such quantities. His solution of  the problem is, so far as I can see, complete and entirely satisfactory."  According to Suppes and Zinnes (1963, p. 38), "An exact axiomatic reconstruction of Wiener's ideas is to be found in the  dissertation of Muriel Wood Gerlach (1957); her axioms are too complicated to state here." We have not studied Gerlach's work  just as we have not gone into details concerning the relationships between the Principia measurement theory and Wiener's  theory that he discusses in pp. 199-204 of the 1921 paper.  Although Wiener may have initiated the idea of measurement by threshold comparisons of pairs of differences, his particular  approach, excepting Gerlach (1957), does not appear to have been followed by others. One indication of why this would be so is  his rather artificial way of inducing additivity for compositions. In the modern representational theory of measurement,  additivity with respect to composition or for a binary operation of concatenation would be deduced for the primary  representation that follows from the axioms. Good examples of this are found in Krantz et al. (1971). The same authors, in  Suppes et al. (1989), provide valuable coverage on measurement representations that accommodate thresholds of discriminability.  10. CONCLUSIONS  Our paper recounts Norbert Wiener's early contributions (1914, 1915, 1921) to the theory of relations and measurement theory.  These contributions center around the generalization of linear orders to interval orders, generalizations of transitivity and  completeness to n-ary relations, and psychophysical measurement of phenomena subject to discriminability thresholds through  comparisons between pairs of differences or intervals.  Wiener's papers on these subjects were written in the challenging notation of the Principia Mathematica, which he studied as a  teenager under Bertrand Russell soon after he earned his Ph.D. Although Wiener's subsequent contributions to Brownian motion,  Fourier transforms, ergodic theory, and related topics were highly acclaimed during his lifetime, his Principia-related work  went largely unnoticed. It has only recently been seen as an achievement of lasting value. By translating those papers into  modern terms, we hope that others will appreciate their contributions.  As we have studied Wiener's papers and related writings, other topics of historical interest have come into sight. One of  these is the development, including  182 FISHBURN AND MONJARDET  controversies, on measurement in psychophysics from around 1860 to 1930. Another is the reception to the measurement theory in  the Principia Mathematica and to Wiener's program during the latter part of that period. We are not well informed on these  matters and would welcome references or encourage others to research these topics.  APPENDIX  (A) Excerpt from the 1914 Paper, First Paragraph  The theory of relations is one of the most interesting departments of the new mathematical logic. The relations which have  been most thoroughly studied are the series: that is, relations which are contained in diversity, transitive, and connected  or, in Mr. Russell's symbolism.... Cantor, Dedekind, Frege, Schroder, Burali-Forti, Huntington, Whitehead, and Russell, are  among those who have helped to give us an almost exhaustive account of the more fundamental properties of series. There is a  class of relations closely allied to series, however, which has received very scant attention from the mathematical logicians.  Examples ... are the relation between two events in time when one completely precedes the other, or the relation between two  intervals on a line when one lies to the left of the other, and does not overlap it, or, in general, the relation between two  stretches a and /t, of terms of a series R, when any term lying in a bears the relation R to any term lying in fl. Relations  of this sort, which I shall call relations of complete sequence, differ in general from series in not being connected: that  is, for example, it is not necessary that of two distinct events, each of which wholly precedes or follows some other event,  one should wholly precede the other, for the times of their occurrence may overlap. (p. 441)  (B) Excerpt from the 1915 Paper, Final Paragraph  The interest and importance of this work on sensation-intensities lies in the fact that it is often naively assumed by  psychologists that the series of sensation-intensities is in some wise a datum of experience, and not a construction. As a  result, they are led into the most grotesque interpretations of such numerical formulae as Weber's law. A series of  sensation-intensities is often treated as if it were ... a series of sensation-quantities, without any analysis whatsoever of  the basis on which this series is put into one-one correspondence with the series of 0 and the positive real numbers, in order  of magnitude. It is at any rate a necessary preliminary to this exceedingly complex problem to know what the series of  sensation-intensities really are, and to what their relation to our experience is: without this analysis, no scientific  psychophysics is possible. (p. 28)  (C) Excerpt from the 1921 Paper, Final Paragraph  In conclusion, let us consider what bearing all this work of ours can have on experimental psychology. One of the great  defects under which the latter science at  WIENER ON THE THEORY OF MEASUREMENT 183  present labours is its propensity to try to answer questions without first trying to find out just what they ask. The  experimental investigation of Weber's law is a case in point: what most experimenters do take for granted before they begin  their experiments is infinitely more important and interesting than any results to which their experiments lead. One of these  unconscious assumptions is that sensations or sensation-intervals can be measured, and that this process of measurement can be  carried out in one way only. As a result, each new experimenter would seem to have devoted his whole energies to the invention  of a method of procedure logically irrelevant to everything that had gone before ... no two people choose quite the same  method for working up their results. Now, if we make a large number of comparisons of sensation-intervals of a given sort with  reference merely to whether one seems larger than another, the methods of measurement given in this paper indicate perfectly  unambiguous ways of working up the results so as to obtain some quantitative law such as that of Weber, without introducing  such bits of mathematical stupidity as treating a "just noticeable difference" as an "infinitesimal," and have the further  merit of always indicating some tangible mathematical conclusion, no matter what the outcome of the comparisons may be. (pp.  204-205)  REFERENCES  ARMSTRONG, W. E. (1939). The determinateness of the utility function. Economic Journal, 49, 453-467. ARMSTRONG, W. E. (1948).  Uncertainty and the utility function. Economic Journal, 58, 1-10.  BENZER, S. (1959). On the topology of the genetic fine structure. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 45,  1607-1620.  FALMAGNE, J. C. (1985). Elements of psychophysical theory. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. FISHBURN, P. C. (1970a). Utility theory  for decision making. New York: Wiley.  FISHBURN, P. C. (1970b). Intransitive indifference with unequal indifference intervals. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 7,  144-149.  FISHBURN, P. C. (1971). Betweenness, orders and interval graphs. Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra, 1, 159-178.  FISHBURN, P. C. (1985a). Interval orders and interval graphs: A study of partially ordered sets. New York: Wiley.  FISHBURN, P. C. (1985b). Interval graphs and interval orders. Discrete Mathematics, 55, 135-149. FISHBURN, P. C. (1986).  Measurement theory and mathematics. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 30, 91-96.  FULICERSON, D. R., & GROSS, O. A. (1965). Incidence matrices and interval graphs. Pacific Journal of Mathematics, 15, 835-855.  GALANTER, E. H. (1956). An axiomatic and experimental study of sensory order and measure. Psychological Review, 63, 16-28.  GERLACH, M. W. (1957). Interval measurement of subjective magnitudes with subliminal differences (Tech. Rep. No. 7). Stanford,  CA: Stanford University, Applied Mathematics and Statistics Laboratory. GILMORE, P. C., & HOFFMAN, A. J. (1962).  Characterizations of comparability and interval graphs [Abstract]. In International Congress of Mathematicians (p. 29).  Stockholm.  GILMORE, P. C., & HOFFMAN, A. J. (1964). A characterization of comparability graphs and of interval graphs. Canadian Journal  of Mathematics, 16, 539-548.  GOLUMBIC, M. C. (1980). Algorithmic graph theory and perfect graphs. New York: Academic Press. GOODMAN, N. (1951). Structure  of appearance. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press.  184 FISHBURN AND MONJARDET  GUILBAUD, G. TH. (1978). Continu expbrimental et continu mathbmatique. Mathematiques et Sciences Humaines, 62, 11-33.  HAJOS, G. (1957). Uber eine Art von Graphen. Internationale Mathematische Nachrichten, 11, 65. HALPHEN, E. (1955). La notion  de vraisemblance. Publications de 1'Institut de Statistique de l'UniversW de Paris, 4, 41-92.  HUNTINGTON, E. V., & Kline, J. R. (1917). Sets of independent postulates for betweenness. Transactions of the American  Mathematical Society, 26, 257-282.  KAMP, H. (1979). Events, instants and temporal reference. In C. Rohrer (Ed.), Time, tense and quantifiers (pp. 376-417).  Tubingen.  KRANTZ, D. H., LUCE, R. D., SUPPES, P., & Tversky, A. (1971). Foundations of measurement (Vol. 1). New York: Academic Press.  KYBURG, H. E. (1977). Comments on [14b], [15a], [21a]. In N. Wiener (Author), Collected works (Vol. 1, pp. 83-86). Cambridge,  MA: MIT Press.  LEKKERKERKER, C. G., & Boland, J. Ch. (1962). Representation of a finite graph by a set of intervals on the real line.  Fundamenta Mathematicae, 51, 45-64.  LUCE, R. D. (1956). Semiorders and a theory of utility discrimination. Econometrica, 24, 178-191. MASANI, P. R. (1990).  Norbert Wiener, 1894-1964. Basel/Boston: Birkhauser-Verlag. MONJARDET, B. (1988). Intervals, intervals, - - .. Order, 5,  211-219.  NARENS, L. (1985). Abstract measurement theory. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. PASCH, M. (1882). Vorlesungen fiber neuere  Geometrie. Leipzig: Teubner. ROBERTS, F. S. (1969). Indifference graphs. In F. Harary (Ed.), Proof techniques in graph theory  (pp. 139-146). New York: Academic Press.  ROBERTS, F. S. (1970). On nontransitive indifference. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 7, 243-258. ROBERTS, F. S. (1979).  Measurement theory with applications to decisionmaking, utility, and the social sciences. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.  SCOTT, D., & SUPPES, P. (1958). Foundational aspects of theories of measurement. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 23, 113-128.  SHUCHAT, A. (1984). Matrix and network models in archaeology. Mathematics Magazine, 57, 3-14. SUPPES, P., KRANTZ, D. H., LUCE,  R. D., & TVERSKY, A. (1989). Foundations of measurement (Vol. 2). New York: Academic Press.  SUPPES, P., & Zinnes, J. L. (1963). Basic measurement theory. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, & E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook of  mathematical psychology (Vol. I, pp. 1-76). New York: Wiley.  WIENER, N. (1914). A contribution to the theory of relative position. Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 17,  441-449.  WIENER, N. (1915). Studies in synthetic logic. Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 18, 14-28.  WIENER, N. (1921). A new theory of measurement: a study in the logic of mathematics. Proceedings of the London Mathematical  Society, 19, 181-205.  WIENER, N. (1953). Ex prodigy: My childhood and youth. New York: Simon & Schuster. WIENER, N. (1977). Collected works (Vol.  1), Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  RECEIVED: October 16, 1989