10.1016/0022-2496(92)90050-h
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 36, 1-20 (1992)  The "Horse Race" Random Utility Model for Choice Probabilities and Reaction Times, and Its Competing Risks Interpretation  A. A. J. MARLEY  McGill University  AND  HANS COLONIUS  Universitdt Oldenburg  Random utility models have traditionally been applied to probabilistic choice data, with little attention to reaction times.  We describe the class of "horse race" random utility models that can be applied to both choice probabilities and reaction  times. We show that any (well behaved) set of choice probabilities and reaction times on a fixed set can be represented by an  independent "horse race" random utility model, and relate this result to work in the theory of competing risks. We use the  latter theory to motivate the condition that the option chosen and the time of choice be independent, a condition that is  satisfied by a large class of (extreme value) "horse race" random utility models. Combining the latter condition with the  assumption of an independent "horse race" random utility model yields a new characterization of Luce's choice model, and a  generalization of these conditions to subset choices (as opposed to choosing a single "best" element) yields the transition  probabilities of Tversky's elimination-by-aspects model. 1992 Academic Press, Inc.  1. INTRODUCTION  Random utility models hold an important position in theoretical, experimental, and applied work in the areas of preference,  ranking and choice (Colonius, 1984, provides a recent extensive summary of much of the theoretical work, and BenAkiva and  Lerman, 1985, and Train, 1986, give detailed discussions of statistical properties and applications). These models are  normally applied to situations where a person has to select a single "best" option from an available set, but (see later)  Reprint requests should be addressed to A. A. J. Marley, Department of Psychology, McGill University, 1205 Avenue Docteur  Penfield, Montreal, Quebec H3A IBI, Canada. Hans Colonius can be contacted at Institut fur Kognitionsforschung, Universitdt  Oldenburg/FB 5, P.O. Box 2503, Oldenburg, D-2900, Germany.  0022-2496/92 $3.00  Copyright cQ 1992 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  they can also be generalized to include cases where a person may select a subset (possibly including two or more options) for  further consideration or final choice. A challenging theoretical question in this domain has been: under what conditions does  a set of choice probabilities satisfy a random utility model? Falmagne (1978) gave the solution for probabilities of choice  (of single "best" elements) defined on all subsets of a finite set, and Cohen (1980) extended this result to infinite sets;  Marley (1990) summarizes work on the case where only binary choice probabilities are available-no satisfactory solution has  yet been developed in that case. Also, Barbera and Pattanaik (1986) use techniques paralleling those of Falmagne (1978) to  characterize random utility models where a person can select a subset (possibly including two or more options) for further  consideration or final choice. Such (transition) random utility models (Corbin & Marley, 1974) are related to, but not  identical to, the random (subset) advantage models that we discuss later in this paper.  An interesting extension of random utility models and of the associated theoretical questions arises when we also consider  reaction times. In the preference area, there are few theoretical or experimental studies of the extended problem, exceptions  being Busemeyer, Forsyth, and Nozawa (1988) and Marley (1989) for theoretical developments, and Petrusic and Jamieson (1978)  for experimental work. The present paper summarizes some elementary theoretical results regarding the joint representation of  choice probabilities and reaction times by (appropriately defined) random utility models and poses the general  representational problem. In particular, we show that (under quite general conditions), any set of choice probabilities and  reaction times on a fixed choice set can be represented by an (appropriately defined) independent random utility model.  However, it is not possible to reduce a general (dependent) random utility model over all subsets of some master set to an  independent random utility model, and the problem of characterizing such dependent random utility models (for choice  probabilities and reaction times) is still open. We relate our results to work in theory of competing risks, and use  techniques from that theory to study models where the time of choice and the option chosen are independent.  This independence condition is satisfied by Marley's (1989) class of random utility models, which includes all models based on  multivariate (dependent) Weibull distributions-in particular, Luce's (1959) choice model, the transition probabilities in  Tversky's (1972a, b) elimination-by-aspects (EBA) model, and McFadden's (1978) generalized extreme value class (GEV) all have  such a representation. An open question is whether there are (random utility) models not in Marley's class that satisfy  independence of the time of choice and option chosen.  We also characterize Luce's (1959) choice model as the only model (for choice of the single "best" option from the available  set) that satisfies both sets of independence conditions mentioned above. Finally we generalize these models and conditions to  allow choices of subsets, rather than single elements, and show that the transition probabilities of Tversky's (1972a, b)  elimination-by-aspects (EBA) model are uniquely characterized by those generalized independence conditions.  For simplicity, the major notation and results of the paper are stated in terms of selection of a single "best" element.  Section 5 then extends the results to subset choice.  2. "HORSE RACE" RANDOM UTILITY MODELS  Let S = IX,, ..., x} be a finite set of potential choice options and let the subset X of S, with I X1 > 2, be the currently  available choice set.' T(X) is a random variable denoting the time at which a choice is made, C(X) is a random variable  denoting the (single "best") element chosen, and PX(x; t), t >, 0, is the probability that option x is chosen from X after  Px(x; t) = Pr[C(X) = x r)T(X) > t] (1)  may be thought of as a survival function (for option x). A collection of survival functions {P,(x; t) : x e X s S} for a fixed  X 9 S will be called a joint structure of choice probabilities and reaction times. If the collection of survival functions  ranges over all subsets of S, the joint structure is called complete, and denoted by (S, P). If nothing else is specified, we  will tacitly assume below that the joint structures considered are complete.  We now investigate a simple model generating such a joint structure, namely the "horse race" random utility model (cf. Marley,  1989). Assume that associated with each option x e X there is a nonnegative random variable t(x) which denotes the time of  occurrence of some "event" associated with that option; the element is chosen whose "event" occurs first. In terms of the  above notation, for each x e X  PX(x;t)=Pr[t<t(x)<t(y):for all yeX-{x}]. (2)  We assume that all distributions are absolutely continuous (Feller, 1966, pp. 136-140), i.e., they have densities and no  singular components. Our main result (Theorem 1) need not hold if simultaneous occurrences of "events" can happen with  positive probability (cf, e.g., Miller, 1977); absolute continuity ensures that a single "best" element is always defined by  the above "events." (In fact, by associating "events" with subsets rather than with single elements, we can even study models  of subset choice under this condition of absolute continuity-see Section 5).  DEFINITION 1. A joint structure of choice probabilities and reaction times (S, P) satisfies a "horse race" random utility  model if there is a nonnegative random vector t= (t(x,), ..., t(x) on some probability space such that Eq. (2) holds for all  subsets  ' Note that the cardinality of the subset X is assumed to be > 2. For single-element subsets, it is not obvious why the time  for a choice should vary at all. If it is taken to reflect the time to choose between that option and no choice at all, the  no-choice option (Corbin and Marley, 1974) could be included in S which again restricts the subsets X to cardinality > 2.  X, with JXJ > 2, of S. The random vector t is called a random representation of the joint structure. If the components of t  are jointly independent, then the random representation (and the corresponding "horse race" random utility model) is called  independent.  The term "random utility" in this definition derives from the following observation (see Marley, 1989). Setting  PX(x)= lim P, (X; t) r-o+  = Pr[t(x) < t(y) : for all y E X - {x}]  = Pr[t(x) =min{t(y) : y E X}],  then Px(x) denotes the probability of choosing option x from X. Obviously, the collection of choice probabilities {PX(x) : x e  X g S} constitutes a structure of choice probabilities (Corbin and Marley, 1974), and the representing vector t also provides  a (choice) random utility representation (Corbin and Marley, 1974) for these choice probabilities. Note that the usual  representation is in terms of random variables U such that  PX(x)=Pr[U(x)=maxIU(y) : yEX}].  Clearly, these two representations (in terms of a min or a max) are equivalent in that one can be derived from the other by  applying an appropriately chosen strictly monotonic (decreasing) transformation on the relevant random variables, leaving the  choice probabilities invariant.  The representation problem for a joint structure of choice probabilities and reaction times is then:  Given a joint structure of choice probabilities and reaction times {Px(x, t); x E X g S}, what conditions on the survival  functions Px(x; t) are necessary and sufficient for the existence of a "horse race" random utility representation of that  joint structure? (RP)  One aim of this paper is to point out a close connection between a (partial) solution to the above problem and a basic result  in the theory of competing risks (see, e.g., David and Moeschberger, 1978). The latter theory refers to situations in which an  object is exposed to two or more causes of failures, or risks, simultaneously. There are postulated to be a fixed number of  different mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive causes which compete to bring about the eventual failure of the  object under study. Obvious examples of such a situation arise in actuarial science and industrial reliability applications. A  basic condition underlying most competing risks situations is that only the time of failure and the identity of its cause are  observable (the latent failure time model, cf. Gail, 1982) as opposed to the full failure distribution for all the causes.  If Q,(x; t) denotes the probability that a failure due to cause x is observed after time t when S is the set of possible  causes (or risks), then in the theory of competing risks Q,(x; t) is commonly called the crude survival function for cause x.  Returning to the "horse race" random utility model, Q,(x; t) obviously corresponds to the observable survival function Ps(x;  t) for choices from S. Moreover, it should be clear that going over to a subset X of feasible choices corresponds to a  competing risks situation where all risks in S not contained in X are a priori eliminated.  We now present a simple proof, based on Berman (1963), that, under some regularity conditions, any set of choice probabilities  and reaction times { PX (x; t ) x e X} on a fixed (finite) set X can be represented by independent random variables in such a  way that Eq. (2) holds (Townsend, 1976, presents a related result). It then follows immediately from that result what the  conditions are for a (complete) joint structure of choice probabilities and reaction times {PX(x; t) : x e Xg S} to be  representable by an independent horse race random utility model. We then restate these results in terms of hazard functions,  relate them to work on competing risks theory, and study the special case where the option chosen and the time of choice are  independent. Berman's (1963) proof is short, so we include a variant of it for completeness. Berman wrote his proof in terms  of distribution functions corresponding to 1 - P, (x; t), whereas we write ours in terms of the survival functions PX(x; t).  Also, the distributions in the solution can be either proper (with zero measure at infinity) or improper (with positive  measure at infinity)---we briefly discuss this fact after presenting the theorem and proof. (The interpretation of the  solution given in Part(b) of Theorem 1 is given in Section 3).  For simplicity, we assume PX(x; t) > 0 for all t > 0. The result is easily generalized to various weaker conditions (see  Marley, 1992).  THEOREM 1. (a). Consider a joint structure of choice probabilities and reaction times { PX (x; t) : x e X } on a fixed finite  set X. If each PX (x; t), x e X, is absolutely continuous and positive for all t > 0, then there exist unique independent  random variables tx(x), x e X, such that Eq. (2) holds.  (b) A (complete) joint structure of choice probabilities and reaction times, i.e. {PX(x; t), x e X 9 S}, can be uniquely  represented by an independent horse race random utility model if the conditions of (a) hold and  [(d/dt) PX(x; t)]  PAY, t)I  ( Y_ yeX  is independent of X g; S for all t > 0.  Proof (also see Berman, 1963). Part (a). We wish to find, for the given X- S, (nonnegative) random variables t'(x), x e X,  such that for x e X and for t >, 0,  We now assume that tX exists satisfying Eq. (3) and show how that assumption allows us to actually construct the solution.  If tX exists, i.e., Eq. (3) holds, then with T(x) =min,,EXtx(y) we have  Px(y;t)= Y Pr[t<t'(y)<t'(z)-for all zc-X-{y}]  VEX YEX  = Pr[t < min tx(y)] vex  = Pr[t < T(X)],  and also letting GX(t) = Pr[tx(x) > t], we have (using independence of the t'(y), yC-X)  Gv(t)=Pr[T(X)>t].  vex  Combining these two results, we have  Pr[T(X) > t] = Y Px(y; t) = II GX(t), (4) YCX VEX  each term being the probability that T(X) exceeds t. Inserting the right hand side of Eq. (4) in the right hand side of Eq.  (3), where the right hand side of Eq. (3) equals  we obtain  ft 11 GX(s)d[I-GX(s)1, YE {x}  Px(x; t)= -f H Gx,(s). [GX(s)]-1 dGx(s)  -_ vex  f r~ [ Y_ Px(y; s)] d{ log GX(s)} iCX  Conversion to a differential equation yields  dPx(x; s)= ,Y_ PX(Y; s)J d{log GX(s)}, [vex  with (unique, proper or improper) solution  GX(t)=exp f f [ I Px(y; s)]-1 dPx(x; s){. (6) L E X  (Remember, we are assuming that Px(x; t), x E X, are positive and absolutely continuous for all t >, 0). For suppose {H X, x E  X} is a second solution. Then it also satisfies Eq. (5) for all s, and therefore  log GX (s) = log HX (s) + C,  so  Gz (s) = AHX (s).  But we require that for s = 0, GX (s) = HX (s) = 1, so A = 1.  Thus the random vector tX composed of the (proper or improper) random variables tx(x), x E X, with survival functions GX (t),  t,>0, is the desired "horse race" random utility representation of {PX(x; t), XEX}.  Part (b), Clearly, to have a common random utility representation t of P, (x; t), x E X g S}, we require that tx(x) be  independent of X for all X S~ S, i.e., that the right hand expression of Eq. (6) be independent of X, so in particular we  require that  [(d/dt) PX(x; t)]  (Y_ PX(v; t) J v  be independent of X for all t > 0. Q.E.D.  Some, but not all, of the distributions (and associated random variables) in the above solution may be improper-i.e., have  positive measure at infinity. This occurs if the integral in Eq. (6) does not diverge (to minus infinity) as t goes to  infinity. However, provided the reaction time distribution Pr[T(x) > t] is proper, i.e., with zero measure at infinity (which  it customarily would be), then at least one of the G x, , x E X, must be proper because by Eq. (4) their product is then  proper. Miller (1977) presents a quite elementary example with T proper, but with one of the distributions in the solution  improper, and he also presents an alternative condition (to absolute continuity) under which solutions (proper or improper)  exist.  In summary, given a set of reaction time distributions {PX(x; t) : x E X g~ S}, we can use the expression given in the  statement of the theorem and its dependence or otherwise on X s~ S to check whether these reaction time distributions are  compatible with an independent "horse race" random utility model, and if they are, to obtain the (unique) solution.  We now relate this result to other work from the theory of competing risks. In particular, we show how the condition in  Theorem 1(b) can be interpreted as saying that the cause specific (or crude) hazard rate associated with outcome (read: cause)  x, x E X, is independent of X.  3. HAZARD RATE REFORMULATION  For an arbitrary subset X of S, define a hazard function (e.g., Luce, 1986, p. 13) with respect to the crude survival function  for option x in context X as follows:  hX(t)= lim (116)Pr[t<T(X),<t+6nC(X)=xlT(X)>t]. (7) a-o+  Thus, h'(t) can be interpreted as the instantaneous rate of choosing option x from X at time t given that no choice was made  before t. In terms of competing risks, hX(t) is the instantaneous rate of failure from cause x when all causes in X act  simultaneously, commonly called the cause-specific (or crude) hazard rate. For h'(t) to exist, we have to assume absolute  continuity of the crude survival function Px(x; t). Going over to the unconditioned probability in Eq. (7) and remembering the  elementary fact that  Pr[T(X) > t] _ Y Px(Y; t) (8) VEX  (see proof of Theorem la) gives  ( Y_ PAY; t)', vex  provided Pr [T(X) > t] :A 0.  Note that the right hand side expression in Eq. (9) agrees (except in sign) with that given in the statement of Theorem 1(b).  Thus, the arguments below simply show how to construct the solution given in Theorem 1(a) from the hazard function perspective  given by hX (t), t > 0. For a fixed set X, Eq. (9) leads directly to the desired random variable representation, and for a  common representation on all subsets X of a given set S, hX must not depend on X (as Theorem lb).  Pr[T(X) > t] is commonly referred to as the overall survival distribution (for set X) with a corresponding overall hazard rate  hx(t); i.e., by definition  _ -d/dt Pr[T(X) > t] hx(t) Pr[T(X) > t] '  (10)  and so from Eqs. (8), (9), (10)  hx(t)= Y, h.x(t). XEX  The next step towards a random utility representation is to define a set of independent random variables tx(x), x e X, with  survival distribution functions (SDFs) given by  Pr[tx(x)>t]=exp -Jr hf(s) ds] (11) 0  =GX(t).  (This is the standard relationship between a hazard function hx(t) and its survival distribution GX(t~--see, for instance,  Luce, 1986, p. 15). But this representation of {Gx, x E X} is exactly the form given in the proof of Theorem 1 using Berman's  (1963) approach. Note that in order for GX (t), t ~ 0, to be a proper SDF, we must have that  J h_Y(s) ds 0  diverges to infinity as t tends to infinity.  Thus, under rather mild regularity conditions, the independent random variables t'(x), x E X constructed above can be used to  generate the survival functions Px(x; t). In competing risks theory, this is a well-known result, often referred to as the  "nonidentifiability problem" (cf. Cox, 1959; Berman, 1963; Tsiatis, 1975; Elandt-Johnson & Johnson, 1980, p. 277 ff). It means  that any set of competing risk data (in the absolutely continuous case) can be explained by some independent risk model. This  is conceived as a problem since the independence model is often unrealistic (e.g., when systemic diseases are studied). The  only way to establish identifiability of a dependent model in the standard competing risks situation is to assume that the  distribution of the vector t belongs to some (flexible) parametric family. It is then often possible to estimate the  parameters of the multivariate distribution and to test for independence (see, e.g., Basu & Gosh, .1978; Arnold & Brockett,  1983).  Remember that for a joint structure of choice probabilities and reaction times the random variables t'(x) defined according to  Eq. (11) do not completely solve the representation problem (RP) stated above. As already discussed, their SDF's, GX, defined  via hX , in general depend on the specific subset X of feasible choice options, whereas (see Definition 1) we want the same  random vector (t(x,),..., t(xn)) to generate the survival functions Px(x; t) for arbitrary x E X g S. However, as also  mentioned in our discussion of Berman's result, it is trivial to state the additional conditions that are needed for the same  independent random variables to represent { Px (x, t) : x E X } for all X g S. Nonetheless, we see in the next section that it  is not in general possible to represent a dependent "horse race" random utility model by some equivalent independent "horse  race" random utility model-at least, not if the independent random variables are associated directly with the elements of S.  4. THE PROPORTIONAL HAZARD RATE CONDITION  We now discuss a condition that has frequently been made in the competing causes literature (see, e.g., David and  Moeschburger, 1978) and show that (somewhat surprisingly) it is equivalent to a condition that has arisen as a a result of the  specification of a large family of random utility models. We then show that, within this family, the only model that can be  represented by an independent "horse race" random utility model is Luce's choice model. Since the class without independence  is significantly larger, including all of McFadden's (1978) generalized extreme value  (GEV) models and the transition probabilities of Tversky's (1972a, b) eliminationby-aspects (EBA) model, as well as the choice  model, this result shows that for our purposes independence is usually too strong an assumption.  DEFINITION 2. A joint structure of choice probabilities and reaction times (S, P) satisfies the proportional hazard rate (PHR)  condition iff for any subset X of S there are constants Cx(x), x e X, such that  hx(t)=Cx(x)hx(t), (12)  where hx is the overall hazard rate for T(X), and hx are the cause specific hazard rates.  Although C, (x), x E X g~ S, is not constrained in this definition, we now show that in fact we must have Cx(x) = Px(x) for  all x E X 9: S.  Combining Eqs. (8), (9) gives  h"(t) = [(-d/dt) Px(x; t)]/Pr[T(X) > t],  which with Eqs. (10), (12) implies that [(-d/dt) Px(x; t)]/Pr[T(X) > t] =hx(t)  = Cx(x) hx(t)  = CX(x)[(-d/dt) Pr[T(X) > t]]/Pr[T(X) > t].  Cancelling the denominators and integrating with respect to t then easily gives  Px(x; t) = Cx(x) Pr[T(X) > t].  In particular, because Px(x)=lim,~o Px(x; t), this equation implies that Cx(x)= Pr[C(X)=x], i.e., we have  Px(x; t)=Pr[C(X)=x] Pr[T(X) > t], (13)  and therefore the stochastic independence of the random variables T(X) and C(X) is established as a consequence of PHR with  CX(x)=Pr[C(X)=x]. Moreover, the converse is shown by reversing the above steps. Thus, the proportional hazard rate (PHR)  condition (with Cx(x) = Pr[C(X) = x]) is equivalent to assuming stochastic independence between T(X) and C(X). Theorem 2 of  Kochar and Proschan (1991) proves an equivalent result. Intuitively, the proportionality of the hazard rates means that the  time of choice gives no information as to the identity of the choice option, and vice-versa.  Note that a special relationship holds between the SDFs Gx, x e X, and the  overall SDF Pr[T(X) > t] when (PHR) holds with Cx(x)=Pr[C(X)=x]=P,(x) -namely, by Eq. (11),  GX(t)=exp -f t hX(s) dsJ o  =exp I- f0r Cx(x) hx(s) ds]  r lCx(x)  = [exp - f0hx(s) ds]  = Pr [T(X) > t]PX(x). (14)  (The final step follows from the standard relationship between a hazard function and its survival distribution. See, for  instance, Luce, 1986, p.15.) Clearly (by rearranging the above steps), this power function relationship actually is equivalent  to (PHR) with Cx(x)=Px(x), or, equivalently, to the stochastic independence of T(X) and C(X).  Equation (13), which states that the option chosen, x, is independent of the time of choice, t, is satisfied by (at least) the  class of "horse race" random utility models generated by generalized stable survival functions (Marley, 1989)-a class that  includes Luce's choice model, McFadden's generalized extreme value model, and (when absolute continuity is not required) the  transition probabilities of Tversky's elimination-by-aspects model. This independence condition was first studied in detail in  the psychological literature by Robertson and Strauss (1981), and has also been studied by Lee (1979), and Kochar and Proschan  (1991). It is an open question whether this independence condition characterizes the above class of "horse race" random  utility models.  We now use the two independence conditions mentioned in this paper to give an interesting characterization of Luce's (1959)  choice model. Remember, Luce's choice model holds for a system of choice probabilities {P,(x) : x E X C S} provided there is a  ratio scale v on S such that provided P,(x) :A 0, 1,  PX(x) =  vex v(y).  For simplicity in the following, we assume that all the choice probabilities are nonzero. The result can be generalized when  this is not the case by adding a connectivity and a transitivity condition (Luce, 1959, Theorem 4, p. 25).  THEOREM 2. Consider an independent horse race random utility model (S, P) where for each x E X 9 S, P, (x; t) is absolutely  continuous and positive for all t > 0 and P,(x) is nonzero. If the option chosen, C(X), is independent of the time of choice,  T(X), then the choice probabilities satisfy Luce's choice model.  Proof. Under the stated conditions, GX , x E X, of Eq. (14), must be independent of X, and so in particular for x, y E X o Y,  with X, Y 9 S  Px(x) log Pr[T(X) > t] = P,,(x) log Pr[T(Y) > t]  and  Px(Y) log Pr[T(X) > t] = PY(Y) log Pr[T(Y) > t].  Dividing gives  PX(x) __ PY(x) PAY) Pr(Y)  which implies (Luce, 1959) that there is a ratio scale v on S such that for x E X s~ S,  PX(x) = v(x) l~1ZEX v(Z)'  i.e. the choice model representation. Q.E.D.  Continuing with the development in Theorem 2, in order to obtain the distributions T(X), X s; S, define Y1 on the nonnegative  reals by: for t >, 0,  log Pr[T(S) > t] Y_ZCS v(z)  Substituting this representation and those of the choice probabilities in the first equation of the proof, and taking Y= S, we  obtain  log Pr[T(X) > t] = I v(z) - T(t), ZC-X  Pr[T(X) > t] =exp Y v(z) Yf(t), zcx  where Vf(0) = 0, W(oo) = -oc.  Remember that VI(t) is defined in terms of the survival function Pr [T(S) > t], and is thus, as developed, not an arbitrary  function. However, as we discuss later, if we only constrain the development to satisfy Luce's choice model (for the choice  probabilities), then we do have considerable freedom in the choice of the survival function, and hence of Y1.  Related (but not identical) characterizations of the choice model are given by Robertson and Strauss (1981, Theorem 2), who  refer to Strauss (1979, Theorem 4) for proof, and by Bundesen (1991) and Vorberg (undated manuscript).  5. CHOICES ON SUBSETS  The above development assumes that a single element must be chosen from the set of available options. However, one needs to  also consider results for the case  where a subset with more than one element may be selected. Such subset selection might only be an intermediate stage in the  determination of a single "best" element, as in (Markov) transition models (Tversky, 1972b; Corbin and Marley, 1974); or the  selected subset could be the final choice set. In the former case, the overall reaction time distribution is determined  recursively via a generalization of Luce's (1960) techniques (Marley, 1975). Such generalizations are complex, and require  further developments in the light of more recent results. Therefore, here we only discuss reaction time models for one stage  (not the full recursion) of subset choice.  Extending and reinterpreting the notation of Section 2, let Q,(Y, t), t > 0, be the probability that the nonempty2 subset Yc X  is "selected" (for further consideration) after time t when X is the available choice set, and assume that  Qx(Y, t)=Pr[C(X)= YnT(X)> t],  where (as in Section 2) T(X) is a random variable denoting the time at which a choice (of a subset) is made, and C(X) is now a  random variable denoting the subset chosen. Such a collection { Q, (Y; t) : 0 c Y c X c S}, or (S, Q) for short, will be  called a joint structure of transition probabilities and reaction times, and as previously we usually focus on complete  structures, i.e., those defined over all subsets of S. The following definition generalizes the idea of a "horse race" random  utility model to such subset selection (Marley, 1991b, gives a parallel definition when a single "best" element must be  selected).  DEFINITION 3. A joint structure of transition probabilities and reaction times (S, Q) satisfies a random (subset) advantage  model provided there are nonnegative random variables t'(Y), 0 c Y s X s S, such that  Qx(Y;t)=Pr[t<tx(Y)<tx(Z):for all Z with 0cZsX, Z0Y]. (15)  If the tX( Y), 0 c Y c X, for a fixed X are independent, then the random (subset) advantage model is independent.  Clearly, the idea behind this definition is that some "event" is associated with each nonempty subset of the available choice  set, and that the time of choice and the subset selected are determined by the occurrence of the first such event. Note that  the random variables tX( Y) for each subset X are allowed to depend on X. One would then suspect, given the result of Theorem  la, that any joint structure of transition probabilities and reaction times (S, Q) will satisfy an independent random (subset)  advantage model (under absolute continuity). This is in fact the case (Theorem 3 below), so we will later strengthen the  requirements of the representation.  z We assume that the selected subset must be nonempty (but might be the whole available set) as this is the usual assumption  for Markov transition models (Tversky, 1972a, b). However, see Corbin and Marley (1974) for a discussion of the no-choice  option where the person can select the empty set, i.e., reject all the options of the currently available choice set.  As before, assuming absolute continuity,  QX(Y) = Pr[t'(Y) < tx(Z) : for all Z with c Z s X, Z :A Y] = lim QX(Y; t)  1-.o+ is the probability of selecting the subset Y of X (for further consideration). {Qx(Y) : 0 c Ys Xc S} then constitutes a  structure of transition probabilities (Corbin and Marley, 1974).  We now pose (and partially solve) representation questions regarding joint structures of transition probabilities and reaction  times parallel to those we studied above for joint structures of choice probabilities and reaction times.  For instance, the proof of the following result follows immediately from the proof of Theorem l(a), with random variables and  distributions defined for all Y, c Y s X s S replacing those for all x E X s S.  Paralleling the conditions of Theorems 1 and 2, for simplicity we assume QX(Y; t) > 0 for all t >_ 0.  THEOREM 3. A set of transition probabilities and reaction times WAY, t) 0 c Yc X} can be uniquely represented by an  independent random (subset) advantage model provided Qx(Y, t), c Yc X, are absolutely continuous and positive for all t>0.  Proof. As in Theorem 1(a), where instead of constructing random variables tx(x), x E Xsi~S, it is necessary (by exactly the  same techniques) to construct random variables t x( Y), 0 c Y c X c S. Q.E.D.  To formulate a version of Theorem 1(b) in the current context, we need to understand what it might mean for a family of random  variables t x( Y), c Y S~] X S~ S, to be "consistent." A plausible constraint is min-consistency: Let k= 2151 -1, and let  gl,..., gk be the nonempty subsets of S. There is a nonnegative random vector t= (t(g,), ..., t(gk)) such that for O c Yc Xs S,  tx(Y)=min{t(J) I JnX=Y, 0cJSS}. (16)  This is interpreted as follows. First, consider choices on the master set S. Associated with each nonempty subset J of S is a  nonnegative random variable t(J) which denotes the time of occurrence of some "event" associated with that subset, and the  subset is chosen whose "event" occurs first. Now consider choices that are constrained to the subsets of some presented set X,  X c S. In this case, it is as if the person first determines some subset J, 0 c J c S, by the above process on the master set  (via the random variables t(J), 0 (-- Jc S), and then makes as his/her subset selection the (maximal) subset Y of J for which  Ys X. (This dependence on the master set might appear to be inappropriate; however, there is an equivalent hidden dependence  on the master set in all random utility models, including the previously discussed "horse race" random utility model. Also,  Marley (1981) shows how to motivate min-consistency directly from an assumption regarding the existence of a set of "aspects"  that characterize the elements of S).  Clearly, one can apply Eq. (16) to the random (subset) advantage representation of Theorem 3 to yield conditions (in terms of  the transition probabilities and reaction times) under which min-consistency holds for the representation. This result appears  of limited interest, so we turn to a version of Theorem 2 that applies to structures of transition probabilities and reaction  times. We are able to show that an appropriate version of Theorem 2 in the current context gives the transition probabilities  of Tversky's EBA model as the unique solution'-remember, the EBA model is a generalization of Luce's choice model. Before  developing that result, it should be noted that if the t(J), 0 c J c S, are independent, then so are the tX( Y), Y g X, for a  fixed set X. However, min-consistency in isolation does not constrain the distribution of the nonnegative random vector t (nor  of tx(Y), Y g X) to have any specific form (e.g., exponential). Thus, the constraints placed on these distributions by Theorem  4 (next) must be due to additionally assuming that the subset chosen is independent of the time of choice.  To state the theorem, we need to know a little more about the transition probabilities in Tversky's EBA model. Tversky (1972b)  motivated his structure of transition probabilities (S, Q) via proportionality: for 0 c Y, Z ~ X g; S,  QX(Y) _y_JnX=Y,0_JSs Qs(J) QX(Z) Y_JnX=z,0_JSS QS(J)  provided the denominators are both positive, and if one denominator vanishes, so does the other.  Remembering that we have reinterpreted T(X) as the time of the choice of a subset of X and C(X) as the subset chosen, we  obtain:  THEOREM 4. Consider an independent random (subset) advantage model (S, Q) where for each 0 c Yc X S S, QX(Y, t) is absolutely  continuous and positive for all t > 0 and QX(Y) is nonzero. If the model satisfies min-consistency, and if the subset chosen,  C(Y), is independent of the time of choice, T(Y), then the transition probabilities satisfy proportionality.  Proof. Given the representing random variables t X( Y), 0 c Y 9 X c S, let  GY(t)=Pr[tx(Y)>t], t>0,  ' The following technical point is important for relating this result to other characterizations of the EBA as a random  utility model, although an understanding of this point is not necessary to understand the present result in isolation. As  mentioned in the text, Marley (1981) characterized the transition probabilities of the EBA model in terms of a stochastic  process over "aspects." Aspects are selected randomly, and options are retained for further study if they contain the selected  aspect. At the level of aspects, the relevant random utility model belongs to the generalized extreme value family (Marley,  1989), but does not at that level satisfy absolute continuity-since, via the aspects, more than one "event" (selection of an  option) can occur at the same time. Nonetheless, when this aspect based model is reinterpreted at the level of selection of  subsets of elements, it does satisfy absolute continuity-in particular, only a single "event" (associated with the selection  of a particular subset) can occur at a particular time.  (with Ys=t) be the associated survival functions. Then using min-consistency, Eq. (16), and the independence of the t(J), c  Jc S, we have  GY(t)= 11 Gis(t), Jnx=Y mcJcS  log GY(t)= log Gs(t). Jnx=Y  O_Jss  Also, the arguments leading to Eq. (14) go through in an exactly parallel fashion under the present conditions to give, for 0  c B s A s S,  GB(t) = Pr[T(A) > t]QA(B)  log GB(t) = QA(B) log Pr[T(A) > t],  which substituted in the above sum of logs expression gives  Qx(Y) log Pr[T(X) > t] = Y QS(J) log Pr[T(S) > t]. (17)  Jnx=Y O=JSS  However, Y such that 0 c Y c X is arbitrary, so we also have, for any 0 r- Z'S: X,  Qx(Z) log Pr[T(X) > t] = y QS(J) log Pr[T(S) > t]  Jnx=z OcJcS  and dividing by the conditions of the theorem Qx(Z) > 0 gives for 0 c Y, Z 9 X,  QX(Y) Y-Jnx=Y,0~JSS QS(J)  QX(Z) Y_Jnx=z,Oc'=S QS(J)'  i.e., proportionality. Q.E.D.  To construct the representation of T(X), 0 c Xc S, implied by this result, we use the following representation of a structure  (S, Q) that satisfies proportionality (Corbin and Marley, 1974; Marley, 1981): there is a set of nonnegative scales vx, c X  9 S, such that for 0 c Y 9 X s S,  QX(Y)= yx(Y) Y_O_CSx vx(C)  with  vx(Y)= Y_ vs(J). Jnx=Y OcJSs  Thus Eq. (17) can be rewritten as  vx(Y) log Pr[T(X) > t] = vx(Y) log Pr[T(S) > t],  Y_0_C=_x VAC) Y-0-D9S vs(D) i.e., letting  we obtain  VIM = log Pr[T(S) > t] Y-OcDSS vs(D)  Pr[T(X) > t] =exp ( Y_ vx(C) - Yf(t)~. O~C=_x  Note that Yf(t) is defined in terms of the survival function Pr[T(S) > t], and is thus, as developed, not an arbitrary  function. However, as with Luce's choice model (see Section 6, Conclusion), if we only constrain the development to satisfy  proportionality, then we do have considerable freedom in the choice of the function 'I%  6. CONCLUSION  We have characterized the class of independent "horse race" random utility models (for choice probabilities and reaction  times). It remains to characterize the class of general (i.e., not necessarily independent) "horse race" random utility  models, and sub-classes of the general class, such as those that satisfy independence of the option chosen and the time of  choice. One might hope to generalize Falmagne's (1978) approach to solve the former problem, and Marley (1989 ) discusses  possible approaches to the latter problem.  Although this latter class includes many common models such as Luce's choice model (see earlier), the independence of the  option chosen and the time of choice is probably too strong for most data. For instance (Marley, 1989), consider the following  (independent) "horse race" representation for the choice model: for x e X,  Pr [t(x) > t ] = exp - v(x) T(t)  for t > 0, with v positive valued and Yf a strictly increasing function with 'P(0) = 0, T'(oo) = oc. Then it is easily checked  that  Px(x; t)= Pr[t < t(x) < t(y) : ye X- {x}]  _ v(x)  EyExv(Y).exp-vY_ V(Y) -W(t),  which is of the form discussed early, but now IF is an arbitrary function (satisfying the given conditions).  Now consider the hazard function  (-d/dt) Px(x; t)- v(Y) TV),  Px(x; t) vex  which is separable (Lute, 1986, p. 156) in the set X and the time t. It is known that such hazard functions for real data  frequently are first increasing in t, then decreasing in t until they reach a stable asymptotic value (e.g., Luce, 1986, Chap.  4). Clearly y"(t) in the above can be selected with such a shape and still satisfy the conditions placed on Y% However,  Maloney and Wandell (1984), discussed in Luce, 1986, p. 156), have studied such separable hazard functions in the domain of  visual detection, and found them not entirely satisfactory.  A further interesting theoretical task is to complete the study of reaction times in (Markov) transition models. We have only  presented results for one stage of the choice process (Theorems 3, 4). Combining these results with Lute's (1960) work on  transition models based on discarding a single element at a time (he presented a family of gamma distributions as a solution)  and with Stern's (1987) work on gamma processes, will probably lead to more realistic reaction time models that nonetheless  retain some of the tractability of the models presented here (also see the discussion in Marley, 1989).  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  Marley's work was supported in part by the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada, and by a Canada Council  Leave Fellowship. Various of the ideas were developed while he was a visiting lecturer at the University of Sydney, and he  thanks J. P. Sutcliffe of that University for his hospitality and critical comments. Colonius' work was supported in part by a  grant from the Stiftung Volkswagenwerk. He thanks Jim Townsend and Jerry Busemeyer for some useful discussions of some aspects  of this paper. We both appreciate the useful comments of Richard Schweickert and two anonymous referees. Thanks are also due  to Kilsoon Cummings for typing this manuscript.  REFERENCES  ARNOLD, B. C., & BRocKETT, P. L. (1983). Identifiability for dependent multiple decrement/competing risk models. Scandinavian  Actuarial Journal, 117-127.  BARBERA, S., & PATrANAIK, P. K. (1986). Falmagne and the rationalizability of stochastic choices in terms of random orderings.  Econometrica, 54, 707-715.  BASU, A. P., & GOSH, J. K. (1978). Identifiability of the multinormal and other distributions under competing risk model.  Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 8, 413-429.  BEN-AKTIVA, M., & LERMAN, S. R. (1985). Discrete choice analysis: Theory and applications to travel demand. Cambridge: MIT  Press.  BERMAN, S. M. (1963). Note on extreme values, competing risks and semi-Markov processes. Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 34  1104-1106.  BUNDESEN, C. (1991). The relationship between independent race models and Lute's choice axiom. Manuscript, Psychological  Laboratory, Copenhagen University.  BUSEMEYER, J. R., FORSYTH, B., & NOZAWA, G. (1988). Comparison of elimination by aspects and suppression of aspects choice  models based on choice response time. Journal of Mathematical Mathematical Psychology, 32, 341-349.  COHEN, M. A. (1980). Random utility systems-The infinite case. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 22, 1-23.  COLONIUs, H. (1984). Stochastische Theorien individuellen Wahlverhaltens. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. CORBIN, R., & MARLEY, A. A.  J. (1974). Random utility models with equality: An apparent, but not actual, generalization of random utility models. Journal  of Mathematical Psychology, 11, 274-293. Cox, D. R. (1959). The analysis of exponentially distributed life-times with two  types of failure. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 21, 411-421.  DAVID, H. A., & MOESCHBURGER, M. L. (1978). The theory of computing risks. London: Griffin. ELANDT-JOHNSON, R. C., & JOHNSON,  N. L. (1980). Survival models and data analysis. New York: Wiley. FALMAGNE, J. C. (1978). A representation theorem for finite  random scale systems. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 18, 52-72  FELLER, W. (1966). An introduction to probability theory and its applications. New York: Wiley. GAIL, M. (1982). Competing  risks. In Encyclopedia of Statistical Sciences, Vol. 2. New York: Wiley. KoCHAR, S. C., & PROSCHAN, F. (1991). Independence of  time and cause of failure in the multiple dependent competing risks model. Statistica Sinica, 1, 295-299.  LEE, L. (1979). Multivariate distributions having Weibull properties. Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 9, 267-277,  LUCE, R. D. (1959). Individual choice behavior. New York: Wiley.  LUCE, R. D. (1960). Response latencies and probabilities. In K. J. Arrow, S. Karlin, and P. Suppes (Eds.), Mathematical  methods in the social sciences, 1959 (pp. 298-311). Stanford: Stanford Univ. Press.  LUCE, R. D. (1986). Response times. Their role in inferring elementary mental organization. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.  LUCE, R. D., & Suppes, P. (1965). Preference, utility, and subjective probability. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter  (Eds.), Handbook of Mathematical Psychology, Vol. 3. New York: Wiley. MALONEY, L. T., & WANDELL, B. A. (1984). A model of  single visual channels response to weak test lights. Vision Research, 24, 633-640.  MARLEY, A. A. J. (1975). Reaction time and sensory processes in sequential elimination models. Manuscript, Department of  Psychology, McGill University.  MARLEY, A. A. J. (1981). Multivariate stochastic processes compatible with "aspect" models of similarity and choice.  Psychometrika, 46, 421-428.  MARLEY, A. A. J. (1989). A random utility family that includes many of the "classical" models and has closed form choice  probabilities and choice reaction times. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 42, 13-36.  MARLEY, A. A. J. (1990). A historical and contemporary perspective on random scale representations of choice probabilities and  reaction times in the context of Cohen and Falmagne's results. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 34, 81-87.  MARLEY, A. A. J. (1991). Context-dependent probabilistic choice models based on binary comparison. Mathematical Social  Sciences, 21, 201-231.  MARLEY, A. A. J. (1992). A selective review of recent characterizations of stochastic choice models using distribution and  functional equation techniques. Mathematical Social Sciences, 23 (in press). MCFADDEN, D. (1978). Modelling the choice of  residential location. In A. Karlquist et al. (Eds.), Spatial interaction theory and planning models (pp. 75-96). Amsterdam:  North-Holland.  MILLER, D. R. (1977). A note on independence of multivariate lifetimes in competing risks models. The Annals of Statistics, 5,  576-579.  PETRUSIC, W. F., & JAMIESON, D. S. (1978). Relation between probability of preferential choice and time to choose changes with  practice. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 4, 471-482.  ROBERTSON, C. A., & STRAUSS, D. J. (1981). A characterization theorem for random utility variables. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 23, 184-189.  STERN, H. S. (1987). Gamma processes, paired comparisons and ranking. Ph.D. Thesis, Department of Statistics, Stanford  University.  STRAUSS, D. J. (1979). Some results on random utility models. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 20, 35-52.  TOWNSEND, J. T. (1976). Serial and within-stage independent parallel model equivalence on the minimum completion time. Journal  of Mathematical Psychology, 14, 219-238.  TRAIN, K. (1986). Qualitative choice analysis. Cambridge: MIT Press.  TSIATIs, A. (1975). A nonidentifiability aspect of the problem of competing risks. Proceedings of the National Academy of  Sciences USA, 72, 2f-22.  TVERSKY, A. (1972a). Elimination by aspects: A theory of choice. Psychological Review, 79, 281-299. TVERSKY, A. (1972b).  Choice by elimination. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 9, 341-367. VORBERG, D. Characterizations of independent random  utility models which imply the choice axiom. Undated manuscript, Fachbereich Psychologie, Philipps-Universitat Marburg.