10.1016/0022-2496(92)90056-d
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 36, 146-153 (1992)  Book Review  Pattern Recognition by Human and Machine  YOH-HAN PAO. Adaptive Pattern Recognition and Neural Networks. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1989. Pp. xvii + 299 + index.  $37.75.  Reviewed by F. GREGORY ASHBY  Yoh-Han Pao is a Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and Director of the Center for Automation and  Intelligent Systems Research at Case Western Reserve University. Dr. Pao has occupied the George S. Dively Distinguished  Professor of Engineering Chair at Case Western Reserve since 1982. He has published extensively in the area of distributed  associative memories since the early 1970s.  The reviewer, F. Gregory Ashby, is an Associate Professor of Psychology at the University of California at Santa Barbara. His  primary research interests are in the areas of perceptual identification and categorization and the stochastic modeling of  mental processes. Two of his recent articles appear in Psychological Review. 1992 Academic Press, Inc.  The recognition, identification, and categorization of patterns are among the most important perceptual processes. As a  consequence, pattern recognition has a long history as a topic of intellectual curiosity and scientific investigation. For  many years this interest was restricted primarily to psychologists, who sought to understand the processes involved in human  pattern recognition. Soon after the development of the digital computer, however, electrical engineers became interested in  designing machines with pattern recognition capabilities. Although research in machine pattern recognition began slowly,  between 1968 and 1974 more than 500 journal articles on pattern recognition appeared in English language engineering journals.  Today, machine pattern recognition is a research area of intense activity.  Network models have a very different history. They were originally developed by physicists and engineers as models of simple  electrical circuits. In psychology, network models were first proposed by Donald Hebb (1949) in his influential book,  Organization of Behavior. Hebb showed how an undifferentiated array of neuronlike elements could perform simple pattern  recognition tasks. For the most part, however, early work on neural nets focused on their ability to mimic certain aspects of  human memory. Only recently has the neural net approach been brought to bear with full force on the pattern recognition  problem.  Adaptive Pattern Recognition and Neural Networks, by Yoh-Han Pao, surveys  Correspondence and reprint requests should be sent to F. Gregory Ashby, Department of Psychology, University of California,  Santa Barbara, CA 93106.  0022-2496/92 $3.00  Copyright Q 1992 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  146  neural network models of pattern recognition. The book is divided into two parts. The first section reviews three different  classical approaches to pattern recognition; namely the statistical approach, the fuzzy set approach, and the syntactical  approach. The remainder of the book describes various neural net implementations of these different approaches. Along the way  the reader encounters the generalized delta rule, various forms of associative memory, nets that perform cluster analysis,  nets that increase the dimensionality of the pattern space to increase pattern separation, nets that operate on fuzzy logic,  and nets that work on patterns that are expressed as strings of linguistic symbols.  The greatest strength of the book is its breadth. A great diversity of topics are covered and the book does an excellent job  of at least introducing the reader to the many different neural net approaches to pattern recognition. Unfortunately, however,  because no author index or comprehensive reference list is provided, the book's value as a reference is somewhat limited.  Instead of a single list of references at the end of the book, short lists are given at the end of each chapter.  Ironically, the book's greatest strength is also its greatest weakness. Pao covers so many topics that only a few are treated  in the kind of detail that the nonexpert needs. Discounting the references and appendices, the text is only 241 pages long. I  found myself wishing that the book were much longer or that Pao had decided on a less ambitious agenda and devoted the book to  only one or at most two of the three approaches that he discusses.  Pao is a physicist and not a psychologist and the volume reflects this fact. Rather than construct models that mimic human  pattern recognition processes, Pao is interested in constructing the most powerful pattern recognition devices possible. The  most powerful machine, constructed without regard to psychological process, may serve as a poor model of human performance. Of  course, psychologists interested in artificial intelligence (AI) are well aware of this dilemma. A good example of this  problem occurs in computer chess. The most powerful chess computers perform at the Master level and thus are better than  almost all humans who play chess. These machines are blindingly fast and so are able to examine hundreds or even thousands of  alternative moves in the time it takes their human opponent to examine only a few. In this case, the programs that run these  machines are not good models of human chess playing performance. Even so, the electrical engineering approach is powerful and  should not be overlooked by psychologists.  One advantage of reading an outside source is the fresh perspective that it can offer. For example, one of the issues that Pao  discusses very early in his book is whether stimulus information should be assumed to have a numeric or nonnumeric internal  representation. This is a very slippery issue, which the psychological literature has occasionally addressed, but which bears  closer scrutiny.  By "numeric," Pao seems to have in mind geometric representations that contain a small number of continuous valued dimensions.  Many pattern recognition models in psychology satisfy this restriction. This includes random walk and accumulator models of  choice reaction time (e.g., Link & Heath, 1975; Ratcliff, 1978; Vickers, 1979), multidimensional scaling models (e.g.,  Kruskal, 1964a, 1964b; Shepard,  1962a, 1962b; Torgerson, 1958), univariate and multivariate versions of signal detection theory (e.g., Ashby & Townsend, 1986;  Green & Swets, 1966), and exemplar theories of categorization (e.g., Nosofsky, 1986), among many other examples.  In the "nonnumeric" class, Pao includes two different kinds of representation. First are the models that focus on a featural  rather than a dimensional representation. A feature can be either present or absent and often has a nested relation that is  naturally represented in a connected graph, typically a tree. Perhaps the most notable feature models in the psychological  literature were developed by Amos Tversky. Specifically, I refer to his elimination-by-aspects model of choice (Tversky,  1972), his feature contrast model of similarity (Tversky, 1977), and his recent elegant work with hierarchical clustering  (e.g., Corter & Tversky, 1986; Sattath & Tversky, 1977; see also, Carroll, 1976; Johnson, 1967; Marley, 1981, 1988; Shepard &  Arabie, 1979).  Pao's second class of "nonnumeric" models postulate a symbolic or linguistic representation. These models assume that patterns  can be described by a generative system of rules, which might be given by a production system or a grammar. Every pattern  class is associated with a unique set of rules, and so pattern recognition is essentially equivalent to determining which set  of rules generated the stimulus pattern. Early proponents of this approach in psychology were Allen Newell and Herbert Simon  (e.g., Newell & Simon, 1972; see also Anderson, 1975; Klahr, Langley, & Neches, 1987).  Defining feature models as nonnumeric is somewhat problematic. Because one can typically define a feature as a binary valued  dimension, it is usually possible to depict feature representations geometrically. In this case, each dimension contributes  only one bit of information (i.e., presence or absence) and so the resulting perceptual space frequently has many dimensions.  In addition, the natural distance measure is the Hamming metric, defined as the number of features on which the two patterns  disagree. The dissimilarity measure proposed by Tversky (1977) in his feature contrast model generalizes Hamming distance.  Thus, feature models often lead to, geometric representations that contain a large number of discrete valued dimensions.  Despite its difficulty, however, I will adopt Pao's definition of numeric and nonnumeric representation for the remainder of  this article.  Because numeric representations can be depicted geometrically, they place certain constraints on the underlying data  structure, and so they offer the possibility of testing whether numeric or nonnumeric representation is most appropriate. When  a stimulus is represented as a point in a multidimensional space, there must be some other stimulus which is its nearest  neighbor. Geometric models impose an upper bound on the number of stimuli that can share the same nearest neighbor. For  example, when points are distributed on a line, any single point can be the nearest neighbor of at most two other points. In  two dimensions, a point can be the nearest neighbor of at most five other points. Similar, but even more restrictive bounds,  can be derived if it is assumed that the points are samples from a continuous probability distribution and the space is  Euclidean (Tversky & Hutchinson, 1986).  In an examination of 100 data sets, Tversky and Hutchinson (1986) found this more restrictive geometric-statistical upper  bound to be satisfied with most perceptual data sets but to be violated with many conceptual data sets. Violations were most  severe in conceptual data sets containing a superordinate category label. For example, Mervis, Rips, Rosch, Shoben, and Smith  (1975) found that 18 of 20 fruit names were judged to be most closely related to the word "fruit." The concept "fruit" can be  nearest neighbor to 18 stimuli only in a geometric space of high dimensionality. Thus, one interpretation of these results is  that numeric representation may be most appropriate with perceptual stimuli but nonnumeric representation may be required when  the stimuli are conceptual in nature.  On the other hand, the Mervis et al. results can be accommodated by at least one geometric model of low dimensionality.  General recognition theory (Ashby & Gott, 1988; Ashby & Maddox, 1990, 1992) assumes that the perceptual effects of a category  can be represented by a multivariate probability distribution. A practiced subject is assumed to divide the perceptual space  into regions, and to associate a category label with each region. On each categorization trial, the subject determines in  which region the stimulus representation falls and then emits the associated response. For example, the "apple" region  contains the representation of all objects we classify as apples. Similarly, the "fruit" region contains the representation of  all objects we classify as fruit. Since the designation fruit can be given to an apple, an orange, or a pear, etc., the  "fruit" response region is the union of the response regions of all its subordinate category members. Likewise, the category  "fruit" can be modeled as the probability mixture of the multivariate distributions associated with each subordinate member.  A natural way to define the similarity of category A to category B is as the proportion of the category A distribution that  falls in the category B response region (Ashby & Perrin, 1988). Since the probability that a subject will confuse an apple and  orange or an apple and pear is low, this model predicts that the proportion of the "fruit" distribution that falls in the  "apple" region should exceed the proportion of either the "orange" or the "pear" distribution that falls in the "apple"  region. Thus, subjects should judge "fruit" and "apple" to be more similar or related than "orange" and "apple" or "pear" and  "apple." In general, the superordinate category name should be judged most related to all subordinate category members. The  major exception occurs when a pair of subordinate category members are extremely similar. For example, the proportion of the  "orange" distribution falling in the "lemon" response region might be greater than the proportion of the "fruit" distribution  falling in the "lemon" region, and thus we might expect "orange" and "lemon" to be more related than "fruit" and "lemon." This  is exactly what Mervis et al. found.  The distinction between numeric and nonnumeric models is therefore fuzzy, especially if one includes feature models in the  nonnumeric group. At any rate, although Pao surveys models that assume both kinds of representation, he clearly favors those  that postulate nonnumeric representation. For example, he concludes the chapter that surveys the statistical pattern  recognition approach, which is based on  numeric representation, with an extensive section of criticisms. In contrast, no criticisms can be found in the chapter  reviewing methods that assume nonnumeric representation. In addition, Pao even suggests that attributes with natural numeric  representations, like hue, age, and weight, might be better represented nonnumerically.  Pao's criticisms of statistical pattern recognition should also be of interest to the psychological community, especially  since statistical pattern recognition is essentially equivalent to multidimensional signal detection theory. Consider the case  in which the subject is asked to assign a pattern x to one of two classes, c, or c2. In the statistical pattern recognition  approach, called the Bayesian approach by Pao, the subject is assumed to use the rule  Assign x to c, if P(c, I x) > P(c2 I x); otherwise assign x to c2.  The first criticism considered by Pao is that "P(c;I x) should represent a belief rather than an objective probability, and  that it would be remarkable if that subjective belief always came out to be equal to the [objective probability]" (p. 49). Pao  assumes that "beliefs" obey all laws of objective probability and so the concept in the psychological literature that is  closest in meaning to Pao's term "belief' is subjective probability (e.g., Krantz, Luce, Suppes, & Tversky, 1971).  In the case of psychological applications, the argument that P(ci I x) should be a belief rather than an objective probability  has two major weaknesses. First, it assumes that the statistical approach is invalid if the subject's estimate of P(ci I x) is  not exactly equal to the true value of P(ci I x). Again, this criticism reflects a philosophical difference between AI and  psychology. If one's goal is to build the most powerful pattern recognition device that is possible, then any error when  estimating P(ci I x) is unattractrive, since Bayes' rule maximizes overall accuracy. As psychologists interested in the  accurate modeling of human behavior, however, we are primarily interested in the decision rule that subjects choose. If they  use a Bayesian rule then the statistical pattern recognition model is valid, even if subjects misestimate the posterior  probabilities.  The second weakness of the argument that P(c; I x) should be a belief rather than an objective probability is that it assumes  the Bayesian rule (Eq. (1)) is the only one of value in the statistical pattern recognition approach. True, this rule  maximizes overall accuracy, but human subjects might maximize some other quantity, or they might choose to maximize overall  accuracy, but under some constraint (e.g., that the resulting decision bound is linear). In psychology, therefore, it might  prove useful to wed the assumption that pattern information is best represented statistically, with other more general  decision rules.  The second criticism of the statistical pattern recognition approach considered by Pao is that  ... estimating the quantities P(x l c;) and especially the likelihood ratios P(x J c,)/P(x J c2), usually is much easier than  is estimating the belief P(c; l x). The latter task usually requires much "expertise" and experience, whereas learning the  local relationships P(x l c;) is principally a matter of isolated observation. (p. 50)  In response to this criticism, note first that the Eq. (1) rule can be rewritten as  Assign x to c, if P(cz i X) > 1  or equivalently as  P(XIcl) P(Cl) Assign x to c, if P(X IP() p(cz) > 1.  P(x)  If the two classes are equally likely then this rule reduces to Assign x to c, if PP(x i C z) > 1  or equivalently to  Assign x to c, if P(X I c1) > P(X I cz). (2)  Thus the rule based on likelihoods is equivalent to the rule based on "beliefs" and so the issue of computational difficulty  is irrelevant. If the subject uses a rule based on likelihoods and we assume that the decision is made on the basis of  beliefs, no harm will be done. We will still be able to predict the subject's behavior perfectly.  A similar criticism that sometimes is encountered in the psychological literature is that statistical models of pattern  recognition require subjects to know too much about the statistics of the various patterns, specifically that the subject is  able to compute the likelihood ratio P(X I c1)/P(x I c2) for any pattern x. The decision rule of Eq. (2), however, does not  assume that the subject can accurately estimate the likelihood ratio for any pattern x. Instead, all it requires is that, for  any x, the subject is able to decide whether the likelihood ratio is greater than 1.0 or less than 1.0. One simple way of  accomplishing this is for the subject to divide the space into response regions. In one set of regions, the likelihood ratio  is greater than 1.0 and so any pattern falling here will be assigned to class c, . In the other set of regions the likelihood  ratio is less than 1.0 and so is associated with class cz. The decision bound is the hypersurface separating the two sets of  regions. Under this interpretation, the subject can maximize overall accuracy simply by recalling the response label  associated with the region in which the stimulus pattern falls.  Pao realizes that the statistical pattern recognition approach does not require detailed knowledge of the probability  distributions. Even though he criticizes the approach in the above passage for assuming too much knowledge on the part of the  subject, earlier in the same chapter he acknowledges that detailed knowledge is not necessary:  It is interesting that, in this case, the act of classification ultimately does not require detailed knowledge of the  probability distributions. All that is required is knowledge of one number, xtnreshold, which serves as a discriminant. More  complex situations are correspondingly more difficult, and in such cases the knowledge of several discriminant values might be  required.... (p. 40)  In summary, Pao's approach throughout the book is to describe many topics at an introductory level and a few topics in depth.  Unfortunately, some of the topics in which I was most interested were mentioned only briefly. For example, Pao mentions the  interesting result that a three layer neural net can form arbitrarily complex decision regions, but he gives very few details  about how this is done. On the other hand, I had little interest in some of the topics he chose to emphasize. For example, he  describes optical holography in more detail than I thought was necessary. This is an interesting topic but it really only  serves as an analogy for network models of associative memory. Other readers will have different interests and some may find  that every topic in which they are interested is discussed in adequate detail. If each topic were discussed in depth, the book  would be much longer of course, but 1, for one, would find it more useful.  This book will be most useful to readers with some background in mathematics, engineering, or computer science, but with  little or no knowledge of pattern recognition and/or neural networks. Such readers will be exposed to a huge variety of topics  in a minimum number of pages. Careful study of the text should allow them to determine which topics they find most interesting  and should provide them with the references needed to find these topics discussed in more detail.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  Preparation of this article was supported in part by National Science Founation Grant BNS88-19403. I thank Tony Marley for his  helpful comments during the preparation of this article.  REFERENCES  ANDERSON, J. R. (1975). Language, memory and thought. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  ASHBY, F. G., & GOTT, R. (1988). Decision rules in the perception and categorization of multidimensional stimuli. Journal of  Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 14, 33-53. ASHBY, F. G., & MADDOX, W. T. (1990). Integrating  information from separable psychological dimensions. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 16,  598-612. ASHBY, F. G., & MADDOX, W. T. (1992). Complex decision rules in categorization: Contrasting novice and experience  performance. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 18.  ASHBY, F. G., & PERRIN, N. A. (1988). Toward a unified theory of similarity and recognition. Psychological Review, 95, 124-150.  ASHBY, F. G., & TOWNSEND, J. T. (1986). Varieties of perceptual independence. Psychological Review, 93, 154-179.  CARROLL, J. D. (1976). Spatial, non-spacial, and hybrid models for scaling. Psychometrika, 41, 439-463. CORTER, J. E., &  TVERSKY, A. (1986). Extended similarity trees. Psychometrika, 51, 429-451.  GREEN, D. M., & SWETS, J. A. (1966). Signal detection theory and psychophysics. New York: Wiley.  HEBB, D. O. (1949). Organization of behavior. New York: Wiley.  JOHNSON, S. C. (1967). Hierarchical clustering schemes. Psychometrika, 32, 241-254.  KLAHR, D., LANGLEY, P., & NECHES, R. (Eds.) (1987). Production system models of learning and development. Cambridge, MA: MIT  Press.  KRANTZ, D. H., LUCE, R. D., SUPPES, P., & TVERSKY, A. (1971). Foundations of measurement: Additive and polynomial  representations (Vol. 1). New York: Academic Press.  KRUSKAL, J. B. (1964a). Multidimensional scaling by optimizing goodness of fit to a nonmetric hypothesis. Psychometrika, 29,  1-27.  KRUSKAL, J. B. (1964b). Nonmetric multidimensional scaling: A numerical method. Psychometrika, 29, 115-129.  LINK, S. W., & HEATH, R. A. (1975). A sequential theory of psychological discrimination. Psychometrika, 40, 77-105.  MARLEY, A. A. J. (1981). Multivariate stochastic processes compatible with "aspect" models of similarity and choice.  Psychometrika, 46, 421-428.  MARLEY, A. A. J. (1988). Random utility models with binary tree decomposable rank orders satisfy Tversky's  elimination-by-aspects model. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 32, 436-448. MERVIS, C. B., Rips, L., RosCH, E., SHOBEN, E.  J., & SMITH, E. E. (1975). Relatedness of concepts. Unpublished data.  NEWELL A., & SIMON, H. A. (1972). Human problem solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. NOSOFSKY, R. M. (1986).  Attention, similarity, and the identification-categorization relationship. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 115,  39-57.  RATCLIFF, R. (1978). A theory of memory retrieval. Psychological Review, 85, 59-108. SATTATH, S., & TVERSKY, A. (1977).  Additive similarity trees. Psychometrika, 42, 319-345. SHEPARD, R. N. (1962a). The analysis of proximities: Multidimensional  scaling with an unknown distance function. I. Psychometrika, 27, 125-140.  SHEPARD, R. N. (1962b). The analysis of proximities: Multidimensional scaling with an unknown distance function. 11.  Psychometrika, 27, 219-246.  SHEPARD, R. N., & ARABIE, P. (1979). Additive clustering: Representation of similarities as combinations of discrete  overlapping properties. Psychological Review, 86, 87-123.  TORGERSON, W. S. (1958). Theory and methods of scaling. New York: Wiley.  TVERSKY, A. (1972). Elimination by aspects: A theory of choice. Psychological Review, 79, 281-299. TVERSKY, A. (1977).  Features of similarity. Psychological Review, 84, 327-352.  TVERSKY, A., & HUTCHINSON, J. W. (1986). Nearest neighbor analysis of psychological spaces. Psychological Review, 93, 3-22.  VICKERS, D. (1979). Decision processes in visual perception. New York: Academic Press.