10.1016/0022-2496(92)90027-5
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 36, 325-374 (1992)  Implications of Marginal and Conditional  Detection Parameters for the Separabilities and Independence of Perceptual Dimensions  HELENA KADLEC  Purdue University  AND  JAMES T. TOWNSEND  Indiana University  Ashby and Townsend developed a theory and related methodology for assessing various types of perceptual independence within  recognition accuracy experiments. A special case of considerable import was the General Gaussian Recognition model based on  multivariate normal distributions with arbitrary covariance matrices across stimuli. The General Recognition model can also be  viewed as a multidimensional extension of signal detection theory and thereby yields two sets of signal detection analyses,  macro- and microanalyses, introduced earlier by Townsend and his colleagues. The present work develops logical relationships  among these two sets of signal detection parameters and the various concepts of "perceptual independence," including  perceptual and decisional separability, marginal response invariance, sampling independence, and perceptual independence.  These relationships lead to new tests of the varieties of independence and permit a qualitative construction of the underlying  perceptual space. (0 1992 Academic Press, Inc.  Ashby and Townsend (1986) recently introduced a theory of recognition, called the General Recognition Theory, which provided a  framework for defining and interrelating various concepts of perceptual independence from the experimental and theoretical  literature. It also established a logical basis for the testing of these notions. A special and important case of the General  Recognition Theory is derived from assuming that the underlying perceptual distributions are multivariate normal in form. The  univariate version of this Gaussian model would reduce to the traditional unidimensional model of signal detection theory  (Green & Swets, 1966). The Gaussian case of General Recognition Theory can thus be viewed as an extension of signal detection  theory to the multidimensional case.  General Recognition Theory can been described in detail elsewhere (Ashby & Townsend, 1986). A brief overview here serves to  introduce our notation  Correspondence and requests for reprints should be sent to Dr. Helena Kadlec, currently at the Department of Psychology,  University of Victoria, Victoria, B.C., Canada, V8W 3P5.  325  0022-2496/92 $5.00  Copyright t7 1992 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  326 KADLEC AND TOWNSEND  and to define the necessary perceptual terms. The reader is referred to other papers by Ashby and colleagues (e.g., Ashby,  1988; Ashby & Gott, 1988; Ashby & Maddox, 1989; Ashby & Perrin, 1988) for other extensions and applications of the General  Recognition Theory. Following the introduction of the framework and the related concepts of perceptual independence, we  present our theoretical results. The various logical relationships are explored and adapted to potential empirical tests of  the perceptual qualities. In the final section, we illustrate the new tests with data from one previous study on featural  interactions by Townsend, Hu, and Ashby (1981).  In studying perceptual interactions of predesignated features, Townsend and his colleagues have proposed two sets of measures  of feature interactions based on signal detection theory (Townsend, Hu, & Evans, 1984; Townsend, Hu & Kadlec, 1988). These  were called signal detection macroanalyses, which were based on marginal or global effects of the features across different  stimuli, and signal detection microanalyses, which were based on individual feature effects conditional on the perception of  other features in the stimulus pattern. To date, these measures have largely been employed in a relatively theory-free way,  although their measurement has helped lead to a global-to-local model of elementary feature perception called Blobloc  (Blob-to-Local; Townsend et al., 1984, 1988).  The present paper develops theoretical relationships holding among the major concepts of General Recognition Theory and these  two sets of detection-oriented measures of featural interactions. These relationships give rise to a method whereby the  various notions of perceptual independence can be tested, and it is shown how the two sets of signal detection measures open  up a sizeable additional window of observation on the varieties of perceptual independence investigated by Ashby and Townsend  (1986). The simple tests that result provide an alternative approach to model fitting (e.g., Ashby & Perrin, 1988), whereby  only the equality of various signal detection estimates is employed to infer perceptual independencies.  The framework presented here is couched within the familiar detection-identification paradigm with accuracy measures. A number  of studies have used estimates of signal detection d's to investigate "perceptual independence" of various stimulus attributes  (e.g., Graham, Kramer, & Haber, 1985; Olzak, 1986; Sorkin, Pohlmann, & Gilliom, 1973; Townsend et al., 1981, 1984, 1988;  Wickelgren, 1967). Other methods and dependent measures, however, have also been used to investigate independence, including  multidimensional scaling techniques of (dis)similarity ratings (e.g., Burns & Shepp, 1988) and measures of response times for  the detection of a target stimulus either as a function of display size (e.g., Treisman & Gelade, 1980) or with redundant  targets (e.g., Miller, 1982). The method presented here consequently contributes to an already large assortment of techniques  used in investigating perceptual independence of stimulus features or dimensions. It does, however, have the notable and  distinguishing feature that it stems from a tight theoretical framework in which the various within- and across-stimulus  perceptual notions are interrelated with the observable measures of signal detection theory.  DETECTION PARAMETERS 327  THE GENERAL RECOGNITION THEORY: OVERVIEW AND NOTATION  Before we proceed, our uses of the terms "dimension" and "feature" need to be clarified. A number of investigators (e.g., Gati  & Tversky, 1982; Tversky & Krantz, 1970) have pointed out that the term "dimension" has been used in several different senses  in the literature. At the risk of adding yet more meanings to the term, we need to distinguish two uses of the term  "dimension" in the present discussion-a stimulus (or physical) dimension and a perceptual dimension (see also Ashby &  Townsend, 1986).  Our usage of a stimulus or physical dimension is as Garner (e.g., Garner & Haun, 1978) defined a dimension: as an attribute of  a set of stimuli that exists at some positive level in each stimulus of the set. This is equivalent to an experimentally  manipulable variable, one sense of "dimension" described by Tversky and Krantz (1970). For example, attributes such as  stimulus intensity, hue, and line orientation or length could be considered as stimulus dimensions for visual stimuli, and  amplitude and frequency of sound waves for auditory stimuli. Garner has also contrasted this definition of a stimulus  dimension with the term "feature," which he defined as an attribute that either exists in a set of stimuli or does not exist,  but if it does exist has only one level. We use the terms "feature" or "stimulus component" in the more general sense of  physical dimension, since in general an existing component may have more than one level. For example, in the types of stimuli  used by Townsend and his colleagues (Townsend et aL, 1981, 1984, 1988) and in the example used for illustration below,  features are the line segments of fixed orientation and length from which the stimulus set is formed. The important point  here, however, is that these terms, stimulus dimension and feature, refer to the physical aspects of the stimuli.  A perceptual dimension, on the other hand, is a dimension on which a given (physical) feature in the presented stimulus is  represented in a hypothetical perceptual space. For example, in the auditory domain, perceptual dimensions of loudness and  pitch correspond to the physical dimensions of amplitude and frequency, respectively. Processing visual information seems more  complex, and there is not as yet much agreement as to what the perceptual dimensions of visual stimuli are. For pattern  recognition, since Hubel and his co-workers identified cortical cells that were selectively responsive to lines and edges of  various lengths and orientations (e.g., Hubel & Weisel, 1968; Livingstone & Hubel, 1988), investigators have hypothesized that  these simple stimuli could serve as the building blocks of more complex pattern perception. Other investigators have suggested  that the visual system analyzes visual patterns in terms of spatial frequency components (e.g., Graham, 1989; Watson, 1983).  Recent evidence seems to suggest that spatial frequency information is the physiologically relevant information (see e.g., De  Valois & De Valois, 1988); more research, however, is needed in this area before we know what the perceptual dimensions are.  More abstractly, an example of a perceptual dimension may be the strength with which the feature is represented in the  perceptual space (e.g., Wickelgren, 1967),  328 KADLEC AND TOWNSEND  possibly realized by the frequency of firing of neurons or the number of neurons firing in a specific cortical area. Although  the psychophysical mapping between a physical dimension and the corresponding perceptual dimension may not be oneto-one in  general, we assume that every psychologically available physical dimension can be represented by one perceptual dimension.  Other cases, once evidence becomes available, should be relatively easy to incorporate into the general theory.  On a single presentation of a given feature (at a given level of a physical dimension), an entire distribution of perceptual  effects may occur on its perceptual dimension. This is analogous to the assumption made by Thurstone in his Law of Categorical  Judgment (e.g., Thurstone, 1927) and in signal detection theory (Green & Swets, 1966), except now we have a dimension for each  possible feature in the stimulus set, resulting in a higher dimensional perceptual space. Thus, assuming that the perceptual  effects have continuous (in our case multivariate normal) distributions, a given stimulus presentation can result in any value  from the entire continuum.' This definition of a perceptual dimension seems only loosely similar to Tversky and Krantz's  (1970) definition of a psychological dimension as an organizing principle for the perception of objects. It is similar in that  both are contrasted with physical dimensions; however, a defining characteristic of a psychological dimension for Tversky and  Krantz (1970) is that some perceptual experiences (one dimension) are psychologically (or perceptually) independent of other  perceptual experiences (another dimension). We do not require such a characteristic from our perceptual dimensions.  In the General Recognition Theory, a stimulus is defined in terms of separate components or features, each of which is  represented by a single perceptual dimension in the perceptual space. In a given stimulus, each feature is represented at some  level (of a stimulus dimension, e.g., intensity, line length, etc.). It is only required that two or more levels be selected  from each stimulus dimension. In the present discussion, it will be supposed that two levels from each of two stimulus  dimensions have been selected. It cannot be emphasized too strongly that the theory does not necessitate that the stimulus  dimensions be binary valued, as for example, in the presence or absence of stimulus features. When we speak of two levels on a  physical dimension, these two levels could have any values on that dimension. The presence versus absence (binary levels)  example is merely a special case when one of the levels has a zero value and the other a nonzero value on the given stimulus  dimension. Our experimental illustration in the last section, however, will be applied to a design where binary-valued levels,  featural presence versus absence, were employed.  AS in the notation of Ashby and Townsend (1986), features are denoted as capital letters A and B, and a stimulus is denoted as  A ;B;, i, j= 1, 2, where the subscript  ' The examples of perceptual dimensions as frequency of neuronal firing or the number of neurons active in a particular  cortical area might both suggest discrete, non-Gaussian distributions. However, it is customary to approximate discrete  distributions by continuous ones. In addition, and under rather broad conditions, one might invoke the Central Limit Theorem  to bypass these objections.  DETECTION PARAMETERS 329  represents the level of the feature on the corresponding stimulus dimension in the presented stimulus. For example, when we  consider binary levels, i= 1 (j= 1) means that the feature A (B) was absent from the stimulus, while i = 2 (j = 2) means that  A (B) was present. In a given experiment, all features in the feature set and at each level are combined factorially to form a  complete set of stimuli. For example, if two features (e.g., a vertical and a horizontal bar) each at one of two levels  (presence or absence), are combined factorially, the stimulus set would contain a blank stimulus, a vertical bar stimulus, a  horizontal bar stimulus, and a stimulus containing both the vertical and the horizontal bar. We call such a design a  "feature-complete factorial design."'  General Recognition Theory views perception as a two-stage process. When a stimulus (A, B) is presented, perceptual processes  of the system operate on it to produce a perceptual effect (a, b). Based on this effect, the decisional processes then choose  the response that the system will make. As discussed above, the theory assumes that the perceptual effect of any given  stimulus (or feature) is not constant over trials, but has a multivariate normal distribution. This allows us to represent  each stimulus within an experimental situation as a joint probability density of the perceptual effects of the constituent  features in the perceptual space. In a featurecomplete factorial design with two features in the feature set.each at one of  two possible levels, as in our previous example, we have four bivariate densities in the perceptual space: one for the blank  stimulus, one for each of the stimuli composed of each feature individually, and one for the stimulus containing both features.  An alternative and more convenient view of the joint densities in the perceptual space is to represent them by their equal  probability contours (see Fig. 1). These are produced by cutting through the joint densities in a plane parallel to the  coordinate axes, such that all points on the resulting contours have the same density value. In the upper left part of Fig. 1,  the perceptual space resulting from a feature-complete factorial design with two features, A and B, each at two levels, is  illustrated.  To introduce our notation as shown in Fig. 1, let X be defined as the random variable representing the perceptual effect of  feature A, and Y be defined as the random variable representing the perceptual effect of feature B. A postulate in all the  following work is that the perceptual space is the Cartesian product of two perceptual dimensions, each described by the real  line. The joint density of X and Y when stimulus A;Bj, i, j= 1, 2, is presented is denoted byf,,B;(x, y), and it is  represented as an equal probability contour in Fig. 1. Integrating these joint densities over the entire range of one variable  gives us the marginal densities. Thus, in Fig. 1, g,, B.(x) and g,a,B; (y) denote the marginal densities along the x-axis  (feature A dimension) and along the y-axis (feature B dimension), respectively.  z Ashby and Townsend (1986) referred to this paradigm as the complete identification paradigm. This latter term, however,  traditionally only stipulates that there is exactly one response for each and every stimulus, rather than the idea that all  possible feature combinations are included in the experiment. We therefore suggested (Townsend et al., 1988), as we do here,  the term "feature-complete factorial design." Note also that this paradigm is akin to the "concurrent experiment" with a  one-to-one stimulus response assignment (e.g., Graham, Kramer, & Haber, 1985; Wickens & Olzak, 1989).  330 KADLEC AND TOWNSEND Y  FIG. 1. An example of a General Recognition model introducing our notation. See text for further explanations.  The decision process assumes that the observer sets up decision criteria which divide the perceptual space into different  response regions. It is assumed that each feature has its own set of criteria. In general, when there are n levels of a  feature in an experiment, n - 1 criteria would be required: In an identification experiment with binary levels of the  features, there is only one criterion for each feature; it is reported either as present or as absent. Alternatively, in an  experiment in which the subject is asked for confidence ratings on each feature (e.g., Ashby, 1988; Olzak, 1986; Wickelgren,  1967), n- 1 criteria for an n-point rating scale would be required.  As in signal detection theory, we generalize the concept of a decision criterion, which is a point in one-dimensional space,  by defining it as a curve in a two-dimensional perceptual space (or a hyperplane in an n-dimensional perceptual space). These  curves are assumed to be continuous, dividing the perceptual space into various response regions, such that a given response  will be made for every percept falling within that response region. In the two-dimensional representation in Fig. 1, the  decision criteria for the two levels of features A and B are represented as curves cA and CB, respectively.  A stimulus presentation on a given trial results in a percept represented by a single point in the perceptual space. If a  percept of a feature falls above the criterion curve for that feature, the observer will report that feature at level 2; for  binaryvalued features, that feature will be reported as present. The subject's response to  DETECTION PARAMETERS 331  an entire stimulus then corresponds to the region in the perceptual space where the percept falls in relation to the decision  criteria for each individual feature. In our two-feature binary-valued example, if the percept of a stimulus falls above the  criterion for feature A (to the right curve c,, in Fig. 1) and below the criterion for feature B (below CB), the subject  responds that feature A was present and feature B was absent.  In order to estimate the signal detection parameters, confusion matrices are employed. These provide only the probabilities of  "hits" and "false alarms;" thus, some simplifying assumptions about the observer's response strategy, and thus the decision  criteria, must be made. Most commonly, investigators assume that the subject uses a response strategy such as minimum distance  classification (i.e., choose that response which corresponds to the shortest distance of the percept to each of the means) or  some optimal response strategy (e.g., maximizing percent correct). The theory presented here does not address this issue, but  may be extended in the future to do so. A major simplifying assumption we make here is that all the decision criteria are  parallel to the perceptual axes. This assumption stands as one of the hypotheses that can be tested using our methods. In some  cases, this assumption can be bypassed in testing other hypotheses.'  It should be noted that parallel, or linear, decision bounds may or may not correspond to optimal responding, defined as  maximizing percent correct. In feature-complete factorial designs, a few special cases arise in which parallel bounds may be  optimal. For example, when all densities are assumed to have covariance matrices equal to the same scalar multiple of the  identity matrix (i.e., all variances equal and all covariances equal to zero), parallel decision bounds will be optimal. Once  the variances become unequal and/or the covariances become nonzero, however, linear criteria may no longer be optimal (see,  e.g., Ashby & Gott, 1988; Ashby & Townsend, 1986). This does not, however, detract from the generality of the General  Recognition Theory, since in general both independent decision process and information integration models (e.g., Ashby & Gott,  1988; Shaw, 1982) can be incorporated within the General Recognition framework, depending on the particular placement of the  decision bounds.  As noted earlier, only two levels of each of two stimulus dimensions will be considered in the present study; however, it  should be clear that the results readily  ' Hence, our definitions of the signal detection parameters (see next section) are based on the assumption that the decision  criteria are parallel to the coordinate axes, a condition defined as decisional separability. Originally we had thought that  constraining the criteria to be linear would be sufficient, but this turns out not to be the case. Our rationale for the  linear criteria was that there would exist unique points on the criteria (e.g., the intersection of the linear bound with the  line joining the density means) which would preserve the probabilities of hits and false alarms when going from  two-dimensional to the marginal mappings. However, our various attempts to find such unique points have failed, even when the  variance--covariance matrices were assumed to be identity matrices. Thus in most of the theoretical results we present here,  parallelity of the decision bounds will be assumed. Extensions to nonparallel decision bounds awaits the development of the  theory where the mappings from two- (or higher-) dimensional to one-dimensional spaces preserve the probabilities of hits and  false alarms.  332 KADLEC AND TOWNSEND  extend to include stimuli with more than two features and to any number of values (levels) selected from continua such as  stimulus intensity, hue, line length, and so on (see Kadlec & Townsend, 1992, for extensions of the present results to more  than two dimensions and to more than two levels). For ease of terminology and to make the analogy with signal detection theory  more obvious, we will sometimes refer to the two levels as if they were binary-valued (i.e., presence and absence). It must be  stressed that these terms are used only for convenience; in actuality "absence" means the first level or a percept falling  below the decision criterion, and "presence" refers to the second level or a percept which falls above the decision criterion.  In this multidimensional view, we can define two types of signal detection analyses. These were introduced by Townsend and his  co-workers (Townsend et al., 1984, 1988) where they were called signal detection macro- and microanalyses. In terms of the  General Recognition Theory, signal detection macroanalyses involve obtaining the d' and a parameters of signal detectability  theory (Green & Swets, 1966) from the marginal densities, g,;B.(z), i, j= 1, 2, z=x or y. A number of investigators have used  estimates of these, particularly the d"s, to study one kind of "perceptual independence," what Ashby and Townsend (1986)  called perceptual separability (see definitions below; e.g., Graham et al., 1985; Olzak, 1986; Tanner, 1956; Wickelgren,  1967). In signal detection microanalyses, the joint densities, fA,Bj(x, y), are used to calculate the d"s and f's for each  individual feature, by conditioning on how the other feature in the stimulus was perceived. In two dimensions, two sets of  microanalytic comparisons result: We can compare the parameters for a given feature when these are conditioned on (1) the  correct report of the presence ("hit") versus the incorrect report of the absence ("miss") of the other feature, and (2) the  correct report of the other feature's absence ("correct rejection") versus the incorrect report of the other feature's  presence ("false alarm"). Sorkin et al. (1973) have performed similar (micro )analyses in a feature-complete factorial design  with two auditory signals.  In terms of Fig. 1, the microanalyses involve those portions of the corresponding pairs of joint densities falling either  above or below the criterion for the other feature, respectively. For example, if we want to compare the d' or l for feature  A, conditioned on the hit versus the miss of feature B (implying that B was present in the stimulus), we would obtain the d'  or (3 from the densities fA,B, and fA,BZ above the cB criterion (for conditioning on a hit) and corhpare them with those  obtained from the same two densities but below the CB criterion (conditioning on a miss). For comparing d' and fl for feature  A conditioned on the correct rejection versus the false alarm of feature B, we would look at the two densities fA,B, and fAZB,  in an analogous manner. The definitions of the d' and /3 parameters of both signal detection macro- and microanalyses are made  mathematically explicit in the Theoretical Results section.  With this overview of the General Recognition Theory we are now ready to define the perceptual concepts we consider. We  present all definitions, as they were stated in Ashby and Townsend (1986), in the next section for easy reference.  DETECTION PARAMETERS 333  VARIETIES OF PERCEPTUAL INDEPENDENCE: DEFINITIONS  We begin with perceptual and sampling independence. We view perceptual independence as the finest level type of dimensional  invariance, as it imposes statistical independence of perceptual dimensions at the within-trial level.  DEFINITION 1. Perceptual independence of features A and B in a feature-complete factorial design holds in stimulus A; B; if  and only if the perceptual effects of A and B are statistically independent; that is, if and only if  fA;a;(x, Y) = gA;s;(x) gA;Bj(Y), for all x and y.  Thus, the perceptual effects of features x and y are statistically independent when their joint within-trial density is the  product of their marginal densities.  Sampling independence is a somewhat more global form of perceptual independence. "Sampling" is the term suggested by Townsend  et al. (1980, 1981) to avoid theoretically loaded or ambiguous terms such as "detection" or "extraction." It applies in  experiments in which the subject believes that only one of a number of levels of a stimulus dimension (e.g., presence vs  absence) is presented on each trial and hence must make a decision as to which level was presented. Townsend and colleagues  make the case that in feature-complete factorial designs, it is reasonable to assume that what is sampled is reported  (Townsend et al., 1984). This assumption amounts to a "direct report" strategy, wherein subjects respond the results of their  sampling.  DEFINITION 2. Sampling independence holds if and only if the probability that both features are reported is equal to the  probability that feature A is reported times the probability that feature B is reported. If a and b denote the events that  feature A and B, respectively, are reported, then sampling independence in stimulus A; B; holds if and only if  P(a2b2 I AiB;) = [P(a2 I AiB;)] x [P(b2 I AiB;)],  where P(a2I A;B;)=P(A is sampled I A;B;)= [P(a2b, I A;B;)+ (P(a2b2 I A;B;)], and P(b2I A;B;)=P(B is sampled I A;B;)= [P(a,b2I  A;B;)+P(a2b2I A;B;)]. Similarly, we can define other conditional response probabilities for P(aib;1 AkB.), that is, reporting  a; b; when stimulus Ak B was presented (k = 1 or 2 and m = 1 or 2).  It is interesting that for some time, researchers (including the second author of the present study) seemed to believe that  perceptual independence was logically equivalent to sampling independence (see, e.g., Wandmacher, 1976; Rumelhart, 1971;  Townsend & Ashby, 1982). This is not true in general. In the very special case, if the distributions of perceptual effects  were binary (i.e., if f,,e,(x, y) were equal to unity at only one point and zero elsewhere) then sampling and perceptual  independence would be equivalent as long as the decision criteria cut between the  334 KADLEC AND TOWNSEND  two perceptual values. Within the General Recognition framework this position is untenable, as the above definitions indicate.  These definitions make it clear that perceptual and sampling independence are concerned with within-stimulus effects. Thus, it  may be the case that in the same experiment, perceptual or sampling independence of the two features may hold in one stimulus  but not in another. The next three definitions concern perceptual and decisional effects of the two features across stimuli.  DEFINITION 3. In a feature-complete factorial design with stimuli A;B;, i, j = 1, 2, the features A and B are perceptually  separable if and only if the perceptual effect of one feature does not depend on the level of the other; that is, if and only  if  and  gA;a,(x) = 9A;BZ(x), i = 1, 2,  9A, a; (Y) = j= 1, 2.  9A, B, (Y),   DEFINITION 4. In a feature-complete factorial design with stimuli A;B;, i, j = 1, 2, the features A and B are decisionally  separable if and only if the decision about one feature does not depend on the level of the other; that is, if the decision  bounds in the General Recognition Theory are parallel to the coordinate axes.  DEFINITION 5. Marginal response invariance for one feature holds if and only if the probability of correctly recognizing a  given level of that feature does not depend on the level of the other feature; in other words, marginal response invariance  holds for feature A if and only if  P(a,IA;B,)=P(a;IAjB2), i=1,2,  where P(a; I A;B,)=P(a;b, I A;B,)+P(a;b2I A ;B,), and P(a;1 A;B2)=P(a;b, I AjB2) + P(a;b2 I AiB2). Similarly, marginal  response invariance holds for feature B if and only if  P(b;IAIB;)=P(b;IA2B;), j=1,2,  where P(b; I A, Bj) = P(a, b; I A, Bj) + P(a2 b; I A, Bj ), and P(b; I A2 Bj) = P(a, bj I A2 Bj ) + P(a2bj I A2Bl).  In these definitions, observe that one feature may be perceptually or decisionally separable from the other, while at the same  time the other need not be perceptually or decisionally separable from the first. This is an important point, since in some of  the following propositions separability of one feature is sufficient, while in other propositions mutually separable  components are required. It is notable that the perceptual literature supports the idea that such asymmetries can be found  experimen-  DETECTION PARAMETERS 335  tally. For example, when the visual system is adapted to a horizontal stimulus, response times to the horizontal stimulus  become slower but remain unaffected for the vertical stimulus (e.g., McKenna, 1985; see also, e.g., Pantle & Sekuler, 1969,  who demonstrated direction-of-motion specific adaptation).  THEORETICAL RESULTS  In this section we present the major theoretical results. The reader should keep in mind that these results hold under the  following assumptions: (1) the stimulus set forms a feature-complete factorial design, and (2) each stimulus is represented by  a multivariate Gaussian density (except where noted). The results are given for the two-dimensional case with two levels on  each dimension. However, generalizations to instances with more than two dimensions and/or more than two levels are  straightforward (see Kadlec & Townsend, 1992). Recall also that the terminology we sometimes use is strictly for convenience  and that feature "absence" refers to the first level and feature "presence" to the second level.  The first part of this section deals with marginal d' and fl parameters of signal detection macroanalyses and their  relationships to perceptual and decisional separabilities, and marginal response invariance. In the second part, conditional  d' and J3 of signal detection microanalyses and their relationships to perceptual and decisional separabilities, perceptual  independence, and sampling independence are explored. Proofs of all propositions are given in the Appendix, except in certain  cases where a relatively obvious proof can be expressed by an example.  Signal Detection Macroanalyses  As mentioned above, the d' and # parameters of signal detection macroanalyses are based on the marginal densities.  Theoretically these are obtained by integrating the joint densities in the perceptual space over the variable not of interest.  These marginal Gaussian densities are then used as the "noise" (that density where the feature was absent from the stimulus)  and "signal +noise" (where the feature was present in the stimulus) densities, as in the signal detectability theory of Green  and Swets (1966), to obtain the d' and # parameters. The theoretical formulas which follow correspond to the methods of  estimation of these parameters used by Townsend et al. (1984, 1988).  We denote the mean vector and covariance matrix of density fA;B (x, y) by  A B _ ltx(AiBj), /I _and ~' A B a z  2 (AiBj) o-x,(AiBj)1  W( 1 j)-CYY(AiBj)J ')-IUXY(AiBj) -, (AiBj) J'  respectively. The covariance term can also be written as u,Y(AiBj)=px,(AiBj) ax(AiBj) ay(AiBi), where pxy(AiBj) is the  correlation coefficient between X and Y  336 KADLEC AND TOWNSEND  in density f,;Bj. The marginal d' for feature A at the jth level of feature B can then be written as (see also Fig. 1)  hx(A2Bj)-yx(AjBj)  dABi C6X(A2Bi)+0'X(A1Bj)] 1/2~  j=1,2.  Similarly, marginal d' for feature B at the ith level of feature A is  __ ur(AjB2)-hr(AjBj)  dA,B [QX(AiB2)+QY(AjBj)P~= 1~ 2.  As in signal detectability theory, the marginal /l's are defined as the likelihood ratios of the marginal densities, evaluated  at the criterion values, CA or CB, respectively. In these definitions, it becomes apparent why we require the decision bounds  to be parallel to the coordinate axes. Without a unique point to represent in some sense the "average" or "most  representative" decision criterion in the one-dimensional mapping, it is unclear how to define the likelihood ratios. In other  words, the likelihood ratio for feature A, say, would be a function of y in general (i.e., the percept of feature B). Thus  with analogous notation as for the marginal d"s, and the parallel decision criteria given by x = CA and y = cB, respectively,  we write,  and  /~ j= 1, 2>  #ABj= 9A,B;(CA)   9A, I   By (CA   #AiB =9AjB2(CB)' i=1,2.  SA;Bj(CB)   In the following propositions, we will often need to make assumptions regarding the equality of variances of the marginal  densities. However, we need to distinguish two different versions of this assumption. In the weaker case, the assumption of  equal marginal variances across levels of the other feature denotes that the variances of the marginal densities of one  feature do not change across levels of the other feature. For example, if the marginal variances for feature A are equal  across levels of featureB, then Q,(A,B,)=Qx(A,B2) (=a,,) and Qx(A2B,)=Qx(A2B2) ( =Qxz). However, the variances of the "noise"  and "signal + noise" densities under consideration need not be equal, even for the same feature (i.e., in the preceding  example it could be that 6x1 :A Q1Z). The second, stronger assumption is that all marginal variances are equal, across levels  of a feature as well as the variances of the "noise" and "signal +noise" densities, for each feature. In this case when all  marginal variances are equal, for example for feature A (i.e., on the x-dimension), we require that  tTx(A,B,)=6x(A,B2)=Qx(A2B,)=ax(A2B2). We will make explicit which assumption is required in each of the propositions.  The first two propositions (la and lb) are obvious, but they are included for  DETECTION PARAMETERS 337  completeness and to motivate the rationale for Proposition lc. Proposition lc gives necessary and sufficient conditions for  constant marginal d' values.  PROPOSITION la. If feature A is perceptually separable from feature B, then the marginal d "s of feature A are equal across  the two levels of feature B; that is,  d,4BI = dABZ.  Similarly, if perceptual separability holds for feature B, then d AI a = d'  ZB.  The reverse implication of this result does not hold. Even if we fix the difference in the means and have equal marginal  variances across levels, it will not necessarily follow that we will achieve perceptual separability for the given feature.  This is illustrated by the example shown in Fig. 2. Here, the densities are equally spaced, have the same variances, and  therefore have equal marginal d"s, yet they do not yield equal marginal densities. In other words, since d' represents a  (standardized) difference in means, it only specifies the means uniquely to an additive constant. This result is stated in the  following proposition. The proof is omitted.  PROPOSITION lb. Equal marginal d' values do not necessarily imply that perceptual separability holds.  The example in Fig. 2 suggests that if the means of the joint densities form a rectangle and if the marginal variances do not  change across levels of the features, we would have necessary and sufficient conditions for perceptual separability to hold.  This intuition is supported, as the following proposition shows. In contrast to Proposition la, note that in this case we  require that perceptual separability hold for both features simultaneously.  FIG. 2. Example showing that constant marginal d' values do not imply perceptual separability. Note that although da,B=d ',Z B  and dAB =dAB,, SA;B,(x) 0 SA;e,(x) for i= 1, 2.  338 KADLEC AND TOWNSEND  PROPOSITION lc. Perceptual separability holds for both features if and only if all three of the following conditions hold:  (i) the variances of the marginal densities, for each feature across the levels of the second feature, are equal (i.e.,  ax(A1B1)=ux(A1B2)=axe, ax(AzBI)= ax(AZBz)=axz, ay(A1B1)=ay(A2B,)=aye, and ay(A1Bz)=ay(AZB2)=UYZ);  (ii) marginal d"s for both features are constant across levels of the other feature (i.e., dAB = d ABZ = d A and dAB = d'A2B =  d 'B); and,  (iii) (dA)2+-(da)2=(dAB)', where dAB denotes the diagonal distance between the means of fA,B, andfAZBZ (see Fig. 2). We call  this the Euclidean diagonal d' condition.  Conditions (ii) and (iii) together imply that the means of the four densities form a rectangular configuration.  This proposition is particularly useful since it does not depend on decisional separability. What is required is a test of the  diagonal d'. At first glance this proposition seems testable empirically; estimates of dAB should be readily obtained from  trials where both and no features were presented. Investigators who have used the feature-complete factorial design to  estimate the two-feature d"s have estimated the diagonal d "s in this way (e.g., Graham et al., 1985; Olzak, 1986; Wickelgren,  1967). However, this may not ordinarily be the most appropriate way of estimating the diagonal d"s in feature-complete  factorial designs. In this design, when we estimate the probability of a hit and a false alarm for the two-feature stimulus  (AZBZ), there is an ambiguity with respect to the inclusion of the probability of report of the one-feature stimulus (A2B, or  A,B2), which is a subset of the features of the presented stimulus. Do we include it in the probability of a hit, or do we  include it in the probability of a false alarm, or do we ignore these completely? In other words, it is not clear how one  should divide the perceptual space "diagonally" so as to include only the fA,B, and fAZBZ densities (see e.g., Fig. 2). The  problem is what to do with the overlapping fA,BZ and fAZB, probabilities.  To circumvent this problem, a more appropriate experimental design to estimate dAB may be to present the subject with a series  of blocks of trials, where in some blocks only the two-feature and the 0-feature (blank) stimuli are the only alternatives  available. The subject would be aware of the current subset of possible stimulus presentations. Thus, even though the  perceptual space originally included distributions for all four possible stimuli, only the relevant two would be used,  resulting in more appropriate estimates for dAB. Under the assumption that the perceptual spaces remain invariant across the  different blocks of trials, separate estimates of d A, d a, and dAB could be obtained from these different blocks of trials,  eliminating the need to consider the confusions resulting from the one-feature stimuli. This is but one suggestion to avoid  this problem; other investigators may find alternative, more appropriate solutions.  The next two propositions, 2a and 2b, relate decisional and perceptual separabilities to marginal /3's. Proposition 2a gives  the conditions under which  DETECTION PARAMETERS 339  equal marginal /3 values may be expected, and this is logically implied only when both separabilities hold.  PROPOSITION 2a. If decisional separability holds for both features and perceptual separability holds for feature A, then the  marginal fl's for feature A are equal across levels of feature B; that is,  f' ABA - F' AB2  Similarly, if decisional separability and perceptual separability hold for feature B, then #A,B=fA2B'  This result does not give a direct test of decisional separability based on the marginal detection parameters, but gives the  conditions when equal marginal f's may be expected. Proposition 2b presented next provides more direct results relating the  empirically observable # values to the separabilities. The proofs are omitted, since these results are easily illustrated by  examples.  PROPOSITION 2b. (i) If decisional separability holds for both features but perceptual separability fails for feature A, then  it is not necessarily true that the marginal fl 's for feature A will be equal.  (ii) Constant marginal l3 values for feature A, #AB,=fAB2, and decisional separability for both features do not imply  perceptual separability for feature A across levels of feature B, even when all marginal variances are assumed equal.  Y  CA  FIG. 3. Example showing how a failure in perceptual separability can result in different marginal P's even though decisional  separability holds.  480/36/3-2  340 KADLEC AND TOWNSEND  An example to illustrate the result in part (i) is given in Fig. 3. It shows that a failure in perceptual separability can  lead to unequal marginal J3's even when decisional separability holds. Part (ii) of Proposition 2b states that under the  assumption of decisional separability, the converse of Proposition 2a is not true. An example of this result is illustrated in  Fig. 4, which shows that equal marginal /i's can be obtained even when perceptual separability fails. In this example, all  marginal variances are equal and the marginal f3's for feature A across levels of feature B are equal, yet perceptual  separability does not hold because the marginal densities at the first level of B have a larger distance between their means  than the marginal densities at the second level of B.  It is also true that if perceptual separability holds but decisional separability fails for feature A, then it is not  necessarily true that the marginal P's for feature A will be equal. However, as we pointed out above, in the case where the  decision bounds are not parallel to the coordinate axes, marginal /3's would need to be defined as a function of the  perceptual effect on the second dimension, and this we do not consider here.  The final set of propositions involving the marginal parameters relate marginal response invariance to marginal d' and l.  PROPOSITION 3a. If marginal response invariance holds for feature A and decisional separability holds for both features, then  d ABA = d',,, under the assumption of equal variances for feature A across levels of feature B.  Y  CA  FIG. 4. Example showing that although decisional separability holds for feature A and the marginal fl's for feature A across  levels of feature B are equal (=1.0), perceptual separability fails.  DETECTION PARAMETERS 341  PROPOSITION 3b. If marginal response invariance holds for feature A and decisional separability holds for both features, then  YAB, = flIBZ (without any assumptions about the variances).  PROPOSITION 3c. If d ABI = d'ABZ and NAB, = PABZ and decisional separability holds for feature A, then marginal response  invariance holds for feature A, under the assumption that all marginal variances are equal (on the x-dimension), i.e., when  ax(AI Bt) = ax(A1 B2) = ux(A2Bi) = ax(A2B2)  Similar propositions are obtained for feature B on the y-dimension by interchanging the roles of A and B.  Note that under the much stronger assumption that all marginal variances are equal, these propositions give both necessary and  sufficient conditions on d"s and l for marginal response invariance to hold. However, this strong assumption is not required  for the necessity of equal macroparameters to imply marginal response invariance, and in particular equal marginal /l's follow  directly from marginal response invariance. We can therefore immediately state, without proof, a corollary to Proposition 3.  COROLLARY. Under the assumptions that all marginal variances are equal on the x-dimension and decisional separability holds  for both features, marginal response invariance holds for feature A if and only if d~B, = dABZ and l'AB, _ /3Aa2.  Similarly for feature B on the y-dimension.  In the distribution-free case, Theorem 5 in Ashby and Townsend (1986, p. 166) stated that both perceptual and decisional  separability for features A and B are sufficient conditions for marginal response invariance.' The reverse implication was not  found to hold; marginal response invariance alone does not logically imply any conclusions regarding perceptual and decisional  separabilities. However, marginal response invariance together with decisional separability does imply perceptual separability  in certain cases. While this statement is not true in the general distribution-free case, we found that it does hold in the  Gaussian case where the marginal variances for one feature are equal across levels of the other. We state this result as  Proposition 4 next.  PROPOSITION 4. If all densities are Gaussian and the marginal variances for feature A are equal across levels of feature B  [i.e., when Qx (At B,) = ax (A t B2)  Theorem 5 in Ashby and Townsend (1986, p. 166) states that in a feature-complete factorial design, if perceptual and  decisional separabilities both hold for features A and B, then marginal response invariance holds for both features. Neither  kind of separability alone, however, implies marginal response invariance.  342 KADLEC AND TOWNSEND  and a,(A2BI)=ax(A2BZ)], then marginal response invariance for feature A and decisional separability for both features imply  perceptual separability of feature A. Similarly for feature B, on the y-dimension.  In other words, under the Gaussian and equal variance assumptions, this proposition states that if the probability of  correctly recognizing feature A is the same across the levels of feature B, and the decision criteria do not change across  levels, then the marginal densities for feature A will be identical across the levels of feature B. Recall that the  probability of correctly recognizing a feature as present is simply the area under the normal "signal" curve from the  criterion value to infinity. Clearly then, if the areas and the criteria are the same, and the normal densities have the same  variances, then the only free parameters are the means of the two "signal" densities (one for each level of the other  feature), which must then also be equal.  The third combination among marginal response invariance and the two separabilities-whether marginal response invariance and  perceptual separability imply decisional separability-does not hold in general, but may be true if the decision bounds are  constrained to be linear. This result is easy to visualize in the case of linear decision bounds, but we do not state it here,  since we do not have a proof for it. For nonlinear decision bounds, this result will not hold, since perceptual separability  and marginal response invariance may both still hold without the bounds being parallel (e.g., if the bounds "wiggle" in some  way so as to preserve the probabilities of marginal response invariance).  This concludes the theoretical results for the marginal d' and /3. We next turn to the theoretical results relating d' and #  parameters of signal detection microanalyses to the various notions of perceptual independence.  Signal Detection Microanalyses  In this section we consider the conditional d' and Q parameters. As in the case of the macroanalyses above, the following  theoretical formulas correspond to the methods of estimation in the earlier experimental papers (Townsend et al., 1984, 1988).  Note that all of the results in this section assume decisional separability for both features. Again, all results are  presented for the two-dimensional case with two levels on each dimension; however, they generalize readily to situations with  more than two dimensions and/or more than two levels (see Kadlec & Townsend, 1992).  At this point we must establish the pertinent theoretical structures. Those readers willing to take these on faith may wish to  move immediately to Proposition 5a. Recall that X is the random variable representing the perceptual effect resulting from the  visually degraded presentation of feature A, and Y is the random variable analogously defined for feature B. We now wish to  derive a joint density of X and Y when we condition, for example, on the hit or miss of feature B. The hit or miss on feature  B demands that B was actually present in the stimulus; thus, we are  DETECTION PARAMETERS 343  concerned with the two densities fA,BZ, i = 1, 2. The normalized joint densities for conditioning on the hit on feature B are  then written as  fA*, (x,YIBhit) = f ( fBf~fAx'x, Y  Y) dx dY  B,( XI  Y) i = 1 2 f B 9A,BZ(Y) dY  and similarly when we condition on the miss of feature B,  fn;(x, YI Bmiss) = ~B ~fA;B2(x, Y) f-crf-,,: fA;B,(x,Y)dxdy  fA;BZ(x, Y) i = 1, 2, f'-'B. gA,B,(Y) dY  where CB is the constant (y-coordinate) value of the decision criterion for feature B. Here i = 1 or 2 depending on whether  feature A was actually absent or present in the stimulus, respectively. In these joint densities, X ranges over the real  numbers in both, and Y ranges from CB to infinity in f A: (x, y I B hit) and from negative infinity to cB in f **; (x, y I B  miss). Note that we assume decisional separability in these definitions. If decisional separability fails, then the  integration takes place over the response region either above or below the curve defining the decision bound.  From these densities, we now obtain the corresponding marginal densities for X or Y by integrating over the range of the other  random variable. The "marginal" conditional density for X conditioned on the hit of feature B, which will be employed to  define the microanalytic signal detection parameters, is then given by  9A4, (x, Y I B hit) = J x f A*,BZ(x, Y I B hit) dy  __ f,-. fAiBZ(x, Y) dY f B 9A;BZ(Y) dY  Similarly, the "marginal" conditional density for A; conditional on the miss feature B is  of  g*n;(x I B miss) =f `B.  fA,BZ(x+ Y) dY  f `g. gA,B,(Y)dY  For the "marginal" densities of A; conditional on the false alarm and correct rejection of feature B-denoted g**, (z I B fa)  and g**, (z I B cr), respectively, where z = x or y-the same integrals (with the same ranges), respectively, would be taken  but using the original joint densities fA;B,, i= 1, 2.  By exchanging the roles of A and B we get the corresponding definitions for  344 KADLEC AND TOWNSEND  feature B conditioned on (1) the hit and miss of feature A by considering the joint densities for stimuli A2 B;, j= 1, 2 or  (2) the correct rejection (cr) or false alarm (fa) of feature A using the densities for A, B;, j = 1, 2, with the criterion  for reporting feature A as present at x = CA.  Using these densities, we now define the conditional d"s analogously to the d' parameter of signal detectability theory. For  example, the d' value for feature A conditional on the hit of feature B, is defined as  YAZ(B hit)- YA,(B hit)  d'(A I B hit) =  [aa2(Bhit) +aAJBhit)]'/2  where PA, (B hit) and U2  , (B hit) are the mean and the variance given that feature B was a hit and stimulus A;B2 was presented gA, (x I B hit) ). The  means are the expected values given by  of X, respectively, (i.e., of the density  PA,(Bhit) =E[XI B hit, A;B2]= f x9A;(XI Bhit) dx  __ f B 9A,BZ(Y) E[X I Y= Y, A;B2] dY f B gA,B,(Y) dY  We know that for two random variables, X and Y, with a bivariate distribution, the conditional mean of X at a given value of Y  is given by  normal  E[XI Y=Y]=Fix+(Y-py)pxy ax U ,  Y  where pxy is the correlation coefficient of the bivariate normal density, px and ax are the mean and variance of the marginal  density of X, and p, and a Y are the mean and variance of the marginal density of Y. Substituting these into the last  expression above and simplifying, we find that  E[X I B hit, A;B2] = pAi(B hit)  =ux(AiB2)-pxy(AiB2)"x(A B  ,2) {py(AiB2)-E[YI Bhit, A;B2]}, ay(A;B2)  where  E[ YI B hit, A,B2] = f x yg*,(y I B hit) dy  __ I,, YgA;BZ(Y) dY f B gA,BZ(Y) dY  DETECTION PARAMETERS 345  To find the variances QA ;(B hit), we have that QA ;(B hit) = Var[XI B hit, ArB2] _ E[X2I B hit, ArB2] - {E[X I B hit, ArB2]  }2, with  E[X21 B hit, ArB2] = f ' x2g';(x1 B hit) dx  -_ f B 9A,BZ(Y) E[X 21 Y= Y, ArB2] dY f B gA;BZ(Y) dY  and E[X I B hit, ArB2] given above. The expected value of X2 inside the integrand for a given value of Y is given by  E[X 21 Y= Y, ArB2] = Var[XI Y= Y, ArB2] + {E[X 1 Y= Y, ArB2] }2.  In general, Var[XI Y=Y]=U2 (1-pXY), so after substitution and simplification we have  QA,(B hit) = Var[XI B hit, ArB2] x(A;B2)[1 -Pxy(AiB2)]  +P2 y(AiB2) u2 (ArB2) Var[ YI B hit, A;B2]. QY(AtB2)  Substituting these into the definition of d'(A I B hit) we get the desired expression.  Similarly,  PAZ (B miss) - p,,(B miss)  d' A B miss) = ( I ) _ [a AZ (B miss)) ,(B miss)] 112,  where  pA;(Bmiss) =E[XI B miss, ArB2]  =Px(AiB2)-Pxy(AiB2) 6x(AiB2) JNY(AiB2)-E[YI B miss, ArB2]}, 6Y(AjB2)  and  QA,(Bmiss) =Var [XIBmiss, A;B2] =QX(A;B2)[1 -PXY(AiB2)]  2 (A B) QX(A,B2) Var[ YI B miss A B ].  +PXY r 2 orr(AiB2) r 2  Again, analogous expressions may be derived for d"s conditional on correct rejections (cr) and false alarms (fa) by using the  moments from the corresponding densities.  The definitions for the conditional f's are easier to derive. Using the "marginal"  346 KADLEC AND TOWNSEND  conditional densities defined above, we write the conditional /3 for feature A given the hit or miss of feature B as  #(A I B hit) =g*2(CA B hit)  g.,(cA B hit)  and  *  J3(AI Bmiss) =ggi~ccAI B miss B miss)  where CA is the x-coordinate of the criterion for reporting feature A.  With the conditional parameters now defined, we turn to the theoretical results concerning these parameters. The first  proposition shows the relationship between conditional d' parameters and perceptual independence. That perceptual independence  implies constant conditional d"s is intuitively apparent, since if the two variables are independent, the behavior of one is  unaffected by the second. This was one of the original rationales for using it in experiments (Townsend et al., 1984). As the  proof of Proposition 5a shows (see Appendix), the conditional densities become equivalent to the marginal densities, since all  the relevant y-values integrate out.  PROPOSITION 5a. Under the assumption that decisional separability holds for both features,  (i) If perceptual independence holds in stimuli A;BZ, i= 1 and 2, then d'(A I B hit) = d'(A I B miss), and these will be equal  to the marginal dABZ.  (ii) If perceptual independence holds in stimuli A ;B,, i=1 and 2, then d'(AI Bcr)=d'(AIBfa)=dAB,.  Analogous results hold for feature B conditioned on feature A if the roles of A and B are interchanged.  We were unable to find many results relating the signal detection microanalytic parameters to perceptual and decisional  separabilities. While exploring the possible relationships among these, however, we found a very special case where constant  conditional d"s may be obtained, in the absence of perceptual independence. It rests on a very particular placement of the  (parallel) decision bounds, and only in the case where the covariance matrices of the pair of densities are identical. In this  situation, the variance expressions in the denominators of the definitions of the conditional d"s become equivalent, and the  distances between the two conditional means (of the conditional densities above and below the decision bound) remain constant,  resulting in equal conditional d"s. We state the proposition for parallel decision bounds, but we suspect this result also  holds for linear bounds and the corresponding placement of the means.  DETECTION PARAMETERS 347  PROPOSITION 5b. Conditional d'(A I B hit) = d'(A I B miss), if all three of the following conditions are satisfied:  (i) The covariance matrices of the bivariate normal densities fA,B, and f,,,, are equal [i.e., X(A,B,)=X(A2B2)];  (ii) The y-coordinates of the two mean vectors are equal [i.e., y,,(A,B2)= uy(A2BZ)]; and  (iii) the parallel decision bound passes through the two mean vectors p(AI BZ) and p(A2B2).  Similarly, d'(AJBcr=d'(AJBfa) if X(A,B,)=1(A2B,), fur(A,B,)=Y,,(A2B,), and parallel decision bound passes through the two mean  vectors p(A, B,) and p(A2Bt).  Analogous results also hold for feature B conditional on the behaviour of feature A by interchanging the roles of A and B.  An illustration of this result is given in Fig. 5, where d'(A I B hit) = d'(A I B miss).  Y  g~(xIB hit) gA(xiB hit)  gA1 g~(xlB miss) 2 A(xIB miss, . ,  1  dA(B hit)  X  FIG. 5. Example showing constant conditional d' [d'(A JB hit) = d'(A I B miss)] in the absence of perceptual independence.  (Two joint densities are shown in the top half of the figure. The bottom part of the figure shows the "marginal" conditional  densities; the dashed curves are g'a,(x I B hit), i =1 and 2, resulting from integration above the criterion bound, cB, when  we condition on a hit of feature B, and the solid curves are the "marginal" conditional densities, g*,(x I B miss), resulting  from integration below CB for conditioning on a miss of B.)  348 KADLEC AND TOWNSEND  Observe how the placement of the criterion cB, such that it passes through the means of the two joint densities guarantees  that when the conditional densities are projected onto the x-axis, the variances of the "marginal" conditional densities are  equal (by symmetry of the normal surfaces about their mean vectors) and the distances between the conditional means are  preserved. The result is that we get equal conditional d' values in the absence of perceptual independence.  At first glance this is a rather disturbing if interesting result, since it shows that constant d"s may occur in the absence  of perceptual independence. However, the peculiar placement of the linear decision bound, so that it passes through the two  mean vectors, seems very unlikely to occur in practice. In addition, this placement to accommodate one pair of equivalent  conditional d"s (e.g., for feature A conditional on hit versus miss of feature B) would then make it even more difficult for  the other pair of conditional d "s (for feature A conditional on correct rejection versus false alarm of feature B) to also be  equivalent in the same perceptual space representation. This is because the variances for the second pair of conditional d"s  would now be much different (cf. the variances above versus below the same criterion in the second pair of densities).'  This is obviously a rather contrived example; nevertheless it does invalidate the logical necessity for constant conditional  d' to imply perceptual independence, even when the covariance matrices are equivalent and when decisional separability holds.  We thus get the following corollary as an immediate consequence of Proposition 5b:  COROLLARY. Constant conditional d"s do not necessarily imply perceptual independence in the corresponding pairs of densities.  The next proposition relates constant conditional /3 values to perceptual independence under the assumption of decisional  separability.  PROPOSITION 6. (i) If perceptual independence holds in stimuli A;B2, i= 1 and 2, and decisional separability holds for both  features, then #(A I B hit) = #(A I B miss), and these equal the marginal j3 for feature A at the second level of feature B,  flAB2.  s Equal conditional d's for feature A conditioned on the correct rejection versus false alarm of feature B could perhaps still  result in such an example, if the correlations in densities fA, B, and fA,B, were such that the differences in the means of  the resulting conditional densities were offset by the large discrepancy in the variances. For example, consider the densities  for fA,, and fA,B1 with the decision bound CB passing through t2(A1B2) and u(A2B2), as shown in Fig. 5. Now suppose there is a  large positive correlation in fA, B, and a large negative correlation in fA,B,. The mean difference of the conditional  densities above the criterion (for conditioning on the false alarm of feature B) are much smaller than the mean difference of  the conditional densities below the criterion (for conditioning on the correct rejection of feature B). These mean  differences, when weighted by the corresponding variances-small above the criterion and large below the criterion-might then  result in equal conditional d's for correct rejections versus false alarms. Although theoretically entertaining, the  acquisition of such data would approach the fantastical.  DETECTION PARAMETERS 349  (ii) If perceptual independence holds in stimuli AiBI, i= 1 and 2, and decisional separability holds for both features, then  P(A I B fa) = /3(A I B cr) = PAB~ .  Analogous results hold for feature B conditioned on feature A if the roles of A and B are interchanged.  The above result is intuitively obvious. If perceptual independence with decisional separability holds, then the perception  of, as well as the response to, one feature is not influenced by the presence or absence of the other feature, by definition.  Summarizing thus far, we have shown that under the assumptions of decisional separability and perceptual independence, where  one variable does not affect the other within the same stimulus, the signal detection conditional d"s and the conditional  likelihood ratios both remain invariant.  To round out the relationships among the independence concepts and signal detection parameters, the last two propositions  relate sampling independence to the conditional d' and P. Although these results follow readily from the above propositions  and Theorem 1 in Ashby and Townsend (1986 ),6 we feel that they are important enough to warrant proposition rather than  corollary status, since they provide some of the major results we will use for testing decisional separability. The proofs are  briefly stated in the Appendix.  PROPOSITION 7a. (i) If sampling independence holds in stimuli AiB2, i=1 and 2, and decisional separability holds for both  features, then d'(A I B hit) = d'(A I B miss).  (ii) If sampling independence holds in stimuli A;Bt, i= 1 and 2, and decisional separability holds for both features, then  d'(A I B cr) = d'(A I B fa).  Analogous results hold for feature B conditioned on feature A if the roles of A and B are interchanged.  PROPOSITION 7b. (i) If sampling independence holds in stimuli A ;B2, i= 1 and 2, and decisional separability holds for both  features, then #(A I B hit) = #(A I B miss).  (ii) If sampling independence holds in stimuli A; Bt , i =1 and 2, and decisional separability holds for both features, then  #(A I B cr) = #(A I B fa).  Analogous results hold for feature B conditioned on feature A if the roles of A and B are interchanged.  'Theorem 1 in Ashby and Townsend (1986, p. 160) states that in a feature-complete factorial design:  1. Sampling independence of features A and B in stimulus A;Bj occurs if perceptual independence holds on features A and B and  if decisional separability holds.  2. Perceptual independence of features A and B in stimulus A,Bj occurs if sampling independence holds on features A and B and  if decisional separability holds.  3. If decisional separability fails, then sampling independence is logically unrelated to perceptual independence.  350  KADLEC AND TOWNSEND  Perceptual Separability (feature A)  Decisional Separability (both features)  Fig. 6. Summary of the relationships between signal detection macroanalyses, marginal response invariance, and perceptual and  decisional separabilities. (Double arrows indicate the direction of an implication, while single arrows connect the sufficient  conditions. Single boxes show the unobservable conditions and double-shaded boxes are observable. Note that for (lc) the  implication goes both ways if all conditions are satisfied for both features.)  Perceptual Independence in AiB2, i=1,2  Decisional  Separability for both features  (Th. 1)  AND  Sampling Independence in AiB2, i=1,2  (5a) \/ (7a)  d'(AIB hit)=d'(AIB miss) -d'(AB2)  0(AIB hit)-(3W13 miss) 9(AB2)  (7b)  FIG. 7. Summary of the relationships between signal detection microanalyses and decisional separability, perceptual  independence, and sampling independence. (Double arrows indicate the direction of an implication, while single lines connect  the sufficient conditions. Single boxes show the unobservable conditions and double-shaded boxes are observable.)  DETECTION PARAMETERS 351  This concludes the presentation of our theoretical results. In Figs. 6 and 7, the logical implication from the two sets of  signal detection analyses are summarized; Fig. 6 shows the results involving the macroanalyses and Fig. 7 contains the  microanalysis results. Double arrows indicate the direction of an implication, while single lines connect the corresponding  sufficient conditions.  USING THE THEORETICAL RESULTS TO TEST  FOR PERCEPTUAL PHENOMENA  It is the primary aim of this paper to provide tests of the various perceptual qualities based on the empirically observable  signal detection parameters by using the theoretical relationships depicted in Figs. 6 and 7. Even though there are many  logical relationships, certain ones appear more strategic than others for assaying the perceptual phenomena. Figures 6 and 7  may be consulted for those, as well as other theoretical results, some of which may turn out to be useful in future studies.  Note in Fig. 6 that the marginal signal detection results provide information regarding primarily perceptual and decisional  separabilities, as the effects of different conditions are averaged across trials. The conditional signal detection results  (Fig. 7), on the other hand, yield within-trial response information (i.e., perceptual and sampling independence). This  suggests a two-phase method for evaluating the empirical results: first, consider the results from the macroanalyses and test  for perceptual and decisional separabilities (although the microanalytic results are diagnostic for decisional separability  also, as we will see below), then proceed with the microanalyses to examine the within-stimulus perceptual independence.  Phase 1: Testing for Perceptual and Decisional Separabilities  Figure 8 shows a flowchart of the sequence of steps to follow when testing for perceptual and decisional separabilities of  feature A. Note that the analyses are done for one feature at a time, and that the conclusions may be different for the  different features. Simply by interchanging the roles of A and B, the testing sequence for feature B is obtained. Empirical  queries are indicated by the circles, and the logical conclusions based on their outcomes are shown in the boxes. w-Support  signifies to proceed with caution, since other conditions (perhaps as yet untestable, e.g., the Euclidean diagonal d'  condition) may be required to reach the desired conclusion, or the logical implication may actually go in the reverse  direction, signifying only a tentative conclusion (i.e., absence of falsification).  Beginning at the top of Fig. 8, the first empirical results examined are the marginal d"s, since they provide information  about perceptual separability (Propositions la and lc; see also Fig. 6). Suppose perceptual separability is weakly supported  by constant marginal d"s (see left-hand side of Fig. 8). (As qualified above, this conclusion may be only tentative until a  test for the Euclidean diagonal d' condition, i.e., that d" s = d~z + d;2 is performed. Once it is, the inference is  legitimate.) We may then test for decisional separability by examining whether the marginal fl's are constant (Proposition  2a). If marginal (3's are constant, a look at  352 KADLEC AND TOWNSEND  Yes  w-SUPPORT for Perceptual Separability for feature A  Decisional Separability FAILED. Variances ??  either Decisional Separability FAILED or Variances NOT EQUAL  w-SUPPORT for Decisional Separability and for EQUAL variances  Perceptual Separability FAILED for feature A  w-SUPPORT for Decisional Separability but Variances NOT EQUAL  FIG. 8. Phase I of the testing paradigm: a flowchart showing the sequence of steps in the procedure for testing perceptual and  decisional separabilities of feature A. (The circled queries indicate whether the indicated empirical result was found, while  the logical conclusions are in boxes.)  marginal response invariance will help us to determine some conclusions about decisional separability and the equal variance  assumptions. If marginal response invariance holds for feature A, we gain weak support for both decisional separability (by  Propositions 2a and 3c) and all marginal variances on the x-dimension equal (by Proposition 3c); if marginal response  invariance fails, then either decisional separability has failed or the marginal variances were not all equal, or both of  these conditions failed, but we do not know which (by contrapositive of Proposition 3c). Note, however, that "all the  variances are not equal" does not mean that the variances for feature A were not equal across levels of feature B. This result  thus does not invalidate the conclusion for perceptual separability, which implicitly signifies that the variances were equal  across levels.  Equal marginal d"s and fl's and marginal response invariance for a given feature thus indicate perceptual and decisional  separabilities. In addition, if the same pattern of results is obtained for the second feature, then (assuming the diagonal d'  is Euclidean) perceptual separability is strongly supported for both features, and perceptual independence is indicated (by  Theorem 4 of Ashby & Townsend, 1986),'  7 Theorem 4 in Ashby and Townsend (1986, p. 165) states that in a feature-complete factorial design, if the following three  conditions hold, then perceptual separability and decisional separability together imply the perceptual independence of  features A and B within each stimulus configuration:  (i) All perceptual representations are normally distributed;  (ii) No two p(A,Bj) are equal, where p(A;B,) is the perceptual mean vector associated with stimulus A;B;; and  (iii) The subject is responding optimally (i.e., maximizing probability correct).  DETECTION PARAMETERS 353  if it may be assumed that the subject is responding optimally; that is, if the subject is maximizing percent correct. We will  discuss perceptual independence in more detail in Phase 11.  If the marginal d"s are not constant, then perceptual separability is falsified (by Proposition 1a; see right-hand side of  Fig. 8). In this case if marginal response invariance fails, we cannot draw any conclusions about decisional separability or  about the marginal variances (whether marginal l's are equal or not). If marginal response invariance holds, however, marginal  P's become diagnostic: If they are equivalent, then decisional separability gains tentative support (by Propositions 2a and  3b) and we conclude that the marginal variances must have failed to be equivalent (by Proposition 3a); if, however, the  marginal fl's are not equivalent, then we logically conclude that decisional separability has failed (by Proposition 3b), but  we cannot conclude anything about the marginal variances.  In summary, the strongest evidence for perceptual and decisional separabilities thus comes about when the marginal d"s are  equal, the marginal /l's are equal, and marginal response invariance holds. Recall that marginal response invariance also has  a close relationship with the two separabilities through Theorem 5 in Ashby and Townsend (1986)-perceptual and decisional  separability together imply marginal response invariance. Although Ashby and Townsend cautioned against using marginal  response invariance as the sole support for the separabilities, the additional findings of constant marginal signal detection  estimates would provide further support for the separabilities, consequently strengthening the separability conclusions.  Phase 11: Testing for Perceptual Independence  We now move to the microanalyses to test for perceptual independence -Phase II of our testing procedure. Results of  Propositions 5a, 6, 7a, and 7b, and Ashby and Townsend's Theorem 1 (see footnote 5) are relevant here (see also Fig. 7). As  was the case with macroanalyses, the tests are carried out for each feature individually. In addition, the tests of Phase II  concern only pairs of densities. For example, for a feature-complete factorial design with two features each at two levels,  four separate tests should be carried out. Two tests are required for feature A; comparisons of d' and fl conditional on a hit  versus a miss of feature B (using densities f,,,,, and f,,,,,) and comparisons of d' and conditional on a correct rejection  versus a false alarm of feature B (densities f,, and fA,,, ). The other two tests come from the two sets of comparisons for  feature B. First note that we do not have a direct test of perceptual independence. With regard to verificatory information on  perceptual independence in both stimuli being tested, the best we can do is to amass evidence in favor of it, by observing  constant conditional d"s (Proposition 5a), constant conditional /1's (Proposition 6a), and sampling independence (Propositions  7a, 7b, and Theorem 1 of Ashby & Townsend, 1986). All of these propositions involve the assumption that decisional  separability holds, thus the conditional signal detection parameters also bear relevance on testing decisional separability.  354 KADLEC AND TOWNSEND  The testing sequence for the pair of stimuli A; B2, i = 1 and 2 is illustrated in Fig. 9. If the conditional d"s and f's are  found to be equivalent, we gain more confidence that perceptual independence does indeed hold in two stimuli involved (by  Propositions 5a, 6, 7a, and 7b). Conversely, if either one or both of the conditional signal detection estimates are not  equivalent, then we need to examine whether sampling independence holds in the two stimuli. If it does hold, then we know that  decisional separability must have failed (by contrapositive of Propositions 7a and 7b). In this case we cannot logically  conclude anything about perceptual independence, it may or may not hold. If sampling independence fails, then we know that  either decisional separability or perceptual independence, or both conditions, have failed, but we do not know which. However,  if decisional separability received support in Phase I, then perceptual dependence in at least one of the stimuli involved in  the test would be more strongly indicated.  Figure 9 can also be used to test all other pairs of stimuli. The pair of stimuli A2 B;, j= 1, 2 can be tested by  interchanging the roles of A and B in Fig. 9 in the conditional signal detection parameters. To test the pair of stimuli AA, i  =1, 2, simply replace signal detection parameters conditional on hits and misses in Fig. 9 with those conditional on correct  rejections and false alarms; and analogously for the pair A, B;, j = 1, 2, use correct rejections and false alarms but  interchange the roles of A and B.  In the present microanalyses, decisional separability and perceptual independence cannot be disentangled from each other. This  is apparent even in Theorem 4 of Ashby and Townsend (see footnote 7). According to this theorem, in the Gaussian  Decisional Separability & Perceptual Independence in AiB2, i-1,2 w-SUPPORTED  C  Both d'(AIB hit) d'(AIB miss) and  B hit)-#B(AIB miss)?  Sampling Independence holds in AiB2, i-1,2 ?  Decisional Separability FAILED. no conclusions about Perceptual Independence in AiB2, i-1,2.  either Decisional Separability or Perceptual Independence in AiB2, i-1,2 FAILED  (or both)  Ftc. 9. Phase 11 of the testing paradigm: A flowchart showing procedures for testing perceptual independence using the  microanalysis results. (The circled queries indicate whether the indicated empirical result was found, while the logical  conclusions are in boxes.)  DETECTION PARAMETERS 355  case and under the assumption that the subject is responding optimally, the two separabilities imply perceptual independence.  However, if perceptual separability holds for both features and perceptual independence holds in each stimulus, then  decisional separability is the optimal responding strategy. Assuming we could test the optimality assumption, which cannot be  done in the current feature-complete factorial designs, we may get a little insight into decisional separability versus  perceptual independence, when perceptual separability is found to hold. If optimality is falsified, we would not know whether  it failed because perceptual independence failed or because decisional separability failed, or both. If, however, we found  that decisional separability failed-by the conditional d"s and /i's (unequal) and sampling independence (supported)-but that  the subject was responding optimally, we could conclude that perceptual independence failed.  If perceptual dependence is found, the direction of the dependence may be used to construct a hypothetical representation of  the observer's perceptual space. Recall that perceptual independence in a stimulus corresponds to a circular equal probability  contour, while an elliptical contour with its axes not parallel to the coordinate axes results when perceptual independence  fails. In particular, the conditional d"s are easier to visualize and can be employed to provide clues about the relative  shapes of the joint densities of the observer's perceptual space. For example, if d'(A I B hit) > d'(A I B miss) a possible  configuration consistent with such a result would have fAZBZ with a positive correlation and fA, BZ with a negative (or  perhaps zero) correlation; alternatively, there may be a zero correlation in fAZB2 and a negative one in fA,BZ. This example  also serves to illustrate an important point that the configurations based on the macro- and microanalytic results represent  only the ordinal aspects of the data, and in fact may not be unique. However, parsimony or other methods such as model fitting  (Ashby & Perrin, 1988) or regression analyses (Olzak, 1986) could narrow down the alternative representations considerably.  In summary, these tests provide a wealth of information regarding the perceptual processes in feature-complete factorial  designs. Many qualitative details of the observer's perceptual space can be discovered by combining all the available  information hitherto gained. An example illustrating these methods of testing the perceptual notions and of constructing an  observer's perceptual space follows next.  EXAMPLE OF EMPIRICAL APPLICATION  To illustrate the testing paradigm, we examine data from a previous study done in our laboratory (Townsend et al., 1981). This  study employed the featurecomplete factorial design with two features, a vertical bar and a horizontal bar, which were  presented in a connected and a gap condition. The simple visual stimuli were presented tachistoscopically so that each subject  responded correctly on approximately 45 to 50% of the trials. Because of significant individual differences  480/36/3-3  356) KADLEC AND TOWNSEND  which emerge when we apply the new testing paradigm, the method will be illustrated with only one observer's data (Observer 3  in the gap condition).  The marginal d' and /3 estimates for Observer 3 in the gap condition are presented in Table 1. (These were reported in Table 3  of Townsend et al., 1981, p. 271.) The marginal d"s for a given feature are the same, within statistical error, across levels  of the other feature. A nonparametric test proposed by Grier (1971) indicates that for each feature the two d"s were within  one standard deviation of their mean. The power of these tests is unknown, but this test seemed appropriate for the initial  analyses presented here. Perhaps bootstrapping methods may be employed in the future to obtain more accurate conclusions.  Under the assumption that marginal variances do not change across levels of the other features, these results provide support  for perceptual separability for both features.  We can now proceed to examine the marginal fl's to see if they reveal any evidence for decisional separability (refer to Fig.  8 for the conclusions). For each feature, the marginal /i's are greater in the two-feature stimulus (i.e., in the presence of  the other feature) than in the one-feature stimulus (when the feature was presented alone). These results logically imply that  decisional separability has failed for both features for this observer. We cannot draw the conclusion that all marginal  variances are equivalent. However, since evidence was found for perceptual separability, we can deduce that the marginal  variances for each feature are at least equal across levels of the other feature.  A question that may be asked at this point is: How do these variances of the perceptual representations of the four stimuli  differ? The present analyses do not allow us to draw conclusions regarding their relative sizes. Ashby and Perrin (1988),  however, fit a General Gaussian Recognition (GGR) model with unequal variances  TABLE I  Marginal d' and P Estimates for Observer 3 in the Gap Condition (from Townsend et at., 1981)  Marginal d'Marginal fl'  Feature    1-feature stimulus 1.54 2.13  2-feature stimulus 1.92* 3.42  Feature -    1-feature stimulus 1.58 2.10  2-feature stimulus 1.65* 3.59  The tests conducted were nonparametric tests suggested by Grier (1971) and were done for the corresponding pairs. For the  d's, indicates the d's were less than 1.0 standard deviation from their mean.  n For all P's, the differences in the B' indices (Grier, 1971) were greater than 10%.  DETECTION PARAMETERS 357  to all observers of this data set, and provided a rationale for why the variances may decrease as the level on the stimulus  dimension increases. While other investigators have argued the reverse, that the variances will increase (e.g., Wickelgren,  1967), it is not the purpose here to debate these various arguments. Hence, for illustrative purposes we will go along with  Ashby and Perrin's argument that the blank stimulus inherently contains more noise, and that the variance of the perceptual  representation for a given feature will decrease with an increasing level on the stimulus dimension (in this case going from  the feature's absence to its presence). For a more complete analysis, this issue will have to be addressed more thoroughly in  subsequent studies.  Summarizing the macroanalyses, evidence exists for perceptual separability for both features, equal variances for both  features across levels of the other, and a failure of decisional separability for both features. Let us next look at evidence  for perceptual independence from the microanalyses. The conditional d' and # results for Observer 3 in the gap condition are  presented in Table 2. (These were recalculated from the confusion matrices provided in Townsend et al., 1981. )  First, note that the d"s for both features, conditional on the correct rejection, are always significantly greater than the d'  conditional on the false alarm of the other feature. Also, the conditional P's are strikingly unequal. The next step is to  look at sampling independence in each of the stimuli. Townsend et al. (1981) tested for  TABLE II  Conditional d' and fi estimates for Observer 3 in the Gap Condition (from Townsend et al., 1981)  Stimulus Feature Conditional d'Conditional fl'  Hits vs Misses  - given I hit 1.45 3.87  - given I miss 1.56* 2.74  given - hit 2.16 10.20  given - miss 1.78* 3.67  Correct Rejections vs False Alarms   - given I cr 1.68 2.36  - given I fa 0.41 1.30  given - cr 1.65 2.38  1 given - fa 0.84 1.42  The tests conducted were nonparametric tests suggested by Grier (1971) and were done for the corresponding pairs. For the  d's, * indicates the d's were less than 1.0 standard deviation from their mean.  For all fl's, the differences in the B' indices (Grier, 1971) were greater than 10%.  358 KADLEC AND TOWNSEND  sampling independence in stimulus A, B, (see bottom of Table 4 in Townsend et al., 1981, p.273) and found that it held for all  four observers in both conditions. We conducted the same tests for the other three stimuli, and also found sampling  independence to be overwhelmingly supported for all observers and stimuli, in both conditions. (We refrain from reporting the  probabilities here, since they are readily computed from the confusion matrices provided in Townsend et al., 1981.) Referring  to Fig. 9, this result indicates that decisional separability has failed, a conclusion that coincides with the marginal  results. We cannot, however, draw a firm conclusion about perceptual independence. Since perceptual separability was  supported, if we assume that the subject responses optimally, we could infer that perceptual independence failed in at least  one stimulus. Note that without decisional separability, Ashby and Townsend (1986) showed that perceptual independence and  sampling independence are logically unrelated. Therefore unequal covariance matrices, as may be indicated for this observer,  do not necessarily violate the conclusion that sampling independence holds in the data.  As we discussed in the introduction, in the absence of decisional separability, it is difficult to interpret the pi's. We will  therefore rely primarily on the conditional d"s in the following discussion on perceptual independence. The d' estimates for  both features, conditional on the hit versus the miss of the other feature, are equal. This suggests that perceptual  independence may hold in the one- and two-feature stimuli. On the other hand, and again for both features, the d"s conditional  on the correct rejection of the other feature was greater than the d' conditional on the false alarm of the other feature (by  more than two standard deviations, using Grier's nonparametric test). This result indicates that perceptual independence has  failed in either the blank stimulus or the one-feature stimuli. We have, however, already entertained evidence for perceptual  independence in the one-feature stimuli (from the d"s conditional on hits versus misses). Hence, the most parsimonious  explanation is that perceptual independence has failed in the blank stimulus. Note, however, that if we chose to accept the  result that perceptual independence failed in the one-feature stimuli, we could still acommodate the result of equal d"s  conditional on hits versus misses by postulating the same dependence (i.e., the same correlations) in the two-feature stimulus  as in both one-feature stimuli. This again brings up the point made earlier that the configurations only represent ordinal  aspects of the data and may not be unique. Parsimony in this case indicates the former configuration.  The corpus of conclusions can now be collated to construct a model of this observer's perceptual representions of the four  simple stimuli. These microanalysis results are particularly useful in providing more detailed information regarding the  actual shape of the densities in the perceptual space: If perceptual independence holds, the densities are circular or  elliptical with the major axes parallel to the coordinate axes; if perceptual dependence is found, they are elliptical with  the tilt of the ellipse indicating the sign of the dependence. Using the observations from Table 2, along with the marginal  results and variance differences found earlier, the most parsimonious model consistent with this observer's data is shown in  Fig. 10.  DETECTION PARAMETERS 359  FIG. 10. General Recognition configuration consistent with the empirical results for Observer 3 of Townsend et al. (1981) in  the gap condition.  The ellipses representing the perceptual effects of the four stimuli capture all the relevant characteristics found in the  preceding analyses. The means of the densities are positioned in a rectangular configuration; on both dimensions, the  variances decrease as the level of the stimulus dimensions increases (from absence to presence), yet they remain invariant for  each feature across levels of the other feature. Both of these aspects preserve perceptual separability for both features,  since if the joint densities are projected onto either axis, the resulting marginal densities are equivalent. The failure in  decisional separability for both features is indicated by both decision bounds increasing linearly as the level of each  feature increases. The direction of the slopes of the criteria are indicated by the observation that the marginal fl's in the  two-feature stimuli (i.e., at the second level) were greater than those in the one-feature stimuli, for both features.  Perceptual independence is shown by the circular contour for the two-feature stimulus and the elliptical contours with the  major axes parallel to the coordinate axes for the one-feature stimuli. These representations preserve the equal d"s  conditional on the hit versus miss of the other feature. For both features, conditioning on the hit versus the miss on the  other feature-above or below the vertical criterion in the top two densities for the horizontal feature, and to the right or  left of the horizontal criterion in the rightmost densities for the vertical feature, respectively-leaves the conditional d "s  invariant. Accommodation of the unequal d "s when these are conditioned on the correct rejection versus false alarm is  accomplished by a positive dependence in the blank stimulus. In this configuration, the d' conditional on a false alarm (above  or to the right of the criterion of the two lower  360 KADLEC AND TOWNSEND  or two left densities, respectively) is smaller that the d' conditional on a correct rejection (below or to the left), as the  results dictate.  Before concluding, a few words should perhaps be stated about the conclusions drawn by the present analyses and those reached  by Ashby and Perrin (1988, Experiment 3) who have fit the Gaussian version of the General Recognition (GGR) model to the same  data. Although their investigation differs from ours in a number of important ways, several consistencies emerge. They fit two  versions of the GGR model: a 10-parameter model which allowed weak violations in perceptual separability (the means were  assumed equal across levels, but the 'variances were allowed to vary across levels), and a 6-parameter model which assumed  that perceptual separability held for both features. For Observer 3 in the gap condition, the 6-parameter model provided a  marginally reasonable fit, suggesting that perceptual separability was supported. The variance estimates revealed that smaller  variances occurred in stimuli with the feature present, and with equal variances across levels. The conclusions reached by the  present analyses are compatible; the equal variance assumption was rejected for both features by the marginal fl results, and  perceptual separability for both features was supported by the marginal d' results, even though the variances of the "noise"  and "signal + noise" densities may have been unequal.  A number of differences between the two approaches, however, also arise. In fitting their models, Ashby and Perrin (1988)  assumed that decisional separability held for both features and that perceptual independence was satisfied in all stimuli. In  contrast, the present analyses indicate that both of these assumptions are violated for this observer. In particular, with  respect to the perceptual independence assumption, the Ashby and Perrin model faces a major challenge, since it is unable to  account for unequal conditional d"s, as we found to be the case in this data set (for all the observers in both conditions).  With perceptual independence, the model always predicts equal conditional d"s. Perhaps this, as well as the large individual  differences we find in our analyses, can explain the less accurate fits of Ashby and Perrin's model to about half the cases.  SUMMARY  We have presented some theoretical developments tying signal detection macroand microanalyses introduced by Townsend et al.  (1984, 1988) to various concepts of "perceptual independence," including perceptual separability, decisional separability,  marginal response invariance, sampling independence and perceptual independence. The relationships that the detection  parameters (and other empirically observable quantities, such as marginal response invariance and sampling independence) have  with the theoretical notions of perceptual independence and the two separabilities provide new ways of testing for these  perceptual qualities in feature-complete factorial designs.  Several tests of these perceptual concepts are suggested by examining the signal  DETECTION PARAMETERS 361  detection estimates. Parameters from signal detection macroanalyses are closely tied to perceptual and decisional  separabilities, which we discussed as Phase I of the testing procedure, while parameters from the microanalyses can be used to  examine perceptual independence in Phase II. These tests were illustrated by examining data of one observer from a study by  Townsend et al. (1981).  Although we have developed these results for use in our own research program to study feature interactions in visual patterns  made up of lines of various orientations as features, the testing procedures presented here are adaptable to many other  experimental domains investigating perceptual independence of two or more dimensions. Questions regarding which and whether  various stimulus characteristics are perceived independently have been addressed under various guises in many experimental  paradigms with a variety of dependent measures. The most closely related research area in this vein includes studies of  independent "channels" involved in the processing of either different spatial frequencies in the visual system (e.g., Graham  et al., 1985; Olzak, 1986), frequency information in the auditory system (e.g., Green, 1958; Sorkin et al., 1973) or dual  (bimodal) detection studies where information from both visual and auditory channels are simultaneously or individually  presented to the subject (e.g., Eijkman & Vendrik, 1965; Fidell, 1970; Miller, 1982; Taylor, Lindsay, & Forbes, 1967). Some of  the latter types of studies often go under the name of (divided) attention (see also Swets, 1984), yet they may reasonably  fall within the scope of the present framework. Many, although not all, of these studies have also used estimates of signal  detection d"s to investigate "perceptual independence" of such channels.  Another research domain to which the method presented here could potentially apply involves the often discussed distinction of  separability versus integrality of stimulus dimensions (e.g., Garner, 1974; Shepard, 1964). The separability or integrality of  the processing of stimuli composed of various facial features in schematic faces (e.g., Tversky & Krantz, 1969), angle of a  radial line and size of a circle (e.g., Nosofsky, 1986; Shepard, 1964) could potentially be studied with the techniques  presented here. Our approach offers an additional perspective through examining perceptual independence of dimensions within  as well as across stimuli, a distinction not often made explicit or tested in previous research.  The varieties of independence considered in this and related papers reside within the Gaussian version of the General  Recognition Theory. The concepts would be completely analogous with other distributions, although new aspects might surface in  the form of skew parameters or other structural differences.  A more fundamental question concerns the relationships among this and other approaches. It has been feasible to make contact  with several of the concepts emanating from Garner and associates, primarily because the latter were typically put forth in a  relatively theory-free manner. However, it is not so obvious exactly how the results and methods of General Recognition Theory  relate to the apparently quite different and more psychometric approach, which also tests for various sources of interactions  among perceptual dimensions, proposed by Wickens and Olzak (Olzak & Wickens, 1983; Wickens & Olzak, 1989). Massaro and  362 KADLEC AND TOWNSEND  Friedman (1990) and Nosofsky (in press) have recently contributed valuable comparisons of a number of important theoretical  contenders that all describe how multiple sources of information are integrated. It appears that in certain cases, our notions  related to internal function and structure will have analogues and homologues in other approaches. This is obvious in the  observable concepts such as sampling independence and marginal response invariance. However, even if they exist, they will  undoubtedly often bear quite different implications for other theories. Furthermore, some of our notions may fail to have  correspondents in certain other models or theories. For instance, "perceptual independence" is defined in terms of the  statistical independence of the underlying random variables representing the different components, referred to as "different  sources of information" by Massaro and Friedman (1990). If the scale values or parameters representing the component  information are deterministic (fixed), then perceptual independence has no real meaning in that case. Research on these issues  should be rewarding.  In summary, the present study contributes another avenue for investigating the basic problem of perceptual independence, a  technique which has the important and distinguishing feature that it is derived from a unified theoretical framework. Its  promise stems from its employment of a greater number of observable measures of the various perceptual qualities. As well as  providing information about within- and across-stimulus perceptual independencies, it also suggests qualitative details about  the direction of perceptual dependencies existing in the human perceptual system.  APPENDIX  The proof of the first proposition is trivial, but may serve to better familiarize the reader with the notation.  PROPOSITION la. If feature A is perceptually separable from feature B, then the marginal d"s of feature A are equal across the  two levels of feature B; that is,  d 'AB, = d ABZ .  Proof. The result follows immediately from Definition 3. Perceptual separability for feature A is defined as 9A,B,(x) =  gA,B,(x), i = 1, 2. If this condition is true, then d'9,=dAB2, since dAB, is just the standardized difference between the  means of 9A,B,(x) and 9A,B,(x). In other words, since 9A,B,(x) = gA,B,(x), then the means and variances for featureA will be  equal: u,(AjBj)=y,(AjB2), and UX(A;Bl)= a2 (A;B2), i =1, 2. Thus,  _hx(A2B1)-Nx(AIB1) dAB' _ CQx(A2B1)+UX(A1B1]1/2  __ px(A2B2)-yx(AIB2) CQX(A2B2) + QX(A1 B2)] 1/2 = d'ABZ.  DETECTION PARAMETERS 363  A similar argument would be followed if we had perceptual separability for feature B, in which case d A,B = d AzB follows from  9A~ Bj (Y) = 9A,B; (Y), j= 1, 2, which in turn implies that U,(A1Bj)=py(A2Bj) and ay(A1B;)=ay(A2B;), j=1,2.  PROPOSITION lc. Perceptual separability holds for both features if and only if all three of the following conditions hold:  (i) the variances of the marginal densities, for each feature across the levels of the second feature, are equal;  (ii) marginal d"s for both features are constant across levels of the other feature (i.e., dAB,=dABZ=dA and dA,B=dAZB=da); and,  (iii) (d,4 )2 + (dB )2 = (d AB)2, where dAB denotes the diagonal distance between the means of fA,B, and fA21Z.  Proof. (Sufficiency). If perceptual separability holds for both features, then by Definition 3 of perceptual separability, the  marginal variances for one feature across levels of the other feature are equal [condition (i)]. It also follows from  Proposition la applied to both features that the d"s are constant for both features [condition (ii)]. To show that condition  (iii) holds, we write the d"s in two-dimensional vector notation as  dAB'- [" d Y(AB;)] and dA;B= [d Y(AiB)],  where, for example, dX(ABj) is determined using x-coordinates of the means and standard deviations [px(A2Bj) and px(A,Bj),  etc.], and dY(AB;) uses py(A2Bj) and u y(A, Bj), and so on. Perceptual separability for both features now implies that: for  feature A, u,(A,B,) =px(A,B2), ax(A,B,)=Qx(A1B2) and px(A2B,)= px(A2BA 6x(AA)=ax(AA); for feature B, py(A,B,)=,uy(A2Bi),  Qy(A,B,)= uy(AA) and uy(A1B2)=,uy(A2B2), ay(A1B2)=6y(A2B2). Substituting these equivalences into the above definitions of d"s  results in  dAB;=[d (A) __]=dA,j=1,2; and dA;B=[dY(B)] dB,i 1,2.  The diagonal dAB is obtained from the law of cosines (with ` denoting vector transpose)  (dAB )2= (dA)` (dA) + (dB )` (dB) - 2(dA)t (dB) cos B  _ (dz(A))2+ (d Y(B))2-0.  (Necessity). To show the converse, if the means have a rectangular configuration, the marginal variances are equal, and the  d"s are constant (i.e., the mean differences between the joint densities are equal), then it is easily seen that the bivariate  normal joint densities for each feature, at each level of the other feature,  364 KADLEC AND TOWNSEND  will project onto the same marginal density. Thus, perceptual separability is implied, as was to be shown.  PROPOSITION 2a. If decisional separability holds for both features and perceptual separability holds for feature A, then the  marginal l's for feature A are equal across levels of feature B; that is, RAB, = NAB2'  Proof. It follows immediately from Definition 4 that decision about feature A should not depend on the current level of  feature B, thus the decision criterion for feature A is the line x = CA, and the marginal likelihood ratios are  /~ _ 9A2B,(CA) I'ABl 9A,B,(CA)  and  NAB2 -gA2B2(CA)  9A, B2(CA )  By perceptual separability, 9A,B,(x) = gA,B,(x), i = 1, 2 for all real x, and in particular for x = CA. Therefore,  NAB, -_gA2B,(CA) 9AIB,(CA)  gA2B2(CA)  9A,B2(CA) - #AB2- 1  Proof for equivalence of I'A;B follows analogously by interchanging the roles of A and B.  PROPOSITION 3a. If marginal response invariance holds for feature A and decisional separability holds for both features, then  d AB, = d AB2, under the assumption of equal variances for feature A across levels of feature B.  Proof. Decisional separability for both features implies that the two decision bounds for feature A and B are given by x = CA  and y = CB, respectively. Recall that a and b denote the events that feature A and B, respectively, are reported. From  Definition 5 of marginal response invariance for feature A, at the first level i = 1,  P(al IA1B1)=P(albl I A1 BI) +P(a,b2I A1 B1)  =fcg cA f fA,a,(x, Y) dx dy+ f f CA fA,B,(x, Y) dx dy ~B I  _  = f CA gA,B,(x) dx,  DETECTION PARAMETERS 365  and  P(a, I A1B2)=P(a,b, I A1B2)+P(a,b21 A1B2)  B A A  =f f c f" ,-2(X' Y) dx dy+ f " f jA,B2(x, Y) dx dy B  = f CA SA,BZ(x) dx  When marginal response invariance holds for feature A, these two probabilities are  equal; therefore, at the first level of A,  f CA SA,B,(x)dx= f CA SA,B,(x)dx=P(alI A1). (1) -00  Note that for binary valued features, P(a, I A,) is the probability that feature A was correctly rejected; that is, that the  subject correctly reported a, ("A absent") when feature A was in fact absent (A,), regardless of the level of feature B.  Similarly, from marginal response invariance for the second level of feature A,  P(a2I A2Bi)=P(a2b, I A2B1)+P(a2b2IA2B1)  B  = f c f'fA,B,(x,Y)dxdy+f'f'fA2B,(x,Y)dxdy  0o cA cB cA  f 00  SAZB,(x) dx  cA  and  P(a2I A2B2)=P(a2b, I A2B2)+P(a2b2I A2B2)  B  = c - f c' fAZBZ(x, Y) dx dy + f c' fc'  SAZB,(x, Y) dx dy  f 00 cA  9A,B,(x)  it follows that  00  fcA ]o SA,B,(x) dx = fC A 9A,B2(x) dx = P(a2 I A2).  Again for binary valued features, P(a2 I A2) would refer to the probability that feature A was correctly "hit," regardless of  the level of feature B.  In signal detection theory, d' and P parameters are computed from P(hit) and P false alarm) = P(fa) = 1 - P(correct  rejection), with  P(hit) _ 0 CA -,u(signal) P(fa) _ 0 CA - JU(noise)  I Q(signal) I , I u(noise)  366 KADLEC AND TOWNSEND  where 0 is the integral of the standard normal deviate from the argument to positive infinity, and p(signal), u(signal) are  the mean and standard deviation of the "signal+noise" density, and j(noise), u(noise) are the mean and standard deviation of  the "noise" density. In our notation, P(hit) at the two levels of feature B are equal [by (2)], and are given by  P(a2I A2B1)=0 CCA-px(A2B1)1 =~ CCA -iix(A2B2)1=P(a2I A2B2); (3) ax(AA) 6x(A2B2)  similarly, P(fa) at the two levels of B are equal [by (1)] and are  P(a2 I A 1 B1) = 0 C CA - UX(AI BI) ~ = 0 C CA - UX(AI B2)1 = P(a2 I Al B2). Q,(AIBI) ax(AIB2)  These equalities imply that  CA- Ux(A2B1) __ CA -px(A2B2) 17x(A2B1) ax(A2B2)  and  CA-lix(AIB1) CA-,ux(AIB2)  ax (A, BI) ax(AIB2)  With equal marginal variances of feature A across levels of B, ux(A2B2)= 6x(AA) and ax(A,B1)=ax(A,B2), Eqs. (5) and (6) reduce  to  CA -Yx(A2B1)=CA-fux(A2B2)  and  CA-yx(AIBI)=CA-yx(AjB2) This implies that ux(A2B2)=,ux(A2B,) and ux(A,B2)=jux(A,BI), which in turn implies that d A12 = d AB, .  PROPOSITION 3b. If marginal response invariance holds for feature A and decisional separability holds for both features, then  I'AB, = l'AB2 (without any assumptions about the variances).  Proof. To show that marginal response invariance implies constant marginal fl's, simply differentiate Eqs. (1) and (2) in the  above proof with respect to x, to obtain 9A, B,(CA)=9A,B2(CA) and gA2B,(CA)=gA2B2(CA). The result is immediate by substituting  these into the definitions of PA,, and flAB2 given in the text.  PROPOSITION 3c. If d AB, = d AB2 and #AB, = #,B2 and decisional separability holds for feature A, then marginal response  invariance holds for feature A, under the assumption that all marginal variances are equal (on the x-dimension).  DETECTION PARAMETERS 367  Proof. Under the assumption that all marginal variances are equal, d AB, = d AB, implies that  ux(A2B1)-px(AlBI)=ux(A2B2)-ux(AIB2) (7)  since the denominators cancel. The equality of the likelihood ratios, #AB, = f AB2, under the assumptions of normality and  decisional separability for feature A (x =CA), and after taking the natural logarithm of both sides, gives  -[CA-ux(A2B,)]2+ [CA -ux(AIBi)]2 2ax2 2ax2  _ -[CA-ux(A2B2)]2+ [CA-ux(AIB2)]2.  Cancelling denominators, expanding, and simplifying, we get  2CA[ux(A2B,)-ux(AI Bi)] - [ux(AA)2-px(Ai B, )2]  = 2CA[ux(A2 B2) - ux(AI B2)] - [ux(A2 B2 )2 - Ax (A, B2)2~.  Since the first term of the left-hand side equals the first term on the right-hand side [by (7)],  px(AA)2-px(A,B,)2=ux(A2B2)2-ux(AIB2)2, or equivalently  [ux(A2B,) - ux(Aj Bi )7 [ux(AA) + ux(Al Bi )7  = [ux(A2B2)-ux(AjB2)1 [ux(A2B2)+ux(AIB2)JAgain using Eq. (7), the first factors in this expression are equivalent, so  [ux(A2Bi)+ux(AIBj)l = [ux(A2B2)+ux(AIB2)7- (8) Subtracting (8) from (7), we get  ux(AI B1) = ux(AI B2)  and  ux(A2Bi)=ux(A2B2)- (10)  Now, adding CA to both sides of (9) and (10) and dividing both sides of each equation by the common standard deviation ax  (given assumption), we get  CA-yx(A2B2) CA-ux(A2B1)  and  ax ax CA-ux(AIB2) CA-px(A,B,)  368 KADLEC AND TOWNSEND  Using 0 to denote the integral of the standard normal density from the argument to positive infinity, it is clear that  CCA -hx(A2B2)1= ~ CCA - Px(A2B, )1 6X Q JX  and  CCA - Ux(AIB2)1 = ~ CCA -lix(AIBI)1 6X ax  (12)  Equation (11) says that P(a2IA2B2)=P(a2IA2B1) [see (3) in proof of Proposition 3a], while Eq. (12) shows that P(a2I A,  B2)=P(a2I AIB,) [see (4)]. Observing that P(a2 j A I Bj) = 1- P(a, I A, Bj), for j =1 and 2, these probabilities are the  definition of marginal response invariance for feature A.  PROPOSITION 4. If all densities are Gaussian and the marginal variances for feature A are equal across levels of feature B  [i.e., when ax (A,B,)=a,(A,B2) and ax(A2BI)=ax(A2B2)], then marginal response invariance for feature A and decisional  separability for both features imply perceptual separability of feature A.  Proof. We can use Eqs. (5) and (6) in the proof of Proposition 3a which follow from marginal response invariance in the  Gaussian case and decisional separability. By hypothesis, Isx(A,B,) = QX(A,B2) and 6x(A2B,) = ax(A2B2), so the denominators in  Eqs. (5) and (6) cancel, thus  CA -hx(AIBI)=CA-hx(AIB2)  and  CA -yx(A2B1)=CA-lix(A2B2)  Clearly yx(AIBI)=px(AIB2) and ux(A2BI)=yx(A2B2), which in turn implies perceptual separability.  PROPOSITION 5a, PART (i). If decisional separability holds for both features and if perceptual independence holds in stimuli A  ;B2, i = 1 and 2, then d'(A I B hit) _ d'(A I B miss), and these will be equal to the marginal d AB2.  Proof. From perceptual independence in stimuli A;B2, i= 1 and 2, we have that fA;B,(XI Y) = gA;B,(x) 9A;B,(Y) for i =1 and 2,  thus  DETECTION PARAMETERS  369  9A;(x 1 B hit) = f .fA;B2(x, Y) dY f cB 9A,B2(Y) dY  __ f B gliB2lx) gl;B2(Y) dY f B gA,B2(Y) dY  __ gA;B2(x) f B gA;B2(Y) dY f B 9A,B2(Y) dY =gAiB2(x), for all x (13)  since the integrals in the numerator and denominator cancel. By a similar argument,  9A;(XIBmiss) =9A,B2(x), for all x. (14) Equations (13) and (14) together imply that  9A,(x I B hit) = gA (x I B miss) = 9A;B2(x), for all x,  and particularly their means and variances are equal (and equal to the marginal means and variances); that is, for i= 1, 2  NAi(B hit) = UAi(B miss) = ux(A;B2)  and  QA ;(B hit) = uA;(B miss) =QX(A;B2).  Using these equalities, and the definitions of the conditional d', we can write  UA2(B hit) - NA,(B hit) d'(A I B hit) = [aA2(B hit) + QA ,(B hit)] 'i2  __ YA2(Bmiss)-YA,(Bmiss)  ,  [Q A2 (B miss) + UA,(B Miss) ]'i2 = d (A I B miss)  ux(A2B2)-,ux(AIB2)  [Or1/2 =d'  B  X(A2B2)+ax(A,B2)]  PROPOSITION 5a, PART (ii). If decisional separability holds for both features and if perceptual independence holds in stimuli  A;BI, i= 1 and 2, then d'(A I B correct rejection) = d'(A I B false alarm) = d'AB, .  Proof. The proof follows from gA,(x I B cr) = g*,(x I B fa) = 9A;B,(x) for i = 1, 2, by an argument analogous to that in part  (i).  370 KADLEC AND TOWNSEND  PROPOSITION 5b. Conditional d'(A I B hit) = d'(A I B miss), if all three of the following conditions are satisfied:  (i) The covariance matrices of the bivariate normal densities f,,,, and f,,,,, are equal [i.e., Y_(A,B2)=Y_(A2B2)];  (ii) The y-coordinates of the two mean vectors are equal [i.e., u,(A, B2) =pr(A2B2)]; and  (iii) the parallel decision bound passes through the two mean vectors p(A,B,) and 1t(A2B2).  Proof. From the definition of conditional d' for feature A conditional on the hit of feature B given in the text, we have  d'(A I B hit) =  pA2(B hit) - PA,(B hit)  [UA2(B hit) + a A, (B hit)] 1/2'  where, for the Gaussian case,  YA;(Bhit) =E[XIB hit, AjB2]  =,ux(AjB2)-Pxr(AiB2)  ax(ArBz)  x A.B) {pr(AiB2)-E[YI B hit, A;B2]} a r( i 2  and  or A,(B hit) = Var[XI B hit, AjB2]  =ax(AiB2) [1-PXr(AiB2)]  2 A B ax(A`B2) Var[ YI B hit, A;B2]. +Pxr( r z) ay(AiB2)  The d'(A I B miss) is defined analogously.  The given placement of the decision bound and symmetry of the normal density about its mean results in the equality of the  conditional variances of Y: Var[ YI B hit, AiB2] = Var[ YI B miss, A;B2], for i = 1, 2. Also by hypothesis we have equal  covariance matrices, therefore aX(A, B2) =U2 (A2B2), a Y2 (A, B2) _ aY(A2BA and pxr(AjB2) ux(AjB2) ur(AjBz)=Pxr(AzB2) ax(AzBz)  ar(AzB2), which also implies that pxr(A,B2)=pxr(A2B2)=p. With these equalities substituted into d'(A I B hit), the expressions  containing the conditional means of Y also cancel, reducing the conditional d's to  d' A Bhit) _ px(A2B2) px(AIB2)  ( I ) _ [aX(AzBz)(1-P2)+UX(A2Bz)(1-p2)]1/z.  DETECTION PARAMETERS 371  Similarly, d'(A I B miss) reduces to  d'(AIBmiss)= 2 hx(A2B2)-hx(AjB2) i~2. [Qx(AzBz)(1-P )+Qx(AzBz)(1-P2)]  Thus d'(A I B hit) = d'(A I B miss) under these given conditions.  Completely analogous arguments with the parameters off,,,, and fl , B2 give the result for d'(A I B cr) = d'(A I B fa), as  well as for the other parts of this proposition.  PROPOSITION 6, PART (i). If perceptual independence holds in stimuli A;BZ, i = 1 and 2, and decisional separability holds for  both features, then #(A I B hit) = fl(A I B miss), and these equal the marginal ft at the second level of feature B, NAB2.  Proof. The conditional # for feature A given the hit and miss of feature B are defined as  9A2(CA I B hit)  #(A I B hit) =  9A, (CA I B hit)  and  9A2(CA I B miss)  /t(A I B miss) = 9A,(CA I B miss)'  where CA is the constant x-coordinate of the criterion for feature A. Furthermore by perceptual independence in stimuli A;BZ,  i =1, 2, f1,B2(x, y) = gA,B2(x) gA;B2(Y), and we can use Eqs. (13) and (14) in the proof of Proposition 5a. Substitution yields  #(A I B hit) =gA2B2(CA) 9AIB2(CA)  and  NA I B miss) =gA2B2(CA) 9A,B2(CA).  Clearly, these are equivalent, and equal to the marginal P for feature A at the second level of feature B.  Analogous arguments hold for part (ii), as well as for feature B conditioned on feature A.  PROPOSITION 7a, PART (i). If sampling independence holds in stimuli A;BZ, i=1 and 2, and decisional separability holds for  both features, then d'(A I B hit) _ d'(A I B miss).  480/36/3-4  372 KADLEC AND TOWNSEND  Proof. From Theorem 1, part 2 of Ashby and Townsend (1986) we have that sampling independence in stimuli A; B2, i = 1 and 2,  and decisional separability imply perceptual independence in stimuli A; B2, i = 1 and 2. By Proposition 5a, part (i), we see  that d'(A I B hit) = d'(A I B miss).  PROPOSITION 7a, PART (ii). If sampling independence holds in stimuli A ;B,, i= 1 and 2, and decisional separability holds for  both features, then d'(A I B cr) _ d'(A I B fa).  Proof. Similarly to the proof of part (i), if sampling independence holds in stimuli A; B, , i=1 and 2, and decisional  separability holds, perceptual independence is implied in stimuli A; B, , i = 1 and 2 (by Theorem 1, part 2), therefore d'(A I  B cr) = d'(A I B fa) (by Proposition 5a, part (ii)).  By interchanging the roles of A and B, we have the same results for feature B conditioned on feature A.  PROPOSITION 7b. (i) If sampling independence holds in stimuli A; BZ , i = 1 and 2, and decisional separability holds for both  features, then P(A I B hit) = /3(A I B miss).  (ii) If sampling independence holds in stimuli A;B,, i= 1 and 2, and decisional separability holds for both features, then #(A  I B cr) = #(A I B fa).  Proofs. Analogously to the proof of Proposition 7a, Theorem 1 part 2 of Ashby and Townsend and results of Proposition 6a yield  the desired result.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  Some of the results reported in this paper were presented at the Twenty-First Annual Meeting of the Society of Mathematical  Psychology, held at Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, July 28-30, 1988. The authors thank Robert Nosofsky, Trisha Van  Zandt, and an anonymous reviewer for helpful suggestions regarding an earlier version of this manuscript.  This work was supported by National Science Foundation Grant 500-1364-1701, Memory and Cognition Processes Section, and by  Purdue University, David Ross Fellowship.  REFERENCES  ASHBY, F. G. (1988). Estimating the parameters of multidimensional signal detection theory from simultaneous ratings on  separate stimulus components. Perception & Psychophysics, 44, 195-204. ASHBY, F. G., & Gorr, R. E. (1988). Decision rules in  the perception and categorization of multidimensional stimuli. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and  Cognition, 14, 33-53. ASHBY, F. G., & MADDOX, W. T. (submitted for publication). A response time theory of separability and  perceptual independence.  ASHBY, F. G., & PERRIN, N. A. (1988). Toward a unified theory of similarity and recognition. Psychological Review, 95, 124-150.  ASHBY, F. G., & TowNSEND, J. T. (1986). Varieties of perceptual independence. Psychological Review, 93, 154-179.  DETECTION PARAMETERS  373  BURNS, B., & SHEPP, B. E. (1988). Dimensional interactions and the structure of psychological space: The representation of  hue, saturation, and brightness. Perception & Psychophysics, 43, 494-507.  DE VALOIS, R. L., & DE VALOIS, K. K. (1988). Spatial vision. New York: Oxford Univ. Press. EUKMAN, E., & VENDRIK, J. K.  (1965). Can a sensory system be specified by its internal noise? The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 37,  1102-1109.  FIDELL, S. (1970). Sensory function in multimodal signal detection. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 47,  1009-1015.  GARNER, W. R. (1974). The processing of information and structure. Potomac, MD: Erlbaum.  GARNER, W. R., & HAUN, F. (1978). Letter identification as a function of perceptual limitation and type of attribute. Journal  of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 4, 199-209. GATT, L, & TVERSKY, A. (1982). Representations of  qualitative and quantitative dimensions. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception & Performance, 8, 325-340.  GRAHAM, N. (1989). Visual analyzers. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.  GRAHAM, N., KRAMER, P., & HABER, N. (1985). Attending to the spatial frequency and spatial position of near-threshold visual  patterns. In M. I. Posner & O. S. M. Marin (Eds.), Attention and Performance XI. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  GREEN, D. M. (1958). Detection of multiple signals in noise. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 30, 904-911.  GREEN, D. M. & SWETS, J. A. (1966). Signal detection theory and psychophysics. New York: Wiley. GRIER, J. B. (1971).  Nonparametric indexes for sensitivity and bias: Computing formulas. Psychological Bulletin, 75, 424-429.  HUBEL, D. H., & WEISEL, T. N. (1968). Receptive fields and functional architecture of monkey striate cortex. Journal of  Physiology (London), 195, 215-243.  KADLEC, H., & TOWNSEND, J. T. (1992). Signal detection analyses of dimensional interactions. In F. G. Ashby (Ed.),  Multidimensional probabilistic models of perception and cognition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.  LtvINCSTONE, M. S., & HUBEL, D. H. (1988). Segregation of form, color, movement, and depth: Anatomy, physiology, and  perception. Science, 240, 740-749.  MASSARO, D. W., & FRIEDMAN, D. (1990). Models of integration given multiple sources of information. Psychological Review, 97,  225-252.  MCKENNA, F. P. (1985). Modifying the gestalt factor of proximity: Theories compared. Perception, 14, 359-366.  MILLER, J. (1982). Divided attention: Evidence for coactivation with redundant signals. Cognitive Psychology, 14, 247-279.  NOSOFSKY, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the identification-categorization relationship. Journal of Experimental  Psychology: General, 115, 39-57.  NOSOFSKY, R. M. (1987). Attention and learning processes in the identification and categorization of integral stimuli. Journal  of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 13, 87-108. NOSOFSKY, R. M. (in press). Relations between  exemplar-similarity and likelihood models of classification. Journal of Mathematical Psychology.  OLZAK, L. A. (1986). Widely separated spatial frequencies: Mechanism interactions. Vision Research, 26, 1143-1153.  OLZAK, L. A., & WICKENS, T. D. (1983). The interpretation of detection data through direct multivariate frequency analysis.  Psychological Bulletin, 93, 574-585.  PANTLE, A., & SEKULER, R. (1969). Contrast response of human visual mechanisms sensitive to orientation and direction of  motion. Vision Research, 9, 397-406.  RUMELHART, D. E. (1971). A multicomponent theory of confusion among briefly exposed characters. San Diego: Univ. of  California, Center for Human Information Processing, Report No. 22.  SHAw, M. L. (1982). Attending to multiple sources of information, I. The integration of information in decision making.  Cognitive Psychology, 14, 353-409.  SHEPARD, R. N. (1964). Attention and the metric structure of the stimulus space. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 1, 54-87.  374 KADLEC AND TOWNSEND  SORKIN, R. D., POHLMANN, L. D., & GILLIOM, J. D. (1973). Simultaneous two-channel signal detection, III. 630- and 1400-Hz  signals. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 53, 1045-1050. SwETs, J. A. (1984). Mathematical models of  attention. In R. Parasuraman & D. R. Davies (Eds.), Varieties of attention. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.  TANNER, W. P. (1956). Theory of detection. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 28, 882-888.  TAYLOR, M. M., LINDSAY, P. H., & FORBES, S. M. (1967). Quantification of shared capacity processing in auditory and visual  discrimination. Acta Psychologica, 27, 223-229.  THURSTONE, L. L. (1927). A law of comparative judgment. Psychological Review, 34, 273-286. TOWNSEND, J. T., & ASHBY, F. G.  (1982). Experimental test of contemporary mathematical models of visual letter recognition. Journal of Experimental  Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 8, 834-864.  TOWNSEND, J. T., Hu, G. G., & ASHBY, F. G. (1980). A test of visual feature sampling independence with orthogonal straight  lines. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 15, 163-166.  TOWNSEND, J. T., Hu, G. G., & ASHBY, F. G. (1981). Perceptual sampling of orthogonal stright line features. Psychological  Research, 43, 259-275.  TOWNSEND, J. T., Hu, G. G., & EVANS, R. J. (1984). Modeling feature perception in brief displays with evidence for positive  interdependencies. Perception & Psychophysics, 36, 35-49.  TOWNSEND, J. T., Hu, G. G., & KADLEC, H. (1988). Feature sensitivity, bias, and interdependencies as a function of intensity  and payoffs. Perception & Psychophysics, 43, 575-591.  TREISMAN, A.M., & GELADE, G. (1980). A feature-integration theory of attention. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 97-136.  TVERSKY, A., & KRANTZ, D. H. (1969). Similarity of schematic faces: A test of interdimensional additivity. Perception &  Psychophysics, 5, 124-128.  TVERSKY, A., & KRANTZ, D. H. (1970). The dimensional representation and the metric structure of similarity data. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 7, 572-596.  WANDMACHER, J. (1976). Multicomponent theory of perception. Psychological Research, 39, 17-37. WATSON, A. B. (1983). Detection  and recognition of simple spatial forms. NASA Technical Memorandum 84353, April, 1983.  WICKELGREN, W. A. (1967). Strength theories of disjuctive visual detection. Perception & Psychophysics, 2, 331-337.  WICKENS, T. D., & OLZAK, L. A. (1989). The statistical analysis of concurrent detection ratings. Perception & Psychophysics,  45, 514-528.  RECEIVED: February 14, 1989