10.1016/0022-2496(92)90040-e
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 36, 278-282 (1992)  Theoretical Note  Urn Models for Evolutionary Learning Games NOLA D. TRACY  McNeese State University  AND  JOHN W. SEAMAN, JR.  Baylor University  In an influential paper, Harley (Journal of Theoretical Biology 89, 1981, 611-633) proposed a model in which an evolutionarily  stable strategy (ESS) is learned rather than inherited. Harley also established an approximation to such an ESS called the  relative payoff sum learning rule. Audley and Jonckheere (British Journal of Statistical Psychology 9, 1956, 87-94) and Arnold  (Journal of Mathematical Psychology 10, 1973, 232-239; 4, 1967, 301-315) have developed general urn models for learning  through reinforcement. In this paper, we establish correspondences among these learning models, thus suggesting a potential  bridge between evolutionary game theory and classical learning theory. C 1992 Academic Press, Inc.  1. INTRODUCTION  Evolutionary game theory (Maynard Smith and Price, 1973; Maynard Smith, 1982) is primarily concerned with the evolution of  behavior. Strategies in evolutionary games are behavioral phenotypes, and payoffs are changes in Darwinian fitness. Loosely  speaking, an evolutionarily stable strategy (ESS) is a behavioral phenotype such that, if it is adopted by all members of a  population, then no mutant strategy can invade under the influence of natural selection. For a concise overview of  evolutionary game theory, see Riechert and Hammerstein (1983). A review of the extensive literature on the subject has been  Harley (1981) has developed and explored ideas about learning rules and evolutionary game theory in an attempt to understand  how an ESS might be achieved by non-genetic means. In Harley's theory, learning rules are the behavioral phenotypes of  interest; he is concerned with characterizing an ESS for learning. Harley has suggested an approximation to such an ESS known  as the relative  Correspondence and requests for reprints should be sent to Nola D. Tracy, Department of Mathematics, Computer Science and  Statistics, MSU Box 92340, Lake Charles, LA 70609-2340.  0022-2496/92 $5.00  Copyright 1992 by Academic Press, Inc.  All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.  278  URN MODELS FOR EVOLUTIONARY LEARNING GAMES 279  payoff sum learning rule. Tracy and Seaman (1989) have established a rigorous mathematical foundation for Harley's theory,  correcting certain technical arguments appearing in Harley's paper.  Audley and Jonckheere (1956) have proposed a two-response-choice stochastic learning model and discussed several  modifications, including some which allow the effect of the previous history sequence to depend on temporal distance from the  present trial. Arnold (1973) has generalized Audley and Jonckheere's model to a continuum of responses. He has also considered  the effect of the previous history sequence but provided for lag one dependencies through the introduction of correlation  parameters.  Harley's model also makes use of the previous history sequence, though not through the use of correlation parameters. We shall  see that, although he was apparently unaware of the connection, Harley's model utilizes temporal distance just as Audley and  Jonckheere had suggested. In this paper, we establish a correspondence among these models, thus establishing a potential link  between evolutionary game theory and classical learning theory.  In Section 2, we review Arnold's generalization of Audley and Jonckheere's urn model. In Section 3 we present Harley's model  and the relative payoff sum learning rule. We characterize Harley's development as an urn model in Section 4 and establish the  connections to the work of Arnold, Audley, and Jonckheere.  2. ARNOLD'S URN SCHEME  Consider a sequence of trials in which an individual must make a choice between two actions. In particular, let 61 be a set  (or an urn) initially containing a; balls of color C;, i =1, ..., k. After each trial, one of p sets R; of balls is added to  the urn. The set 9Pj is known as a reinforcement set. Let a;; be the number of balls of color i in 9P;, i = 1, ..., k, j =1,  ..., p, so that the total number of balls in R  ; is Ek-, a;~. After trial t, reinforcement set R; is added to the urn with probability n;. The n;'s cannot depend on the  results of trials 1, ..., t -1. Arnold (1967, p. 303) refers to this as noncontingent reinforcement (see also Arnold 1973, p.  233; Atkinson and Estes, 1963, p. 142; or Johnson and Kotz, 1977, p. 271). The assumption of noncontingent reinforcement is  used in the derivation of certain asymptotic results (see the end of Section 3).  On each of t trials, an individual samples (with replacement) from one of the reinforcement sets Rj added on previous trials  or from 611. Thus, on trial t there are two possible actions:  Action 1. Randomly select a ball from the reinforcement set added after trial t-g, g=l,-,t-1, or  Action 2. Randomly select a ball from 611.  480/36/2-9  280 TRACY AND SEAMAN  Let Sg, g =1, ..., t -1, be the probability of selecting from the reinforcement set added after trial t- g in Action 1. Thus,  Action 2 has probability fl, = 1 -Y-h-; 5,,. Clearly, Y_h , S,, converges and lim, 1- Y_h , Sh.  Let Yh be the value of the index of the reinforcement set chosen after trial h. Note that Pr( Yh = j) = 7r; and the Yh's are  mutually independent. Let X, take the value i if a ball of color C; is chosen on trial t, i = l, ..., k. Then the probability  that the ball chosen on trial t will be of color C;, given the sequence of reinforcement sets for trials 1, ..., t - 1, is  given by  PrCX,=i 'n1 (Yi=ai) I=#, k  ( a.+~%Yt hatih gab) I+h~1 \fig ia~gaH/~ (1)  j=1 Y-9=I t(ag+ a a  where ah indexes the reinforcement set added after trial h, that is, ah e 11, 2, ..., p }, h = 1, ..., t - 1. Note that the  accumulation of balls in the urn changes the probability of a particular color being chosen on any trial. This is the actual  "learning" procedure.  Arnold (1973, p. 234) has noted that "the Audley-Jonckheere urn scheme can be identified as the special case where S; = 0 Vi."  Thus, the Audley-Jonckheere urn scheme takes the following form:  1 a + y,`,- i ain~, PrCX,=i n (Yi=ai))=yk-1`(ag+y;,-lagah)i=1  Clearly, in this form, the Audley-Jonckheere urn scheme makes no use of previous history sequences. However, as we have  already noted, Audley and Jonckheere (1956, p. 89) have suggested that temporal distance be used for such purposes: "Another  way in which we might modify assumptions as to the effects of previous events on the probability of success at the (n + 1)th  trial is to weight the effects with some function of their temporal distance from the trial in question." In the next section,  we shall see that Harley has done just that.  3. HARLEY'S RELATIVE PAYOFF SUM LEARNING RULE  As we have stated, evolutionary game theory is concerned with the evolution of behavioral phenotypes. In the application of  game theory to the evolution of behavior it is not unreasonable to assume that individuals play a given "game" repeatedly.  Foraging and mating come immediately to mind. Suppose the strategy (behavioral phenotype) to be employed in such a game is  learned rather than genetically pre-determined. If the learning process is genetically determined, then it must be under the  influence of natural selection and potentially amenable to study under evolutionary game theory.  Harley (1981) has approached the problem of the evolution of learning from an evolutionary game theoretic point of view. He  has defined an evolutionarily stable  URN MODELS FOR EVOLUTIONARY LEARNING GAMES 281  (ES) learning rule and established an approximation to it. As we shall see, that approximation, the so-called relative payoff  sum (RPS) learning rule, is closely related to the urn models of Audley, Jonckheere, and Arnold.  Formally, the RPS rule is defined as follows. For a given game, suppose an individual has k possible distinct behaviors ("pure  strategies") and let r; be proportional to the a priori probability of employing the ith behavior; that is, prior to learning,  the probability of using behavior i is proportional to r;, i = 1, ..., k. (There is evidence for the existence of genetically  determined probability distributions-see the discussion on the female digger wasp Sphex ichneumoneus in Maynard Smith, 1982,  p.75, and the references therein.) Let R,(t) be the probability of using behavior i on trial t and let the random variable  Q;(t) be the payoff, representing changes in Darwinian fitness, for using behavior i on trial t. Then, for 0 < m < 1 and t >  2, Harley has proposed that  __ rr+Z%-i m'-"-1Qr(h)  Rj(t) ~s=, (rg+m'h-'Q,(h)).  The coefficient m"-called the memory factor-provides for heavier weights on more recent payoffs.  Harley has described the RPS learning rule as specifying "most frequently the behaviour which has, up to present, paid the  most, but only in proportion, roughly, to its cumulative payoff relative to the overall total" (1981, p. 617). Note that, like  (1), R; (t) is a conditional probability, since it depends on a specific prior sequence of trials and outcomes.  Arnold (1973) has derived the asymptotic response probability distributions for his noncontingent reinforcement urn scheme.  Motivated by Arnold's asymptotic results, Tracy and Seaman (1989) have shown that, under certain conditions, Harley's RPS  learning rule approximates the ES learning rule in the sense that the two have the same limiting form with probability one;  that is, the RPS rule converges almost surely to the ES learning rule.  4. CONNECTING THE MODELS  Although he did not recognize it as such, Harley's RPS learning rule is a generalization of Audley and Jonckheere's urn model  in the same spirit as Arnold's generalization. Like Arnold, Harley allows for more than two responses. On a given trial, the  player can choose behaviors from the existing repertoire of k distinct behaviors. Since the reinforcement urn sets correspond  to units of Darwinian fitness from payoffs which have been translated into reinforcement probabilities (see Harley, 1981, pp.  617-619, for a possible physiological structure capable of affecting such a translation), choosing from this repertoire is  analogous to selecting a ball from the urn-that is, choosing Action 2, not Action 1, in Arnold's model. This forces b; = 0 for  all i so that /3, = 1 for all t and, in view of Eq. (2), the correspondence  282 TRACY AND SEAMAN  between Harley's model and Audley and Jonckheere's urn scheme begins to take shape. It remains to consider Harley's  utilization of previous history sequences. Here, like Audley and Jonckheere, he makes use of a geometric progression of  weights. These weights are in the form of Harley's memory factors, which result in greater emphasis being placed on more  recent trials. The inclusion of Harley's memory factors in (2) completes the correspondence.  5. CONCLUSION  Evolutionary game theory has had a great impact on thinking in behavioral ecology. Perhaps the correspondences considered in  this paper will extend that influence into the domain of learning theory. Indeed, Maynard Smith (1982, p. 55) has noted "...  there is not only a formal analogy between learning and evolution; there is also a causal connection between them."  ACKNOWLEDGMENT  We are indebted to the editor and two anonymous referees for their helpful criticism on an earlier version of this manuscript.  REFERENCES  ARNOLD, B. C. (1967). A generalized urn scheme for simple learning with a continuum of responses. Journal of Mathematical  Psychology, 4, 301-315.  ARNOLD, B. C. (1973). Response distributions for a generalized urn scheme under noncontingent reinforcement. Journal of  Mathematical Psychology, 10, 232-239.  ATKINSON, R. C., & ESTES, W. K. (1963). Stimulus sampling theory. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter (Eds.), Handbook  of mathematical psychology (Vol. 2, Chap. 10). New York: Wiley. AUDLEY, R. J., & JONCKHEERE, A. R. (1956). The statistical  analysis of the learning process. British Journal of Statistical Psychology, 9, 87-94.  HARLEY, C. B. (1981). Learning the evolutionarily stable strategy. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 89, 611-633.  HINES, W. G. S. (1987). Evolutionarily stable strategies. A review of basic theory. Journal of Theoretical Population Biology,  31, 195-272.  JOHNSON, N. L., & KOTZ, S. (1977). Urn models and their application. New York: Wiley.  MAYNARD SMITH, J. (1982). Evolution and the theory of games. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press. MAYNARD SMITH, J., & PRICE, G.  R. (1973). The logic of animal conflict. Nature, 246, 15-18. RIECHERT, S., & HAMMERSTEIN, P. (1983). Game theory in the  ecological context. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics, 14, 377-409.  TRACY, N. D., & SEAMAN, J. W. (1989). Evolutionarily stable learning rules. Working Paper Series IS-WP-89-11, Department of  Information Systems, Baylor University.  RECEIVED: June 18, 1990