10.1006/jmps.1993.1001
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 37, 1-20 (1993) 

Extracting Human Expertise for Constructing Knowledge Spaces: An Algorithm 

MATHIEU KOPPEN* 

New York University 

In a theory for efficient knowledge assessment, a particular domain of knowledge is conceptualized as a set of problems in this domain and a person’s knowledge state as the subset of problems this person is capable of solving. A system of such states that is closed under union is called a knowledge space. In determining the knowledge of students in a particular domain, the assessment procedures use such a knowledge space as their theoretical model of the collection of feasible knowledge states. Therefore, the actual construction of knowledge spaces for particular domains is a critical problem. A method is presented in which experts in the field are confronted with a carefully chosen sequence of questions about specific relationships between the problems of the domain. Since this method relies only on the mathematical properties of closure systems, the questioning procedure is directly applicable in other contexts, viz., in the determination of any system of sets that is closed under either union or intersection, © 1993 Academic Press, Inc. 

1. INTRODUCTION 

Any more advanced computerized instruction system must include a component for assessing the initial knowledge of a student and updating this assessment as the student progresses through the administered course material. In designing such procedures we have to specify very concretely how we represent and measure “the knowledge” of a student. A framework for doing this has been developed by Doignon and Falmagne (1985). They conceptualize a particular domain of knowledge as the collection of problems (or items) in that field and the knowledge State of an individual as the subcollection of these problems that this individual is capable of solving. In general, only some of the subsets of problems will constitute possible knowledge states; this family of feasible states (which may depend on the targeted student population) is called the knowledge structure of the domain (for this population). 

This formalization is at the basis of a knowledge assessment project, a com- 

Correspondence and requests for reprints should be sent to Mathieu Koppen, University of Nijmegen, NICI, Department of Mathematical Psychology, P.O. Box 9104, 6500 HE Nijmegen, The Netherlands. *This work was supported by DOD Grant MDA903-87-K-0002 to Jean-Claude Falmagne at New York University. The author thanks Jean-Claude Falmagne for suggesting the problem and for his comments on a previous draft, and Bruce Bloxom and two anonymous referees for comments that significantly improved the presentation. 

} 

0022-2496/93 $5.00 

Copyright © 1993 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. 

2 

MATHIEU KOPPEN 

prehensive description of which is given by Falmagne, Koppen, Villano, Doignon, and Johannesen (1990). In this context, Falmagne (1989) has developed a procedure for testing a given knowledge structure against empirical data and possibly refining it by a sequence of likelihood ratio tests. Also, a number of automated procedures have been designed that search such structures to locate or at least approximate students’ states (Falmagne & Doignon, 1988a, b; Degreef, Doignon, Ducamp & Falmagne, 1986). All these procedures start from a fixed, given knowledge structure and in this paper we are concerned with how to determine such a structure in the first place. 

We present a method for eliciting the necessary information from experts in the field (in our case, for instance, experienced teachers or tutors). As such, we find ourselves in the domain of “knowledge acquisition” or “knowledge engineering,” a process which is percetved as a major bottleneck in the development of expert systems in general (Lehner & Adelman, 1989) and of Intelligent Tutoring Systems in particular (Anderson, 1988; Miller, 1988). Interviewing experts is a widely used method in this field, although it has its own problems, which are often not recognized (Forsythe & Buchanan, 1989). In fact, our questioning of the expert can only formally be called an interview. The restrictive way of representing knowledge in the form of the above-defined knowledge structure allows a complete standardization and automation of the procedure. Indeed, the expert will be asked only one type of question. As discussed in previous papers (Falmagne e/ al., 1990; Koppen & Doignon, 1990), we cannot ask an expert directly for the list of possible knowledge states, but have to resort to an indirect approach. Koppen and Doignon (1990) provide the theoretical, mathematical basis for this method. The central concept is the special kind of knowledge structure where the union of any number of knowledge states is again a state. Doignon and Falmagne (1985) argue that this assumption of closure under union is a reasonable one for knowledge structures in practice and they reserve a special name for it: such a structure is called a knowledge space. In Koppen and Doignon (1990) these knowledge spaces are shown to be in 1-1 correspondence with a class of relations between the different items of the domain, the so-called entail relations. Thus, we will obtain a knowledge space indirectly by asking an expert about this entail relation between the items. 

It must be stressed that the correspondence between knowledge spaces and entail relations is solely based on the fact that a knowledge space is a system of sets that is closed under union. More precisely, we use the equivalent fact that in such a space the complements of the states constitute a system that is closed under intersection. Such systems are mathematically known as closure systems (Birkhoff, 1967) and Koppen and Doignon (1990) have shown that any closure system can be alternatively represented by an entail relation. Consequently, the algorithm presented here can be used to determine any system of subsets that is closed under union or intersection indirectly through the corresponding entail relation. For concreteness and to show the original motivation, we use throughout this paper the knowledge space interpretation of the system in question. 

. 

KNOWLEDGE SPACE ALGORITHM 

3 

In Section 2, we discuss the kind of questions we have to ask the expert and show how to derive the implied knowledge space. It turns out that the number of questions can be substantially reduced by making appropriate inferences. In Sections 3,4, and 5, we describe these inferences in some detail and investigate how they can be exploited to turn an impractical straightforward approach into a querying procedure that has proved to be workable in practice. In Section 6, these discussions of the various aspects converge in a description of the resulting algorithm, and we add some remarks about the applicability of this method. 

2. THE QUESTIONS TO THE EXPERT AND THE DERIVATION OF THE KNOWLEDGE SPACE 

We want to query an expert about a specific field of knowledge, represented by a finite set XY of problems, and assume that, implicitly, she relies on some knowledge space of that field, to be made explicit by indirect means. It seems that an expert should be able to respond reliably to questions of the following kind: 

[Q] “Suppose that a student under examination has just failed all the problems a,, a3, ..., a,. Is it then practically certain that this student will also fail problem 5?”

The expert is told to assume optimal examination conditions, meaning that there is no “noise” in the data in the form of lucky guesses or careless errors by the student. In such case, we can, writing A for {a,, @2,..,a,}, interpret the above question as: 

[1] Is it true that in the knowledge space there is no state disjoint from A and containing the element 5?

Indeed, a student in such a state would fail ail problems a, to a,, yet give a correct answer to 6. Thus, the answers to the questions [Q] contain information about the knowledge space, and Koppen and Doignon (1990) have shown formally that in fact they determine it completely. How to find the unique space implied by the answers to [Q] is, in a sense, clear from the interpretation [I]. A priori, before any response from the expert, there are no restrictions on the knowledge space and every subset of X¥ must be considered a possible knowledge state. So, we draw up the list of all these subsets and start querying the expert. Whenever she indicates that, indeed, failing some set of problems A entails failing some problem 5, we apply [I]: we remove from the current list of potential knowledge states every set that contains 4 but is disjoint from A. 

Notice that after applying this operation the resulting, trimmed collection of states is still a space, 1.e., still closed under union. (Obviously, the power set that we start with is a space.) Indeed, if K= K, UK, is removed because of the above observation, that is, if b&€K and KNA=Q, then both K,AnA=Q@ and K,0A=Q, while also beK, or b€ K,. Thus, K, or K, has also been removed: the 

4 MATHIEU KOPPEN 

operation cannot create a counterexample for the closure under union. We come back to this point in Section 6. 

2.1. The Possibility of Inferences 

The above direct application of [I] is, however, only feasible when the number of items is really small. First, when X contains n items, there are n x 2”—' questions [Q] (counting, of course, only those where 4 is different from all a;). Second, the power set will contain 2” elements, so just the trivial looking part of “drawing up the list of all these subsets” soon becomes prohibitive. (The algorithm that we are going to describe has been applied to a set of 50 items, and 2°°> 10'°.) Fortunately, the questions in [Q] are not all independent. As a consequence, we can save many queries to the expert by drawing appropriate inferences from earlier obtained answers. Fully using these inferences also allows us, in general, to greatly reduce the collection of subsets that require consideration. Rather than starting with the full table of subsets of X, the algorithm will generate subsets that are of interest dynamically, in the process. These two related issues, the question of drawing inferences and the question of using these inferences to generate a minimal subtable of subsets of X are dealt with in the Sections 3 and 4. 

Below we give examples of some basic inferences and show how they are implied by the above application of [I]. Next we describe how the knowledge space can be recovered from the complete table of responses and inferences, which means that this space can remain implicit until the end. We denote the situation where failing A entails failing 6 by APb. This defines Y as a binary relation between subsets of items and items. We denote by . the complement of Y, that is, we write AWOd. when A## is not true. In terms of the knowledge space, A.W indicates that there is indeed a state that is disjoint from A and contains 5. The expert’s task it is to tell us, in principle for each pair (A, 6), whether APb or AW6 holds. 

ExaMPLe 1. From this definition it is clear that A#b implies A’#b for any A'’2>A. Applying [I] indeed puts this inference into practice: after all sets that contain 4 and are disjoint from A have been removed from the list of potential states, there certainly are no sets left containing & and disjoint from A’. Thus, a “new” observation A’Pb, with AGA’, would be totally uninformative and we would not want to ask the expert the corresponding question. 

EXAMPLE 2. Suppose we have observed a¥b and b&c. (If the left argument to the relation # is a singleton set {a}, we simply write aPb for {a} Pb, etc.) According to the definition of #, we must then also have a¥c. (That is, restricted to single items, ¥ is transitive.) Indeed, any subset of X that contains c but not a either contains 5, in which case it has been removed by the observation a9, or it does not contain 4, in which case it has been removed by b¥e. 

EXAMPLE 3. This transitivity property of F also allows inferences from negative answers: from the observations afb and aWc we must conclude bc, since the 

KNOWLEDGE SPACE ALGORITHM 

5 

alternative bc, together with a¥b, would produce the inference a¥Wc, contradicting the observation a/c. 

EXAMPLE 4. The transitivity of A in the domain of singleton sets generalizes in the following way. Suppose we have A#bh, for some subset A and items 4,, i=1,..,k, and suppose for the subset B= {b,,..,,} and item c we have also observed B¥c. By the definition of A we must conclude Ac and indeed any subset containing ¢ and disjoint from A has been removed by BYc if it is disjoint from B and by A#b, if it contains b,. There are corresponding generalizations for negative inferences. 

The last example suggests a natural way of extending the use of # to the case where both arguments are subsets. For A, BCX, this extension is defined by 

==> picture [243 x 11] <==

with the corresponding extension of 

==> picture [251 x 11] <==

According to Example 4, the so-extended # is transitive on the power set of XY. The relations defined by (1) correspond to the entail relations of Koppen and Doignon (1990). 

2.2. Recovering the Knowledge Space from the Relation 

The above examples show that a considerable amount of information could be lost if we were to interpret the expert’s responses only in terms of their direct consequences for the knowledge space under construction. We do, in fact, take quite the opposite approach: we collect all answers and inferences in a subsets-by-items table and leave the implied knowledge space implicit until the end. (Table 2 in Koppen and Doignon (1990) gives an example of such a table.) This space can be easily read off from the completed table. To see this, consider for A <X the collection A* of items that any student will fail who fails all items in A: 

==> picture [84 x 13] <==

==> picture [12 x 13] <==

The mapping At A* has the following properties: 

==> picture [202 x 11] <==

==> picture [226 x 27] <==

These properties are immediate from the definition of Y and definition (3). (Mathematically, they show that the mapping is a closure operator and, thus, the image set a closure system; see Birkhoff, 1967). Specifically, (6) represents the fact that, 

6 

MATHIEU KOPPEN 

. 

observing a student who fails all of A, we may conclude that he will fail all of A*, but nothing more than that: it is possible to master exactly those problems that are not in A*. In other words, X\A* is a knowledge state. We denote this complement of A* by A°; it is the collection of items that can still be solved by a student who is known to fail all of A: 

==> picture [222 x 13] <==

The argument can easily be reversed. For any knowledge state K there exists in principle a student who solves all of K, but fails all of X\K. Consequently, from failing X\K we can conclude no more than just that: (¥\K)* =X\K and thus K=(X\K)*. This shows how the knowledge space, let us call it y, can be extracted from the table in which the expert’s answers and resulting inferences are stored: 

==> picture [217 x 14] <==

In the following sections we investigate how we can use inferences like those in the above examples to make the task of building this table feasible in case of a nontrivial number of items. 

3. COLLECTING THE INFERENCES 

In order to develop the possible inferences in full generality, we deal first with 7 and / as relations between subsets of XY (definitions (1) and (2)). In practice, however, we can maintain only the original version of these relations in a subsetsby-items table, and the actually implemented version of the inferences is given at the end of this section. As we have indicated, even maintaining a full subsets-byitems table is infeasible with a moderate number of items, so in Section4 we investigate how to generate only a part of this table that still contains all the information. 

According to the definition of A, AAx holds for any x ¢ A. Combining this with the extension definition (1), the following properties follow easily: for any A, BC X, 

==> picture [219 x 10] <==

and 

==> picture [232 x 10] <==

We have already observed the transitivity of A: for any A, B, CCX, 

==> picture [246 x 10] <==

In Koppen and Doignon (1990) it was proved that (9), (10), and (11) fully characterize the relations that are generated by the positive answers to the questions [I] (the so-cailed entail relations). These properties are equivalent to the set (4), (5), 

KNOWLEDGE SPACE ALGORITHM 

7 

and (6), as follows easily from definition (3) (see also Koppen & Doignon, 1990; this is the equivalence between closure systems and entail relations). 

The situation in which we want to use (9), (10), and (11) is as follows. For each pair (A, B) of subsets of X we want to establish whether APB or AWB holds. By collecting information (responses of the expert) and making inferences, we have arrived at a decision for some of these pairs. Now for some pair, (A, A’) say, information is obtained, resulting in either APA’ or ANA’, and the question is: for which of the pairs of sets (B, C) that are still undecided does this new information provide the missing link that makes an inference, either BAC or BWC, possible? 

3.1. Inferences from Transitivity 

Let us start with the more familiar case of inferences just due to the transitivity condition (11). Consider first the case where the new information is positive: we add APA’ to our list. This allows a positive inference for pairs (8, C) for which this new entry completes a path in # from B to C, that is, for which there were already such paths from B to A and from 4’ to C: 

==> picture [293 x 10] <==

The new observation APA’ can also lead to negative inferences for pairs (B, C). One possibility is that, in #, there is a path from A’ to B, while it is known that there is no such path from A to C: 

==> picture [296 x 10] <==

A negative inference is also obtained when, in #, A can be reached from C, while it is known that A’ cannot be reached from B: 

, 

==> picture [296 x 10] <==

Finally we look at the case where the new information is negative: AWA‘ is obtained. This allows only negative inferences B.C and these are given whenever the alternative BPC would complete a path in ¥ from A to A’: 

==> picture [297 x 10] <==

These four inference rules are represented in Fig. | in the form of diagrarns. Note that, in this whole discussion, paths may have zero length; in the last case, for instance, we might have A = B or C= A’, and similarly in (12a, b, c). 

3.2. The General Case 

The inferences in (12), which are solely based on the transitivity (11), may be strengthened by incorporating the properties (9) and (10). Since the equivalence in (10) automatically also holds for the complementary relation A”, we may, in any condition in (12a) to (12d), replace A’ by A’U A and C by CUB. In each rule we can choose the alternative that makes the condition the weakest (and thus the 

8 MATHIEU KOPPEN 

==> picture [326 x 85] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
A
A Am mmA A mt
B———e C a ee [or] Te BooneC
(12a) (12b) (12c) (12d)
----- End of picture text -----

Fic. lt. Diagrams of the inferences from transitivity given in rules (12). Solid arrows connect pairs of sets known to be in Y, dashed arrows pairs known to be in 1”. In each diagram, the new observation is in the top row and the thick arrow in the bottom row is the inference implied by the other arrows. 

corresponding inference rule the most powerful). In order to apply (12a), for instance, we have to find a subset & such that BAA and a subset C such that either A'PC, or (A'U A) AC, or A’P(C UB), or (A’ UA) A(CU B). The weakest of these conditions is (A’UA)¥C. The alternative condition A’A(C UB), for instance, leads to (A’' UA) 2D A'A(CU B)ZC, which, by (9) and (11), implies (A’UA) AC. Similarly for the other two alternatives. In general, whenever there appears in a condition a pair of sets that is in the relation Y, we get the weakest form of this condition by making the left member of this pair as big and the right member as small as possible. Accordingly, we choose A’ wu A in (12a, b)}, A’ in (12d); C in (12a), CU B in (12c, d). 

It looks as though the same kind of reasoning with respect to the pairs in appearing in the conditions of rules (12b, c) indicates that we should make the right member of such a pair as big as possible. In (12b), for instance, it is clear that, by (9), AMC implies AV(CU B), so the latter condition is weaker. On closer inspection, however, the two versions appear to be completely equivalent. Any & we are considering here satisfies the other condition of (12b): A’PB. Together with the new observation APA’ this implies APB. So whenever AWx for some xe CUB, we cannot have xe B: AVY (Cw B) implies AWC. We do not gain, then, by replacing C by CUB in (12b) and in practice we only lose, when Y and / are only available in their restricted form, as relations between a subset and an item. Then the condition AWC is established by verifying that indeed Ax for some xeC and there is obviously no sense in extending the domain of search to Cu B, if we know that we will not find such an x in B. Therefore, we do not replace C by Cu B in (12b) and, for the same reason, we choose A’ over A'U A in (12c). All in all, by taking the properties (9) and (10) into account, we have arrived at the following transformation of the inference rules (12) (see Fig.2 for the corresponding diagrams): 

==> picture [315 x 64] <==

KNOWLEDGE SPACE ALGORITHM 

9 

==> picture [362 x 86] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
A———— A'UA A>AU A A 4 A------+4
N+
\7
P————*¢ Bree - eC Bee---CUB  Boe----eCuUB
(13a) (13b) (13c) (13d)
----- End of picture text -----

==> picture [292 x 9] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
Fic. 2. Diagrams of the general inference rules (13). Same conventions as in Fig. 1.
----- End of picture text -----

3.3. The Practical Implementation 

Now we want to apply these rules in the actual situation where we deal with # and W only in their restricted version, as relations between subsets and items. Note that the conditions in (13) can all be checked in this restricted version. According to definition (1), the condition APB is fulfilled if and only if for all xe B it has been established that APx. Similarly, by (2), A 4 B follows if and only if there is some xéB for which A.Vx has been established. The restricted version forces only changes in the input and output of the rules (13), the new observation and the derived inference. 

For one thing, our expert provides us with answers to questions of the form [Q]; that is, the new information we get does not concern a pair of subsets A and 4A’, but a subset A and an item x. Accordingly, in the above rules (13) we may substitute x for A’ everywhere. As for the new inferences, we can, in the restricted version of the relations A and WV, only handle conclusions of the form BYy or BAy. This is no real restriction in (13a), where the conclusion is positive. Indeed, the conclusion BYC is equivalent to the collection of conclusions BYy for all ye C, and these can all be implemented. 

The situation is more complicated, however, for the negative conclusions BAC in (13b, c,d). This means that for some ye C we must have BAy, but unless we have already established B#z for every but one ze C, we would not know which yeéC to pick. (If there is already some established Bz, ze C, then the conclusion BAC does not tell us anything new, of course.) We must conclude that the negative inference BAC cannot be implemented in full generality in the restricted version of Y and ./. Since it is utterly impractical to work with the extended version of these relations, we are content with just collecting all inferences of the form BAy. This restriction amounts to substituting y for C everywhere in the rules (13). 

In sum, then, the following specialization of (13) is the collection of inference rules that are actually applied in our algorithm. We use the shorthands A. for Av {x} and B, for Bu {y}; the corresponding diagrams are given in Fig. 3: 

==> picture [296 x 57] <==

10 

MATHIEU KOPPEN 

==> picture [326 x 86] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
A-————A, 9 A———\ >A, A-————> t A------~+2
\7
\7
PL x.  XLfe
P-_—e Beoro--ey‘a pom7 7. -—o8, Bowne ok,
(14a) (t4b) (14c) (14d)
----- End of picture text -----

Fic. 3. Diagrams of the implemented rules (14). Same conventions as in Figs. 1 and 2. 

In practice, it appears that rules (14b, c, d) still find most negative inferences, but they are in principle incomplete; how we deal with this situation is discussed in Section 5. 

4, GENERATING A MINIMAL SUBTABLE OF INFERENCES 

As we already indicated in Section 2, even for a moderately large number of items it becomes soon impractical to generate a full subsets-by-items table. (For instance, Table2 in Koppen and Doignon (1990) could be given in complete form only because it deals with the toy example of a five item domain.) Fortunately, it is, in general, not necessary to construct this full table. The inferences we decribed in the previous section may render complete rows of such a table uninformative. That is, there may be a number of subsets A of X, such that for any b eX it can be inferred whether A¥b or AMNb holds by inspection of some other rows of the table. Of course, we would like to avoid including such redundant subsets in the table. Their detection is easier using the properties (4) to (6), which we have seen to be equivalent to the properties (9) to (11) that were used in the previous section. 

Two subsets A and B of X are equivalent for ® whenever A* = B*. (This means they have identical rows in the subsets-by-items table). From (7) and (8) it is clear that equivalent subsets contribute one and the same state to the knowledge space, so for recovering the complete space only one representative of a collection of equivalent subsets is needed in the subtable. However, the primary purpose of the subtable is to collect all inferences and this implies that two equivalent subsets must both be in the subtable whenever their equivalence is only established empirically, on the basis of the expert’s answers to questions regarding these subsets. In this case, the two rows contain independent information on which inferences can be based. Only if we can infer, ahead of time, that some subset is equivalent to another subset, then that subset can be discarded from the subtable without throwing away inferences. Below are two important cases of this situation. 

EXAMPLE 5. Consider A, BOX such that AC BCA*. By (5), this implies A* c B* <(A*)* and thus, by (6), 4*= B*. So, all subsets B between A and A* are equivalent to A and need not be stored in the table: they represent the same 

KNOWLEDGE SPACE ALGORITHM 

11 

knowledge state as A (8+ = A~) and any inference involving B can be made using A instead, so the table of inferences is still complete. 

EXAMPLE 6, Consider A, 8, CCX with A and B equivalent and C arbitrary. By (5) and (4) we derive (A UC)* 3 A* = B* DB. Since also (A UC)* 2C, it follows (AUC)*>(BUC) and thus, by (5) and (6), (A UC)* 2>(BUC)*. The roles of A and B can be interchanged, so we conclude that (AU C)}*=(BUC)*. Thus, the table needs to contain only supersets of one of two equivalent subsets A and B. Any B’ > B is known to be equivalent to AU (B’\B), which is a superset of A. 

4.1. Partitioning the Table into Blocks 

The approach we have chosen for building a minimal subtable is to proceed by blocks, where a block is defined by the cardinality of the set A in [T], ie. the number k in [Q]. First we ask the expert for any single item @ and for any 5 whether failing a would imply failing 6. This collection of questions constitutes block 1. Next comes block 2, in which the generic question is whether failing a pair a,, a, would imply failing 6. Then, in block 3, we consider a triple a,, a3, a3, etc. The main reason for choosing this ordering of the questions is practical: it would seem that questions of the form [Q] are easier the fewer items are involved, that is, the smaller & is. Thus, with this ordering the expert starts with the easiest questions and we may expect to get the most reliable responses. By using the inferences, we can then try to minimize the number of more difficult questions that have to be asked later on. Formally, this order of going through the blocks will not be optimal in all circumstances; we return to this issue in Section 6. 

4.2. The Construction of a New Block 

The idea is not only to proceed by blocks of increasing cardinality, but to actually construct block & of the table only after blocks | to A -—1 have been completed. These blocks are then consulted to decide which subcollection of the k-subsets of X needs to be considered in block k. That is, the table is constructed dynamically, depending on the answers and inferences obtained so far. Since we have no advance knowledge about equivalent subsets, block 1 is constructed to consist of all singleton subsets. Block &, k > 1, 1s constructed in such a way that 

(1) it includes only those &-subsets of X¥ that are not known to be equivalent to some subset in the blocks | to A-1; 

(ii) it includes only one representative of any number of &-sets that are known to be mutually equivalent. 

Condition (i) provides us with a termination condition: we know that blocks | to k contain all information regarding #—and, thus, all information regarding the knowledge space—if and only if the next block to be constructed, block «+1, appears to be empty: any subset not in blocks | to & has a representative there to which it is equivalent. 

12 

MATHIEU KOPPEN 

How is it actually decided which subsets are to be in block k? First, because of the above conditions, we need to consider for “admission” to block & only k-subsets that are of the form AU {x} where A is a subset appearing in block k-1 and x¢A*. Indeed, if A is a (k—1)-subset that is not present in block k—1, then, by construction, there must be a subset B, somewhere in blocks 1 to k—1, to which A is equivalent; but then the k-subset AU {x} is equivalent to BU {x} (cf. Example 6). And if xe A*, then, by (4), (AU {x})CA*, and, by (5) and (6), A*<(AU {x})* €(A*)* = A*, so in this case AU {x} can be represented by the subset A in the previous block. 

Secondly, if a number of subsets 4,, ..., A,, in block k—1 have turned out to be equivalent, we pick one je {1,..., m}, say i= 1, and we do not include in block k any extension of the sets A,,..., A,,. The only extensions we consider are the sets A,u{x} with x¢ Af = --- = AX. This is a direct application of Example 6. 

Finally, any remaining candidate must be subjected to the test of Example S. That is, if B is such a set, we have to go through the blocks 1 to & —1 in order to check whether there is some subset 4A such that A © BC A*. Only if this is not the case, is the subset B finally accepted as a member of block k. 

4.3. The Transport of Previous Inferences to a New Block

Until now we have bypassed one crucial problem. In Section 3 we discussed what inferences could be drawn from observed responses of the expert and in that discussion it was tacitly understood that we were in a position to actually implement any of these inferences. We acted as if the full subsets-by-items table were available, while we have seen above that in fact only a subtable is created, block by block. In our algorithm, the inference rules (14) can only be applied within the current block, since the previous blocks have already been completed and the following blocks are not there yet. This poses the problem of how to recover, after the construction of a new block, the inferences for that block that we “forgot” to implement when we were dealing with a previous block. 

Let A be a subset in a newly constructed block k. Collecting all positive inferences APx amounts to finding the maximal subset A* of X such that from the data in blocks 1 to k—1 it can be inferred that A * ¢ A*. By (5) and (6), B*¥ © A* whenever BC A*, which means that the same holds with respect to A*: for any subset B we may from BCA?* infer B* CA*. Also, by (4), AS A*. These observations lead to the following procedure for determining A*: 

(i) set initially A* to A;

(ii) while there is a subset B in blocks | to k—1 such that BO A®* and B* ¢ At, add B* to A*. 

Note that the loop (ii) will not be entered when & = 1, and indeed in this case the initialization step (i) gives the correct result. Note also that the while-loop cannot be implemented by one pass through blocks 1 to k—1: each time that A* is adjusted, it grows and therefore previously considered subsets B that were rejected because B ¢ At must be reconsidered. 

KNOWLEDGE SPACE ALGORITHM 

13 

Similarly, collecting the negative inferences A.x amounts to finding the maximal subset A~ of X¥ such that A~ © A~. From (5) and (6) it follows that whenever Ac B*, then also A* ¢ B*, Taking complements we see that Bt < A* for any B such that A & B* and we obtain the following procedure for finding A~: 

(i) set initially A~ to the empty set;

(ii) for every subset B in blocks ! to k—1 such that B* >A, add B* to A~.

Again, in block ! only the initialization step (i) is executed, with the correct result. This time, the loop (ii) is just one pass through the completed blocks. 

— 44. Summary 

This completes the description of how the relevant subtable is constructed. To recapitulate, the construction proceeds by blocks of subsets of equal cardinality, starting with the singleton subsets. After a block has been completed, the next block is constructed according to the specifications in 4.2. Next, the procedures of 4.3 are applied in order to collect the positive and negative inferences for this new block that can be drawn from the data in the previous, completed blocks. Only then do we Start asking the expert questions from the collection tn this block for which no inference was obtained. In this process, we derive new inferences within this block by applying the inference rules (14) of Section 3. The whole procedure terminates when the newly constructed block is in fact empty (and this is surely the case after block |X|). 

5. CHOOSING THE NEXT QUESTION 

In the preceding two sections we have dealt with the main design issues. Before we move to a presentation of the resulting algorithm in the next section, we discuss here one remaining question that is of a more local nature. Nevertheless, the general solution to the problem of deciding which of the open questions to ask the expert next will also give us a way to deal with the incompleteness of the negative inferences (see Section 3.3). 

On a global level, the order of the questions follows from the above design decisions: we first have to ask the questions pertaining to block 1, next those to block 2, and so on. Within each block, however, the next question to be asked can be chosen freely out of the pool of open questions in that block. Of course, we would like to maximize the number of inferences so as to minimize the total number of questions that have to be asked. But this criterion is not practicable in its generality: it would require us to compute, for each of the questions under consideration, all possible continuations. 

To become practical, we drastically limit our scope: we try to find a best question to ask next just by considering the number of inferences each candidate question would yield when asked at this moment. Since the inferences are only implemented in the current block, “number of inferences” has to be interpreted with this 

MATHIEU KOPPEN 

14 

qualification. This attempt at optimization by looking at the immediate consequences of a question may be compared with trying to win a chess game by looking just one move ahead: it does not guarantee success, but it certainly beats doing moves at random. 

5.1. Criteria for a “Best” Question 

It is not obvious what constitutes a “best” question, since which inferences are made, and thus also their number, will depend on the expert’s answer. Several approaches are conceivable, all based on different ways of combining two values: the number of inferences for a positive and that for a negative answer. If we think the expert is, overall, equally likely to say “yes” or “no”, the mean—or, equlvalently, the sum—of these two numbers is a good measure: we pick a question for which this sum is maximal. If we think there is some other fixed probability for a “ves” answer, we maximize instead a weighted sum, the weights being determined by the probability of the corresponding event. We can try to be more sophisticated and estimate dynamically the probability of a “yes” answer (based on observed relative frequencies so far). It seems doubtful, however, that we will obtain consistent estimates in this way; the probability in question may change drastically over the time course of the query procedure (for instance, going from one block to the next), so the estimates based on prior information may be misleading. 

Effects may also vary widely for different experts and different sets of items and to get some hold on what criterion is best in what situation would require extensive empirical investigations. It must be noted that the choice of a criterion is indeed fully a matter of practical considerations: one criterion may be substituted for another without any consequence for the rest of the algorithm. 

5.2. The Adopted Selection Rule 

The selection rule that we implemented satisfies a “maximin” criterion, which may be regarded as more conservative in that it not so much tries to maximize the immediate gain, as it tries to minimize the immediate cost resulting from a very poor question. For each candidate question we consider the number of inferences for a positive answer and that for a negative answer, and we select the questions for which the minimum of these two numbers is maximal over all questions. From these, a best question is picked as one for which the total number of inferences—or, equivalently, the “other” number—is maximal. 

In practice it is not always feasible to consider ail the open questions in this process. Whenever the number of candidate questions is too large, we just select a sample and pick the best from this sample. The idea is again that, especially when there are many open questions, there may be many questions that are “best” or approximately so and the important thing is to avoid picking a particularly bad question. 

5.3. Dealing with the Incomplete Negative Inferences 

Regardless of what criterion is used for choosing the next question, the point that the possible inferences of a question are computed before the question is actually 

KNOWLEDGE SPACE ALGORITHM 

15 

posed to the expert is of some significance in another respect. It allows us to discover negative inferences that were missed by the incomplete inference rules (14b, c,d). For any question that we consider in the selection procedure, we compute the list of inferences for a negative answer and the corresponding list for a positive answer. Whenever this last list contains a contradiction with the data collected so far, we have in fact detected a negative inference for this question. Since the list of inferences for a negative answer is still available, we can add all these inferences to the table. After processing this pseudo-observation, we restart the selection procedure. By picking up missed negative inferences this way, we make sure that any question posed to the expert is indeed an open question: both answers are compatible with the existing body of data and, thus, the obtained answer will really be an additional piece of information. 

6. THE ALGORITHM 

Now we are ready to put the pieces together and present the integrated algorithm for obtaining a knowledge space from an expert’s answers to questions of the form [Q]. The algorithm consists of two parts; first it is established, directly or indirectly, for any subset A of Y and any xe X whether A#x or AWx holds; the second part consists just in translating the constructed table into the corresponding knowledge space. In Table 1, the algorithm is presented in a top-down fashion. Expressions in italics are names of procedures whose definition follows; plain text is supposed to be self-explanatory and words in boldface denote keywords of our “programming language.” In the description we fall back on notation used in Section 4.3: for any subset A, At is the variable denoting the maximal subset for which A+ ¢ A* has been established. Similarly, A~ is the variable corresponding to the maximal subset for which A~ © A+ has been verified. We have complete information regarding a subset A whenever A*UA™~ =X; then necessarily A* =A* and A~ =A?. 

This completes the description of the algorithm and next we turn to some questions regarding its practical] applicability. To get a feeling for the range of possibilities, we first look at a few special cases, Let us start with the worst case for the algorithm, which is indeed terrible. If, actually, any subset of X is a knowledge state, we will not observe any positive answer from the expert, the inference rules will not give us any additional inferences and we will have to construct the complete subsets-by-items table. To fix ideas, for a 50 item set we would have to complete a 2°° by 50 table by asking an expert 50 x 2% = 2.8 x 10'° questions. 

This worst case shows that the order in which the blocks are constructed in the algorithm (by increasing cardinality) is certainly not uniformly optimal. With the reverse order, that is, starting with block {|X|—1, we would have to ask only the |X| questions in this block. From the negative responses to these questions, negative responses to all remaining questions can be inferred. This can be checked with rule (14d), but it is also clear in terms of the knowledge space. We just have 

480/37/1-2 

16 

MATHIEU KOPPEN 

TABLE 1 

The Resulting Algorithm 

MAIN PROGRAM: Initialize first block; while new block is non-empty 

do 

Fill block; Construct next block od; 

Output space. 

INITIALIZE FIRST BLOCK: 

Set {x}* :={x}; {x}~ =, for all xe ¥. (Cf. Section 4.3.) 

FILL BLOCK: while open question left do Choose next question; Obtain answer; Add appropriate list of inferences to table od. 

CHOOSE NEXT QUESTION: 

decide on sample size; for sample size number of questions do Collect inferences for negative answer; Collect inferences for positive answer; if this is currently best question then save the two lists of inferences fi od. 

COLLECT INFERENCES FOR NEGATIVE ANSWER: apply rule {14d} of Section 3.3. 

COLLECT INFERENCES FOR POSITIVE ANSWER: apply rules (14a, b, c) of Section 3.3; if contradiction with existing data then add list of inferences for negative answer to table; goto beginning of Filf block fi. 

CONSTRUCT NEXT BLOCK: find all subsets in new block by applying Section 4.2; initialize A* and A~ for each subset A by applying Section 4.3. 

OUTPUT SPACE: 

output the sets 4~ = A?* collected in the table. (Cf. Section 2.2.) 

Note. See text for explanation. 

KNOWLEDGE SPACE ALGORITHM 

17 

to realize that the negative response X\{a} a (all questions in block |X] —1 are of this form) amounts to saying that {a} is a knowledge state (cf. interpretation [I ]). Being closed under union, a knowledge space that contains all singleton sets must be the full power set. This reverse order, however, is bad in the other extreme case, when all answers are positive. This corresponds to the knowledge space consisting of just the two trivial states @ and X, which means that all items are equivalent: solving one means solving all. It can be shown that in this case the reverse order of going through the blocks would require exactly 2'*!— 2 questions (the number of subsets to be discarded from the power set), and now the order by increasing cardinality is optimal: |X| questions in block 1 would suffice. With X= {x,,..,x,}, the observations x,Px;,, for i=1,..,n, with x,,,=X,, would indeed establish the equivalence of all items in_X. 

A more interesting case arises when there is just one fixed order in which the items are mastered. In psychometrics, this unidimensional case has been of great importance; the items are said to constitute a Guttman scale (after Guttman, 1944), The knowledge space concept is basically multidimensional (for any reasonable definition of “dimension” in this context) and the Guttman scale corresponds to the very restrictive case of a space consisting of a single chain. With X= {x,,.., x,} and x, preceding x;,, (i=1,...,.—1), this would be the chain 

==> picture [219 x 14] <==

Going through the blocks in reverse order, we would again need 2'*! — 2 questions to determine this space. The order used in the algorithm is here also optimal: the 2|X|—-2 responses x,Px,.,, Xj;4,;Mx; (i=1,..,2—1) in block | reveal the situation completely. 

In general, the order by increasing cardinality profits from the presence of structure (indicated by positive responses in blocks 1 and following), while the reverse order is better in the absence of structure (negative responses in blocks |X| —1 and following). Since our objective is to use the knowledge spaces in knowledge assessment procedures, we have to assume a certain amount of structure anyway to make the whole enterprise worthwile. Such a space will be workable in practice only if the number of states is a tiny fraction of the number of subsets, and only in this case will the restrictions embodied in this space produce a real gain in efficiency. (Note that a space counting 1000 states would, in case of just 20 items, contain less than one pro mille of all subsets; for 30 items it would already be less than one per million, and in practice domains will contain more than 20 or 30 items.) This gives an additional argument for the order of the blocks in the algorithm, besides the one based on the difficulty of the question [Q] for the experts, which was mentioned in Section 4.1. 

So, our algorithm is not meant for domains of knowledge with little structure, where the constituting notions can be acquired in almost any order. These are generally not very interesting and, if they appear, they are usually recognizable as 

MATHIEU KOPPEN 

18 

such from the outset. Consequently, we need not question many experts—and certainly not in the format of the above algorithm—to find out that “almost anything goes.” But even if we would start the procedure in such a case, we would find out about the lack of structure after completing the first block. It is hard to come up with fields of information where there are very few implications from a single item to another item, but where there suddenly are many from pairs or triples (etc.} of items. That is, if we get hardly any positive responses in block 1, it seems a safe bet that the situation will not get much better later on and we may decide to stop the procedure. Completing the first block will, in the worst case, take a number of questions that is quadratic in the number of items. 

If we wish, we can in this case, at least partly, check the assumption of little structure by going from block 1 immediately to block |X| — 1. Instead of presenting them in the form [Q], which would be horrible here, we could use the special interpretation of these questions that we have seen above to put them in a different format so that expert teachers could respond reliably. For instance, 

“Suppose you are tutoring a student who does not master any of the items in the set X. Could you then start by teaching him item a?” 

A positive response to this question would correspond to the negative response X\{a} Ma and to establishing {a} as a knowledge state. With Y the subset of items that constitute singleton states, it follows from the closure under union that the full power set of Y must be included in the knowledge space. 

The above considerations make it clear that there are no convenient theoretical bounds on time and space requirements and performance will strongly depend on the amount of structure perceived by the expert. A natural question is, how much structure is needed for domains of some fixed size to make the algorithm practicable? In principle, the performance of the algorithm can be tested by simulation studies, in which the task is to reconstruct artificial knowledge spaces with varying degrees of structure. The primary problem with this kind of test is the fact that the family of all knowledge spaces is huge (in the order of 27") and since up to now no real domains have been analyzed in terms of this concept, we have no idea where in this huge collection the practically significant knowledge spaces are. (It is very unlikely that they are distributed “uniformly” over the lattice of knowledge spaces.) Thus for any—necessarily tiny—sample of artificial knowledge spaces, the practical relevance would be questionable. 

It seems simpler to test the algorithm directly on a domain of knowledge that is interesting in practice. Such a test has actually been performed: five experts went through the presented procedure where the set ¥ consisted of 50 problems in high school mathematics. The results of this application are described in Kambouri, Koppen, Villano, and Falmagne (1991); here we just give an indication of how the algorithm performed in this practical case. With one exception (that we go into below) the experts finished the procedure by completing no more than five blocks. 

KNOWLEDGE SPACE ALGORITHM 

19 

(Note that theoretically 49 blocks might be necessary.) Thus, after no more than five blocks, Construct next block produced an empty new block, indicating that all information had been collected. For these experts, the number of questions they had to answer varied between 1000 and 2500 (compared to the theoretical maximum of +2.8 x 10'%), which took them between 10 and 20 hr. 

Indeed, there was one expert who did not finish the procedure; after the completion of block 3, the constructed fourth block appeared still to be very large and it was decided that it was not feasible to let her continue. This shows the dependence of efficiency on the amount of perceived structure (this expert was more conservative than the others), but it also permits us to highlight an additional advantage of the algorithm. The fact is that when this procedure is interrupted at an arbitrary moment, it still produces a knowledge space, and one which is guaranteed to include the final space that would have been obtained, had the procedure terminated regularly. 

This is discussed more fully in Koppen and Doignon (1990), but a direct justification for this assertion is available, if we accept that our algorithm is just a more efficient implementation of the straightforward application of [1] described in Section 2. There we started with the full power set of X; every positive answer of the expert led us to remove a number of states and we noted that every intermediate knowledge structure had to be a space. In particular, when we interrupt the procedure after block 1, we obtain a knowledge space that is known to be the closure under intersection of the final space. That is, this space contains all the states of the final space, plus possibly a number of intersections of these states that do not appear in the final space. Such a space that is closed under intersection corresponds to the interesting special case where the relationships between the items can be fully described by a partial order. Again, for more details see Koppen and Doignon (1990). 

To return to our stopped expert, we did indeed compute the knowledge space that she had established by the end of the third block. (This requires continuing to run the algorithm without the expert and with the following modifications: the procedure Fill block is removed and in Construct new block the sets A* are computed as before, but then the block is completed by setting 4~ =X\A*. That is, the expert is replaced by one who gives only negative responses.) As expected, the resulting knowledge space was bigger than those of the other experts, but it was in the same order of magnitude and nowhere near the theoretical maximum. In general, by far the most reduction in the size of the knowledge space takes place in block 1 (i.e., is caused by positive answers in block 1) and the rate of reduction drops continually in later blocks. (Again referring to the direct application of [T] in Section 2, it is for instance clear that the first positive response in block 1 results in a reduction of 25%, removing all subsets containing one, but not the other of a pair of items.) 

In sum, the algorithm has shown to be applicable to a practical domain of knowledge with a nontrivial number of items. Of course, this is just one case, and more research will be needed to show how much further than 50 items we can go; 

20 

MATHIEU KOPPEN 

the one stopped expert in this case is certainly reason for some caution. In this respect, the fact that good approximations were obtained after the first few blocks, often even after block 1, is essential. Running a fixed number of blocks takes time (and space) that is polynomial in the number of items. The first block can be completed in @(n?) time and, more generally, the first & blocks in O(n**') time, where nis the number of items. So, when efficiency is a concern, the procedure might well be restricted to the first or first few blocks, even in cases where it could in principle be completed. 

REFERENCES 

ANDERSON, J. R. (1988). The expert module. In M. C. Polson, & J. J. Richardson, (Eds.), Foundations of intelligent tutoring systems, Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. .

BirkHorr, G. (1967). Lattice theory. American Mathematical Society Colloquium Publications { Vol. 25). Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society.

DEGREEF. E., DoiGnon, J.-P., Ducamp, A., & FALMAGNE, J.-C. (1986). Languages for the assessment of knowledge. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 30, 243-256.

DoiGNnon, J.-P., & FALMAGNE, J.-C. (1985). Spaces for the assessment of knowledge. /nternational Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 23, 175-196.

FALMAGNE, J.-C. (1989). A latent trait theory via a stochastic learning theory for a knowledge space. Psychometrika, 54, 283-303.

FALMAGNE, J.-C., & DoiGNnon, J.-P. (19884). A class of stochastic procedures for the assessment of knowledge. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 41, 1-23.

FALMAGNE, J.-C., & DoIGNon, J.-P. (1988b). A Markovian procedure for assessing the state of a system. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 32, 232-258.

FALMAGNE, J.-C., KopPEN, M., VILLANO, M., DoiGNon, J.-P., & JOHANNESEN, L. (1990). Introduction to knowledge spaces: How to build, test and search them. Psychological Review, 97, 201-224.

ForsyTHE, D. E., & BUCHANAN, B. G. (1989). Knowledge acquisition for expert systems: some pitfalls and suggestions. /EEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 19, 435-442.

Gutiman, L. (1944). A basis for scaling qualitative data. American Sociological Review, 9, 139-150.

KambBourti, M., Koppen, M., VILLANO, M., & FALMAGNE, J.-C. (1991). Knowledge assessment. Tapping human expertise. Irvine Research Unit in Mathematical Behavioral Sciences, University of California at Irvine.

Koppen, M., & DoiGNnon, J.-P. (1990). How to build a knowledge space by querying an expert. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 34, 311-33).

LEHNER, P. E., & ADELMAN, L. (1989). Introduction to special issue on perspectives in knowledge engineering. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 19, 433-434.

MILier, J. R. (1988}. The role of human-computer interaction in intelligent tutoring systems, In M. C. Polson & J. J. Richardson (Eds.), Foundations of intelligent tutoring systems, Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

RECEIVED: March 12, 1990 

