10.1006/jmps.1993.1024
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 37, 401-420 (1993) 

A Group-Theoretic Analysis of Mental Space lsometries in Form Recognition 

KATHLEEN C. CHEN* 

Rochester Institute of Technology 

AND 

Mou-TaA CHEN 

State University of New York, Brockport 

A space isometry is a geometric transformation that preserves the Euclidean distance between two points in space. Due to its distance-preserving property, an isometry maps a space form into a congruent form. An experiment was designed to test a group model of space isometries. The task required discrimination of the three-dimensional forms of direct and opposite isometries. The identity, rotation, translation, and displacement are direct isometries, while reflection, glide reflection, and rotary reflection are opposite isometries. Subjects discriminated the forms by a key-press response and the reaction time was measured. The results validated the three constructed ascending normal series of space isometries: fa Ta kt ak, faTak,and/aTaTUC< FE where 7, T, E*, TUC, and E denote the identity group, the translation group, the direct isometry group, the group of translations and central inversions, and the isometry group, respectively, The results are explained by a reference frame hypothesis. A reference frame has several subframes of reference: the sense, verticality, uprightness, and position. As the group of translations and central inversions is associated with verticality, the direct isometry group and the translation group are associated with the sense and the uprightness of a form, respectively. The identity group is associated with the main frame of reference itself and therefore has all of the four perceptual properties. Our findings show that the perceptual properties associated with space isometries are ordered in terms of facilitation of recognition as uprightness, sense, verticality, and position; uprightness is the most favorable condition, and position provides minimum facilitation in form recognition, € 1993 Academic Press, Inc. 

INTRODUCTION 

Cassirer in 1938/1944 attempted to study perception through an extension of Klein’s (1893) Erlangen program, which based geometry on the transformations that left geometrical objects invariant. Psychologists never seriously pursued such a 

> * Supported by the College of Liberal Arts Faculty Research Fund of R.LT. Reprint requests should be addressed to Kathleen C. Chen, Department of Psychology, College of Liberal Arts, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY 14623.

401 

0022-2496/93 $5.00 

Copyright © 1993 by Academic Press, Inc. All rights of reproduction in any form reserved. 

402 

CHEN AND CHEN 

proposal until Hoffman (1966) showed how Lie groups and their one-parameter subgroups might account for some perceptual illusions and other phenomena. Caelli, Hoffman, and Lindman (1978a, 1978b) extended the application of group theory to real and apparent motion, using Lorentz group of relativity physics. By the early 1980s, there was more interest in exploring group theoretical models of perceptual behavior. 

Chen and Chen (1982, 1987) established a chain of plane isometry subgroups and three series of plane isometry normal subgroups. The chains and series served as models for form recognition based on the principle of simplicity in Gestalt psychology. They also constructed another group model of plane similarities with two normal subgroups: the direct similarity group and the dihedral group. The models were supported by experimental evidence, showing that the latency for recognizing images under transformations of the normal subgroup that preserves the sense of a form was shorter than those images of the normal subgroup that preserves the size of the form. 

Palmer (1983) presented a theory of perceptual organization, based on the concept of local invariance over the group of Euclidean similarity transformations. His theory accounts for the phenomenon of shape constancy, motion perception, figural goodness, perceptual group, and reference frame effects; he employs a parallel processing system constructed from spatial analyzers that are related to each other by similarity transformations. . 

Another group-theoretic approach was formulated by Leyton (1986) on perceptual organization. The theory claims that perceptual organization is defined by the input group of a machine, which has a decomposition sequence prescribed by an algebraic stability ordering. A number of organizational phenomena were predicted and explained by an extensive analysis of the decomposition sequence. His theory of perceptual organization associates a symmetrically interrelated stimulus set with a group of transformations. The concept of group is then used to describe the internal structure of reference and to identify an object as a set of invariant properties under transformations. He postulated that human cognition involves an internal reference which is a successive decomposition of the input group into subgroups and eventually to the identity element. This reference process is accomplished by the removal of instabilities from the input group. He used the plane topological group, the plane affine group, and the plane Euclidean group in one of his illustrations. In contrast to his study, we used the three-dimensional isometry group which is a subgroup of the space Euclidean group, and we extended the concept of reference frames to subframes. 

The most recent group-theoretic approach in perception was presented by Carlton and Shepard (1990a). They set forth group theoretical treatments for the representation of motion in three dimensional space. Explicit formulations for representing rigid motions of extended objects that differ in location and orientation were developed. They also showed the representation of motions intermediate between those prescribed by Lie groups and by classical physics. In Part II of their paper (Carlton & Shepard, 1990b), they formulated the effects of the sym- 

ANALYSIS OF MENTAL SPACE ISOMETRIES 

403 

metry group of an object on the representation of its simplest motions. Their study like our present study is concerned with spatial transformations in the threedimensional physical world. Their focus is on motions of an object. They regarded the geodesic path as the simplest psychological motion of an object from one position to the other. The rigid motions in their study include only translation, rotation, and screw displacement, and they were not concerned with opposite isometries which we include in our study. Their internal simulations are governed by some laws of physics or to a lesser degree by the theory of geometric groups such as Lie groups and symmetry groups. The internal representation in our study is based on a model with structural features of isometry groups. 

In our pursuit of a group-theoretic approach to perceptual constancy, we started to study the isometry group and some of its subgroups and normal subgroups in two-dimensional figures (Chen & Chen, 1982). We then extended our isometry group to the larger similarity group with a fixed point and its normal subgroups (Chen & Chen, 1987). Both those studies were confined to the two-dimensional plane. The present study is an extension of group application to perception of objects in three-dimensional space, using the isometry group and some of its normal subgroups. The following sections describe space isometries and the formulation of a theoretical group model for three-dimensional shape constancy. 

SPACE ISOMETRIES 

An isometry is a transformation that maps points P and Q into points P’ and Q’ such that the Euclidean distance between P’ and Q’ is the same as the Euclidean distance between P and Q. The Euclidean distance between two points P(x), ¥;, Z,) and Q(x, 2, Z2) in space is defined as PQ =./{x,—x,)?+ (92 -y, )? + (2-21). With its distance preserving property, an isometry preserves the shape of a figure as well as area or volume and consequently it maps a plane or space figure into a congruent figure. Weyl (1952) considered the use of congruence as the best way of describing the structure of space preferred by Newton and Helmholtz. A transformation that maps a figure into a congruent figure was called a congruence transformation. Thus Weyl’s congruence transformation is an isometry. To illustrate the isometries, we use the right-handed coordinate system, i.e., a coordinate system whose positive x-axis points to the observer, whose positive y-axis points to the right, and whose positive z-axis points upward. Those points having three positive coordinates form the first octant and we agree that those points having negative x-coordinate and positive y- and z-coordinates form the second octant. In 1776, Euler identified all six space isometries as reflection, translation, rotation, screw displacement, glide reflection, and rotary reflection (Martin, 1986). A space transformation is a reflection in plane A, denoted by o,, if and only if o4,(P)=P whenever P is on A and o,(P)=@Q whenever P is off A and plane A is the perpendicular bisector of segment PQ. A space transformation is a translation through vector PQ, denoted by tp, if and only if for each point XY, tpg (X¥)= Y 

CHEN AND CHEN 

. 

404 

where vectors XY = PQ. A space transformation is a rotation about line m through angle @, denoted by p,,9, if and only if for each point P such that P lies in the plane A that is perpendicular to m, m intersects A in point 0, p,,4 is the plane rotation of plane A through angle @ about point 0, and point P remains in plane A. Line m is called the axis of the rotation. A screw displacement is the product of a rotation about a line and a translation through a vector parallel to the axis of the rotation. A glide reflection is the product of a reflection in a plane anda translation through a vector parallel to the mirror of the reflection. A rotary reflection is the product of a reflection in a plane and a rotation about an axis perpendicular to the mirror of the reflection. Figure1 shows a standard form and its image under a rotary reflection by rotating about the z-axis through 60° counterclockwise and reflecting in a plane parallel to the xy-plane. A space transformation is a central inversion in point P, denoted by a, if and only if o,(P)=P and for each point QO#P, o,(Q)=R where P is the midpoint of segment OR. Point P is called the center of the inversion. A central inversion is a special case of a rotary reflection whose rotation is through 180°. Hence a central inversion in point P is the product of three mutually perpendicular planes with common point P. For example, the central inversion in the origin maps a point with coordinates (x, y, z) into the point with coordinates (—x, —y, —z). Figure 2 shows a standard form and its image under the central inversion whose mirrors are the three coordinate planes. Dodge gives many illustrative graphs of the above definitions in his Euclidean Geometry and Transformations (1972). 

A space isometry is a product of at most four reflections. A translation tpg is a product of two reflections whose mirrors are both perpendicular to vector PQ and, hence, parallel. The distance between the two planes is half the distance between P and Q. A rotation p,,,9 is a product of two reflections whose mirrors intersect in line m and include an angle with a measure half @. A central inversion o, is a product of three reflections whose mirrors are pairwise perpendicular and intersect in point P. Since a screw displacement is a product of a rotation and a translation, it is a product of four reflections. Similarly, either a glide reflection or a rotary reflection is a product of three reflections (Martin, 1986). 

Fic. 1. A standard form (left) and its image under a rotary reflection by rotating about the z-axis through 60° counterclockwise and reflecting in a plane parallel to the xy-plane. 

ANALYSIS OF MENTAL SPACE ISOMETRIES 

405 

Fic. 2. A standard form (left) and its image under the central inversion whose mirrors are the three coordinate planes. 

We say that an isometry is even or odd, according to whether the number of its factor reflections is even or odd. Thus a translation, a rotation, or a displacement is even, whereas a reflection, a glide reflection, or a rotary reflection is odd. We call an even isometry a direct isometry and an odd isometry an opposite isometry. Since an integer is either even or odd but not both, the set of space isometries may be partitioned into the subset of direct isometries consisting of translations, rotations, and screw displacements; and the subset of opposite isometries consisting of reflections, glide reflections, and rotary reflections. The identity transformation is a direct isometry. The product of two odd isometries is an even isometry. 

Group MODEL 

The construction of the group model is based on a hypothesized sequence to be tested by an experiment which is fully described under Experiment. The task in the experiment involved discriminating three-dimensional forms of direct and opposite isometries. The class of direct isometries includes the identity, rotation, translation, and screw displacement; and the class of opposite isometries includes reflection, glide reflection, and rotary reflection. Each trial consisted of a pair of forms that are either direct isometric or opposite isometric to each other. Half the subjects discriminated forms by pressing the left-hand key on the computer key board for direct isometries and the right-hand key for opposite isometries and vice versa for the other half of the subjects. The computer recorded all reaction times and errors. Assuming mental transformation and using reaction time as the behavioral index, we hypothesized the following increasing sequence of reaction time as a function of recognition of images of forms under various transformations, 

RT(1) < RT(T)< RT(R) < RT(S)< RT(M) < RT(G) < RT(RM), 

(1) 

where J, T, R, S, M, G, and RM denote the sets of the identity tranformation, translations, rotations, screw displacements, reflections, glide reflections, and rotary reflections, respectively. 

The rationale for the above hypothesized sequence is partly derived from our previous findings indicating the importance of the sense of a two-dimensional form in recognition. Forms that preserve the sense are easier to recognize than those that do not preserve the sense such as mirror images of the form. Also, we believe that 

480/37/3-6 

406 

CHEN AND CHEN 

composite transformations require longer processing time than a transformation. The composite isometries are screw displacement, which is the product of a rotation and a translation; glide reflection, which is the product of a translation and a reflection; and rotary reflection, which is the product of a rotation anda reflection. 

Based on Sequence (1), we constructed three increasing sequences of reaction time as a function of transformations of space Euclidean subgroups, 

RT(I)}< RT(T)< RT(E*)< RT(E), 

RT(1)< RT(T)< RT(E), 

RT(1) < RI(T)< RI(TUC) < RTE), 

where J, 7, E*, E, and TUC denote the identity group, the translation group, the direct isometry group, the space isometry group, and the group of translations and central inversions, respectively. Each increasing sequence of reaction time induces an ascending chain of subgroups of the space Euclidean group. The above three sequences induce respectively the three ascending chains 

==> picture [78 x 46] <==

where the symbol< denotes the inclusion relation on groups. Since each subgroup preserves a certain visual feature, the chains may provide information on shape constancy. An arrangement of the three chains produces a rhombus-shaped group model as shown in Fig. 3. 

Construction of the Model. A set of transformations with composition as the binary operation forms a group or an abstract group, if it contains the product of any two (closure property) and inverse of each (inverse property). When the order of the factors of a product is immaterial, the group is an Abelian or a commutative 

==> picture [30 x 89] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
y Et
TUC
----- End of picture text -----

Fic. 3. A structure of normal subgroups of the space isometry group. A group on the left is a normal subgroup of a group on the right. A solid line indicates the preservation of the sense by a normal subgroup, a dotted line signifies the preservation of uprightness by the normal subgroup 7, a double line preserves verticality by a normal subgroup, and the heavy line symbolizes invariance of position by the identity group. 

ANALYSIS OF MENTAL SPACE ISOMETRIES 

407 

group. Usually space transformation groups are non-Abelian. A subset of a group is a subgroup, if the subset is a group under the binary operation of the group. The subgroups of space isometries that we used in this study are normal or invariant subgroups. A subgroup N of group G is a normal subgroup of G, denoted by N<G, if for every g in G and n in N the conjugate of n by g, gng—', is in N where g~' is the inverse of g. We may rephrase the definition of normal subgroup as follows: N<3G, if and only if gVg~'=N. If H is a subgroup of G, g in G, then Hg= {hg:h in H} is called a right coset of H in G. Similarly a left coset of H is gH=({gh:hin H} of HinG. 

From the definitions, it is clear that conjugates play an important role in the formation of normal subgroups. The following lemma sheds light on the function of a conjugate. 

LEMMA 1. A transformation f sends x to y if and only if the conjugate gfeo' sends g(x) to g()y). 

Proof. gfg~'(g(x))=gf(x). Clearly gf(x)=g(y) if and only if f(x)=y. JJ The conjugate g/g~' behaves as a transformation when/ is shifted by g. Thus the conjugate of f by g is a transformation of the same kind as f Figure 4 illustrates 

==> picture [178 x 180] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
m
60°
p(A) A
----- End of picture text -----

Fic. 4. The figure illustrates the function of the conjugate of a reflection by a rotation. If we rotate the space form about line m through — 60°, reflect in plane A, and then rotate about m through 60°, the effect is the same as reflecting the form in the image plane after plane A is rotated about m through 60°. In equation form we have po,p7'!=a,,4)- 

408 

CHEN AND CHEN 

the conjugate of a reflection in plane A by a rotation about line m through 60°. We have po ,p~'=o,,4). This means that the conjugate of a reflection in plane A by the rotation is the same as a reflection in the plane that is the image of A being rotated about m through 60°. 

We find it useful to describe perceptual organization with normal subgroups and cosets. When a form in space is projected and displayed in the center of a twodimensional screen, an observer may impose a_ three-dimensional cognitive Cartesian coordinate system. Just and Carpenter (1985) reviewed numerous studies demonstrating the existence of such a cognitive Cartesian coordinate system. Physical objects are perceived in relation to a cognitive coordinate system which consists of an implicit origin and some directional axes. Suppose that we agree on the use of the right-handed coordinate system; in this coordinate system, the z-axis is the most salient symmetry axis, and the origin is the most salient symmetry point. Now suppose that the test form is the image of a standard form that has been rotated by p about the z-axis through 60° and the rotated form has been translated along the positive y-axis by t. To recognize the test form, some subjects may adopt the strategy of imagining the test form rotating about the z-axis through — 60° by p~' and then translating the rotated form back to the original position of the standard form by x~', in order to match it with the standard form or its internal template if the standard form is absent. Others may translate the test form to the origin first by t~' and then rotate the translated image about the z-axis through —60° by p~'. Translations t and z are different because the direction of x is the direction of t affected by the rotation. The composition of transformations in these two different ways may be represented as n~'p~'=p—'t—'. Simplifying, we obtain (px)~'={tp)~', px=tp and t=pnxp~'. Thus we have the equation of cosets pT=Tp and normal subgroup T= pTp_'. Figure 5 shows the visual organization and algebraic representation of the composition of the transformations. 

Let G and H be groups. A homomorphism of G into H is a function for which (ab) =f(a) f(b) for all a, 6 in G. The kernel of fis the set of g in G such that f(g) is the identity element in H. If G is a group and N<G, the set of right cosets of N in G forms a quotient group, denoted by G/N (Herstein, 1964}. An isomorphism is a homomorphism that is a one-to-one correspondence (Rotman, 1968). 

To construct our model, we need another lemma. 

LEMMA 2. There is a homomorphism of the space isometry group E onto a group of order two. The kernel of this homomorphism consists of all direct space isometries in E*. 

THEOREM. A structure of some normal subgroups of space isometry group is as given in Fig. 3. 

Proof, Since a transformation is one-to-one and onto, it has an inverse. It suffices to show the closure property of each subgroup of the space isometry group. 

Since direct isometries are even isometries, and even numbers are closed under 

ANALYSIS OF MENTAL SPACE ISOMETRIES 

409 

_ 

==> picture [182 x 187] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
A standard form A test form
(pay! = (tp)
T= pimp
pr = ha m\ J [7]
pT=Tp A
----- End of picture text -----

Fic. 5. Visual organization of inverse transformations for recognizing a rotated and then translated image. 

addition, direct isometries from a group E*. By Lemma 2, £* is the kernel of homomorphism of £. The First Isomorphism Theorem states that if f: G— H is a homomorphism with kernel K, then K is a normal subgroup of G and the quotient group of G by K, G/K, is isomorphic with the image of f (Rotman, 1968). By this theorem, E* < E. 

The only space isometries that map a line into a parallel line are central inversions and translations that include the identity transformation. The product of two central inversions is a translation, and conversely a translation is a product of two central inversions. Furthermore, the product of three central inversions is a central inversion (Martin, 1986). Thus the union of the set of translations and the set of central inversions is a group, denoted by TUC. The observations made after Lemma 1 support the fact that the conjugate of a translation or a central inversion by an isometry is a translation or a central inversion, respectively. Hence TU C <I E. We prove the closure of the space translation group by defining translations t((x, py, z))=(x+a, y+b, z+) and x{(x, y,z))=(x+r, y+5s, 7+ ¢) where a, b, c, r, s, and ¢ are real numbers. Then ar((x, »,z))=(x+at+r, y+b4+5,Z+c+f) 8 a translation, because real numbers are closed under addition. Furthermore, tr((x, y,Z)) = (xt+rt+ayptst+b,zt+t+e) = (xt+atnrytbts, ztceot+Hp= nt((x, y,2z)), because real numbers are commutative under addition. Hence the set of translations forms not only a group, but also an Abelian group. The remarks stated immediately after Lemma | support the fact that the conjugate of a translation by an isometry is a translation. Therefore T<aiE, T<iEt, and TaTvc. 

Finally it is obvious that /<1 7 for tit~'=rtr7'=1 J 

410 

CHEN AND CHEN 

EXPERIMENT 

A. Purpose 

The purpose of the experiment was to test the subjects’ recognition of a threedimensional object using reaction time as the behavior index and to validate the postulated group model. 

B. Method 

Subjects. Twelve students, of whom eight were male and four were female from the Rochester Institute of Technology, served in the experiment. All subjects were majoring in different scientific and technical fields but were taking a psychology course with one of the authors. They were interested in participating in the experiment. They all had 20/20 vision or corrected 20/20 vision. 

Stimuli. Two computer-generated perspective line drawings portrayed seven rigid cubes of the same size fastened face to face. These stimuli are similar to those introduced by Shepard and Metzler (1971). The standard forms are shown in Fig. 6 (form 1} and Fig. 7 (form 2). The cubes form a three-dimensional structure that cannot be transformed into itself by any reflection. Figure 6(1) subtended a visual 

==> picture [8 x 9] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
a
----- End of picture text -----

b 1 

: 

==> picture [21 x 36] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
7
----- End of picture text -----

Fic. 6. Standard form (1) and forms in which each form differs from the standard form by 60° (a)}, 120° (b), and 180° (c} rotation in depth with (b) and (c) and without (a) crossing a topological discontinuity or “singularity” in two-dimensional projection. 

ANALYSIS OF MENTAL SPACE JISOMETRIES 

411 

==> picture [132 x 155] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
a
2 b
Cc
----- End of picture text -----

Fic. 7. Standard form (2) and forms in which each form differs from the standard form by a 60° (a), 120° (b), and 180° (c)} rotation in depth with (b) and (c) and without (a) crossing a topological discontinuity or “singularity” in two-dimensional projection. 

angle of about 5°34’, Fig. 7(2) subtended a visual angle of about 4°46’, and the space separating the figures subtended a visual angle of about 6°22’. The two standard forms underwent the following transformations: 

2x4 rotations counterclockwise about the z-axis with angular departure of 0, 60, 120, 180° from the positive x-axis in the right-handed coordinates. 

2x4 mirror reflections in the planes with a multiple of 60° angular departure of the planes of reflections from the xz-plane. 

2 x 3 translations—one along the y-axis, one along the z-axis, and one moving into the second octant. 

2x3 glide reflections—the above three translations each followed by a reflection in a plane parallel to the direction of the translation. 

2x4 screw displacements—the above four rotations each followed by a translation along the z-axis. 

2x4 rotary reflections—the above four rotations each followed by a reflection in a plane perpendicular to the z-axis. 

Procedure. Each subject participated in one practice session and two test sessions of 132 trials each, completing a total of 264 trials. Each standard form underwent 22 transformations; with two standard forms, there were 44 transformations altogether. The direct and opposite isometries occurred in equal frequencies of 11 times each for either standard form. In each session, the possible 44 transformations 

412 

CHEN AND CHEN 

were repeated three times, resulting in 132 trials for each session. Each trial consisted of a standard and a test form that were always isometric to each other. Prior to the first session, the subject was verbally instructed as to the nature of the task and was given 36 practice trials with immediate feedback of “right” or “wrong” after each stimulus pair. The feedback was not given during the test session. Before the second session, the subject also received 12 warm-up trials representative of six different kinds of transformations. The stimulus pairs presented during the practice trials were different from the test stimuli, and these practice pairs would not reappear during the test trials. 

The beginning of each trial was signaled by a green warning field for approximately 1s, followed by the visual presentation of the pair of perspective drawings randomly selected by the computer for that trial. The computer presented all stimulus pairs and recorded the reaction times and errors of each subject. Test forms on which errors were made were presented again by the computer, in order to obtain a complete set of error-free data for each subject. The experimenter instructed the subjects that they would be shown two forms: one standard form always appearing on the left of the screen, and the other, the comparison form on the right of the screen. Their task was to determine whether those two forms were intrinsically of the same or different shapes by pressing the appropriate key. The experimenter explained that “intrinsically of the same shape” meant that the two objects could be made congruent by rapidly moving the comparison stimulus with respect to the standard stimulus in space; and that “intrinsically different in shape” meant that the two objects could not be brought into congruence by any rigid motion in space. The experimenter using the demonstration stimuli illustrated the point of intrinsically same shape by physically rotating a comparison stimulus to match the standard stimulus. This showed that even though two stimuli may initially appear to be quite different, they can nevertheless be found to be identical in intrinsic shape when one is rotated into the orientation of the other. Another illustration followed to demonstrate that intrinsically different shapes can never be brought into congruence by any rigid motion in space. This also showed that the comparison stimulus is a mirror image of the standard stimulus.. 

Half the subjects pressed the right-hand key for congruent forms and the lefthand key for incongruent ones. The roles of the two hands were reversed for the other half of the subjects. This procedure was to control possible response biases. 

C. Results 

Reaction Time as a Function of Angular Difference. The angular difference between the portrayed orientation of the two three-dimensional objects rotated about the z-axis, which is the vertical axis, in depth, is an independent variable of interest. Reflections in the planes with a multiple of 60° angular departure of the planes of the reflection from the xz-plane are more difficult for subjects to picture mentally and hence longer times are expected. Figure 8 presents the group mean reaction times computed on the “same” responses for rotation and screw displace- 

ANALYSIS OF MENTAL SPACE ISOMETRIES 

413 

==> picture [248 x 212] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
4 : eX nnn K
a—
Xocee K
3
ww eo ONL A
t- Y Lae aeok Oo
tc ae he
5 ° “0
A oe O X - Rotary reflection
@ - Reflection
e) A - Screw displacement
1 O - Rotation
$$ $$ £i— <@ +  <—+—
0° 60° 120° 180°
Angle of Rotation or Inclination of Plane of Reflection
----- End of picture text -----

| 

Fic. 8. Mean reaction time as a function of angular difference for rotary reflection, reflection, screw displacement, and rotation. 

ment and “different” responses for reflection and rotary reflection, at each 60° interval of rotation from 0° to 180°. 

In the cases of both rotation and screw displacement, reaction time increases according to a linear function of angular difference in portrayed orientation, ranging from 1.3 s at 0° to 2.5 s at 180° for rotation and 1.6 to 2.5 s for screw displacement. Reaction times for “different” responses ranging from 2.3 to 2.4 s for reflection and 3.3 to 4.0 s for rotary reflection are generally similar to those obtained for the “same” responses of rotation and screw displacement. The only discrepant point is the one for 180° reflection with 10 subjects showing short mean reaction times. These subjects might not be using the strategy of first rotating the object and then assessing the relative position of the arms of the objects. They could be using a nonrotational strategy in this special case of 180° due to the fact that 180° departure from the xz-plane is again the xz-plane for reflection. The dip in reaction time at 180° is consistent with previous studies of plane similarity transformations isometries (Chen & Chen, 1987; Metzler & Shepard, 1974). 

Error Rates. The repetitions used to obtained a reaction time for an errorless response to each pair were included in the error rates which correlated positively with reaction times. Error rates range from 1.9 to 9.5% for individual subjects. In the graphic depiction of mean reaction times and in the statistical analyses, reaction times of incorrect responses have been excluded. 

Reaction Times for Six Isometries. Group mean reaction times for the six isometries, translation, rotation, screw displacement, reflection, glide reflection, and 

414 

CHEN AND CHEN 

TABLE 1 

Mean and Standard Deviation Reaction Time {s} for Various Space Isometries 

+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+
|      | I    | T    | R    | R    | M    | G    | RM   |
+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+
| Mean | 1.33 | 1.37 | 1.97 | 2.03 | 2.48 | 3.08 | 3.76 |
+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+
| SD   | 0.41 | 0.49 | 0.68 | 0.65 | 0.94 | 0.91 | 1.40 |
+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------+

Note. /, identity; 7, translations; &, rotations; S, screw displacements; M, reflections; G, glide eflections; RM, rotary reflections. 

rotary reflection, are shown in Table 1. The mean reaction times for the identity, translation, rotation, and screw displacement were 1.68 s as opposed to the mean reaction times for reflection, glide reflection, and rotary reflection of 3.11, a difference of 1.43 s. This indicates that reaction times for direct isometries {7, R, S} are shorter than reaction times for opposite isometries {M, G, RM}. 

Significant differences between the mean reaction times of isometries were tested by two-tailed ¢ tests and the levels of significance are shown in Table 2. The results showed highly significant differences in reaction times for nearly all isometries (eo < 0.001 or p<90.01), except identity versus translation and rotation versus screw displacement, which were not significant. The results may be summarized as 

RT(1)= RT(T)< RT(R) = RT(S) < RT(M) < RT(G) < RT(RM), 

where x denotes a Statistically insignificant relation. Except for translation or translation as a component in composite screw displacement, these results are consistent with our hypothesized sequence as 

RT(1) < RT(T) < RT(R) < RT(S) < RT(M) < RT(G)< RT(RM). 

The effect of translation as a component in glide reflection, however, was significant. Our 1982 study showeda significant difference in recognition between identity 

TABLE 2 

Levels of Significance among Space Isometries by Two-Tailed ¢ Test 

+----+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+
|    | I     | T     | R     | S     | M     | G    |
+----+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+
| T  | N.S.  |       |       |       |       |      |
+----+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+
| R  | 0,001 | 0.001 | nS    |       |       |      |
| Ss | 0.001 | 0.001 |       |       |       |      |
+----+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+
| M  | 0.001 | 0.001 | 0.001 | 0.01  |       |      |
+----+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+
| G  | 0.001 | 0.001 | 0.001 | 0.001 | 0.001 |      |
+----+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+
| RM | 0,001 | 0.001 | 0.001 | 0.001 | 0.00! | 0.01 |
+----+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+------+

Note. n.s., not significant; 7, identity; 7, translations; R, rotations; S, screw displacements; M, reflections; G, glide reflections; RM, rotary reflections. 

ANALYSIS OF MENTAL SPACE ISOMETRIES 

415 

’ 

==> picture [246 x 87] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
RT(E*)
RT (1)(1! ———arT(T)- (T) ——____——or RT(E)
RT(T UC)
----- End of picture text -----

Fic. 9. An ordering of reaction time as a function of space isometry normal subgroups. The reaction time of a space isometry subgroup on the left is shorter than the reaction time of a subgroup on the right. Note. n.s., not significant. 

and translation. In that study, we used a sample size of 72, and correct response as a behavioral measure for recognition of two two-dimensional shapes. The discrimination task also differed: the previous experimental task was a one-stimulus task where subjects compared the test stimuli with a standard stimulus stored in memory, and the locations of the standard stimulus and test stimuli coincide, except for stimuli involving translation. In the two-stimulus task of the present study, both standard and test stimuli appeared on the screen side by side with a space separation subtending a visual angle of 6°22’. 

Results Confirming Group Model. The significant differences between mean reaction times for subjects to determine the transformations of forms in groups J, T, E*, TUC, and E were tested by two-tailed ¢ test. These results are summarized in a diagram corresponding to our group model in Fig. 9. The results provide three monotonic increasing sequences. The decimals indicate the levels of significance. RTU)= RIT) < RI(E*) < RTE), 0.001 0.001 RT(1)=RT(T) < RT(E), 0.001 RT) RI(T) < RI(TUC) < RICE). 0.001 0.602 

The diagram in Fig. 9 is isomorphic to the hierarchical structure of the normal subgroups in Fig.3 which is the group model we constructed. Not shown on the diagram is a significant difference (p<0.001) between reaction times for forms in groups E* and TuUC. 

D. Discussion 

Surface Features of Two-Dimensional Projections. The reaction time depends almost entirely on the angle of the orientational difference between the two portrayed objects in three-dimensional space. The degree of similarity between the two perspective pictures, taken as two-dimensional patterns, seems to have little effect. Metzler and Shepard (1974) showed that the reaction times for depth pairs, differing by the same angle in three-dimensional space, were not significantly longer for pairs in which the two-dimensional pictures were topologically widely different 

416 

CHEN AND CHEN 

than for paris in which the pictures were topologically the same. The 120° and 180° rotations of both our standard forms would carry their two-dimensional projections through what Metzler and Shepard (1974) called singularity. With a singularity, these rotations, if carried out, would pass through a singular orientation in which certain surfaces of the object coincide with the line of sight. At this point of rotation, certain parts of these surfaces may be hidden from view while other surfaces emerge in view. Rotation of 60° of both standard forms encounter no singularity. Iliustrations of these cases are shown in Figs. 6 and 7. The mean reaction times for 0, 60, 120, and 180° were 1.33, 1.90, 2.19, and 2.45 s, respectively. They are significantly different by ¢ test (p <0.01 or p<0.05). Both 120° and 180° rotations crossed a singularity and there was a mean increase of 260 ms reaction time which could be attributed to an angular increase of 60°. Rotations of 0° and 60° did not cross any singularity, and mean increase in reaction time was 570 ms. Therefore, there was a consistent 60° angular increase ranging from ‘260 to 570 ms, regardless of whether the rotation crossed a singularity. All 12 subjects showed an increase from 0° to 60°; nine out of 12 subjects showed an increase from 60° to 120° and from 120° to 180°. When the two factors of discontinuity for two-dimensional projection and rotation of the three-dimensional object were pitted against each other, i.e., 60° and 120°, there was only a mean increase in reaction time of 290 ms. This reaction time should be longer if we expect an increase due to the addition of crossing of a singularity. Furthermore, subjects reported that they performed imagined rotations on the two-dimensional drawings as objects in three-dimensional space. 

The most striking evidence that the surface features of the two-dimensional pictures were unimportant was provided by Metzler and Shepard (1974). They showed that the slope of the reaction-time function was just as large for pairs differing by a simple rigid rotation of one of the pictures within its own picture plane as for pairs differing by the much more complex transformation of one of the two-dimensional pictures that is induced by a rotation of the three-dimensional object in depth. They further indicated that the two isometric versions, oriented in such a way as to project very similarly shaped two-dimensional patterns, always led to the response of “different.” 

A very recent experiment by Niall and MacNamara (1990) had observers match or reproduce abstract planar shapes under conditions of rotation in the picture plane and pictured rotation in depth. Departure from projective equivalence was assessed by measuring the planar analogue of cross ratio. They concluded that ordinary observers are not sensitive to projective invariance for itself; an observer sees the geometric properties of external objects, not the geometric properties of images on the retina. They believe that the deeply rooted tradition of explaining shape constancy by resorting to projective invariance has no adequate empirical support. 

All of the above evidence and an increasing body of empirical findings against the’ traditional projective theory of shape constancy seem to be consistent with the notion that the subjects were performing their mental operations upon internal 

ANALYSIS OF MENTAL SPACE ISOMETRIES 

417 

representations. These representations were analogous to the three-dimensional objects portrayed in the two-dimensional pictures rather than to the twodimensional pictures actually presented. 

Internal Representation of the Group Model. Our results seem to place some significant abstract constraints on the nature of the representation, even though it cannot provide anything specific about the representation of three-dimensional objects at the neurophysiological level. The most important of these is that the “internal model” embodies important structural features of the three-dimensional object that are not manifest in the two-dimensional projection of that object on the retina, whereas the features peculiar to this two-dimensional projection seem to have little influence on the internal process. This conclusion supports previous studies (Metzler & Shepard, 1974). 

The structural features of isometry groups intimately linked to perceptual properties are sense, verticality, uprightness, and position. The sense of an object, say, a tetrahedron XYYZW, can be defined as right or left according to whether a righthand screw moves toward or away from the vertex W when piercing the plane XYZ along the altitude to W, and when rotated in the direction ¥-— Y-Z—YX. Figure 10 illustrates a right-hand tetrahedron. For brevity, we call the right sense of a tetrahedron the sense. An isometry that maps tetrahedron YYZW to tetrahedron X’Y'Z’W’ is called direct or opposite according to whether the two congruent tetrahedrons have the same or different senses (Dodge, 1972). Corresponding to this structural property of the sense of an identity object is the perceptual experience of the sense of the object. Mirror images of the identity object reverse its sense. 

The verticality property of an object refers to any line parallel to the vertical axis of a Cartesian coordinate system imposed on the object. The verticality has no specification of top/bottom of an object. If the top and bottom are assigned to an object and their locations are exchanged, the verticality of the object is preserved. Physical objects are perceived with respect to a cognitive coordinate system which consists of at least an implicit origin and some directional axes. The existence of a cognitive coordinate system has been demonstrated by research on the recognition 

==> picture [10 x 8] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
WwW
----- End of picture text -----

==> picture [104 x 84] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
|
:
----- End of picture text -----

Z 

Fic. 10. A right-hand tetrahedron. 

418 

CHEN AND CHEN 

of objects that have previously been seen from a different perspective (Marr, 1982; Rock, 1973). Another series of studies attempted to discover the determinants of the vertical axis of the cognitive coordinate system in a mental rotation task. The subjects tilt their heads in some conditions to dissociate the retinal upright from the gravitational upright (Corballis, Zbrodoff, & Roldan, 1976). They showed that reaction time is shorter if the major axis of one of the figures to be compared coincides with the major axis of the cognitive coordinate system. For forms with no intrinsic upright but with a clear structural dimensionality, the gravitational upright was used as the vertical axis. In our present study, perceptual verticality refers to the cognitive vertical axis of the standard form chosen by the subject and is similar to the geometric axis which has no assignment of top/bottom of an object. 

Rock (1973) has shown that the environmentally upright rather than the retinally upright version is generally recognized. In other words, retinal disorientation does not prevent recognition, but environmental disorientation does. The present experiment is based on the notion that the subject will assume that the standard form being shown on the screen is upright. This means that the top of the figure is the region uppermost on the screen, and the bottom, left, right, front, and back of the form are then assigned accordingly. The perceptual property of uprightness, therefore, means assignment of top/bottom to the standard form with reference to the environment. To maintain uprightness, the top/bottom must be preserved. This property differs from verticality where top/bottom need not be preserved. Finally, the property of position refers to the location of the object on the screen. The linkage of these perceptual properties to structural features of isometry groups is shown as follows: object forms that differ in sense are related by a reflection in a plane; those that differ in verticality are related by a rotation about a line; those that differ in uprightness (0° rotation) are again related by a rotation about a line; and those that differ in position are related by a translation along a line. Figure 3 shows the structure of normal subgroups of the space isometry group, and the preservation of the above four perceptual properties by various subgroups of the space isometry group; e.g., E* and its subgroups T and / preserve sense, TUC and its subgroups 7 and / preserve verticality, and T and its subgroup / preserve uprightness in addition to sense and verticality. Subgroup I alone preserves position in addition to uprightness, sense, and verticality. Notice that our results showed that the reaction time for E* was less than TUC, indicating the importance of the property of sense over verticality. All these mean that objects having the same shape are related to each other by transformations of the Euclidean isometry group: translation, rotation, reflection, and their composites. These are the transformational underpinnings of shape constancy in three-dimensional space. In other words, objects have the “same shape” in three-dimensional space if they can be made to coincide by a set of transformations. 

Our group model fits into a class of theory called reference frame theory (Leyton, 1986a, 1986b; Palmer, 1983; Rock, 1973), because it suggests that our visual system constructs descriptions of objects or events in relation to background structure that resembles a reference frame in analytic geometry. We postulate that each of the four 

ANALYSIS OF MENTAL SPACE ISOMETRIES 

419 

perceptual properties, sense, verticality, uprightness, and position, has its own subframes which are part of the main frame of reference. Each normal subgroup selects and brings out a particular subframe to describe shape in the simplest way. The internal representation is therefore a relatively abstract scheme that is partially isomorphic to the spatial structure of the external object. The representation resembles a “program” with “subroutine” that can be executed in various ways in order to recognize the identity of an object. Spatial transformations using appropriate subframes are a succession of adjustments that progressively alter the properties of the representation, while leaving invariant the properties corresponding to the object’s structure. The successive adjustments are in the order toward stability or more information of space isometries. The results of reaction times of space isometries reflect the order of stability. Identity is the most stable, since all four perceptual properties are preserved, and rotary reflection is the least stable since none of the four perceptual properties are preserved. To demonstrate an application of our group model, we select a screw displacement, which is an isometry from the input group. A screw displacement tp, a product of a rotation p and a translation 7, belongs to the direct isometry group E*. The human visual system tends to remove first the less stable rotation. The removal of rotation extracts the translation, thereby bringing out the subframe of uprightness of the object. The next cognitive sequence is the removal of translation and the extraction of the identity group, which brings out the main frame itself. These cognitive processes of removing instabilities employ the inverse transformations: t~'p~'pt =1. 

The above cognitive processes executed are illustrated as 

+-----------------------+----------------+
| Normal subgroups      | l<Takt,        |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Removal of isometries | ieterp,        |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Subframes             | position       |
|                       | —_uprightness. |
+-----------------------+----------------+

E. Conclusions 

Our results contribute additional support for the conclusions already advanced by other studies (Shepard & Cooper, 1982; Shepard & Metzler, 1971). Specifically, reaction time increases linearly with angular differences in orientation and subjects arrive at their judgments of sameness and difference in this discrimination task by carrying out an internal process upon an internal representation that is more akin to the three-dimensional object portrayed in the perspective picture. 

The experimental findings validate the group model with the exception of the identity and translation groups. Our findings showed that recognition of shape depends on preservation of the perceptual properties in isometry groups in the order of uprightness, sense, verticality, and position, Preservation of uprightness in objects provides an observer with the best condition for shape recognition, followed by preservation of sense, and then the preservation of verticality, while the effect of position is not strong. 

420 

CHEN AND CHEN 

REFERENCES 

CAELLI, T., HOFFMAN, W. C., & Linpman, H. (1978a). Apparent motion: Self-excited oscillations induced by neuronal flaws. In E. L. J. Leeuwenberg & H. F. J. M. Buffart (Eds.), Formal theories of visual perception (pp. 103-116), New York: Wiley. 

CaAELLI, T., HOFFMAN, W. C., &Lindman, H. (1978b). Subjective Lorentz transformations of the perception of motion. Journal of the Optical Society of America, 68, 402-411. CarLTon, E. H., & SHEPARD, R. N. (1990a). Psychologically simple motions as geodesic paths: I. Asymmetric objects. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 34, 127-188. CARLTON, E. H., & SHEPARD, R. N. (1990b). Psychologically simple motions as geodesic paths: II, Symmetric objects. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 34, 189-228. CassirEr, E. (1944). The concept of group and the theory of perception. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 5, 1-35. (Original French version published 1938). 

CHEN, M. T., & Cen, K. C. (1982). A transformational analysis of form recognition under plane isometries. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 26 (3), 237-251. 

CHEN, M. T., & CHEN, K. C. (1987). A group mode! of form recognition under plane similarity transformations. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 30 (4), 321-337. CorBALLIS, M. C., ZBroporF, J., & RoLpAN, E. E. (1976). What’s in mental rotation? Perception & Psychophysics, 19, 525-530. 

Dopce, C. W. (1972). Euclidean geometry and transformations. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. HERSTEIN, I. N. (1964). Topics in algebra. New York: Blaisdell. 

HoremMan, W. C. (1966). The Lie algebra of visual perception. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 3, 65-98. Just, M. C., & CARPENTER, P. (1985). Cognitive coordinate system: Accounts of mental rotation and individual differences in spatial ability. Psychological Review, 92, 137~171. Kein, F. (1893). A comparative review of recent researches in geometry (D. W. Haskell, Trans.). Bulletin of the New York Mathematical Society, 2, 215-249. ; Leyton, M. (1986a). A theory of information structure: I. General principles. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 30, 103-160. 

Leyton, M. (1986b). A theory of information structure: II. A theory of perceptual organization. Journa/ of Mathematical Psychology, 30, 257-305. Marg, D. (1982). Vision. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman. Martin, G. E. (1986). Transformation geometry: An introduction to symmetry. New York: Springer-Verlag. METZzLER, J., & SHEPARD, R. N. (1974). Transformational studies of the internal representation of threedimensional objects. In R.Solso (Ed.}, Theories of cognitive psychology: The Loyola Symposium (pp. 147-201). Ptomac, MD: Erlbaum. NIALL, K. K., & MacNamara, J. (1990). Projective invariance and picture perception. Perception, 19, 637-660. Paumer, S. E. (1983). The psychology of perceptual organization: A transformational approach. In J. Beck, B. Hope, & A. Rosenfeld (Eds.), Human and machine vision. New York: Academic Press. Rock, 1. (1973). Orientation and form. New York: Academic Press. Rotman, J. J. (1968). The theory of groups: An introduction, Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 

SHEPARD, R. N. & Cooper, L. (1982). Mental images and their transformations. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. SHEPARD, R. N., & Metzler, J. (1971). Mental rotation in three-dimensional objects, Science, 171, 701-703. WeyL, H. (1952). Symmetry. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press. 

RECEIVED: September 23, 1991 

