10.1006/jmps.1995.1029
JOURNAL OF MATHEMATICAL PSYCHOLOGY 39, 285-314 (1995) 

Decompositions of Response Times: an Almost General Theory* 

EHTIBAR N. DZHAFAROV 

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 

AND 

RICHARD SCHWEICKERT 

Purdue University 

TO 

MOHEering work: the problem is that of decomposing response time (RT) into component durations selectively influenced by different external variables (factors). A prototypical example is the familiar additive decomposition of RT into stochastically independent selectively influenced ts Let Td t b ble RT d componen S- et eno € an observa e » @ rancor variable (simple RT, choice RT for a given response or aggregated over several responses). Let the distribution of T depend on two factors, « and B, all other external variables being fixed or counterbalanced across trials: T=T(a B) hat the RTi ti is additivel d able e say tha u e in question 18 acditive ¥y ecomposa © into stochastically independent and selectively influenced component times A= A(a«) and B=B({), if the following three assumptions hold. 

Response time (RT} whose distribution depends on two external factors can sometimes be presented as an algebraic combination oftwo random variables, component times, each of which is selectively influenced by one of these factors. The algebraic operation connecting these component times {such as addition or “minimum of the two”’} is referred to as the decompositionrule.We consider a broad subclass of associative and commutative decomposition rules, and for any operation from this subclass we construct a decomposition test, a relationship between observable RTs that must hold if these RTs are decomposable by meansofthis operation. The decomposition tests are constructed under the assumption that RT components are either W stochastically independent or perfectly positively stochastically interdependent (in which case they are increasing functions of acommon random variable). The decomposition tests generalize the summation test proposed by Ashby & Townsend (1980) and Roberts & Sternberg {1992) for additive decompositions into stochastically independent components.Under the assumption of perfect positive stochastic interbut also sufficient for the RT decomposability by means of the corresponding operation. Under the assumption of stochastic independence, it is possible that a decomposition test is successful but RTs on f). cannot be decomposed by any operation. Under both assumptions, however, a successful decomposition test recovers the true decomposition rule essentially uniquely. For a given decomposition rule, the component times themselves cannot be determined uniquely, and the stochastic relationship between them generally has to be assumed rather than recovered from the decomposition tests. © 3995 Academic Press,[Inc.] ee 

(i) Selective influence assumption: the (distributions and B, respectively (so that B does not depend ona, or A on f). 

(i1) Stochastic independence assumption. for any given values of a and B the random variables A( ax) and B B) are tochastically j de dent stochastically independent. 

(iii) Additive decomposition rule assumption: the observable RT To 8) is distributed as A(a) + B p) $ el > . 

The conjunction of these three assumptions can be referred to as the (principal) architecture of the RT in question. A concise representation of this architecture is provided by the formula 

1, INTRODUCTION 

This paper deals with one of the classical problems of responseP time analysis,ysis, dating dating back to Sternberg’sBs (1969)(1969 

==> picture [175 x 16] <==

Correspondence and reprint requests should be addressed to E. N. Dzhafarov, Department of Psychology, University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, 603 E. Daniel St, Champaign, IL 61820. 

where the symbol a should be read “is distributed as,” the symbol | indicates stochastic independence, and the rand ‘ables T. A dB dtod donl om varlables 2B, A, an are assumed TO epen only on those factors that are explicitly shown as their arguments. (The reason for using the equidistribution symbol = rather 

* Fhe authors are indebted to Lee Rubel and Donald Burkholder for many fruitful discussions of the mathematical issues involved. Donald Burkholder has also provided the proof of one of the lemmas in Appendix A. 

285 

0022-2496/95 $12.00 

480/39/3-4 

All rightsCopyright of reproduction © 1995 by Ac in a nydemic form Press, reserved Inc . 

286 

DZHAFAROV AND SCHWEICKERT 

than a numerical equality = will be explained later; it should be noted now that the two must not be confused.) Due to the obvious interpretation of the additive decomposition rule as reflecting a physical concatenation of processes in time, this architecture is commonly referred to as “serial” (with stochastically independent components). Replacing in the formulation above the operation + with the operations max (“maximum of”) or min (“minimum of”), one gets two other familiar architectures, commonly referred to as “parallel” ones (with stochastically independent components): 

==> picture [214 x 36] <==

Most of the previous studies of RT decompositions have been confined to these three architectures. 

In this paper the notion ofaRT decomposition into selectively influenced components is extended along two dimensions. First, we incorporate, within a unified theoretical framework, architectures that widely differ in their decomposition rule, the mathematical operation connecting hypothetical component times A(«) and B(f). Among logically possible decomposition rules we focus specifically on a broad subclass of commutative and associative operations, termed simple operations. This subclass includes the traditional operations of arithmetic addition, minimum, and maximum as special cases, but it also includes a variety of beentheoretically previouslyinteresting considereddecomposition in the context rules of that RT have analysis, not such as “Minkowski-norm” decompositions, 

==> picture [174 x 20] <==

and multiplicative decompositions, 

==> picture [140 x 24] <==

We propose an interpretation of RT components that naturally leads to decomposition rules other than the familiar “serial” and “parallel” connections. In this interpretation, component times A(a) and B(f) reflect certain “properties,” rather than “parts” of a hypothetical process evoked by a signal and developing until it reaches a preset criterion level (Dzhafarov, 1993). 

Second, our analysis is not confined to stochastically independent component times exclusively. Stochastic independence of component times by no means follows from their being selectively influenced by different factors. The essence of our approach to this issue, derived from Dzhafarov (1992), is that A(a} and B(f) are selectively 

influenced (by a and f, respectively) if, and only if, the proposition , 

==> picture [150 x 23] <==

holds for their joint distribution, where A and B are some functions, whereas (X, Y) is a pair of random variables (“internal sources of variability”) whose joint distribution does not depend on the factors « and £. Stochastic independence, A(x) | B(f), is obtained as a special case, by assuming that the internal sources of variability are themselves stochastically independent, X 1 Y. 

The analytic tools used in this paper, however, are not powerful enough to allow us to operate with arbitrary joint distributions of the internal sources of variability, (X, Y). "stead we contrast stochastic independence with only the simplest case of stochastic interdependence, termed perfect PoSitive stochastic interdependence. This is obtained by _4SSuming that the two component durations have one com™on source of variability, X = Y, whereas both functions 4 40d B increase with the value of X. In this case (generalizing the “single-variate RT decomposition model,” Dzhafarov, 1992), the component times A(a) and B({) are increasing functions of each other, for any given values ofa and f: we denote this relationshipby A(«) || B(8). 

Thus, the focus of this paper is on the RT architectures representable as 

==> picture [180 x 22] <==

or 

==> picture [174 x 20] <==

where @ is an operation chosen from the subclass of associative and commutative operations mentioned earlier. 

The principal point of interest is, of course, whether and _ . how such a RT architecture can be empirically recovered, based on a relationship between observable RT distributions only. Ashby & Townsend (1980) proposed a simple empirical procedure that, if not successful, proves that the RT cannot be additively decomposed into stochastically independent components. Later this procedure was subjected to a thorough experimental analysis by Roberts & Sternberg (1992), as the “summation test.” We show in this paper that analogous tests can be constructed for all simple operations (in fact, all associative and commutative operations) connecting A{a) and B(f), under both stochastic independence, A(x) | B(#), and perfect positive stochastic interdependence, A(«) || B( 8). We term the variety of these tests the decomposition tests, and this paper is dedicated to studying their most basic properties. 

DECOMPOSITIONS OF RESPONSE TIMES 

287 

Logically, a decomposition test constructed for a specific 2. STRUCTURE OF THE PAPER AND TECHNICALITIES simple operation (say, +) and for one of the two forms of stochastic relationship (1 or ||} is a necessary condition for In Section 3 we discuss the original Ashby-Townsend- 3 we discuss the original Ashby-Townsend- we discuss the original Ashby-Townsend- discuss the original Ashby-Townsend- the original Ashby-Townsend- original Ashby-Townsend- Ashby-Townsendthe existence of the corresponding architecture (in this Roberts—Sternberg summation test as a necessary condition summation test as a necessary condition test as a necessary condition as a necessary condition a necessary condition necessary condition condition example, a “serial” architecture with the same stochastic for an additive decomposition of RT into stochastically an additive decomposition of RT into stochastically additive decomposition of RT into stochastically decomposition of RT into stochastically of RT into stochastically RT into stochastically into stochastically relationship). The aim of this study is to investigate whether independent components. In Section 4 we introduce the components. In Section 4 we introduce the In Section 4 we introduce the Section 4 we introduce the 4 we introduce the we introduce the introduce the the and under which conditions sucha test is also sufficient for concept of a simple operation and construct decomposition of a simple operation and construct decomposition simple operation and construct decomposition operation and construct decomposition and construct decomposition construct decomposition decomposition the existence of the corresponding decomposition, as wellas tests, analogous to the summation test, as necessary condi- analogous to the summation test, as necessary condi- to the summation test, as necessary condi- the summation test, as necessary condi- summation test, as necessary condi- test, as necessary condi- as necessary condi- necessary condi- condiwhether and under which conditions the decomposition rule — tions for decomposability involving any of such operations is identified by the test uniguely. This investigation 1s con(including, notably, the operations of maximum and mini- notably, the operations of maximum and mini- the operations of maximum and mini- operations of maximum and mini- of maximum and mini- maximum and mini- and mini- miniducted with no a priori constraints imposed on observable mum that have been previously characterized only by the that have been previously characterized only by the have been previously characterized only by the been previously characterized only by the previously characterized only by the characterized only by the only by the by the the RT distributions (which makes the results potentially applipattern of failure of the original summation test, with no failure of the original summation test, with no of the original summation test, with no the original summation test, with no original summation test, with no summation test, with no test, with no with no no cable to decompositions of random variables in empirical tests specifically designed for “parallel” architectures). In specifically designed for “parallel” architectures). In designed for “parallel” architectures). In for “parallel” architectures). In “parallel” architectures). In architectures). In In domains other than RT). . Section 5 we study the uniqueness-of-identification problem 5 we study the uniqueness-of-identification problem we study the uniqueness-of-identification problem study the uniqueness-of-identification problem the uniqueness-of-identification problem uniqueness-of-identification problem problem 

In Section 3 we discuss the original Ashby-Townsend- 3 we discuss the original Ashby-Townsend- we discuss the original Ashby-Townsend- discuss the original Ashby-Townsend- the original Ashby-Townsend- original Ashby-Townsend- Ashby-TownsendRoberts—Sternberg summation test as a necessary condition summation test as a necessary condition test as a necessary condition as a necessary condition a necessary condition necessary condition condition for an additive decomposition of RT into stochastically an additive decomposition of RT into stochastically additive decomposition of RT into stochastically decomposition of RT into stochastically of RT into stochastically RT into stochastically into stochastically independent components. In Section 4 we introduce the components. In Section 4 we introduce the In Section 4 we introduce the Section 4 we introduce the 4 we introduce the we introduce the introduce the the concept of a simple operation and construct decomposition of a simple operation and construct decomposition simple operation and construct decomposition operation and construct decomposition and construct decomposition construct decomposition decomposition tests, analogous to the summation test, as necessary condi- analogous to the summation test, as necessary condi- to the summation test, as necessary condi- the summation test, as necessary condi- summation test, as necessary condi- test, as necessary condi- as necessary condi- necessary condi- condirule — tions for decomposability involving any of such operations — tions for decomposability involving any of such operations tions for decomposability involving any of such operations for decomposability involving any of such operations decomposability involving any of such operations involving any of such operations any of such operations of such operations such operations operations (including, notably, the operations of maximum and mini- notably, the operations of maximum and mini- the operations of maximum and mini- operations of maximum and mini- of maximum and mini- maximum and mini- and mini- minimum that have been previously characterized only by the that have been previously characterized only by the have been previously characterized only by the been previously characterized only by the previously characterized only by the characterized only by the only by the by the the pattern of failure of the original summation test, with no failure of the original summation test, with no of the original summation test, with no the original summation test, with no original summation test, with no summation test, with no test, with no with no no tests specifically designed for “parallel” architectures). In specifically designed for “parallel” architectures). In designed for “parallel” architectures). In for “parallel” architectures). In “parallel” architectures). In architectures). In In Section 5 we study the uniqueness-of-identification problem 5 we study the uniqueness-of-identification problem we study the uniqueness-of-identification problem study the uniqueness-of-identification problem the uniqueness-of-identification problem uniqueness-of-identification problem problem for simple operations under the assumption of stochastic simple operations under the assumption of stochastic operations under the assumption of stochastic under the assumption of stochastic the assumption of stochastic assumption of stochastic of stochastic stochastic independence. We show that a simple operation is identified We show that a simple operation is identified show that a simple operation is identified that a simple operation is identified a simple operation is identified simple operation is identified operation is identified is identified identified uniquely among among all “algebraically distinct” competing simple operations. Note that the uniqueness of identifica- operations. Note that the uniqueness of identifica- Note that the uniqueness of identifica- that the uniqueness of identifica- the uniqueness of identifica- uniqueness of identifica- of identifica- identification does not imply that the identified architecture exists: it does not imply that the identified architecture exists: it not imply that the identified architecture exists: it imply that the identified architecture exists: it that the identified architecture exists: it identified architecture exists: it architecture exists: it exists: it it only rules out other, competing architectures. In Section 6 rules out other, competing architectures. In Section 6 out other, competing architectures. In Section 6 other, competing architectures. In Section 6 competing architectures. In Section 6 architectures. In Section 6 In Section 6 we point out that a wide variety of stochastic relationships point out that a wide variety of stochastic relationships out that a wide variety of stochastic relationships that a wide variety of stochastic relationships a wide variety of stochastic relationships wide variety of stochastic relationships variety of stochastic relationships of stochastic relationships stochastic relationships relationships between component times are consistent with their being component times are consistent with their being times are consistent with their being are consistent with their being consistent with their being with their being their being being selectively influenced by different factors, and we introduce influenced by different factors, and we introduce by different factors, and we introduce different factors, and we introduce factors, and we introduce and we introduce we introduce introduce the second (after stochastic independence) focal relation- second (after stochastic independence) focal relation- (after stochastic independence) focal relation- stochastic independence) focal relation- independence) focal relation- focal relationship: perfect positive stochastic interdependence. We show perfect positive stochastic interdependence. We show stochastic interdependence. We show interdependence. We show We show show in the same section that decomposition tests involving the same section that decomposition tests involving same section that decomposition tests involving section that decomposition tests involving that decomposition tests involving decomposition tests involving tests involving involving simple operations can also be constructed operations can also be constructed can also be constructed also be constructed be constructed constructed for perfectly perfectly positively stochastically interdependent component times, interdependent component times, component times, times, that these tests are necessary conditions for the existence tests are necessary conditions for the existence are necessary conditions for the existence necessary conditions for the existence for the existence the existence existence of the corresponding architectures, and that the decom- the corresponding architectures, and that the decom- corresponding architectures, and that the decom- architectures, and that the decom- and that the decom- that the decom- the decom- decomposition rules are identified by these tests uniquely (or rules are identified by these tests uniquely (or are identified by these tests uniquely (or identified by these tests uniquely (or by these tests uniquely (or these tests uniquely (or tests uniquely (or uniquely (or (or “essentially” uniquely). In Section 7 we turn to the problem uniquely). In Section 7 we turn to the problem In Section 7 we turn to the problem Section 7 we turn to the problem we turn to the problem turn to the problem to the problem the problem problem of the existence of an architecture the existence of an architecture existence of an architecture of an architecture an architecture architecture if the corresponding the corresponding corresponding decomposition test is successful. We show that the existence test is successful. We show that the existence is successful. We show that the existence successful. We show that the existence We show that the existence show that the existence that the existence the existence existence is guaranteed under the assumption of perfect positive guaranteed under the assumption of perfect positive under the assumption of perfect positive the assumption of perfect positive assumption of perfect positive of perfect positive perfect positive positive stochastic interdependence, but that under the assumption interdependence, but that under the assumption but that under the assumption that under the assumption under the assumption the assumption assumption of stochastic independence it is guaranteed only in the case stochastic independence it is guaranteed only in the case independence it is guaranteed only in the case it is guaranteed only in the case is guaranteed only in the case guaranteed only in the case only in the case in the case the case case of “min-parallel” and “max-parallel” architectures (and even “min-parallel” and “max-parallel” architectures (and even and “max-parallel” architectures (and even “max-parallel” architectures (and even architectures (and even (and even even then, only if we allow for “incomplete” random variables only if we allow for “incomplete” random variables if we allow for “incomplete” random variables we allow for “incomplete” random variables allow for “incomplete” random variables for “incomplete” random variables “incomplete” random variables random variables variables as component component times). For For all other simple operations {including the traditional “serial” one, with stochastically traditional “serial” one, with stochastically “serial” one, with stochastically one, with stochastically with stochastically stochastically independent components) a decomposition test may very components) a decomposition test may very a decomposition test may very decomposition test may very test may very may very very well be be successful while no corresponding decomposi- no corresponding decomposi- corresponding decomposi- decomposition of RTs is possible. We also show that the two forms of RTs is possible. We also show that the two forms RTs is possible. We also show that the two forms is possible. We also show that the two forms possible. We also show that the two forms We also show that the two forms also show that the two forms show that the two forms that the two forms the two forms two forms forms of stochastic relationship considered in this paper, stochastic independence and independence and and perfect positive stochastic interdependence, are not uniquely recovered by the decom- are not uniquely recovered by the decom- not uniquely recovered by the decom- uniquely recovered by the decom- recovered by the decom- by the decom- the decom- decomposition tests: generally, they have to be assumed rather tests: generally, they have to be assumed rather generally, they have to be assumed rather they have to be assumed rather have to be assumed rather to be assumed rather be assumed rather assumed rather rather than found out. In Section found out. In Section out. In Section In Section 8 we show how the concept of we show how the concept of how the concept of the concept of concept of of a RT decomposition into selectively influenced component RT decomposition into selectively influenced component decomposition into selectively influenced component into selectively influenced component selectively influenced component influenced component component times can be interpreted to make all simple compositions can be interpreted to make all simple compositions be interpreted to make all simple compositions interpreted to make all simple compositions make all simple compositions all simple compositions simple compositions compositions a priori equally “realistic.” The concluding section briefly summarizes the main summarizes the main the main main results established in this established in this in this this paper. 

We show that under the assumption of stochastic indefor simple operations under the assumption of stochastic simple operations under the assumption of stochastic operations under the assumption of stochastic under the assumption of stochastic the assumption of stochastic assumption of stochastic of stochastic stochastic pendence, A(a) 1 B(f), a decomposition test constructed independence. We show that a simple operation is identified We show that a simple operation is identified show that a simple operation is identified that a simple operation is identified a simple operation is identified simple operation is identified operation is identified is identified identified for a specific simple operation, if successful, is not generally uniquely among among all “algebraically distinct” competing sufficient for the existence of the corresponding architecture. simple operations. Note that the uniqueness of identifica- operations. Note that the uniqueness of identifica- Note that the uniqueness of identifica- that the uniqueness of identifica- the uniqueness of identifica- uniqueness of identifica- of identifica- identificaIf, for example, observable RTs T(a, £), for several approtion does not imply that the identified architecture exists: it does not imply that the identified architecture exists: it not imply that the identified architecture exists: it imply that the identified architecture exists: it that the identified architecture exists: it identified architecture exists: it architecture exists: it exists: it it priately chosen values of a and f, satisfy the original Ashby-__ only rules out other, competing architectures. In Section 6 rules out other, competing architectures. In Section 6 out other, competing architectures. In Section 6 other, competing architectures. In Section 6 competing architectures. In Section 6 architectures. In Section 6 In Section 6 Townsend—Roberts-Sternberg summation test, these RTs we point out that a wide variety of stochastic relationships point out that a wide variety of stochastic relationships out that a wide variety of stochastic relationships that a wide variety of stochastic relationships a wide variety of stochastic relationships wide variety of stochastic relationships variety of stochastic relationships of stochastic relationships stochastic relationships relationships nevertheless may be indecomposable into sums of selecbetween component times are consistent with their being component times are consistent with their being times are consistent with their being are consistent with their being consistent with their being with their being their being being tively influenced stochastically independent component _ selectively influenced by different factors, and we introduce influenced by different factors, and we introduce by different factors, and we introduce different factors, and we introduce factors, and we introduce and we introduce we introduce introduce times. We show, however, that no two tests designed fortwo the second (after stochastic independence) focal relation- second (after stochastic independence) focal relation- (after stochastic independence) focal relation- stochastic independence) focal relation- independence) focal relation- focal relationdifferent simple operations can be successful simultaneously ship: perfect positive stochastic interdependence. We show perfect positive stochastic interdependence. We show stochastic interdependence. We show interdependence. We show We show show (with rather mild constraints imposed on the relationship in the same section that decomposition tests involving the same section that decomposition tests involving same section that decomposition tests involving section that decomposition tests involving that decomposition tests involving decomposition tests involving tests involving involving between these operations). This means that, under the simple operations can also be constructed operations can also be constructed can also be constructed also be constructed be constructed constructed for perfectly perfectly assumption of stochastic independence, a successful decompositively stochastically interdependent component times, interdependent component times, component times, times, position test identifies the decomposition rule in the RT that these tests are necessary conditions for the existence tests are necessary conditions for the existence are necessary conditions for the existence necessary conditions for the existence for the existence the existence existence architecture uniquely, if this architecture exists at all (which of the corresponding architectures, and that the decom- the corresponding architectures, and that the decom- corresponding architectures, and that the decom- architectures, and that the decom- and that the decom- that the decom- the decom- decomthe test generally does not guarantee). position rules are identified by these tests uniquely (or rules are identified by these tests uniquely (or are identified by these tests uniquely (or identified by these tests uniquely (or by these tests uniquely (or these tests uniquely (or tests uniquely (or uniquely (or (or 

The situation is much simpler under the assumption of “essentially” uniquely). In Section 7 we turn to the problem uniquely). In Section 7 we turn to the problem In Section 7 we turn to the problem Section 7 we turn to the problem we turn to the problem turn to the problem to the problem the problem problem perfect positive stochastic interdependence, A(a)||B(f). of the existence of an architecture the existence of an architecture existence of an architecture of an architecture an architecture architecture if the corresponding the corresponding corresponding Here, a successful decomposition test constructed for a decomposition test is successful. We show that the existence test is successful. We show that the existence is successful. We show that the existence successful. We show that the existence We show that the existence show that the existence that the existence the existence existence specific simple operation is always both necessary and sufis guaranteed under the assumption of perfect positive guaranteed under the assumption of perfect positive under the assumption of perfect positive the assumption of perfect positive assumption of perfect positive of perfect positive perfect positive positive ficient for the existence of the corresponding architecture. At stochastic interdependence, but that under the assumption interdependence, but that under the assumption but that under the assumption that under the assumption under the assumption the assumption assumption the same time, for all practical purposes (the precise meanof stochastic independence it is guaranteed only in the case stochastic independence it is guaranteed only in the case independence it is guaranteed only in the case it is guaranteed only in the case is guaranteed only in the case guaranteed only in the case only in the case in the case the case case ing of which will be explained later), the decomposition rule — of “min-parallel” and “max-parallel” architectures (and even “min-parallel” and “max-parallel” architectures (and even and “max-parallel” architectures (and even “max-parallel” architectures (and even architectures (and even (and even even here is identified by the test as uniquely as in the indethen, only if we allow for “incomplete” random variables only if we allow for “incomplete” random variables if we allow for “incomplete” random variables we allow for “incomplete” random variables allow for “incomplete” random variables for “incomplete” random variables “incomplete” random variables random variables variables pendence case, under the same mild constraints imposed on as component component times). For For all other simple operations the algebraic relationship between “competing” operations. {including the traditional “serial” one, with stochastically traditional “serial” one, with stochastically “serial” one, with stochastically one, with stochastically with stochastically stochastically A unique recovery of the decomposition rule under the independent components) a decomposition test may very components) a decomposition test may very a decomposition test may very decomposition test may very test may very may very very assumption of either stochastic independence or perfect well be be successful while no corresponding decomposi- no corresponding decomposi- corresponding decomposi- decomposipositive stochastic interdependence does not mean that tion of RTs is possible. We also show that the two forms of RTs is possible. We also show that the two forms RTs is possible. We also show that the two forms is possible. We also show that the two forms possible. We also show that the two forms We also show that the two forms also show that the two forms show that the two forms that the two forms the two forms two forms forms the component times themselves, A(x) and B(f), can be of stochastic relationship considered in this paper, reconstructed uniquely (the opposite is de facto true). Nor stochastic independence and independence and and perfect positive stochastic does it mean that the decomposition tests allow one to interdependence, are not uniquely recovered by the decom- are not uniquely recovered by the decom- not uniquely recovered by the decom- uniquely recovered by the decom- recovered by the decom- by the decom- the decom- decomempirically identify, rather than to assume, the stochastic position tests: generally, they have to be assumed rather tests: generally, they have to be assumed rather generally, they have to be assumed rather they have to be assumed rather have to be assumed rather to be assumed rather be assumed rather assumed rather rather relationship between component times, even for as limiteda than found out. In Section found out. In Section out. In Section In Section 8 we show how the concept of we show how the concept of how the concept of the concept of concept of of choice as that between independence and perfect positive a RT decomposition into selectively influenced component RT decomposition into selectively influenced component decomposition into selectively influenced component into selectively influenced component selectively influenced component influenced component component interdependence: two tests designed for one and the same times can be interpreted to make all simple compositions can be interpreted to make all simple compositions be interpreted to make all simple compositions interpreted to make all simple compositions make all simple compositions all simple compositions simple compositions compositions simple operation, one with A(a«)|[B(f), another with a priori equally “realistic.” The concluding section A(a) 1 B(£)}, may very well be successful simultaneously briefly summarizes the main summarizes the main the main main results established in this established in this in this this (1.¢., on the same observable RTs). paper. 

288 

DZHAFAROV AND SCHWEICKERT 

The proofs of all rigorously established results are presented in the Appendices, which, also contain necessary’ auxiliary lemmas and rigorous definitions of key concepts. In the main text these results are summarized in the form of numbered Statements. Generally, we allow the discussionin the main text to be mathematically looser than in the corresponding Appendices, especially in such (important) technical details as domains of functions and spectra of random variables. Although all random variables representing RTs can be safely assumed to be positive and have continuous density functions, no such restrictions are imposed in this paper (not even continuity of distribution functions), as all our results turn out to hold for arbitrary random variables. Random variables are always denoted by boldface letters. Besides the common abbreviations RT” and “RTs”, we use the following abbreviations for frequently used terms: “tv.(°s)” for “random variable(s)”; “gs -independence” and “s.-independent” for “stochastic independence” and “stochastically independent | p-p.s.-interdependence and "p-ps.-interdependent Sor perfect _ Positive stochastic interdependence and “perfectly positively stochastically interdependent. 

3. SUMMATION TEST 

We oo. . begin with the empirical test proposed by Ashby & Townsend (1980) and termed the “summation test by Roberts & Sternberg (1992) for additive decompositions of RT into independent selectively influenced component times. 

==> picture [213 x 23] <==

Confining one’s attention to a 2 x 2 crossed factorial design, where factors a and # attain two values each, (a), a) (8,, 82), and denoting 

==> picture [169 x 31] <==

one can rewrite (1) as a system of four distributional equations: 

==> picture [186 x 86] <==

The reason for using the equidistribution symbol = in (1) and (2), rather than the numerical equality =, is that the component times occurring in different equations (ie, 

corresponding to different treatments) are unrelated r.v.’s: only their individual distributions, and not their joint distributions, are defined. In particular, the component times denoted by one and the same symbol (say, A,) in different equations are unrelated r.v.’s with identical distributions. If, for instance, the decompositions of T,, and T,, were presented as 

==> picture [113 x 30] <==

this would have wrongly implied a definite stochastic relationship between T,, and T,,, by the virtue of their dependence on a common r.v., A,. One should be cautious not to transfer algebraic properties of numerical equations (such as the equivalence of a+b=c and a=c—b) to distributional equations. 

To construct an empirical test for decomposition (2), one has to subject the observable RTs T,,, Ti2, Tx, To: to numerical transformations resulting in new r.v.’s (such as T12+T4,). The distribution of such a rv., however, is not defined unless one specifies the joint distribution of the argument r.v.’s (in this example, T,, and T,,). It must be clear from our comments on the meaning of = that stochastic relationships among T,,, T,», T2,, T,. are not constrained in any way by their hypothetical decompositions: the joint distribution of, say, (T,>, T2,) can be chosen arbitrarily, insofar as its marginals coincide with the individual distributions of T,. and T,. In constructing the Ashby—Townsend—Roberts-Sternberg test one chooses to treat (T,,, T22) and (T,,, T,,) as pairs of s.-independent r.v.’s, making thereby such r.v.’s as T,, + T2. and T,,+ T3, 3) hole then. quite easy to see now that if'decomposition , 

==> picture [229 x 24] <==

Indeed, if one chooses to treat the component times A,, B,, A,, B, in (2) as mutually s.-independent r.v.’s, then 

==> picture [210 x 44] <==

whereas 

==> picture [200 x 35] <==

for any fixed joint distribution of (A,, B,, Az, B,), because arithmetic addition is associative and commutative. (We present this simple derivation in detail, as it lends itself to an immediate generalization, discussed below.) 

DECOMPOSITIONS OF RESPONSE TIMES 

289 

. The empirical value of proposition (3) is in that it relates only observable RTs to each other, completely circumventing the hypothetical component times. As a result, (3) provides an empirical test for the decomposition assumptions represented by (2), in the sense that if (3) is empirically rejected, then RT cannot be decomposable according to (2). It does not follow from this, of course, that if (3) is empirically corroborated, then RTs are necessarily decomposable according to (2) (later we will show this to be de facto false). Nor does it follow that if (3) is empirically corroborated, then RT cannot be decomposed in some other, nonadditive, way (this will be shown to be de facto true, under certain constraints). 

Clearly, empirical rejection or corroboration of (3) can only be statistical, based on finite samples of RTs T,,, T)2, T,,, T,,: the distributions of these r.v.’s are only observable, not actually observed. Strictly speaking, therefore, the truth or falsity of proposition (3) is always an inference, rather than an empirical fact, and our use of the word empirical in this paper should be understood as an abridged version of “providing a basis for constructing empirical procedures.” Unless specifically mentioned, however, in this paper we predicate all our considerations on the assumption that the truth or falsity of propositions involving observable RTs has been inferred correctly. It should be mentioned here that such an inference does not necessarily presuppose a successful reconstruction of true RT distribution or characteristic functions (as would be the case in the convolution-based procedure suggested by Ashby & Townsend, 1980): Roberts & Sternberg’s (1992) procedure (the “summation test” proper) circumvents such a reconstruction completely. We briefly describe this procedure next, not only for its own sake, but also because it elucidates the logical structure of proposition (3). 

Refer to Fig. 1. Let each of the four observable RTs T;, be represented by a finite sample {#10 ..., 9°} (f=1, 2; j=1,2), the values being listed (for convenience only) in an ascending order; the equality of all four sample sizes to n is also immaterial and assumed for convenience only. Then the set of the n? equally weighed values {r{“) + 1S), k, le {1, 2,..,}, is a sample from T,, + T,,, and the set of the n* equally weighed values {r{4' + r{/} is a sample from T,.+T.,. Note that the assignment of equal weights to all possible pairs (1%),$9) and all possible pairs (14), 19?) is the operational meaning of T,, | T,, and T,, 1 T», respectively (the term “weight” is synonymous here to “probability mass”). Other stochastic relationships would have resulted in weighing different pairs differently, up to an exclusion of some pairs from consideration (1.e., assigning to them zero weights). Now, if proposition (3) is true, then the empirical distribution functions constructed from the two samples are mutually s.-independent estimates of one and the same distribution, which can be corroborated or rejected by an appropriate non-parametric procedure (note, 

7,,£4, +B, (A,18,) 

==> picture [230 x 263] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
cr y ya FF
+ | te tithe, tyre ves th + &
<= |, 12 > no
| 2 tith, byt te “ hi + be
“ . .
<| Ty4.+ Tx, Fy Tx)
-~l | | 1 oon > on non
a) be tithe tit te - ti + be
;
Ty, =A, +B, (A; 1 B))
” 2 ?
a | y 1 2.3 n | jl
‘at i _ tie ¥ “as
= g, tot &, + t, - + é,
ay
+ T.,+T > (T,1T»)
<< | - 1g eat .
_ vo + to + a . +0,
i ae ==
FIGURE 1
----- End of picture text -----

however, that within either of the two samples, the n’ yalues, viewed as r.v.’s, are stochastically interdependent, making the use of conventional procedures, such as §mirnov-Kolmogorov’s, dubious). 

4. DECOMPOSITION TESTS INVOLVING SIMPLE OPERATIONS 

The following generalization suggests itself immediately. 

_ STATEMENT 1. Let @ be any associative and com‘“#lative operation, and let RTs Ty, Ty2, Tu, Tx in a 2 * 2 &ossedfactorial design be decomposable as 

==> picture [185 x 84] <==

Then 

==> picture [237 x 23] <==

In other words, proposition (5) is anecessary condition for the existence of a decomposition described by (4). 

290 

DZHAFAROV AND SCHWEICKERT 

7,,=A,@B, (4,1B,) 

==> picture [231 x 265] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
,
a fa log 2.41 n.d
+ | tz teh, ki eOh ve ty @ &
as<~ t22 t,®iL1 te2 ti.2AL ty»2 ves tetn41 ;2
S| (Ty @T, Ty ltr):
=I ‘
& ty t,o% tt, oe, oe th, @ by
a ty tet, ted, ves tot,
Aa]
ag< ty tot, a OG oe tt,@ by
ys . ° ‘
s| ° : Ty @Ty, Ty [1][ Tr)] ;
sll : 2 nh
x| & to Ot, toot ve th ot
i ~— ie “=
----- End of picture text -----

FIGURE 2 

No formal proof of this statement is necessary here, because it has already been given: in deriving (3) from (2) the only property of arithmetic addition used has been its associativity and commutativity. Proposition (5) will be referred to as the decomposition test for the architecture described by (4). The operational meaning of Statement | is illustrated in Fig. 2. As in the original summation test, we form all possible pairs (z{{), t5;’) from samples representing T,, and Tz, and all possible pairs (t15’, ¢$?) from samples representing T,, and T;,, and assign to all these pairs equal probability masses. Instead of arithmetically summing the paired elements, however, we subject them to the operation that is assumed to create observable RTs from their hypothetical component times, ¢. Finally we compare the empirical distributions of (f;;' f5;)-values and (2, ® 23;)-values to corroborate or falsify the hypothesis that they are sampled from one and the same population. 

Since the operauions minimum and maximum are also both associative and commutative, 

==> picture [99 x 16] <==

==> picture [103 x 15] <==

==> picture [13 x 11] <==

==> picture [173 x 14] <==

==> picture [179 x 12] <==

we have, as a corollary, a straightforward transfer of the summation test from “serial” to “parallel” architectures: 

==> picture [214 x 235] <==

In the modified Roberts-Sternberg procedure for these operations,Pp one takes the larger of the two values in every pair in the case of maximum and the smaller of the two m the case of minimum. It is remarkable that although the symmation test was proposed by Ashby & Townsend as early as in 1980, the precise analogues of this test for “parallel” architectures have not been previously noted. Instead, these architectures have been characterized by the pattern of failure of the original summation test (Nozawa, 1992; Schweickert, 1978; Townsend & Ashby, 1983; Townsend & Nozawa, 1988; for surveys see Luce, 19g6Massaro & Cowan, 1993; Schweickert, 1992: Townsend, 1990). 

At this point one might pose an important question: Are different architectures, say, “parallel” and “serial,” objectively different (i.e., empirically distinguishable), or are they merely different languages for describing the dependence of observable distributions on external factors, languages one js free to arbitrarily choose among? It has been shown by Dzhafarov (1993) that any family of RT distributions can —_he modeled in terms of a certain number of processes developing in time and the corresponding number of criteria (critical levels), such that a response is observed when one of the processes reaches its criterion first. The criteria can be thought of as I.v.’s, and their joint distribution can be chosen arbitrarily. In particular, the criteria can always be chosen to be mutually s.-independent, in which case the observable RT is distributed as the minimum of several s.-independent r.v.’s, a result independently established by Marley & Colonius (1992) and Townsend (1976). Superficially, this corresponds to the “min-parallel” architec- 

DECOMPOSITIONS OF RESPONSE TIMES 

291 

ture described by (8), seemingly suggesting that all other architectures should be reducible to this one. Such a conclusion 1S not true, however, because it overlooks the key assumption that RT components are selectively influenced. The assumption of selectivity has not been made in Dzhafarov (1993), where different processes correspond to different responses, not factors. The question, therefore, should be reformulated as follows: Is it always true, or can it ever happen, that one of the tests holds for some T,,,T,2, T,,, T.. (say, the summation test described by proposition 5), and another test also holds for the same T,,, T,., T2,;, T.. (say, the max-test or min-test in propositions 7 and 8)? This question (the answer to which is that this cannot happen, under some constraints) is a special version of the uniqueness-of-identification problem, discussed later. 

Another question arises in relation to the fact that froma mathematical point of view there seems to be no reason for confining one’s attention to the three architectures just considered. Are these architectures more “realistic” than those involving other decomposition rules, say, multiplication? A multiplicative architecture was, in fact, proposed, albeit in a different context, by Roberts (1987). According to his model, actions such as bar presses are controlled by pulses generated at a source and transmitted through regulatorsto the response system. For any given stimulus each regulator transmits a fixed fraction of the pulses it receives to the next regulator, but this fraction may vary from one experimental condition to another. Suppose now that a factor « {a characteristic of the stimulus) selectively influences a regulator A, while another factor, f, selectively influences a regulator B: the combined effect of the two factors on the rate of responding then will be the product of their individual effects. [t is easy now to recast this modelinterms of randomly varying component times and to obtain a multiplicative architecture, as well as the corresponding empirical test, 

==> picture [250 x 83] <==

where k > 0 is a conversion coefficient included to match the dimensionality of time products and time. 

One may still be unconvinced of the “possibility” of such an architecture, and ultimately such a question can only be resolved empirically, by reliably demonstrating (or failing to demonstrate in a long run) the existence of RTs that conform with the right-hand side of proposition (9). In the concluding section of this paper we discuss a possible interpretation, within the framework of the “McGill modelling 

language” (Dzhafarov, 1993), of the notion of a RT component, according to which no mathematically valid decomposition rule can be excluded from consideration a priori. The essence of this interpretation is that the component times A(a) and B(f)}, even in the familiar “serial” and “parallel” schemes, are thought of as time-dimensioned characteristics of a single process, rather than durations of separate processes. The component A(«) may be said to be the “RT that would be observed if the factor # did not intervene (exist),” the component B(f) may be interpreted analogously, and the factual RT turns out to be computable from these two “would-be” RTs by means of an algebraic operation. The reader who knows of compelling arguments for not considering any operations beyond arithmetic addition, minimum, and maximum may still find this paper of interest, as the applicability of our results to these three decomposition rules is by no means diminished by their applicability to other decomposition rules. 

Moreover, the arithmetic addition, minimum, and maximum are in fact the prototypical operations from which ail other operations considered in this paper can be obtained by a unified mathematical procedure, derived from Aczél’s (1966) investigation of the associativity equation (see also Krantz, Luce, Suppes, & Tversky, 1971, pp. 99-102). In the present context, the class of all possible associative and commutative operations is too broad to lead to useful results beyond the necessity property established in Statement 1: stronger constraints must be imposed to obtain stronger results. These constraints are described in Definition Al, and their mathematical structure is elucidated in Lemma Al (of Appendix A). Here, in order to make the motivation for these constraints clear, we choose a more constructive (and less formal) way of presentation. 

The operation a+ is not only associative and commutative, it is also increasing in both arguments and continuous in both arguments, and it maps positive reals (negative reals, all reals) onto positive reals (respectively, negative reals, all reals). Consider an arbitrary real-valued, strictly monotonic (increasing or decreasing), and continuous function g whose domain is some open interval of reals J. Then the expression g—'[g(a) + 9(b)] defines a new binary operation that can be denoted by a@b. This operation is closed on J and maps onto J, and is associative, commutative, increasing in both arguments, and continuous in both arguments. In other words, a @ 6 shares all principal properties of a+, except, perhaps, for its domain. It is natural to call all such operations addition-like. The remarkable mathematical fact is that an operation cannot have the properties just mentioned without being representable as g~'[ g(a) + g(6)]. The function g creating an addition-like operation © from arithmetic addition 1s denoted by gq; two different functions g, create two different operations, except when they are scaling transforms of each other. As an example, the multiplication x is an 

292 

DZHAFAROV AND SCHWEICKERT 

addition-like operation, with / being the half-line of positive reals and g,. being logarithm: 

addition as a prototype, by means of a unified mathematical algorithm, 

As a result, the multiplicative architecture described by (9) can be reduced to a “serial” architecture by log-transforming all r.v.’s involved. Another Interesting additionlike operation, from the point of view of its potential applicability to experimental data, is obtained by making &@ a power function (the domain / being again the half-line of positive reals) 

==> picture [88 x 13] <==

where |p| > 1. The RT architecture and decomposition test of s.-independence) are 

==> picture [214 x 103] <==

The empirical value of this scheme for positive values of p stems from the fact that as p increases, the corresponding architecture gradually changes from being purely additive (“serial,” p= 1) to being purely supremal (“max-parallel,” p=), exhibiting intermediate properties in between. This is a consequence of the well-known property of the Minkowski norm: 

and that the operations min{a, b} and max{a, b} can be appended to this class of the addition-like operations as its limit cases. Since they are not the only limit cases, however, jt would be more elucidating, as well as more veridical to the factual motivation, to consider min{a, b} and max{a, b} as two independent prototypical cases, on a par with arithmetic addition. It is easy to see then that, unlike the addition, maximum and minimum, when one applies to them the same mathematical algorithm, do not generate “™@ximum_-like” and “minimum-like” operations beyond function g, 

==> picture [153 x 39] <==

if g5 is increasing,° and 

==> picture [155 x 36] <==

if gis decreasing. As a result, having applied this algorithm to the three prototypical operations, +, min, and max, we end up with the class of “simple operations” (for the lack of a better term), consisting of all addition-like operations a@b, and the operations min{a, 6} and max{a, 5}. Within the class of simple operations, Statement | becomes equivalent to the conjunction of three propositions: (7) for maximum, (8) for minimum, and the proposition below for all addition-like operations @: 

==> picture [177 x 16] <==

==> picture [243 x 131] <==

As a result, the “Minkowski-norm” operations (p > 1} may provide a reasonable approximation, if not an adequate description, in the situations when the factors « and £ appear to have only partially additive effects. For negative values of p (1e., for p< —1), we have 

==> picture [168 x 18] <==

from which it follows that an architecture corresponding to 

a negative value of p might be utilized when the combined effect of the factors « and f£ appears to be between the “min-parallel” (p= —0o) and “harmonic” (p= —1) combinations. 

5, UNIQUENESS OF SIMPLE OPERATIONS UNDER STOCHASTIC INDEPENDENCE 

It must be clear now that a broad class of potentially use- 

We can now rigorously formulate and answer the ques- 

ful decomposition rules can be obtained from arithmetic — tion posed in the previous section: Under the assumption of 

DECOMPOSITIONS OF RESPONSE TIMES 

293 

s.-independence, 1s 1t possible that two decomposition tests involving two different simple operations are successful for one and the same quadruple of observable RTs T,,, Tj2, T,,, T2.? The answer turns out to be affirmative if no additional constraints are imposed, but it changes to negative if one excludes from consideration one trivial case and . 7 imposes a rather natural condition on the algebraic relanesrivial case between just mentioned two competing is the one simple when operations. The 

This disappointing result has a clear algebraic cause: the two simple operations in question, + and @, are such that the system of numerical equations 

==> picture [40 x 29] <==

can haveor more than one (unordered)aa pair of; reals (x, y) satisfying this system. This is not the case in most other cases,structed involving simple operations. more interesting For example, with and less artificially appropriatelyconchosen domains and coefficients, each of the systems 

==> picture [232 x 22] <==

Obviously, then 

==> picture [207 x 15] <==

==> picture [74 x 122] <==

for any commutative operation @, and in particular, for caseany simple should: op b e ration. excludedeo It is from. also consideration obvious,: however, because that this this is. the case when at least one of the factors a and £ is ineffective. Indeed, if T,, = T,2, T.. = T>,, then changes in the second factor have no effect at any level of the first factor, and we have the opposite situation if T,, = T,,, To. =7T,>. To be of any interest, the analysis should be restricted to the cases when both factors are effective, that is, when (T,,, T.) and (Tia, T,,), ignoring the order within the pairs, are different pairs of r.v.’s. We will refer to such quadruples of RTs of r.v.’s. We will refer to such quadruples of RTs r.v.’s. We will refer to such quadruples of RTs We will refer to such quadruples of RTs will refer to such quadruples of RTs refer to such quadruples of RTs to such quadruples of RTs such quadruples of RTs quadruples of RTs of RTs RTs | Tis Ta, Tar, T22 as having effective index factors. The following example shows that even if the index factors are effective, one can still think of pairs of decomposition tests that may be successful simultaneously. Let one of the tests be the original summation test, comparing the distribution of T,,+T2. (Ty, 1 T22) with that of Tis+T2 (Ti21T2,). Let the competing decomposition test be designed for the addition-like operation ® defined (by the algorithm discussed in the previous section) by the function Sax) =2x+sin x (this function is strictly increasing and continuous). In other words, this test compares the distriwithbution of [2T,,+ sin Ty, 1+ {2T22.+ sin Tp.| (Ty, L To2) that of [2T,, + sin Ty2] + [2T2, +sin T2,] (T,2 + T2,). Choose now an arbitrary r.v. XY, such that lext X > 2x (lext X is the infimum of the spectrum of X) and put 

1.5 a+ most one (unordered) solution (x, y), for any (a, b). et us call two operations exhibiting this property algebrai- us call two operations exhibiting this property algebrai- call two operations exhibiting this property algebrai- two operations exhibiting this property algebrai- operations exhibiting this property algebrai- exhibiting this property algebrai- this property algebrai- property algebrai- algebraically distinct decomposition rules, the motivation for the term being as follows. Consider two such operations, for example, arithmetic addition and arithmetic multiplication on positive reals, and let (c,,, ¢22) and (¢,5, C2;) be different (unordered) pairs of positive reals. Then if c,;+¢>= 6, 4¢,,, itis impossible that c), Cx) = C19 ¢;, and vice versa. Necessary and sufficient conditions for simple operations to be algebraically distinct decomposition rules are estab_jiched in Lemmas A2 and A3. We summarize and illustrate them here informally, as they play a key role throughout this paper. Fig. 3 illustrates the situation when two algebraically distinct decomposition rules are both addition-lke (denoted @ and ®). According to Lemma A2, this happens if, and only if, the defining functions gg and gg are strictly convex-concave with respect to each other (see Definitionis that A2). if one The choosesgeometric one meaning of these of operations, this property say in @, Fig. va3 &@ transforms the axes Se that the anal ne nnie represented DY a stralg f lne (for any a), then the contour x@y= » (for any 5) is either convex (Fig. 3a) or concave (Fig. 3b) with respect to this straight line. As a result the two contours cannot intersect at more than two points, and 5ecause of their symmetry with respect to the mainye bisector, these two intersection points are identical when viewed as unorderedLemma A3: pairs. any addition-like Figure 4 illustrates operation the facts © and established maximum in are algebraically distinct decomposition rules (Fig. 4a); any 

pairs of r.v.’s. We will refer to such quadruples of RTs of r.v.’s. We will refer to such quadruples of RTs r.v.’s. We will refer to such quadruples of RTs We will refer to such quadruples of RTs will refer to such quadruples of RTs refer to such quadruples of RTs to such quadruples of RTs such quadruples of RTs quadruples of RTs of RTs RTs | Tis et us call two operations exhibiting this property algebrai- us call two operations exhibiting this property algebrai- call two operations exhibiting this property algebrai- two operations exhibiting this property algebrai- operations exhibiting this property algebrai- exhibiting this property algebrai- this property algebrai- property algebrai- algebrai- 

==> picture [207 x 23] <==

Obviously, (T1,, Tos) and (T,2,To1) are different (unordered) pairs of r.v.’s, and it is easy to verify that for these T,,, Ty2, T2:, T22 both our decomposition tests hold: Nhe S129 "219 © 22 P 

==> picture [182 x 70] <==

480/39/3-5 

294 

DZHAFAROV AND SCHWEICKERT 

| 

==> picture [444 x 631] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
a b
8oly) 8aly)
“frend
Notas Ae
er}
7
Be(x) Be(x)
FIGURE 3
ab
yy
7 ee N <
; in{x, y} =b
, al
x x
c
y
L
__ shen
one
xX
----- End of picture text -----

ab 

FIGURE 4 

DECOMPOSITIONS OF RESPONSE TIMES 

295 

addition-like operation @ and minimum are algebraically distinct decomposition rules (Fig.4b); minimum and maximum are algebraically distinct decomposition rules (Fig. 4c). 

can nevertheless be satisfied by infinitely many (X, Y)-pairs (eg.,ifboth A and Bare unit-normally distributed, then any two normal distributions whose variances add to | and whose means are zero would constitute a solution). The following two statements, therefore, based on Theorems _B1, B2, and B3, are nontrivial. 

The question posed at the beginning of this section can now be reformulated as follows: Under the s.-independence assumption, can two decomposition tests involving two algebraically distinct decomposition rules hold distinct decomposition rules hold decomposition rules hold rules hold hold simul-_. STATEMENT 2. taneously for one and the same quadruple of observable RTs T,,, Ty, T21, T22, provided that both index factors are effective. that ig (T T ) and (T,,,T,), are different as unordered pairs? Put ina shorter form. does a successful decomposition test identify the decomposition rule uniquely test identify the decomposition rule uniquely identify the decomposition rule uniquely the decomposition rule uniquely decomposition rule uniquely rule uniquely uniquely ue among algebraically distinct decomposition rules? The reader may be tempted to say that the answer is trivial, for the following reason: using again arithmetic addition and multiplication as examples, since the system of numerical equations 

. . 

algebraically distinct decomposition rules hold distinct decomposition rules hold decomposition rules hold rules hold hold simul-_. STATEMENT 2. 

STATEMENT 2. 2. Under the assump tion of s.-independence, if a decomposition test involving an addition-like operation is successful[for][ observable][ RTs][ T,,, Ty2, T21,][ T22][ (with][ effec-] tive index factors) then no other decomposition test that valves an algebraically distinct addition-like decomposition » Or maximum, or minimum can be successful on the same Or maximum, or minimum can be successful on the same maximum, or minimum can be successful on the same or minimum can be successful on the same minimum can be successful on the same can be successful on the same be successful on the same successful on the same on the same the same same ° 

decomposition test identify the decomposition rule uniquely test identify the decomposition rule uniquely identify the decomposition rule uniquely the decomposition rule uniquely decomposition rule uniquely rule uniquely uniquely ue » Or maximum, or minimum can be successful on the same Or maximum, or minimum can be successful on the same maximum, or minimum can be successful on the same or minimum can be successful on the same minimum can be successful on the same can be successful on the same be successful on the same successful on the same on the same the same same 

STATEMENT 3. Under the assumption of s.-independence, if @ decomposition test involving minimum or maximum is successful for observable RTs T,,;, T,., To, To. (with effective index factors), then no decomposition test involving an addition-like decomposition rule may be successful on the same RTs. 

==> picture [376 x 33] <==

One can summarize these two Statements by saying that fOr any Tin 1 Tx, Ti2t Tas with effective index factors, none offththe systemst off distributionaldistributional equationst 

has no more than one (unordered) solution, it must also be true (one might think): that the system of distributional«ote bait; equations 

4 

==> picture [492 x 119] <==

has no more than one (unordered) pair of r.v.’sgt satisfyingpg, it; ergo the two decomposition tests 

can hold, where @ and @ are algebraically distinct addition-like decomposition rules. Each of the two equations within a system excludes the other. 

cannot hold simultaneously, unless (T,,, T2.) and (T;2,T2:) are identical. Although the resulting statement, as we will see, happens to be correct, the reasoning by which it was obtained is expressly false. We will see, for example, that this reasoning would have led to a wrong conclusion if the two operations were minimum and maximum, rather than addition and multiplication. The best example known to us, however, follows from Reényi’s (1950) theory of linear equations in r.v.’s: the numerical system 

—_—The only remaining case is that in which the competing operations are maximum and minimum. It turns out that here, in spite of the fact that these two operations are algebraically distinct, it is possible that for some T,, L T., T,, 1 T., 

3 

==> picture [407 x 54] <==

; . . even when the index factors are effective, that is, when (T,,, Tx.) and (T,2, T;,) are not identical as unordered pairs. It is easy to see, however, that for this to happen, the relationship between (T,,,T,.) and (T,,T.,) must be of a rather artificial nature, both readily identifiable and unlikely to be observed. 

always ; . ae has a unique solution, but the distributional system 

==> picture [103 x 35] <==

296 

DZHAFAROV AND SCHWEICKERT 

==> picture [189 x 167] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
1 3
°
F(t) y
1 2
0 a
FIGURE §
----- End of picture text -----

==> picture [4 x 11] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
t
----- End of picture text -----

Refer to Fig. 5 that shows two repeatedly intersecting distribution functions, one following the path 1-2-3, the other the path a~b-c. Let them be the distribution functions F;;(t) and F,,(t) for RTs T,, and T,,, respectively. Consider now the following procedure, called a cross-over rearrangement (Definition B2): choose any two successive crossing points, say, the end-points of the line segments 2 and b, and interchange the two segments in between, in this case 2 and b. We obtain thereby two other functions, one following the path 1-b-3, the other the path a—2-c. This step can be repeated as many times as there are pairs of successive crossing points (possibly counting as such oo and — 00). Thus in Fig. 5 we can form eight different pairs of curves that are cross-over rearrangements of the functions F,,(£) and F,(t) (counting themselves). It is easy to verify thatany such a pair of curves can be viewed as a pair of distribution functions, and can be, therefore, taken to be the pair of distribution functions F),(t), F2,(t) for some RTs T,. and T,. By Theorem B4, the decomposition tests involving minimum and maximum can succeed simultaneously, on one and the same quadruple of RTs T,,;, T,2, Tz, T22, if, and only if, the distribution functions F,,(t), F2{¢) are crossover rearrangements of the distribution functions F;\(t), F;,(t). Intuitively, this situation seems highly unlikely, and it seems safe to compartmentalize it and exclude it from consideration. Observe that cross-over rearrangements of distribution functions F,,(t), F2,(¢) will typically be less smooth than the functions themselves: for example, in Fig. 5 any cross-over rearrangement of the curves 1-2-3 and a—b-c (except for the exchange of the entire curves) will have at least one “cusp,” indicating a discontinuity in the density function. One could, therefore, exclude such rearrangements by imposing a formal requirement that T,,, Ti2, Tz, T22 must all have continuous density functions. Now we can formulate the final proposition of this section, based on Theorem B4. 

STATEMENT 4. Let the observable RTs T,,, 17), T2,.T2 be such that (the distribution functions for) T,., Tz are not 

cross-over rearrangement of (the distribution functions for) T,,, T... Then, under the assumption of s.-independence, the decomposition tests involving minimum and maximum cannot be simultaneously successful on T,,;.T 2, Tx, F232. 

Observe that one does not have to mention here the effectiveness of the index factors, because the identity of (T,,, T32) and (T,,, T,,) is a special case of the distribution functions for T,,, T,, being cross-over rearrangements of those for T,,. T2>. 

It should be emphasized that the uniqueness-of-identification results obtained here and below (Statements 2, 3,4, and 6) tell us nothing about statistical power of competing decomposition tests. Obviously, algebraically distinct decomposition rules may very well be so similar lange. eaonples ‘thinkidee ample ony nwo unreaustica ly orm” operations with exponents 12 and 13). At the same time a computer simulation work using a wide variety of Weibult-distributed RT components (Cortese & Dzhafarov 1995) shows that at the level of only a few thousand RTs pet treatment one can achieve a virtually perfect discriminability among the three traditional decomposition rules: plus, maximum, and minimum. ° 

6. PERFECT POSITIVE STOCHASTIC INTERDEPENDENCE 

That the (hypothetical) selectively influenced component times A(a) and B(f) in a decomposition of an observable RT are s.-independent, A(a) 1 B( B), has been assumed by most researchers primarily because, in the absence of empirical information for or against, this is thought to be the simplest choice, both conceptually and technically. Dzhafarov (1992) has analyzed an alternative possibility, termed the “single-variate RT decomposition model,” that, if one is to be guided by simplicity considerations, is at least a viable alternative to the s.-independence hypothesis. Moreover, the investigation presented by Dzhafarov (1992) leaves little doubt that this alternative is, in fact, more simple conceptually and more manageable technically. In the context of decomposition tests, as we will see, this conclusion is even more called for. For the moment we are not concerned with the issue of empirical testability of the. single-variate RT decomposition model against the s.-independence model, both being treated as assumptions that predicate decomposition tests. 

As mentioned in the Introduction, the theoretical framework for the variety of possible stochastic relationships between component times A(x) and B( B } is formed by the definition of selective influence, 

==> picture [153 x 14] <==

DECOMPOSITIONS OF RESPONSE TIMES 

297 

where A and B are some functions, whereas (X, Y) isa pair of r.v.’s {termed “internal sources of variability”) whose joint distribution does not depend on the factors a and f#. Possible interpretations for internal sources of variability in terms of randomly preset criteria or stochastic components of a response formation process are discussed by Dzhafarov (1993); one such interpretation will also be addressed inthe concluding section of this paper. For our present purposes it is sufficient and convenient to assume that both X and Y are uniformly distributed between 0 and 1, and the functions A and B are quantile functions for the r.v.’s A(x) and B(8) (see Definition C}): 

==> picture [171 x 14] <==

In other words, for any 0<p<1,Q,(p,«) is simply the quantile of rank p of the rv. A at the factor level a; analogously for Q,(Y, 8). This choice of X, Y and A, B outlines an important subclass of possible stochastic relationships between A(x) and B(f): each such a relationship is determined by a fixed pairing scheme of quantiles of A(a) with the quantiles of B(f). In the case of s-independence, A(x) L B(f), the pairing scheme is all-with-all, and it induces the all-with-all pairing of the observable RTs, as reflected in the generalized Roberts-Sternberg algorithm (Fig. 2). 

In the single-variate RT decomposition model we assume that there is only one, common source of variability, X=Y, because of which the r.v.s A(x) and B(f) are perfectly positively stochastically (p.p.s.-)interdependent, A(«) || B(f). It is trivial to prove now the following analogue of Statement 1. 

STATEMENT 5. Let @ be a simple operation (in fact, any associative and commutative operation), and let RTs T,,, T,2, To, Tx. in a 2x2 crossed factorial design be decomposable as 

==> picture [182 x 68] <==

me 

==> picture [226 x 17] <==

In other words, proposition (15) is a necessary condition for the existence of a decomposition described by (14). 

Proposition (15) is referred to as the decomposition test (for operation @) under the assumption of p.p.s.-interdependence. The operational meaning of (15) is ilfustrated 

in Fig. 6. Here the equality of sizes of the paired samples, as well as the ascending order in which the samples are arranged, is critical, not just a matter of convenience, as it was in Fig. 2. The value ¢“) is an estimator of a fixed-rank quantile of T,,, and it can only be paired with the estimator _¢{’ of the same-rank quantile of T..; analogously for T,, and T,,. In other words, among the n? pairs (t(j), 19) and n* pairs (1%, 19), k, le {1, 2, .., n}, all are assigned zero weights (1.e., ignored) except for the diagonal pairs = (¢{*?, ¢%), (2%), 24) that are taken with equal weights. The rest is analogous to the case of s.-independence: one computes n values (1%) @ 7) and n values (t{) @ 7%), considering them samples from T,, @ T,, (T), |[T;.} and T,2 @ T;; (T,2 || T2;), respectively. If (15) is true, then the empirical distribution functions constructed from these two samples are mutually s.-independent estimates of one and the same distribution, which can be corroborated or rejected by an appropriate non-parametric procedure. (Here, unlike in the case of s.-independence, the n values, viewed as r.v.’s, 4f¢ stochastically independent within either of the two Samples. The pairing of sample quantiles of the same rank, however, implies a stronger form of stochastic interdependence than p.p.s.-interdependence—the latter only equires pairing of the same-rank population quantiles. As 4 tesult, the use of conventional procedures, such as Smirnov—Kolmogorov’s, remains dubious in this case, too.) We pose now the analogue of the question studied in the previous section: Under the p.p.s.-interdependence 

==> picture [230 x 287] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
;
Ty, =A, @B, (A, Il By)
"1 ‘it ~ “ul
ial to u,* be
<l , >
~ | te t1¢@ &
yy
a |? T1@2Zy Fy |! TM)
x or
a te, ti, Ob,
T 5 =A, @ Bp (A, || B,)
S) a |] tem
at | 5 7 3
~~ by he @ by
;
<| Typ @Tx, Ly | Toy)
a ty tho @ by
----- End of picture text -----

FIGURE 6 

298 

DZHAFAROV AND SCHWEICKERT 

of T,1,T22. Then, under the assumption of p.p.s.-interdependence, two decomposition tests involving two algebraically distinct decomposition rules cannot be simultaneously successful on T,,, Ty2, T2,, T2>. 

==> picture [157 x 244] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
Q(p)
c
3
2
b
a
1
0 p 1
 can two decompositionFIGURE 7  tests involving two
----- End of picture text -----

Put differently, if T,, |'T.. and T,, |)T,, are not crossover rearrangements of each other (which also means that the index factors are effective), then none of the systems of distributional equations 

==> picture [237 x 144] <==

assumption, tests involving two algebraically distinct decomposition rules hold simultaneously for one and the same quadruple of observable for one and the same quadruple of observable one and the same quadruple of observable and the same quadruple of observable the same quadruple of observable same quadruple of observable quadruple of observable of observable can hold, where © hold, where © where © © and @ are algebraically distinct addiRTs Ti Ti. T,, T», provided that both index factors are Ti Ti. T,, T», provided that both index factors are Ti. T,, T», provided that both index factors are T,, T», provided that both index factors are T», provided that both index factors are provided that both index factors are that both index factors are both index factors are index factors are factors are are Honsike cecomponition rules. As in the case of s.-indeeffective? In other words, does a successful decomposition -_ ences eat of In other words, does a successful decomposition -_ ences eat of other words, does a successful decomposition -_ ences eat of words, does a successful decomposition -_ ences eat of does a successful decomposition -_ ences eat of a successful decomposition -_ ences eat of successful decomposition -_ ences eat of decomposition -_ ences eat of -_ ences eat of ences eat of eat of of test identify the decomposition rule as uniquely here as it identify the decomposition rule as uniquely here as it the decomposition rule as uniquely here as it decomposition rule as uniquely here as it rule as uniquely here as it as uniquely here as it uniquely here as it as it it a Th es the other. Th es the other. es the other. the other. other. does under the assumption ofs.-independence? The answer under the assumption ofs.-independence? The answer the assumption ofs.-independence? The answer assumption ofs.-independence? The answer ofs.-independence? The answer The answer answer C © computer computer cary, 1095: ore already mentione f requires that we deal with cross-over rearrangements of that we deal with cross-over rearrangements of we deal with cross-over rearrangements of deal with cross-over rearrangements of with cross-over rearrangements of cross-over rearrangements of rearrangements of of ( ortese & ortese & & Dzhalarov, quantile functions. Figure 7 illustrates the concept. The two functions. Figure 7 illustrates the concept. The two Figure 7 illustrates the concept. The two 7 illustrates the concept. The two illustrates the concept. The two the concept. The two concept. The two The two two Section 5) shows 5) shows shows that statistical discriminability of the three curves shown, 1-2-3 and a-b-c, are the same as in Fig. 5 shown, 1-2-3 and a-b-c, are the same as in Fig. 5 1-2-3 and a-b-c, are the same as in Fig. 5 and a-b-c, are the same as in Fig. 5 a-b-c, are the same as in Fig. 5 are the same as in Fig. 5 same as in Fig. 5 as in Fig. 5 in Fig. 5 Fig. 5 5 traditional decomposition rules (plus, max, min} under the only viewed this time as functions of quantile rank p: let viewed this time as functions of quantile rank p: let this time as functions of quantile rank p: let time as functions of quantile rank p: let as functions of quantile rank p: let functions of quantile rank p: let of quantile rank p: let quantile rank p: let rank p: let p: let let assumption of p of p p them be the quantile functions Q,,(p) and Q,,(p) for RTs be the quantile functions Q,,(p) and Q,,(p) for RTs the quantile functions Q,,(p) and Q,,(p) for RTs functions Q,,(p) and Q,,(p) for RTs Q,,(p) and Q,,(p) for RTs and Q,,(p) for RTs Q,,(p) for RTs for RTs RTs under the the assumption of s.-independence: a virtually perfect T,, and T 5, and T 5, T 5, 5, respectively. Cross-over rearrangements of Cross-over rearrangements of rearrangements of of discriminability is is achieved at a level of these two functions (such as 1-b~c and a—2-3) are obtained two functions (such as 1-b~c and a—2-3) are obtained functions (such as 1-b~c and a—2-3) are obtained (such as 1-b~c and a—2-3) are obtained as 1-b~c and a—2-3) are obtained 1-b~c and a—2-3) are obtained and a—2-3) are obtained a—2-3) are obtained are obtained obtained RT's per treatment. per treatment. treatment. as in Fig. 5, by choosing successive crossing points, and in Fig. 5, by choosing successive crossing points, and 5, by choosing successive crossing points, and by choosing successive crossing points, and choosing successive crossing points, and successive crossing points, and crossing points, and points, and and Observe that that the algebraic distinctiveness of the simple interchanging the line segments between them. The resulting the line segments between them. The resulting line segments between them. The resulting segments between them. The resulting between them. The resulting them. The resulting The resulting resulting operations involved involved is as critical here as it is under the curves can also be viewed as quantile functions Q,.(p), can also be viewed as quantile functions Q,.(p), also be viewed as quantile functions Q,.(p), be viewed as quantile functions Q,.(p), as quantile functions Q,.(p), quantile functions Q,.(p), assumption of of s.-independence. This can be demonstrated Q,,(p), for some RTs T,, and T,,,. It is easy to see that the for some RTs T,, and T,,,. It is easy to see that the some RTs T,, and T,,,. It is easy to see that the RTs T,, and T,,,. It is easy to see that the T,, and T,,,. It is easy to see that the and T,,,. It is easy to see that the T,,,. It is easy to see that the It is easy to see that the is easy to see that the easy to see that the to see that the see that the that the the by using the same using the same the same same example (see the previous section): the quantile functions Q),(p), Q2:(p) for (T,2, T2,) are cross- functions Q),(p), Q2:(p) for (T,2, T2,) are cross- Q2:(p) for (T,2, T2,) are cross- for (T,2, T2,) are cross- (T,2, T2,) are cross- T2,) are cross- crossoperation + + competes against the addition-like operation over rearrangements of the quantile functions Q,,(p), ® defined byQ,.(p) for (T,,, Ts») if, and only if, the same is true about rearrangements of the quantile functions Q,,(p), ® defined by for (T,,, Ts») if, and only if, the same is true about (T,,, Ts») if, and only if, the same is true about Ts») if, and only if, the same is true about if, and only if, the same is true about of the quantile functions Q,,(p), ® defined by and only if, the same is true about the quantile functions Q,,(p), ® defined by only if, the same is true about quantile functions Q,,(p), ® defined by if, the same is true about the same is true about same is true about is true about true about about ® defined bychoose an arbitrary defined by an arbitrary arbitrary by the function X such that fal lextX ) = 2x Q,.(p) for (T,,, Ts») if, and only if, the same is true about rearrangements of the quantile functions Q,,(p), ® defined by for (T,,, Ts») if, and only if, the same is true about (T,,, Ts») if, and only if, the same is true about Ts») if, and only if, the same is true about if, and only if, the same is true about of the quantile functions Q,,(p), ® defined by and only if, the same is true about the quantile functions Q,,(p), ® defined by only if, the same is true about quantile functions Q,,(p), ® defined by if, the same is true about the same is true about same is true about is true about true about about ® defined bychoose an arbitrary defined by an arbitrary arbitrary by the function X such that fal lextX ) = 2x choose an arbitrary defined by an arbitrary arbitrary by the function X such that fal lextX ) = 2x their distribution functions. As a result, we may simply say, a by some abuse of language, that the RTs T,,, T,, are crossTi, = X~—2a; over rearrangements of the RTs T,,, T,., without mentionoo. ing either quantile or distribution functions. It is also easy to This time we put we put put T), see that all comments made in the previous section about Verify that the that the the decomposition tests involving + and @ hold the justifiability of compartmentalizing and excluding from S!™ultaneously: consideration the RTs quadruples T,,, T\., T2,, T2. exhibiting this relationship apply here with no modifications. The following8 statement is based on Theorems Cl [2T,, +sin and €2 , 

; a ; 

taneously for one and the same quadruple of observable for one and the same quadruple of observable one and the same quadruple of observable and the same quadruple of observable the same quadruple of observable same quadruple of observable quadruple of observable of observable can hold, where © hold, where © where © © and @ are algebraically distinct addiRTs Ti Ti. T,, T», provided that both index factors are Ti Ti. T,, T», provided that both index factors are Ti. T,, T», provided that both index factors are T,, T», provided that both index factors are T», provided that both index factors are provided that both index factors are that both index factors are both index factors are index factors are factors are are Honsike cecomponition rules. As in the case of s.-indeeffective? In other words, does a successful decomposition -_ ences eat of In other words, does a successful decomposition -_ ences eat of other words, does a successful decomposition -_ ences eat of words, does a successful decomposition -_ ences eat of does a successful decomposition -_ ences eat of a successful decomposition -_ ences eat of successful decomposition -_ ences eat of decomposition -_ ences eat of -_ ences eat of ences eat of eat of of the two equations within a system test identify the decomposition rule as uniquely here as it identify the decomposition rule as uniquely here as it the decomposition rule as uniquely here as it decomposition rule as uniquely here as it rule as uniquely here as it as uniquely here as it uniquely here as it as it it a Th es the other. Th es the other. es the other. the other. other. — lati d ‘oned does under the assumption ofs.-independence? The answer under the assumption ofs.-independence? The answer the assumption ofs.-independence? The answer assumption ofs.-independence? The answer ofs.-independence? The answer The answer answer C © computer computer cary, 1095: ore already mentione f requires that we deal with cross-over rearrangements of that we deal with cross-over rearrangements of we deal with cross-over rearrangements of deal with cross-over rearrangements of with cross-over rearrangements of cross-over rearrangements of rearrangements of of ( ortese & ortese & & Dzhalarov, ; m 33 see the last paragraph ° quantile functions. Figure 7 illustrates the concept. The two functions. Figure 7 illustrates the concept. The two Figure 7 illustrates the concept. The two 7 illustrates the concept. The two illustrates the concept. The two the concept. The two concept. The two The two two Section 5) shows 5) shows shows that statistical discriminability of the three curves shown, 1-2-3 and a-b-c, are the same as in Fig. 5 shown, 1-2-3 and a-b-c, are the same as in Fig. 5 1-2-3 and a-b-c, are the same as in Fig. 5 and a-b-c, are the same as in Fig. 5 a-b-c, are the same as in Fig. 5 are the same as in Fig. 5 same as in Fig. 5 as in Fig. 5 in Fig. 5 Fig. 5 5 traditional decomposition rules (plus, max, min} under the only viewed this time as functions of quantile rank p: let viewed this time as functions of quantile rank p: let this time as functions of quantile rank p: let time as functions of quantile rank p: let as functions of quantile rank p: let functions of quantile rank p: let of quantile rank p: let quantile rank p: let rank p: let p: let let assumption of p of p p ‘p.s.-interdependence 18 even better than them be the quantile functions Q,,(p) and Q,,(p) for RTs be the quantile functions Q,,(p) and Q,,(p) for RTs the quantile functions Q,,(p) and Q,,(p) for RTs functions Q,,(p) and Q,,(p) for RTs Q,,(p) and Q,,(p) for RTs and Q,,(p) for RTs Q,,(p) for RTs for RTs RTs under the the assumption of s.-independence: a virtually perfect T,, and T 5, and T 5, T 5, 5, respectively. Cross-over rearrangements of Cross-over rearrangements of rearrangements of of discriminability is is achieved at a level of onlya few hundred these two functions (such as 1-b~c and a—2-3) are obtained two functions (such as 1-b~c and a—2-3) are obtained functions (such as 1-b~c and a—2-3) are obtained (such as 1-b~c and a—2-3) are obtained as 1-b~c and a—2-3) are obtained 1-b~c and a—2-3) are obtained and a—2-3) are obtained a—2-3) are obtained are obtained obtained RT's per treatment. per treatment. treatment. Loge es ; as in Fig. 5, by choosing successive crossing points, and in Fig. 5, by choosing successive crossing points, and 5, by choosing successive crossing points, and by choosing successive crossing points, and choosing successive crossing points, and successive crossing points, and crossing points, and points, and and Observe that that the algebraic distinctiveness of the simple interchanging the line segments between them. The resulting the line segments between them. The resulting line segments between them. The resulting segments between them. The resulting between them. The resulting them. The resulting The resulting resulting operations involved involved is as critical here as it is under the curves can also be viewed as quantile functions Q,.(p), can also be viewed as quantile functions Q,.(p), also be viewed as quantile functions Q,.(p), be viewed as quantile functions Q,.(p), as quantile functions Q,.(p), quantile functions Q,.(p), assumption of of s.-independence. This can be demonstrated Q,,(p), for some RTs T,, and T,,,. It is easy to see that the for some RTs T,, and T,,,. It is easy to see that the some RTs T,, and T,,,. It is easy to see that the RTs T,, and T,,,. It is easy to see that the T,, and T,,,. It is easy to see that the and T,,,. It is easy to see that the T,,,. It is easy to see that the It is easy to see that the is easy to see that the easy to see that the to see that the see that the that the the by using the same using the same the same same example (see the previous section): the quantile functions Q),(p), Q2:(p) for (T,2, T2,) are cross- functions Q),(p), Q2:(p) for (T,2, T2,) are cross- Q2:(p) for (T,2, T2,) are cross- for (T,2, T2,) are cross- (T,2, T2,) are cross- T2,) are cross- crossoperation + + competes against the addition-like operation over rearrangements of the quantile functions Q,,(p), ® defined byQ,.(p) for (T,,, Ts») if, and only if, the same is true about rearrangements of the quantile functions Q,,(p), ® defined by for (T,,, Ts») if, and only if, the same is true about (T,,, Ts») if, and only if, the same is true about Ts») if, and only if, the same is true about if, and only if, the same is true about of the quantile functions Q,,(p), ® defined by and only if, the same is true about the quantile functions Q,,(p), ® defined by only if, the same is true about quantile functions Q,,(p), ® defined by if, the same is true about the same is true about same is true about is true about true about about ® defined bychoose an arbitrary defined by an arbitrary arbitrary by the function X such that fal lextX ) = 2x[>][ 2z,] + sin[ and] ¥ Again,put we 

==> picture [209 x 23] <==

This time we put we put put T), || Tx, and T 12Ta., and it is easy to Verify that the that the the decomposition tests involving + and @ hold S!™ultaneously: 

==> picture [5 x 13] <==

==> picture [182 x 64] <==

STATEMENT 6. Let the observable RTs T,,,T,2,T2;, T>> be such that T,,,7., are not cross-over rearrangements 

DECOMPOSITIONS OF RESPONSE TIMES 

299 

7. SUFFICIENCY OF DECOMPOSITION TESTS FOR DECOMPOSABILITY 

choice of the interval in which the component times may attain their values, is in establishing that the additive component times can always be chosen “to make sense.” For example, one would not want to additively decompose RTs one would not want to additively decompose RTs would not want to additively decompose RTs not want to additively decompose RTs want to additively decompose RTs to additively decompose RTs decompose RTs RTs that are inherently positive into components that may are inherently positive into components that may inherently positive into components that may positive into components that may into components that may components that may that may may attain negative values. Since the interval of positive reals is negative values. Since the interval of positive reals is values. Since the interval of positive reals is Since the interval of positive reals is the interval of positive reals is interval of positive reals is of positive reals is positive reals is reals is is 4 domain for arithmetic addition (because the addition is domain for arithmetic addition (because the addition is for arithmetic addition (because the addition is arithmetic addition (because the addition is addition (because the addition is (because the addition is the addition is addition is is defined on this interval and maps onto it), Statement 7 tells on this interval and maps onto it), Statement 7 tells this interval and maps onto it), Statement 7 tells interval and maps onto it), Statement 7 tells and maps onto it), Statement 7 tells maps onto it), Statement 7 tells onto it), Statement 7 tells it), Statement 7 tells Statement 7 tells 7 tells tells us that the component times can always be chosen to lie that the component times can always be chosen to lie the component times can always be chosen to lie component times can always be chosen to lie times can always be chosen to lie can always be chosen to lie always be chosen to lie be chosen to lie chosen to lie to lie lie within this interval. Note that even though the domain of this interval. Note that even though the domain of Note that even though the domain of that even though the domain of even though the domain of though the domain of the domain of domain of of an operation is part of this operation’s definition, there can be is part of this operation’s definition, there can be part of this operation’s definition, there can be this operation’s definition, there can be operation’s definition, there can be definition, there can be there can be can be be different domains for operations denoted by one and the domains for operations denoted by one and the for operations denoted by one and the operations denoted by one and the denoted by one and the by one and the one and the and the the same symbol and computed according to one and the same symbol and computed according to one and the same computed according to one and the same according to one and the same to one and the same one and the same and the same the same same algorithm. For example, addition may have one of the three For example, addition may have one of the three example, addition may have one of the three addition may have one of the three may have one of the three have one of the three one of the three of the three the three three domains, (0 ©), (—oo, 0), and (—oo, oo), whereas any (0 ©), (—oo, 0), and (—oo, oo), whereas any ©), (—oo, 0), and (—oo, oo), whereas any (—oo, 0), and (—oo, oo), whereas any 0), and (—oo, oo), whereas any and (—oo, oo), whereas any (—oo, oo), whereas any oo), whereas any whereas any any open interval of reals can serve as a domain for maximum interval of reals can serve as a domain for maximum of reals can serve as a domain for maximum reals can serve as a domain for maximum can serve as a domain for maximum serve as a domain for maximum as a domain for maximum a domain for maximum domain for maximum for maximum maximum or minimum. minimum. 

So far, we have seen that the two forms of stochastic example, one would not want to additively decompose RTs one would not want to additively decompose RTs would not want to additively decompose RTs not want to additively decompose RTs want to additively decompose RTs to additively decompose RTs decompose RTs RTs relationship between hypothetical component times, s.-indethat are inherently positive into components that may are inherently positive into components that may inherently positive into components that may positive into components that may into components that may components that may that may may pendence and p.p.s.-interdependence, exhibit an almost attain negative values. Since the interval of positive reals is negative values. Since the interval of positive reals is values. Since the interval of positive reals is Since the interval of positive reals is the interval of positive reals is interval of positive reals is of positive reals is positive reals is reals is is perfect parallelism. Under both assumptions the decom4 domain for arithmetic addition (because the addition is domain for arithmetic addition (because the addition is for arithmetic addition (because the addition is arithmetic addition (because the addition is addition (because the addition is (because the addition is the addition is addition is is position tests are necessary conditions for the existence of defined on this interval and maps onto it), Statement 7 tells on this interval and maps onto it), Statement 7 tells this interval and maps onto it), Statement 7 tells interval and maps onto it), Statement 7 tells and maps onto it), Statement 7 tells maps onto it), Statement 7 tells onto it), Statement 7 tells it), Statement 7 tells Statement 7 tells 7 tells tells the corresponding architectures (ie. the architectures us that the component times can always be chosen to lie that the component times can always be chosen to lie the component times can always be chosen to lie component times can always be chosen to lie times can always be chosen to lie can always be chosen to lie always be chosen to lie be chosen to lie chosen to lie to lie lie involving the same simple operation and the same form of within this interval. Note that even though the domain of this interval. Note that even though the domain of Note that even though the domain of that even though the domain of even though the domain of though the domain of the domain of domain of of an stochastic relationship; see Statements 1 and 5). Under both operation is part of this operation’s definition, there can be is part of this operation’s definition, there can be part of this operation’s definition, there can be this operation’s definition, there can be operation’s definition, there can be definition, there can be there can be can be be assumptions, excluding the peculiar case of cross-over different domains for operations denoted by one and the domains for operations denoted by one and the for operations denoted by one and the operations denoted by one and the denoted by one and the by one and the one and the and the the rearrangements, only one decomposition rule can be same symbol and computed according to one and the same symbol and computed according to one and the same computed according to one and the same according to one and the same to one and the same one and the same and the same the same same successfully used in a decomposition test, providing itcomalgorithm. For example, addition may have one of the three For example, addition may have one of the three example, addition may have one of the three addition may have one of the three may have one of the three have one of the three one of the three of the three the three three petes against algebraically distinct decomposition rules (see domains, (0 ©), (—oo, 0), and (—oo, oo), whereas any (0 ©), (—oo, 0), and (—oo, oo), whereas any ©), (—oo, 0), and (—oo, oo), whereas any (—oo, 0), and (—oo, oo), whereas any 0), and (—oo, oo), whereas any and (—oo, oo), whereas any (—oo, oo), whereas any oo), whereas any whereas any any Statements 2, 3,4, and 6). None of these results however, open interval of reals can serve as a domain for maximum interval of reals can serve as a domain for maximum of reals can serve as a domain for maximum reals can serve as a domain for maximum can serve as a domain for maximum serve as a domain for maximum as a domain for maximum a domain for maximum domain for maximum for maximum maximum implies that a successful decomposition test guarantees the or minimum. minimum. existence of the corresponding architecture: we do not One could add to Statement 7 (though this issue is not could add to Statement 7 (though this issue is not add to Statement 7 (though this issue is not to Statement 7 (though this issue is not Statement 7 (though this issue is not 7 (though this issue is not (though this issue is not this issue is not issue is not is not not know, for example, whether it follows from the success of pursued in Appendix D beyond the most obvious continuity in Appendix D beyond the most obvious continuity Appendix D beyond the most obvious continuity D beyond the most obvious continuity beyond the most obvious continuity the most obvious continuity most obvious continuity obvious continuity continuity the original summation test that the observable RTs are characteristics of the quantile functions involved) that the of the quantile functions involved) that the the quantile functions involved) that the functions involved) that the involved) that the that the the additively decomposable into s.-independent components. component times A,, A, B,, B, can always be chosen so times A,, A, B,, B, can always be chosen so A,, A, B,, B, can always be chosen so A, B,, B, can always be chosen so B,, B, can always be chosen so B, can always be chosen so can always be chosen so always be chosen so chosen so so This problem, the sufficiency of decomposition tests for that their quantile functions (and distribution functions) their quantile functions (and distribution functions) quantile functions (and distribution functions) (and distribution functions) distribution functions) functions) the existence of corresponding architectures, is the one we _ have the same degree of smoothness as the quantile (respecconsider next. We will see that the mentioned parallelism _ tively, distribution) functions for the decomposed RTs T,,, between the two forms of stochastic relationship breaks T,,, T,,, T.. T,,, T.. T.. down on this problem: the analysis of the p.p.s.-interdeAs already mentioned, the situation is much more com- already mentioned, the situation is much more com- mentioned, the situation is much more com- the situation is much more com- situation is much more com- is much more com- much more com- more com- compendence case turns out to be much simpler. The following plex if one assumes that the component times are s.-inde- if one assumes that the component times are s.-inde- one assumes that the component times are s.-inde- assumes that the component times are s.-inde- that the component times are s.-inde- the component times are s.-inde- component times are s.-inde- times are s.-inde- are s.-inde- s.-indestatement is based on Theorems D1] and D2. pendent. The decomposability is guaranteed here only if the The decomposability is guaranteed here only if the decomposability is guaranteed here only if the is guaranteed here only if the guaranteed here only if the here only if the only if the if the the 

One could add to Statement 7 (though this issue is not could add to Statement 7 (though this issue is not add to Statement 7 (though this issue is not to Statement 7 (though this issue is not Statement 7 (though this issue is not 7 (though this issue is not (though this issue is not this issue is not issue is not is not not pursued in Appendix D beyond the most obvious continuity in Appendix D beyond the most obvious continuity Appendix D beyond the most obvious continuity D beyond the most obvious continuity beyond the most obvious continuity the most obvious continuity most obvious continuity obvious continuity continuity characteristics of the quantile functions involved) that the of the quantile functions involved) that the the quantile functions involved) that the functions involved) that the involved) that the that the the component times A,, A, B,, B, can always be chosen so times A,, A, B,, B, can always be chosen so A,, A, B,, B, can always be chosen so A, B,, B, can always be chosen so B,, B, can always be chosen so B, can always be chosen so can always be chosen so always be chosen so chosen so so that their quantile functions (and distribution functions) their quantile functions (and distribution functions) quantile functions (and distribution functions) (and distribution functions) distribution functions) functions) one we _ have the same degree of smoothness as the quantile (respec- we _ have the same degree of smoothness as the quantile (respec- _ have the same degree of smoothness as the quantile (respec- have the same degree of smoothness as the quantile (respec- the same degree of smoothness as the quantile (respec- same degree of smoothness as the quantile (respec- degree of smoothness as the quantile (respec- of smoothness as the quantile (respec- smoothness as the quantile (respec- as the quantile (respec- the quantile (respec- quantile (respec- (respec_ tively, distribution) functions for the decomposed RTs T,,, tively, distribution) functions for the decomposed RTs T,,, distribution) functions for the decomposed RTs T,,, functions for the decomposed RTs T,,, for the decomposed RTs T,,, decomposed RTs T,,, RTs T,,, T,,, T,,, T,,, T.. T,,, T.. T.. 

As already mentioned, the situation is much more com- already mentioned, the situation is much more com- mentioned, the situation is much more com- the situation is much more com- situation is much more com- is much more com- much more com- more com- complex if one assumes that the component times are s.-inde- if one assumes that the component times are s.-inde- one assumes that the component times are s.-inde- assumes that the component times are s.-inde- that the component times are s.-inde- the component times are s.-inde- component times are s.-inde- times are s.-inde- are s.-inde- s.-independent. The decomposability is guaranteed here only if the The decomposability is guaranteed here only if the decomposability is guaranteed here only if the is guaranteed here only if the guaranteed here only if the here only if the only if the if the the operations involved are minimum or maximum, and even then in a somewhat less straightforward sense. We consider these operations first, preceded by necessary clarifications.; Let T be a continuous Iv., Say, a non-negative one, as would be natural to assume in the case of a RT. Recall that, by conventional definition, the distribution function F,(t) for T should converge to zero as ¢ decreases (here, +0), and it should converge to 1] as f¢ increases {> 00). If the first of these requirements is not satisfied, that is, F(t} p>0 as t—» 0, we will say that T is left-incomplete {in probabilistic terminology, has an atom at 0). If the second requirement isthat not T satisfied, is tight-incomplete that is, F,;(t)- (has ang< 1 as atom f- at 00, infinity; we will say in Feller, 1968, such r.v.’s are called “defective”; in Dzhafarov, 1993, right-incomplete r.v.’s are called incomplete). In the literature on the “parallel” versus “serial” RT architectures right-incomplete r.v.’s have sometimes been treated as a physical impossibility (Luce, 1986, Townsend, 1976; Townsend & Ashby, 1983). It has been shown, by Dzhafarov (1993), however, that right-incomplete component times are physically realizable and that they arise naturally in the context of “min-parallel” architectures. In the Grice-representability language, a component time is modelled as the time it takes for a deterministic process (evoked by stimulus) to cross a randomly preset criterion, as shown in Fig. 8. It may happen then, as in Fig. 8a, that 

STATEMENT 7. Under the assumption of p.p.s.-interdependence, let a decomposition test involving a simple operation % (addition-like,eo minimum,or maximum); be successful when applied to RTS T 11, T12. Tos Too. that is, 

==> picture [208 x 22] <==

, Then there exist rv.’s Ay, Ao, By, By such that 

==> picture [116 x 85] <==

The component times A,, A,, B,, B, are not generally determined uniquely, but their spectra can always be chosen to lie within the same domain of the operation @ that contains the spectra of RTs T,,, T12, T>,, To. 

Combining this statement with Statement 5, we can say that proposition (15) is both necessary and sufficient for the decomposability of RTs according to (14). The importance of the concluding sentence in Statement 7, concerning the 

300 

DZHAFAROV AND SCHWEICKERT 

==> picture [646 x 189] <==

----- Start of picture text -----
criterion A response criterion A response
md level level
ie a
.=
—p—
= =a
aspd f__a=
— -}——
fd eeeas
{-——~+ {———+
probability a probability hee o a
density A time density / MEE : “3 time
----- End of picture text -----

FIGURE 8 

with a non-zero probability gq the criterion exceeds the maximum level of the process, making the crossing time an incomplete r.v. If such a process is assumed to compete with other processes (the winner being the one that reaches its criterion first), then the observable minimum of the competing crossing times may be right-complete (so that a finite RT is observed in every trial) even if all but one of the component times are right-incomplete. The modelling of the left-incompleteness in the Grice-representability language is equally simple (Fig. 8b): the starting level for a process may 5, be non-zero, in which case the criterion may fall below it with some non-zero probability p. If the overall observable RT is assumed to be the longest of the crossing times for several processes (the “max-parallel” architecture), then this RT will be left-complete even if all but one of the component times are left-incomplete. Both forms of incompleteness, left and right, can be equivalently modelled in the McGillrepresentability language (Dzhafarov, 1993). Having established this, we can formulate the following statement, derived from Theorems El and E2. 

Then there exist r.v.s A,, Aj, B,, B, such that, respectively, 

==> picture [139 x 191] <==

The component times A,, A,, B,, B, are not generally determined uniquely, but their spectra can always be chosen to lie Within the same domain of the operation max (or min) that Contains the spectra of RTs Ty, 12, T21, T22. The compoWert times Ay, Ao, By, B, are all right-complete in the case of maximum, but some of them (not all) may be left-incomplete; in the case of minimum, they are all left-complete, but some of them (not all) may be right-incomplete. 

STATEMENT 8. Under the assumption of s.-independence, let a decomposition test involving maximum (or minimum) as its operation be successful when applied to RTST,,,T1.,T, T 3», that is . 

==> picture [242 x 16] <==

Combining this statement with propositions (7} and (8), and keeping in mind the possibility of incomplete component times, we can say that, under the assumption of s.-independence, a successful decomposition test involving minimum or maximum is both necessary and sufficient for the existence of the corresponding “parallel” architecture. 

of 

min{T,,,T..} =; min{T,.,Tx} (Ty 1 T2.,Ty LT). 

DECOMPOSITIONS OF RESPONSE TIMES 

301 

The remaining decomposition tests involve addition-like operations. Mathematically, any such decomposition test can be immediately reduced to one with arithmetic addition, because 

. 

==> picture [95 x 27] <==

==> picture [97 x 16] <==

is equivalent to 

==> picture [182 x 38] <==

Renaming the gq-transformed RTs as T,,, T15, Ts, To, we observe that these new r.v.’s are either all positive or all negative, or else they can attain all real values (see Lemma Al). The problem can now be formulated as follows: Given that 

==> picture [251 x 51] <==

==> picture [184 x 94] <==

on the condition that they are all positive (negative, arbitrary) if T,,, T,., T2,, T. are positive (respectively, negative, arbitrary)? If, and only if, such A,, A, B,, B, can be found, then by g;'-transforming them one gets the dceeOs tonit} S088ht: 

==> picture [117 x 85] <==

Although the mathematical theory of decompositions of r.v.’s into sums of s.-independent r.v.’s is conspicuously void of results that might be judged both general and constructive, a variety of decompositions associated with so-called irreducible r.v.s have been found (Linnik & Ostrovskii, 1972; Lukacs, 1960) that imply that (17) may very well hold 

without (18). A “classical” example (albeit artificial in the present context, as the r.v.’s involved are all discrete) is obtained by putting 

==> picture [166 x 90] <==

_, 

and verifying that (17) holds. It can be proved (Lukacs, 1960) that all these r.v.’s are irreducible, that is, all their possible “ecoaren into sums of s.-independent components have the torm 

==> picture [159 x 22] <==

where ¢ is a constant (formally, a constant and a r.v. are s.-independent). From this it follows easily that no decompomisible s ition spectra (18) is possible of Ay, A,. for ii... these ,., r.v.’s, and even whatever if some theof per- A,, A,, B,, B, are allowed to be constants. (The essence of the example, using the language defined in Appendix E, is that both “RTs” T,,, T,, here are irreducible, but neither is an independent additive component of either of the “RTs” Ty», T},.) A “classical” example involving continuous r.v.’s is as follows. Let T,,, Ty, T.,, T22 (with unconstrained spectra) have the following characteristic functions {Lukacs, 1960): 

==> picture [142 x 74] <==

; 

Again, (17) holds, because ¢11(s) @22(5) = 9 12(5) @2,(5), but no decomposition (18) is possible (because both T,,, T,, are irreducible, but neither is an independent additive componentwhich is normally of either distributed, T,,, which and is irreducible hence can itself, have or only T,,, normallyOther examples, distributed or references independent to the additive literature components). containing such examples, can be found in Feller (1968), Linnik & Ostrovskii (1972), Lukacs (1960), and Rusza & Szekely (1988). Irreducible r.v.’s, upon which all these examples are based, are not as rare as one might judge from the difficulty of constructing them. In fact, for any distribution function there exists an irreducible r.v. with a distribution function arbitrarily close to it (see Definition El and Lemma El for more rigorous formulations). We are in the position now to formulate the following statement, based on Theorem E3. 

302 

DZHAFAROV AND SCHWEICKERT 

STATEMENT 9. Under the assumption of s.-independence, Irrespective of the the results of such an such an an investigation, a decomposition test involving any addition-like operation ® however, one practical conclusion that can be drawn from one practical conclusion that can be drawn from practical conclusion that can be drawn from conclusion that can be drawn from that can be drawn from can be drawn from be drawn from drawn from from may be successful for some r.v’s T,,, 7,2, T2,;, Tx, that do this paper is that s.-independence in the context of RT paper is that s.-independence in the context of RT is that s.-independence in the context of RT that s.-independence in the context of RT s.-independence in the context of RT in the context of RT the context of RT context of RT of RT RT not have the corresponding architecture. In other words, for decompositions should not be invoked for the sake of should not be invoked for the sake of not be invoked for the sake of invoked for the sake of for the sake of the sake of sake of of any addition-like operation @ one can find a quadruple of — simplicity, either conceptual (one’s intuition should be conr.ves T1,, Ty2, T2;, T22 such that siderably “educated” to successfully deal with independent “educated” to successfully deal with independent to successfully deal with independent successfully deal with independent deal with independent with independent independent 

Irrespective of the the results of such an such an an investigation, however, one practical conclusion that can be drawn from one practical conclusion that can be drawn from practical conclusion that can be drawn from conclusion that can be drawn from that can be drawn from can be drawn from be drawn from drawn from from this paper is that s.-independence in the context of RT paper is that s.-independence in the context of RT is that s.-independence in the context of RT that s.-independence in the context of RT s.-independence in the context of RT in the context of RT the context of RT context of RT of RT RT decompositions should not be invoked for the sake of should not be invoked for the sake of not be invoked for the sake of invoked for the sake of for the sake of the sake of sake of of of — simplicity, either conceptual (one’s intuition should be con- — simplicity, either conceptual (one’s intuition should be con- simplicity, either conceptual (one’s intuition should be con- either conceptual (one’s intuition should be con- conceptual (one’s intuition should be con- (one’s intuition should be con- should be con- be considerably “educated” to successfully deal with independent “educated” to successfully deal with independent to successfully deal with independent successfully deal with independent deal with independent with independent independent additive components of r.v.’s) or technical (the actual computation oftrivial and ad independent hoc) The pps. additive interdependence components is assumption both nonseems at least equally plausible a priori, and it does make matters simple. Dzhafarov (1992) showed that for some experimentalhypothetical component situations one can times that impose would restrictions make the two on assumptions,empirically testable s.-independence vawainst each and ether p.p.s.-interdependence, (for . detailed analysis, see Dzhafarov & Rouder, 1995). 

==> picture [204 x 23] <==

but that cannot be decomposed as 

==> picture [119 x 85] <==

Unfortunately, these restrictions do not apply to the decomposition tests based on a 2x2 factorial design. A decomposition test involving an addition-like operation can Y*!Y well hold on one and the same quadruple of RTs Ti, Tra Ta, T'zz under both assumptions, s.-independence and P-P-S--interdependence. As an example, consider the RTs 

Comparing this statement with Statement 1, we conclude that, under the assumption of s.-independence, a successful decomposition test involving an addition-like operation is necessary but not sufficient for the existence of the corresponding architecture. 

==> picture [201 x 90] <==

We see that addition-like decompositions into s.-independent components stand in sharp contrast to all other decomposition tests. Having verified that 

Where lextX >a. It is easy to verily that for these RTs 

==> picture [205 x 16] <==

one rules out the possibility that the RTs T,,, 1,2, T2,,T.. hold simultaneously. It would be useful to investigate what simultaneously. It would be useful to investigate what It would be useful to investigate what would be useful to investigate what be useful to investigate what useful to investigate what to investigate what investigate what what might have an architecture involving another, algebraically additional constraints have to be imposed on RT distribu- constraints have to be imposed on RT distribu- have to be imposed on RT distribu- to be imposed on RT distribu- be imposed on RT distribu- imposed on RT distribu- on RT distribu- RT distribu- distribudistinct, decomposition rule, but one cannot be sure that tions (or those of the hypothetical RT components) that (or those of the hypothetical RT components) that those of the hypothetical RT components) that of the hypothetical RT components) that the hypothetical RT components) that hypothetical RT components) that RT components) that components) that that they have the architecture involving @: this has to be would prevent this from happening (making thereby the prevent this from happening (making thereby the this from happening (making thereby the from happening (making thereby the happening (making thereby the (making thereby the thereby the the proved by actually finding some quadruple of @-decomtwo forms of stochastic relationship testable against each forms of stochastic relationship testable against each of stochastic relationship testable against each stochastic relationship testable against each testable against each against each each posing component times A,, A>, B,, B.. This result is cerother). tainly disappointing, but it is not clear at the moment just how grave its consequences are for RT analysis. We cannot =.g, PHYSICAL REALIZABILITY OF NON-TRADITIONAL exclude the possibility that all empirically observable RTs DECOMPOSITION RULES de facto belong to a subclass of r.v.'s for which the decomposability in question is guaranteed by a success of the Perhaps the most unusual notion introduced in this the most unusual notion introduced in this most unusual notion introduced in this unusual notion introduced in this notion introduced in this introduced in this in this this corresponding decomposition test, at least for some decom- __ paper is that ofusing operations other than arithmetic addiposition rules. Just as an example, this would be the case tion, minimum, and maximum. As stated earlier, decisive minimum, and maximum. As stated earlier, decisive and maximum. As stated earlier, decisive maximum. As stated earlier, decisive As stated earlier, decisive stated earlier, decisive earlier, decisive decisive for additive decompositions if all RT distributions were arguments in favor of the “possibility” of RT architectures in favor of the “possibility” of RT architectures favor of the “possibility” of RT architectures of the “possibility” of RT architectures the “possibility” of RT architectures “possibility” of RT architectures of RT architectures RT architectures architectures gamma-distributions with one and the same exponential involving such operations can only be empirical. such operations can only be empirical. operations can only be empirical. can only be empirical. only be empirical. be empirical. empirical. It is parameter. It would be very useful, therefore, to investigate legitimate, however, in the absence of empirical informa- however, in the absence of empirical informa- in the absence of empirical informa- the absence of empirical informa- absence of empirical informa- of empirical informa- empirical informa- informathe validity of Statement 9 for a relatively narrow family of tion, to ask whether these alternative operations can at all to ask whether these alternative operations can at all ask whether these alternative operations can at all whether these alternative operations can at all these alternative operations can at all alternative operations can at all operations can at all can at all at all all r.v.’s that would include (according to some, so far non- _ be physically realizable, that is, whether they can be shown existing, theory) all possible RTs or all possible RTs in a to reflect some properties of hypothetical processes whose reflect some properties of hypothetical processes whose some properties of hypothetical processes whose properties of hypothetical processes whose of hypothetical processes whose hypothetical processes whose processes whose whose certain experiment. The mentioned (non-existing) theory durations are observable RTs. In the case of the common are observable RTs. In the case of the common observable RTs. In the case of the common RTs. In the case of the common In the case of the common the case of the common case of the common of the common the common common constraining the family of RT distributions would also be operations (+, min, max) their physical realizability is (+, min, max) their physical realizability is min, max) their physical realizability is max) their physical realizability is their physical realizability is physical realizability is realizability is is likely to constrain the distributions of the component times, obvious: one can think of each component time as the one can think of each component time as the can think of each component time as the think of each component time as the of each component time as the each component time as the component time as the time as the as the the which might considerably simplify mathematical analysis. | duration of a separate subprocess (selectively influenced by duration of a separate subprocess (selectively influenced by of a separate subprocess (selectively influenced by a separate subprocess (selectively influenced by subprocess (selectively influenced by (selectively influenced by influenced by by 

hold simultaneously. It would be useful to investigate what simultaneously. It would be useful to investigate what It would be useful to investigate what would be useful to investigate what be useful to investigate what useful to investigate what to investigate what investigate what what additional constraints have to be imposed on RT distribu- constraints have to be imposed on RT distribu- have to be imposed on RT distribu- to be imposed on RT distribu- be imposed on RT distribu- imposed on RT distribu- on RT distribu- RT distribu- distributions (or those of the hypothetical RT components) that (or those of the hypothetical RT components) that those of the hypothetical RT components) that of the hypothetical RT components) that the hypothetical RT components) that hypothetical RT components) that RT components) that components) that that would prevent this from happening (making thereby the prevent this from happening (making thereby the this from happening (making thereby the from happening (making thereby the happening (making thereby the (making thereby the thereby the the two forms of stochastic relationship testable against each forms of stochastic relationship testable against each of stochastic relationship testable against each stochastic relationship testable against each testable against each against each each other). 

Perhaps the most unusual notion introduced in this the most unusual notion introduced in this most unusual notion introduced in this unusual notion introduced in this notion introduced in this introduced in this in this this some decom- __ paper is that ofusing operations other than arithmetic addi- decom- __ paper is that ofusing operations other than arithmetic addi- __ paper is that ofusing operations other than arithmetic addi- paper is that ofusing operations other than arithmetic addi- is that ofusing operations other than arithmetic addi- that ofusing operations other than arithmetic addi- ofusing operations other than arithmetic addi- than arithmetic addi- arithmetic addition, minimum, and maximum. As stated earlier, decisive minimum, and maximum. As stated earlier, decisive and maximum. As stated earlier, decisive maximum. As stated earlier, decisive As stated earlier, decisive stated earlier, decisive earlier, decisive decisive arguments in favor of the “possibility” of RT architectures in favor of the “possibility” of RT architectures favor of the “possibility” of RT architectures of the “possibility” of RT architectures the “possibility” of RT architectures “possibility” of RT architectures of RT architectures RT architectures architectures involving such operations can only be empirical. such operations can only be empirical. operations can only be empirical. can only be empirical. only be empirical. be empirical. empirical. It is legitimate, however, in the absence of empirical informa- however, in the absence of empirical informa- in the absence of empirical informa- the absence of empirical informa- absence of empirical informa- of empirical informa- empirical informa- information, to ask whether these alternative operations can at all to ask whether these alternative operations can at all ask whether these alternative operations can at all whether these alternative operations can at all these alternative operations can at all alternative operations can at all operations can at all can at all at all all so far non- _ be physically realizable, that is, whether they can be shown far non- _ be physically realizable, that is, whether they can be shown non- _ be physically realizable, that is, whether they can be shown _ be physically realizable, that is, whether they can be shown be physically realizable, that is, whether they can be shown physically realizable, that is, whether they can be shown realizable, that is, whether they can be shown that is, whether they can be shown is, whether they can be shown whether they can be shown they can be shown can be shown be shown shown to reflect some properties of hypothetical processes whose reflect some properties of hypothetical processes whose some properties of hypothetical processes whose properties of hypothetical processes whose of hypothetical processes whose hypothetical processes whose processes whose whose durations are observable RTs. In the case of the common are observable RTs. In the case of the common observable RTs. In the case of the common RTs. In the case of the common In the case of the common the case of the common case of the common of the common the common common operations (+, min, max) their physical realizability is (+, min, max) their physical realizability is min, max) their physical realizability is max) their physical realizability is their physical realizability is physical realizability is realizability is is obvious: one can think of each component time as the one can think of each component time as the can think of each component time as the think of each component time as the of each component time as the each component time as the component time as the time as the as the the | duration of a separate subprocess (selectively influenced by duration of a separate subprocess (selectively influenced by of a separate subprocess (selectively influenced by a separate subprocess (selectively influenced by subprocess (selectively influenced by (selectively influenced by influenced by by 

DECOMPOSITIONS OF RESPONSE TIMES 

303 

a certain factor) with uniquely defined starting-stopping rules. In such a “naturalistic” interpretation, the alternative addition-like decomposition rules de appear artificial, ifnot non-realizable. We propose, therefore, another interpretation, at this stage as a logical possibility only. We present this interpretation in the McGill modelling language (Dzhafarov,of stochastic 1993), processes in which evoked observable by stimuli RTs and are developing durations until they reach a fixed critical level (criterion). 

one can indeed construct the process C,_ ,(1|X, Y) so that proposition (19) holds. Consider the process representable as 

==> picture [228 x 58] <==

with the following properties: g is some monotonic continuous function (increasing or decreasing) mapping positive time values onto one of the three intervals (— oo, 0), time values onto one of the three intervals (— oo, 0), values onto one of the three intervals (— oo, 0), onto one of the three intervals (— oo, 0), of the three intervals (— oo, 0), the three intervals (— oo, 0), three intervals (— oo, 0), intervals (— oo, 0), (— oo, 0), oo, 0), (0,00), or (—%, 0); A, and By are some increasing or (—%, 0); A, and By are some increasing (—%, 0); A, and By are some increasing 0); A, and By are some increasing A, and By are some increasing and By are some increasing By are some increasing are some increasing some increasing increasing functions mapping reals into positive time values and mapping reals into positive time values and reals into positive time values and into positive time values and time values and values and and depending on the factors a and f as their respective param- on the factors a and f as their respective param- the factors a and f as their respective param- factors a and f as their respective param- a and f as their respective param- and f as their respective param- f as their respective param- as their respective param- their respective param- respective param- param(If the expression for the process appears too artificial, the expression for the process appears too artificial, expression for the process appears too artificial, for the process appears too artificial, the process appears too artificial, process appears too artificial, appears too artificial, too artificial, artificial, observe that by simple renaming it can be simplified as that by simple renaming it can be simplified as by simple renaming it can be simplified as simple renaming it can be simplified as renaming it can be simplified as it can be simplified as can be simplified as be simplified as simplified as as 

The simplest special case ofa stochastic process isadetertinuous function (increasing or decreasing) mapping ministic function of time with randomly preset initial condi- _positive time values onto one of the three intervals (— oo, 0), time values onto one of the three intervals (— oo, 0), values onto one of the three intervals (— oo, 0), onto one of the three intervals (— oo, 0), of the three intervals (— oo, 0), the three intervals (— oo, 0), three intervals (— oo, 0), intervals (— oo, 0), (— oo, 0), oo, 0), tions. Let C,, ,(¢|X, Y) be sucha process, where ¢standsfor (0,00), or (—%, 0); A, and By are some increasing or (—%, 0); A, and By are some increasing (—%, 0); A, and By are some increasing 0); A, and By are some increasing A, and By are some increasing and By are some increasing By are some increasing are some increasing some increasing increasing time, X, Y are r.v.’s representing initial conditions, and C, , functions mapping reals into positive time values and mapping reals into positive time values and reals into positive time values and into positive time values and time values and values and and is some increasing function of t that depends on factors « depending on the factors a and f as their respective param- on the factors a and f as their respective param- the factors a and f as their respective param- factors a and f as their respective param- a and f as their respective param- and f as their respective param- f as their respective param- as their respective param- their respective param- respective param- paramand # as its parameters. The process is assumed to be _ eters. (If the expression for the process appears too artificial, the expression for the process appears too artificial, expression for the process appears too artificial, for the process appears too artificial, the process appears too artificial, process appears too artificial, appears too artificial, too artificial, artificial, evoked at moment f=0 and increase until it crosses some observe that by simple renaming it can be simplified as that by simple renaming it can be simplified as by simple renaming it can be simplified as simple renaming it can be simplified as renaming it can be simplified as it can be simplified as can be simplified as be simplified as simplified as as fixed criterion, whose value can be taken to be unity. The time of the crossing is determined by solving for ¢ the S, exp{ ®,[ g(t)— ¥e(S2)]}}; equation 

it will save us time, however, to use the more explicit version.} The process level is considered undefined or equal to zero at all moments ¢t > 0 at which g(t) — g(A,{X)) falls outside the domain of g~'. It is easy to prove that at all other moments the process increases. The solution (with respect to /) of the equation 

==> picture [73 x 12] <==

==> picture [69 x 23] <==

==> picture [72 x 22] <==

is the observable RT. Suppose that it happens that this solution is representable as 

==> picture [198 x 30] <==

is, writing A{a, X), B(B, Y) instead of A,(X), B,(Y), 

==> picture [198 x 11] <==

==> picture [200 x 33] <==

where @ is a simple operation, and A, B are some functions. Then, putting 

where @® is the addition-like operation determined by Se = &. This agrees with (19) and makes our point for addition-like operations: architectures involving such operations are physically realizable. The case of s.-independence is obtained by assuming that the two initial conditions are mutually s.-independent, X | Y; the case of p.p.s.-interdependence is obtained by assuming that the process is singlevariate, X=Y. The traditional serial architecture with s.- independent components corresponds in this scheme to the process 

==> picture [102 x 71] <==

one can say that the RT has the architecture 

d T(a, B) == Ala) © BP), 

==> picture [195 x 42] <==

where the stochastic relationship between A(a) and B(f) is determined by the joint distribution of X, Y (the initial conditions that now can be called “internal sources of variability” for the component times). As we see, the component times here are merely time-dimensioned descriptors of a single process, and they are not interpretable as durations of its separate “parts.” It remains to demonstrate now that 

The minimum and maximum operations can be appended as limit cases, through a procedure involving “Minkowskinorm” operations for maximum (9(f)=??, p> 1) and their negative-exponent counterparts for minimum (g(t) =7?, p<-—l). To avoid technical complications, however, 

304 

DZHAFAROYV AND SCHWEICKERT 

(B2) Under the assumption of s.-independence,a successful ( @ )-test is sufficient for ( # )-decomposability of RTs if the operation @ is min or max (some of the component times in these cases can be incomplete random variables); if the operation @ is addition-like, then a ( @)-test may be successful even if the RTs are not ( ®)-decomposable (in which case they are not decomposable by means of any ther operation either). 

a more straightforward approach is to simply define stochastic processes as 

==> picture [175 x 36] <==

where c, and cy are some increasing functions. Denoting the solutions of the equations c,(t}X)=1 and eg(t) ¥)=1 by A(a, X) and BB, Y), respectively, aaaband to see that unitythe processes Cy"p"(t|X, ¥) and Com"(t|X,¥) cross a mintthis interpretation AC,level X), at BB, the and ¥)}, momentstne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle andthis interpretation AC,level X), at BB, the and ¥)}, momentstne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and interpretation AC,level X), at BB, the and ¥)}, momentstne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and AC,level X), at BB, the and ¥)}, momentstne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle andlevel X), at BB, the and ¥)}, momentstne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and X), at BB, the and ¥)}, momentstne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and at BB, the and ¥)}, momentstne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and BB, the and ¥)}, momentstne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and the and ¥)}, momentstne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and and ¥)}, momentstne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and ¥)}, momentstne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and momentstne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle andtne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle andtwo Y)} Detwern paralle and Y)} Detwern paralle and Detwern paralle and paralle and and withinthe spectra the same of the domain RTs themselves. of the. the same of the domain RTs themselves. of the. same of the domain RTs themselves. of the. of the domain RTs themselves. of the. the domain RTs themselves. of the. domain RTs themselves. of the. RTs themselves. of the. themselves. of the. of the. operation. @. that contains contains processes, is obviously inconsequential, and our only reason for presenting it is to emphasize that here, too, as is the case with addition-like decomposition rules, the component . . . . ; ae times can be interpreted as time-dimensioned characteristics of a single process, rather than durations of separate processes. 

(C) Recovery ofcomponent times. The component times of ( @)-decomposable RTs generally cannot be recovered but their spectra can always be chosen to lie their spectra can always be chosen to lie spectra can always be chosen to lie can always be chosen to lie always be chosen to lie chosen to lie to lie lie the spectra the same of the domain RTs themselves. of the. the same of the domain RTs themselves. of the. same of the domain RTs themselves. of the. of the domain RTs themselves. of the. the domain RTs themselves. of the. domain RTs themselves. of the. RTs themselves. of the. themselves. of the. of the. operation. @. that contains contains operation. @. that contains contains @. that contains contains that contains contains 

¥) cross a a niquely, but their spectra can always be chosen to lie their spectra can always be chosen to lie spectra can always be chosen to lie can always be chosen to lie always be chosen to lie chosen to lie to lie lie 

mintthis interpretation AC,level X), at BB, the and ¥)}, momentstne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle andthis interpretation AC,level X), at BB, the and ¥)}, momentstne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and interpretation AC,level X), at BB, the and ¥)}, momentstne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and AC,level X), at BB, the and ¥)}, momentstne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle andlevel X), at BB, the and ¥)}, momentstne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and X), at BB, the and ¥)}, momentstne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and at BB, the and ¥)}, momentstne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and BB, the and ¥)}, momentstne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and the and ¥)}, momentstne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and and ¥)}, momentstne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and ¥)}, momentstne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and momentstne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle andtne respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and respectively. traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and traditional max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and max{A(a, ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and ine one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and one, corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and corence X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and X), with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and with BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle and BB,two Y)} Detwern paralle andtwo Y)} Detwern paralle and Y)} Detwern paralle and Detwern paralle and paralle and and withinthe spectra the same of the domain RTs themselves. of the. the same of the domain RTs themselves. of the. same of the domain RTs themselves. of the. of the domain RTs themselves. of the. the domain RTs themselves. of the. domain RTs themselves. of the. RTs themselves. of the. themselves. of the. of the. operation. @. that contains contains 

. . . - (D) Recovery of stochastic relationship : The decomposition tests do not recover the stochastic relationship: a (@ }-test may be successful under both p.p.s.-interdependence and s.-independence. 

| (FE) The results of this paper are not predicated on any constraints imposed on RT distributions. The results therefore are equally applicable to random variables in other empirical domains. 

9. SUMMARY OF MAIN RESULTS 

APPENDIX A: SIMPLE OPERATIONS 

To state the main. results succinctly, we adopt the following conventions. A decomposition test involving a decomposiDEFINITION Al. An operation @ operation @ @ tion rule @ is referred to as the ( #)-test. Analogously, we _ tion-like operation on some open interval say that RT is ()-decomposable, meaning that it can be 7x J—/J onto, J—/J onto, onto, is associative, continuous, and decomposed into two components connected by the simple increasing in both arguments. An in both arguments. An both arguments. An arguments. An An operation on/ is called operation @. It is implied but not mentioned explicitly simple if it is min{a, b}, max{a,b} or if it is min{a, b}, max{a,b} or it is min{a, b}, max{a,b} or is min{a, b}, max{a,b} or min{a, b}, max{a,b} or b}, max{a,b} or max{a,b} or or a®b, where @ is that we deal with a 2 x 2 crossed factorial design and that addition-like (a, be 1). (a, be 1). be 1). 1). the component times are selectively influenced by different ; factors. It is also implied without mentioning that the RTs Lemma Al. (Aczél). An operation ® Al. (Aczél). An operation ® (Aczél). An operation ® An operation ® operation ® ® involved do not form a pattern of cross-over rearrangeSME interval interval I< Re iff there is a strictly Re iff there is a strictly iff there is a strictly there is a strictly is a strictly a strictly strictly monotonic conments (in particular, the index factors are effective), and “04S Junction §@:1—+Re, such that competing decomposition rules (# and ©) are Sa L8el4)+8el)); ge is determined L8el4)+8el)); ge is determined ge is determined is determined determined uniquely up to a algebraically distinct. With these conventions in mind, the "#/tiplication cg@. Addition-like Addition-like results are as follows. mutative, and g_(1) is one of the three and g_(1) is one of the three g_(1) is one of the three is one of the three one of the three of the three the three three intervals (—, 0), 

DEFINITION Al. An operation @ operation @ @ is called an addiwe _ tion-like operation on some open interval _ tion-like operation on some open interval tion-like operation on some open interval operation on some open interval on some open interval some open interval open interval interval /¢ Re if © maps 7x J—/J onto, J—/J onto, onto, is associative, continuous, and strictly increasing in both arguments. An in both arguments. An both arguments. An arguments. An An operation on/ is called simple if it is min{a, b}, max{a,b} or if it is min{a, b}, max{a,b} or it is min{a, b}, max{a,b} or is min{a, b}, max{a,b} or min{a, b}, max{a,b} or b}, max{a,b} or max{a,b} or or a®b, where @ is addition-like (a, be 1). (a, be 1). be 1). 1). 

; oo Lemma Al. (Aczél). An operation ® Al. (Aczél). An operation ® (Aczél). An operation ® An operation ® operation ® ® is addition-like on SME interval interval I< Re iff there is a strictly Re iff there is a strictly iff there is a strictly there is a strictly is a strictly a strictly strictly monotonic con“04S Junction §@:1—+Re, such that a@b= Sa L8el4)+8el)); ge is determined L8el4)+8el)); ge is determined ge is determined is determined determined uniquely up to a "#/tiplication cg@. Addition-like Addition-like operations are commutative, and g_(1) is one of the three and g_(1) is one of the three g_(1) is one of the three is one of the three one of the three of the three the three three intervals (—, 0), (0, 00), (— 00, 00). 

(A) Necessity and uniqueness of identification. Under either of the two forms of stochastic relationship, p.p.s.interdependence or s.-independence, and for any two decomposition rules e and © , P ° 

- a Proof, The main statement, that a@b= gq Lgol4) + &@ (b)], and the uniqueness statement are proved in Aczeél (1966, pp. 256-267), with the commutativity following as an obvious corollary. That gg{/) is (— 00,0), (0, 00), or (—:, ©), is proved as follows. Jf sup gg(/)+ sup g@(/) >supg@(Z), then, for sufficiently large x, yega(/), vt ye me Sell). Hence go)—ly Ose—1 (viel whileil Bo (), So (¥) ef, which contradicts the fact that © Is closed. If sup g@{J)+sup go(J) <supge(s), then for a sufficiently large zeg,(J), x +y<z for all x, veg (J). Hence gg'(z) cannot be presented as gg(xJ)@g5'(y), which contradicts the fact that @ maps onto. It follows that sup g@(J)}+sup g@(/) =sup gq{J), and hence sup gq(/) = —0o, 0, or +00. Analogously one proves that inf g (J) + infg(/)=infg(/), that is, infgs(7J)= —o, 0, or +. 

(Al) asuccessful ( @ )-test is necessary for(@)-decomposability of RTs: 

(A2} (@)-test and (©)-test cannot be successful together; that is, no RTs can be both ( @)-decomposable and (})-decomposable 

P 

(B) Sufficiency. 

(B1) Under the assumption of p.p.s.-interdependence a successful (  )-test is sufficient for (#)-decomposability of RTs. 

DECOMPOSITIONS OF RESPONSE TIMES 

305 

_ 

This completes the proof, because the only three nondegenerate intervals that can be formed from these values are (— 00, 0}, (0, 00}, or (—«w, 0). 

DEFINITION A2. Given two addition-like operations ® and ® on some interval J< Re, gg is called strictly convex (strictly concave) on J with respect to gq, if the function g defined by 2g = gq is strictly convex (strictly concave) on Ze (/). The function g is well defined and continuous because both gg and gq are strictly monotonic and continuous. Obviously, gg is strictly convex (strictly concave) with respect to gm on some interval iffgq is strictly concave (strictly convex) with respect to gg on the same interval. 

The proof of the following lemma, except for minor modifications, was provided to us by Donald Burkholder (personal communication, June 1994). 

LemMa A2. (Burkholder). Given two addition-like operations ® and ® on some interval I< Re, the following two 

statements are equivalent: 

(i) the system of equations 

==> picture [144 x 28] <==

is satisfied by no more than one unordered pair (x, y) for any ordered pair (a, b): 

(ii) g@ is strictly convex or strictly concave on I with 

respect 10 Be 

~Proof. Let gg=8Eq, and let é denote ga(c). This allows us to rewrite the system as 

==> picture [187 x 30] <==

Any two different pairs (%,,9,), (% 2), such that X,+¥y=X2+ Yo can be presented (except for trivial permutations of indices) as 

==> picture [87 x 75] <==

==> picture [178 x 20] <==

==> picture [145 x 16] <==

<X¥+4,X+4,X<sup go(J). 

Proposition (i) then can be viewed as stating that for all such X, 4, X, and 4, %, the function 

==> picture [222 x 67] <==

does not vanish. At the same time, g is strictly convex (concave) on ga(I) iff F(¥, 4,%, 42%) is strictly positive (negative) for all admissible values of %, 4,X, and 4, X. This Proves that (i1) implies (i). Assume now that (1) holds, but, fr some triads (X), 41%), 42%), and (X2,. 41X25 42Xo), F(X1, 4X1, 4.%)) > 0 and F(X2, 4, X2, 42%.) <0. Let f(a), O0<a< 1, be defined by 

==> picture [193 x 33] <==

Observe that f(«) is continuous, and 

==> picture [238 x 115] <==

Since, by assumption, f(0)>0 and f(1)<0, there must be a point «a between 0 and 1 at which f(a)=0. This is impossible, however, because it follows from (i). that F(X, 4,X, 4X) never vanishes. This contradiction proves that (1) implies (11) and completes the proof. 

LemMa A3. Given an addition-like operation © on some interval IS Re, each of the systems of equations 

==> picture [213 x 50] <==

is satisfied by no more than one unordered pair (x, y) for any ordered pair (a, b). 

Proof. Since gq is strictly monotonic, the contour x® y=a, which is equivalent to g9(x) + 8@(¥)=8 a4), defines a strictly decreasing relationship between x and y for any a. Hence, for any b, this contour cannot intersect 

306 

DZHAFAROV AND SCHWEICKERT 

straight lines x = b and y =} at more than one point each; due to the contour’s symmetry with respect to the main bisector, the two intersection points are identical as unordered pairs (refer to Fig. 4). This proves the lemma for the first two systems of equations. For the third one, the unordered solution is always (x, y)=(a, b). This completes the proof. 

points in Sy, y) <--<y, (121) have been determined uniquely, and we show by induction that then either x,, , or _y,,, (or both) are determined uniquely. This is sufficient to prove the lemma, because at the end of the induction chain one of the r.v.’s (X, Y) will be determined uniquely, and the other will then be determined from either of the distributional equations g,(X) + ge(Y) £ SalA), Sea(X)+8ea(Y) fg @(B), by deconvolution. 

APPENDIX B: UNIQUENESS OF SIMPLE OPERATIONS UNDER STOCHASTIC INDEPENDENCE 

We begin the induction step by forming all pairwise combinations x,@x, and x,@ x, among the values known by the induction hypothesis: 

In the theorems below the spectra of all r.v.’s are assumed to lie in the domains of the simple operations relating them to each other (the spectrum of a r.v. is the set of its possible values). 

==> picture [136 x 91] <==

THEOREM Bl. For any given pair of r.v.s A and B, there is at most one (unordered) pair of r.v.s X 1 Y, such that 

Let 

==> picture [50 x 34] <==

. 

that is, a, and b, are the smallest elements in S', and Sz, provided that g is strictly convex (strictly concave) with tespectively, that have not been “accounted for” in terms respect to g @: of the known values of S, and Sy. Obviously, either We first prove this. first prove this. prove this. this.. theorem for a special subclass of for a special subclass of a special subclass of special subclass of subclass of of XOthere can be 41=4,, no OF combination X%4,@y¥, x,@x,¢J, =a, (or both), that is less because than discrete r.¥.’s, referred to as primitive. The result is then r.¥.’s, referred to as primitive. The result is then referred to as primitive. The result is then to as primitive. The result is then primitive. The result is then The result is then result is then is then then both these values. Analogously, either x, @)74,;=b, or generalized to arbitrary r.v.’s based on limit considerations, to arbitrary r.v.’s based on limit considerations, arbitrary r.v.’s based on limit considerations, r.v.’s based on limit considerations, based on limit considerations, on limit considerations, limit considerations, considerations, x, ,@y,= b, (or both). If 

We first prove this. first prove this. prove this. this.. theorem for a special subclass of for a special subclass of a special subclass of special subclass of subclass of of discrete r.¥.’s, referred to as primitive. The result is then r.¥.’s, referred to as primitive. The result is then referred to as primitive. The result is then to as primitive. The result is then primitive. The result is then The result is then result is then is then then generalized to arbitrary r.v.’s based on limit considerations, to arbitrary r.v.’s based on limit considerations, arbitrary r.v.’s based on limit considerations, r.v.’s based on limit considerations, based on limit considerations, on limit considerations, limit considerations, considerations, since any r.v. can be approximated by a weakly converging sequence of primitive r.v.’s. (The concept of weak convergence, which here coincides with that of convergence in distribution, is explained in most textbooks of probability; see, e.g., Loeve, 1963.) 

==> picture [66 x 36] <==

DEFINITION BI. A rv. X is called primitive if its spectrum S,, consists of a finite number of points x, <--- <x, each associated with a probability mass of \/n. 

then y,,, is determined uniquely, and the induction step is complete. Analogously, if 

LemMA BI. Theorem B1 holds if the rvs A and B are primitive. 

==> picture [67 x 30] <==

Proof. Let one solution (X, Y) exist. Obviously, both X and Y are primitive, and denoting their spectra by Sy=x,<-:- <x, and Sy=y,<-:- <y,,, we observe that the spectra of A and B contain am points each: S,=4,S-:: <a,,,, Sg=b,<--: <O,,,. For definiteness, assume that (X,Y) are always chosen so that x;< yy. 

then x,,, 1s determined uniquely, and the induction step is complete. These two possibilities are not, of course, mutually conflicting. Assume now that none of them takes place. Then 

It is clear that 

==> picture [199 x 54] <==

==> picture [55 x 34] <==

hence, by Lemma A2, x, and y, are determined uniquely (x, < y,). Taking this as an induction basis, we assume that the first k points in Sy, x; < --- <x, (k 21) and the first/ 

Since each of the two equation pairs determines (x,41, ¥;4,) uniquely, the induction step is complete if only one, but not another of these equation pairs holds. It 

DECOMPOSITIONS OF RESPONSE TIMES 

307 

remains to be proved, therefore, that if both these equation pairs hold, then their solutions (%,4,1,3;,;) and (X, 4153741) coincide. Indeed, if both 

==> picture [176 x 35] <==

. 

. 

then there must exist pf > p, > q, p > p, and g > q, such that 

==> picture [176 x 47] <==

Then we have, however, by grouping the equations differently, 

==> picture [226 x 73] <==

and 

==> picture [233 x 70] <==

This completes the duction step and the proof of the lemma. 

To generalize thisoo, uniqueness result to arbitrary; r.v.’s, (of which we are really interested in continuous ones only), we make use of topological considerations. The topological terms and facts used here and below are standard, their definitions and proofs being found is almost any textbook of topology or advanced calculus (see, e.g., Kelly, 1955), Let Xx be the class of all r.v.’s, Np CR be the class of all primitive tv.’s, and NEcRp be the class of primitive r.v.’s whose spectra contain n elements. We introduce the following embedding relationship on Xp: rvs CER and Cen, k = 1, 2, ..., are equivalent if their ordered spectra are related as 

==> picture [208 x 49] <==

By such a refinement any set Nj, can be embedded as a subset in X*. Obviously, X% is closed (n-point spectra can weakly converge to n-point spectra only), and hence &% is compact in the sense of weak convergence (because, by pp.subspacesHelly’s 179-180). theorem, of & We are Hausdorff. N will is compact also need in this the sense; see obvious fact Loeve, that the 1963, 

Proof of Theorem Bl, The distributional equations 

==> picture [90 x 45] <==

define a continuous operator @:NxNX—NxN uniquely mapping pairs (X, Y) into pairs (A, B). We have to prove that 27~' maps (A, B) into (X, Y) uniquely, considering, of course, (X, Y) and (Y, X) indistinguishable. By Lemma B1, this is true if (A, B)- Q(Np xp) GNpxN,, that is, the restriction of 2 to Npx¥N, > Q(NpxN_p) is a bijection, obviously continuous. For an arbitrary n> 1, consider a sequence of embedded spaces NZxNLCORTXNTc QING-- ONZxXNZC--. XRS) CORE and XN) the S -- corresponding OREXR™P) sequenceFor any i=1,2,.., the restriction of 2 to NEXN> Q(R; X NE) is a continuous bijective operator from a compact space N™xN"™ onto a Hausdorff space Q(N%x NF). Hence, by a well-known theorem of topology (Kelly, 1955, p. 141), any such restriction of Q:N%xN%> Q(NS x NE) is a homeomorphism; that is, the restriction of 27' to Q(N% x 82) > NZ xR” is a continuous bijection. Consider now the restriction of Q—' to Q(¥p)— Fp, where 

==> picture [197 x 26] <==

Any element of Q(%,) belongs to all spaces Q(N%x X%) beginning withcorresponding restrictions some value of i, Q-! and are in all continuous. these spaces As the a result, the restriction of Q-! to Q(.Fp) > Fp is continuous 4, Q( Fp). 

Suppose now that Q-! maps some pair of (nonprimitive) r.v’s (A, B) into two distinct unordered pairs (X,, Y,) and (X,, Y,). Then in the small neighborhood of (A, B) one should be able to find two arbitrarily close embers of Q(,) that map into two distinct members of fp, which contradicts the continuity of the restriction of Q-' to QF») > Fp. This completes the proof. 

THEOREM B2. For any given pair of r.v.s A and B, there is at most one (unordered) pair of r.v..s X 1 Y¥, such that 

==> picture [69 x 35] <==

308 

DZHAFAROV AND SCHWEICKERT 

Proof. One can verify step-by-step that the entire proof of Lemma Bl applies here with no non-trivial modifications, except that references to Lemma A2 should be 

necessarily create a point of decrease in one of the functions. This completes the proof. 

; 

Theorem B1 applies here in its entirety. 

X LY. such that 

THEOREM B3. For any given pair of r.v.s A and B, there is at most one (unordered) pair of rvs X 1 Y, such that 

==> picture [4 x 13] <==

==> picture [69 x 35] <==

==> picture [68 x 40] <==

Proof. This system of distributional equations 1s equivFen to ine following numerica calsan relating the 

LemmaProof. B1 couldIt is easy also to see begin that at the the maxima, induction rather chain than in the minima of S, and S, (hence also of Sy and Sy), and proceed in the decreasing, rather than increasing, order of indexation. With such an order-reversion, the proof of Lemma BI (hence of Theorem B]1) applies here with no non-trivial modifications. The scheme of proof used in Lemma BI does not work, however, if the two operations are min and max. Fortunately, this is the case when a proof of the uniqueness {that turns out to be of a weaker variety) can easily be obtained by elementary means. We need first one auxiliary result. 

==> picture [154 x 30] <==

; , ; 

; 

Their solutions, for any given f, are unique up to an interchange of F,(t) and Fy(t) values, and the proof is completed by applying Lemma B2. 

APPENDIX C: UNIQUENESS OF SIMPLE OPERATIONS UNDER PERFECT POSITIVE INTERDEPENDENCE 

DEFINITION B2. Let F(t), Fy(o) be the distribution DEFINITION C1. C1. The quantile function Q(p) (0 < p <1) quantile function Q(p) (0 < p <1) function Q(p) (0 < p <1) Q(p) (0 < p <1) (0 < p <1) < p <1) p <1) <1) functions of r.v.’s X, Y. Point ¢ is called a crossing point of for a ry. X is defined as inf {t: F(t) > p}, where F(t) is the a ry. X is defined as inf {t: F(t) > p}, where F(t) is the ry. X is defined as inf {t: F(t) > p}, where F(t) is the X is defined as inf {t: F(t) > p}, where F(t) is the is defined as inf {t: F(t) > p}, where F(t) is the defined as inf {t: F(t) > p}, where F(t) is the as inf {t: F(t) > p}, where F(t) is the inf {t: F(t) > p}, where F(t) is the {t: F(t) > p}, where F(t) is the F(t) > p}, where F(t) is the > p}, where F(t) is the p}, where F(t) is the where F(t) is the F(t) is the is the the the two distribution functions if for all sufficiently small — gistribution function for X. [This makes quantile functions &>0, [Fy(t+e)— Fy(¢—e)][ Fy(t—e) — Fy(t+€)] <0 sight-continuous, with a countable number of discon- a countable number of discon- countable number of discon- number of discon- of discon- disconand#0, either Fy(t+e)—Fy({t+e)#0 or Fy(t—e€)—Fy(t—£) tinuities of the first kind.] The definition of cross-over of the first kind.] The definition of cross-over the first kind.] The definition of cross-over first kind.] The definition of cross-over kind.] The definition of cross-over The definition of cross-over definition of cross-over of cross-over cross-over Let {++ <f_)<ty<t;<---} be the sequence of all yearrangements of the quantile functions Oy(p), Oy(p) for of the quantile functions Oy(p), Oy(p) for the quantile functions Oy(p), Oy(p) for functions Oy(p), Oy(p) for Oy(p), Oy(p) for Oy(p) for for such crossing points. Functions G,(/),G2(f), right-cony's X, Y is analogous to Definition B2. [ Obviously, cross- X, Y is analogous to Definition B2. [ Obviously, cross- Y is analogous to Definition B2. [ Obviously, cross- is analogous to Definition B2. [ Obviously, cross- analogous to Definition B2. [ Obviously, cross- to Definition B2. [ Obviously, cross- Definition B2. [ Obviously, cross- B2. [ Obviously, cross- [ Obviously, cross- Obviously, cross- crosstinuous, are called cross-over rearrangements of the distriover rearrangements of quantile functions correspond to rearrangements of quantile functions correspond to of quantile functions correspond to quantile functions correspond to correspond to to bution functions Fy(t), Fy({t) if in any interval [¢,,t;.1), cross-over rearrangements of the corresponding distribu- rearrangements of the corresponding distribu- of the corresponding distribu- the corresponding distribu- corresponding distribu- distribueither G(t)=Fy(t), G(t)=Fy(t), or Gi(t)=F y(t), tion functions. We may continue, therefore, to speak of the functions. We may continue, therefore, to speak of the We may continue, therefore, to speak of the may continue, therefore, to speak of the continue, therefore, to speak of the therefore, to speak of the to speak of the speak of the of the the G(t}=Fy(t). (Obviously, cross-over rearrangements of cross-over rearrangements of 1.¥’s without mentioning rearrangements of 1.¥’s without mentioning of 1.¥’s without mentioning 1.¥’s without mentioning without mentioning mentioning distributionbecause they functions are increasing are themselves and right-continuous.] distribution functions, By gjther guantile or distribution functions.| guantile or distribution functions.| or distribution functions.| distribution functions.| functions.|| abuse of language, we will say that r.v.’s with distribution Lemma Cl. If, Cl. If, If, for any p (0 <p<)) at which the values any p (0 <p<)) at which the values p (0 <p<)) at which the values (0 <p<)) at which the values <p<)) at which the values at which the values which the values the values values functions G,(1), G.(t) are cross-over rearrangements of the of quantile functions Qy(p), Qy(p) exist, these values are quantile functions Qy(p), Qy(p) exist, these values are functions Qy(p), Qy(p) exist, these values are Qy(p), Qy(p) exist, these values are Qy(p) exist, these values are exist, these values are these values are values are are rvs X, Y with distribution functions Fy(t), Fy(t). determined uniquely as an unordered pair (i.e., up to their uniquely as an unordered pair (i.e., up to their as an unordered pair (i.e., up to their an unordered pair (i.e., up to their unordered pair (i.e., up to their pair (i.e., up to their (i.e., up to their up to their to their 

DEFINITION C1. C1. The quantile function Q(p) (0 < p <1) quantile function Q(p) (0 < p <1) function Q(p) (0 < p <1) Q(p) (0 < p <1) (0 < p <1) < p <1) p <1) <1) for a ry. X is defined as inf {t: F(t) > p}, where F(t) is the a ry. X is defined as inf {t: F(t) > p}, where F(t) is the ry. X is defined as inf {t: F(t) > p}, where F(t) is the X is defined as inf {t: F(t) > p}, where F(t) is the is defined as inf {t: F(t) > p}, where F(t) is the defined as inf {t: F(t) > p}, where F(t) is the as inf {t: F(t) > p}, where F(t) is the inf {t: F(t) > p}, where F(t) is the {t: F(t) > p}, where F(t) is the F(t) > p}, where F(t) is the > p}, where F(t) is the p}, where F(t) is the where F(t) is the F(t) is the is the the small — gistribution function for X. [This makes quantile functions — gistribution function for X. [This makes quantile functions gistribution function for X. [This makes quantile functions function for X. [This makes quantile functions for X. [This makes quantile functions X. [This makes quantile functions [This makes quantile functions makes quantile functions quantile functions sight-continuous, with a countable number of discon- a countable number of discon- countable number of discon- number of discon- of discon- discontinuities of the first kind.] The definition of cross-over of the first kind.] The definition of cross-over the first kind.] The definition of cross-over first kind.] The definition of cross-over kind.] The definition of cross-over The definition of cross-over definition of cross-over of cross-over cross-over yearrangements of the quantile functions Oy(p), Oy(p) for of the quantile functions Oy(p), Oy(p) for the quantile functions Oy(p), Oy(p) for functions Oy(p), Oy(p) for Oy(p), Oy(p) for Oy(p) for for y's X, Y is analogous to Definition B2. [ Obviously, cross- X, Y is analogous to Definition B2. [ Obviously, cross- Y is analogous to Definition B2. [ Obviously, cross- is analogous to Definition B2. [ Obviously, cross- analogous to Definition B2. [ Obviously, cross- to Definition B2. [ Obviously, cross- Definition B2. [ Obviously, cross- B2. [ Obviously, cross- [ Obviously, cross- Obviously, cross- crossover rearrangements of quantile functions correspond to rearrangements of quantile functions correspond to of quantile functions correspond to quantile functions correspond to correspond to to cross-over rearrangements of the corresponding distribu- rearrangements of the corresponding distribu- of the corresponding distribu- the corresponding distribu- corresponding distribu- distribution functions. We may continue, therefore, to speak of the functions. We may continue, therefore, to speak of the We may continue, therefore, to speak of the may continue, therefore, to speak of the continue, therefore, to speak of the therefore, to speak of the to speak of the speak of the of the the cross-over rearrangements of 1.¥’s without mentioning rearrangements of 1.¥’s without mentioning of 1.¥’s without mentioning 1.¥’s without mentioning without mentioning mentioning gjther guantile or distribution functions.| guantile or distribution functions.| or distribution functions.| distribution functions.| functions.|| 

Lemma Cl. If, Cl. If, If, for any p (0 <p<)) at which the values any p (0 <p<)) at which the values p (0 <p<)) at which the values (0 <p<)) at which the values <p<)) at which the values at which the values which the values the values values of quantile functions Qy(p), Qy(p) exist, these values are quantile functions Qy(p), Qy(p) exist, these values are functions Qy(p), Qy(p) exist, these values are Qy(p), Qy(p) exist, these values are Qy(p) exist, these values are exist, these values are these values are values are are determined uniquely as an unordered pair (i.e., up to their uniquely as an unordered pair (i.e., up to their as an unordered pair (i.e., up to their an unordered pair (i.e., up to their unordered pair (i.e., up to their pair (i.e., up to their (i.e., up to their up to their to their imerchanse),then Qx(p)and Qx{p) are determined uniquely 

distributionLina B2, functionsUf for Fy(t), any real Fy(t) 1 at exist, which these the values values are of determined uniquely as an unordered pair (i.e., up to their interchange), then F,(t) and F(t) are determined uniquely up to cross-over rearrangements. 

of 

Proof. The same as for Lemma B2. 

THEOREM Cl. [ gq is strictly convex (strictly concave) withthere respect is at most tO gq, one then (up to for cross-over any given rearrangements) pair of r.v.’s A and pair B, of +.p.’5 X|| Y, such that 

Proof. Observe that Fy(t) and F(t) are non-decreasing and that in any interval (¢;,¢;,,) between two crossing points, either F,(t)> Fy(t) or Fy{t)< Fy(t). Therefore, if the entire segments of Fy(t) and Fy(t) on (t;, t;..,) are interchanged, the functions will remain non-decreasing. However, any partial interchange in (f,,¢,.,) will 

==> picture [51 x 37] <==

DECOMPOSITIONS OF RESPONSE TIMES 

309 

; 

Proof. The distributional equations can immediately be rewritten as numerical ones with quantile functions, 

Proof. The system determinant of the linear equations (with respect to @,, a, b,, 65) 

==> picture [158 x 34] <==

==> picture [52 x 66] <==

whose solutions, by Lemma A2, are unique up to an interchange of Q,(p) and Q,(p) values. The proof is completed by applying Lemma Cl. 

is zero, and the equations are mutually consistent because cu + €99 =C3 + C2). All real solutions of this system, there‘OT Can be presented as 

TuroreM C2. For any given pair of r.v’s A and B, there is at most one (up to cross-over rearrangements) pair of r.v.s X || ¥, such that 

==> picture [323 x 75] <==

The same is. true for systems 

If €4,, C29, C12, C2, are all non-negative, then by subjecting the four right-hand expressions above to nonnegativity constraints, and solving all the inequalities for a,, one gets 

==> picture [178 x 34] <==

==> picture [54 x 68] <==

Proof. The same as for Theorem Cl, except that uniqueness up to interchanges is now justified by Lemma A3. 

APPENDIX D: EXISTENCE OF DECOMPOSITIONS UNDER PERFECT POSITIVE INTERDEPENDENCE 

which is equivalent to max{c,, —¢2,,0} <a,<min{e,,. 1}. This proves that all non-negative solutions that exist are obtained as stated. To prove that they do exist, one has to show that max{c,, —¢2,,0} <min{c,,,c,,}. This inequality is equivalent to the system 

Here and in the next appendix we will need some auxiliary algebraic results. 

LEMMA Dti. Any four reals ¢,,, C22, €12, C2; Such that Cy +22 =Ci2 + C2, can be additively decomposed as c= a;+b, (i=1, 2; j=1, 2), all decomposing {a,,a2, b,, b2}quadruples being obtained by arbitrarily choosing a, and putting 

==> picture [62 x 78] <==

==> picture [75 x 57] <==

in which the first three inequalities hold trivially (because C12, €21, €4, are all non-negative), and the fourth inequality holds because (¢,.+¢3;) —¢;; =C2. 20. The non-positive case is considered analogously. This completes the proof. 

I r ; . if C13 C225 C12,€21 are ait non-negative (non-pasitive), then there exist non-negative (non-positive) decomposing (a1, a), 6), b}-quadruples: all such quadruples are obtained by restricting a, to the closed interval [max{c\;—c,,0}, min{¢,,¢12}] (if non-negative) or the closed interval [max{c,,, Cy2}, min{c,;— C2, 0} ] (if non-positive). 

LemMA D2. If cy te, =Cy ten, Cy t én =Fi24+ tn, and éy>c, (i= 1,2; j=1, 2), then the decomposing quadruples {a,,a2,b,,b2} and {G,,4, b,,b,} of Lemma D1 can always be chosen so that G;>a,, 6;> 6; (i= 1, 2). 

| 

480/39/3-6 

310 

DZHAFAROV AND SCHWEICKERT 

Proof. By Lemma D1, we have to prove that one can always choose d, 2a, so that 

==> picture [121 x 53] <==

and that, under non-negativity or non-positivity constraints, both @, and a, belong to the appropriate intervals. It isi easy to see that the inequalities: +a: above are satisfied. iff: 

==> picture [178 x 36] <==

the interval being non-empty because 

==> picture [51 x 27] <==

==> picture [145 x 70] <==

In the non-negativity case we sum the two doubleinequalities 

==> picture [216 x 47] <==

and observe that 

==> picture [191 x 71] <==

> that is,on @, ¢[max{é,,~ —@,,,~ 0}, min{Z,,,tm @2}],ow as required; by LemmaD1. The non-positivity case is considered analogously. This completes the proof.

LEMMA D3. Any four C11, C22, C12, C2,;€1 that max{¢),, €22} =max{c).,¢2,} can be decomposed2 Re such as ¢,=max{a,, b;} (i=1, 2; j=1, 2), with a), a2, b,, 6, EL. 

In particular, the {a,, a2, b,, b,}-quadruples can be obtained as 

==> picture [196 x 122] <==

. 

. 

corresponding to, respectively, 

==> picture [193 x 64] <==

The theorem also holds for max being replaced with min everywhere, provided that < is replaced with > in the last lines of the expressions for a,, a2, 6, b3. 

==> picture [23 x 11] <==

==> picture [169 x 15] <==

Eo} = max{é,>, E>}, and Cy 2 Cy (Gi= l, 2; j= l, 2), then the decomposing quadruples {@,, 42, 6,, 5} and G;2a,,{@,, G@, b;>b; b,, b,} (i=1,2). of Lemma The D3 theorem can always be also holds chosen for so max that being replaced with min. 

Proof. Without; loss of generality,; assume that 

==> picture [82 x 39] <==

: 

edie: 

==> picture [143 x 11] <==

==> picture [193 x 86] <==

DECOMPOSITIONS OF RESPONSE TIMES 

311 

In case (1), by Lemma D3, one can put 

==> picture [195 x 54] <==

and the statement of the theorem holds trivially: a, <4j, 6, <b, b, <b, and one can always choose a, between a, and min{b,, b2} >min{b,, b2}. In case (2), by Lemma D3, one can put 

==> picture [193 x 58] <==

and observe that a,<d, (because ¢).<é2), 0, <b, (because ¢2;<é3,), and a,<4@, {because a,<b,= C49 & En) = Gy). Obviously,), b, <4, and also 6, <G, because otherwise we would have c¢,.2¢€»>é,; hence b,<min{d,, ay}, and one can always choose b, between these values. The remaining cases are considered analogously, and the theorem is transferred to min trivially. This completes the proof. 

oe THEOREM Di. Let ® be an addition-like operation On 

==> picture [220 x 81] <==

where A,, Ay, B,, B, are r.v.s with spectra in I, The quantile functions ofA,, A, B,, B, are all continuous at every quantile level at which the quantile functions ofT,,,T\2,T21, To. are all continuous. 

Proof. The assumptions of the theorem can be presented as 

Sel QilP))] + gel G22(p)]= gelQilP)l]+ gelQalp)l, 

==> picture [41 x 22] <==

where Q,;(p)e/ are the quantille functions of the rvs T, (i=1,2, 7=1,2). We have to prove that there exist 

quantille functions A,(p), A.(p), By(p), Bo(p)el7 such that 

==> picture [231 x 77] <==

Obviously, the only two constraints imposed on g4[ A,(p)], gel Ax(p)], Sel Bi(p)], Sal Bop) are that they are non-decreasing and that their values belong to &ea(1). By Lemma Al, g(/) can only be ( — 0, 0), (0, 00), or (—0, 00). In any of these three cases Lemmas D1 and ofD2 gg[Q,(p)]-functions guarantee the existence‘ (non-strictly) of additive. increasing. decompositions. with: p while remaining within g,(7). To prove the continuity part of the theorem, observe that by Lemma D2, for anyp < J, 

==> picture [180 x 84] <==

If all four go[Q,,(p)]-functions are continuous at some point p between p and , then both the left-hand and the &e@lAi(p)] to be continuous at p. The functions 

==> picture [236 x 56] <==

are then continuous at j, too. The proof is complete. 

EON pe Let T3,T12,T2,T22 be rvs with Spectra in 1, and tet 

==> picture [4 x 14] <==

==> picture [239 x 12] <==

yp.) Tas Tiss T215 T22 can be decomposed as 

==> picture [195 x 25] <==

where A,, A>, B,, B, are r.v.’s with spectra in I. A,, A>, By, B, can be chosen so that their quantile functions are all continuous at every quantile level at which the quantile functions of T,,, T12, T21, T22 are all continuous. The theorem also holds for max being replaced with min. 

312 

DZHAFAROV AND SCHWEICKERT 

Proof. The assumptions of the theorem can be presented as 

==> picture [194 x 34] <==

where Q,;(p)e/ are the quantile functions of the r.v.’s_ T, (i=1, 2, 7=1,2). We have to prove that there exist quantile (i.e., non-decreasing) functions A,({p), A,(p), B,(p), Bo(p) 61, such that 

==> picture [174 x 80] <==

InLemmas this formulation, D3 and D4. the The proof continuity immediately statement follows immediately from follows from the fact that if all Q,(p)-functions are continuous at some point p, then at least one of the four patterns 

{mex 

==> picture [142 x 129] <==

must hold in some neighborhood ofp once it holds at p. The proof for min being the same, the theorem is proved. 

APPENDIX E: EXISTENCE OF DECOMPOSITIONS UNDER INDEPENDENCE 

THEOREM El. Let Ti Tio T2, To be rvs with spectra in I, and let 

max{T,;,T2.} =; max{T,2,T2,} (T), L Tx2,T)2 172). Then T,,, Tio V2, Tz can be decomposed as 

T, =; max{A;,B,} (A; B,; i=1, 2, 7=1, 2), 

where A,,A,,B,,B, are rv’s (right-complete, but not necessarily left-complete) with spectra in I; however, at least one of the pairs (A,, A.) or (B,, B,) is a pair of complete r.v.s.tinuous The at distribution every point functions of I at which of A,, the Az, distribution B,, B, are functions all conof T 14, Ty, T3,;, T22 are all continuous. 

Proof. The assumptions of the theorem can be pregonted as | 

log F,,(t) + log Foot)! =log F,.(t)+tloe F,.(t), tel g Fy, (t) g F22(t)} g F(t) g F(t), , 

where(i= 1, 2,j=1, F;,(t) are the 2). We distribution have to prove functions that there of exist the distribu- r.v.’s T,, tionincomplete,: functions such 4 (7),1 that 242(t), B,(t), B.(t),1 te, generally left- 

==> picture [167 x 84] <==

The only constraints imposed on a log-distribution function non-positive, that it converges to 0 as ¢ -» sup J (if it is rightoncomplete), an interv a lnd / thatare that it converges this function to —oo is non-decreasing as t— inf J and(if it logisand left-comple A,(t), D2 tha log t A,(t), non-decrasinge). It imm log B,(t), e diately log and foll B,(t) nn-positive o ws can from indeed Lemmas functions be found D1 log A(t) is a non-decreasing function such that that satisfy the decomposition identities above. Specifically, 

max{log< log Fy,(t), A(t) log < Fia(t)} 

< min{log F,(t) — log F,,(¢), 0}, 

whereas 

log A(t) = log F,(t) —log F,,(t) + log A,(¢) 

==> picture [139 x 11] <==

==> picture [141 x 11] <==

. 

. 

. 

Clearly, since log F,(t)-functions vanish as t— sup J, log A,(t), log A,(t), log B,(t), log B,(t) vanish, too, which means that A,, A», B,, B, are all right-complete. As t— infJ, however, even though log F,,(t)-functions tend to —oo, it cannot be excluded that some of the functions log 4,(t), log A,(t), log B,(t), log B,{t) converge to finite values. At the same time, if both log A,(t) and log A,(t) have finite limits, then both log B,(t) and log B,(f) tend to — oo, and conversely, if both log B,(t) and log B,(t) have 

DECOMPOSITIONS OF RESPONSE TIMES 

313 

finite limits, then both log A,(t) and log A,(t) tend to —0oo. This immediately follows from algebraic identities 

==> picture [139 x 138] <==

proving that either (A,, A,) or (B,, B,)isapairofcomplete r.v.’s. The continuity part of the theorem is proved as in Thvores D1. Th© Progrssfi compreslete. THEOREM E2. Let 1,,,1T,2,T2,;,T2. be rvs with spectra in I, and let min{T,,,T..} =4 min{T,,,T.,} (Ty, 1T2,Ti21Tx). 

Then T,;, 7:2, T21, T22 can be decomposed as 

==> picture [201 x 24] <==

where A,,A>,B,,B, are rvs (left-complete, but not necessarily right-complete) with spectra in I; however, atleast one of the pairs (A,, A.) or (B,, B,) is a pair of complete r.v.s. The distribution functions of A,, A>, B,, B, are all continuous at every point of I at which the distribution functions of Ti, Ty2, Tz, T22 are all continuous. 

Proof. The proof is the same as that of Theorem E1, except that instead of distribution functions it is conducted in terms of log-survival functions log[1 —F;,(t)] (= 1, 2, j=1, 2), constrained by 

==> picture [174 x 35] <==

and decomposed as 

log(1 — F,,(t)] =log[1 — A,(t)] + logl1 — B,(z)] log[ 1 — Fi2(t)] =log[ 1 — A,(t)] + log[1 — B,(1)] tel _ log[1 €4. ~~ F,,(t)] =log[1 ~ A,(t)] + logl 1— B,(t)] log[1 — F,,(t)] =log[1 — A,(t)] + log[ 1— B,(a)], 

DEFINITION El. Let a certain interval 7¢ Re be fixed, and let all r.v.’s mentioned below have their spectra inf. 

Ar.v. Xiscalled an independent additive component ofa r.v. U, in which case we write X c** U, if U < x+y (X 1 Y), for some r.v. Y. [If X is degenerate, 1.e., X = x e J with probability 1, then X ¢** U, for any U; also, for any constant xel, U—xc'* U, provided the spectrum of U — x is in I.] A rv. X is called irreducible if it is non-degenerate and cannot be presented as X s X,+X, (X, 1 X,) unless either X, or X, is degenerate. [ An important fact about irreducible r.v.’s is that if 7= Re, or 7 is a closed interval in Re, then the space of all irreducible r.v.’s is everywhere dense (in the sense of weak convergence) in the space of all r.v.’s (Linnik & Ostrovskii, 1972, p.97, Rusza & Szekely, 1988, p. 161).] Finally, a rv. X is called prime if XC'* U+V (wi)ULV) impliesmp X <'* U or X c** V. 

LemMMA El. In any of the three intervals (—0, 0), (0, ©), er {—, o), one can find a r.v. X that is irreducible (in this interval) but is not prime (in this interval ). 

Proof. The lemma is proved by examples discussed or referred to in the main text. Examples for the interval (—0o, 0) are trivially obtained from those for the interval val(0, oo), (—oo, by 0) multiplying the statemen posi t ive of r.v.’s the lemma with — also 1. For follows the inter- from a general non-constructive theorem by Rusza & Szekely (1988, pp. 128-129) that says that no r.v. is prime in (— oo, 0). a | 

THEOREM E3. For any addition-like operation ® on Is Re, one can find four r.v2s T1,, T,2, T2,, T22 with spectra ™ I, such that even though 

==> picture [204 x 23] <==

they cannot be decomposed as 

==> picture [177 x 15] <==

where A,, A>, B,, B; are r.v.’s with spectra in I. 

Proof. By Lemma Al, gg(I) is one of the three intervals, (— 00, 0), (0, co), or (— 00, ©). Then, by Lemma E1, one can find an irreducible X in g,,{I) that is not prime. This meanssuch that that one can find r.v.’s Y, U, V with spectra in g(I), 

==> picture [148 x 15] <==

. 

. 

but neither XC'* U nor XG V. Putting X=g,(T),), Y = £6(T2), U = £o(T 12), Vv =£(T>,), assume that, contrary to what the theorem says, there are r.v.’s g@{Aj), &@(A2), £o(B,), ¥q(B2) in gq(I), such that 

==> picture [239 x 15] <==

314 

DZHAFAROV AND SCHWEICKERT 

Since goli) is irreducible, either g olA,) or g@(B,) inthe decomposition 

==> picture [176 x 19] <==

must be degenerate: say, g~({A,) =a (with; probability. 1), in which case £q(B,) = falTi) —a. Then the decomposition of Ze(T2) can be presented as 

==> picture [214 x 19] <==

from which; it follows that 

==> picture [130 x 19] <==

As this contradicts the assumption that neither X <= UJ nor ia : X c'* Y, the theorem is proved. ~ 

REFERENCES 

. . ; . oe 

eeone onactures on fi[unctional equations][ and][ their][ applications]

Ashby, F. G., & Townsend 1 T. (1980). Decomposing the reaction time distribution: Pure insertion and selective influence revisited. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 21, 93-123.

Cortese,time J. M., & Dzhafarov, E. N. (1995). Empirical recovery of response decomposition rules II: Discriminability of serial and parallel

architectures.

Dzhafarov, E. N. (1992). The structure of simple reaction time to step-function signals. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 36, 235-268.

Dzhafarov, E. N. (1993). Grice-representability of response time distribution families. Psychometrika, 58, 281-314.

Dzhafarov, E. N., & Rouder, J, N. (1995). Empirical discriminability oftwo models for stochastic relationship between additive components of response time. Manuscript submitted for publication

Feller, W. (1968). An introduction to probability theory and its applications, Vol. 1. New York: Wiley

Kelly J L (1955). General topo logy. Princeton, NJ: Van Nostrand Krantz D. H., Luce, R. D., Suppes, P., & Tversky A. (1971), Foundations ofMeasurement Vol 1. San Die: oO. CA: Academic Press > .

Linnik, Yu. V. & Ostrovskii, LV. (1972). Decompositions of random variables and vectors. Moscow: Nauka (in Russian).

Loeve, M. (1963). Probability theory, Princeton NJ: Van Nostrand.

Lukacs, E. (1960). Characteristic functions. New York. Hafner. Luce, R. D. (1986). Response times: Their role in inferring elementary mental organization. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.

Marley,model A. A. for choice J., & probabilities Colonius, H. and (1992), reaction The times, “horse and race” its random competing utility risk interpretation. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 36, 1-20. 

Massaro, D. W., & Cowan, N. (1993). Information processing models:

Microscopes of the mind. In L. W. Porter & M. R. Rosenzweig (Eds.), Annual review ofpsychology. Palo Alto: Annual Reviews. 

Nozawa, G. (1992). Stochastic models of human information processing. Rényi,Unpublished A. (1950). doctoral On the dissertation, algebra of Dartmouth distributions. College, Publicationes Hanover, Mathe- NH. maticae, 1, 135-149.

Roberts, S. (1987). Evidence for distinct serial processes in animals: The multiplicative-factors method. Animal Learning and Behavior, 15, 135-175.

Roberts, S. & Sternberg, S. (1992). The meaning of additive reaction-time effects: Tests of three alternatives. In D. E. Meyer and S. Kornblum ({Eds.)},MIT Press. Attention and performance XIV (pp. 611-654). Cambridge, MA:

Rouder, J. N. (1994). Toward a distribution-free decomposition of simple reaction time. Unpublished manuscript.

Rusza, I. Z, & Z, & & Szekely, G. G. J. (1988). Algebraic probability Algebraic probability probability theory.

Rusza, I. Z, & Z, & & Szekely, G. G. J. (1988). Algebraic probability Algebraic probability probability theory. Chichester; Wiley.

Schweickert, R. (1978). A critical path generalization of the additive factor method: Analysis of a Stroop task. Journal ofMathematical Psychology, 18, ] 05-139. . ;

Schweickert, R. (1992). information, time, and the structure of mental ede) twenyi year manae -nares ane i"Een MIT Dee and performance pp. 933-566}. Cambridge, , , . . .

Sternberg, S. (1969). The discovery of pTOCeSSINE Stages: Extensions of Donders’ method. In W. G. Koster (Ed.}, Attention and performance II, Acta Psychologica, 30, 276-315. wae .

Townsend, J. T. (1976). Serial and within-stage independent parallel model equivalence on the minimum completion time. Journal ofMathematical Psychology, 14, 219-238. ; .

Townsend, J. T. (1990). Serial vs. parallel processing: Sometimes they look like tweeledum and tweedledee but they can (and should) be distinguished. Psychological Science, 1, 46-54.

Townsend, J. T., & Ashby, F. G. (1983). Stochastic modeling of elementary psychological processes. Cambridge, England: Cambndge Univ. Press.

Townsend, J. T., & Nozawa, G. (1988), Streng evidence for parallel pro©@SSi"g with simple dot stimuli. Paper presented at Twenty-Ninth Annual Meeting of the Psychonomic Society, Chicago, IL.

Received: August 12, 1994 

